An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Neil Maizlish, PhD, MPH, Public Health Institute,
555 12th St, 10th Floor, Oakland, CA 94607, USA. Email:neil.maizlish@phi.org
Collection date 2020 Mar-Apr.
The objective of this project was to demonstrate and assess approaches of urban local
health departments (LHDs) to simultaneously address climate change, health, and equity;
incorporate climate change into program practice; and participate in their
jurisdiction’s climate change work.
From January 2016 through March 2018, the Center for Climate Change and Health created
learning activities, networking and relationship-building opportunities, communication
platforms, and information sharing for 12 urban LHDs in the United States. We used
administrative data and conducted interviews with participants and key informants to
assess success in meeting learning collaborative goals.
LHDs developed diverse projects that incorporated internal capacity building, climate
and health vulnerability assessments, surveillance, and community engagement. Projects
fostered greater LHD engagement on climate change, broadened community partnerships, and
furthered LHD integration into jurisdictions’ climate planning. LHD engagement helped
shift the dialogue in the community and jurisdiction about climate change to include
public health.
LHDs have skills and expertise to rapidly partner with other governmental agencies and
community-based organizations and to help communities identify vulnerabilities, take
action to reduce the health harms of climate change, and—through Health in All Policies
approaches and community partnerships—to ensure that climate policies are optimized for
positive health and equity outcomes.
Keywords:local health departments, climate change, adaptation, resilience, health equity
Climate change is the greatest public health challenge of the 21st century1,2and exacerbates health inequities.3For example, low-income families are less likely than higher-income families to have
the insurance or financial resources to rebuild their lives after a severe weather event. The
public health community is well positioned to play a leading role in addressing the health
impacts of climate change through preparedness, prevention, research, partnerships, and
policy. Policy advocacy at the national level aims to lessen the impact of climate change on
health, especially by mitigating greenhouse gases in the energy sector. However, the public
health community at the local level plays a crucial role because many public health
activities, opportunities for greenhouse gas mitigation, and climate impacts occur at the
local level.2(Mitigationin this article refers to reducing greenhouse gas
emissions.Adaptationrefers to adjustments in human and natural systems in
response to actual or expected climate change, which moderates harms or takes advantage of
beneficial opportunities.) Local health departments (LHDs) are frontline responders to
climate-related disasters and inform, educate, and empower their jurisdictions to take actions
that mitigate and adapt to climate change. Many LHDs already have partnerships in the most
affected communities and a broad mandate to protect and promote health. LHD engagement with
other agencies in climate planning can optimize the health and health equity benefits of
climate action. Yet, few LHDs are engaged in this issue.4
To help build local climate and health capacity, the Center for Climate Change and Health
(CCCH) of the Public Health Institute in Oakland, California, organized and led a learning collaborative5for urban LHDs from January 2016 through March 2018. The goals of the learning
collaborative were to build LHD climate and health capacity, demonstrate strategies LHDs can
use to incorporate climate change into current practice, and enhance participation in local
and regional climate change mitigation, adaptation, and resilience work.
We describe the learning collaborative and its impact on LHDs and their communities and
identify lessons learned. Although previous efforts, such as assessments of needs and capacity
building on health climate change, were aimed mostly at state health departments,6-9the CCCH-convened learning collaborative was unique in its exclusive focus on LHDs and
climate change, health, and equity.
CCCH disseminated a request for proposals through its networks and national organizations
representing local public and environmental health agencies (Figure). Applicants had broad discretion to develop
projects (Table 1) that
addressed climate mitigation, adaptation, and resilience, and that

Overview of the learning collaborative process of the Center for Climate Change and
Health and local health departments.
Projects of local health departments in the climate and health learning
collaborative, 12 sites, United States, January 2016–March 2018
built LHD capacity to address climate and health equity across public health
programs,
integrated intersectoral action,
integrated a health equity lens, and
incorporated community engagement.
Detailed descriptions of the LHDs and their projects are available elsewhere.10CCCH offered grants of up to $40 000 per LHD during 2.25 years (January 2016
through March 2018). Thirteen LHDs submitted proposals. Six LHDs received funding for 2.25
years (Denver, Colorado; Los Angeles County, California; Minneapolis, Minnesota; New
Orleans, Louisiana; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; and Seattle–King County, Washington), 3
LHDS received funding for 2 years (Maricopa County, Arizona; Milwaukee, Wisconsin; and
Multnomah County, Oregon), and 3 LHDs received funding for 18 months (Tulsa, Oklahoma;
Macomb County, Michigan; and Columbus, Ohio). One health department left the collaborative
after 8 months and was not included in this evaluation.
LHD staff members participated in 2 in-person meetings (one at kickoff and another 15
months later), bimonthly webinars, bimonthly one-on-one telephone calls with the LHD
project team and CCCH staff members, and resource sharing through a shared computer
network drive and listserv. In the months before the kickoff meeting, CCCH requested that
awardees spend time familiarizing themselves with and gathering information about
activities on climate change in their jurisdiction and among their partners. To structure
this information gathering, CCCH developed 4-6 questions that were specific to each LHD
based on potential gaps identified in their applications. We discussed the findings with
the LHDs during the first one-on-one telephone calls. We conducted one-on-one telephone
calls informally and confidentially to review accomplishments, discuss strategies to
address barriers, and exchange technical assistance.
Before the kickoff meeting, we asked LHDs to complete an online survey to rank the
importance of potential webinar topics. We then sequenced the webinars to reflect the
rankings and the timeline of common activities. For example, at least half of the projects
proposed creating climate-health vulnerability maps as a key first step. Thus, the initial
webinar focused on vulnerability mapping. The 90-minute webinars featured subject matter
experts from CCCH and outside organizations and presentations by LHDs highlighting their
projects, followed by a discussion of the topic among all LHDs and experts.
We conducted a qualitative evaluation to assess whether individual LHD goals and CCCH
goals were met. We requested that the goals for each project be enumerated in the
contractual scope of work. Along with the goals, the scopes of work listed objectives,
timelines, and deliverables, such as reports, presentations, and meeting minutes. We
synchronized the payment schedule with the timeline for deliverables so that we could have
materials to objectively determine whether the goals specified in the scopes of work were
met. We used publicly available information from jurisdiction websites, administrative
data, and questionnaires and interviews of key informants. Administrative data included
the original applications, quarterly reports, contract deliverables and materials, and
notes of in-person meetings and one-on-one telephone calls. CCCH staff members developed
questionnaires and interview guides for learning collaborative participants and key
informants, which included identification of major accomplishments, impacts of the LHD
project, unexpected opportunities, challenges, and areas for improving the learning
collaborative process.
We described characteristics of LHD staffs and subcontractors/consultants,
intraorganizational partners, jurisdictional and community-based organization (CBO)
partners, capacity-building activities, steps to include vulnerable populations and health
equity, project integration with LHD programs and communications, and outreach and inter-
and intraorganization relationship building.
Each LHD nominated 2 key informants: 1 represented LHD leadership and the other
represented a governmental or CBO partner. Three CCCH staff members interviewed key
informants in semistructured, 30-minute telephone interviews that took place in the
penultimate month of the learning collaborative. CCCH staff members conducted debriefings
after each interview to identify key themes. Additional details about the methods,
questionnaires, and protocols for evaluation are available elsewhere.10
LHDs were diverse in geography (Midwest, South, East Coast, and West Coast), size of
populations served (365 000 to 10 million population), number of staff members (100-4500
employees), annual budgets ($14 million to $893 million), and nature of projects (Tables 2–4). Each community had substantial racial/ethnic
and geographic health inequities within their jurisdictions. The lead program for the
learning collaborative project was environmental health at 5 LHDs, emergency preparedness
at 4 LHDs, and epidemiology at 1 LHD; 2 LHDs had joint leads in environmental health and
emergency preparedness. All LHD projects had a component on climate change adaptation, and
5 LHDs conducted an adaptation project, such as rainwater harvesting, improved
epidemiologic surveillance, assessing heat vulnerability in home-bound populations,
mosquito surveillance, or interventions in faith-based communities. Six LHDs conducted a
community-engaged assessment of vulnerability to climate change, and 2 LHDs emphasized
internal capacity and strategic planning. All LHDs partnered with either municipal or
county governmental agencies, CBOs, and/or academic institutions. Most learning
collaborative participants hired 1 part-time staff member or an intern or contracted with
a local university.
Characteristics of local health departments that took part in a climate and health
learning collaborative,aby site, January 2016–March 2018b
aThe learning collaborative is an organized and facilitated approach to
capacity building on the topic of climate change and public health that includes
teams from multiple local health departments (LHDs) coming together to learn, apply,
and share methods, ideas, and data.
bData sources: Data were compiled from LHDs’ applications to participate
in the learning collaborative and publicly available documents of websites of the
LHDs and their jurisdiction. Additional details of the LHDs are available athttp://climatehealthconnect.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/11/Kresge_Learning-Collaborative-Evaluation_2.1.2018.pdf.10
Climate strategies or threats and organizational characteristics of local health
departments that took part in a climate and health learning collaborative,aby site, January 2016–March 2018b
aThe learning collaborative is an organized and facilitated approach to
capacity building on the topic of climate change and public health that includes
teams from multiple LHDs coming together to learn, apply, and share methods, ideas,
and data.
bData sources: Data were compiled from LHDs’ applications to participate
in the learning collaborative and publicly available documents of websites of the
LHDs and their jurisdiction. Additional details of the LHDs are available athttp://climatehealthconnect.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/11/Kresge_Learning-Collaborative-Evaluation_2.1.2018.pdf.10
cMitigationrefers to reducing greenhouse gas
emissions.
dAdaptationrefers to adjustments in human and natural
systems in response to actual or expected climate change that moderate harms or take
advantage of beneficial opportunities.
Partners and previous climate change activities of local health departments (LHDs)
that took part in a climate and health learning collaborative,aby site,
January 2016–March 2018b
aThe learning collaborative is an organized and facilitated approach to
capacity building on the topic of climate change and public health that includes
teams from multiple LHDs coming together to learn, apply, and share methods, ideas,
and data.
bData sources: Data were compiled from LHDs’ applications to participate
in the learning collaborative and publicly available documents of websites of the
LHDs and their jurisdiction. Additional details of the LHDs are available athttp://climatehealthconnect.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/11/Kresge_Learning-Collaborative-Evaluation_2.1.2018.pdf.10
cMitigationrefers to reducing greenhouse gas
emissions.
dAdaptationrefers to adjustments in human and natural
systems in response to actual or expected climate change that moderate harms or take
advantage of beneficial opportunities.
All LHDs engaged in internal capacity building, but the internal capacity building
varied widely in intensity and success. Several LHDs targeted upper management through
interviews, which helped educate managers, increase buy-in, and identify opportunities
for broader engagement within the health department and with external partners. The Los
Angeles County Department of Public Health and Public Health–Seattle & King County
engaged in proactive but labor-intensive activities to build internal support and
capacity for the integration of climate change into LHD programs. Public Health–Seattle
& King County created a blueprint of key LHD actions to advance climate change and health.11Most LHDs conducted educational outreach to managers and staff members using
venues such as all-employee or divisional in-services, lunchtime seminars, and regular
meetings of executive leadership, managers, and staff members.
Ten of the 12 LHDs integrated climate change and health into internal and
jurisdictional climate planning, implementation, and policy development. We observed
bidirectional integration of (1) climate change into LHD processes and (2) public health
into climate change planning processes led by city or county offices of sustainability
or other governmental agencies. Examples include the following:
The Macomb County (Michigan) Department of Public Health used the Mobilizing for
Action through Planning and Partnerships process in its 2016 Community Health
Needs Assessment, designating climate change as a key “force of change.”12
LHDs in Maricopa County, Arizona, and Tulsa City–County, Oklahoma, integrated
climate change into heat-illness surveillance and mosquito/West Nile virus
surveillance, respectively.
The Philadelphia Department of Public Health incorporated climate change into
programs for asthma and air quality and analyzed geographical patterns of asthma
incidence to prioritize clinical networks for participation in climate outreach
and education programs.
LHDs in New Orleans, Minneapolis,13Philadelphia, Denver,14,15and Multnomah County (Oregon) performed climate and health vulnerability
assessments for extreme heat and other climate threats, in some cases adapting the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s BRACE model (Building Resilience
Against Climate Effects).8LHDs incorporated indicators of social vulnerability to climate change
impacts.
LHDs in Maricopa and Macomb counties used community-based surveys to assess
vulnerability to heat and flooding, respectively, in socioeconomically
disadvantaged populations that previously experienced these environmental
threats.
The Los Angeles County Department of Public Health collaborated with an internal
workgroup to develop a strategic plan for LHD climate action, including an extreme
heat response plan, and worked with an intersectoral workgroup to develop an urban
heat island mitigation plan.
Participants used various strategies and venues to inform and engage the public, CBOs,
and other agency partners, including workgroups (Philadelphia, New Orleans, Denver),
community climate health summits (Maricopa County, Milwaukee), committee work integrated
into larger community planning processes (Denver, Macomb County), and neighborhood
meetings (Minneapolis, New Orleans). LHDs in Los Angeles, Multnomah County, Minneapolis,
Seattle–King County, and New Orleans contracted with CBOs that represent
socioeconomically disadvantaged communities to inform, seek input from, and empower
their constituencies. In some projects, CBOs helped design (Multnomah County) and
communicate the results of vulnerability assessments and channeled feedback from
neighborhoods (New Orleans, Minneapolis).
CCCH established trust with LHDs, especially through in-person meetings and one-on-one
telephone calls. One-on-one consultation facilitated honest and nonjudgmental dialogue
about the project, progress, and challenges and provided an opportunity for CCCH to prompt
and encourage each LHD to move further into less comfortable territory (ie, related to
health equity and community engagement). Progress reports augmented project
accountability. CCCH made connections among LHDs that faced similar challenges or were
doing related work. The talent among the learning collaborative participants and the role
played by CCCH were mutually reinforcing. CCCH staff members contributed to credible
mentorship: a national leadership role with a broad network of public health contacts,
expertise in establishing and managing public health and climate change programs in local
and state government, and expertise in climate and health communications, policies,
climate science, epidemiology, Health in All Policies, and health equity.
We interviewed 22 key informants: 8 LHD senior staff members, 6 city sustainability
office staff members, 2 jurisdictional emergency management staff members, and 6 leaders
from nonprofit advocacy organizations or local CBOs. The interviews corroborated that the
learning collaborative spurred capacity building within LHDs to engage in work on climate,
health, and equity within their jurisdictions (11 of 12 LHDs), with intersectoral
partners, and with vulnerable communities. Non-LHD key informants reported that LHDs were
highly valued partners that added the human health dimension to a previous environmental
framing of climate change (10 of 12 LHDs). Key informants emphasized the unique role of
LHDs to collect, analyze, and communicate data that link climate, health, vulnerability,
and equity (12 LHDs). LHDs and non-LHD key informants acknowledged the severe funding and
capacity limitations that impede work on climate, health, and equity (8 of 12 LHDs).
The learning collaborative demonstrated that LHDs are an underleveraged national
resource. Most LHDs were able to raise awareness, engender interest, build executive
leadership support, and identify potential roles for various LHD programs. Ten LHDs
reported substantial increases in community awareness and engagement on climate and
health. Key lessons learned were the following:
LHDs can integrate climate change into existing programs and routine processes,
even with limited resources. A small amount of funding for explicit climate change
work triggered substantial activity, even in locations where no such work had
previously occurred. Core LHD skills, such as analyzing and presenting data,
community outreach and engagement, health risk communication, and serving as a
convener on health issues, are easily applicable to climate change. Because climate
change touches virtually every aspect of LHD work, multiple entry points exist in
LHDs for climate and health work. Emergency preparedness and environmental health
are adaptation oriented, but other programs aligned with chronic disease prevention,
epidemiology, and policy can incorporate mitigation activities.
LHDs can foster more robust community engagement on climate change through health
and equity. LHDs are trusted and active partners in their jurisdictions and can
leverage existing relationships with community partners to engage communities on the
issue of climate change, health, and equity. LHD awareness of community
vulnerabilities and concerns (including impacts of previous extreme weather events)
and LHD efforts to address health inequities, through a focus on the social
determinants of health, provide a context and sensitivity for the discussion of
climate and health that may allow LHDs to engage with communities in a way that
differs qualitatively from the way in which other local government agencies engage
with communities.
Many opportunities for LHDs to participate in jurisdictional activities related to
climate mitigation, adaptation, and resilience are unrealized. The limited
engagement of LHDs represents missed opportunities to infuse the concepts of health
and equity into climate change planning. More than 50 of the largest US cities
participate in national and international initiatives on climate change sponsored by
associations of mayors, cities, and nonprofit organizations.16LHDs can bring their expertise, skills, and community orientation into these
processes, and, most importantly, they can bring a health and equity lens that
potentially enhances the benefits to disadvantaged communities provided by local
government climate action planning.
The role(s) of LHDs in addressing climate change and its impacts are not yet well
recognized internally or externally.4,17Participation in the learning collaborative provided legitimacy for LHD
engagement and created a channel for buy-in within the health department and the
jurisdiction.
LHDs are increasingly aware of and interested in greater participation in work that
addresses climate change, but most LHDs lack the resources to initiate activities on
their own. The learning collaborative triggered discussion with non–participating
LHDs and expression of interest in discussing the activities and learnings (and in
participation in future learning collaboratives). For example, informal climate and
health exchanges sprung up along the West Coast and along the Colorado Front Range,
as well as interest in the feasibility of a climate and health learning
collaborative in Ohio.
Climate and health vulnerability assessment provides an important entrée for LHD
action. A climate and health vulnerability assessment provides evidence for action
and offers opportunities for engagement within the LHD, among governmental
departments, and in the community. It can focus on population risk factors (eg,
homebound persons) or on climate impacts (eg, heat). Inclusion of social
vulnerability and social determinants of health is required to address the health
equity impacts of climate change. The learning collaborative demonstrated that a
vulnerability assessment need not require substantial resources beyond those
available within the LHD’s epidemiology programs and/or local universities.
Vulnerability assessment provides an important foundation but is not sufficient to
guide broad-based action that considers both adaptation and mitigation strategies.
Vulnerability assessment is not, however, a prerequisite for LHD action on climate
change, as demonstrated by several LHDs (eg, Los Angeles).
The learning collaborative provided critical structure and a supportive process.
Because few LHDs are engaged in work on climate change and health, the learning
collaborative provided important support. Participants particularly appreciated
one-on-one consultation and peer support.
Communicating about climate change to staff members, policy makers, and the general
public is challenging, because (1) the issue is complex; (2) few examples of materials
for nonprofessionals explicitly address climate, health, and equity; and (3) few
examples exist of integration of climate change into routine LHD communications.
Building on the experience of the learning collaborative, we produced the first guide
for LHDs on climate change, health, and equity.18The need to develop and implement effective climate and health communications
that are field tested and evaluated in multiple public health programs and contexts is urgent.19
In some jurisdictions, concerns about the political polarization of climate change led
to hesitation about speaking openly about climate change and omitting references to
climate change from health messages about climate threats (eg, extreme heat,
mosquito-borne illness). When LHDs ventured to explicitly discuss climate change, they
found that communities welcomed an open discussion about climate change and health, and
LHDs received no negative feedback even in politically conservative environments.
LHDs were more successful in engaging actors in city and county government agencies
than in other programs within their own health department. The learning collaborative
focused on relatively large LHDs, for whom it is often difficult to break down
intraorganizational and programmatic barriers to communication. LHDs that focused on
internal capacity building were more successful in spreading work on climate change
across multiple programs than LHDs that focused on a specific project. Commitment and
engagement from high-level leadership fostered greater spread of learning collaborative
activities within LHDs. Many staff members wanted to be more engaged but were uncertain
how to do so given the dearth of precedents or models that integrate climate change into
programs with categorical funding and narrowly construed mandates.
Several learning collaborative participants discovered an unanticipated level of
interest in the health and equity impacts of climate change among both community
partners and other agencies, creating a demand for LHD engagement that exceeded
capacity. LHDs worked within the limitations of their funding for the learning
collaborative, but several LHDs leveraged the project to pursue additional funding.
LHDs have limited resources, which have decreased in recent years. In addition, LHD
staff members are constantly called upon to address immediate needs, such as Zika case
investigations (New Orleans), preparing for a Papal visit (Philadelphia), or responding
to a giant sinkhole (Macomb County). Senior leaders in many LHDs do not yet see climate
change as a priority. Several LHDs noted challenges in community engagement, such as
insufficient resources to contract with CBOs, turnover among CBO staff members, and
concerns about reaching out before solidifying internal LHD support.
Most learning collaborative projects focused on climate adaptation, yet the greatest
health co-benefits are likely to be in systems changes that lower carbon pollution (eg,
through active transportation and healthy food systems).20More opportunities emerged for a mitigation component as LHDs became more
conversant with the issue, strengthened their relationships with other agencies, and
engaged in discussions with community members about climate change and health.
The learning collaborative highlighted several strengths of LHDs. First, routine
collection, analysis, interpretation, and dissemination of data on health and its
determinants and climate-related environmental exposures support the essential function of
assessment. Assessment informs leadership of the health dimensions of the problem,
provides information to inform priorities and policies on climate change, and helps
managers understand how climate change affects other LHD priorities, policies, and service
delivery. Second, LHDs have knowledge and understanding of, and strong relationships with,
their communities, which facilitates the bidirectional flow of information on climate
change, health, and equity in community engagement. Third, LHDs are increasingly adopting
a multisectoral approach to improving health through a focus on the social determinants of
health. Multisector collaborations on Health in All Policies and climate, health, and
equity functionally overlap and are mutually reinforcing. Finally, LHDs have expertise in
communications on challenging health topics; however, this expertise is in its formative
stages for climate and health.
A limitation of the evaluation was that it was not conducted by independent reviewers.
However, the analysis followed a detailed, written evaluation plan; used official
documents whenever feasible to independently verify information; examined deliverables
including websites and educational materials, interview guides, and meeting agendas; and
interviewed persons not directly engaged in the project. We also believe that trust built
during the collaborative fostered candid self-assessment by learning collaborative
participants that allowed greater understanding of their challenges and achievements.
The learning collaborative model is replicable, and with additional resources and
coordinated approaches, LHDs can become important actors to counter the threat of climate
change. The learning collaborative advanced the field by providing examples of LHD capacity
building and community engagement for climate change, health, and equity. LHDs around the
country are rapidly adopting a Health in All Policies approach and increasing their
engagement with other agencies in their jurisdiction across multiple sectors to address the
social determinants of health and health inequities. These initiatives provide a venue to
integrate climate change and health. LHDs can advance the dual opportunities to provide a
health and equity lens in climate policy and programs and to educate other jurisdiction
staff members about the links among climate change, health, equity, and the health benefits
of climate action.
The authors acknowledge Laura Buckley and Brian Moy of CCCH, who provided technical
assistance.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests:The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding:The authors disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article: The authors acknowledge grant support from
the Kresge Foundation.
ORCID iD:Neil Maizlish, PhD, MPHhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-6672-1183
Articles from Public Health Reports are provided here courtesy ofSAGE Publications
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894