An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Department of Geosciences, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA. E-mail:maglau@princeton.edu
Received 2014 Jul 8; Revised 2014 Nov 21; Accepted 2015 Jan 5; Issue date 2015 Aug.
Methane (CH4) emission by carbon-rich cryosols at the high latitudes in Northern Hemisphere has been studied extensively. In contrast, data on the CH4emission potential of carbon-poor cryosols is limited, despite their spatial predominance. This work employs CH4flux measurements in the field and under laboratory conditions to show that the mineral cryosols at Axel Heiberg Island in the Canadian high Arctic consistently consume atmospheric CH4. Omics analyses present the first molecular evidence of active atmospheric CH4-oxidizing bacteria (atmMOB) in permafrost-affected cryosols, with the prevalent atmMOB genotype in our acidic mineral cryosols being closely related to Upland Soil Cluster α. The atmospheric (atm) CH4uptake at the study site increases with ground temperature between 0 °C and 18 °C. Consequently, the atm CH4sink strength is predicted to increase by a factor of 5–30 as the Arctic warms by 5–15 °C over a century. We demonstrate that acidic mineral cryosols are a previously unrecognized potential of CH4sink that requires further investigation to determine its potential impact on larger scales. This study also calls attention to the poleward distribution of atmMOB, as well as to the potential influence of microbial atm CH4oxidation, in the context of regional CH4flux models and global warming.
After 7 years of a steady-state concentration between 1999 and 2006, atmospheric (atm) CH4has been increasing steadily at 5 p.p.b. year−1(Dlugokenckyet al., 2009). At 1.80 p.p.m.v. in 2011, the atm CH4concentration is 217 times lower than that of carbon dioxide (CO2); however, it accounts for 18% of the total radiative forcing by long-lived greenhouse gases (IPCC, 2013) and has a global warming potential 75 times greater than CO2over a 20-year timescale (Shindellet al., 2009). Although cost-effective strategies could be applied to mitigate CH4production due to anthropogenic activities (~64% of current global total CH4emissions), future global CH4emissions will depend greatly on the uncertain responses of natural ecosystems to climate change, especially in wetlands and permafrost-affected areas in the Arctic and sub-Arctic regions (Dlugokenckyet al., 2011;Grahamet al., 2012).
Permafrost, defined as ‘ground that remains ⩽0 °C for at least 2 consecutive years' (Van Everdingen, 1998), is overlain by an active layer that thaws seasonally. By 2100, it is projected that the mean annual air temperature in the Arctic will have increased by up to 10 °C (IPCC, 2013), which would result in warming of the 17.8–22.8 × 106km2of permafrost (Zhanget al., 2008;Hugeliuset al., 2014) that contains 1034±183 or 1104±133 Pg of soil organic carbon in the top 3 m (Hugeliuset al., 2014). If 20–59% of the permafrost has thawed down to 0.5–1 m by 2200 as predicted (Schaeferet al., 2011), this large carbon pool would become available for microbial mineralization into greenhouse gases and may amplify warming. As a result of the concern about this positive feedback response that further intensifies warming, the transition of carbon-rich permafrost into CH4-emitting wetlands has been the focus of considerable research (1–9 inFigure 1;Supplementary Table S1), even though the majority (87%) of Arctic permafrost is comprised of mineral (that is, carbon-poor) cryosols (Hugeliuset al., 2014). Observations of atm CH4uptake were first reported in Alaskan permafrost sites in early 1990 s (Whalen and Reeburgh, 1990). Since then, atm CH4uptake has occasionally been reported in other permafrost-affected sites (a–k inFigure 1;Supplementary Table S1), including cryosols of high organic carbon and water saturation levels where CH4emission was expected. Recently reported CH4fluxes of polar desert mineral cryosols at Ellesmere Island, Canada over five consecutive summers also indicate consumption of atm CH4(a inFigure 1;Emmertonet al., 2014). In the present study, we investigated the CH4feedback response of mineral cryosols on Axel Heiberg Island (AHI) in the Canadian high Arctic by bothin situflux measurements and laboratory experiments, identified the active functional groups responsible for the feedback process and evaluated how these cryosols would respond to changing climate.

CH4field fluxes in the Northern Circumpolar permafrost region. Sites that showed net CH4release are sources (numbers) whereas those showed net atm CH4consumption are sinks (letters). The CH4fluxes are rounded up to the first decimal place except for values <0.1 mg CH4-C m−2day−1. Purple outline indicates that the presence of atmMOB is supported by microbial data. Information of soil characteristics is provided inSupplementary Table S1. Background map was generated using the interactive tool ‘The Atlas of the Cryosphere' (Maurer, 2007) available at the National Snow and Ice Data Center website (http://nsidc.org/data/atlas/).
The study site, characterized by high-centered ice-wedge polygons of acidic tundra, is located at an upland polygonal terrain in proximity to the McGill Arctic Research Station at Expedition Fjord (79°24'57"N, 90°45'46"W), AHI, Nunavut, Canada. The average depth of the active layer varied between 60 and 73 cm (mid-summer 2009–2011;Allanet al., 2014). The mean soil temperatures in mid-summer (14 July 2013) at both the polygon interior and the ice wedge trough were 9±0.8 °C at 5-cm depth and decreased to 3±1.4 °C at 20-cm depth. Soil temperatures were measured by LiCOR thermistor (Maxim Integrated Products, San Jose, CA, USA). The polygon (16 × 16 m2) from which cryosols were collected for incubation and molecular studies was sparsely vegetated but root materials were present to 15-cm depth (Stackhouseet al., submitted). Soil characteristics and pore water chemistry has been analyzed by Stackhouseet al.(submitted). Briefly, the cryosols were slightly acidic (pH 5.5–6). The top 10 cm of the active layer had up to 6 wt% of organic carbon but much less (~1 wt%) from 10 cm down to the permafrost table during summer. Total nitrogen did not vary with depth (0.1 wt%).
The general methodology of this study is presented here. A detailed version is provided in theSupplementary Material, which includes the measurements of CH4uptake in the field and under laboratory conditions, the setup of incubation experiments, various molecular analyses and the characterization of CH4uptake rates by the mineral cryosols.
In situCH4fluxes were measured in July 2011–2013 using a Picarro soil CO2-CH4gas analyzer (Picarro Inc., Santa Clara, CA, USA) or Los Gatos Fast Methane Analyzer (Los Gatos Research Inc., Mountain View, CA, USA) (Allanet al., 2014; Stackhouseet al., submitted and this study). Surface fluxes were measured in replicates using open-circuit dark chambers with continuous gas replacement from the air in 2011–2013 or closed-static chamber in 2013. Soil temperatures at corresponding depths were measured by LiCOR thermistor (Maxim Integrated Products).
As part of the long-term intact core-warming experiments, 4 g of cryosols were collected and processed as described in Stackhouseet al.(submitted) andSupplementary Material. Total DNA was extracted using the Fast DNA SPIN Kit (MP Biomedical, Irvine, CA, USA) (Vishnivetskayaet al., 2014). The extracted DNA samples were used to prepare metagenome shotgun libraries using the Illumina Nextera DNA Library Preparation Kit (Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) and sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq 2000 platform (Chauhanet al., 2014). Raw data from 16 near-surface (at 5-cm depth) cryosol samples representing different time point (T=1 week, 6 and 12 months) were processed and analyzed using MG-RAST (Meyeret al., 2008). All gene features were taxonomically assigned for determining the microbial compositions. The relative abundance of each individual genus was not statistically different at alpha=0.05 (analysis of variance in STatistical Analysis of Metagenomic Profiles (STAMP;Parks and Beiko, 2010)), and therefore means (and s.ds.) of all 16 samples were reported. Only the methanotrophic and methanogenic genera (as reviewed byNazarieset al., 2013) with relative abundances >0.001% were reported.
De novoco-assembly of raw sequences from 10 libraries (five 1-week and five 6-months thawed samples at 5-cm depth) were performed using MetaVelvet (Namikiet al., 2012). Functional classifications were annotated separately via IMG/ER and MG-RAST (ID: 4530050.3). Contigs identified as ‘methane monooxygenase' were searched for protein-coding genes because they may contain fragments of more than one gene. Phylogenetic affiliation of individual gene was queried against the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) non-redundant protein database using BlastX. Co-assembly of sequences from multiple libraries usually masks the genetic variations within and between populations or libraries, and the resultant contigs likely contain mixed genetic signals from the dominant population. We used the prefix pan- to indicate that the detected genes are not derived from a single clonal population.
De novoassembly is more preferred when compared with reference-based assembly because the latter prevents the discovery of new genotypes or variants by setting ana prioriframework for read alignment. Nonetheless, raw reads of five 1-week thawed samples (5-cm depth) were mapped to the representativepmoCAB operon of Upland Soil Cluster α (USCα) recovered by bacterial artificial chromosome cloning (GenBank Acc. No.CT005232) (Rickeet al., 2005) to demonstrate that a completepmoCAB operon of the USCα genotype was successfully assembled from our data.
Phylogenetic trees were constructed from deduced amino-acid (aa) sequences forpmoA,pmoB andpmoC genes that encodes for α, β and γ subunit of particulate methane monooxygenase (pMMO), respectively. All sequences had no frame-shift errors and no curation was applied. Three data sets, one for each gene, were created. Each data set contains the aa sequences of pan-pmogenes from this study and reference sequences downloaded from NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). For the latter where aa sequences were not available, nucleotide sequences were downloaded and translated. Positions covered by more than half of the sequences were included while unaligned and ambiguous positions were trimmed. RAxML (v7.2.7 alpha) (Stamatakis, 2006;Stamatakiset al., 2008) was used to search for the best-scoring maximum likelihood tree with the aa evolutionary model selected by ProtTest (v3.3) (Darribaet al., 2011) and empirically estimated base frequencies, and to perform a rapid bootstrap analysis of 100 iterations in single run.
Cryosols for metatranscriptomic analysis were collected on 15 July 2013 from an ice-wedge polygon (79°24'57"N, 90°45'48"W), namely polygon interior and trough. The samples were preserved using LifeGuard Soil Preservation Solution (MO BIO Laboratories, Inc., Carlsbad, CA, USA) and stored at −20 °C. Total RNA was extracted from 15 g of soil using the RNA PowerSoil Total RNA Isolation Kit (MO BIO Laboratories, Inc.). Illumina TruSeq libraries were generated from the total RNA following the manufacturer's protocols (Illumina) and sequenced on MiSeq (1 × 150 nt). Raw reads were quality controlled and assembled (built-in assembler velvet) using CLC Genomics Workbench (version 7.0; CLC Bio, Boston, MA, USA), and annotated by MG-RAST (ID 4548476.3 and 4548477.3 for the polygon interior and trough samples, respectively). Transcript contigs containingpmoB genes were translated and used as template for the alignment of the peptide sequences detected from the proteome experiment (as described below).
Cores showing high CH4uptake flux in the intact core-thawing experiment (Stackhouseet al., submitted) were selected. Cryosols at 5-cm depth from 1-week cores, within situwater saturation conditions, were subsampled and kept frozen at −20 °C. Three grams of cryosol was mixed with sodium dodecyl sulfate-based lysis buffer, and the slurry were subjected to protein extraction and trypsin proteolysis described earlier (Choureyet al., 2010). Digested peptides were separated on an in-house packed SCX (Luna)-C18 (Aqua) column and analyzed by an LTQ-Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA). The raw spectra acquired by 12-step MS/MS runs were searched via SEQUEST v27 (Enget al., 1994) against a custom pMMO database using parameters described elsewhere (Thompsonet al., 2006;Sharmaet al., 2012). Sequences of common contaminants such as trypsin and keratin were also concatenated to the database. Identification of at least two peptide sequences per protein was set as the criterion for positive protein identifications. Three technical replicates were analyzed for each protein sample.
Two sets of microcosms were set up to study the effect of water saturation and temperature on atm CH4oxidation rates. A frozen core collected in April 2011 (Stackhouseet al., submitted) was dissected into sections for every 10 cm. The peripheral rim of 5-cm thick was discarded to remove any potential contaminants from the core liner. The pristine cryosols were put into sterile Whirl-pak bags and homogenized by hand. The 0–10-cm section was used in this experiment. Cryosols were preconditioned to attain the desired water saturation levels of 33, 66 and 100%, respectively, by storing subsamples in a desiccator at 4 °C. Eight-to-10 g (wet weight) of cryosols were then put into vials and sealed with treated butyl rubber stoppers and Al-crimps. Blank vials containing no soils were used to track abiotic gas exchanges and minor instrumental drift. All treatments were run in triplicates. The headspace was flushed for 2–4 min with manufactured air (20% O2, 80% N2, 2.0 p.p.m.v. CH4, 400 p.p.m.v. CO2, 53±21 p.p.b.v. H2and 95±14 p.p.b.v. CO). Additional manufactured air was injected with a gas-tight glass syringe to overpressurize the vials to 1.5 atm. One set of 12 vials was incubated at 4 °C while another set was incubated at 10 °C. Gas was sampled from the headspace atT=0, twice per week for the first 2 weeks and weekly for another 2 weeks (period of incubation=31 days). Analysis was performed on Picarro iCO2 (Model no. G2101-I) using the G2101-i coordinator (Picarro Inc.). The detection limit for CH4is 50 p.p.b.v.
Q10is used to measure the rate of change of a chemical or biological reaction as a consequent of temperature increase of 10 °C.Q10values were computed for methanotrophy using (1) mean CH4oxidation rates obtained from microcosms for each treatment and corresponding incubation temperatures; and (2) mean CH4oxidation rates reported in the literature for which temperature data were available. For the latter, only rates collected from a temperature difference of >5 °C were used.
We are cautious about quantitatively extrapolating the observed effects of temperature and water saturation under laboratory conditions to the real situation and model prediction, therefore only field CH4fluxes and the corresponding surface soil temperatures measured during 2011–2013 expeditions were used to determine the Arrhenius relationship. Fluxes measured by open-circuit chambers were used to determine the relationship, whereas those measured by closed-static chambers were excluded to eliminate the variations resulted from different collection methods (Whalenet al., 1992). Natural logarithm of CH4uptake fluxes (yaxis) was plotted against 1000/temperature (xaxis) to create an Arrhenius plot, which showed a potential change in the slope. The data were then analyzed using the ‘Segmented' R package (http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/segmented/). For comparative purpose, other data were overlain on the plot (Figure 4), which include: (1) CH4fluxes estimated from our microcosm experiments at 2.0 p.p.m.v. of CH4; (2) CH4fluxes estimated from intact core-thawing experiments (Stackhouseet al., submitted); and (3) atm CH4oxidation sites at lower latitudes.

Arrhenius relationship of CH4uptake and surface soil temperature at AHI. Expected ln-CH4fluxes (thick line) and 95% confident intervals (thin line) were estimated from best-fit linear regression analyses. The breakpoint temperature reads 3.588 (eq. 5.6 °C), as indicated by the dashed line. Values of activation energy (Ea) and temperature coefficient (Q10) were derived from respective slopes. Results estimated from forest soils (parallel lines,Castroet al., 1995) are provided as a reference.
Monthly air temperatures at AHI during 1990 s and 2090 s were simulated through the Climate Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP5) using eight climate models (BCC-CSM1.1, CCSM4, CSIRO-Mk3.6.0, GFDL-ESM2M, GISS-E2-R, HadGEM2-AO, IPSL-CM5A-MR and NorESM1-M) (Tayloret al., 2012). The ‘high emissions scenario' assuming mitigation policies in action (RCP8.5) was used to project the climate change in 2090s. Monthly and annual atm CH4uptakes were estimated for temperatures from each model, and multi-model means were obtained by taking average across all models.
Air temperatures at Eureka, Ellesmere Island, Nunavut, Canada (N80°00'03', W86°00'25' 112 km NE of AHI) were available for 2010 and 2011 through Total Carbon Column Observing Network (TCCON) (Wunchet al., 2011). Temperature data (T) from late March to August 2011 was used. Missing data was gap-filled by linear interpolation between the two neighboring values. Mean daily temperatures were calculated by averaging multiple measurements on the day, which were then averaged to give monthly temperatures. The monthly and annual uptake fluxes were estimated in a similar manner as that using the CMIP5-simulated temperatures. Eureka is located at higher latitude where the temperature is slightly cooler than that at AHI. CH4uptake fluxes therefore were also calculated forT+1 °C andT+6 °C which, respectively, are more representative for our study site and also to mimic severe summer warming, which was not projected by climate models.
Measurement ofin situsurface CH4flux at various locations at the AHI site during the initial thaw and into mid-summer from 2011 to 2013 consistently showed atm CH4uptake (b inFigure 1;Supplementary Table S1). The CH4uptake rates at AHI (−0.1 to −0.8 mg CH4-C m−2day−−1) are at the lower end of the range (−0.02 to −17.8 mg CH4-C m−2day−1) observed among other sites in the Arctic and sub-Arctic region (a–k inFigure 1), but are comparable with that of other terrestrial systems at lower latitudes (−0.1 to −1.0 mg CH4-C m−2day−1) (Luoet al., 2013). The comparison of the scarce data on CH4uptake at the northern latitudes suggests that mineral cryosols act as a constant active atm CH4sink (this study andEmmertonet al., 2014) in part because of their low soil organic carbon availability, low vegetation cover and low moisture content (Supplementary Table S1). This field observation was followed up with molecular analyses and incubation experiments to understand this atm CH4oxidation process that is known to be mediated by microorganisms.
From the top 5 cm of intact cores in a long-term warming study (Stackhouseet al., submitted), we extracted DNA for metagenomic analyses. All gene features predicted by the MG-RAST M5NR database revealed that known methanotrophic taxa accounted for only 0.7% of all annotated sequences (Supplementary Table S2A) in comparison to the 55% of Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria (Chauhanet al., 2014). Among the methanotrophic community, α-proteobacterial (Type II) methanotrophs dominated over γ-proteobacterial (Type I) or verrucomicrobial methanotrophs (Supplementary Table S2A). The abundance of the methanotrophic community at our study site decreased with depth (Stackhouseet al., submitted).
Atm CH4oxidation primarily occurs by reaction with hydroxyl radicals (OH ) in the troposphere and stratosphere but is also mediated by aerobic CH4-oxidizing bacteria (MOB) that have high affinity for atm CH4, or atmospheric CH4-oxidizing bacteria (atmMOB) (Dlugokenckyet al., 2011). Soils consuming atmospheric CH4, for example, forest soils, show low Michaelis–Menten constants (Km), ranging from 2 to 348 p.p.m.v. (Kniefet al., 2003;Bender and Conrad, 1992). As genetic information on atmMOB has been limited to a collection ofpmoA genes encoding for the α subunit of pMMO (Degelmannet al., 2010;Martineauet al., 2014;Bárcenaet al., 2011) and a 42-kb-long sequence of the genotype USCα (Rickeet al., 2005), the search forpmogenes has been the only way to detect the yet-to-be cultured atmMOB whose phylogenetic identity of 16S rRNA gene has remained elusive.
De novoco-assembly of raw sequences yielded 13 contigs that contained genes affiliated to MMO and homologous enzymes (Supplementary Table S3A). Six of these contigs (528–1301 nt) yielded seven pan-pmogene fragments. We estimated the abundance of these pan-pmogenes by mapping read sequences against the 13 contigs. The low percentage ofpmogenes confirmed that MOB are a minority in the cryosol community (<1%) (Supplementary Table S3A). The phylogeny of our pan-pmoA,pmoB andpmoC genes (Supplementary Figures S1–S3) suggests that the prevalent pMMO-possessing MOB in our cryosol samples are closely related to USCα, which appears to be the dominant MOB in acidic soils where atm CH4uptake was reported (Kniefet al., 2003;Rickeet al., 2005;Martineauet al., 2014), such as our samples (pH 5.5–6).
In acidic forest soil samples where only USCα-likepmoA genes were detected, the 16S rRNA genes from α-proteobacterial familiesMethylocystaceaeandBeijerinckiaceaewere detected and were more abundant than γ-proteobacterial MOB (Lauet al., 2007), which is similar to what was found in this study. Although the phylogenetic identity of USCα cannot be resolved down to genus level, it is logical to think that, similar to the 16S rRNA genes, protein-coding genes of USCα are homologous to those of these two families. Hence, the gene features in our metagenomes being assigned to these two families may come from the USCα-like atmMOB. Unfortunately, these annotation results derived from all gene features do not give a reliable basis to deduce the relative abundance of our USCα-like atmMOB.
MOB strains grown under high CH4concentrations in the laboratory are found unable to oxidize CH4at low concentrations (<600 p.p.m.v.). However, exceptions have been reported in the literature. For example,Methylobacter albusBG8 oxidized atm CH4when supplemented with methanol (Bensteadet al., 1998), andMethylocystissp. SC2 oxidized atm CH4by expressing its high-affinity pMMO (Baani and Liesack, 2008). Genes related to these two genera, albeit at low abundance, were detected in our metagenomic data (Supplementary Table S2A), but the specific strains aforementioned were not detected. Although the contribution from other MOB cannot be excluded, USCα-like atmMOB is likely responsible for most of the observed atm CH4uptake at our site.
Technical problems such as insufficient sequencing depth in metagenomic analyses and primer bias in PCR-based assays (McDonaldet al., 2008) partly explain why atmMOB has not been reported in previous molecular studies carried out in the Arctic region (Supplementary Table S4). To our knowledge, this study presents the first report of USCα-like atmMOB in metagenomic libraries, indicating that our data may represent the largest inventory of USCα genomes available, which will facilitate the search for additional genes belonging to USCα and hence improve the identification of its phylogenetic lineage.
The metatranscriptomes detected transcripts closely related to USCα (Figures 2a and b), which confirmsin situatmMOB activity and its responsibility for thein situatm CH4uptake measured at our study site. Shown by the multiple sequence alignment of translated aa sequences ofpmoB genes, our USCα-like pan-pmoB genes do contain the conserved residues (H33, H137 and H139) coordinating the di-Cu center, the active site of pMMO (Balasubramanianet al., 2010) (Supplementary Figure S4). The number of raw reads related to USCαpmogenes in the polygon trough sample was about 100-fold higher than that in the polygon interior sample (118 vs 1 reads). Thirty-four percent of 8039 transcript contigs (>200 bp) assembled from the trough sample mapped to our metagenome contigs, including the 13 MMO-containing contigs (Supplementary Table S3B). Surprisingly none of the transcript contigs from the polygon interior sample matched with our MMO-containing metagenome contigs. The higherpmogene expression at the more vegetated, moist trough suggests that, like other MOB (Liebneret al., 2011), the USCα-like atmMOB has preference for vegetated micro-niches in polygonal terrains.

Transcripts of methane monooxygenase relating to atmMOB USCα. Mapping of metatranscriptomic reads from (a) the polygon interior and (b) the trough samples to the USCαpmoCAB operon (GenBank Acc. No.CT005232;Rickeet al., 2005). ThepmoA gene inCT005232is annotated as orf48. (c) Alignment of a translated aa sequence of the transcript contig 7286 and five unique peptides (color boxes) identified from a separate proteomic experiment. Mismatches are denoted by red letters.
Detecting a specific protein from a low-abundance population (that is, rare proteins) is challenging given the high protein diversity in soils. Nonetheless, metaproteome profiling of the near-surface cryosols from intact cores subjected to warming experiments yielded pmoB peptides. Five of the six unique pmoB peptides aligned to the same USCα-likepmoB-transcript contig (Figure 2candSupplementary Table S5), which confirms that the active USCα-like atmMOBin situis also active in our warming experiments performed on intact cores that exhibit net atm CH4uptake under all studied conditions (Stackhouseet al., submitted). The absence of pmoA and pmoC peptides in our samples may be partly due to the low extractability of these proteins as they are highly hydrophobic and embedded in the membrane lipid layer or partly because of their lower abundance relative to pmoB peptides. The more frequent detection of pmoB has also been reported in other CH4-oxidizing samples (Paszczynskiet al., 2011). Among the three subunits of pMMO, β subunits may serve a regulatory role as they do for the soluble form of MMO (Murrellet al., 2000) and therefore show a higher expression level.
The detection of active USCα at AHI indicates that high Arctic mineral cryosols are a previously unidentified habitat of atmMOB (Kolb, 2009) and the biogeographic range of this methanotrophic group extends to 80°N. The search for atmMOB in other Arctic cryosols may help to explain the phenomenon of atm CH4uptake in the polar region.
A factorial microcosm experiment simulating natural thaw conditions was designed to study the effects of temperature and water saturation on atm CH4oxidation. CH4(initial concentration at 2.0 p.p.m.v.) was consumed under all conditions by the end of a 31-day incubation (Table 1). Assuming a first-order rate law (Whalen and Reeburgh, 1990), estimated CH4oxidation rates at 33% saturation were threefold to fourfold faster than at 66% and 100% saturations at each temperature and twofold faster at 10 °C than at 4 °C (Table 1). Thermal sensitivity of atm CH4oxidation was quantitatively assessed using theQ10, which describes the rate of change of a reaction resulting from an increment of 10 °C. At 100% saturations, theQ10values fell within the range of 1.3–2.9 values previously reported from incubation experiments carried out at atmospheric or elevated CH4concentrations (Figure 3). In contrast, theQ10value was 6 at 33% and 66% saturations (Figure 3). In contrast, theQ10value was 8 at 33% saturation (Figure 3). Thus, lower water saturation not only increased the CH4oxidation rate, presumably by promoting the availability of O2and CH4to atmMOB, but also allowed atmMOB to be more responsive to temperature change. A similar interactive effect of water saturation and temperature on atm CH4oxidation was observed in boreal forest soils (Whalen and Reeburgh, 1996). HighQ10values were also estimated for CH4oxidation in Siberian cryosols at elevated CH4concentrations (Figure 3), suggesting that under some conditions thermal sensitivity of CH4oxidation is as high as that reported for methanogenesis, which exhibitsQ10values of 0.6–12, in some boreal and temperate wetlands (Whalen, 2005).

Temperature coefficients (Q10) estimated from incubation experiments. All symbols mark the mid-point of the temperature range (denoted by the error bars) from which theQ10was calculated. MWHC, maximum water-holding capacity.
Field fluxes of atm CH4uptake at AHI displayed different kinetic properties as a function of ground temperature between 0 and 18 °C. The breakpoint in temperature response, however, occurred at a lower temperature (5.6 °C) than previously reported from the temperate region (Castroet al., 1995), and the rate of increase was reduced remarkably at temperatures >5.6 °C (Figure 4). A stronger thermal sensitivity of atm CH4uptake at cooler temperatures suggests that the USCα at high northern latitudes may represent an ecotype containing cold-adapted pMMO.
Climate models predicted a seasonal difference in warming over the century, with 10–14 °C warming in fall/winter and 3–5 °C warming in spring/summer (Supplementary Figure S5). As a consequence, atm CH4uptake fluxes would take place over more months each year, which would then result in a fivefold increase in the annual atm CH4uptake to −1.8 mg CH4-C m−2year−1(Table 2). However, the mean summer temperatures simulated for the 2090 s were 5–10 °C cooler than the temperatures measured at nearby Eureka, Ellesmere Island in 2011 (Supplementary Figure S5). This summer warming further increased the annual uptake fluxes by a factor of 4–6 (−8.0 to −11.5 mg CH4-C m−2year−1) (Table 2). Although 2011 could have been an abnormally warm year (field observations andSturtevant and Oechel, 2013), this indicates that warming of 10 °C at the Arctic across all months is possible (Supplementary Figure S5).
Abbreviations: LCI, lower confidence interval; NA, not available; UCI, upper confidence interval.
In addition to warming, climate change over the next century is also expected to affect the atmospheric circulation, cloudiness and precipitation pattern. Recent climate modeling results have predicted that the loss of sea ice in the Arctic Ocean would result in increased wintertime precipitation over Arctic land, including the Canadian Archipelago (Deseret al., 2010;Higgins and Cassano, 2009). A critical question is whether such hydroclimatic changes would also result in increased soil moisture during summer (June–August) when microbial activities are their greatest (Table 2). This will likely depend on the local landscape and ground water hydrological transport.
Our study site is located on the slope (176-m elevation) within 200 m from a small lake (Colour Lake, 10 ha). Based on our field observations in the past 3 years, snowmelt increased soil moisture to saturated level during initial spring thaw when the temperature was low and when the measured atm CH4oxidation rates were also low. However, the surface cryosols, where atmMOB was most abundant, became dry (15–20 wt%) in summer when the temperature was warmer and when the measured atm CH4oxidation rates were higher. In light of the underground hydrological system that facilitates drainage of snowmelt, we therefore expect the acidic mineral surface cryosols at our upland site to stay dry during summer. The temperature dependence of atm CH4uptake was determined based upon field fluxes measured from initial thaw to mid-summer, that is, ‘initial wet/cold and later dry/warm' conditions. An increase in precipitation during summer would lower the atm CH4oxidation rates, as suggested by our microcosm experiments. Our predictions of CH4uptake increasing with future warming are therefore likely to be among the high estimates (that is, dry soils). Nonetheless, substantial uncertainties remain in determining the combined effects of twenty-first century changes in precipitation, evapotranspiration, land surface hydrology and permafrost structure on soil moisture (Hinzmanet al., 2013;Aviset al., 2011), hence vegetation cover and ultimately the balance between atm CH4oxidation and methanogenesis. Additional studies accounting for the links between microbial processes and hydroclimate should be carried out to reduce this uncertainty.
Net CH4flux in soils is a balance between methanogenesis and CH4oxidation where both reactions are sensitive to temperature change. It may then be a concern that future warming may convert our study site from a sink of CH4to a source if methanogenesis is enhanced relative to methanotrophy as a result of increases in soil temperature and moisture. Methanogens were present at the lowest abundance (0.16% of total sequences) in near-surface cryosols (Supplementary Table S2B; Stackhouseet al., submitted) where the oxic condition is inhibitory to methanogenesis. Depth profiling of dissolved CH4in the intact core-warming experiments detected methanogenesis taking place at depths near the permafrost table at 4 °C; however, pore water CH4concentrations diminished towards the surface and became undetectable at 5 cm (Stackhouseet al., submitted).In situdepth profiling of pore gas showed a minimum CH4concentration of <53 p.p.b.v. (at 23 cm) and then progressively increases with depth. Anaerobic microcosm experiments performed on active layer samples from this site yielded methanogenic rates of 0.4–0.9 nmols of CH4-C g−1day−1at 4 °C (Allanet al., 2014). Such a production rate extrapolated over the 70-cm depth of the active layer would be equivalent to 1.2–2.8 mg CH4-C m−2day−1if the soils were strictly anaerobic and no microbial oxidation were taking place. These results demonstrated that the relatively low amount of CH4being produced at depth is completely oxidized before reaching the atmosphere (open circles inFigure 4).
As a decreasing temperature gradient as a function of depth will exist naturally down to the permafrost table, (atm) CH4oxidation in the upper layers is anticipated to be greater than methanogenesis at the lower depths. AHI should continue to be a CH4sink under this assumption. Nonetheless, further investigations are required to determine: (i) the range of CH4production rates by subsurface methanogenesis that the aerobic methanotrophic community can accommodate before they cease providing a net atm CH4sink; (ii) the critical conditions (for example, temperature and water saturation level) under which this offset takes place; and (iii) changes in permafrost dynamics as well as the potential topographical and hydrological modifications as a result of warming.
Under expected patterns of climate change, AHI will continue to be a microbial atm CH4sink and the sink strength will vary distinctly in accordance with seasonal and inter-annual temperature variability. We recommend this two-kinetics temperature dependence of atm CH4uptake be implemented in CH4flux modeling to improve the predictive power. In addition, if atmMOB are ubiquitous in mineral cyrosols (and potentially present in peatlands), permafrost-affected cryosols (particularly mineral cryosols) have likely been modulating the rate of atm CH4increase. Further studies are required to determine the impact on the regional CH4fluxes, for example, (i) whether the uptake of atm CH4during summer months partially accounts for the dip of ~50 p.p.b.v. in atm CH4concentration and the δ13C enrichment observed seasonally in summer at high latitudes (Dlugokenckyet al., 2009;Pickett-Heapset al., 2011;Houwelinget al., 2000) and (ii) whether a CH4sink at high latitudes attributes to the unexplained bowl-shape variation in the CH4isotopic record across the Holocene period (Sowers, 2010).
We thank the Canadian Polar Continental Shelf Program (PCSP) for their logistical support and McGill University's High Arctic Research Station. The project was supported by US Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Biological and Environmental Research (DE-SC0004902) to TCO and SMP; NSF grant (ARC-0909482) to ACL; and grants from Canada Foundation for Innovation (CFI) (206704) and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Discovery Grant Program (298520-05) and the Northern Research Supplements Program (305490-05) to LGW. We also thank the reviewers for their valuable comments.
Author contribution
MCYL, BTS, ACL, JR, RLH, SMP, LGW and TCO designed research. MCYL, BTS, ACL, AC, TAV, KC, NCSM, PCB, GL-G, NB, JR, WHP, CRO, DMM and TCO performed research. All the authors analyzed data. MCYL wrote the manuscript and all authors commented on the drafts.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Supplementary Informationaccompanies this paper on The ISME Journal website (http://www.nature.com/ismej)
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
Articles from The ISME Journal are provided here courtesy ofOxford University Press
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894