An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Corresponding author.
Received 2023 Nov 21; Accepted 2024 Feb 16; Issue date 2024 Oct.
Building expertise in climate and planetary health among healthcare professionals cannot come with greater urgency as the threats from climate change become increasingly apparent. Current and future healthcare professionals—particularly internists—will increasingly need to understand the interconnectedness of natural systems and human health to better serve their patients longitudinally. Despite this, few national medical societies and accreditation bodies espouse frameworks for climate change and planetary health–related education at the undergraduate (UME), graduate (GME), and continuing (CME) medical education level. As a community of medical educators with an enduring interest in climate change and planetary health, the Society of General Internal Medicine (SGIM) recognizes the need to explicitly define structured educational opportunities and core competencies in both UME and GME as well as pathways for faculty development. In this position statement, we build from the related SGIM Climate and Health position statement, and review and synthesize existing position statements made by US-based medical societies and accreditation bodies that focus on climate change and planetary health–related medical education, identify gaps using Bloom’s Hierarchy, and provide recommendations on behalf of SGIM regarding the development of climate and planetary health curricula development. Identified gaps include (1) limited systematic approach to climate and planetary health medical education at all levels; (2) minimal emphasis on learner-driven approaches; (3) limited focus on physician and learner well-being; and (4) limited role for health equity and climate justice. Recommendations include a call to relevant accreditation bodies to explicitly include climate change and planetary health as a competency, extend the structural competency framework to climate change and planetary health to build climate justice, proactively include learners in curricular development and teaching, and ensure resources and support to design and implement climate and planetary health–focused education that includes well-being and resiliency.
KEY WORDS:climate change, planetary health, medical education, competency
Human health depends upon a stable climate and healthy planet. Record-high temperatures; wide-spread pollution of water, air, and soil; resource scarcity; and biodiversity loss are all consequences of human disruption to Earth’s natural systems. These and many other environmental factors affect multiple dimensions of human health and well-being—such as increasing the risk of food insecurity,1exposure to infectious diseases,2non-communicable disease,3forced migration,4and stresses on mental health.5Indeed, anthropogenic climate change and environmental degradation are among the greatest threats to public health in the twenty-first century, with disproportionate impacts on vulnerable populations.6
Building expertise in climate and planetary health among healthcare professionals cannot come with greater urgency. Climate-driven extreme weather events, projected to increase in frequency and severity, have already caused disruptions in healthcare delivery and poor health outcomes, particularly in racial/ethnic minoritized and low-income communities globally.7To rise to the growing challenges climate change poses to health and health equity, current and future healthcare professionals including internists need to understand the interconnectedness of natural systems and human health, and how climate-driven factors influence health at the individual, community, and societal level. This scope of planetary medical education is informed by existing climate and health frameworks, most notably the National Climate Action Climate Change and Health Conceptual Framework.8This framework builds on the social ecological model to describe how climate drivers result in adverse health outcomes, accounting for the moderating impacts of social and behavioral context (e.g., race/ethnicity, gender, education) and the built environment (e.g., land use and ecosystem change) on known exposure pathways that directly result in health outcomes (e.g., heat, poor air quality). In addition, this framework details indirect mechanisms through which climate change impacts human health, such as agricultural change, population displacement, and vector habitat changes that are geographically shifting the incidence of various vector-borne diseases. Incorporating such frameworks into medical education holds promise to improve internists’ ability to accurately diagnose and manage climate-sensitive health conditions. Moreover, physicians so trained will also be better prepared to comprehensively counsel patients through climate-related health threats by targeting the structural and intermediary drivers of adverse, climate-related health impacts, and advocate for climate-smart policies in their health systems,9,10communities, and society in the broader pursuit of health equity and climate justice.11,12
Despite the urgent need for climate and planetary health in medical education, few national medical societies and accreditation bodies espouse relevant frameworks for education at the undergraduate (UME), graduate (GME), and continuing (CME) medical education level. Nonetheless, medical schools and residency programs across the US and abroad are incorporating climate change and planetary health into their curricula13—often driven by learners themselves.14–17These decentralized initiatives are undertaken without consensus within and guidance from leading American medical education institutions. This has limited a formal, structured incorporation of climate change and planetary health–related competencies and requirements into curricula throughout the medical education continuum.13
The Society of General Internal Medicine (SGIM) had previously issued a position statement on the Health Effects of Climate Change.18Among its recommendations, the statement advocates for leadership in climate and health education, and exposure of trainees to curricula addressing the public health impacts of climate change. Building from these important points, this position statement informs how the medical education community at large can recognize and address the clear need for climate-informed medical education. As a community of medical educators with an enduring interest in climate change and planetary health, SGIM members recognize the need to explicitly define structured educational opportunities and core competencies in both UME and GME as well as pathways for faculty development (CME). In doing so, SGIM members recognize the opportunity to standardize and enhance existing climate and planetary health programs at medical schools, residencies, and professional societies across the country, and foster imagination and implementation of climate-sensitive programs that will allow humanity and the natural systems to thrive now and in the future.
In this paper, we review and synthesize existing position statements made by US-based medical societies to examine the extent of advocacy for climate change and planetary health–related medical education. While we recognize SGIM as US-based but internationally focused, and that climate change is a global issue, we have chosen to focus on US-based medical societies due to the authors’ familiarity with US medical education practices and policy. Then, we provide recommendations on behalf of SGIM that outline a proposed climate and planetary health–focused mandate for education in US-based UME, GME, and CME curricula. However, these recommendations are likely applicable beyond US-based medical curriculum given their wide-ranging scope.
SGIM represents more than 3000 of the world’s leading academic general internists, who are dedicated to improving access to care for all populations, eliminating health inequities, and creating a just system of care where all people can achieve optimal health—all through educating internists, undertaking the necessary research, and advocating for change. This position statement was developed jointly by the SGIM Environmental Health Interest Group and Medical Education Committee.
We undertook a narrative review of published and/or endorsed position statements from national medical societies focused on climate change and planetary health educational advocacy. For the purpose of this review, we defined a medical society’s position statements as being official position statements approved and/or made public from the governing authorities of the respective medical society. A list of medical societies was adapted from Bush et al.19and cross-referenced with a list from the US-based Medical Society Consortium for Climate and Health, which itself has been tracking climate and planetary health position statements from US-based medical societies. The co-authors examined this list of medical societies, created in 2022, to review any climate or planetary health–based official position statements from corresponding medical society websites. Societies were also approached via email or phone as a secondary measure to obtain position statements, including those position statements existing behind society paywalls.
Additional societies were added based on co-author expertise and experiences, and by examining peer-reviewed literature. We also reviewed reports from the UME and GME accreditation educational entities, specifically the Liaison Committee on Medical Education (LCME) and the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME). We finalized this search on June 25, 2023.
Position statements and reports were summarized and reviewed (AKG, AA, DL) using a rubric informed by the Planetary Health Report Card (PHRC).15The PHRC is an evidence-based advocacy tool that evaluates various facets of climate, planetary health, and education across US and international medical schools. The tool uses metrics that are informed by the prevailing literature on medical pedagogy and climate and planetary health. Used in over 96 medical schools across 11 countries, the PHRC is actively used (and public reported) as a tool to assess integration of climate and planetary health in healthcare education. Of the PHRC’s core metrics that focus on curricular development, the metrics that informed the rubric and the identification of gaps were (1) Health Effects of Climate Change; (2) Environmental Health and Effects of Anthropogenic Toxins on Human Health (including environmental justice); (3) Clinical Applications of Climate and Planetary Health; and (4) Administrative Support for Planetary Health, including faculty support.
Informed by the PHRC, four criteria were created, reviewed by the authorship team, and subsequently used to evaluate medical society position statement in relation to climate and planetary health–focused medical education (Table1): (1)Target audience(i.e., medical education at the UME level, GME level, and CME level); (2)Educational methods proposedsuch as promotion of curricular development, advocacy tools, and scholarship; (3)Emphasized content in educational missionsuch as the magnitude or urgency of identified climate change issues, and the application of climate/planetary health principles to patient care; and (4)Educational objectivesbased on Bloom’s Taxonomy of Educational Objectives.20
Evaluation Rubric of Medical Society Position Statements in Reference to Medical Education
To ensure consistency in the evaluation of each statement, each position statement was independently assessed by three co-authors (AKG, AA, DL) and where discrepancies existed, consensus was reached iteratively among this group. Then, the assessments were shared first with the entire authorship team, and then with the SGIM Medical Education Committee and Environmental Health Interest Group for comment to ensure consistency and agreement.
This position statement was reviewed by SGIM Council and approved on November 3, 2023.
Fifteen out of 113 (13.2%) US medical societies had an endorsed position statement that described climate health and/or planetary health. Of these, ten had made any explicit description of the role of medical education.21–30The features of each of these position statements according to the categories of the rubric are described in Table2.
Summary of US Medical Society Position Statements with Descriptions of Climate and/or Planetary Health
“Work to promote medical educational opportunities regarding the effects of climate change on the environment and child health. Programs during medical school and residency, as well as continuing medical education, can inform pediatricians on current and anticipated effects”
“Advocate for local, national, and international policies that reduce greenhouse gas emissions and for adaptation strategies that improve preparedness for anticipated climate-associated effects. Educate elected officials on the risks climate change poses to child health; speak at public hearings; and provide expert testimony. Help educate the public through letters to the editor and community engagement”
“NMA educate its members on the health effects of climate change and promote that members “lead by example” by increasing use of sustainable energy and energy conservation in their homes, offices, clinics, hospitals and other healthcare facilities”
“NMA educate their patients, policymakers, and the public about the health effects of climate change and the importance of climate mitigation and adaptation to the coming health threats of climate change”
“Supports educating the medical community on the potential adverse public health effects of global climate change and incorporating the health implications of climate change into the spectrum of medical education, including topics such as population displacement, heat waves and drought, flooding, infectious and vector-borne diseases, and potable water supplies.”
“Recognizes the importance of physician involvement in policymaking at the state, national, and global level and supports efforts to search for novel, comprehensive, and economically sensitive approaches to mitigating climate change to protect the health of the public; and (b) recognizes that whatever the etiology of global climate change, policymakers should work to reduce human contributions to such changes”
“…climate change and health content should be integrated into internal medicine continuing medical education and medical school and residency curricula, and physicians are encouraged to inform their community and policymakers about the health effects of climate change.”
“ACP reiterates its recommendation that climate change and health content be integrated at all levels of physician education to ensure that physicians are aware of risks to patients and are prepared to advise them accordingly.”
The content of the position statement varied among these ten statements. In terms of the target audience, seven medical societies described the need for medical education across the spectrum of UME, GME, and CME,23,24,26–30whereas two (the American Thoracic Society [ATS]22and American Academy of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation [AAPMR])25focused more on CME among established physicians in their specific specialties.
Among several medical societies (i.e., American Academy of Pediatrics [AAP],23National Medical Association,21American Medical Association [AMA],27ATS,22and American College of Physicians [ACP]),30advocacy played an important role in the educational methods described. Advocacy was often coupled with descriptions of the application of knowledge to patients and healthcare systems. Moreover, several of these societies were explicit in their description of how advocacy could be undertaken. For example, the AAP states “... [to] [a]dvocate for local, national, and international policies… that improve preparedness for anticipated climate-associated effects...[and] [e]ducate elected officials on the risks climate change poses to child health.”23Only the AMA and ACP position statements made direct references to curricular development in climate change and planetary health. Notably (but separately), LCME and ACGME lacked any mention of climate change in the reports or statements focused on medical education accreditation.
Seven of the ten medical societies detail how physicians, with the appropriate knowledge and education, can advocate to and for their patients about climate-induced health risks.21,24–26,28–30These ranged from forms of advocacy through public outlets (for example, the AAP details how physicians can “...help educate the public through letters to the editor”23) whereas the AAPMR underscored the importance of directly addressing climate and planetary health with patients, “... particularly those with disabilities.”25
All position statements evoked the foundational taxonomic features of educational theory—remember, define, explain, recognize, and understand. Four of the nine statements described in any detail the subsequent steps of utilizing this foundational knowledge to improve patient care and advocate. The AMA’s statement was the only one to directly speak to more complex and abstract educational objectives of critique, creation, design, and intervene by supporting “...efforts to search for novel, comprehensive, and economically sensitive approaches to mitigating climate change to protect the health of the public.”
Despite its growing importance, only fifteen out of 113 (13.2%) US medical societies advocated any position related to climate change and planetary health. Of these, only ten describe any role of medical education, doing so across different target audiences, with various explicit goals, emphases, and delineated educational objectives.
As organizations that ensure and maintain the professional identities of medical professionals, medical societies have the potential to play an outsized role in the advocacy for standards in medical education specifically related to climate change and planetary health. Findings from our analysis reveal several important gaps in how medical societies can leverage their platforms to promote the training of future and current medical professionals in climate change, planetary health, and the health and well-being of our patients. These gaps are informed by the relevant metrics from the PHRC in addition to the growing experience of the authorship group who represent medical educators in UME, GME, and CME who act as educational faculty in climate and health.
Our analysis of existing position statements underscores the need to advocate for systematic approaches to climate and planetary health in medical education. A lack of accredited competencies, the development of the necessary curricula, and the infrastructure required to address the needs across the UME, GME, and even CME curricula are notable from our rubric. There needs to be alignment of these goals by addressing the unique educational needs for each cohort at each stage of medical career. Further, while our analysis demonstrates that position statements highlight the importance of advocacy, there is limited emphasis on linking the science of climate change to health (i.e., evidence-based medicine), and bringing to bear this knowledge on clinical practice, as well as advocating for health system and societal changes to confront the impacts of the changing climate. An example of this may be a primary care physician utilizing the National Climate Action Plan to explain to their asthmatic patient how wildfire smoke exacerbates their underlying disease, thus explaining management strategies including the use of air purifiers, mask wearing, and remaining indoors.
Increasingly, medical education accreditation bodies emphasize the role of structural and social determinants on health. For example, the ACGME—the accreditation body for all GME in the US—requires both residents and their program directors to be aware and responsive to the structural and social determinants of health.31Climate change causes inequitable impacts on health and well-being, with the greatest adverse effects on the most vulnerable members of our society—be they children, older aged adults, and socially vulnerable and minoritized members of society.7Medical societies, as professional homes to physicians and medical trainees across the education continuum, have an important role in highlighting these inequities while advocating for medical professionals to develop the knowledge, skills, and abilities to address these climate-related impacts and achieve health equity and climate justice. In the US, the historical absence of strong federal policy has resulted in the majority of climate health advocacy efforts occurring at a local level through community-based action.32,33Therefore, it is imperative that proposed climate health educational guidelines center intersectionality through encouraging responsible community partnerships and providing the resources to sustainably do so.
Climate and planetary health medical education is unique in that it has the potential to reimagine components of traditional medical education. There is an increasing acknowledgement of the learner-driven approach to climate education.34–36Organizations such as Medical Students for a Sustainable Future,37the PHRC,15and Global Consortium for Climate and Health Education38and their respective initiatives have led the way in the development of learner-focused educational initiatives. These organizations speak to the overwhelming interest among the younger generation of health professionals to understand, address, and create opportunities to improve healthcare systems and the welfare of their patients. While student leadership has catalyzed many educational interventions in medical schools across the country, it is important for medical education institutions to responsibly aggregate, standardize, and implement this learning domain in partnership with their learners. Furthermore, this work highlights the need for faculty to build the requisite skills and knowledge alongside learners to understand, analyze, and examine the impacts of climate change on patients, and advocate for future steps.
The burgeoning effects of climate change on the mental health of learners, teachers, and medical professionals at large need to be acknowledged. In the past, climate-amplified extreme weather events have created widespread disruption to centers of medical education and medical student and resident training.39–41These events will be more likely in the future and threaten to worsen the disproportionately high rates of poor mental health in medical professionals and trainees. Furthermore, climate anxiety is being increasingly recognized among youth.42The increase in morbidity related to the changing climate and its effect on planetary health combined with this disruption to medical education needs to be highlighted by medical societies, and plans undertaken to address these important issues affecting the well-being of medical professionals regardless of the career stage.
These gaps invite opportunities to promote climate change and planetary health in a thoughtful, structured way across all levels of medical education. To this end, SGIM recommends the several actions to promote climate change and planetary health in medical education at the UME, GME, and CME levels.
#1 Call on UME/GME/CME Accreditation Bodies to Explicitly Include Climate Change and Planetary Health as a Competency
Increasingly, the many effects of climate instability on human health are being witnessed. To ensure a systematic, structured, and standardized incorporation of climate and planetary health into UME and GME curricula, both LCME and ACGME should explicitly acknowledge and detail relevant learning objectives, and competencies across the undergraduate and graduate levels of medical education for climate change and planetary health. Current tools exist (e.g., the core competencies, lecture materials, and suggestions for incorporation into existing curricula, created by the Global Consortium on Climate and Health Education)38that can be adapted and modified to ensure a holistic, biopsychosocial approach across organ systems, delivery of healthcare, and clinical specialty to climate and planetary health.43Many of these published competencies, developed and collated by experts at the nexus of climate change and medical education around the globe,44,45provide a detailed roadmap to development knowledge and understanding of key concepts in climate and health that consider environmental justice and viewpoints including from the Global South. By formalizing the current work being done at medical schools and residencies across the US and globally (often through the adaptation of existing curricula to accommodate climate and planetary health), medical educators can catalyze the implementation of frameworks for climate-focused education in a similar way to how social determinants of health have been incorporated in UME and GME curricula.
At the UME and GME level, climate and planetary health–focused competencies through specially designed objective structured clinical examinations may serve as appropriate tools of assessment. Moreover, as established faculty build their expertise in climate change and planetary health, CME opportunities in this space should be made abundant by medical societies and related professional organizations. For example, the incorporation of climate-focused questions in board certifications may serve as the necessary foundation of a fund of knowledge in climate and planetary health, acting as a bridge between GME and CME. Regardless, as climate change and health curricula start to be employed at their various levels, there will be opportunity to undertake assessment of these competencies creatively.
#2 Proactively Include Learners in Curricular Development and Teaching
Learners at all stages of their professional development continue to build expertise in the effects of climate change and planetary health on human health. Evidence of the impacts of a changing climate on planetary and human health continues to evolve and grow. The value of learner-driven approaches from the undergraduate and graduate levels of medical education is clear, made evident and demonstrated by widely disseminated initiatives such as the PHRC.15Therefore, SGIM believes that learners, particularly those undertaking UME and GME curricula, should not only have a seat at the table of the development of necessary competencies, learning objectives, and educational opportunities, but should also be provided with the necessary resources and educational stewardship from experienced medical educators to drive forward the educational agenda. By implementing this adult-learning approach to climate and planetary health–related education with highly motivated learners,46educators can lay the groundwork for engaging and novel educational experiences that will support learners to acquire and apply expertise, while also addressing concerns about limitations in space and time in curricula—a common challenge that lies in adding content to medical curricula already vying for space for several other important priorities.
#3 Extend the Structural Competency Framework to Climate Change and Planetary Health to Build Climate Justice
Structural competency47—the ability to understand how larger socioeconomic, cultural, political, and economic forces shape health outcomes with self-reflexive humility—provides an exemplary framework to learn and reflect upon the complex relationship between climate or planetary health and health equity.48SGIM endorses the use of this framework to better equip medical professionals at the various stages of their training to build the expertise and skills to address patient concerns individually, and at a systems-based level. When invoked in broader medical training, the development of structurally competent medical practitioners has the potential to cast a light on the nature of climate injustice through self-directed educational experiences, and imagine and build alternative pathways to address the consequences of climate injustice, thus enabling the development of tools for advocating for change.
#4 Ensure Resources and Support to Design and Implement Climate and Planetary Health–Focused Education that Includes Well-Being and Resiliency
Medical schools, residency programs, and professional societies must create room to integrate and assimilate existing educational objectives within a climate and planetary health framework. Doing so will ensure that communities of educators feel supported in the development of climate-focused curricular opportunities at all levels of medical education. This includes the provision of time for faculty to undertake the development of climate and planetary health modules, or the incorporation of available resources with time for professional education, throughout existing learning platforms. Importantly, proposed planetary health educational guidelines should explicitly encourage the delineation of time and resources dedicated to providing mental health resources for learners undergoing climate health education.
The need to educate current and future medical professionals regarding the effects of climate and planetary factors on human health is urgent. As new evidence continues to demonstrate the large impacts of climate-driven events on human health today, existing educational efforts—currently led and championed by learners themselves—will require formalization across medical education curricula at the UME, GME, and CME levels. Accreditation bodies, medical schools, residency programs, and professional societies all have an important role to play to ensure that future educational standards around climate and planetary health and the practice of medicine are standardized and structured. Utilizing existing structural competency frameworks and providing the necessary resources for learners and educators alike will promote the necessary changes to sustainably integrate this important topic into existing curricula to the benefit of patients and the general population.
The authors declare that they do not have a conflict of interest.
Publisher's Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Articles from Journal of General Internal Medicine are provided here courtesy ofSociety of General Internal Medicine
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894