An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Correspondence:Noah T. Leith (leith.eco.evo@gmail.com;leithnt@berkeley.edu)
Corresponding author.
Revised 2025 Oct 2; Received 2025 Apr 24; Accepted 2025 Oct 29; Issue date 2025 Nov.
This is an open access article under the terms of thehttp://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Carryover effects broadly influence adult performance and population persistence. Although variation in developmental environments can have contrasting effects on survival and reproduction, current predictive models of vulnerability to environmental change typically ignore simultaneous changes in both fitness components. We tested how developmental temperatures shape survival and multiple aspects of reproduction in a plant‐living insect (Enchenopa binotatatreehoppers) and used population dynamic models to examine the cumulative impact of these complex effects on population growth. We show that elevated developmental temperatures increase adult fertility, offsetting reduced juvenile survival and potentially forestalling population declines following global warming. Moreover, pairing mates from different developmental temperatures exacerbated morphological mismatches between sexes, reducing mating success and sperm transfer. Our findings thereby provide novel evidence that thermal carryover effects can generate assortative mating and selection on adult reproductive morphology, in addition to shaping the relative importance of survival and reproduction for persistence in warming climates.
Keywords:climate change, extinction, fertility, genitalia, mating behaviour, phenotypic plasticity, population dynamics, sex‐specific response, sexual selection, thermal tolerance
We show that hotter juvenile temperatures can increase adult fertility in an emerging model insect system. These reproductive benefits may be crucial for insect populations to avoid extinction during global warming, which often reduces survival rates. Population dynamics estimated from lethal stress alone, or without considering carryover effects from developmental plasticity across animals' different life stages, may be unreliable for predicting extinction risk in response to climate change.

Increasingly extreme and unpredictable temperatures are leading threats to biodiversity (Bellard et al.2012; Thomas et al.2004). Understanding the processes shaping extinction risk in the wake of global warming is therefore paramount to forestalling biodiversity loss. Although breakdowns in many fitness components could culminate in extinction, population persistence in warming climates—particularly for short‐lived organisms—may hinge specifically on reproduction (Franco and Silvertown2004; Le Coeur et al.2022). Reproduction is often more thermally sensitive than survival, causing the thermal limits of fertility to disproportionately influence species' vulnerability to climate change (Dahlke et al.2020; van Heerwaarden and Sgrò2021; Ørsted et al.2024; Walsh et al.2019). However, the thermal sensitivity of reproduction depends on the temperatures experienced across the entire life cycle; developmental environments can determine both overall performance and how adults respond to environmental variation later in life (i.e., carryover effects, Box1; Moore and Martin2019). Although some carryover effect models imply that adverse developmental environments consistently reduce both survival and reproduction (Lindström1999; Van De Pol et al.2006), theory predicts that variation in developmental environments could alternatively induce compensation or trade‐offs between fitness components (Metcalfe and Monaghan2001; Moore and Martin2019). Whether carryover effects on reproduction compound or buffer against the potentially lethal effects of global warming may crucially shape future extinction risk (Norris2005; O'Connor and Cooke2015).
Carryover effects occur when the environmental conditions experienced early in life (e.g. as a developing embryo or juvenile prior to adulthood) affect an individual's performance in subsequent life stages (Moore and Martin2019; O'Connor et al.2014). To characterise the types of carryover effects shaping performance traits, factorial experiments can test for specific patterns of performance across different combinations of developmental and adult environmental treatments. These carryover effects are mediated by developmental plasticity in morphological, physiological, and/or behavioural traits. Consequently, carryover effects could generate selection on these plastic traits to further exploit or ameliorate the fitness impacts of developmental plasticity (Moore and Martin2019). Below, we outline the predictions supporting different forms of carryover effects on adult performance and the consequences of carryover effects for selection on adult traits.
Silver spoon effects: Silver spoon effects occur when developing under specific conditions enhances or hinders performance across all environments in later life stages (Lindström1999; Van De Pol et al.2006). Silver spoon effects are supported if one developmental treatment increases average performance across all adult treatments. Silver spoon effects could also be sex‐specific, with effects of developmental treatments that differ in magnitude and/or sign between males and females.
Predictive adaptive plasticity: Predictive adaptive plasticity allows individuals to achieve higher adult performance in conditions that reflect their early life experiences, and therefore typically evolves when variation in developmental environments predicts variation in adult environments (Bateson et al.2014). Predictive adaptive plasticity is supported by significant interactions between developmental and adult treatments. For example, individuals that experienced relatively hot developmental treatments should achieve higher performance at relatively hot adult treatments. Predictive adaptive plasticity can also be sex‐specific; for instance, if only one sex's developmental treatment predicts its optimal adult treatment. Because reproduction requires performance by both sexes, adaptive plasticity (or a lack of plasticity) in one sex could even bias the sensitivity of reproduction to adult treatments in both sexes (Leith et al.2021).
Assortative reproduction: Reproductive performance may be hindered if mating partners developed under different environmental conditions, as these individuals may express incompatible reproductive phenotypes (West‐Eberhard2005). Carryover effects leading to assortative reproduction by developmental environment are supported by significant interactions between female and male developmental treatments, with reduced performance when males and females are from different treatments. Assortative reproduction carryover effects can be asymmetric; for example, if performance decreases when males from cold developmental treatments are paired with females from warm developmental treatments, but not vice versa.
Consequences for selection on adult traits: If carryover effects shape selection on adult phenotypes, then an individual's developmental environment and/or the developmental environment of their mates should influence (i) the expression of adult traits, and (ii) if and how developmentally plastic traits affect adult performance. For instance, optimal developmental environments may enable more individuals to express high‐performance adult phenotypes, leading selection to act in the same direction as plasticity in this environment (Moczek et al.2011; West‐Eberhard2005). When a developmental environment causes individuals to express maladaptive phenotypes, selection should instead act in the opposite direction of developmental plasticity. For instance, potential mates that developed in different environments may express more divergent reproductive phenotypes that are less compatible compared to potential mates that developed in the same environment (West‐Eberhard2005). As a result, selection should be stronger when mates develop in mismatched environments, favouring individuals with traits that resemble the phenotypes expressed in their mate's developmental environment.
Carryover effects from embryonic and juvenile temperatures are widespread and can shape lifelong survival, adult behaviour, and reproductive performance in many ways (Kefford et al.2022; Ma et al.2021). Developmental temperatures can affect both average reproductive performance and the sensitivity of reproduction to adult temperatures (Abram et al.2017). For example, optimal developmental temperatures can increase overall adult fecundity (silver spoon effect, Box1; Min et al.2021; Scharf et al.2015; Vasudeva2023), whereas suboptimal developmental temperatures can exacerbate reduced fecundity at suboptimal adult temperatures (Velikaneye and Kozak2024). In other cases, individuals that survive stressful developmental temperatures can recover upon adulthood (Sales et al.2021), or the adult temperatures where reproductive performance peaks may shift to match prevailing developmental temperatures (predictive adaptive plasticity, Box1; Macchiano et al.2023; Rebolledo et al.2021; Slotsbo et al.2016; Vasudeva et al.2019). Different types of carryover effects may even shape different stages of reproduction such that developmental temperatures affect gametogenesis, mating behaviour, fertilisation, and parental care in distinct ways (Dougherty et al.2024; Leith et al.2021; Pilakouta and Baillet2022; Sidhu et al.2024).
Sex‐specific plasticity can have important reproductive consequences, since mating and fertilisation require coordination between males and females. Sexes typically differ in the thermal sensitivity of adult performance (Chatten et al.2025; Pottier et al.2021) and heightened thermal sensitivity in one sex can disproportionately shape the thermal sensitivity of mating rates between sexes (Brandt et al.2018; Leith et al.2020,2021; Macchiano et al.2023; Pembury Smith et al.2025). Moreover, sex‐specific effects of developmental temperatures on sexual signals and mating preferences (Beckers and Schul2008; Lis et al.2020; Macchiano et al.2023; Singh et al.2020) could disrupt mate localization, species recognition, and the ability to choose beneficial mates in altered thermal environments (Tuomainen and Candolin2011). Even just before and during copulation, sex‐specific plasticity in body size (Lafuente et al.2018; Singh et al.2020) and genitalia (Berger et al.2011; Blanckenhorn and Hellriegel2002; Fischer et al.2003; Iglesias‐Carrasco et al.2020; Klepsatel et al.2019; McDonald et al.2018; Vasudeva et al.2014,2019) can hinder genitalia coupling and sperm transfer (Eberhard et al.1998; Holwell et al.2010; Simmons2014). By contrast, congruent plasticity between sexes can maintain reproduction when temperatures vary between generations (Vasudeva et al.2019) or facilitate assortative mating by developmental environment (Box1; Beckers and Schul2008; West‐Eberhard2005). Recent conceptual and computational advancements predict that these reproductive consequences of sex‐specific plasticity should scale up to shape population growth rates and the outcomes of natural selection, but tests of these hypotheses are rare (Box1; Forsman2018; Hangartner et al.2022; Moore and Martin2019; Stillwell et al.2010).
Here, we tested how carryover effects from juvenile temperatures influence multiple stages of reproduction and examined the consequences of carryover effects for selection on adult phenotypes and population growth rates. Our study focused onEnchenopa binotatatreehoppers, a phytophagous insect that experiences highly variable temperatures during development and adulthood (Jocson et al.2019; Leith et al.2024). We reared insects at two developmental temperatures (21°C or 26°C) and staged mating interactions between adults from the same or different developmental treatments. The mating interactions occurred across a continuous range of temperatures (28°C–33°C), allowing us to test how developmental temperatures affected overall performance and the sensitivity of reproduction to thermal variation during adulthood. We quantified changes in mating likelihood, fertility (sperm transferred and egg laying likelihood), and fecundity (number of eggs laid) and hypothesized that changes in performance at each stage of reproduction would be associated with mismatches in male–female morphology driven by sex‐specific plasticity. Finally, we developed a population dynamic model and parameterized it using our experimental results. This model evaluated the alternative hypotheses that carryover effects on each stage of reproduction culminate to either intensify or buffer against reduced survival in warming environments.
We studiedEnchenopa binotatatreehoppers that have specialised in the woody shrub,Ptelea trifoliata(Sullivan‐Beckers and Cocroft2010; Wood1980).Enchenopa binotataspends their entire life cycle on their host plant species, including overwintering as eggs in the stems, developing as juveniles during late spring, and mating as adults from mid to late summer (Sullivan‐Beckers and Cocroft2010). We can therefore reliably link the effects of host plant temperatures on treehopper performance in the laboratory to natural variation in microclimates and lifelong treehopper fitness (Jocson et al.2019; Leith et al.2024; Macchiano et al.2023).
We collected wildE. binotataas 1st and 2nd instar juveniles in Columbia, Missouri, USA (38.924925, −92.318294) during the first week of May 2021 and May 2022. We sampled multiple trees and branches to account for genetic variation (Rebar and Rodríguez2014). We reared the juveniles in a laboratory in St. Louis, MO, USA, where they were randomly assigned to a developmental temperature of 21°C or 26°C (Tdev). TheseTdevfall within the natural range of microclimates where juveniles develop until adulthood and reflect year‐to‐year differences in developmental microclimates at the field site (seeSupporting Information; FiguresS1andS2; Macchiano et al.2023). We placed approximately 125 juveniles on each of 16 potted and netted host plants in 2021 (eight plants for eachTdevtreatment) and on each of 14 potted and netted host plants in 2022 (seven plants for eachTdevtreatment). Rearing plants were placed in custom wooden incubators with glass doors (Macchiano et al.2023) set to either 21°C or 26°C and 45% relative humidity with a 100 W full spectrum LED plant grow light (14:10 h light: dark photoperiod) mounted outside of each incubator. At adulthood, we moved the plants to four Darwin Chambers incubators (PG034) set to 23.5°C (the midpoint between theTdevtreatments) and 45% relative humidity. Additional details on the rearing protocol are provided in theSupporting Information.
We tested for carryover effects on mating likelihood, fertility, and fecundity by staging mating trials at sexual maturity (6 weeks into adulthood at the onset of female mating receptivity; Rodríguez and Cocroft2006). In 2021, we paired males and females from either the same or differentTdevtreatments and tested how developmental and adult mating temperatures affected mating likelihood and sperm transfer. In 2022, we only paired males and females from the sameTdevand tested how developmental and mating temperatures affected mating likelihood, egg‐laying likelihood, and total eggs laid. Our results from the 2021 experiment indicated low mating and fertilisation success for pairs from differentTdevtreatments (see Results), which would have limited our sample size for fecundity. Moreover, pairs from similarTdevare likely most common in wildE. binotata, given that developmental microclimates in the field show limited variation across individual plants within a year and significant variation across years (seeSupporting Information). Only using matchedTdevtreatments between sexes in the 2022 trials therefore prioritised the most ecologically realistic relationships between survival and reproduction under warming. This approach was key for our population dynamic models (see below), which were predominantly informed by the 2022 mating trials. Before each mating trial, we randomly paired a male and female from different rearing plant replicates and assigned the pair to one of the three target testing temperatures that we used as set points for the thermostats in the testing incubators (i.e., mating temperatures,Tmate: 23°C, 28°C or 33°C). We recordedTmateas the actual temperature at the time of mating, or at the end of the trial if mating did not occur, at a resolution of 0.1°C. TheTmatevalues thus varied continuously from 22.8°C to 35°C, reflecting natural variation in microclimate temperatures on host plants during peak mating season (Leith et al.2024). Testing across this range is sufficient to detect variation in the optimal temperature for mating likelihood (Fowler‐Finn et al.2025; Leith et al.2020; Macchiano et al.2023). Moisture released from the potted testing plants kept the testing environments at approximately 45% relative humidity regardless ofTmatetreatment.
The mating trials followed established protocols for assaying thermal sensitivity inE. binotatamating behaviour (Leith et al.2020; Macchiano et al.2019,2023; Sasson et al.2022). We first acclimated individuals for 20 min in incubators at the assignedTmate. Then, we placed the female onto the main stem of the testing plant 15 cm above the soil. After the female acclimated for 5 min, we introduced the male approximately 10 cm below the female. We recorded whether mating occurred to estimate mating likelihood and allowed the pair to freely interact until they finished mating, or after 4 h if mating did not occur (Leith et al.2020; Macchiano et al.2023). We recorded mating latency and duration when mating occurred, since mating duration can affect fecundity inE. binotata(Cirino et al.2024), and ended the trial once the pair naturally separated. All individuals were used only once and males were euthanized following trial completion. Overall, 253 mating trials were included in our analysis in 2021 and 169 mating trials were included in our analysis in 2022 (see TableS1for sample size in eachTdev–Tmatetreatment combination).
To quantify sperm transfer in 2021, we euthanized and preserved mated females by freezing them at −20°C immediately following trials, then dissected sperm from their bursa copulatrix (organ where sperm is stored immediately after copulation before transfer to the spermatheca). To quantify egg laying likelihood and total eggs laid in 2022, we placed mated females individually on new netted plants and maintained them outside for overwintering. After all females senesced, we determined whether females laid at least one egg and counted the number of eggs in laid egg masses (following Fowler‐Finn et al.2018). Egg masses are easily identified by their white waxy coating. SeeSupporting Informationfor further details on quantifying fertility and fecundity.
We characterised carryover effects at each stage of reproduction (mating likelihood, mating latency, mating duration, sperm transferred, egg laying likelihood, and total eggs laid; Box1) using a series of generalised linear models (stats, R v4.2.0; R Core Team2022) and visualised all results withggplot2(Wickham2016). SeeSupporting Informationfor details on the effect structures, error distributions, and link functions for each model.
To test if morphological plasticity underlies carryover effects on reproduction (Box1), we first measured a series of adult morphological traits for the individuals in the 2021 mating trials. We measured three traits representing body size (pronotum length, face length, and the length of right femur II; Rodríguez and Al‐Wathiqui2012,2011), two traits representing female genitalia (ovipositor traits 1 and 2), and five traits representing male genitalia (aedeagus traits 1–3 and style traits 1 and 2). SeeSupporting Informationfor details on morphometrics.
To test for plasticity in each morphological trait in response to developmental temperature (Tdev), we fit linear mixed effects models (lme4; Bates et al.2015) with each trait as a response variable,Tdevas a fixed effect, and rearing plant replicate as a random effect. We fit separate models for male and female traits and assessed significance withFtests. Supplementary analyses showed strong hypoallometry and no developmental plasticity in the scaling relationships between genitalia and body size, suggesting selection for precise coupling of the focal genital traits (seeSupporting Information, TableS6; Eberhard et al.1998). Next, we tested ifTdevaffected relationships between morphology and reproductive performance (i.e., selection on morphology; Box1) using separate generalised linear models for each of the fourTdevtreatment combinations. Mating likelihood and sperm transfer were fit as response variables, with effects ofTmateand the traits that showed plasticity in response toTdev(female face length, ovipositor trait 1, and aedeagus trait 3; seeSupporting Informationand TablesS8andS9for model details). We determined that selection on a morphological trait was stronger in aTdevtreatment if the standardised parameter estimate of the trait effect exceeded the 95% confidence intervals of the effects in otherTdevtreatments.
We developed a mathematical model in R (R Core Team2022) that incorporates the direct and carryover effects of temperature during development (Tdev) and at the time of mating (Tmate) and predictsE. binotatapopulation growth rate over the course of one generation. Because female mating inE. binotatais not limited by the availability of males (Sullivan‐Beckers and Cocroft2010), our model considered only female fitness and focused on the processes shaping female fecundity in our 2022 experiment. We modelled population growth rate using the five parameters that showed significant effects on reproductive performance (see Results). Females mate successfully with a probability ofPmate. After mating, females lay eggs with probabilityPegg. If females lay eggs, the average number of eggs laid over their lifetime isE. The sex ratio of the hatching juveniles isS, and the probability of surviving from the egg stage until moult to adulthood isμ. We splitμinto three components: egg hatching rate (μegg), juvenile survival rate (μjuv), and adult survival to sexual maturity (μadult).
We used the following model to simulate the effects of temperature during development and mating onE. binotatapopulation growth rate. WithNtas the number of females at timet, the change in population size can be modelled as:
wherePmateTmateindicates thatPmatedepends onTmate, andPeggTdevandμjuvTdevindicates thatPeggandμjuvdepend onTdev. The population growth rateλis:
whereλ= 1 indicates population stasis,λ> 1 indicates population growth, andλ< 1 indicates population decline. We simulatedλfor populations of 100 females across for each combination ofTdev(21°C or 26°C) andTmate(every 1°C between 10°C and 40°C), encompassing the full range of potential mating temperatures encountered in the field (Jocson et al.2019; Leith et al.2024). The model determined whether each female mated and oviposited at least one egg by randomly drawing values from a uniform distribution between 0 and 1; a female mated or laid at least one egg if the random number was less thanPmateorPegg, respectively. The number of offspring produced by each female that mated and then oviposited was drawn from a Poisson distribution (mean = expected lifetime egg production (E)).
We used generalised linear models and the data from the 2022 mating trials to parameterize effects ofTdevandTmateon each stage of reproduction. We used a binomial error distribution for estimatingPmateandPegg, and a gaussian error distribution for estimating log(E). We included a quadratic term to estimate the effect ofTmateonPmatesincePmateis highest at intermediate values ofTmate:
TheTmateestimate assumes that females that have not mated after 4 h will not mate even if they encounter another male at the same temperature, since our mating trials were 4 h long and the mean latency to mate when mating occurs is around 1.5 h (see Results; Leith et al.2020; Macchiano et al.2023). Parameterizing the quadratic effect ofTmateonPmateusing the data from the 2021 mating trials produced similar effects on the relationships between population growth rates acrossTdev(FigureS4). We used the model estimates from an effect ofTdevonPegg, wherePegg= 0.85 whenTdev= 21°C andPegg= 1.0 whenTdev= 26°C. Because we did not detect significant effects ofTdevorTmateonE, we used the median value ofE= 71 eggs. We did not directly collect data on the sex ratioSof the hatching juveniles nor on the probability of surviving from eggs to the adult stageμ. However, a previous field study (Leith et al.2024) suggests that adult sex ratios are approximately equal at the start of the mating season (S= 0.5). To estimateμ, we estimatedμegg= 0.2,μjuv= 0.4, andμadult= 0.9 based on previous work inE. binotataand other ecologically similar treehopper species (Caceres‐Sanchez et al.2017; Morales et al.2022; Wood and Guttman1982; Zink2003), resulting in an overallμ=μegg·μjuv·μadult= 0.07. Although juvenile mortality was not directly measured in 2022, we used the ratio of adults that emerged in eachTdevtreatment in 2021 and in a previously published study (Macchiano et al.2023) to estimate the impacts ofTdevon survival. We found 12% fewer adults surviving atTdev= 26°C (676 total adults) compared toTdev= 21°C (768 total adults) in our 2021 experiment, despite starting with approximately equal numbers. We explored the effects of different levels of reduced juvenile survival atTdev= 26°C to account for uncertainty in this effect (see below).
We examined three scenarios whereTdevaffected juvenile survival (μjuv): no effect ofTdevon juvenile survival (μjuv= 0.4), a moderate effect (μjuv= 0.43 whenTdev= 21°C and 0.37 whenTdev= 26°C), or a severe effect (μjuv= 0.48 whenTdev= 21°C and 0.32 whenTdev= 26°C). The moderate survival effect was calculated based on typical juvenile survival in nature (μjuv= 0.4; see above) and the ratio of surviving adults in the 21°C versus 26°CTdevtreatments in the 2021 mating trials (768:676 adults). The severe effect was calculated with the same method, but using the ratio of surviving adults in a previous study with the sameTdevtreatments (117:79 adults; Macchiano et al.2023). Finally, we examined whether the carryover effect ofTdevonPeggcounteracted the effects ofTdevonμjuvby definingPegg= 0.93 at both values ofTdevin each survival scenario and comparing the outcomes of these population models to models that included an effect ofTdevonPegg. We repeated the simulation 500 times for all six population models (three survival scenarios, either with or without carryover effects ofTdevonPegg) and calculated the means and 95% confidence intervals for the distributions of predictedλvalues.
An interaction between female and maleTdevin 2021 suggests asymmetric assortative mating (χ12= 7.09,p= 0.0078; TableS3; Box1), with reduced mating when females reared at 21°C were paired with males reared at 26°C (Figure1). Mating likelihood peaked between 24°C and 28°CTmate, indicated by a negative linear effect ofTmatein 2021 (χ12= 13.55,p= 0.0002) and a quadraticTmateeffect in 2022 (χ12= 5.59,p= 0.0180; Figure1). Notably, this quadraticTmateeffect closely resembled a published mating likelihood thermal performance curve using the sameTdevtreatments but a broader range ofTmate(FigureS3; Macchiano et al.2023). No interaction betweenTdevandTmatesuggests no predictive adaptive plasticity in mating likelihood (Box1; Table 1). Finally, mating duration decreased at hotterTmate, butTdevdid not affect mating duration (TableS4) and neitherTdevnorTmateaffected mating latency (TableS4).

Effects ofE. binotatadevelopmental temperatures (Tdev) and adult mating temperatures (Tmate) on mating likelihood in the 2021 mating trials (points and solid lines) and 2022 mating trials (bars and dashed lines, a and b only). Point colours indicate female and maleTdev, where blue is 21°C and 21°C (a), open purple is 21°C and 26°C (b), open yellow is 26°C and 21°C (c), and red is 26°C and 26°C (d), respectfully. Fitted curved and 95% CI bands were determined from GLMs. Mating likelihood decreased when females reared at 21°C were paired with males reared at 26°C. Mating likelihood was also highest at intermediateTmate, reflecting previous results across a broaderTmaterange (FigureS3; Macchiano et al.2023), and the optimalTmateappeared slightly warmer in 2022 than in 2021 (a, d).
Females received more sperm if they developed at 21°CTdev(χ12= 12.71,p= 0.0004), but males transferred more sperm if they developed at 26°CTdev(χ12= 5.37,p= 0.0205; TableS3; Figure2a), indicating sex‐specific silver spoon effects on sperm transfer (Box1). Sperm transfer was not affected byTmate(nor aTdevbyTmateinteraction; TableS3) and therefore did not show predictive adaptive plasticity (Box1).

Effects ofE. binotatadevelopmental temperatures (Tdev) on (a) sperm transferred during mating in the 2021 trials, and (b) egg laying likelihood and (c) total eggs laid in the 2022 mating trials. Large points show estimated marginal means from GLMs ±95% CI. Point colours indicate female and maleTdev, where blue is 21°C and 21°C, open purple is 21°C and 26°C, open yellow is 26°C and 21°C, and red is 26°C and 26°C, respectfully. (a) Sperm transfer increased when females developed at 21°C and when males developed at 26°C, regardless of pairing. (b) Egg laying likelihood increased when treehoppers developed at 26°C. (c) Total eggs laid was not affected byTdev. Adult mating temperature (Tmate) did not affect sperm transfer, egg laying likelihood, or total eggs laid.
Four out of 27 mated females in the 21°CTdevtreatment did not produce eggs (Figure2b), but mated females always produced eggs whenTdevwas 26°C, indicating a silver‐spoon effect on female fertility (χ12= 6.16,p= 0.0131; TableS3; Figure2b; Box1). However,Tdevdid not affect the number of eggs laid (TableS3; Figure2c). Egg‐laying likelihood and the number of eggs laid were not affected byTmate(nor aTdevbyTmateinteraction; TableS3) and therefore did not show predictive adaptive plasticity (Box1).
HotterTdevled to larger female ovipositors (ovipositor trait 1;F= 5.17,p= 0.0395), larger female body sizes (female face length;F= 4.61,p= 0.0498), and larger male aedeagi (aedeagus trait 3;F= 11.75,p= 0.0043; TableS7; Figure3). Developmental temperature also affected the relationships between these traits and reproductive performance. Ovipositor size only affected mating likelihood whenTdevwas 21°C for both sexes, with smaller ovipositors conferring increased mating success (χ12= 7.71,p= 0.0055; Figures3dand4a; TableS8).

Effects ofE. binotatadevelopmental temperatures (Tdev) on (a–c) female and male morphological traits related to body size and genitalia, and (d–g) the effects of morphological variation on mating success and sperm transfer in the 2021 mating trials. In (a–c), blue points indicate 21°CTdevand red points indicate 26°CTdev. Large points in (a–c) show estimated‐marginal means from LMMs ±95% CI. Points in (d–g) show standardised parameter estimates (β) ± 95% CI from GLMs.

Changes in selection onE. binotatamorphology across developmental temperatures (Tdev). Colours indicate female and maleTdev(blue is 21°C and 21°C, purple is 21°C and 26°C, and yellow is 26°C and 21°C). Lines and bands are estimated fits ±95% CI from GLMs. (a) Females with smaller ovipositors mated more whenTdevwas 21°C for both sexes. (b) Males with smaller aedeagi mated more whenTdevwas 21°C for females and 26°C for males. WhenTdevwas 26°C for females andTdev21°C for males, mating likelihood increased for the smallest females (c) and for males with larger aedeagi (d), and smaller females received more sperm (e).
WhenTdevwas 21°C for females and 26°C for males (the treatment with relatively small females and large males), males with smaller aedeagi were more likely to mate (χ12= 3.86,p= 0.0494; TableS8; Figures3gand4b). WhenTdevwas 26°C for females andTdev21°C for males (the treatment with relatively large females and small males), males with larger aedeagi were more likely to mate (χ12= 11.39,p= 0.0007; TableS8; Figures3gand4c) and the smallest females were more likely to mate (χ12= 7.71,p= 0.0055; TableS8; Figures3gand4d). Smaller females also received more sperm in thisTdevtreatment combination (χ12= 8.03,p= 0.0046; TableS9; Figures3fand4e). Overall, predicted selection on male and female morphology was stronger in the mismatchedTdevtreatment combinations (Figure3d–g) that generated the greatest morphological mismatches between sexes (Figure3a–c), and predicted selection in these treatments favoured less divergent phenotypes between sexes (Figure4b–e).
Our models predict population declines (λ< 1) when mating interactions occur at thermal extremes (Figure5). Carryover effects ofTdevon egg laying likelihood (Pegg) and direct effects ofTdevon juvenile survival to adulthood (μjuv) culminated to shape the peak population growth rate and the range of adultTmatewhere population size increases (λ> 1). Specifically, whenTdevhas no effect on juvenile survival, warmerTdevcauses higher peak growth rates and broadens the range ofTmateacross which population size increases due to the silver spoon effects of warmerTdevon egg laying likelihood (Figure5a). However, our models show minimal differences in population growth rate acrossTmatewhenTdevonly moderately reduces juvenile survival (Figure5b). By contrast, peak growth rates increase at warmerTdevand population growth is positive across a broader range ofTmatewhenTdevmore severely reduces juvenile survival (Figure5c). Positive carryover effects on reproduction at warmerTdevcould therefore stabilise or even reverse the deleterious effects of warmerTdevon survival. Supporting this, removal of the carryover effect ofTdevon egg‐laying likelihood (Pegg) has two main consequences: hotterTdevalways reduces population growth rate (Figure5e,f) and population declines occur across all values ofTmatewhen hotterTdevseverely reducesμjuv(Figure5f).

Simulation model estimating variation inE. binotatapopulation growth rate (λ) across developmental temperatures (Tdev) and adult mating temperatures (Tmate). In all cases, mating likelihood depends onTmate. In (a–c), the probability for mated females to lay eggs depended onTdev. In (d–f), the probability for mated females to lay eggs was fixed at 0.93. The negative effect of hotterTdevon juvenile survival strengthens from left to right, varying between no effect (a, d), a moderate effect (b, e), or a severe effect (c, f). The dashed vertical lines bound theTmaterange leading to positive population growth. Curves and bands show the means and 95% CI forλacross 500 simulations. Blue curves indicate 21°CTdevand red curves indicate 26°CTdev.
Vulnerability to global warming depends on the thermal sensitivity of both survival and reproduction (Johnson et al.2023; Kingsolver and Buckley2020). Despite widespread carryover effects on performance in both contexts, current predictive models typically ignore changes in multiple fitness components and their cumulative impacts on population persistence (Sgrò et al.2016; Sinclair et al.2016). We show that even relatively weak carryover effects increasing fertility can help bufferE. binotataagainst reduced survival at elevated developmental temperatures, potentially averting population declines in the wake of global warming. To be sure, more severe temperature increases than those examined here would likely reduce fertility, and relationships between the thermal limits of survival and reproduction vary considerably among taxa (Parratt et al.2021; Walsh et al.2019). Our key finding is that thermal variation across life stages can generate compensation among different fitness components, suggesting multiple pathways toward persistence in warming climates. Population dynamics estimated from lethal stress alone, or without considering carryover effects across life stages, may be unreliable for predicting extinction risk.
Conflicts in the thermal sensitivity of male and female performance may threaten persistence in changing climates (García‐Roa et al.2020; Leith et al.2021,2022). In some cases, temperature change can directly increase the harm inflicted on one sex during mating (Breedveld et al.2023; García‐Roa et al.2019), potentially exacerbating extinction risk (Flintham et al.2023). Our results show how differences in male and female developmental temperatures could also create apparent conflict between the sexes and fitness components beyond affecting direct harm during mating. Mating success was lowest when females reared at cooler temperatures were paired with males reared at hotter temperatures, but the males of these pairs also transferred the most sperm during mating; sex‐specific carryover effects that enhance mating likelihood in females may therefore trade off with sperm transfer performance or limit mating to males that also produce more sperm.
Our population dynamic models revealed that adult thermal niche breadth (i.e., the range of adult mating temperatures that confers positive population growth,sensuHutchinson1957) depends on the balance between survival and carryover effects on fertility. When survival did not differ across environments, hotter developmental temperatures expanded the adult thermal niche (Figure5a). Models exploring whether plasticity can buffer populations from global warming typically assess whether predictive adaptive plasticity in optimal temperature ranges or the skew of adult thermal performance curves tracks temperature shifts (Sinclair et al.2016; Walsh et al.2019). We instead demonstrate how carryover effects on only average fertility across all adult temperatures could still expand adult thermal niches and promote persistence in warming climates, since this enhanced fertility provides a population‐level fitness buffer at adult temperature extremities where mating activity is low. However, severely reduced survival in hotter developmental environments still offset increased fertility, narrowing the adult thermal niche (Figure5c) and potentially limiting population viability. Although insects experience a vast range of microclimates at fine spatial scales (Caillon et al.2014; Leith et al.2024; Pincebourde and Woods2020; Woods et al.2015), the widest adult thermal niche identified by our model is already mostly unavailable to treehoppers in nature (approximately 23°C to 32°C; Figure5; Leith et al.2024). Moreover, treehoppers (and likely many other plant‐living insects) do not actively thermoregulate to maintain the optimal body temperatures for mating (Leith et al.2024). Shifting or widening adult thermal niches to encompass hotter temperatures may therefore be necessary for populations to persist in changing climates (Kearney et al.2009; Sunday et al.2014).
Plasticity in key morphological traits likely contributed to assortative mating by developmental temperature and changes in selection on male and female reproductive morphology across thermal environments. Selection often favours the developmental canalization of genitalia and other morphological traits involved in copulation (Eberhard et al.1998). Our results show that canalization could be further favoured by selection when differences in male and female developmental temperatures exacerbate morphological mismatches between sexes, allowing only males and females with the least divergent morphologies to reproduce (Box1; Figure3, Figure4c–e). However, the selection landscape on thermal plasticity in morphology is likely more complex. Developing under cooler temperatures led females to produce smaller ovipositors that enhanced mating success (Box1; Figure3, Figure4a), thereby exposing female genitalia to directional selection (Moczek et al.2011; West‐Eberhard2005). If small ovipositors compensate for detrimental changes in other copulatory traits under cool conditions (Morris and Rogers2013), then selection may even favour the evolution of more pronounced plasticity in ovipositors to enable females to produce different adaptive morphological traits (or trait combinations) across developmental environments (Moore and Martin2019).
Developmental plasticity in lethal thermal limits is insufficient for most organisms to fully accommodate global warming (Gunderson et al.2017; Gunderson and Stillman2015; Pottier et al.2022). However, even without considering plasticity in lethal thermal limits, our findings show that any fertility benefits of elevated developmental temperatures could help offset typically higher mortality rates in warming climates. We also demonstrate how patterns of morphological plasticity underlying these carryover effects can shape selection on reproductive morphology. Whether reproductive traits ultimately evolve in response to such altered selection regimes will crucially affect whether organisms can adapt to global warming (Leith et al.2022; Moore et al.2021). Overall, accurately predicting vulnerability to global warming requires considering not only acute thermal sensitivity in multiple fitness components, but also long‐term plasticity in each fitness component due to temperature perturbations across the life cycle.
A.M., N.T.L., and K.D.F.‐F. designed the experiment. A.M., I.S., J.P.W., and N.T.L. collected the data. B.T. constructed the population model; B.T., N.L.T. and K.D.F.‐F. estimated model parameters from the data presented. N.T.L. performed the remaining statistical analysis and generated the figures. N.T.L., A.M., and K.D.F.‐F. wrote the manuscript, and B.T. provided editing suggestions. K.D.F.‐F. provided project management and funding.
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Table S1:Sample size (number of male–female pairs) for each developmental temperature (Tdev) and adult mating temperature (Tmate) treatment combination used in the 2021 and 2022 mating trials.
Table S2:Results from global generalised linear models testing the effects of female and male developmental temperature (Tdev) and adult mating temperature (Tmate) on each stage of reproductive success. Significant parameters are indicated in bold. Interactions and quadratic effects withp> 0.05 were removed from the final models.
Table S3:Results from generalised linear models testing the effects of female and male developmental temperature (Tdev) and adult mating temperature (Tmate) on each stage of reproductive success. The 95% confidence interval for theTdevparameter estimate (β) could not be calculated for egg‐laying likelihood because all mated females laid eggs in the 26°CTdevtreatment (indicated by dashes). Significant parameters are indicated in bold. Interactions and quadratic effects withp> 0.05 were removed from the final models and are therefore not shown. We retained the non‐significant quadraticTmateeffect in the mating likelihood analysis so that the fittedPmatecurves acrossTmatewere comparable between years.
Table S4:Results from generalised linear models testing the effects of female and male developmental temperature (Tdev) and adult mating temperature (Tmate) on mating latency and duration. Significant parameters are indicated in bold. Interactions withp> 0.05 were removed from the final models and are therefore not shown.
Table S5:Results from post hoc contrasts of the estimated marginal means of mating likelihood across each male and femaleTdevcombination in the 2021 mating trials. Significant parameters are indicated in bold.
Table S6:Effects of rearing treatment on the allometric scaling of male and female morphological traits. We specified an offset slope of 1 for ln (Pronotum length) to test the null hypothesis that the scaling of each genitalia trait with pronotum length was isometric. Rearing plant was included as a random effect in all models. Results were obtained from linear mixed‐effects models usingFtests and the Kenward‐Roger degrees of freedom approximation. Significant parameters are indicated in bold.
Table S7:Effects of developmental temperature (Tdev) on male and female morphological traits. Rearing plant was included as a random effect in all models. The number of individuals measured in each treatment are listed undern. Results were obtained from linear mixed‐effects models usingFtests and the Kenward‐Roger degrees of freedom approximation. Significant parameters are indicated in bold.
Table S8:Results of generalised linear models testing the effects of female and male morphological traits on mating likelihood across combinations of female and male developmental temperature (Tdev). Mating temperature (Tmate) was included as a covariate in all models. However, the parameter estimates forTmateare not reported here for simplicity, as all trait effects on mating likelihood were analysed in separate models (see Methods for justification). Significant parameters are indicated in bold.
Table S9:Results of generalised linear models testing the effects of female and male morphological traits on sperm transfer across combinations of female and male developmental temperature (Tdev). Significant parameters are indicated in bold.
Figure S1:Temperature regimes on plants whereE. binotatawere collected in the field. (a) Temperatures regimes measured during the developmental stage (May 1—May 30). (b) Temperature regimes measured during peak mating season (June 14—July 14). Curve colours represent temperatures measured on different collection plants. Solid curves represent temperatures measured in 2021, while dashed curves indicate temperatures measured in 2022. Curves were derived from a cyclic generalised additive mixed effects model.
Figure S2:Variation in temperature regimes within plants whereE. binotatawere collected in the field. Individual curves represent individual iButton temperature loggers. Curve colours represent temperatures measured on different collection plants. Solid curves represent temperatures measured in 2021, while dashed curves indicate temperatures measured in 2022. The top row show temperature regimes measured during the developmental stage (May 1—May 30). The bottom row shows temperature regimes measured during peak mating season (June 14—July 14). Curves were derived from cyclic generalised additive mixed effects models.
Figure S3:Mating likelihood in 2022 was highest at intermediateTmate. Reflecting previous results across a broaderTmaterange. The black curve and points in show results from the 2022 mating trials in this study and the grey lines and points show results from an experiment performed in 2019 that tested mating likelihood across a wider range of mating temperatures (Macchiano et al.2023). Lines and bands are estimated fits ±95% CI from GLMs.
Figure S4:Simulation model estimating variation inE. binotatapopulation growth rate (λ) across developmental temperatures (Tdev) and adult mating temperatures (Tmate) where the effect ofTmateon mating likelihood was parameterized using data from the 2021 mating trials. In (a–c), the probability for mated females to lay eggs depended onTdev. In (d–f), the probability for mated females to lay eggs was fixed at 0.93. The effect ofTdevon offspring survival as juveniles varied between no effect (a, d), a moderate effect (b, e), or a severe effect (c and f). Curves and bands show the means and 95% CI forλacross 500 simulations. Blue curves indicate 21°CTdevand red curves indicate 26°CTdev.
We thank EA Miller for assistance with data collection, EA Hardison for feedback on statistical analysis and visualisation, and DO Elias for editorial suggestions. N.T.L. was supported by a Saint Louis University Presidential Fellowship, a Saint Louis University Dissertation Fellowship, and a University of Pittsburgh Ecology and Evolution Postdoctoral Fellowship. A.M. was supported by Saint Louis University. N.T.L., A.M., I.S., and J.P.W. were supported by NSF IOS‐1656818 (to K.D.F.‐F.). K.D.F.‐F. was supported by NSF IOS‐1656818 and the Saint Louis University Research Institute.
Leith, N. T.
, Macchiano A., Tenhumberg B., Smith I., Woods J. P., and Fowler‐Finn K. D.. 2025. “Carryover Effects on Reproduction Can Buffer Against Mortality‐Driven Population Declines at Elevated Developmental Temperatures.” Ecology Letters
28, no. 11: e70264. 10.1111/ele.70264.
Editor:Christoph Scherber
Funding:N.T.L. was supported by a Saint Louis University Presidential Fellowship, a Saint Louis University Dissertation Fellowship, and a University of Pittsburgh Ecology and Evolution Postdoctoral Fellowship. A.M. was supported by Saint Louis University. N.T.L., A.M., I.S. and J.P.W. were supported by NSF IOS‐1656818 (to K.D.F.‐F.). K.D.F.‐F. was supported by NSF IOS‐1656818 and the Saint Louis University Research Institute.
Noah T. Leith and Anthony Macchiano contributed equally to this work.
The data and code are available at Figshare (Leith et al.2025):https://figshare.com/s/d84135a57fe83dd8079b.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
Table S1:Sample size (number of male–female pairs) for each developmental temperature (Tdev) and adult mating temperature (Tmate) treatment combination used in the 2021 and 2022 mating trials.
Table S2:Results from global generalised linear models testing the effects of female and male developmental temperature (Tdev) and adult mating temperature (Tmate) on each stage of reproductive success. Significant parameters are indicated in bold. Interactions and quadratic effects withp> 0.05 were removed from the final models.
Table S3:Results from generalised linear models testing the effects of female and male developmental temperature (Tdev) and adult mating temperature (Tmate) on each stage of reproductive success. The 95% confidence interval for theTdevparameter estimate (β) could not be calculated for egg‐laying likelihood because all mated females laid eggs in the 26°CTdevtreatment (indicated by dashes). Significant parameters are indicated in bold. Interactions and quadratic effects withp> 0.05 were removed from the final models and are therefore not shown. We retained the non‐significant quadraticTmateeffect in the mating likelihood analysis so that the fittedPmatecurves acrossTmatewere comparable between years.
Table S4:Results from generalised linear models testing the effects of female and male developmental temperature (Tdev) and adult mating temperature (Tmate) on mating latency and duration. Significant parameters are indicated in bold. Interactions withp> 0.05 were removed from the final models and are therefore not shown.
Table S5:Results from post hoc contrasts of the estimated marginal means of mating likelihood across each male and femaleTdevcombination in the 2021 mating trials. Significant parameters are indicated in bold.
Table S6:Effects of rearing treatment on the allometric scaling of male and female morphological traits. We specified an offset slope of 1 for ln (Pronotum length) to test the null hypothesis that the scaling of each genitalia trait with pronotum length was isometric. Rearing plant was included as a random effect in all models. Results were obtained from linear mixed‐effects models usingFtests and the Kenward‐Roger degrees of freedom approximation. Significant parameters are indicated in bold.
Table S7:Effects of developmental temperature (Tdev) on male and female morphological traits. Rearing plant was included as a random effect in all models. The number of individuals measured in each treatment are listed undern. Results were obtained from linear mixed‐effects models usingFtests and the Kenward‐Roger degrees of freedom approximation. Significant parameters are indicated in bold.
Table S8:Results of generalised linear models testing the effects of female and male morphological traits on mating likelihood across combinations of female and male developmental temperature (Tdev). Mating temperature (Tmate) was included as a covariate in all models. However, the parameter estimates forTmateare not reported here for simplicity, as all trait effects on mating likelihood were analysed in separate models (see Methods for justification). Significant parameters are indicated in bold.
Table S9:Results of generalised linear models testing the effects of female and male morphological traits on sperm transfer across combinations of female and male developmental temperature (Tdev). Significant parameters are indicated in bold.
Figure S1:Temperature regimes on plants whereE. binotatawere collected in the field. (a) Temperatures regimes measured during the developmental stage (May 1—May 30). (b) Temperature regimes measured during peak mating season (June 14—July 14). Curve colours represent temperatures measured on different collection plants. Solid curves represent temperatures measured in 2021, while dashed curves indicate temperatures measured in 2022. Curves were derived from a cyclic generalised additive mixed effects model.
Figure S2:Variation in temperature regimes within plants whereE. binotatawere collected in the field. Individual curves represent individual iButton temperature loggers. Curve colours represent temperatures measured on different collection plants. Solid curves represent temperatures measured in 2021, while dashed curves indicate temperatures measured in 2022. The top row show temperature regimes measured during the developmental stage (May 1—May 30). The bottom row shows temperature regimes measured during peak mating season (June 14—July 14). Curves were derived from cyclic generalised additive mixed effects models.
Figure S3:Mating likelihood in 2022 was highest at intermediateTmate. Reflecting previous results across a broaderTmaterange. The black curve and points in show results from the 2022 mating trials in this study and the grey lines and points show results from an experiment performed in 2019 that tested mating likelihood across a wider range of mating temperatures (Macchiano et al.2023). Lines and bands are estimated fits ±95% CI from GLMs.
Figure S4:Simulation model estimating variation inE. binotatapopulation growth rate (λ) across developmental temperatures (Tdev) and adult mating temperatures (Tmate) where the effect ofTmateon mating likelihood was parameterized using data from the 2021 mating trials. In (a–c), the probability for mated females to lay eggs depended onTdev. In (d–f), the probability for mated females to lay eggs was fixed at 0.93. The effect ofTdevon offspring survival as juveniles varied between no effect (a, d), a moderate effect (b, e), or a severe effect (c and f). Curves and bands show the means and 95% CI forλacross 500 simulations. Blue curves indicate 21°CTdevand red curves indicate 26°CTdev.
The data and code are available at Figshare (Leith et al.2025):https://figshare.com/s/d84135a57fe83dd8079b.
Articles from Ecology Letters are provided here courtesy ofWiley
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894