An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Equally contributing first authors
Corresponding Author: Weihsueh A. Chiu (wchiu@tamu.edu)
Issue date 2023 Feb.
Climate change will cause a range of related risks, including increases in infectious and chronic disease, intensified social and economic stresses, and more frequent extreme weather events. Vulnerable groups will be disproportionately affected due to greater exposure to climate risks and lower ability to prepare, adapt, and recover from their effects. Better understanding of the intersection of vulnerability and climate change risks is required to identify the most important drivers of future climate risks and effectively build resilience and deploy targeted adaptation efforts. Incorporating community stakeholder input, we identified and integrated available public health, social, economic, environmental, and climate data in the United States (U.S.), comprising 184 indicators, to develop a Climate Vulnerability Index (CVI) composed of four baseline vulnerabilities (health, social/economic, infrastructure, and environment) and three climate change risks (health, social/economic, extreme events). We find that the vulnerability to and risks from climate change are highly heterogeneous across the U.S. at the census tract scale, and geospatially cluster into complementary areas with similar climate risks but differing baseline vulnerabilities. Our results therefore demonstrate that not only are climate change risks both broadly and variably distributed across the U.S., but also that existing disparities are often further exacerbated by climate change. The CVI thus lays a data-driven, scientific foundation for future research on the intersection of climate change risks with health and other inequalities, while also identifying health impacts of climate change as the greatest research gap. Moreover, given U.S. government initiatives surrounding climate and equity, the CVI can be instrumental in empowering communities and policymakers to better prioritize resources and target interventions, providing a template for addressing local-scale climate and environmental justice globally.
Keywords:environmental justice, climate justice, resilience, climate change risks, climate change vulnerability, climate change and health
With growing evidence that national efforts to mitigate climate pollution in the U.S. and other countries will fail to meet the International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) climate target of limiting warming to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels, there is increased interest in understanding where investments in resilience and adaptation strategies may be deployed to curb the most serious and impactful harms (Iturbide M. et al. 2021;World Health Organization 2021). Furthermore, given existing long-standing disparities experienced by vulnerable communities across the United States and worldwide, there is a critical need for increased understanding of the nexus of vulnerability and climate change risks in order to ensure that adaptation efforts are targeted to those most in need.
To fill this critical gap, we have integrated existing public health, social, economic, environmental, and climate data at the U.S. census tract level, comprising almost two hundred indicators, to develop a Climate Vulnerability Index (CVI). CVI integrates baseline vulnerabilities that reduce resilience (health, social/economic, infrastructure, and environment) and climate change risks that may adversely affect individuals and communities (health, social/economic, extreme events). Together, these data illustrate the most ambitious attempt to date to provide a cumulative and quantitative assessment of specific vulnerabilities, risks, and disparities related to climate change. The ultimate objective of the CVI is to provide a robust scientific foundation for characterizing the geographic distribution of health, social, environmental, and climate disparities across the U.S. This scientific foundation will not only enable a better understanding of the intersection of climate risks and multiple dimensions of inequality, but also facilitate prioritization of actions and investments to mitigate those vulnerabilities and risks. Moreover, the CVI provides a template for future efforts both in the U.S. and beyond to develop evidence-based planning tools for addressing climate vulnerabilities and risks.
We utilized a broad range of sources, from existing literature to community input, to identify potential indicators to include in the Climate Vulnerability Index (CVI). Previous EJ-related screening tools at the national (FEMA National Risk Index), state (CalEnviroscreen, MD-EJUST, EJScreen), and regional (HGBEnviroscreen) levels were reviewed, and indicators compiled (U.S. Department of Homeland Security: FEMA 2021;California Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment 2022;United States Environmental Protection Agency 2020;NCSG and UMD School of Public Health 2022;Bhandari et al. 2020). From the onset, we purposefully engaged EJ community-based organization leaders with whom we had existing working relationships and held periodic meetings over the course of over a year to ensure that essential indicators relevant for community advocacy were included in the tool. Specifically, community stakeholders requested inclusion of data reflecting sources of population susceptibility, long-standing inequity in the neighborhoods they serve, and known areas needing fundamental structural investment based on daily lived experience, including inclusion of vulnerable populations such as the incarcerated, Veterans, and those with disabilities; built environment and affordable housing metrics; public transit quality and accessibility to health infrastructure and jobs; and communications infrastructure such as internet availability. Additionally, we reviewed recommendations from the White House Environmental Justice Advisory Council Justice40 Climate and Economic Justice Screening Tool (CEJST) recommendations to identify relevant indicators for inclusion in the CVI (White House Environmental Justice Advisory Council 2021). Feedback from academic, non-profit, and government collaborators with subject-matter expertise who have developed similar screening and mapping tools, or who could use the tool in evaluating future projects, was also incorporated during CVI tool development.
Indicators were sought across two main themes: Baseline Vulnerabilities and Climate Change Risks (Figure 1). Baseline Vulnerability indicators reflect factors that may reduce resilience and/or are potential sources of long-standing community inequity or injustice, were divided into four categories: Health, Social & Economic, Infrastructure, and Environment. The Health domain addresses differences in prevalence of chronic and infectious diseases, access to care, maternal and child health, mental health, life expectancy and preventive care. These indicators are known to vary by geography and program availability, which impacts community health, and are areas where investments would improve resilience systemically (National Academies of Sciences Engineering and Medicine 2022; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; Robert Wood Johnson Foundation; and Center for Disease Control and Prevention Foundation 2020;National Center for Health Statistics 2018;National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences 2022). The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (CDC/ATSDR) Social Vulnerability Index (SVI) underlies more than half of indicators in the Social & Economic domain but were augmented by additional indicators such as redlining designations in urban areas, additional vulnerable populations (e.g., homeless, veterans), crime and prison statistics, housing characteristics, and presence/lack of non-governmental organizations (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention - Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry 2018;White House Environmental Justice Advisory Council 2021;Nelson R.K. 2022). Because infrastructure investments and the built environment play a critical role in community development, cohesiveness, and adaptability, we identified transportation, energy, food, water and waste management, governance, access to physical, digital, and financial resources factors Baseline Infrastructure subcategory domains (National Academies of Sciences Engineering and Medicine 2022). The final Baseline Vulnerability domain consisted of Environmental indicators that characterize long-standing disparities of environmental exposure stressors and pollution (R. Bullard 1994), and include transportation, area and point sources generating air, soil, and water pollution, land use, and environmental health risk metrics.

One or more indicators (nin parentheses) are aggregated into each component (outermost boxes), which are then combined into individual vulnerability and risk categories (inner boxes), and finally into the overall Climate Vulnerability Index (center), visualized as a radial pie chart ToxPI (Toxicological Prioritization Index) profile.
The direct and indirect impacts of Climate Change were divided into three risk categories: Health, Social & Economic, and Extreme Events. Increasing temperatures and other climate stressors affect individual and community health (World Health Organization: Environment 2011;National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences 2022;Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2022a). Health projections of climate-related infectious disease and pollution-related morbidity and mortality were incorporated in subcategory domains. Direct and indirect social and economic costs of climate change include indicators reflecting property impacts, economic and productivity losses, energy transition and greenhouse gas emissions (Cho 2019;Martinich J and Crimmins 2019). The Extreme Events domain encompasses increased frequency and/or severity of natural disasters and weather extremes. Each category was further divided into subcategories reflecting more detailed aggregations of indicators and include both historical data and projections (Figure 1andSupplemental Table 1).
More than 200 datasets were evaluated for inclusion in the CVI. We prioritized publicly available, national consistent (all 50 US states plus District of Columbia) data with census tract level geographic resolution with the most recently released dataset. Recognizing there may be pandemic-related anomalies, we predominantly obtained annual data from 2017–2019. As noted inSupplemental Table 3, indicators were obtained from government and private sector databases, published literature, data provided by individual study authors, and the NASA Health and Air Quality Applied Sciences Satellite Data for Environmental Justice Tiger Team. We focused on individual indicators rather than use of existing index scores as many index scores are composites of many variables to avoid double counting or over-weighting indicators. Census tracts, which have an average population of about 4,000 people, were chosen as the geographical unit of observation due to abundance of data at this scale and because finer resolution (census block group or block level) data may suffer from unacceptable levels of uncertainty or censoring of data due to privacy issues (Ravichandran V. 2021). Census tracts also allow for sufficient granularity to understand hyperlocal differences within urban areas whereas county level data is too broad to identify drivers of vulnerability or where targeted benefits and resources should be directed. However, when census tract level data were unavailable, we utilized county- or state-level data. For these limited datasets, all census tracts within the geographic area were assigned the same value.
U.S. Census 2010 Tigerline shapefiles (U.S. Census Bureau 2010) were used to define geographic boundaries because most datasets have not yet been updated using 2020 census tracts. We relied primarily on pre-pandemic era data, and we wanted to avoid spatial or temporal misclassification by utilizing 2020 census boundaries. Thus, there were 73,057 census tracts and 3,221 counties for all 50 U.S. states and the District of Columbia. We note the 2010 boundaries simply define the geographic areas and not timing of data collection. For a small number of transportation datasets that were only available on 2020 census boundaries, we used a U.S. Census Bureau recommended crosswalk to reassign 2020 bounded data to 2010 geographic areas (U.S. Census Bureau 2022).
Datasets were evaluated for completeness, distribution, and variability in observations. We excluded datasets where there was a preponderance of missing data or were virtually uniform across census tracts. Notably, several national datasets (n=9) lacked Alaska and Hawaii data (as indicated inSupplemental Table 3). These datasets were not excluded, as metrics for 48 contiguous states were available. Instead, values for Alaska and Hawaii were left missing and did not contribute to the CVI index score for those states. The paucity of datasets that included US territories precluded our ability to include them in CVI.
Data were obtained in GIS format and converted to comma separated value (csv) files using ESRI ArcGIS so they could be integrated with other datasets to create the CVI score. As noted previously, 2010 U.S. census tract geographic boundaries were used to assign average values. For raster datasets, pixels falling within tract boundaries (polygons) were averaged to assign a single value per tract.
Where a small fraction of data was missing, it was imputed with the median at the next larger geographic scale (i.e., for missing census tracts, the median of non-missing census tracts within a county was assigned). No indicator had more than 25% of its data imputed, and all but 10 indicators had less than 5% imputed. Additionally, where appropriate, population- or area-based adjustments were made to create indicator parameters that were comparable across census tracts (e.g., case counts converted to per capita). All data were converted to percentiles so that a single scale could be used to integrate disparate data sources. For consistency in directional uniformity, some indicator percentiles were inverted so that higher percentiles reflected greater vulnerability or risk. For example, lower life expectancy in years had a higher percentile value indicating greater vulnerability. Certain types of indicators required additional pre-processing, as described further below.
Data processing and analyses were conducted using Microsoft Excel (version 2205) and ESRI ArcGIS Pro (3.0.0), and R studio (Version 1.4.1717, R version 4.1.1). The data and code that support this study are available on GitHub (https://github.com/wachiuphd/CVI).
Many indicators originated from point-source datasets representing locations relating to emissions of pollution (e.g., hazardous waste generators) or infrastructure (e.g., EV charging stations). These datasets were converted to tract-level metrics detailing the degree of proximity and density of points to serve as a proxy for exposure (in the case of pollutants) or access (for infrastructure). To do so, we first applied a kernel density smoothing function to the input dataset. We used a parabolic (Epanechnikov) specification in recognition of the fact that for many pollutants concentrations are highest near their source and drop off increasingly as a function of distance. Kernel density approaches generally yield accurate descriptors of exposure in the absence of more granular datasets (Portnov, Dubnov, and Barchana 2009). The kernel density layer was then averaged by census tract, returning a single value for each depicting the overall proximity to, and density of, the related points. This closely follows the methods used for estimating proximity indicators in other screening tools such as EJSCREEN (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 2019), and we employed the same threshold of 5km as a cutoff distance, after which proximity is no longer considered in density calculations.
Transportation policies and infrastructure investments have greatly impacted communities of color and low-wealth; diverse transit resources and access are critical for maintaining resilient neighborhoods (Ingram et al. 2020). Federal Highway Administration’s (FHWA’s) Highway Performance Monitoring System (HPMS) data was used to assess transportation infrastructure: road usage, coverage, and condition (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 2017). The HPMS dataset includes Average Annual Daily Traffic (AADT) and International Roughness Index (IRI) values at the road link level (Sayers 1995;U.S. Department of Transportation - Federal Highway Administration 2018). IRI values were extracted by link for functional classes 1 (interstates) to 4 (minor arterials) from the 2018 HPMS. Functional classes 1 to 4 cover the most important road segments and data are available for 95 percent of the U.S. census tracts. A weighted average IRI for each census tract was generated by calculating the average IRI weighted by the length of the road segment link.
The lane-miles per highway segment was calculated by multiplying the number of lanes by the length of each highway segment from HPMS. Lane-miles per capita are the sum of the lane-miles in a census tract divided by the census tract population. It is assumed that the more transportation infrastructure per capita (i.e., lane-miles per capita), the more resilient a community is to climate change risks.
The 2019 National Bridge Inventory (NBI) data were analyzed to calculate a bridge condition indicator by census tract (U.S. Department of Transportation - Federal Highway Administration 2019). The NBI contains various bridge metrics for 614,066 highway bridges in 50 U.S. states. The bridge condition indicator by census tract was calculated as the percentage of poor bridges in each census tract. If there were no bridge in a census tract, then the indicator value was captured asnot available.
The flood risk score developed by First Street Foundation at the zip code level was used to assess the risk of infrastructure flooding. The flood risk score estimates flood vulnerability due to rainfall, riverine flooding, and coastal surge flooding on a scale of 1 (minimal flood risk) to 10 (extreme flood risk) (First Street Foundation 2022). We calculated a flood risk score for each census tract using the area-weighted average.
Congestion is mainly an urban phenomenon, so congestion indicators were extracted from the Texas A&M Transportation Institute’s Urban Mobility Report (UMR), which has been published every year since 1987 (Texas A&M Transportation Institute 2021). The average commute delay (i.e., hours per commuter) was extracted for 494 urban areas from the 2019 UMR. A congestion indicator was calculated for each census tract using the area-weighted average.
The Walk Score developed by Redfin was used to ascribe “walkability” of each census tract (Walkscore 2022). The Walk Score considers pedestrian friendliness of the infrastructure to the nearest amenities categorized as: dining and drinking, groceries, shopping, errands, parks, schools, and culture and entertainment. The Walk Score for each census tract was generated by extracting the Walk Score at the centroid of the census tract. If the centroid had no assigned Walk Score, we extracted the Walk Score at the nearest road segment to the centroid.
The Place level Transit Performance Score from Alltransit was used to assess transit services by census tract. The Transit Performance Score considers six criteria: job accessibility, economic, equity, health, transit quality, and mobility network (Center for Neighborhood Technology 2019). The overall score is collected and published by Census Bureau “place” (a dynamic geographical statistical area of concentrated population or housing including unincorporated communities) rather than census tract within a state. As a result, there was some geographic misalignment of geographic boundaries between place and census tract. In instances where census tract did not overlap with place, it was assumed that these census tracts had no transit service. Area-weighted average was used to assign transit score for each census tract.
Hospital proximity was calculated as a proxy indicator to assess hospital access in the census tract. Hospital proximity was determined by calculating the distance (in kilometers) between the census tract centroid and the nearest hospital. Hospital location data was extracted from Homeland Infrastructure Foundation-Level Data (HIFLD) compiled by the Department of Homeland Security. The dataset contains the location information for 7,791 hospitals (Homeland Infrastructure Foundation-Level Data (HIFLD 2022). The study team did not consider Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) hospitals, long-term care facilities, rehabilitation centers, and psychiatric hospitals as these facilities are generally not open to the public.
Higher transportation activity (as measured by vehicle miles traveled or VMT per capita) increases vulnerability, especially to port and environmental justice communities, by generating greater air pollution emissions mainly from freight and goods movement. This exacerbates existing climate risks to neighborhoods such as road inundation from flooding. We calculated vehicle miles traveled (VMT) per capita per vehicle type (passenger cars and truck) as a proxy indicator for the level of transportation activity in a census tract. The AADT per road segment and road segment length was extracted from the 2018 HPMS to calculate the VMT by vehicle type (i.e., combination truck, single-unit truck, and passenger vehicle) for each road segment. The total VMT by vehicle type for each census tract was subsequently calculated by summing the road segment VMT by vehicle type in each census tract. From this, the total VMT by vehicle type per capita was calculated for each census tract.
All indicators within and across category domains were evaluated to assess redundancy. While we recognize there will be collinearity in indicators given the large number included in the tool, our goal was to overlay indicators to understand how collectively they contribute to community overburden or limit ability for communities to adapt to climate change and which factors were the main drivers.
To integrate data across multiple data streams, we adapted the Toxicological Prioritization Index (ToxPI) approach (Marvel et al. 2018;Reif et al. 2013;Bhandari et al. 2020), which has been used extensively to communicate risk prioritization and profiling information. Like other risk indices, ToxPI utilizes a weighted average to aggregate data to provide an overall relative ranking; however, the accompanying graphical radial pie chart profile also provides an indicator of the specific drivers of increased vulnerability. Moreover, as shown inFigure 1, we utilized a hierarchical structure where subcategory scores are built from individual indicators, category ToxPI scores are built from subcategories, and the overall CVI score is built using category ToxPI. In creating the unitless index score, each indicator, sub-domain, and domain were equally weighted.
For the overall CVI score and each category and subcategory score, we investigated spatial clustering of high and low scoring census tracts using the Getis-Ord Gi* statistic subdomains. This approach returns a z-score and corresponding p-values indicating a degree of confidence for the extent to which census tracts form a high- or low-scoring cluster. Map legends depict the degree of statistical significance per tract (ranging from 90–99% confidence).
We utilizedk-means clustering to group census tracts with “similar” ToxPI profiles made up of category-specific scores. The gap statistic, calculated using a random 10% sample of census tracts, was used to determine the optimal number of clusters. Clusters were sorted by mean overall CVI score. The mean score within each cluster for each category was the metric for the “average” baseline vulnerability or climate change risk for that cluster. The contribution to overall variance from each category (using eta-squared statistic) was the metric for the categories that contributed most to variation within each cluster. The geographical distribution of cluster members was examined to determine if there are any spatial groupings within each cluster.
We map investments across recent federal legislation to CVI categories. To do so, provisions across all three bills (IRA, IIJA and CHIPS) were extracted and filtered down to those that could lead to reductions in vulnerability or risk, and where a screening tool such as CVI can play a critical role in appropriately allocating resources. A broad definition of investment was used, which includes tax credits as well as direct spending, and did not further include estimates regarding revenue generation or deficit reduction. Certain provisions are structured as incentives that scale based on income brackets or have earmarked some portion of overall funding for vulnerable populations. In these cases, total investments amounts were summed values rather than further sub-setting funding levels. Separately, provisions can vary in how they define vulnerability for funding recipients, not necessarily defining terms such as “disadvantaged” and “low-income” specifically. We include all such programs and include funding from every fiscal year indicated in the acts.
For each CVI community stakeholder organization collaborating in development of this screening and mapping tool, we examined the overall CVI scores for the census tracts within their respective communities and compared them to more climate resilient neighborhoods in their same region. Scores were mapped as choropleths and included ToxPI radial pie charts to understand the main drivers of vulnerability within the highest ranking census tracts. The factors driving vulnerability were examined through ToxPI profiles of subcategory scores for each category domain, as well as bar charts of all indicators, subdivided by category and subcategory.
After data collection, cleaning, and evaluation, as well as engagement with communities and external stakeholders, we selected 184 indicators, representing two themes (Baseline Vulnerabilities and Climate Change Risks). These were divided into seven category domains, made up of thirty-six subcategories, which were aggregated to form the CVI (Figure 1,Supplemental Table 1). The Baseline Health and Environment categories are the most data rich, with 42 and 43 indicators, respectively, reflecting long-standing interest in the geospatial distribution of disparities in health outcomes and environmental pollution, often thought to be synergistic with climate vulnerability (R.D. Bullard 2018;USGCRP 2018;Watts et al. 2021). The most data-poor category is Climate Change risks to Health, with only 8 indicators and some subcategories relying on a single dataset, reflecting a small cross section of potential health effects due to the lack of consistent, national projections (Watts et al. 2021). The remaining categories each had moderate amounts of data, between 17 and 28 indicators, with at least two datasets for each subcategory. Over half of the Baseline Social & Economic indicators rely on previous compilations from the CDC Social Vulnerability Index (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention - Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry 2018), and all but one of the Climate Change Extreme Events indicators rely on IPCC or the FEMA National Risk Index; other domains have more diverse sources of data (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention - Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry 2018;Iturbide M. et al. 2021;U.S. Department of Homeland Security: FEMA 2021). Details on individual indicators and their sources are provided inSupplemental Table 3.
Figure 2shows the overall geographic distribution of CVI scores by theme and category (seeSupplemental Figures 5–6for maps for each category and subcategory). Overall CVI is highest—corresponding to greatest vulnerability and risk—in the southeastern states and further westward (Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, California’s Central Valley), with statistically significant hotspots throughout these regions and the lowest scores, and corresponding coldspots in the Northeast, upper Mid-West, and West Coast (Figure 2a,Supplemental Figure 1a). Overall Baseline Vulnerabilities and Climate Change Risks show a similar pattern in the South, but hotspots are more localized for Baseline Vulnerabilities (Figure 2b–c,Supplemental Figure 1b–c). Additionally, Baseline Vulnerabilities extend into the Southwest and California’s Central Valley, whereas Climate Change Risks extend up into the Mid-Atlantic and parts of New England.

Spatial distribution of county median CVI score for (a) all 184 indicators (overall index score), (b) limited to Baseline Vulnerability domains (n=139 indicators), and (c) Climate Change Impact indicators (n=45 indicators), and individual category domains (d-j). Higher index scores correspond to higher vulnerability or risk.
Census-tract variation in composite scores is moderate (sd = 0.09 to 0.12). However, individual Baseline category scores tend to have greater variation (sd = 0.15 to 0.19), as well as substantially different geographic distributions (Figure 2d–g,Supplemental Figure 1d–g). Baseline Health and Baseline Infrastructure vulnerabilities exhibit similar patterns, with high vulnerability throughout the Southeast and Midwest, though Infrastructure vulnerability is more pronounced across Texas and California. Baseline Social and Economic vulnerabilities are highest in the West and Southwest, with more localized clusters of high values nationwide. Baseline Environment vulnerability is linked predominantly with metropolitan regions, reflecting areas with more sources of pollution.
Climate Change Risks are more diverse geographically (Figure 2h–j,Supplemental Figure 1h–j) but tend to be less localized with lower variation than Baseline scores (sd = 0.12 to 0.18). Climate Change-related Health Risks are concentrated in the South, with a large uniform cluster of high vulnerability stretching across the southeastern U.S. In this region, projected temperature-related health impacts such as mortality and worsened air quality are most pronounced. High Climate Change-related Social & Economic risks cover large swaths of the Upper Mississippi River basin, chiefly driven by projected losses in agricultural yields and increases in crime rates. Additionally, these risks include coastal areas along the Gulf of Mexico and Eastern seaboard up to New Jersey, largely due to flood risk to properties and reduced tax revenue. For Climate-related Extreme Events, areas of high vulnerability are concentrated in the Mountain West and Southwest, Southern Coast, Northeast and Michigan. Primary drivers here relate to sweeping changes in the climate due to disruptions in temperature and precipitation, resulting in increased drought, extreme heat, wildfires, and frequency of storms. Coastal census tracts in the Gulf of Mexico and Eastern Seaboard demonstrate higher vulnerability due to sea level rise and increased hurricane frequency.
Examining heterogeneity at different geographic scales reveals that except for Climate Change-related Health risks, there is at least as much variation within individual states as between states (Supplemental Figure 7a,7c), showing the highly localized nature of these vulnerabilities and the need for high resolution data (Supplemental Figure 7b). There is also substantial variation as to the dominant category driving the overall score for vulnerability or risk. For all census tracts, there is relatively even distribution across all categories except for Baseline Infrastructure, which is dominant only 5% of the time; however, for the top quartile or top decile, Baseline and Climate Change-related Health constitute the majority of dominant categories (Supplemental Figure 7d) and are drivers of higher CVI scores.
The 100 census tracts with the highest overall CVI scores were concentrated in 28 counties in 9 states (Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, Tennessee, Pennsylvania, North Carolina, and South Carolina), mostly clustered in urban areas (Supplemental Figure 2a). Texas, Louisiana, Alabama, and Tennessee accounted for 87 of the highest 100 combined scores. Shelby County (i.e., Memphis), Tennessee had the most census tracts (n=21) concentrated in one county among the top 100 most vulnerable, while Mobile County, Alabama had 14 and Jefferson County, Texas accounted for 12, including the 3 highest ranking tracts overall. There were clusters of highly ranked census tracts in Houston, Texas (n=4), Corpus Christi, Texas (n=2), Lake Charles, Louisiana (n=4), St. John the Baptist Parish in Louisiana’s “Cancer Alley” (n=5), Calhoun County, Alabama (n=5), Birmingham, Alabama (n=3), Hamilton County (Chattanooga), Tennessee (n=3), and Philadelphia County (n=4), Pennsylvania. Many of these are located near concentrations of industrial facilities and are known EJ communities (Deep South Center for Environmental Justice 2020,The Houston Flood Museum 2022,U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 2022,PBS News Hour 2021,Allen et al. 2019,Mancini 2022).
The U.S. executive branch is currently using CEJST to help Federal agencies, “identify disadvantaged communities that are marginalized, underserved, and overburdened by pollution” for the purpose of providing, “40 percent of overall benefits of certain Federal investments” (termed the Justice40 Initiative). The census tracts with high CVI scores were generally also previously identified as “disadvantaged” by the CEJST: the top 100 were all “disadvantaged,” as were 95% of the top 1% and 81% of the top 10% (Supplemental Figure 2a–c). However, the range of CVI scores among CEJST-identified communities is quite wide (Supplemental Figure 2d), and many communities not identified by CEJST also have high CVI scores. Thus, the CVI along with its component scores can be a useful complement to the CEJST in ranking and comparing census tracts within and across counties, states, regions, and nationally, as well as to target interventions.
Because of the high heterogeneity in components that make up the overall CVI Index Scores, we utilized unsupervised clustering viak-means to identify groupings of census tracts that exhibited “similar” composite and individual category scores. Our analysis identified six major clusters, each of which contained similar ToxPI profiles in terms of (i) overall CVI score, (ii) individual category scores, and (iii) drivers of intra-cluster variation (Figure 3a–c). Additionally, these clusters had unique geographic distributions (Figure 3d). A summary of each cluster follows:

(a) Distribution of overall CVI Scores for each k-means cluster. (b) Mean CVI category scores for each k-means cluster. (c) Contributions from each CVI category to variance in overall CVI Score by cluster. (d) Geographic distribution of each cluster.
Cluster A has the highest average CVI scores, driven by higher-than-average Baseline Health, Social and economic, and Infrastructure vulnerabilities, as well as higher-than-average Climate Change-related Health and Social and Economic risks. Within the cluster, variation is driven by differences in Baseline Environmental vulnerabilities as well as Climate Change-related Health risks. This cluster predominates throughout the South and represents those “areas with both high non-environmental baseline vulnerabilities and heightened health and social/economic climate risks” and exhibit the greatest intersection of baseline vulnerabilities and climate risks.
Cluster B has the second highest average CVI scores, driven by high Baseline vulnerabilities, but is less vulnerable to Climate Change risks on average. Within the cluster, variation is driven mostly by differences in Climate Change-related Health risks. This cluster concentrates in the West and in urban centers, and represents areas considered “traditional urban/polluted environmental justice areas without heightened climate risks,” which experience Environmental and other Baseline vulnerabilities.
Cluster C is similar to Cluster A in that it has greater than average Climate Change-related Health and Social and Economic risks, but by contrast has lower than average Baseline vulnerabilities. Also, like Cluster A, variation within the cluster is driven by differences in Baseline Environmental vulnerabilities as well as Climate Change-related Health risks. It overlaps geographically with Cluster A, predominately being in the South, but with fewer Baseline vulnerabilities, and thus represents “areas of average baseline vulnerability with heightened health and social/economic climate risks.”
Cluster D overall has lower than average CVI scores in most cases, with the dominant category being Climate Change-related Social and Economic and Extreme event risks, but average to below average Baseline vulnerabilities. Geographically, this cluster is the complement of Cluster A, predominating in the Northeast, Midwest, and West, and represents “areas of average baseline vulnerability with heightened social/economic and extreme event climate risks.”
Cluster E has the second lowest average CVI scores, with the dominant category being Baseline Environmental vulnerabilities, and most other vulnerabilities and risk being below average. Geographically, it is like Cluster B, being concentrated in urban centers. This cluster represents “more affluent urban/polluted areas without heightened climate risks,” but which still experience Baseline Environmental risks by virtue of their location.
Cluster F has the lowest average CVI scores, with below average Baseline vulnerabilities, and more risk to Climate Change Extreme Events, but average or lower vulnerability in other domains related to Climate Change. Geographically it overlaps with Cluster D, but within more affluent areas, thus represents “areas with below average baseline vulnerability but heightened social/economic and extreme event climate risks.”
These Clusters naturally group into pairs withsimilar climate risks but differing baseline vulnerabilities. Specifically, Clusters A and C are areas of heightened health and social/economic climate risks but differing baseline vulnerabilities. Similarly, Clusters D and F are areas of heightened social/economic and extreme event climate risks but differing baseline vulnerabilities. Finally, Clusters B and E are areas without heightened climate risk but with higher baseline environmental vulnerabilities, while differing in other baseline vulnerabilities.
To evaluate robustness and illustrate how the CVI may be used to test or generate hypotheses, we examined the correlation of the composite indices (CVI, Baseline, and Climate Change) with several potential explanatory variables (Supplemental Table 2), including per-capita income, population density, and land use. For income, we find a strong negative correlation (R < −0.6) with overall CVI and Baseline vulnerabilities, but little correlation with climate risks (|R| < 0.1). It stands to reason that areas of lower income exhibit higher vulnerabilities, which is consistent with EJ literature. Population density has little correlation with CVI overall and small correlations with Baseline and Climate vulnerabilities (R=0.11 and −0.23). This underlines the finding that there is a great degree of heterogeneity among areas of high vulnerability and risk, and that they may be found in both rural and urban settings. Most correlations with land use were low, with notable exceptions that Climate Change risk has a moderate negative correlation with developed areas (R=−0.41) and low to moderate positive correlations with forests, pastures, and wetlands (R=0.33, 0.28 and 0.22 respectively).
Additionally, inSupplemental Figure 3, we qualitatively examined the relationship between the composite indices and redlining as defined by Home Owner Loan Corporation (HOLC) grade, where category D (assigned a ‘hazardous’ rating) corresponds to the greatest degree of historic redlining in neighborhoods across the U.S. (Nelson R.K. 2022) There is a preponderance of increasing Baseline vulnerability as HOLC grades go from highest (A) to lowest (D), in a linear trend. This is not the case for climate, where worse neighborhood grades are, on average, found in areas with lower climate vulnerability. These results echo conclusions found in recent studies that long standing structural racism via HOLC has led to a legacy of disinvestment and greater vulnerability in many of these neighborhoods today. However, climate change risks are more widely distributed geographically (Lynch et al. 2021;Lee et al. 2022).
Supplemental Figure 3also summarizes these same domains by USEPA region, to inform policymaking on these issues. We find that two regions (Regions 4 [Southeast] and 6 [South Central]) contain tracts of generally higher Baseline vulnerability and Climate Change risk. Regions 5 (Great Lakes) and 9 (Southwest) rise higher than the rest for Baseline vulnerabilities, while Regions 1 (New England) and 3 (Middle Atlantic) do so for Climate Change risks. These regions taken together contain large shares of the highest scoring tracts across the U.S.
Our analysis shows the complexity of climate risks and the geospatial differences within and between counties, states, and geographic regions. Clustering analysis shows that census tracts with high baseline health, social and economic, and infrastructure vulnerabilities coupled with high health and socio-economic related climate risks had the highest average CVI scores. While there are climate risks nearly everywhere, the CVI clearly demonstrates the substantial intersection between longstanding disparities, captured in our Baseline vulnerability indicators, and heightened risks to climate change. As a result, many disadvantaged communities are likely to be more greatly impacted, more frequently, and often at greater cost due to higher cost of basic services such as housing and transportation, lack of access to health care, technology, and socio-economic progress (Mohnot S. 2019). Additionally, the heterogeneity of indicators with the greatest contribution to the CVI implies that hyperlocal differences are drivers of cumulative vulnerability, thus illustrating the need for locally targeted solutions and interventions.
The CVI we have developed addresses a number of limitations that are present in existing map-based indexing approaches. First, many earlier index tools have focused on environmental, socio-demographic, or health metrics, and do not directly incorporate climate risks (USEPA 2020;Williams et al. 2022;Temper et al. 2018;Snorek 2018;Jephcote and Mah 2019;European Environment Agency 2020;European Environment Agency 2022;Laville 2022). Second, the regional nature of many tools limits their applicability (California Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment 2022;Bhandari et al. 2020;New York State Department of Environmental Conservation 2022;NCSG and UMD School of Public Health 2022). For instance, recent legislative policies have prioritized EJ communities for infrastructure investments to deploy across many different sectors, thus requiring national-level data. Most existing tools also lack indicators for access to essential services, equitable infrastructure, health care, education, and social progress, hampering communities’ abilities to respond to climate change and contributing to widening the gap that EJ communities face because of decades of underinvestment and discriminatory policies (Shonkoff et al. 2012).
Even more recent climate-focused screening and mapping tools focus on a narrow intersection of indicators, such as climate and environment or climate and health (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry 2022;Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2022a,2022b;U.S.G.S. June 22, 2021;NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information [NCEI] 2022;U.S. Department of Homeland Security: FEMA 2021;University of Wisconsin Population Health Institute and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation 2022). None of the tools integrate climate change impacts with environmental, health, and socioeconomic metrics except CEJST (U.S. Executive Office of the President Council on Environmental Quality 2022). However, CEJST uses a threshold-based methodology with a percentile cut-off value criteria for a limited (n=25) number of indicators to identify disadvantaged communities and does not provide information on specific drivers of vulnerability or risk (White House Council on Environmental Quality’s Climate and Economic Justice Screening Tool [CEJST] 2022).
The CVI has several important limitations, largely driven by data availability and data quality. Most importantly, there is a paucity of data related to health impacts of climate change available for the entire U.S. While scientists understand the health implications of warming environments (Watts et al. 2021;World Health Organization 2021;USGCRP 2016), projections of morbidity and mortality down to the census tract level at a national scale are generally not available, as reflected in the low number of indicators in the climate change risk health domain. Additionally, availability of maternal and child health data such as maternal mortality or childhood blood lead levels were limited by inconsistency in state reporting requirements and privacy issues. Water quality data was particularly challenging to obtain and critically lacking, including data on safe drinking water information systems, lead-based water service lines, municipal waste-water systems, emerging contaminants in drinking water, and unregulated groundwater. The CVI would have benefited from greater availability of datasets reflecting climate related resilience and impacts on Native American populations and tribal communities. We know, for example, that Native American crops (First Foods) are particularly susceptible to climate change, but these are not included in existing datasets (Lynn et al. 2013). Overall, however, the CVI still represents the most comprehensive collection of available data related to vulnerability and climate risk.
With respect to data quality, one important limitation of the CVI is its reliance on self-reported (survey-based) data for many health-based metrics developed by the CDC. To be consistent, we did not incorporate more highly resolved measured data at local or regional scales. Thus, communities would benefit from ground-truthing with external or more highly resolved data, if available, for added accuracy. Geocoding misclassification is also a potential issue for some datasets, such as prison population, gun deaths, drug overdose, and homicides, which are often counted using an individual’s home address rather than where they currently reside or where the event transpired. Additionally, we decided to include many indicators available only at the state or county level, despite the recognition that there may be variability geographically that may not be accurately captured. Finally, data collected during SARS-CoV2 presented unique challenges as annual estimates may be biased due to disruptions in normal reporting, behavioral patterns, and potentially census enumeration. We hope improvements in data collection and reporting supported by the Biden administration 2021 Environmental Justice Mapping and Data Collection Act (H.R. 516/S.101) will allow inclusion of additional and more accurate indicators with future updates (U.S. Congress 2021–2022).
The CVI makes available and actionable a plethora of publicly available neighborhood-level data to community advocates, decision makers, municipal planning organizations, and government agencies, so that planning, programs, and grant funding from recent legislation can be targeted to disadvantaged communities. Indeed, several recent legislative efforts in the U.S., including executive orders such as the Justice 40 mandate and legislation such as the Inflation Reduction Act (White House Environmental Justice Advisory Council 2021;U.S. Congress 2021,2022;National Academies of Sciences Engineering and Medicine 2022), have created a need to identify and allocate resources to address vulnerabilities and risks from climate change, with substantial funding earmarked to benefit vulnerable communities directly. Total funding across the recently passed IRA, IIJA, and CHIPS bills reaches approximately $1.6 trillion over 10 years (Table 1). Approximately 41% ($641 billion) of this overall amount involves targeting resources to communities most in need to alleviate baseline vulnerabilities, and 35% ($535 billion) for climate change risks. A tool such as CVI should play a key role in helping ensure resources are appropriately distributed to meet those targets. Moreover, these legislative mandates can be further mapped to specific vulnerabilities and climate risks to develop a nuanced way of matching appropriate funds to local needs for these enormous federal initiatives (Supplemental Table 4).
Climate vulnerability and risk-related funding in major recent legislative efforts.
Entries correspond to overall investment levels, and corresponding shares from each piece of legislation, that can lead to improvements in baseline vulnerability or climate risk outcomes.
When investments provided improvements across multiple categories, these were split and allocated (in equal shares).
These sums include all forms of climate investments (both for mitigation and adaptation) able to reduce climate change risk outcomes and may overlap with investments in baseline vulnerabilities. SeeSupplemental Table 4for detailed information about specific provisions and sources.
The breadth of the CVI can be credited in part to the continuous engagement with communities and stakeholders in all phases of development, leading to inclusion of metrics important for quantifying risks and vulnerabilities based on lived experiences and locally supported solutions. While citizen scientists and community leaders have first-hand knowledge in what threatens their communities and what is needed to mitigate, respond, and recover from climate impacts, they often lack access to scientific data or the capacity to gather information across disciplines to effectively advocate for action. Through our engagement process, we aimed for a paradigm shift from a unidirectional information flow to co-creation of this research, as a key goal of the CVI is to create a meaningful tool for quantitative community resilience planning and decision making. To illustrate how understanding neighborhood level drivers may facilitate identification of interventions tailored to specific community needs, we consider as a case example the location of several of our community engagement stakeholders in Harris County, TX.
The census-tract level CVI scores in Harris County (Figure 4) shows a distinctive geographic pattern consistent with previous work on disparities, including a low vulnerability “arrow” that highlights the affluent areas of Houston and a concentration of EJ communities near the Houston Ship Channel (Binkovitz L. and O’Neil E. 2021). In the ToxPI radial pie charts, the three top scoring census tracts have high scores across all domains, though higher for Baseline vulnerabilities as compared to Climate Change risks. Pleasantville (census tract 48201212500), an EJ community in Houston, was the highest-ranking census tract in Harris County, and 26th out of 73,057 census tracts nationally. Domain-specific ToxPIs provide information on driving factors within each category, indicating where funding and resources could be targeted to yield the greatest benefits. For instance, within Baseline Health, overall physical health and chronic disease are drivers, while for Climate Change Extreme Events, flooding is the major driver and among the highest ranked risks in the nation.

The top three ranking census tracts are highlighted by their FIPS code, score, and percentile rank, along with the ToxPI visualization of the category domain scores (slices defined inFigure 1). For the top ranked census tract, the scores for subcategory components within each category domain are also visualized using ToxPI. Percentile ranks for each indicator, separated by subcategory component, are shown separately inSupplemental Figure 4.
Thus, these visualizations provide an easy and effective way to communicate the complexity of integrating more than 180 indicators and to identify which have the greatest contribution to the respective index score. Used in combination, they can provide a systems perspective for communities to understand multi-factorial root causes of equity and justice disparities and climate risks facing their communities. Prioritizing and addressing factors with the largest contribution to domain specific or overall index score has the potential to target interventions to lessen climate justice burdens.
Examining individual indicators (Supplemental Figure 4) provides further insights into local conditions that drive vulnerability in risk, which may be targets of intervention. For instance, bounded by two major interstates, with the industry-dense Houston Ship Channel to its south, this community’s Baseline vulnerabilities in terms of Infrastructure and Environment stem from transportation and sources of pollution. Investments to address burden of heavy-duty vehicles, rail, congestion, and freeway infrastructure could improve air quality, community safety concerns, chronic health conditions, and flooding from freeway runoff. Additionally, the high burden of energy costs, lack of broadband/internet limiting communication and access to services and education, food insecurity, housing affordability, governance, and socioeconomic stressors jeopardize Pleasantville’s climate resilience. High prevalence of chronic diseases, and lack of access to transit and health care all contribute to burdens on residents and hamper abilities to shoulder additional costs from climate events. Pleasantville was one of the least-served low-to-middle income community seeking FEMA assistance in the Houston region after Hurricane Harvey (Episcopal Health Foundation 2018;Begley D. and Gonzalez Kelly S. August 2022). Prioritizing IIJA or IRA funding to address infrastructure improvements, clean energy and energy efficiency, clean transit, affordable housing, reduction and remediation of pollution, and training and workforce development would strengthen Pleasantville’s climate resilience and substantially benefit the community. Similarly, funding for zero-emission ports infrastructure, including heavy duty vehicles, shore-power for ocean-going vessels, and widescale electrification of cargo-handling equipment, and funding for reference grade monitoring of air toxics are examples of micro-targeted priorities that would provide the Pleasantville community with ensuring, systemic benefits.
Through a compilation of almost 200 indicators at the census tract scale, we have found that while many climate change risks are broadly distributed across the U.S., their intersection with existing disparities creates highly heterogeneous cumulative vulnerabilities, down to the census tract scale. By providing local scale data across a wide range of indicators, the CVI thus lays a data-driven, scientific foundation for future research on the intersection of a variety of climate change risks and inequalities in health, social and economic factors, infrastructure, and environmental quality, while also revealing that health impacts of climate change are the greatest research gap. However, in addition to advancing the future understanding of the complex interactions among these factors, this effort also delivers actionable data today. Specifically, the CVI not only provides overall ranking and prioritization of communities where mitigation and intervention are most needed, but also yields valuable insights to develop micro-targeted strategies to ensure that their implementation addresses the most critical factors underlying cumulative vulnerability and risk.
We thank community leaders from Achieving Community Tasks Successfully (ACTS) of Pleasantville, Houston, Texas, Coalition of Community Organizations (COCO), of Fifth Ward, Houston, Texas, Sunnyside Community Redevelopment Organization (SCRO) of Sunnyside, Houston, Texas, Will County Community Partners, Illinois, South Bronx Unite of Bronx, New York, and Michigan United for providing valued input on desired indicators for inclusion in the CVI and feedback on development and results of the tool; Ivan Rusyn for providing input on study design; Reza Farzeneh, providing input of transportation data and environmental data; Kristi Pullen Fedinick of NRDC; Gaige Kerr and NASA HAQAST Satellite Data for Environmental Justice TIGER Team; Andrew Pedicino, Lesa Walker and Julia Gohlke for assistance with data gathering; Sharmila Bhandari and Kelsey Meisenhelder for assistance in data processing; and David Reif and Jonathan Fleming for assistance in implementing ToxPI in R and ArcGIS. This research was supported in part by the National Institute for Environmental Health Sciences (P42 ES027704), and institutional support from Texas A&M University. The results, conclusions and opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of their respective organizations.
Competing Interest Declaration:The authors declare no competing interests.
CRediT Author Statement
P. Grace Tee Lewis: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data Curation, Writing – Original Draft, Supervision, Project administration;Weihsueh A. Chiu: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data Curation, Writing – Original Draft, Visualization, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition;Ellu Nasser: Investigation, Data Curation, Writing – Original Draft;Jeremy Proville: Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data Curation, Writing – Original Draft, Visualization;Aurora Barone: Investigation, Data Curation, Writing – Original Draft, Visualization;Cloelle Danforth: Validation, Investigation, Data Curation;Bumsik Kim: Formal analysis, Investigation, Data Curation, Writing – Original Draft;Jolanda Prozzi: Investigation, Resources;Elena Craft: Conceptualization, Methodology, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition.All: Writing – Review & Editing
ASSOCIATED CONTENT
Supplemental Material
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894