An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Correspondence:ksgutie2@ncsu.edu; Tel.: +1-910-612-6461
Received 2015 Nov 30; Accepted 2016 Jan 27; Issue date 2016 Feb.
This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons by Attribution (CC-BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Climate justice is a local, national, and global movement to protect at-risk populations who are disproportionately affected by climate change. The social context for this review is the Southeastern region of the United States, which is particularly susceptible to climate change because of the geography of the area and the vulnerabilities of the inhabiting populations. Negative human health effects on variable and vulnerable populations within the Southeast region due to changing climate are concerning, as health threats are not expected to produce parallel effects among all individuals. Vulnerable communities, such as communities of color, indigenous people, the geographically isolated, and those who are socioeconomically disadvantaged and already experiencing poor environmental quality, are least able to respond and adapt to climate change. Focusing on vulnerable populations in the Southeastern United States, this review is a synthesis of the recent (2010 to 2015) literature-base on the health effects connected to climate change. This review also addresses local and regional mitigation and adaptation strategies for citizens and leaders to combat direct and indirect human health effects related to a changing climate.
Keywords:climate change, climate justice, human health, rurality, vulnerable populations
The National Research Council’sCommittee on Understanding and Monitoring Abrupt Climate Change and its Impactsacknowledges that climate change is most likely occurring at least as fast as any other warming event over the last 65 million years and that this warming trend is expected to increase in its speed and intensity over the next 30 to 80 years [1]. TheCommitteeaddresses two global changes that are occurring abruptly: the disappearance of Arctic sea ice and increases in the extinction rates of marine and terrestrial species. It is important to not only consider global impacts of climate change but to also address more regionally-based past, present, and future impacts.
The Southeast region of the United States (U.S.) is exceptionally vulnerable to climate change-related events, such as sea level rise, heat waves, hurricanes, and drought, due to latitude, topography, and proximity to the Atlantic Ocean and Gulf of Mexico [2]. As a result of the changing climate, populations living along the Atlantic and Gulf coasts will be affected by sea level rise and subsequent land loss, and many inhabitants of the Southeast will experience increasing temperatures and more frequent, intense, and sustained extreme heat events [2]. Further, the region’s water supply stress due to periodic water shortages is anticipated to increase significantly by 2050, affecting forestry, recreation, manufacturing, agriculture, power generation, and fisheries [3]. People living within geographically isolated areas in the Southeast are likely to experience the direct and indirect effects of a changing climate differently, and perhaps more dramatically, than those residing in other areas [4].
Beyond the susceptibility of the region to climate change-related events due to geography, Southeastern U.S. populations can be characterized as vulnerable due to their rurality and socioeconomic status. There are varying definitions of what it means to be “rural.” The U.S. Census Bureau identifies a rural area to consist of all “territories, populations, and housing units located outside urbanized areas and urban clusters (i.e., densely populated areas containing more than 50,000 or more than 2500 people, respectively)” [1]. At least one-third of the populations in 7 out of the 10 states comprising the Southeastern U.S. live in an area considered rural by the U.S. Census Bureau [5]. The Southeastern U.S. is comprised of over 90% rural land area [5]. People who live in rural areas in the Southeast currently do and will continue to experience climate change in unique ways by virtue of regional changes in temperature, precipitation, and severe weather events and their vulnerable status [5].
The USDA Economic Resource Service reports a difference of over $10,000 in per capita income between urban ($32,007) and rural ($21,005) residents [6]. Nine out of the 10 states with the highest rural and small town poverty rates, as calculated from the 2010 U.S. Census, are located in Southeastern or bordering states [7]. Furthermore, Lalet al.notes that the Southeastern U.S. has been “plagued by unemployment” [8] (p. 823). These economic conditions may lower this population’s ability to respond to the impacts of climate change.
The racial and ethnic make-up of the region’s inhabitants is variable throughout the Southeastern U.S., with overall higher percentages of Caucasians, followed by African Americans and then Latinos/Hispanics. Caucasians comprise anywhere from 53% (Georgia) to 92% (West Virginia) of the population in the Southeastern states. Several Southeastern states have larger populations of traditionally underrepresented racial and ethnic groups. While African Americans comprise only 3% of the population of West Virginia, 37% of the population of Mississippi is African American. Latinos/Hispanics comprise 25% of the Florida population [9].
Climate justice, a subset of environmental justice, is defined by Bulkeleyet al.as the “mobilization of justice with respect to climate policy” [10] (p. 915). Audet argues that climate justice is “socially constructed through conflicts and negotiations” [11] (p. 371). The term “climate justice” is thought to have been coined by Henry Shue in 1992 inThe International Politics of the Environmenttext by Hurrell and Kingsburgy [12]. However, the use of the term did not become popularized until the beginning of the 21st century when various activist groups around the world began voicing the perceived injustice of those suffering the most from climate change. This included populations who were living in low lying areas subject to flooding and sea level rise and people living in drought-stricken regions of the globe [13].
Climate justice is generally discussed in the literature in relation to one of two types: distributive (outcome) and procedural (process) [14,15]. Bulkeleyet al.organized distributive justice as the rights and responsibilities of individuals, organizations, and governments within the larger climate justice scene as differentially distributed across space and time (e.g., who is responsible for reducing greenhouse gas emissions and on what time scale should the mitigation be addressed); whereas procedural justice is the inclusion and participation, equitably, of all affected parties (e.g., explicitly determining who should take responsibility for decision making over mitigation policy, how, and for whom is it being done because all parties involved have rights that need to be respected through acknowledgement and voluntary participation) [10]. Fraser also presented a third type, “recognition justice,” where rights and differences of cultural and social groups are recognized and addressed [16]. In this regard, recognition justice calls for the affirmation of difference—based on race, gender, class, and even geography—to overcome obstacles for any subset of the population to be involved in responding to an issue [16]. This review frames climate justice within the Southeastern U.S. in respect to recognition justice.
To date, issues of equity and climate justice have been more fully investigated at the country-to-country level than at smaller sub-national levels [17]. Concern regarding this relative inattention to vulnerable populations within the U.S. led to the establishment of Executive Order 12898 by President Bill Clinton in 1994 directing “Federal Actions to Address Environmental Justice in Minority Populations and Low-income Populations” [18]. This action resonates with Ebi, Lindgren, Suk, and Semenza’s assertion that the degree to which health risks affect humans is determined not only by the changing climate but also by who and what is exposed and the population’s vulnerabilities [19]. Vice Admiral Vivek H. Murthy, the Surgeon General of the United States, remarked at the Summit on Climate Change and Health (23 June 2015) “Climate change is therefore not just a health issue but a moral issue and each of us has the responsibility to do what we can, as much as we can, for as long as we can.”
While issues of climate justice have traditionally focused on urban populations, the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS) identifies serious concerns for vulnerable populations within rural regions in the U.S. because climate change health threats are not expected to affect all populations equally [20]. Lalet al.assert that “the literature specifically related to how climate change will affect rural communities, their resilience, and adaptive capacity in the United States is scarce” [8] (p. 819). Further, the literature suggests that vulnerability differs not only among nations and regions but also across demographic divides (i.e., race, ethnicity, age, income level, and gender) [21,22,23]. Beyond the well-established disparities in health between Caucasians and racial and ethnic minorities, rural minorities are at an even greater disadvantage for health status and health care [24,25,26,27]. NIEHS also identifies people living in poverty and outdoor workers (i.e., farmers and farmworkers) as vulnerable populations for climate change effects [20]. Rural and underrepresented populations, such as those inhabiting the Southeastern U.S., represent some of the most vulnerable of demographic and occupational groups.
This review consists of three primary sections. The first addresses evidence of existing and projected climate change effects in the Southeastern U.S. The second section links climate change to human health, with a focus on rural Southeastern U.S. communities. The third makes suggestions for climate change mitigation and adaptation in the Southeastern U.S., differentiating strategies at the local, regional, and national level. Throughout the review, there is an emphasis on the Southeastern U.S. because of the vulnerabilities of the region’s populations due to both their rurality and socioeconomic status, as well as the geographic features of the region that are expected to exacerbate climate change-related impacts [2].
Figure 1shows the states comprising the Southeastern U.S. and specific effects of climate change in the targeted region. Climate change is already evident through physical climatic data taken over the last half century, and impacts have been documented and are expected to continue, if not worsen.Table 1outlines four major subsets of climate change: temperature, precipitation, sea level rise, and extreme weather events. The evidence of climate change presented is specific to the Southeastern U.S., and projected climate change effects for both urban and rural Southeastern populations from the literature are identified. Literature often emphasizes the impacts of climate change in relation to large urban centers in developed countries, such as the U.S., and overlooks surrounding populations of rural communities in these same countries.

Map of Southeastern U.S. region with corresponding climate change effects identified.
Climate change in in the Southeastern U.S.: Evidence supporting climate change and past and potential population impacts.
FromTable 1, it is clear that climate change is underway in the Southeastern region of the U.S. and that this change has had and will continue to have a direct impact on human populations. The projected increase in hurricane intensity will undoubtedly be one of the most challenging climate change effects for vulnerable populations throughout this region as many already-vulnerable populations live within low-lying areas along the coast. One has only to recall the devastation of Hurricane Katrina, which hit the Gulf Coast Southeastern states in 2005, to understand the potential loss of built capital (i.e., residential, commercial, agricultural and industrial infrastructure), human capital (i.e., life, physical and mental health), and social capital (i.e., social supports and networks, emergency funds) [72].
Temperature extremes and seasonal shifts will also present wide-ranging challenges to the vulnerable populations inhabiting the Southeastern U.S. Extreme hot temperatures will not only directly affect human health through heat exhaustion and heat stroke, particularly among manual laborers [73], but will also indirectly affect health through reduced yields for agricultural crops and loss of aquatic life. While much of the existing literature on climate change effects focuses mainly on large populations in urban centers and impoverished people in less economically developed countries, the literature highlighted inTable 1points to future concerns, particularly for rural and vulnerable populations in more economically developed regions, such as in the Southeastern U.S., in the areas of human health and well-being.
Issues of climate justice have been explored at the global level, comparing impacts on developed countries (DCs) (e.g., U.S., Japan, Germany, France, United Kingdom) and least developed countries (LDCs) (e.g., Ethiopia, Rwanda, Yemen, Haiti) [74,75,76]. However, the vast discrepancies in economic conditions and health status and, as a result, environmental justice and equity within a single DC or LDC country are not as well understood. Marmot, Allen, Bell, Bloomer, and Goldblatt emphasize thatall countriesshould have two aims in regard to human health: (1) improve the average health of its citizens and (2) reduce health inequities among low-, middle-, and high social classes to the health level of the most advantaged [77]. This makes it particularly concerning that as a result of climate change impacts the inequality of health status and healthcare access by socioeconomic class is expected to worsen [78].
People inhabiting rural areas within the U.S. have reduced longevity as compared to their urban counterparts; Singh and Siahpush determined that life expectancy was inversely related to rurality and that the disparity between urban and rural communities widened over time [79]. Comparing two extreme life expectancies in the U.S. in regards to rurality, race, and gender, poor African American men in non-metropolitan areas averaged a 67.7 year life expectancy, which is more than 20 years less than equally poor Asian/Pacific Islander women in metropolitan areas (89.6 years) [79]. As suggested by this comparison of life expectancy as an indicator of health, rural and vulnerable populations in the Southeastern U.S. will have unique challenges related to indirect and direct effects of climate change on human health.Figure 2identifies human health effects related to climate change in rural areas that may further contribute to urban-rural, racial, and income discrepancies.

Health effects of climate change in vulnerable populations in the Southeastern U.S. connected to temperature, precipitation, sea level change, and extreme weather events.
The range of health impacts identified inFigure 2highlights the need for continued and expanded climate justice interventions in the Southeastern U.S., where the most vulnerable groups are among the most negatively impacted by the changing climate. Many of the health issues addressed inFigure 2are related to chemical or biological contaminant exposure as an indirect result of climate change effects, including increasing temperatures and water quality and quantity concerns. For example, increased temperatures associated with climate change are expected to release volatile compounds that were previously trapped in water, such as trichloroethylene (TCE) and polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB), exposing populations through ingestion or inhalation to these and possibly other carcinogenic toxicants [20]. Additionally, flooding may overburden water treatment facilities and waste lagoons from animal agriculture, exposing populations to pathogenic viruses and microorganisms. Flooding will also cause increased pesticide run-off and may introduce fertilizers containing nitrogen and phosphorus into the water, creating harmful non-toxic and toxic algal blooms that may sicken or kill animals and people [20,80].
Figure 2provides evidence to support the link between environmental factors associated with climate change and effects on human health. McMichael argued that, in addition to large-scale and systemic environmental factors (such as those associated with climate change), demographic and social factors(i.e., population growth, aging, family structures) and economic activity (i.e., wealth creation and distribution and financial status and health care) impact human population health [81]. While environmental factors—for example, increased foodborne illnesses and waterborne diseases and the depletion of drinking water resources—are the most obvious linkage between climate change and human health, demographic and economic factors also come into play. Human health quality and access to care are directly related to socioeconomic and geographical status [81].
Access to services, facilities, and goods has been an overarching theme within the social and environmental justice movements and extends to the realm of climate justice as well, with particular relevance for the Southeastern U.S. Accessibility to health facilities and services often encompasses three categories of access: financial access, behavioral access, and spatial access [82].Financial accessis tied to the ability of people to receive adequate health care under personal cost constraints.Behavioral accessrefers to how people utilize health services, including doctor visits, medications, and emergency care.Spatial accessaddresses the geographic distribution and subsequent travel times to health care facilities, especially in remote, rural areas. Health disparities among the most vulnerable rural inhabitants—including children, adolescents, and the elderly—are often attributed to inequity in the distribution of health care providers, especially access to physicians relative to other providers (e.g., nurse practitioners and midwives) [83]. There are areas in the Southeastern U.S., predominantly in rural locations, that are identified as primary care health professional shortage areas (PC-HPSAs) [84]. For example, Thomaset al.identified a rural area in Georgia where no pediatricians were accepting new Medicaid (health care program for those with low incomes and limited resources) patients and there was less than one family/general practitioner per every 2000 individuals per county. As the climate-induced health outcomes outlined inTable 2(e.g., asthma attacks, heat strokes, and psychological stress disorders) increase, the need for health care services that are equitable, affordable, and positioned appropriately for Southeastern rural communities will be essential.
Example climate change mitigation and adaptation strategies addressing health effects by exposure class in the Southeastern U.S.
Access to health care facilities and services is not the only environmental justice issue at play; there are additional disparities in access to quality, healthy food sources, which often vary by rurality, ethnicity, and socioeconomics. Access to healthy food options can help populations maintain health in a preventative fashion [85], and Hilmers, Hilmers, and Dave identified potential public health hazards for “low-income and racial/ethnic minority populations” with regard to their ability to make health dietary decisions and to manage a healthy body weight due to a lack of access [85] (p. 1652). As food production shifts locally, nationally, and globally due to temperature and precipitation changes, costs and accessibility of quality foods for all communities may be stressed even further. This stress will likely put an additional burden on low-income, minority, and remote communities to acquire healthy and affordable nutritional options.
Mitigationaims to reduce human influence on the climate system, whereasadaptationencompasses policies and programs that work to prevent or minimize impacts of a changing climate on human populations [95]. Adaptation can be either anticipatory (occurring prior to experiencing effects of climate change) or responsive (resultant from climate change effects already occurring) [96]. Local climate change mitigation efforts may include fundraising for and installation of solar panel farms in support of low-emission, clean-energy power sources. An example of a local adaptive measure to reduce flooding related to climate change is the creation of a sea wall along a beach-front property. Where mitigation approaches naturally take place at all levels(i.e., local, regional, national, international), oftentimes adaptation to climate change occurs at the local or regional level [97]. It should be noted, however, that mitigation and adaptation are not mutually exclusive as the two are inherently linked [97].
The U.S. Geological Survey identifies more than 15 federal government entities that have been established to not only research the science behind climate change (e.g., National Oceanic and Atmospheric Association: Climate Division) but also to ensure the well-being of citizens in the wake of climate change (e.g., Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Climate and Health Division) [98]. However, there is little evidence of positive climate change interventions by the organizations listed, as well as others, especially in rural areas and among underrepresented populations. Bierbaumet al.categorizes four groups of participants in climate change mitigation efforts: “federal government, states, tribal and local/regional governments, and private sector and non-governmental organizations” [99] (p. 364). It is recognized that having stakeholders within the private sector who are members of, represent, and/or engage with vulnerable populations take a more active stance and give voice to local citizens and communities serves to guide and benefit the mitigation and adaptation efforts of both public and private entities [99]. For example, the Coastal Sustainability Studio at Louisiana State is helping to implement community-developed plans and training tools for areas impacted by Hurricanes Gustav and Ike, and the Fish and Wildlife Service and The Nature Conservancy have marketing efforts that highlight how various types of stakeholders can positively impact erosion and salt water intrusion.
ThePanel on Adapting to the Impacts of Climate Changeacknowledges that “there is currently no a clear federal policy directive to encourage proactive adaptation to climate change” and that more needs to be done at the national level “to fill this void” [100] (p. 4). A few suggestions made by thePanelinclude increasing the federal government’s role as a catalyst to provide information, resources, and incentives; evaluate needs for risk management; and serve as a role model for programs nationwide [100]. One of the limiting factors for the availability of solid information about the benefits, costs, potentials, and limits of climate change adaptation actions is the “diversity of impacts and vulnerabilities across the United States” [100]. Greater focus on regional needs and additional involvement of stakeholders impacted by our changing climate would inform mitigation and adaption strategies in the Southeastern region and throughout the U.S.
Globally, there are many mitigation and adaptation policy dilemmas [15]: Who is responsible for climate change impacts? How should DCs assist LDCs adapt to climate change? How should assistance be distributed among LDCs? What are fair procedures for planning and decision making? These questions have relevance intranationally as well. Vulnerable populations in the Southeastern U.S. who are already experiencing the burdens of climate change in the form of climate variability and extreme weather events will require protection and assistance through national policies falling under the umbrella of climate justice. This does not suggest that mitigation and adaption policy response remains exclusively at the national level because, in the case of many climate change adaptations, responses at multiple levels are necessary for change to occur.Table 2identifies local and regional mitigation and adaptation strategies to address climate change in the Southeastern U.S. with respect to the health effects identified inFigure 2.
The interconnectedness of mitigation and adaptation strategies and related health effects is evident fromTable 2. Some climate change mitigation and adaptation efforts produce a domino effect, resulting in more positive (e.g., changes in agriculture and livestock production that lead to reduced red meat consumption both positively affect human health and minimize greenhouse gas emissions) and potentially negative (e.g., renewable biofuel production may increase the need for agricultural worker labor, increasing opportunity for excessive heat, humidity, and pesticide exposure) effects on human health.
Rural populations of the Southeastern U.S. are in a position to participate in target mitigation strategies to reduce the anthropogenic impact of climate change through technological developments, workplace (i.e., agricultural and industrial) practices, personal and community behavior changes. However, adaptation strategies may prove challenging due to several factors specific to the Southeastern U.S. and may therefore require assistance from regional and/or national groups. For example, enhanced communication methods were a common theme among adaptation strategies inTable 2. Due to the geographic remoteness of communities and associated lack of communication resources (e.g., telephones, televisions, high-speed Internet, and computers) within many impoverished homes, effective and timely communication of health effects for vulnerable populations is difficult. Similarly, while diet and behavior modifications may be able to provide individuals with healthier lifestyles at the same time as adapting to climate change, these modifications require financial resources that may need to be supplemented by government programs. Lack of adequate transportation affects access to both health care and nutritious foods. State and local governments have been successful in collaborating to improve food access in low-income neighborhoods by introducing mobile markets to bring fresh produce into local communities and incentivizing grocery stores with healthy, low-cost fresh food options to move into low-income communities [85].
While both mitigation and adaptation can be planned at various levels(i.e., individual, local, regional, national), successful implementation will require multi-level support. Hallegatteet al.contend that climate change policies are best implemented at the local scale by mitigating transportation, energy, water, and building infrastructures to reduce human impacts on greenhouse gas emission and by adapting locally to climate change effects [112]. At the local level, effective solutions will necessitate cooperation among “government, business sectors, individuals, and the collective citizenry acting together” [50] (p. 401). In their review, the authors identified criteria from seminal literature that are necessary for developing local climate change solutions: make the process engaging, present content in an understandable fashion, make the information salient to the stakeholders’ and decision-makers’ lives, and foster affective responses that are both relevant and motivating at an individual level [50].
Involving all stakeholders in mitigation and adaptation efforts can create sustainable community development [97]. It is common for mitigation strategies to be presented as a win-win scenario, often referred to as co-beneficial, in order to attract the interest of all organizations and individuals affected by the policy [113]. For example, through building a solar farm in a community, energy service costs could be minimized for the individual, and local companies who create and then install the solar panels would benefit economically as well. In addition to initiating preventative measures to combat current and future climate change, “a comprehensive approach that considers all stakeholders within different levels, and the availability of resources” is recommended for communities and individuals [97] (p. 290). The authors indicate that the best adaption and mitigation strategies for addressing climate change in low- and middle-income communities must focus not only on specific environmental issues but also social and economic issues. Ebiet al.suggest that the capacity to adapt to climate change includes population awareness of the issues; option availability and availability of knowledge, skills, and technology; political drive; human and financial investment capital; and institutional capacity [19]. The literature underscores that continual efforts must be made to provide particularly vulnerable populations with the knowledge, skills, and capital to empower individuals and communities to develop and support local and regional co-beneficial mitigation and adaptation strategies.
Ongoing research is needed in the area of climate justice for rural populations in the Southeastern U.S. and various underrepresented groups in regions throughout the U.S., other DCs, and LDCs. Specifically, issues of procedural climate justice as it relates to voice need to be more fully addressed; as Burnhamet al.insist, more attention needs to be given to “who sits at the table, how they are allowed to participate, whose knowledge counts, and who gets to define the problem” because to this point, the federal and state entities have been the loudest voices [114] (p. 245). Although this review focused on the Southeastern U.S., it was evident through the literature searches conducted that there were scant articles focused on climate change concerns and adaptive strategies targeting regional areas within larger national contexts. Researchers need to assess and develop climate change mitigation and adaption strategies, especially at the local and individual level, tailored to marginalized and vulnerable communities [115]. As globalization creates an interconnectedness with populations afar, issues of environmental justice related to climate change must continually be monitored among the poor and underrepresented in all countries, in addition to the inhabitants of less developed countries [116].
There are several limitations of this review. First, although the Southeast region of the U.S. is relatively small geographically, the scope of this review is still grand in scale. Thus, the information presented in this article is not exhaustive for every topic presented, but is a synthesis of the literature for each subtopic (i.e., climate justice, health effects of climate change, mitigation, adaptation) from extensive Google Scholar searches focused on recent research efforts. Articles within the last five years (2010–2015) were targeted. However, often these articles contained references to seminal work and valuable resources dating back to the 1990s; these sources were also included. All journal articles, both national and international, were considered if they were written in or translated into English. Common search terms used included: climate change in the Southeastern United States, health effects of climate change, rural populations and climate change, vulnerable populations and climate change, as well as combinations of the terms. Articles were filtered by reviewing titles and/or abstracts for relevance. Articles were included if they were specific to the Southeastern U.S. and were published within the target time period. Additionally, grey literature was searched and included, as needed, to provide pertinent current data produced by government entities (e.g., U.S. Census Bureau, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, U.S. Department of Agriculture). Secondly, as aforementioned, the literature directly targeting climate change effects and projections, as well as climate justice, in the Southeastern U.S. is scant, necessitating extrapolation from studies of urban populations or vulnerable populations in other regions. Finally, although the information contained in this review is crucially important to the human health of the vulnerable and underrepresented populations in the Southeastern U.S., neither the sources nor this article itself is directed toward the audience truly at the heart of the matter—the citizens of the Southeastern U.S. Thus, this research should ultimately be used to further advance the understanding and capacity of individuals within the targeted populations and similar populations worldwide to help develop manageable adaptive strategies to combat the changing local, regional, and global climates.
By virtue of the fact that they are inhabitants of a developed country, populations in the Southeastern U.S. are at a relative advantage with regard to climate change impacts; globally, vulnerable populations are responding to drought, famine, vector/zoonotic-related disease outbreak, and, more recently, cultural genocide as a result of necessary population relocation [117]. Even so, vulnerable communities of the region struggle to attain environmental justice, specifically the right to a healthy environment. The issue of climate justice is particularly salient to the Southeastern U.S. where the geography of the area and the rurality and socioeconomic status of the population make the region susceptible. As there is no “one size fits all” proposition for addressing the needs and protecting the health of vulnerable communities related to the effects of climate change [117] (p. 209), issues of climate justice for the Southeast U.S. and for specific populations in other regions should be considered and given an active voice. Climate justice cannot be a topic only addressed at the global level. Every population throughout the world will experience effects related to climate change somewhat differently, and it is the responsibility of scientists, policy-makers, businesses, and local communities and individuals to take an active participatory role in climate equity issues.
The authors would like to thank Kathleen Dorn and Katlyn May for their suggestions and edits during various stages of manuscript production. Research reported in this publication was supported by NIEHS under award number P30ES025128, the Center for Human Health and the Environment.
Kristie Gutierrez and Catherine LePrevost conceived of the study. Kristie Gutierrez conducted the literature review and drafted the original manuscript. Both authors contributed to the writing and revising of the manuscript.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Articles from International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health are provided here courtesy ofMultidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute  (MDPI)
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894