An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Correspondence: Gabrielle Richards, Environmental Public Health Division, Indigenous Services Canada, Jeanne Mance Building, A.L. 1919D, 200 Eglantine Driveway, Ottawa, ON K1A 0K9;
Tel: (343) 540-8011; Email: Gabrielle.richards@canada.ca
The Climate Change and Health Adaptation Program (CCHAP) is a program within the
First Nations Inuit Health Branch of Indigenous Services Canada (which was previously
under the responsibility of Health Canada). The CCHAP supports Inuit and First Nation
communities in mitigating and adapting to the health impacts of climate change. The
impacts of climate change on Indigenous health can be observed in multiple areas
including, but not limited to, food security, cultural medicines, mental health and landbased
practices. This program seeks to address the needs of climate change and health
in First Nation and Inuit communities to support resiliency and adaptation to a changing
climate both now and in the future through its emphasis on youth and capacity
building. The commentary is based on the Program’s eleven years of experience working
with and for Indigenous communities and provides an overview of the CCHAP
model and the work it has and continues to support. This paper demonstrates three
examples of community-based projects to mitigate and adapt to the health impacts of
climate change to demonstrate climate change resiliency within Indigenous communities.
Keywords:climate change, First Nations, Inuit, community-based, adaptation, mitigation
The Climate Change and Health
Adaptation Program (CCHAP) for
First Nations South of 60N directly
supports First Nations communities
to develop and undertake
adaptation and mitigation projects
to build upon their needs within a
changing climate.
This commentary outlines the
CCHAP’s work and history, and
highlights three cases, in Selkirk
First Nation, Arviat and The
Mi’kmaw Climate Action, which
demonstrate the work these communities
have undertaken with
support from the Program.
Environmental changes are both detrimental
to human health, and an opportunity
to develop adaptive and creative
solutions with those who are threatened
the most by these environmental shifts.1Amongst those who are critically impacted
are First Nation and Inuit communities
whose livelihoods and well-being hinges
upon the wellness of the land. Cunsolo
Willox et al.2describes that Indigenous
communities’ health and well-being are
connected to the land, stating: “[Indigenous]
identities, well-being, livelihoods, histories,
and emotion-spiritual connection are
emergent from the land on which they
live” (p. 546). Many Indigenous community
members continue to live off the land
by hunting, fishing, trapping, and gathering.
The physical impacts of environmental
changes can be observed by First
Nation and Inuit communities by disrupting hunting and game migration patterns
which impacts food security, the melting
of sea ice and permafrost, lower crop
yields, and furthermore, the spread of
infectious diseases and more intense and
longer heat waves.1,3,4Communities are
also impacted emotionally, as Inuit and
First Nation communities express that
these environmental changes, and subsequent
land changes, have impacted community
members’ identities and livelihoods.2,5These environmental changes are happening
at a more accelerated rate than ever
before1and are compounded by the
impacts that colonization has had on
Indigenous communities—further affecting
their cultures and their livelihoods.6Colonization has created multiple impacts
including the displacement and relocations
of First Nations and Inuit people on
their land and territory, the hindrance of
rights to self-determination, the suppressing
of Indigenous languages and cultural knowledge, and the extraction of land and
resources.7These impacts of colonization
compounded with climate change have
subsequently increased communities’ vulnerability
to experiencing climate change,
critically impacting health and well-being.
Indigenous Knowledge is a key component
to climate change resiliency which
helps mitigate the health impacts of a
changing environment, through place and
culture specific knowledge that encourages
significant adaptive capacity to
health concerns that environmental change
has caused.8Indigenous Knowledge is
understood as knowledge that has been
accumulating and evolving through adaptive
processes and cultural transmission
between generations of a community,9and “is an understanding of the world and
of the human place in the world…a view
that explains the mysteries surrounding them and, that gives [communities] a
sense of place” (Arctic Climate Impact
Assessment, 2004).10One key strength of
Indigenous Knowledge lies within local
contexts of cultural and kinship systems
which enables place and culture specific
adaptive capacities to be built within communities.8These aspects can lead to stronger
mitigation practices amongst First
Nation and Inuit communities to adapt to
the issues these communities face.
The Climate Change and Health Adaptation
Program (CCHAP) was established in
2008 in response to concerns from First
Nation and Inuit communities North of
60⁰ including Nunatsiavut (Northern
Labrador) and Nunavik (Northern Quebec),
who were and are being directly impacted
by climate change.10,11These communities
sought to lead research projects that
would positively impact their communities’
health and well-being. The CCHAP
directly funds Indigenous communities
and Indigenous not-for-profit organizations
to support communities in conducting
their own research in climate change
and health, directly building capacity
amongst youth and community members.
Furthermore, directly funding First Nations
and Inuit communities enables communities
to use their funds as they see fit to
address adaptation and resiliency to climate
change. Projects that the CCHAP
supports seek to build community capacity
and raise awareness around climate
change and health while respecting
Indigenous sovereignty. Projects thus rely
on Indigenous Knowledge and other scientific
methods to create tangible change
within their communities, and therefore,
increase awareness of climate change to
reduce risks to health and well-being.
The CCHAP has funded 95 communitybased
research and adaptation projects
from 2008-2016 in areas such as, food
security, water quality, land-based activities,
mental health, and cultural medicines
among others. In 2016 the program
expanded to the southern part of Canada,
serving First Nation communities South of
60⁰. Today, there is one program in the
South and one in the North to serve First
Nation and Inuit communities in adapting
to the changing environments and learning how climate change is impacting health
and well-being within communities.*
The program embraces First Nation leadership
through an Indigenous Selection
Committee which reviews projects, offers
feedback and makes funding decisions.
Transferring the decision-making processes
to First Nation and Inuit community
representatives ensures that projects
undertaken with the CCHAP are truly for
communities, by communities. Through
the integration of Indigenous leadership,
projects undertaken with the CCHAP inherently
utilize interdisciplinary approaches
that combine Indigenous Knowledge and
other scientific approaches to adapt to climate
change impacts. The integration of
these knowledge streams has enhanced
community capacity and encouraged both
mitigation and adaptation measures to
support communities’ well-being.10
For more information on the CCHAP North please visit: https://www.sac-isc.gc.ca/eng/1536238477403/1536780059794.
Below are three case studies that exemplify
some of the work the CCHAP supports
which provide examples of the
breadth and scope of the work Indigenous
communities have undertaken since 2008.
These projects represent some of the successes
Indigenous communities have had
with initiatives undertaken with support
from the CCHAP’s funding. Each of these
projects represents the adaptive capacity
of First Nations and Inuit peoples and
how their cultural knowledge has led to
adaptation and mitigation within a
changing climate, increasing communities’
resiliency to climate change. Projects
supported in Selkirk First Nation, Arviat,
and within Mi’kmaw territory offer an
understanding of the ways Indigenous
communities are adapting to a changing
climate and are addressing the associated
health impacts of climate change on community
health and well-being. The
Northern case studies are adapted from
the CCHAP North Synthesis Report which
is currently under publication, information
from the climatetelling.info website
and project reports with permission and
input from project leads.11,12
The Selkirk First Nation was supported by
the CCHAP in 2015/2016 and produced
multiple outputs, including a video and
publications which can be found at the ClimateTelling website and at the Arctic
Institute for Community-Based Research’s
website.5,11Selkirk First Nation rests centrally
in the Yukon Territories where the
Yukon River salmon are in dramatic
decline. The project undertaken by the
Selkirk First Nation focused on the relationship
between the land, water and the
people who rely on the fish camps for
food security and to continue cultural
practices that support mental, physical,
emotional and spiritual well-being of their
people. The community relies on salmon
as central to their diet and harvesting of
the salmon is at the heart of the Northern
Tutchone cultural traditions. With the low
returns of salmon, due to climactic
changes and industrial pressures on the
Chinook salmon life cycle, Selkirk people
fear not only the loss of a vital food
source, but also the loss of age-old traditions
of the fish camps. The fish camps
are critical to Selkirk food security and at
the heart of transferring Indigenous
Knowledge to the next generation of
Selkirk people. Therefore, the community
wanted to continue the traditions of the
fish camps to ensure the health and mental
well-being of their community members.
This project centered around
maintaining food security and Tutchone
knowledge and culture while adapting to
the threat of climate change. To do this,
the research was guided by a community
advisory committee, Selkirk Elders and
the community. A survey of fish camps
conducted by the youth with support of
the research leads provided an opportunity
for the youth to learn first-hand, the
value and role of the summer fish camps
while being able to understand the
impacts that climate change was having
on their lands and community. Despite
the lack of fish, the youth learned from
Elders the importance of keeping Tutchone
traditions strong as an important resource
for mental well-being and future challenges.
The project identified six key strategies
for adapting to the changing climate.
This project encouraged youth to connect
with their Indigenous Knowledge and the
role it has in promoting mental wellness,
while also learning about the impacts that
climate change is having on their land.
This was achieved with on-the-land activities
at a winter fish camp for youth, as
well as their role in the research process,
including through conducting interviews
and taking photos, culminating in a Photo Voice story. This project encouraged youth
to gain confidence in their communities’
knowledge and raised awareness amongst
youth and community members on the
impacts that climate change is having on
their communities’ health and culture.
Within the community there is a commitment
to keep traditions strong through a
series of climate change adaptation strategies,
including the role of the fish camps.
Arviat, Nunavut was supported by the
CCHAP for four years to undertake a project
targeting food security beginning in
2010. The community produced multiple
reports and outputs including videos and
publications which can be found on the
ClimateTelling website.11In Arviat,
Nunavut, the community developed a
project targeting food security that was
funded. The purpose of this project was to
revitalize the practices of local harvesters
and hunters which were seemingly displaced
through social and cultural dislocation
over the last 40–50 years. This
dislocation led to greater safety concerns
out on the land, and more of the hunted
animals wasted as Indigenous Knowledge
was discouraged by colonial practices. In
addition, many community members
developed diabetes due to reliance on
store bought food, an expensive and lesshealthy
alternative to country food.12Therefore, the community developed a
project by discussing and interviewing
Arviat Elders who grounded the project in
Inuit values and Indigenous Knowledge,
ensuring that the project was culturally
appropriate and followed cultural protocols.
In these interviews, Elders described
the value of ‘food sharing’ and therefore
invested in a community freezer. The next
phase explored the options for producing
local and healthy foods. To do so, the
community developed a composting system
and used seaweed at fertilizer. After
this, the community worked towards
building local capacity to run the greenhouse.
Lastly, the project furthered
engagement within the community to
ensure that a sustainable method of food
production could continue. Each of these
community-led initiatives built community
capacity and supported the revitalization
of Indigenous Knowledge. This has
resulted in the reintegration of knowledge
systems along with new innovations, such
as a greenhouse, to ensure community
members can be food secure. These initiatives
are still strong today, resulting in the
Young Hunters’ Programming to teach
youth hunting skills and several short films and articles which have documented
this community’s journey. This project is
one example of the types of projects
which support First Nation and Inuit communities
to develop local food systems
that are environmentally friendly, produce
healthy food options, and are culturally
appropriate.
As the program moved to include the
southern part of Canada in 2016,
Indigenous communities disclosed to the
CCHAP that extreme weather events are
impacting health and well-being within
these communities. Climate change has
resulted in increased extreme weather
events, including forest fires and floods13which disproportionally impact Indigenous
communities, particularly rural and coastal
communities.14The CCHAP supported the
Confederacy of Mainland Mi’kmaq’s
Mi’kmaw Conservation Group (later
moved into the Mi’kmaw Climate Action
Program) in Nova Scotia in a project that
addressed emergency management in six
different Mi’kmaw communities. This
project conducted research, engaged community
members, developed needs assessments
and reported on the state of
emergency plans. The project supported
Mi’kmaw communities in developing
emergency management measures that
incorporated Indigenous Knowledge of
health and safety. The project looked at
the physical, mental, emotional and spiritual
impacts of climate change, emergency
events, and emergency management on
the health of community members.
Through speaking with community members,
including, youth and Elders, the
Mi’kmaw Climate Action Program gathered
information on their specific concerns
and needs in the case of emergency
due to extreme weather events. The project
also brought together Elders with
youth through workshops to share knowledge
and to encourage passing along skills
that can build capacity and increase resiliency,
through future activities such as
creating canoe paddles and other crafts
and activities to learn emergency skills.
These skills can connect the youth to the
land and help them learn about climate
change and how that will impact extreme
weather events.
These three projects that the CCHAP supported
represent community led initiatives
that support climate change resiliency
amongst First Nation and Inuit communities.
These projects were chosen to represent
the resiliency of First Nation and Inuit
communities and community-based initiatives
that have positioned these communities
at the forefront of both climate change
challenges and adaptation. These projects
undertaken demonstrate the importance
of localizing adaptation and mitigation
measures, specifically within food systems
and emergency management. These projects
developed with the framework of
local, Indigenous Knowledge, to build
capacity within communities.
Engaging youth and Elders to respectively
learn and pass along Indigenous Knowledge
from generation to generation
strengthens communities’ resiliency and
helps ensure that the projects and initiatives
are sustainable as capacity within
the community and amongst youth are
built. Through both peer and professional
training each project builds capacities in
different areas, such as, research and
interview skills, technological skills and
skills on the land. These skills are built
through the passing of knowledge
between generations, which is crucial in
ensuring sustainability for our future, a
future which youth represent. The projects
supported by the CCHAP leverage
First Nation and Inuit knowledge to build
adaptive capacities within a changing climate
that address communities’ health
concerns. It is through these efforts that
Indigenous communities can share both
their visions and concerns for the seven
generations to come.
The CCHAP would like to thank the project
leads of each of the case studies for
allowing us to highlight their work and
providing their input on this manuscript.
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Gabrielle Richards works at the Climate
Change and Health Adaptation Program
and contributed to the writing of this commentary
with Jim Frehs and Erin Myers
who approved the manuscript and added
their comments to ensure that the program
was reflected accurately in the manuscript. Marilyn Van Bibber critically revised the
manuscript and contributed the case study
on Selkirk First Nation.
The content and views expressed in this
article are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect those of the Government
of Canada.
Articles from Health Promotion and Chronic Disease Prevention in Canada : Research, Policy and Practice are provided here courtesy ofPublic Health Agency of Canada
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894