An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Correspondence should be sent to Karen Albright, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Division of General Internal Medicine, 12631 East 17th Ave, Aurora, CO, 80045 (e-mail:karen.albright@cuanschutz.edu). Reprints can be ordered at http://www.ajph.org by clicking the “Reprints” link.
CONTRIBUTORS
K. Albright and J. Scandlyn conceptualized this study, secured funding to support it, oversaw and participated in the data collection, conducted the data analysis, and wrote the article. P. Shah participated in the quantitative and qualitative data collection and the qualitative data analysis and edited the article. M. Santodomingo compiled the original database of state and county departments and Web sites, participated in the quantitative data collection, and edited the article.
Peer Reviewed
Corresponding author.
Accepted 2020 Apr 13; Issue date 2020 Aug.
Objectives.To determine if and how state and local public health departments present information about climate change on their Web sites, their most public-facing platform.
Methods.We collected data from every functioning state (n = 50), county (n = 2090), and city (n = 585) public health department Web site in the United States in 2019 and 2020. We analyzed data for presence and type of climate-related content and to determine whether there existed clear ways to find climate change information. We analyzed Web sites providing original content about climate change for explanatory or attributional language.
Results.Fewer than half (40%) of state health department Web sites, and only 1.6% of county and 3.9% of city Web sites, provided clear ways to find climate change information, whether through provision of original content or links to external agencies’ Web sites. Among Web sites providing original content, 48% provided no explanation of climate change causes.
Conclusions.National and global public health associations have identified climate change as a public health emergency, but most state and local public health departments are not delivering that message. These departments must be better supported to facilitate dissemination of reliable, scientific information about climate change and its effects on health.
In 2017, the American Public Health Association (APHA) declared that “climate change is a health emergency” and joined 70 other health organizations to endorse the “Climate, Health, and Equity Policy Action Agenda.”1Other organizations, including the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the International Panel on Climate Change, explicitly link climate change to health and charge public health organizations with mitigating and adapting to climate change to promote and protect population-level health.2,3
Characterizing climate change as an emergency is consonant with the US public’s growing awareness of the problem. Over the past 5 years, concern about global warming has increased sharply.4In 2019, approximately 7 in 10 persons in the United States reported they believed that global warming was occurring, whereas only about 1 in 6 reported they did not.4Sixty-two percent described themselves as “somewhat worried” about global warming, with 23% being “very worried.”5Despite growing concern, significant differences remain. Of those who believe global warming is occurring, approximately 55% understand it as primarily caused by human activity, whereas 32% attribute it to natural changes in the environment.5Fewer than 20% of persons in the United States understand the strength of scientific consensus about global warming.5,6The issue is deeply politicized, with differences in beliefs aligned with political party affiliation.7
News media are the US public’s leading source of information about environmental science.8Whereas science journalists strive to “foster the dissemination of accurate information regarding science and technology,”9media reports typically focus on sensational climate-related events. These reports treat such events as isolated incidents rather than linking them to climate change,10a term that includes changes in global temperature, rainfall, and snowfall from increased carbon emissions. Although journalists may appear to provide balanced coverage, information bias has contributed to uncertainty about human contributions to climate change within public discourse.11Furthermore, challenging scientific consensus on the occurrence, scale, timing, and effects of climate change has been an explicit campaign tactic.12Efforts to misrepresent, discredit, and suppress scientific evidence about climate science continue in the Trump administration.13
Given politicization of and misinformation about climate science, where might people turn for reliable information? One potential source is public health departments, which residents might reasonably expect to offer neutral, unbiased, science-based messages about the health effects of climate change.14Recently, national organizations have included climate change in environmental health, 1 of the 5 core areas of public health.15The APHA’s Web site contains resources on climate change for public health professionals and the public,16and the CDC’s National Center for Environmental Health includes climate and health among its topics.17The National Association of County and City Health Officials’ (NACCHO’s) policy on climate change calls for member organizations to “institute continuous, science-based, and culturally competent education programs” to inform communities about the health effects of climate change.18
Such inclusion in public health is laudatory, not least because climate change represents an environmental problem on a larger scale than the localized environmental problems that have historically commanded attention in public health. Localized environmental problems (e.g., sewage leaks or lead in drinking water) are readily visible.17They can be resolved with immediate social action, and information about them is easily translatable to the public. By contrast, climate change is a creeping, virtually invisible problem demanding a deeper understanding of and trust in science. It is easily distanced as an “academic issue” requiring a scientific solution, rather than social action.19,20National public health organizations’ inclusion of climate change in environmental health is a critical step in raising awareness about and legitimating the issue.
Generalized worry notwithstanding, people experience the effects of climate change as local phenomena, from injuries and premature deaths related to extreme weather events to geographical (re)distribution of water-borne illnesses. Yet, although a majority of US persons are aware that climate change can negatively affect health, they cannot link it to specific health outcomes.21Because state and local (i.e., county and city) public health departments are well-placed existing resources for information about their immediate environment, and are often trusted for their authority and expertise, they may be more effective than national organizations in disseminating scientific information concerning climate change–induced health risks.22
Given their potential effectiveness in disseminating such information, understanding if and how state and local public health departments present information about climate change on their most public-facing platform, their Web sites, is valuable. This study analyzed the content of all state and local public health department Web sites in the United States to assess whether they provided clear and explicit ways for residents to find information about climate change and to analyze language explaining its causes.
We collected and analyzed data regarding the presentation of climate change information from every functioning state and local public health department Web site in the United States (n = 2725). For this study, we defined state and local public health department Web sites as those managed and controlled at the state level; the county, region, district, or parish level (hereafter “county level”); or the city, town, township, borough, or village level (hereafter “city level”); and that provide public health information accessible for residents. In January 2019, the research team compiled an original database of state and county health departments, including the District of Columbia, through electronic searches of state health agency directories. A total of 2643 departments were identified; the match rate between this original database and NACCHO’s list of public health departments was 100% for state-level departments and 99.4% for county-level departments. The team then searched for and identified available Web sites for these departments. Departments with no Web sites (n = 435) were dropped; some of those departments (n = 65) had social media presence (e.g., Twitter, Facebook) but no official Web site containing substantive information. We dropped an additional 68 departments because their Web site links were nonfunctioning. In July 2019, we analyzed data from the remaining 2140 state (n = 50) and county (n = 2090) Web sites. In February 2020, inspired by a reviewer’s suggestion, we expanded the database to include Web sites for all city-level public health departments listed in NACCHO (n = 585; match rate = 100%). In March 2020, we analyzed these city-level Web sites.
The goal of the analysis was to determine the presence and type of climate-related content presented on each Web site, simulating the process local residents might use when searching for information about climate change or its relationship to health. Each member of the research team participated in data collection, with each searching a portion of the compiled Web sites. Because a section clearly dedicated to environmental content might be a typical starting point for residents, we first searched Web sites to determine the presence of such a section. If no such dedicated section was present, we then searched the Web sites for the presence of any environmental-related content elsewhere on the site. Specific search terms for all sections of the Web site included “climate,” “climate change,” “global warming,” “environment*,” “disaster,” and “weather.” We entered these terms into search boxes if such boxes were embedded in a Web site, but we also visually scoured each Web site for these terms regardless of the presence of search boxes.
In continuing to model how residents might search, the team then analyzed whether the Web site provided a reasonably clear and explicit way for residents to find information about climate change. Two possible ways were identified and, where present, documented: (1) link(s) to external agencies known to provide climate change information (e.g., the CDC, the Environmental Protection Agency), with the connection to information articulated (e.g., “For information about climate change, see…”); and (2) original substantive content about climate change. The team then analyzed any original content about climate change to determine the presence of (1) scientific information about climate change in any form (including footnotes or links to scientific information or reports) and (2) any explicit connection between climate change and health. The team also documented the presence of any links to relevant external agencies, even if those agencies were not identified as sources of climate change information.
The analytic process was rigorous and thorough. The entire team first explored, independently and together, multiple Web sites to understand their typical structure. Through a series of iterative discussions, the team then identified the relevant categories for analysis (e.g., the presence of a dedicated environmental section, external links to relevant agencies, and scientific information) and then together operationalized each step in the analytic process. To establish intercoder reliability, each team member then used this operationalized process to independently analyze the data for 4 states, compared the results, and came to consensus when disagreements arose. One team member then coded the data for the remaining Web sites; that coding was regularly spot checked by 2 other members of the team to confirm reliability. Throughout the process, team members also observed the type of information presented on Web sites as environmental health, although this information was not the focus of the study and thus was not quantified. The team collected all data in Excel spreadsheets (Microsoft, Redmond, WA), organized them by state, and then uploaded complete data sets into SAS statistical software version 9.4 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC) and performed descriptive statistics.
The team then conducted additional analyses to categorize any explanatory language used in conjunction with references to climate change. This occurred in August 2019 for state- and county-level Web sites and in March 2020 for city-level Web sites. The team analyzed each Web site that provided original climate change content (excluding Web sites that provided only links to external Web sites) for (1) presence of any explanatory or attributional language regarding the causes of climate change and, (2) where provided, the type of explanation or attributed cause. One team member downloaded from the relevant Web sites all text and graphics referencing climate change. Three team members then independently categorized and analyzed the data, coming to consensus through discussion as needed.
Table 1presents climate-related content on all available state and local public health department Web sites. Forty-two state health department Web sites (84% of the state sample), 1307 county Web sites (62.5% of the county sample), and 168 city Web sites (28.7% of the city sample) had a clearly indicated section dedicated to environmental content broadly; an additional 5 state (10.0%), 210 county (10.0%), and 212 city (36.2%) Web sites included environmentally related content elsewhere on their sites. Environmental health content typically focused on localized service provision (e.g., testing and monitoring water in wells, municipal water systems, swimming pools, and lakes; permitting and inspecting septic systems; managing solid waste disposal; controlling animal and insect disease vectors; ensuring food safety). The few Web sites that mentioned the broader physical environment and linked it to human health typically focused on actions to prepare for and reduce negative health risks (e.g., protecting against exposure to sun, heat, and severe cold; preparing for extreme weather and natural disasters) but did not link such risks and events to the broader phenomenon of climate change.
Climate-Related Content on State and Local Public Health Department Web Sites: United States, 2019–2020
Note.EPA = Environmental Protection Agency. The sample size is n = 2725.
Forty-three state (86.0%), 479 county (22.9%), and 129 city (22.1%) Web sites included links to external agencies that might reasonably be expected to present climate change information, even if those agencies were not identified as sources of such information. However, clear and explicit ways to find information on climate change existed on only 20 state (40.0%), 34 county (1.6%), and 23 city (3.9%) Web sites, including 18 states (36.0%), 21 counties (1.0%), and 9 cities (1.5%) that offered original content about climate change. Of those offering original content, 18 state (36.0%), 16 county (0.8%), and 8 city (1.4%) Web sites explicitly linked climate change to health, and 17 state (34.0%), 18 county (0.9%), and 7 city (1.2%) Web sites included scientific information (or links to information) about climate change.
Table 2presents the results of the analysis of language used to explain or attribute cause to climate change; anonymized sample Web site text is included to provide illustrative examples. These results indicate that even among Web sites mentioning climate change, the phenomenon is usually distanced from human activity. Of the 48 (18 state, 21 county, 9 city) Web sites providing original content about climate change, 23 (48%; 11 states, 10 counties, 2 cities) offered no explanatory cause for climate change, instead simply alluding to its existence or focusing solely on its effects. Sixteen Web sites (33%; 3 states, 7 counties, 6 cities) associated climate change with the release of greenhouse gasses or carbon emissions but did not directly connect those gasses or emissions to human activity, whereas only 7 Web sites (15%; 3 states, 3 counties, 1 city) explicitly linked human activity to climate change. Two additional Web sites (4%; 1 state, 1 county) associated climate change phenomena with federal or state practices and acknowledged health and other systemic inequities.
Explanatory Language About Climate Change on State and Local Public Health Department Web Sites Providing Original Content: United States, 2019–2020
Note.The sample size is n = 48.
These results evidence a significant gap between the identification of climate change as a national public health emergency and the information about climate change provided to communities by state and local public health departments on their most visible, readily accessible, and public-facing platform. Fewer than half (40%) of all state health department Web sites, and only 1.6% of county and 3.9% of city Web sites, provide a clear way to find information on climate change, whether through original content or links to external agencies. Furthermore, of the relatively few (n = 48; 18 state, 21 county, 9 city) Web sites providing original information on climate change, 48% provide no explanation or attribution of its causes. Instead, some Web sites present the connection between human activity and climate change as an unresolved issue (e.g., “…whether or not human activities are influencing climate change is a matter of global debate.”) Although such statements are not technically false—a small number of individuals globally do debate the role of human activity in climate change—it does not accurately represent the level of scientific consensus about climate change5,7,8,23and may contribute to many US persons’ misperception that scientists do not agree that human activity is a major contributor to climate change.5
County and city public health department Web sites, in particular, necessarily focus on issues such as local water, sanitation, and food safety and inspection services. These are core functions of local public health agencies and are their legally mandated and publicly funded responsibilities.23These agencies often lack the resources that would come with a clear mandate to take on the project of climate change adaptation. Especially in small departments, personnel and budgets may be stretched thin, offering little time or resources to spend on anything other than essential functions. Tight budgets and reduced staff leave few resources for updating Web sites or including anything other than basic information. In some localities, climate change action and citizen engagement may occur through other, nonhealth governmental departments (e.g., tree planting sponsored by departments of parks and recreation), since conceptualizing climate change and mitigation actions as a health issue is relatively new. Furthermore, in some communities, public discussion of climate change and actions related to it may be controversial, and public health officials may fear that such discussions risk losing residents’ trust and confidence.24
Yet we believe that these departments are missing a significant opportunity by failing to address climate change on their Web sites. This missed opportunity represents a loss for the broader public health mission, but it could be addressed with the support of better-resourced national public health agencies. This is also an issue of environmental justice: households that are vulnerable through low income, racial/ethnic minority status, or members with chronic medical conditions or disabilities perceive themselves as at particular risk from climate change and need locally specific information to protect themselves from its effects.25Public health departments depend on budgets and national, state, and local policies enacted by elected officials, and they face varying levels of support for—and sometimes explicit limitations on—their use of terms such as “global warming” and “climate change.” Linking discussion of climate change and health to more localized environmental issues like algal blooms or extreme weather on state and local public health department Web sites could present information on climate change that is acceptable even in areas where the issue is contentious.
People draw from shared cultural models to understand new or unknown phenomena.26A common cultural model for changes in weather patterns is the “natural cycles model” that explains variations in weather patterns over years or decades as the result of naturally occurring cycles (e.g., droughts alternating with periods of increased rainfall and floods).26This cultural model is evident on several states’ Web sites. Many of these Web sites also discuss the negative health effects of weather patterns, and actions that residents can take to prepare for and mitigate them. This model could be expanded by analogy to link local weather events to natural cycles that are affected by human action and that can, in turn, be mitigated through human action.
This study assesses content across a large and unique data set, but it has several limitations. As a cross-sectional study, the analysis is limited to 1 temporal period and thus cannot document changes in presentation of information over time. The city-level data were collected several months after the state- and county-level data, slightly staggering the cross-sectional snapshot. Furthermore, although Web sites are public health departments’ most public-facing platform, they do not necessarily represent all actions and engagement performed by such departments; thus, it is possible that departmental dissemination of climate change information may be occurring through other methods.
Climate change continues to be an emerging field of public health practice. As the science on health impacts has accelerated, broader government initiatives—such as the CDC’s National Environmental Public Health Tracking Network and its Climate-Ready States and Cities Initiative—have emerged to support information and resources regarding climate change and health. However, public health practitioners may not yet have mandates to engage fully with this area of practice, although some may be leading from behind the scenes.27Nonetheless, the absence of information on climate change and its relevance to health on the vast majority of state and local public health department Web sites is a missed opportunity to inform people in the United States of this public health emergency. Although Web sites are only one way that public health departments disseminate scientific information, they are their most public-facing platform and represent departments’ priorities, key programs, and services. They are also where people often look first for community-related health information. A 2019 survey reported that 70% of people in the United States preferred to obtain information from federal agencies through the Internet.28Although not all populations rely on the Internet in equal measure,29it is a heavily used source of information on health topics.30Prominent placement of banners, links, or infographics on climate change and health could be particularly effective ways of capturing residents’ attention.
Many state and, especially, county and city public health departments must operate with significantly constrained resources. Therefore, the Department of Health and Human Services, which funds many public health programs, as well as national public health organizations such as the APHA should increase technical assistance to and financial support for these departments. Such support would enable them to establish on their Web sites clear, explicit, and accessible paths to credible scientific information on climate change and actions that residents can take at both the household and community levels to mitigate its effects. National public health agencies must also increase research on evidence-based approaches to adaptation. This includes tailoring messages to build on locally accepted understandings of weather and climate. A previous survey of local public health department directors found that directors needed funds, personnel, and technical assistance to incorporate programs to adapt to climate change.31They are likely to need similar resources to incorporate information on climate change into their public education programs. There is an ample body of effective, evidence-based communication strategies,22,24,32well-designed informational materials, and authoritative, nongovernmental Web sites like that of the APHA that local health departments could use or provide access to for their communities.
Although some political leaders have expressed doubt over the scientific consensus about climate change, national opinion polls indicate that the majority of people in the United States are eager for credible scientific information on climate change, its effects on health, and the actions they can take to mitigate or adapt to it. Because discussion of climate change may be regarded as controversial in some communities, the public health departments serving them may be hesitant to disseminate information about it, as these departments also need to be respected and valued as sources of information on many other health issues. The situation may be especially difficult in states where government agencies have explicitly limited or prohibited the use of relevant terms (e.g., “global warming,” “climate change”) in official documents.33However, it is worth noting that many public health department Web sites address other issues sometimes regarded as controversial, such as vaccination.
Nongovernmental organizations must continue to work with national leaders and allied organizations to secure funding for public health agencies at all levels of government and urge politicians to speak out on climate change action. Public health agencies might ally with other public services affected by climate change (e.g., transportation, water, sanitation) and with local nongovernmental organizations working on mitigation projects.34The declaration by national and global public health associations of climate change as a public health emergency calls not only for adaptation and mitigation of its health and environmental effects but also for political, social, and economic action on many levels. State and local health departments must be better supported to disseminate information about climate change, its effects on health, and why it represents a public health emergency. The rapid appearance of information on COVID-19 on public health department Web sites throughout the country shows what can be accomplished with resources and commitment. Although COVID-19 is an immediate health threat, climate change is no less serious a peril to the US public.
Support for this research was provided by a Professional Research Opportunities for Faculty (PROF) grant from the University of Denver and a grant from the Office of Research Services at the University of Colorado, Denver, with matching funds from the latter institution’s Department of Health and Behavioral Sciences.
We are thankful for helpful comments from colleagues Maria de Jesus Diaz-Perez, Ivan Ramirez, and Jeffrey Lin, and the assistance with data entry and analysis by graduate and undergraduate research assistants Kristen Bernal, Kate Vinita Fitch, Hannah Marinoff, and Mina Moghaddami in earlier phases of this project.
The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
This study collected only publicly available data and did not involve human participants.
See also Maibach et al., p.1121.
Articles from American Journal of Public Health are provided here courtesy ofAmerican Public Health Association
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894