An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail:zeebe@hawaii.edu.
Edited by Robert E. Dickinson, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, and approved July 9, 2013 (received for review February 8, 2013)
Author contributions: R.E.Z. designed research, performed research, analyzed data, and wrote the paper.
Issue date 2013 Aug 20.
Climate sensitivity measures the response of Earth’s surface temperature to changes in forcing. The response depends on various climate processes that feed back on the initial forcing on different timescales. Understanding climate sensitivity is fundamental to reconstructing Earth’s climatic history as well as predicting future climate change. On timescales shorter than centuries, only fast climate feedbacks including water vapor, lapse rate, clouds, and snow/sea ice albedo are usually considered. However, on timescales longer than millennia, the generally higher Earth system sensitivity becomes relevant, including changes in ice sheets, vegetation, ocean circulation, biogeochemical cycling, etc. Here, I introduce the time-dependent climate sensitivity, which unifies fast-feedback and Earth system sensitivity. I show that warming projections, which include a time-dependent climate sensitivity, exhibit an enhanced feedback between surface warming and ocean CO2solubility, which in turn leads to higher atmospheric CO2levels and further warming. Compared with earlier studies, my results predict a much longer lifetime of human-induced future warming (23,000–165,000 y), which increases the likelihood of large ice sheet melting and major sea level rise. The main point regarding the legacy of anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions is that, even if the fast-feedback sensitivity is no more than 3 K per CO2doubling, there will likely be additional long-term warming from slow climate feedbacks. Time-dependent climate sensitivity also helps explaining intense and prolonged warming in response to massive carbon release as documented for past events such as the Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum.
In the context of anthropogenic greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, equilibrium climate sensitivity is often referred to as the change in Earth’s global mean near-surface air temperature (after reaching a new steady state) following a doubling of the atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration. Generally, climate sensitivity may be referred to as the change in global mean near-surface air temperature in response to a forcing, taking into account various processes in the climate system that can either amplify or dampen the response to an initial perturbation (1,2). These processes are referred to as climate feedbacks, which can operate on very different timescales. In addition, climate sensitivity may depend on the type of forcing and the background climate state (3). In the past, climate sensitivity studies were mostly based on numerical climate models and have focused on the preindustrial/present climate system over timescales of decades to centuries as this approach appeared viable for predicting future climate change (1,4,5). However, recent studies emphasize the investigation of past climate changes and the importance of feedback analysis for a more fundamental understanding of climate sensitivity (3,6–12).
A useful tool for a systematic examination of climate sensitivity is feedback analysis (2,6,13), which can be used to disentangle contributions of individual feedbacks to the overall response. For instance, the global surface temperature change (ΔT) following a change in radiative forcingmay be written as (6):
whereare climate feedback parameters.Eq.1is based on a linearization around an equilibrium state and says that the system’s overall temperature response is composed of a contribution that directly depends on the forcingand additional contributions from feedbacks that depend on ΔTitself (for equilibrium and transient response, seeSI Text). The Planck feedback parameter Λ0represents the change in long-wave radiationfollowing adjustment ofTrequired to balancein the absence of other feedbacks (W⋅m−2⋅K−1; ref.5). Theare positive here for a positive feedback, i.e., when enhancing the Planck response. The radiative forcingmay be due to changes in GHGs, dust, insolation, etc. For example, a doubling of atmospheric CO2(2× CO2) results in a radiative forcing of ∼3.7 W⋅m−2(14). Thus, at 2× CO2, the global surface temperature increasebased on the Planck response alone (all other) would be only ∼1.2 K. The difference between the Planck response and the likely range forof 2–4.5 K (15) is hence due to other feedbacks.
The overall temperature change obtained fromEq.1isand the climate sensitivity,S, is:
The sensitivity increases for positive feedback parameters (, the forcing is amplified) and decreases for(forcing is damped). Considering only fast feedbacks including water vapor, lapse rate, clouds, and snow/sea ice albedo, the fast-feedback sensitivity is, whereare feedback parameters of the fast processes (the typical timescale separating fast and slow processes is often taken as 100 y). Considering fast and slow feedbacks including changes in vegetation, ocean circulation, ice sheets, biogeochemical cycling, etc., the Earth system sensitivity is, whereare feedback parameters of the slow processes. Below,SandS2×=S× 3.7 W⋅m−2is the climate sensitivity in K(Wm−2)−1and kelvin per CO2doubling, respectively (for more details, see ref.3).
Until present, the fast-feedback and Earth system sensitivity have generally been considered separately because the former operates primarily on timescales of decades, and the latter primarily on millennia or longer. For example, climate sensitivity in general circulation models (GCMs) essentially equals the fast-feedback sensitivity and appears fairly constant on centennial timescale (16,17) [earlier GCM results suggesting an increase in the effective climate sensitivity (18) over centuries have been considered an artifact (17)]. Climate sensitivity in simple models used for long-term integrations is often prescribed and constant on all timescales. However, a climate sensitivity parameter that provides a transition between fast and slow feedbacks seems to be missing. In nature, no separation between fast-feedback and Earth system sensitivity exists as climate sensitivity simply changes over time, depending on the varying contributions of the feedbacks on different timescales. Hence, I introduce the time-dependent climate sensitivity,:
whereare coefficients that vary between 0 and 1—depending on the characteristic response time of the slow processj[different functional relationships for theare possible] (MethodsandFig. 1). Time-dependent climate sensitivity introduced here as a theoretical concept (Eq.3) should not be confused with transient ocean heat uptake (16,19–21) or other seemingly transient effects in climate models (17,18). The theoretical advance provided byis that it unifies fast-feedback and Earth system sensitivity becauseapproachesand, respectively, asand. The practical value ofis that it allows evaluation of climate sensitivity continuously over timescales from decades to millions of years. This includes analyses of past climate episodes throughout Earth’s history as well as future predictions of anthropogenic climate change.

Illustration of climate feedback parameters and climate sensitivity over time. (A) Fastand slowclimate feedback parameters. The sum of the fast-feedback parameters isW⋅m−2⋅K−1, yielding a fast-feedback sensitivity ofper CO2doubling (see text andB). The slow feedbacks are illustrated withy andusingEqs.3and6(see text andMethods), the temperature anomaly of the example shown inFig. 2B(red graph), and moderate slow-feedback strength (lines labeled “slow”). The shaded error envelopes inAandBwere calculated based on the likely range of(MethodsandFig. 3). Note the nonlinear horizontal time axis. (B) Climate sensitivity in K(Wm−2)−1(left axis) and in kelvin per CO2doubling (right axis). Considering only fast feedbacks results in a climate sensitivity that is constant over time. However, including slow, time-dependent feedbacks (A) leads to a climate sensitivity that varies over time [S(t)].
Whereas it seems currently difficult to further constrain the fast-feedback sensitivity (5,22), recent paleoclimate studies provide new constraints on the slow feedbacks (3,7–10). Below, I use these paleo-constraints to provide future warming projections. Given scenarios of anthropogenic GHG emissions, I have forecast the evolution of future atmospheric GHG concentrations and surface temperature change usingand the Long-term Ocean-atmosphere-Sediment CArbon cycle Reservoir (LOSCAR) model (23) (Fig. 2). Ocean heat uptake efficiency, which is known to delay surface warming over a few centuries (19,20,24), was included using an effective heat capacity/surface response time (SI Text). Furthermore, slow processes such as changes in vegetation, ice sheets, non-CO2GHGs, etc., were taken into account by specifying slow feedback parametersand corresponding response times(MethodsandTable 1). (The slow feedback from non-CO2GHGs in response to warming is not to be confused with the emission of these gases due to anthropogenic activities.) Theare constrained both directly by a decomposition analysis of climate feedbacks during past climate episodes (3,10) and indirectly by reconstructions of Earth system sensitivity (3,7–10) (Methods). Moreover, uncertainties in the slow feedbacks are examined by varying the slow-feedback parameters (Fig. 3). Note that carbon release from permafrost and oceanic hydrates is also part of the feedback. However, these processes can be explicitly modeled and included here as carbon sources enhancing radiative forcing (Table 1andMethods), rather than implicitly affecting λ values in a less specific fashion (Eq.3). The individual contributions of the various processes to future warming projections are discussed below.

Example of projected anthropogenic warming including various forcings and feedbacks. (A) Anthropogenic CO2emission scenario based on historic emissions until 2010 and a Gauss curve forwith 2,500 Pg C total integrated emissions (46). (B) Projected global surface warming. The base case includes temperature effects on ocean CO2chemistry, increased surface ocean stratification, and ocean heat uptake efficiency. Additional processes that can be included explicitly here as forcings include anthropogenic emissions of non-CO2greenhouse gases (GHGs), permafrost, and oceanic methane hydrates (Methods). Additional slow feedbacks include combined effects of changes in vegetation, non-CO2GHGs, low-latitude glaciers/ice caps, and high-latitude ice sheets. Note: the slow feedback from non-CO2GHGs in response to warming is not to be confused with the emission of these gases due to anthropogenic activities. The red graph is based on moderate values for the slow-feedback parameters(see text andMethods). The shaded error envelope (light red) was calculated based on the likely range of(MethodsandFig. 3). Also shown are warming estimates in Y10,000 from previous studies (orange symbols) that included sediments and a negative, long-term weathering feedback: A05 (2,000 Pg), S09 (1,540/3,720 Pg), M12 (3,000 Pg) = refs.38,40,41(total C emissions in parentheses; A05’s warming pertains to mean ocean warming). (C) Atmospheric CO2concentrations corresponding to the projected scenarios inB. Higher atmospheric CO2levels for given emissions are due to ocean solubility feedback. Note the nonlinear horizontal time axis.
Processes included as forcings/feedbacks in the present study
Anthropogenic emissions. Not to be confused with the slow feedback of non-CO2GHGs.
Includes changes in water vapor, lapse rate, clouds, and snow/sea ice albedo.
Slow feedback. Not to be confused with anthropogenic CH4and N2O emissions.
C release from permafrost/hydrates are actually feedbacks but can be included here explicitly as a forcing (Eq.1), rather than implicitly affecting λ values (less specific).
Calculated as a function of temperature.
Explicitly calculated in carbon cycle model (23).

Summary of projected future warming trajectories. (A) Projected maximum surface warming above preindustrial levelsas a function of total anthropogenic fossil fuel emissions and slow-feedback parameters.represents the combined effects of changes in vegetation, non-CO2GHGs, and low-latitude glaciers/ice caps;represents changes in high-latitude ice sheets.andwere simultaneously increased to cover the likely range of(Methods). The right vertical axis shows the corresponding Earth system sensitivity,. The horizontal line indicates estimates of Earth system sensitivity (ESS) at the lower end of the spectrum (3,8). Thus, the white-dotted area below that line represents an unlikely parameter space for long-term future warming. (B) Projected mean surface warming index(Eq.4). The stars indicate parameter values used for the projection shown inFig. 2(red graph). The magenta line indicates the warming threshold for the irreversible deglaciation of the GIS ofgiven in ref.26.
The fast-feedback parametersenteringEq.3were taken such that the fast-feedback sensitivity,(Fig. 1). Although 3 K is the most likely value for(15), there are uncertainties associated with the(2,5,15), meaning that’s absolute value might be different. However, currently there is little indication from climate models that thevary systematically over centennial timescale (17). In GCMs, thealso seem to depend on the type of forcing and the background climate state, yet systematic relationships that can be applied in future projections appear difficult to infer at this stage (3,25). The present focus is the evolution of the slow feedbacks, whose systematic temporal behavior may be constrained based on recent observations. The present focus is not the uncertainties in the fast feedbacks. For the results presented below, it is important, however, to keep in mind that the calculations are based on the most likely value of.
The maximum global surface warming in response to a total fossil fuel input of 2,500 Pg C over 500 y is projected at ∼4 K if ocean heat uptake efficiency and constant climate sensitivity is included (Fig. 2); for other emission scenarios and parameter variations, see below andFig. 3. This “base case” also includes temperature effects on ocean CO2chemistry and increased surface ocean stratification. The surface warming (ΔT) falls below 4 K within ∼1,000 y after reaching its peak value, even if additional GHG emissions and carbon release from permafrost and oceanic hydrates are included (Table 1). However, with a time-dependentthat includes additional slow feedbacks at moderate strength from changes in vegetation, non-CO2GHGs, low-latitude glaciers/ice caps, and high-latitude ice sheets (MethodsandFig. 1), ΔTremains elevated >5 K beyond Y3,000 and >4 K beyond Y10,000 (Fig. 2). Elevated temperatures enhance the feedback between warming and ocean CO2solubility, causing higher atmospheric CO2levels for given emissions (Fig. 2AandC) and further warming. If sustained over centuries, prolonged warming of this magnitude increases the likelihood of large ice sheet disintegration and major sea level rise (26,27) (see below,Eq.4). In addition, the continued warming may cause higher and extended carbon release from permafrost and oceanic methane hydrates than the estimates included in the present simulations (Fig. 2). It is important that the enhanced long-term warming predicted here is due to slow feedbacks from vegetation, non-CO2GHG, and ice rather than slow ocean heat uptake (21), which is included in the simulations but delays warming only on a timescale of centuries (16,20,24).
The slow-feedback parametersmay be constrained to a certain range of the parameter space using results from paleoclimate studies (Methods). To sample this parameter space, I have calculated future warming trajectories for various emission scenarios and appropriate values for the(Fig. 3). The suite of projection results can be summarized by computing the maximum warming and a mean warming index for each projectioni(relevant e.g., for ice sheet melting):
whereis the global surface warming above preindustrial levels;. Thus,represents the calculated average future warming from the present until year 10,000. The maximum warming depends only weakly on the slow feedbacks and is hence similar for a given emission scenario (Fig. 3A). However, the average warming,, depends strongly on the slow feedbacks and predominantly measures the longevity of the warming (Fig. 3B). This is because the present simulations show a long warming tail, rather than intense peak warming and rapid cooling (SI Text). Given estimates of Earth system sensitivity (Methods), I predict an increase in the duration and magnitude of future warming. For instance, at total emissions of 2,500 Pg C and, the likely range of mean warming over the coming millennia is about 4–6 K, rather than ∼3.5 K when slow feedbacks are ignored (Fig. 3B). This suggests consequences for long-term future climate change projections.
For example, the warming threshold for irreversible deglaciation of the Greenland ice sheet (GIS) (equivalent sea level rise, ∼7 m) has been estimated atabove preindustrial levels (26). A more recent study using a coupled climate-ice sheet model (27) puts this threshold at 1.6 K (range, 0.8–3.2 K). However, at 1.6 K, GIS deglaciation may take ≫104y. The study emphasizes that the timescale of melt depends strongly on the magnitude and duration of the temperature overshoot above the threshold. This feature is better represented here by(Eq.4) than by the maximum warming. For example, all but one simulation withalso include sustained warmingfor more than 4,000 y (SI Text). To avoid GIS deglaciation, total allowed emissions would be ∼2,200 Pg C for a threshold of 3.1 K andif slow feedbacks are ignored (Fig. 3B). However, including slow feedbacks, allowed emissions might be only 1,000–1,700 Pg C (depending on feedback parameters). Humans have already released >365 Pg C from fossil fuel and cement over the past 250 y (28).
The fast-feedback response to anthropogenic CO2emissions represents the largest contribution to the projected warming over the next few centuries. For the base case (2,500 Pg C/500 y,Fig. 2), the calculated maximum additional warming from anthropogenicandemissions is ∼0.6 K, consistent with previous studies (29). Carbon release from permafrost is projected to contribute an additional ∼0.3 K at most on centennial timescale. This is a conservative estimate, using a low sensitivity of the permafrost reservoir size to warming (Methods). Over several millennia, carbon release from methane hydrate systems adds another ∼0.5 K at maximum to the warming (30). Note that the carbon release from methane hydrates predicted for the future does not imply releases of similar magnitude on glacial-interglacial timescale. This is because (i) the recharge time of the oceanic hydrate reservoir is on the order of millions of years and (ii) the temperature swings during glacial cycles were more pronounced toward colder, rather than warmer conditions. Models that include these features predict a relatively small methane release on deglaciations, in agreement with ice core and deep-sea archives, including stable carbon isotope records (31). Note also that, although the last interglacial period was warmer than the preindustrial era, deep-ocean temperatures appear to have been only slightly elevated (32), preventing significant methane release. The predicted future release is comparatively larger because the magnitude of the anticipated anthropogenic warming is unprecedented over the past several million years (31).
Over the coming millennia, an increasing portion of the additional predicted warming is due to slow feedbacks, which also maintain temperatures at elevated levels over this timescale (Fig. 2) (for variation of the slow feedback strength over a wide range, seeFig. 3). At moderate feedback strength (Methods), the slow feedbacks (mostly vegetation, non-CO2GHGs, and low-latitude glaciers/ice caps) cause further warming of about ∼1 K by year 3,000 in the simulations, relative to the case including anthropogenic GHGs, permafrost, and hydrates (Table 1andFig. 2). By year 10,000, the calculated difference in surface temperature warming between these two cases increases to ∼1.8 K mostly due to changes in high-latitude ice sheets, which add to the slow feedback strength on this timescale (Fig. 1).
The implied future changes in high-latitude ice sheets, for example, may be illustrated by comparing feedback parameters (λ values) used in the future projections to those estimated for the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) to Holocene transition. Note that λ values measure the feedback strength per unit warming, not per absolute warming (Eq.1). For the moderate future scenario,W⋅m−2⋅K−1(Methods), whereas for the LGM,has been estimated at ∼0.70 W⋅m−2⋅K−1(3,10). In other words, in the future projections with moderate slow feedback strength, the ice-albedo feedback for high-latitude ice sheets is 14 times weaker than for the LGM–Holocene transition (for further illustration using a simple model, seeSI Text). This reflects the notion that changes in glacial-interglacial ice cover per degree of warming were much larger than those expected for the future. Note that, although the discussion here illustrates changes for a single λ value, a suite of projections are provided using a wide range of λ values (Fig. 3). The moderate scenario may underestimateas several recent studies suggest that the future ice sheet response to warming could be stronger than previously thought (27,33–35). Note, however, that uncertainties in current estimates of ice mass changes for West Antarctica and the Antarctic Peninsula appear to remain large (36).
The feedback parameter for the combined effects of changes in vegetation, non-CO2GHGs, and low-latitude glaciers/ice caps in the moderate future scenario isW⋅m−2⋅K−1. For comparison, ∼0.20 W⋅m−2⋅K−1has been estimated for LGM–Holocene vegetation changes just in the latitude band, whereas corresponding estimates for changes in atmosphericandare about 0.12 W⋅m−2⋅K−1(3,10). This gives a total of ∼0.32 W⋅m−2⋅K−1for the combined effect of these two processes for the LGM–Holocene transition. The moderate future scenario assumes a similar value forbut includes global vegetation changes (not restricted to) and effects of low-latitude glaciers/ice caps.
Regarding the legacy of anthropogenic GHG emissions (37), the main point of this study is that even if the fast-feedback sensitivity is no more than 3 K per CO2doubling, there will likely be additional long-term warming from slow climate feedbacks. Obviously, the projections presented here are subject to uncertainties (e.g., assessed via parameter variations;Fig. 3) and it is yet unknown whether high-end estimates of Earth system sensitivity are applicable to future projections. However, even low-end estimates of Earth system sensitivity such as for the Pliocene (3,8) imply intensified and prolonged warming on millennial timescale (Figs. 2and3).
My results suggest a longer lifetime of human-induced future warming than previous studies (15,38–41) (Fig. 2B). Note that the cited studies as well as the present study do not consider changes in orbital forcing. In extended model runs with low and moderate slow-feedback parameters (Methods), the temperature anomaly dropped to 1/e∼37% of its maximum value after 23 and 165 ky for total emissions of 1,500 and 5,000 Pg C, respectively. All model simulations presented here include sediment CaCO3dissolution and negative, long-term weathering feedbacks, which tend to reduce the atmospheric lifetime of fossil fuel CO2(SI Text). In summary, including a time-dependent climate sensitivity in the projections suggests enhanced future climate change due to slow feedbacks that could amplify the warming and increase the probability for large ice sheet melting and major sea level rise. Note that the sea level rise from deglaciation needs to be added to the sea level rise from thermal expansion (21).
Long-lived peak warming (>∼10,000 y) as suggested here is more consistent with, albeit shorter than the duration of large climate perturbations in the past associated with massive carbon release such as the Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM) (7,42,43). The PETM is considered the best analog for anthropogenic carbon input and independent dating techniques suggest a PETM main phase duration of intense warming of >50,000 y (44). One hypothesis for the longevity of the PETM warming involves additional carbon release from various reservoirs, mobilized as a feedback to the initial warming (45). If the present/future carbon cycle operates in a similar fashion, future warming could be more intense and longer lasting than previously thought.
The carbon cycle model LOSCAR has been used and tested in a number of earlier studies (e.g., refs.7,23,46). For additional information on the use of LOSCAR in the present study and model parameterizations, seeSI Text. Below, the slow-feedback parameters are described, which are subject to uncertainties. The effect of these uncertainties on the results presented here is examined by varying the slow-feedback parameters over their likely range (Fig. 3).
The slow feedbacks include [1] combined effects of changes in vegetation, non-CO2GHGs, low-latitude glaciers/ice caps, and [2] high-latitude ice sheets. Changes in vegetation may occur over timescales ranging from decades to millennia (15,47). For the effects combined under item [1], the response timeis taken as 200 y, whereasis set to 5,000 y (for use of, seeEq.6). The corresponding λ values are constrained as follows (Eq.3). For the last glacial cycle, λ values for vegetation alone (only latitude band) and ice sheets have been estimated at ∼0.20 and ∼0.70 W⋅m−2⋅K−1, respectively (3,10). However, changes in glacial ice cover were much larger than expected for the future and hence the corresponding λ is considered an overestimate in the context of anthropogenic warming. The lower bound of the summay be constrained by estimates of Earth system sensitivity at the lower end,(3,8), yieldingW⋅m−2⋅K−1. High estimates are(3,10), which, again, applies to the last glacial cycle and represents an overestimate with regard to future climate change. Estimates from periods with relatively small (or no) changes in ice cover such as the Pliocene or the PETM may be more appropriate for the near future (3,7–9). For instance, the PETM represents the best paleo-analog for future carbon release as it involved massive carbon input and global warming within a few thousand years. High estimates for the PETM are7.0–8.0 K (3,7), yielding0.70–0.77 W⋅m−2⋅K−1. However, the individual range ofmay be taken as 0–0.1 W⋅m−2⋅K−1, assuming future ice sheet changes to be very small [this is probably a conservative estimate, given recent observations of warming and ice loss in Greenland and Central West Antarctica (34,35)]. Hence a likely range ofis 0.30–0.60 W⋅m−2⋅K−1(Fig. 3). Moderate values for the slow-feedback parameters (;) with units (W⋅m−2⋅K−1; y) are (0.35; 200) and (0.05; 5000) (Fig. 1). Note that λ values may also depend on the type of forcing and the background climate state (3,25), which is however not well understood at present.
TheinEq.3could be chosen to increase smoothly from 0 to 1 over the response time of the slow processes. More generally, the delayed onset of the slow processes may be viewed as a lagged response to an average, past ΔTand hence themay be tied to the integrated past temperature change. For instance, for delayed feedbacks, an equation analog toEq.1may be written as:
where
andis the response time (delay) of processj. Theare then defined by,. In this case, theand hence(Eq.3) are not known a priori but depend on the evolution of ΔT. Numerically, this is a nonissue as thecan be computed from ΔTat previous time steps.Eq.6was used here to calculateandfor the slow processes. For simplicity,was assumed for the fast processes.
I thank the organizers of the workshop on Paleoclimate Sensitivity held in March 2011 in Amsterdam for putting together a great meeting, which prompted me to think about this problem. I also thank the editor and three anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments.
The author declares no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
This article contains supporting information online atwww.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1222843110/-/DCSupplemental.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
Articles from Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America are provided here courtesy ofNational Academy of Sciences
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894