An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
For correspondence. E-maileshortlidge@pdx.edu
Received 2016 Mar 7; Revised 2016 Jun 15; Accepted 2016 Aug 5; Issue date 2017 Jan.
Background and AimsThe Western Antarctic Peninsula is one of the most rapidly warming regions on Earth, and many biotic communities inhabiting this dynamic region are responding to these well-documented climatic shifts. Yet some of the most prevalent organisms of terrestrial Antarctica, the mosses, and their responses to warming have been relatively overlooked and understudied. In this research, the impacts of 6 years of passive warming were investigated using open top chambers (OTCs), on moss communities of Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, Antarctica.
MethodsThe effects of experimental passive warming on the morphology, sexual reproductive effort and stress physiology of a common dioicous Antarctic moss,Polytrichastrum alpinum,were tested, gaining the first species-specific mechanistic insight into moss responses to warming in the Antarctic. Additionally community analyses were conducted examining the impact of warming on overall moss percentage cover and sporophyte production in intact Antarctic moss communities.
Key ResultsOur results show a generally greater percentage moss cover under warming conditions as well as increased gametangia production inP. alpinum. Distinct morphological and physiological shifts inP. alpinumwere found under passive warming compared with those without warming: warmed mosses reduced investment in cellular stress defences, but invested more towards primary productivity and gametangia development.
ConclusionsTaken together, results from this study of mosses under passive warming imply that in ice-free moss-dominated regions, continued climate warming will probably have profound impacts on moss biology and colonization along the Western Antarctic Peninsula. Such findings highlight the fundamental role that mosses will play in influencing the terrestrialization of a warming Antarctica.
Keywords:Antarctic flora, Antarctica, bryophytes, antioxidants, climate change, mosses, physiology, physiological ecology,Polytrichastrum alpinum, sexual reproduction
The Western Antarctic Peninsula (WAP) is experiencing rapid climate change. This is attributed to increased intensity of circumpolar westerlies, warming in the tropical Pacific and El Niño Southern Oscillation effects (Bracegirdleet al., 2008;Ding and Steig, 2013;Etourneau, 2013). Recent data show that warming in the Antarctic is an increasing trend (Meredith and King, 2005;Turneret al., 2013;McMillanet al., 2014;Schmidtkoet al., 2014); since 1950 there has been a 2 °C mean annual increase in atmospheric temperature (Ducklowet al., 2007), while the WAP region has warmed by nearly 3 °C in the past 50 years (Turner and Overland, 2009). Even though temperatures are rising at an unprecedented rate, Antarctica remains one of the harshest environments on Earth, with relatively few terrestrial organisms able to survive on its ice-free terrain (Kappen, 1993).
A small percentage of the Antarctic continent is seasonally ice free (estimated 0·34 %) (Conveyet al., 2014), yet these areas represent unique terrestrial communities. Antarctica is colonized almost exclusively by the hardiest of micro-organisms, plants, lichens, invertebrates and birds (Chownet al., 2015). Of Antarctic plants, two are angiosperms, the Antarctic hair grass (Deschampsia antarctica) and the Antarctic pearlwort (Colobanthus quitensis), while there are at least 111 functionally diverse species of mosses living across the continent, 109 of which are found on the WAP alone (Ochyra, 1998;Ochyraet al., 2008).
Mosses differ from their younger vascular relatives in a number of ways (Goffinetet al., 2009). Mosses are poikilohydric (they maintain the moisture content of their cells at equilibrium with their surroundings), and thus are able to survive severe environmental conditions that would kill most vascular plants, such as freezing and desiccation by entering into a state of suspended metabolic activity until more suitable conditions return (Bewley, 1973;Oliver and Bewley, 1997;Proctoret al., 2007). To date, many terrestrial studies on Antarctic plant communities have focused on the angiosperms (e.g.Smith, 1994;Dayet al., 1999,2008;Hillet al., 2011;Torres-Melladoet al., 2011), while fewer have examined moss communities (for reviews, seeRobinsonet al., 2003;Bramley-Alveset al., 2014). Continuing expansion of ice-free regions in Antarctica will increase the size of habitats suitable for colonization by stress-tolerant mosses (Longton, 1988;Convey and Lewis Smith, 2006;Bramley-Alveset al., 2014;Conveyet al., 2014); therefore, understanding the impacts of global warming on Antarctica’s moss communities will be key to making informed predictions about the future of Antarctica’s terrestrial ice-free margins (Smith, 1994;Royleset al., 2013).
Studies on vascular plants growing in cold regions have shown that climate warming can increase species-specific plant growth and primary productivity (Aerts, 2006;Walkeret al., 2006), as well as sexual reproduction across plant taxa (Molauet al., 1997;Arft, 1999;Dayet al., 1999;Kladyet al., 2011). Warming studies that include mosses are much more limited and typically consider mosses as a group, ‘the mosses’ (Klanderud, 2008). Passive warming experiments conducted in Antarctica (reviewed byKennedy, 1995) found that on substrate without other plants, moss cover increased by 40 % in 2 years, while experiments on mixed moss–grass communities suggested that for at least two moss species, warming decreases cover (Dayet al., 1999,2008) – presumably due to competition – however, little change in moss percentage cover was observed in other Antarctic mixed-plant communities (Bokhorstet al., 2007,2015;Royleset al., 2013). Thus, moss responses to warming are likely to be species specific, and vary depending on the associated vascular plant community – making generalized predictions a challenge (Keuperet al., 2011). Studies of species-specific responses to warming are urgently needed, and may enable us to extrapolate findings to bryophyte functional groups (Chapinet al., 1996;Cornelissen, 1996;Aerts, 2006;Baldwin and Bradfield, 2007;Turetskyet al., 2012).
Similarly limited is our understanding of the reproductive responses of Antarctic mosses to warming. Surveys of Antarctic mosses have captured the sexual systems of species (e.g. monoicous or dioicous), and assessed reproductive effort by recording the presence or absence of sporophytes, which are found relatively infrequently in Antarctica, particularly in mosses with separate sexes (dioicous;Convey and Smith, 1993;Convey, 1994;Smith and Convey, 2002;Ochyraet al., 2008).Casanova-Katnyet al., 2016were the first to show experimentally that three Antarctic moss species (Bartramia patens,Hennediella antarcticaandPolytrichastrum alpinum) had greater sporophyte productionin situunder passive warming on Fildes Peninsula, King George Island.
Reduced sexual reproduction in mosses has classically been attributed to limitations in sperm dispersal – presuming that motile moss sperm require water for transport and can travel less than approx. 10 cm to fertilize a female moss plant (Reynolds, 1980). However, recent studies showed that dioicous mosses are more genetically diverse than would be expected with such dispersal limitation (Wyattet al., 1989;Van der Veldeet al., 2001;Wilson and Provan, 2003). Indeed several studies have since demonstrated greater sperm dispersal distances (for a review, seeGlime, 2007), as well as stress-tolerant sperm (Rosenstiel and Eppley, 2009;Shortlidgeet al., 2012) and microarthropod-mediated sexual reproduction (Cronberget al., 2006;Cronberg, 2012;Rosenstielet al., 2012). Other factors can limit sexual reproduction in mosses, including: inadequate resources (Starket al., 2000) growth trade-offs (Ehrlénet al., 2000) and investment in environmental stress defence (Convey and Smith, 1993;Starket al., 2009;Eppleyet al., 2011). In Antarctic mosses, sporophyte formation appears to be restricted to all but the most favourable microsites (Seppeltet al., 1992), with most species relying primarily on vegetative (asexual) reproduction for dispersal and colonization. The combination of harsh abiotic conditions, minimal free water and short growing seasons in Antarctica may cause mosses to allocate limited energy reserves into cryo- and stress-protective molecules and enzymes (Robinsonet al., 2000) at the expense of primary productivity, sexual reproduction and sporophyte formation.
In this study, we investigated the impact of six years ofin situpassive warming on moss communities via open top chambers (OTCs) on King George Island, Antarctica. Our aim was to understand the consequences of warming on Antarctic mosses by investigating differences between moss communities living in experimentally warmed and unwarmed environments, and through a species-specific approach, using a widely distributed dioicous Antarctic moss species,Polytrichastrum alpinum(Ochyraet al., 2008) to explore moss investment into stress defence mechanisms and reproduction. We predicted that passive warming would impact moss physiology, potentially enabling greater resource investment into growth and reproduction.
The study was carried out on Fildes Peninsula, King George Island (62°00′S, 58°15′W) in the South Shetland Archipelago, an ice-free maritime region of the WAP that has warmed more than three times the global mean (nearly 3 °C in the past 50 years) (Turner and Overland, 2009). The local flora consists of expansive well-developed lichen and moss communities. A total of 61 moss species have been documented on King George Island, of which 40 are present on Fildes Peninsula (Ochyra, 1998). The experiments were conducted on La Cruz Plateau (62°12′S, 58°57′W, 41 m a.s.l.), located in the interior of Fildes Bay, oriented towards the Bransfield Strait, with moderate wind intensity and permafrost at 90 cm depth. We established nine OTCs and corresponding controls (nine locations) along three parallel east–west transects, with the entire site occupying approx. 100 m2of a flat lichen- and moss-dominated rocky plateau (Fig. 1A).

La Cruz Plateau, Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, Antarctica, overlooking Maxwell Bay research site andPolytrichastrum alpinum. (A) Two of the nine open top chambers with control plots located within 0·5 m of each OTC; (B)Polytrichastrum alpinumgrowing at the site. A splash cup (around the male reproductive structures) can be seen on the male gametophyte at the top-centre of the photo.
Each OTC had a hexagonal outline, assembled of 3 mm thick, transparent acrylic panels, 40 cm tall, which tapered at the top with a 106·4 cm diameter base. Each panel had five holes of 1 cm in diameter to improve airflow. The OTCs were previously tested for 2 years for resistance to Antarctic climatic conditions, and were similar in design to others used in Antarctica in Signy and Anchorage Islands (Marionet al., 1997;Bokhorstet al., 2007). For a review of passive warming methods in Antarctica, seeBokhorstet al.(2011). Matched controls were demarcated regions of the same size and shape as the OTC footprint within approx. 0·5 m of each OTC.
All plots were surveyed by sight for moss, lichen and bare-ground percentage cover (categorized as < 1 %, 1 %, 5 %, and then increasing increments of 5 %) at one time point (after 6 years of passive warming). We surveyed the entire area within OTCs and control plots. Two researchers conducted the surveys together, and all measurements were agreed upon to eliminate single observer bias. Mosses were identified to genus or species in the field and verified via microscopy of voucher specimens in the laboratory. Lichens were not identified to species level. The number of sporophytes was documented in each control and OTC plot.
We identified nine mosses:Andreaea gainiiCard.(Andreaeaceae),Bartramia patensBrid. (Bartramiaceae),Bryumsp. (Bryaceae), Ceratodon purpureusHedw. Brid. (Ditrichaceae),Hennediella antarcticaHewd. (Pottiaceae),Pohlia nutansHedw. Lindb.(Bryaceae),Polytrichum piliferumHedw (Polytrichiaceae),Polytrichastrum alpinumHedw., G.L. Sm. (Polytrichiaceae) andSanionia uncinataHedw. Loeske (Campyliaceae). Voucher specimens are stored in the Concepcion Herbarium, Chile (CONC-F, accession numbers: 1575, 1576, 1577, 1578, 1579, 1580, 1581, 1582 and 1583, respectively, for the nine species). Two unknown species, potentiallySyntrichiasp. (Pottiaceae), were found as < 1 % of coverage; plants were too small and in poor condition for identification. There was a large percentage of rocky bare ground in each plot, as well as lichen species, predominantlyUsnea aurantiaco-atra(Jacq.) Bory andHimantormia lugubris. (Hue) I.M. Lamb.
We measured components of stress physiology, sexual reproduction and the potential trade-offs between these two functions in one common Antarctic moss species. We chosePolytrichastrum alpinum(Hedw.) G.L. Sm., as it is a perennial, dioicous moss common on Fildes Peninsula, and was the only dioicous species found within the majority of both OTC and control plots in 2014 (Fig. 1B).Polytrichastrum alpinuminfrequently produces sporophytes in Antarctica (Ochyra, 1998). Of the nine matched OTC and control plots, three were randomly selected for physiological measurements and for sampling of morphological and reproductive measures. In each of these three control and OTC plots,P. alpinumpatches were marked along a 60 cm transect forin situphysiological assessment. The same transects were used for coringP. alpinumfor use in physiological assays (see below). AllP. alpinumcoring occurred after the full community analyses were complete.
Daily mean temperature and relative humidity were measured and recorded using weatherproof data loggers 10 cm above moss canopy level for 5 years (2008–2010 and 2013–2014) (HOBO, U23-001; Onset Computer Corporation, Bourne, MA, USA) on La Cruz Plateau, King George Island in matched OTC and control plots. Due to sensor complications related to Antarctic conditions, we do not have reliable soil moisture data, or temperature and humidity data for 2011–2012.
During January (Austral summer) of 2014, temperatures along the vertical gradient ofP. alpinumcushions (from soil to the air just above the canopy) were logged for three consecutive days. Eight T-type thermocouple wires recording temperature once per second (Hobo UX120; Onset Computer Corporation) were installed at (1) ambient level (air just above the moss canopy): (2) canopy level (in the photosynthetic moss canopy, approx. 0·5 cm below the air–canopy interface); (3) rhizoid level (within the root-like substrate attachment tissue of mosses, below canopy level); and (4) soil level, 3 cm into the substrate, below the moss cushion, on both an OTC and a control plot.
Polytrichastrum alpinummoss canopy chlorophyll content was determined by chlorophyll fluorescence (Gitelsonet al., 1999) by a hand-held meter (Opti-Sciences, CCM-300 Chlorophyll Content Meter, Hudson NH, USA), using standard manufacturer-recommended protocols. Three values were averaged to obtain each data point, and data were collected at threeP. alpinumpatches per each control and OTC plot along the 60 cm transect.
To assess chlorophyll fluorescence parameters non-invasively, we measured maximum quantum yield of photosystem II (PSII) by fluorescence (Fv/Fm). Fluorescence was measured onP. alpinumpatches that had been dark adapted for 30 min prior to measurements (Bilgeret al., 1995;Schreiberet al., 1995). Chlorophyll fluorescence was also measured with an OS5p portable chlorophyll fluorometer (Opti-Sciences) using standard protocols (fluorometer settings were chosen to optimize the moss fluorescence response during the measurement efforts). For the fluorescence measurements only, we randomly selected one additional OTC and associated control plot, as they are non-destructive assays, and we collected five data points per each plot.
For total nitrogen, pigment, protein and antioxidant assays, we usedP. alpinumtissue from six 1·9 cm diameter cores from each of three previously selected matched OTC and control plots. Moss tissue cores were binned by treatment (coming from either OTC or control plots), cleaned of debris and homogenized for immediate use or frozen for laboratory assays. Only mature, green gametophytic tissue was used in these analyses. Total percentage tissue nitrogen was determined using replicates of 0·2 g of dry groundP. alpinumtissue and combusted via elemental analyser (Truspec CN, LECO Corporation, USA); nitrogen content is expressed as a percentage of tissue. To determine carotenoid pigments, 100 mg of tissue was homogenized in acetone and then diluted (ten times) in acetone, and the pigment content was determined spectrophotometrically as previously described (Wellburn and Lichtenthaler, 1984).
For the extraction of proteins,P. alpinumgametophytes (100 mg) were homogenized in a mortar with 1 mL of sodium phosphate buffer 50 mm(pH 7·2). The homogenate was centrifuged at 13 000gfor 25 min and the supernatant (crude extract) was used as a crude enzyme extract. The amount of protein in the crude extracts was determined by the Bradford protein assay (Bradford, 1976) with bovine serum albumin as standard.
When plant tissues are exposed to abiotic stress from various forces (e.g. UV light, temperature, osmotic stress, etc.), oxidative damage can occur among cells, resulting in increased antioxidants or reactive oxygen species (ROS)-scavenging compounds in the cellular milieu (Halliwell, 2006;Mølleret al., 2007). We used a suite of standard assays to assess cellular stress levels by evidence of oxidative damage inP. alpinum.
We determined the amount of thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances (TBARS) in tissues to measure lipid peroxidation by-product accumulation. TBARS were identified by visible spectrophotometry as detailed in previous studies (Ederliet al., 2004), with results expressed in terms of malondialdehyde (MDA) equivalents (Kwon and Watts, 1964;Ederliet al., 2004).
We measured the activity of three different ROS-scavenging enzymes within gametophytic tissues. Presumably, higher activity levels of these enzymes, indicate greater cell damage (Gill and Tuteja, 2010). First, superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity was measured by recording the reduction of nitroblue tetrazolium to formazan by superoxide radicals (Beyer and Fridovich, 1987). Next we tested peroxidase (POD) activity which was quantified as glutathione peroxidase (GPX) by modification of a standard protocol (Curtis, 1971), using the molar extinction coefficient of 26·6 mm–1cm–1at 470 nm for tetraguaiacol. Lastly, ascorbate peroxidase (APX) activity was determined spectophotometrically at 290 nm (Chen and Asada, 1989).
Three additional 1·9 cm diameter cores were removed from each of the three control and OTC plots and were cleaned of substrate. Using a stereomicroscope (Olympus SZ61TR), gametophytes identified asP. alpinumwere counted (to determine canopy density) and then recorded as either: juvenile (bright green coloration with leaves still appressed), mature (leafy gametophyte, green or orange/yellow healthy looking upper shoot) or senescent (little to no photosynthetic tissue, blackening). We measured the length (from the top of the gametophyte to the tip of the rhizoid) of three randomly chosen mature gametophytes from each core to the nearest 0·1 mm. Each mature gametophyte from every core was then dissected under a stereomicroscope and/or a compound microscope (Olympus CX31TR) to determine if there were mature sex organs (archegonia or antheridia) within the gametoecia.
Pairedt-tests were used to test for differences among warmed and unwarmed treatments in total moss percentage cover, species richness,Fv/Fmand chlorophyll fluorescence ratio (CFR) forin situ P. alpinum, as well as for pairedP. alpinumcores to determine differences in gametophyte height and density. t-tests were performed to detect differences in the data mean across plots ± s.e. for temperature and relative humidity,P. alpinumantioxidant assays, total proteins, tissue nitrogen and carotenoids. Tukey’s post-hoc analyses were used to determine differences in seasonal temperatures. Analyses were performed using Prism 6 (GraphPad Software Inc.) or JMP12 (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, NC, USA).
To compare full community-level moss assemblages between OTC and control treatments, percentage cover data were ordinated with a two-dimensional multivariate technique for ecological applications [global multidimensional scaling (monoMDS)]; Bray Curtis distance was determined on scaled data, 999 permutations (Minchin, 1987); and full communities were assessed for statistical differences between treatments (OTC or control) with an analysis of similarity (ANOSIM). Analyses were performed using the Vegan package (Oksanenet al., 2007) of the R Statistical software program (R Core Team, 2013).
We used a generalized linear model to test the effects of treatment (OTC vs. control) and location (nine blocks) on the number of sporophytes in plots (for 18 plots). A Poisson distribution was used for this analysis because of the large number of zeros in the data set, and because these zeros are likely to represent true low frequency effects rather than missing data (Martinet al., 2005). The interaction between treatment and location was not significant and was not included as there is insufficient replication in this design (only one treatment and one control plot per block). A logit model tested the effects of treatment (OTC vs. control) and location (nine blocks) on whether a mature sampledP. alpinumshoot was expressing sex or not (for 281 mature shoots sampled). Analyses were performed using JMP12.
A summary of key results from the study can be found inTable 1.
Study results show that warming significantly impacts mosses of the Western Antarctic Peninsula
Summary findings of the impacts of 6 years of passive warming by OTCs on moss communities and the common moss,Polytrichastrum alpinum, in Fildes Peninsula, Antarctica.
Results from the moss species percentage cover community analysis show that overall community composition in OTCs did not differ significantly from control plots [Fig. 2; non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS), stress = 0·09; ANOSIM test statisticR= –0·00,P= 0·96 based on 999 permutations].Figure 2illustrates that the overall composition of three of our matched plots are very similar (plots 2, 3 and 9) as the points are close together in the NMDS plot, whereas the other six pairs of matched plots are not as similar in overall composition to their matched pair. Similarly, alpha diversity (moss species richness) did not vary between treatments: mean richness was 4·7 ± 0·67 s.e. for control plots, and 4·9 ± 0·82 s.e. for OTC plots (t= 0·43,n= 9,P= 0·68 for each treatment). Mean abundance of each identified species was slightly higher in OTCs over the control plots. Two unidentified species were found in very small cushions, once each in different control plots – these are not included inFig. 3. The overall percentage moss cover was higher in OTCs (Fig. 3B;OTCs, 76·89 ± 9·46 s.e.; controls, 56·11 ± 8·56 s.e.;t= 2·23,n= 9,P= 0·06). Sporophytes were rare in all plots, but were significantly more frequent in OTCs over control plots (n= 18; d.f. = 1;χ2= 50·44,P< 0·0001), with 77 sporophytes in total in three of nine OTC plots compared with 13 sporophytes in total in one of nine control plots. The number of sporophytes also differed significantly among plot locations (d.f. = 8,χ2= 210·48,P< 0·0001). All sporophytes identified were eitherB. patens(58 %) orH. antarctica(42 %).

Moss community composition does not differ between control and warmed plots. Non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) plot shows relationships among percentage cover of full moss community assemblages in each OTC and control plot (stress = 0·09). The same numbers on the upper left-hand side of each point represent matched OTC and control plots; OTCs are represented by filled circles and control plots are represented by open circles. Community composition does not differ by treatment.

Greater overall moss percentage cover in warmed plots. (A) Mean percentage cover of all recorded moss species from control and OTC plots. (B) Mean percentage aggregate moss cover in OTCs and controls. All bars represent data mean (± s.e.), control plots are represented by open bars and filled bars represent OTC plots (n= 9,P= 0·06).
Longitudinal mean daily temperatures measured by data loggers mounted just above moss canopies showed a significant temperature increase in OTC plots over control plots (n= 2124;P= 0·009), with the greatest temperature difference being in the summer months (January, February and March) (Fig. 4A;OTCs, 2·60 ± 0·12 °C s.e.; controls, 2·13 ± 0·13 °C s.e.;t= –2·6,n= 509,P= 0·009). Continuous thermocouple temperature data from summer 2014 also showed significantly higher temperatures in OTCs over controls in all four locations of the soil to air vertical horizon (Fig. 4B;n= 65 532,P< 0·0001 at all four levels) with the largest temperature increase with warming occurring at the canopy level. Ambient temperature means were 0·90 ± 0·01 °C s.e. and 2·39 ± 0·02 °C s.e. in the controls and OTC plots, respectively. Moss canopy temperatures were the most affected by the OTC treatment, with a mean temperature of 0·80 ± 0·01 °C s.e. in the controls and 2·75 ± 0·01 °C s.e. in the OTC plots. Rhizoid-level temperature was also lower in the control plots, with an average of 1·0 ± 0·01 °C s.e. in control, and 2·17 ± 0·01 °C s.e. in the OTC. The soil temperature just below rhizoid level showed the least, although still significant, impact, with control soil temperature mean at 1·87 ± 0·01 °C s.e. and mean OTC soil temperature of 2·68 ± 0·01 °C s.e.

Temperature and relative humidity in control and warmed plots. (A) Mean daily summer temperatures in OTC and control plots for five of seven consecutive years (data median represented by horizontal line, mean represented by cross, ±95 % confidence interval (CI), dots represent outliers;n= 509;P= 0·009). (B)Mean temperatures (± s.e.) measured along a vertical canopy gradient (ambient, canopy, rhizoid and soil level;n= 65532;P< 0·0001). (C) Mean daily summer percentage relative humidity in OTC and control plots for five of seven consecutive years (data mean represented by cross, ±95 % CI, dots represent outliers;n= 448;P= 0·0001). Open boxes and bars represent control plots, and filled boxes and bars represent OTC plots. Data collected at La Cruz Plateau on Fildes Peninsula, King George Island.
Longitudinal mean daily relative humidity revealed significant differences between OTC and control plots. The OTCs had a higher mean relative humidity in the winter months and overall (due to winter means,n= 1798;P< 0·0001) and significantly lower mean relative humidity in the summer months (Fig. 4C;OTCs, 83·29 ± 0·82 % s.e.; controls, 88·22 ± 0·83 % s.e.;t= 4·23,n= 448,P< 0·0001).
Significantin situphysiological differences betweenP. alpinumpatches growing in OTC and control plots were found in dark-adaptedFv/Fmvalues (Fig. 5A;t= 2·52,n= 24,P= 0·02). OTC meanFv/Fmvalues were 0·62 ± 0·02 s.e., and control values were 0·55 ± 0·02 s.e. (n= 24 for each treatment). Similarly, chlorophyll content ofP. alpinumcanopies, reported as the CFR (unit-less measure), was higher in OTCs, but not significantly so (Fig. 5B;OTCs, 0·82 ± 0·03 s.e.; controls, 0·75 ± 0·03 s.e.;t= 1·58,n= 12,P= 0·14).

In situphysiological status ofPolytrichastrum alpinummoss canopies differ by treatment. (A) PSII efficiency (Fv/Fm;n= 24;P= 0·02) and (B)chlorophyll content [chlorophyll fluorescence ratio (CFR);n= 12;P= 0·14]. Bars represent data mean ± s.e.; open bars represent control plots and filled bars represent OTC plots.
Total percentage tissue nitrogen content was slightly greater inP. alpinumfrom warmed plots, but not significantly (OTCs, 0·97 ± 0·05 s.e.; controls, 0·90 ± 0·003 s.e.;t= 1·29,n= 6;P= 0·27). However, total soluble protein content (mg g–1fresh tissue weight) was significantly higher in the OTC tissue than the control tissue (Fig. 6A;OTCs, 6·38 ± 0·14 s.e.; controls, 2·43 ± 0·12 s.e.;t= 21·05,n= 6,P< 0·0001). Total carotenoids (μg mg–1protein) were greater in control plots over OTCs (Fig. 6B;OTCs, 2·46 ± 0·50 s.e.; controls, 5·33 ± 0·43 s.e.;t= 4·36,n= 6,P= 0·01). A measure of internal oxidative damage by tissue lipid TBARS content ofP. alpinumwas significantly greater in controls than in OTCs (Fig. 6C;OTCs, 1·04 ± 0·02 s.e., controls, 3·31 ± 0·26 s.e.;t= 8·75,n= 6,P= 0·0009).

Tissue metabolic properties ofP. alpinummosses differ by treatment. Metabolic properties ofP. alpinumphotosynthetic tissue collected from control (open circles) and OTC plots (filled circles) differ: (A)total protein content ofP. alpinumtissue (n= 6;P< 0·0001); (B) tissue carotenoids (n= 6;P= 0·01); (C) thiobarburic acid-reactive substances (n= 6;P= 0·0009); (D) peroxidase activity (n= 6;P= 0·005); (E)superoxide dismutase activity (n= 6;P= 0·002); and (F)ascorbate peroxidase activity (n= 6;P< 0·0001). Each circle represents an individual assay and the horizontal bar represents the data mean.
We found significantly decreased antioxidant enzymatic activity inP. alpinumtissue extracted from OTCs in all three antioxidant assays conducted (reported in μmol mg–1protein). POD activity was lower in OTCP. alpinumtissue compared with control tissue (Fig. 6D;OTCs, 0·13 ± 0·002 s.e.; controls, 0·53 ± 0·07 s.e.;t= 5·48,n= 6,P= 0·005), as was SOD (Fig. 6E;OTCs, 0·08 ± 0·01 s.e.; controls, 0·23 ± 0·02 s.e.;t= 7·27,n= 6,P= 0·002), and APX (Fig. 6F;OTCs, 8·79 ± 0·17 s.e.; controls, 28·91 ± 0·64 s.e.;t= 31·47,n= 6,P< 0·0001).
The mean number of gametophytes counted perP. alpinumcore (a proxy for canopy density) was lower in OTC plots than in control plots (Fig. 7A;OTCs, 23·0 ± 3·03 s.e.; controls, 35·9 ± 5·36 s.e.;t= 2·90,n= 9,P= 0·02). When broken down into gametophyte ontological category (juvenile, mature or senescent), OTCs contained less of each age group, but, within each ontological category, differences were not significant (Fig. 7A). Mean vertical height (cm) of mature gametophytes did not differ between treatments (OTCs, 2·9 ± 0·15 s.e.; controls, 3·0 ± 0·20 s.e.;t= 0·26,n= 27,P= 0·80).Polytrichastrum alpinumgametophytes expressing male or female gametangia differed between treatments, with significantly more individual gametophytes actively expressing gametangia in OTC plots compared with controls (n= 281 mature gametophytes sampled; d.f. = 1;χ2= 10·09;P= 0·002;Fig. 7B), and among locations (d.f. = 2;χ2= 43·26;P< 0·0001). In total, sex expression was rare in all samples and, of the 18 cores examined, six contained gametophytes that expressed gametangia.Polytrichastrum alpinumsporophytes were found in one of our OTCs, but were excluded from our measurements because they were from a previous season’s fertilizations (pre-2013), as signified by the completely dehisced sporophyte capsules.

Polytrichastrum alpinummoss canopies are less dense in warmed plots and have more gametophytes expressing gametangia. (A)Number of individual gametophytes of three ontological stages and total gametophyte counts per core (1·9 cm diameter) ofP. alpinumfrom control and OTC plots. Mean number of total gametophytes per core differed significantly between treatments (n= 18;P= 0·05). Bars represent data mean (± s.e.); open bars represent cores from control plots and filled bars represent cores from OTCs. (B)Percentage ofP. alpinumgametophytes expressing gametangia is higher in OTC vs. control plots (18·58 and 5·99 % respectively,P= 0·002) from sampled cores.
Here we present results from the first study to investigate the impacts of climate warming on both the physiology and reproductive biology of mosses of the WAP. Moss community results revealed an almost 20 % increase in overall moss cover after 6 years of increased temperature (approx, 2 °C) by passive warming as well as an increase in overall number of sporophytes. Detailed studies of the common moss,Polythrichastrum alpinum, revealed that passive warming led to a significant decrease in stress defence compounds, increased photosynthetic efficiency and machinery, and increased production of reproductive structures. Results of this research provide much needed information regarding the basic impacts of climate warming on Antarctic moss biology, and suggest that continued warming may ultimately enhance reproductive effort in some moss species.
Six years of passive warming did not result in observable differences in moss community composition or species richness (biodiversity) (Fig. 2), a finding that is consistent with previous studies (Bokhorstet al., 2007,2015). However, in this study, warming appears to have caused a significant increase in mean moss cover (Fig. 3) (although we did not record a baseline percentage cover prior to passive warming treatments). A considerable gradient of moss growth rates has been observed from the sub-Antarctic islands to the Antarctic continent, with reports of relative vertical growth rates for Antarctic mosses ranging from 0·2 to 32 mm year–1(Conveyet al., 2014). We saw no differences in height ofP. alpinumgametophytes between the two treatments; however, the overall lateral moss cover coupled with a decrease in canopy density ofP. alpinumsuggest that Antarctic mosses may display plasticity in canopy density as a response to changing environmental factors. We suspect that each species will reveal differential responses to warming with respect to growth and reproductive success, as has been documented in vascular plant communities in the Arctic (Robinsonet al., 1998;Kladyet al., 2011) and the Antarctic (Dayet al., 1999,2008).
It is possible that reduced relative humidity in warmed plots during the metabolically active summer period may have contributed to the observed increase in moss cover by reducing moss surface water – a key diffusional barrier limiting CO2exchange in moss tissues (Royleset al., 2013). Further, the increased OTC temperature may have effectively extended the Antarctic growing season, as has been shown with climatic warming on Signy Island (Conveyet al., 2003). An extension of the time frame for optimal temperatures for photosynthesis (e.g.Helliker and Richter, 2008) may have also contributed to the increase in moss cover and sporophyte production, and the higher chlorophyll content and PSII efficiency (Fv/Fm) observed inP. alpinumwith warming (Fig. 5).
We found reproductive and physiological differences betweenP. alpinumplants from warmed OTC environments compared with those in control plots. Temperature data collected below, within and above theP. alpinumcanopy revealed significant differences in micro-scale temperatures during the growing season (summer), and that the OTC impact was the greatest at the photosynthetically active moss canopy level (Fig. 4B). Passively warmedP. alpinumappeared to be under less physiological stress as it had lower levels of antioxidant activity, greater PSII efficiency and higher tissue protein content compared with controls (Figs 5 and 6A).
By growing in tight cushions, poikilohydric mosses trap water among adjacent gametophytes, creating a dense canopy that reduces overall water loss (Riceet al., 2008). The gametophyte density ofP. alpinumcores from our control plots was significantly greater than that of warmed plots (Fig. 7A). This observed difference in canopy density might be due to weakened pressure to form tight canopies (boundary layer) for protection from desiccation, cold and wind. Testing the effects of warming without changing the impact of natural wind would be difficult, but could help to uncouple the effects of increased temperature from decreased wind and relative humidity. Canopy density was found to correlate positively to primary productivity in tropical mosses (Waite and Sack, 2010); however, here we found evidence of higher PSII efficiency (although still below optimal) in the warmed, less dense mosses, (Fig. 5), suggesting that factors influencing primary productivity in mosses are probably context specific.
Decreased enzymatic antioxidant activity, carotenoid content and TBAR accumulation (Fig. 6) inP. alpinumgrowing in warmed plots demonstrates that this successful Antarctic moss invests heavily in cellular stress defences under current climate conditions, but passive warming significantly reduces cellular stress in this species. Our data are consistent with the hypothesis that if abiotic stress is decreased, antioxidant enzyme activity is also predicted to decrease (Sairamet al., 2002;Apel and Hirt, 2004). The observed decrease in cellular stress responses inP. alpinumunder passive warming suggests that continued warming along the WAP may provide a more favourable, less stressful environment for this common Antarctic moss species.
The total soluble protein content ofP. alpinumplants growing in the OTC plots was significantly greater than for those growing in the control plots (Fig. 6A), and chlorophyll content was nearly significantly higher (Fig. 5B), indicating increased investment in protein synthesis and photosynthetic machinery. It is possible that warmedP. alpinumhad greater nitrogen (N) availability within the OTCs or enhanced ability to mobilize available N to soluble protein, even though we saw only moderately greater total percentage tissue N in warmedP. alpinum. In vascular plants, high protein and chlorophyll content are typically correlated with increased N uptake (Evans, 1989;Haag, 1974;Bakken, 1995;Korandaet al., 2007), but significantly less work has been done on these relationships in mosses. Although most plant systems are N limited, mosses are efficient in acquiring N, and they do so using multiple strategies, often different from those of vascular plants (Jauhiainenet al., 1998;Eckstein and Karlsson, 1999; Turetsky, 2003). A general increase in available nutrients (particularly N) would theoretically provide mosses with the ability to partition more resources towards sexual reproduction with warming (Arft, 1999) presenting a potential mechanism for our observations.
Polytrichastrum alpinumsporophytes are frequently found across less extreme parts of its ranges (Schofieldet al., 1992;Ivanovaet al.2014), while in Antarctica sexual reproduction is largely restricted to the geothermal soils of Deception Island (Smith, 2005) and along higher latitudes (Smith and Convey, 2002). Although in our study, passive warming did not increase sporophyte production inP. alpinum, both male and femaleP. alpinumindividuals increased gametangia production (Fig. 7B), indicating that warming may relieve environmental constraints on reproductive effort. These results are consistent with our initial hypothesis that a reduction in cellular stress may lead to greater investment into (costly) sexual reproduction. Recent work byCasanova-Katnyet al., 2016has found moreP. alpinumsporophytes on Fildes Peninsula with OTC warming, consistent with the pattern of increased sexual expression observed in this study. It should be noted that sexually expressingP. alpinummales have (the relatively uncommon) splash cups (Fig. 1B), which are known to increase moss sperm dispersal (as water droplets fall in the splash cup, the sperm are ejected) (Brodie, 1951). If, with warming, more male gametophytes express gametangia with splash cups, sperm dispersal is likely to increase. How splash cups specifically impact reproductive success of Antarctic mosses has not yet been studied.
Our finding that gametangia production increased but sporophyte production was largely unaffected after 6 years of passive warming inP. alpinumindicates that there must still be barriers to the reproductive success ofP. alpinum(e.g. sperm limitation). Yet, the significantly higher sporophyte number observed in the two monoicous species,B. patensandH. antarctica, under passive warming suggests that warming might differentially impact the reproductive effort and success of dioicous and monoicous species (at least in the near term) on the WAP. Any increase in moss reproductive effort in terrestrial Antarctica has the potential to alter the biotic landscape significantly given that moss spores disperse readily via wind (Muñozet al., 2004), water (Polluxet al., 2009), and invertebrate (Marinoet al., 2009) and bird vectors (Lewiset al., 2014).
Previous work demonstrates the important role of microarthropods (mostly Collembolans) in increasing moss sexual reproduction through mediating sperm dispersal (Cronberget al., 2006;Cronberg, 2012;Rosenstielet al., 2012), and perhaps an active microarthropod community is another necessary ecological requirement for sexual reproduction in Antarctic dioicous species. Studies examining the impacts of simulated warming on plant-dwelling microarthropods in the WAP found that although ubiquitous in both mesic and extreme environments, Collembolans were particularly sensitive to changes in temperature and moisture (Conveyet al., 2002;Dayet al., 2009). Recent work found that warming reduced Collembollan populations in an Antarctic lichen community (Bokhorstet al., 2015). If mosses increase reproductive efforts in response to warming by producing more gametangia, but the resident microarthropods who assist in sperm dispersal (seeRosenstielet al., 2012) are differentially sensitive to warming, this evolving scenario could present a new barrier to reproduction in dioicous mosses of Antarctica. Evidence of the negative impacts of climate change among species due to phenology shifts are becoming common in the literature (e.g.Bellardet al., 2012), and such shifts may similarly impact moss–microarthopod interactions. Studies are currently underway to examine further the impact of OTC warming on these Antarctic moss–microarthropod assemblages, and their relationship to moss reproductive success.
We have shown that Antarctic mosses respond to 6 years of passive warming. We found reduced physiological and cellular stress inP. alpinum, a prominent Antarctic moss species, and increased reproductive success in others, highlighting the range of possible biological responses to climate warming in terrestrial Antarctica. Further studies on individual moss species with consideration of species-specific functional roles and reproductive diversity will inform ongoing efforts to develop a more accurate view of the potential impacts of continued warming on key drivers of terrestrial Antarctic ecology.
We thank P. Zúñiga for help in the field, and Dr Cristina Muñoz Vargas, from Soil and Natural resources from Agronomy Faculty, Universidad de Concepción, Chillan, Chile. We thank Dr Juan Larrain for help with preparation of our voucher samples. A.C.K. and G.E.Z. thank Proyectos Basales y Vicerrectoría de Investigación, Desarrollo e Innovación, Código 021543ZN_INTEXCELENC,Universidad de Santiago de Chile and the DIUCT at the Universidad Católica de Temuco. Also, special thanks to three anonymous reviewers for their comments and insights which improved this manuscript. This work was supported by the Chilean Antarctic Institute (INACH) with generous financial and logistical support [Fr-0112 and T0307]; Comisión Nacional de Investigación Científica y Tecnológica, Chile (CONICYT- CHILE) [FONDECYT 1120895]; and the US National Science Foundation [DEB 128225 to S.M.E.6; PLR 1341742 to S.M.E. and T.N.R.].
Articles from Annals of Botany are provided here courtesy ofOxford University Press
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894