An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Correspondence, 
Matt J. Nimbs, New South Wales Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development, Fisheries Research, National Marine Science Centre, Bay Drive, Coffs Harbour, NSW, Australia. 
Email:matthew.nimbs@dpi.nsw.gov.au
Corresponding author.
Revised 2025 Jun 18; Received 2025 Mar 18; Accepted 2025 Jul 7; Issue date 2025 Oct.
This is an open access article under the terms of thehttp://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.
Temperate Australian kelp forests are highly vulnerable to range contractions because of ongoing ocean warming and extremes. The current mainland distribution of the bull kelpDurvillaea amatheiaeis confined to the far southeastern corner of the continent where warming is occurring two to four times faster than the global average. Extant populations will, thus, require sufficient genetic adaptive capacity to survive these extremes. We examined neutral and adaptive genomic diversity to assess the adaptive capacity and selective pressure on these range edge populations. We have revealed that prevailing ocean currents and dispersal‐restrictive life‐history traits have resulted in isolated, inbred populations across the southeastern range, particularly at the northern edge. Temperature‐related candidate loci exhibited signatures of selection along thermal gradients, with many of these alleles fixed across the species range, suggesting little remaining adaptive capacity, particularly among the warmest populations. Combined, these elements suggestD. amatheiaemay be susceptible to range contractions in the face of ongoing climate change.
Keywords:climate‐change, regional extinction, single nucleotide polymorphisms
analysis of molecular variation
Diversity Arrays Technology Pty Ltd
false discovery rate
genotype–environment associations
gradient forest
Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium
isolation by distance
latent factor mixed models
minor allele frequency
maximum sea surface temperature
mean sea surface temperature
marine heatwave
minimum sea surface temperature
New South Wales
Representative Concentration Pathway
redundancy analysis
sparse non‐negative matrix factorization
single nucleotide polymorphism
sea surface temperature range
variance inflation factors
Ocean warming is driving poleward range shifts for many marine species, resulting in disruption of local marine ecosystems and regional changes in biodiversity (Stuart‐Smith et al.,2022). In warm temperate regions, losses of critical foundation species such as kelp have occurred in several regions, in some cases resulting in collapse of kelp forest ecosystems (Filbee‐Dexter & Wernberg,2018; Smale,2020; Thomsen et al.,2019). Globally, kelp forests are estimated to contribute ~500 billion USD to the global economy through the provision of resources and ecosystem services (Eger et al.,2023), with Australia's Great Southern Reef providing ~10 billion AUD per annum to the Australian economy (Bennett et al.,2016). In particular, the rate at which the ocean is warming in eastern Australia is two to four times faster than the global average (Hobday & Pecl,2014), with climate models predicting local extinction of some kelp species by 2100 under the more severe future climate scenarios (Martínez et al.,2018). Hence, the loss of these foundational macroalgal species has major implications for the communities and industries that rely on healthy kelp ecosystems and the species that depend on them for food and shelter (Eger et al.,2023).
The southeastern Australian endemic bull kelp,Durvillaea amatheiae, is projected to undergo large range contractions under mild Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) scenarios, but under severe change, it is anticipated to become extinct on mainland Australia by 2100 under RCP 6.0 (Martínez et al.,2018). This species is patchily distributed along the mainland Australian coast from Aragunnu (36.59° S, 150.04° E) in New South Wales (NSW) to Wilsons Promontory (39.06° S, 146.46° E) in Victoria (Glasby et al.,2017; Weber et al.,2017) and south into the eastern Bass Strait Islands and eastern, southern, and western Tasmania, where it may occur sympatrically withD. potatorum(Weber et al.,2017). In NSW,D. amatheiaehas a scattered distribution, located on the margins of wave‐exposed headlands in the low intertidal and shallow subtidal zones (Davis et al.,2024). The northern distributional limit has putatively retracted some ~20 km over recent decades, shifting from around Bermagui to Aragunnu (Hermon Slade Foundation,2001). Moreover, congenericDurvillaeaspp. in New Zealand have exhibited local extinctions resulting from marine heatwaves in 2017/2018 (Thomsen et al.,2019), highlighting the thermal sensitivity of this genus. Such rapidly occurring regional extinctions reveal the vulnerability ofD. amatheiaeto a similar fate in NSW. The elevated marine warming occurring in southern NSW (Hobday & Pecl,2014) poses considerable risk to the remaining scattered populations of this species in this region. As a result, there is a pressing need to determine the adaptive capacity of this key species and the risk of future range contractions in eastern Australia.
Genetic adaptive capacity plays an important role in a species ability to adapt and survive through changing conditions (Ahrens et al.,2019; Aitken & Whitlock,2013; Foo & Byrne,2016). One means of exploring adaptive capacity is to determine levels of genetic diversity and structure, including levels of gene flow among extant populations (Aitken & Whitlock,2013; Tigano & Friesen,2016). Both genetic diversity, per se, and (particularly) adaptive diversity are important for conferring populations the ability to undergo selection and adapt to changing ocean conditions. Genotype by environment analyses may be used to identify individual candidate loci linked to environmental stressors such as temperature (Ellis et al.,2012). By examining how these genetic variants change along environmental gradients, we can identify critical thresholds where populations may struggle to adapt. When environmental conditions change faster than populations can evolve through natural selection, population collapse can occur, especially in genetically isolated populations that cannot receive beneficial genes from elsewhere (Smit & Wandel,2006). In this study, we examined genetic diversity and structure and assessed patterns of variation that may indicate a compromised capacity for future thermal adaptation in mainland populations ofDurvillaea amatheiae. Given the fragmentation among these populations and a life history that can result in genetic isolation through very low gene flow (Velásquez et al.,2020) and inbreeding, we tested the hypothesis that these populations are genetically isolated and have suggested that, given their position as the equatorward range edge of the species, some populations may be at the upper limit of their thermal adaptive capacity.
Lamina samples (n= 25–30 per population) ofDurvillaea amatheiaewere haphazardly collected in January 2022 from six locations (Figure1, Table1) across a ~230 km section of the south coast of NSW and eastern Victoria, Australia. Individuals were sampled from the intertidal edge at low tide, and tissue was taken from the distal laminal margin. Care was taken to separate laminae to avoid sampling tissue from the same individual twice, and samples were from plants spaced from 1 to ~20 m apart. The sampling sites covered most of the mainland range ofD. amatheiae(Figure1), including the present‐day northern distributional limit at Aragunnu, NSW, south and west to Cape Conran, Victoria. Across this part of the species's range, distribution was very patchy with large spatial gaps between populations; indeed, the locations sampled represent most of the known, accessible populations in NSW and far eastern Victoria. This study area represents parts of the coast where warming‐driven range retractions are expected to occur over the next few decades (Martínez et al.,2018).

Sampling locations ofDurvillaea amatheiaein south‐eastern Australia with maximum sea surface temperature (average maximum from 2001 to 2020) overlaid. Bermagui represents the historic northern limit of distribution where bull kelp has been lost.
Location, sampling, neutral population statistics, and neutral genomic structure statistics forDurvillaea amatheiae.
Abbreviations:AP, number of private alleles;AR, mean allelic richness;FIS, inbreeding coefficient;HE, expected heterozygosity;HO, observed heterozygosity; MaxSST, maximum annual sea surface temperature (°C); MeanSST, mean annual sea surface temperature; MinSST, minimum annual sea surface temperature;n, number of samples; SSTRange, difference between maximum and minimum annual sea surface temperature.
Lamina samples were placed into 15‐mL centrifuge tubes containing 8 mL of CTAB lysis buffer (hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide—100 mM Tris–HCl, 20 mM EDTA, CTAB 2% w/v, NaCl 1.5 M) and were frozen at −20°C until ready for use.
The Qiagen DNEasy Plant Kit was used to extract genomic DNA from lamina subsamples. Processing followed the manufacturer's protocol for samples rich in phenolic compounds without variation. Samples were eluted at the final step using 50 μL of supplied elution buffer and were quality checked using NanoDrop, Qubit assay, and gel electrophoresis.
For single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotyping, 20 μL of extracted DNA from each sample was sent to Diversity Arrays Technology Pty Ltd (DArT; Canberra, Australia). The DArT organization provides a process pipeline of whole‐genome profiling, without the need for a reference genome (Sansaloni et al.,2011). High‐throughput DArTseq technology was used to genotypeDurvillaea amatheiaeDNA. The PstI‐based complexity reduction method (Kilian et al.,2012) was applied for the enrichment of genomic representation with single copy sequences. This method involved the digestion of DNA samples with a cutting enzyme, PstI, paired with a set of secondary frequently cutting restriction endonucleases, ligation with site‐specific adapters, and amplification of adapter‐ligated fragments. Post digestion with a restriction enzyme pair, a PstI‐overhang‐compatible oligonucleotide adapter was ligated, and the adapter‐ligated fragments were amplified in adherence to standard protocol (Kilian et al.,2012). To develop SNPs, the DArTseq technology was optimized using two PstI‐compatible adapters corresponding to two different restriction enzyme overhangs. The genomic representations were generated following the procedures described by Kilian et al. (2012). Next‐generation sequencing technology was implemented using HiSeq2000 (Illumina, United States) to detect SNP markers. Sequence data was analyzed using DarTsoft14 and DArTdb (Kilian et al.,2012).
In total, 161 individualDurvillaea amatheiaesamples were initially genotyped with the DArTseq™ platform, yielding a total of 60,547 SNP loci with a mean read depth of 14.76 and 29.23% missing data. Raw data were passed through several proprietary filters by DArT to generate a high‐quality dataset for the end user: Strict thresholds were applied to barcode regions (Phred ≥ 30 for 75% of the barcode; Phred ≥ 10 for 50% of the whole read), which ensured reliable sample assignment. Sequences were then truncated to 69 bp, clustered using a 3‐bp Hamming distance, error‐corrected (Phred < 20 corrected to tags with Phred > 25), and analyzed through the DArT GS14 pipeline for SNP calling, with technical replicates and Mendelian validation used to ensure marker quality and reproducibility. After receipt by the authors, additional quality control filters were applied to improve SNP quality while optimizing the number of individuals and loci available for population genomic analyses. Thresholds based on the descriptive statistics from the DArTseq™ pipeline were applied to the raw DArT‐provided SNP data matrix using the R package dartRverse v.2.7.2 (Gruber et al.,2018; Mijangos et al.,2022). Quality control filters were deployed as follows. For read depth, to retain only loci with a minimum depth of five to a maximum depth of 30 reads (FigureS1), we used the function gl.filter rdepth to remove loci with insufficient coverage (which may result in genotyping errors) and those with excessively high coverage (which may indicate duplicated regions or alignment artifacts; Gruber et al.,2018; Mijangos et al.,2022). Then the function gl.filter.reproducibility was used with a threshold of 0.99 to retain only SNPs that were called identically across replicate samples at least 99% of the time—an indicator of genotyping consistency and reliability. Filtering on call rate, the function gl.filter.callrate was used to remove individuals with more than 80% missing data (threshold = 0.2; FigureS2) and to exclude loci with call rates below 0.7, so loci needed to be genotyped in at least 70% of individuals to be retained (FigureS3). Call rate filtering reduces the influence of poor‐quality samples and sparsely genotyped markers, which can bias population analyses (Gruber et al.,2018; Mijangos et al.,2022). A minor allele frequency (MAF) threshold of 0.05 was then applied to remove rare variants using the function gl.filter.maf. Rare SNPs are often less informative for population‐level analyses and may be more prone to genotyping errors. To minimize redundant or non‐independent loci, secondary SNPs were filtered using the function gl.filter.secondaries to retain only one SNP per sequence tag of 69 bp in length, selected based on the most informative variant after conducting 1000 simulations (FigureS4). Filtering secondaries helps ensure that SNPs are not physically linked and reduces the risk of violating assumptions of independence (Gruber et al.,2018; Mijangos et al.,2022). Lastly, individuals with 100% missing genotypes (all loci NA) were removed from the dataset using the function gl.filter.allna, as they provided no useful information for downstream analysis and could have distorted summary statistics. After filtering, dataset 1 had 16,237 SNPs across 154 individuals.
The second dataset, dataset 2, was generated by further filtering SNPs that departed from Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) at α = 0.05. This resulted in a dataset of 8323 putatively neutral, non‐adaptive SNP loci retained across 154 individuals for downstream population genetic analyses. As there is no annotated reference genome forDurvillaea, which precluded identification of synonymous substitutions or non‐coding regions, we used HWE deviation as a proxy to identify loci potentially influenced by selection or other non‐neutral processes. Although we acknowledge that alternative approaches based on genome annotation are preferable when such resources are available, our approach was consistent with established practice in non‐model systems.
Neutral genetic differentiation among populations was analyzed using dataset 2 following the dartR.popgen and dartR.spatial analysis frameworks deployed in R studio. A population distance matrix (Euclidean distances) was processed using the gl.dist.pop function and visualized using gl.plot.heatmap. A principal component analysis was performed using the dartR function gl.pcoa, and the first two principal components were visualized using the gl.pcoa.plot function. Several estimates of population‐level genetic diversity were generated using the poppr package in R, including observed (HO) and expected (HE) heterozygosity and allelic richness (AR; Joop Ouborg et al.,2010). ForAR, allele counts were rarefied by the minimum number of individuals genotyped using the allelic.richness command in the R package hierfstat (Weir & Goudet,2017). Private alleles for each population were calculated using the private_alleles function in poppr. Statistical differences in genetic diversity measures among sites were estimated using the Hs.test function in the R package adegenet (Jombart,2008). Departures from random mating were calculated usingFIS(inbreeding coefficient) using the basic.stats function in hierfstat.
Tests of population genetic structure were subsequently performed by calculating global population differentiation (FST) with 95% confidence limits and population pairwise measures ofFSTwith significance determined using permutation (999) in dartR using the gl.fst.pop function. Multiple testing effects were corrected for using the Benjamini–Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) procedure (Benjamini & Hochberg,1995). An analysis of molecular variation (AMOVA) was performed using the gl.amova function (Kamvar et al.,2014), using a model that partitioned variation among sample sites, with significance based on a randomization test with 999 permutations (TableS1). A mantel test of isolation by distance (IBD) was carried out using the function gl.ibd (Rousset,1997; FigureS5). Finally, the sparse non‐negative matrix factorization (SNMF) algorithm was implemented in the R package LEA (Frichot & François,2015). This algorithm estimates the genetic ancestry components for each sample. For this study, 10 runs were performed with α = 100 for eachKvalue (one to six). The selection of the best number of putative ancestral populations was guided by the cross‐entropy criterion (where, forK, a plot of the cross‐entropy curve formed a “knee” or “plateau”), and the results from the best run were visualized using the barplots function.
Given that the strongest environmental factor that drives macroalgal distribution in southeastern Australia is water temperature (Martínez et al.,2018), we limited the variables used in genotype‐environment associations (GEAs) to water temperature. These were sourced from sea‐surface temperature raster data sets encompassing the period 2001–2020 (daily temporal resolution) developed and used in Nimbs, Champion, et al. (2023). Point data (nearest raster cell to the collection point latitude and longitude) for three remotely sensed temperature variables were extracted for an initial assessment with GEAs using the extract function of the R package terra. The selected variables were maximum sea surface temperature (MaxSST; °C), minimum sea surface temperature (MinSST; °C) and mean sea surface temperature (MeanSST; °C). A fourth variable, sea surface temperature range (SSTRange), was calculated by subtracting MinSST from MaxSST for each sampling point.
This environmental dataset was first analyzed using pairwise scatterplots to reduce dimensionality/collinearity using the function pairs.panels in the R package LEA (Frichot & François,2015). This was carried out because some GEAs are subject to problems (inflation of variance of regression parameters) when highly correlated predictors are used (Dormann et al.,2013; FigureS6). Generally,r> 0.7 is regarded as a good threshold for removing correlated predictors (Dormann et al.,2013). Collinearity was further checked using analysis of variance inflation factors (VIF; Legendre & De Cáceres,2013) via the vif.cca function in the R package vegan (Oksanen et al.,2013). Variable reduction through tests of collinearity and variance inflation resulted in the retention of two temperature‐related environmental variables for use in further analyses: MaxSST and SSTRange (Table1).
Genomic scans for adaptive divergence were carried out to identify candidate SNPs potentially under selective pressure using dataset 1. This step used two different models: redundancy analysis (RDA; Legendre & Legendre,2012) and latent factor mixed models (specifically, LFMM2; Frichot et al.,2013). Redundancy analysis was used to perform a constrained ordination that modeled linear relationships between genetic variation and environmental predictor variables (Legendre & Legendre,2012). This approach enabled the identification of covarying allele frequencies that exhibited associations with environmental factors simultaneously, thereby capturing polygenic signatures of local adaptation. To detect loci under potential selection, the tails of the RDA loading distribution—representing extreme associations—were examined using a cutoff of 2.5 standard deviations from the mean (equivalent to a two‐tailedp‐value of 0.0005). To complement this, LFMM2 was used to test for linear associations between genetic variants and environmental predictors while accounting for potentially confounding population structure. The algorithm of LFMM2 incorporates unobserved latent factors into a least‐squares regression framework, which helps reduce false positives due to cryptic population structure. Latent population structure was estimated using SNMF, as implemented in the snmf function of the R package LEA (version 3.10.2; Frichot et al.,2014). This generated individual ancestry coefficients, which were used to infer the number of ancestral populations (K) and to control for structure in the LFMM2 analysis. Ancestry coefficients were determined for one to 13 ancestral populations (K) by generating an entropy criterion that evaluated the fit of the statistical model to the data using a cross‐validation technique (Frichot et al.,2014). From 100 repetitions, theKvalue with the lowest cross‐entropy score was selected. Next, the optimal factor,K= 4, was used to inform the LFMM to identify whether allele frequencies were correlated with any of the environmental variables. Statistical power of associations was increased by imputing missing genotype data via the gl.impute function in the dartR package using the nearest neighbor option. Subsequently, the function lfmm_ridge was used to compute a regularized least‐squares estimate using a ridge penalty. Individual associations between each SNP frequency and each environmental variable were assessed using statistics test‐calibrated using the genomic inflation factor (function lfmm_test). Corrections for multiple comparisons were applied using the Benjamini–Hochberg algorithm with an FDR threshold of 5% (Benjamini & Hochberg,1995). Significant associations were determined using a threshold of 0.001, as the probability of finding a false positive result increases with lower thresholds (Ahrens et al.,2019). Candidate SNP loci were retained for downstream analysis when they were identified in both methods.
Gradient forest (GF) analysis was used to model allele frequency turnover along environmental gradients using the gradientForest package in R (Jenkins et al.,2019). This machine learning method builds assemblages of regression trees to identify non‐linear associations between environmental variables and allele frequencies, while ranking the importance of variables for each locus. The cumulative importance metric captures how much of the genomic variation is explained by each environmental predictor across the SNP set (Vanhove et al.,2021). The GF algorithm was then used to describe the associations of environmental gradients and genetic variables (Ellis et al.,2012). Gradient forest uses a regression‐tree‐based approach to fit a model of responses between genomic data and environmental variables (Capblancq et al.,2020). Turnover in adaptive genetic variation was modeled on the predictor variables using the candidate SNPs, originally identified via RDA and LFMM2, as the response variables. The machine learning algorithm partitioned allele frequencies at numerous split values along each environmental gradient and calculated the change in allele frequencies for each split. The split importance was cumulatively summed along the environmental gradient and aggregated across alleles to build a non‐linear turnover function to identify loci that were significantly influenced by the predictor variable (Ellis et al.,2012). The analysis was run over 500 regression trees for the environmental predictor variables with all other parameters at default settings. To assess the potential for false positives, we conducted a GF analysis as a control using a set of 139 SNPs randomly selected from the pool of loci that were not identified as outliers in either LFMM2 or RDA. These SNPs were frequency‐matched to the candidate loci and, where possible, sampled from the same chromosomes to control for genomic context.
Durvillaea amatheiaeexhibited very strong genetic structure, clustering as six well‐separated groups in a principal component analysis plot (Figure2b). Analysis of molecular variance indicated highly significant genomic variation (FST= 0.1925,p< 0.001,df_groups = 5,df_error = 148, 1000 permutations) among these populations (TableS1), but IBD analysis (Mantel Test) returned a non‐significant result (p= 0.264,y= 0.22 + 2.1e−07x,r2= 0.0131; FigureS5). All six populations exhibited low allelic richness and inbreeding (positiveFISvalues; Table1), which was also evident as a deficit of heterozygotes (HE>HO) and an overall paucity of heterozygosity (lowHOvalues). Private allele counts (AP) were lowest at the two range‐edge populations, Aragunnu (882) and Tathra (728), followed by Merimbula (1900) and Cape Conran (2252), with the highest counts at Mallacoota (4330) and Green Cape (2875).

Neutral genetic population structure amongDurvillaea amatheiae. (a) PopulationFSTdistance heatmap (pvalues for all pairwise comparisons <0.05). (b) Principal component analysis ordination based on Euclidean distances for individual samples clustered into discrete populations. (c) SNMF generated ancestral co‐efficient barplot based on four putative ancestral groups (K= 4), each bar represents an individual and its constituent ancestral groups, with individuals (bars) arranged into population blocks.
PairwiseFSTanalysis (Figure2a) and significance testing (using permutation tests (p‐values from 1000 permutations,df=n−2)) revealed highly significant differences (p< 0.05 after Bonferroni correction) between each population pair, in which the greatest differentiation was observed between Mallacoota and the two range‐edge populations: Aragunnu and Tathra (FST= 0.48 and 0.43, respectively). The second greatest differentiation was observed between Mallacoota and Merimbula (FST= 0.42). Lower differentiation was observed between Tathra and Merimbula (FST= 0.20), Merimbula and Green Cape (FST= 0.16), and Aragunnu and Tathra (FST= 0.10), and the least differentiation was observed between Cape Conran and Green Cape (FST= 0.07). The latter two locations shared a moderately large proportion of genetic material (compared to other population pairs) whereas Mallacoota appeared to be highly isolated (Figure2a).
Ancestral analysis revealed the most likely number of ancestral groups was four (cross entropy knee or plateau = 4,K= 4; see FigureS7). Each of the four ancestral groups were observed to occur in varying proportions across each population (Figure2c). Group 1 (yellow) constituted the majority of ancestral proportions at Aragunnu and Tathra but with an increased admixture from other groups at the latter. Green Cape and Cape Conran both exhibited similar admixture proportions with ancestry dominated by group 3 (red). Mallacoota and Merimbula were each dominated by separate ancestral groups, group 2 (blue) and group 4 (purple), respectively.
Redundancy analysis and LFMM2 independently identified SNPs exhibiting significant GEAs with both environmental predictors. In the RDA, a permutational analysis of variance confirmed that the constrained ordination model was highly significant overall (p= 0.001,F= 6.049,df_model = 2,df_residual = 151,999 permutations; TableS2). Furthermore, both constrained canonical axes, RDA1 and RDA2, were individually significant (RDA1:F= 7.885,p= 0.003,df= 1,df_residual = 151; RDA2:F= 4.214,p= 0.003,df= 1,df_residual = 151–999 permutations; TableS3). Eigenvalue decomposition indicated that RDA1 and RDA2 explained 65.17% and 34.83% of the constrained genetic variation, respectively (FigureS8). Using a cutoff threshold of ±2.5 standard deviations from the mean of SNP loadings, RDA identified 332 candidate SNPs. The LFMM2 analysis also revealed significant associations between SNP variation and the two environmental predictors. Based on corrected models, LFMM2 identified 607 SNPs as significant outliers. Thep‐value distributions for each environmental variable were inspected via histograms to confirm uniformity under the null hypothesis and enrichment of lowp‐values under the alternative hypothesis (FiguresS9andS10). A total of 139 SNPs overlapped in results from both RDA and LFMM2 approaches. These loci—defined at the level of individual SNPs, not genes—were retained for further analysis using GF modeling (Table2). To assess whether SNP overlap between the methods was greater than expected by random chance, we conducted a hypergeometric test using the phyper function in base R. The test yielded a highly significant result (p< 0.000), indicating that the observed overlap between methods was unlikely to have occurred by chance alone. This result supports the robustness of the identified candidate loci.
Numbers of outlier SNPs detected for each environmental predictor using two GEA algorithms: Redundancy analysis (RDA) and Latent Factor Mixed Models (LFMM2).
Gradient forest modeling revealed non‐linear relationships between environmental variables and allele frequency turnover across the 139 candidate SNPs shared between LFMM2 and RDA. All candidate loci contributed non‐zero importance scores (which quantify the proportion of genetic variation explained by each environmental variable), with MaxSST and SSTRange emerging as predictors of some genomic variation (Figure3). (To evaluate the specificity of these associations, we performed a control analysis using 139 frequency‐matched SNPs that were not identified as candidates in either GEA method. When subjected to the same GF procedure, these control loci showed minimal cumulative importance and lacked any strong association with environmental predictors: FigureS11. As a result, the observed associations in the candidate SNPs were unlikely to have arisen by chance.) MaxSST was determined to be the most important predictor of adaptive genomic variation, explaining 4% of variation (Figure3c). SSTRange had a weak effect, accounting for only 0.1%. Plots of turnover functions from the GF model showed weighted cumulative importance values and variable allelic turnover slopes for both environmental predictor gradients (Figure3a,b). The most important predictor, MaxSST, had a gentle gradient from 20 to ~22.6°C with a series of stepwise changes at ~22.6, ~22.0, and ~21.6°C; the most important allelic change occurred around 22°C. For SSTRange, large turnovers in allelic composition occurred when the temperature range exceeded ~7°C, with only minor allelic variation at narrower temperature ranges. These patterns are reflected in plots of SNP allelic proportions (Figure4). Populations exposed to maximum SST greater than ~22°C (Aragunnu, Green Cape, Tathra, and Merimbula) showed little allelic variation with high levels of homozygosity (both reference and alternate) and little heterozygosity. In contrast, those locations with cooler maximum SSTs (Cape Conran and Mallacoota) had greater levels of heterozygotes. The population observed in the coldest waters, Mallacoota (20.8°C), exhibited a greater proportion of alternate homozygotes than all other populations. For those populations for which the temperature range was wider than ~6.8°C (Cape Conran and Green Cape) there was higher heterozygosity, whereas populations in the narrowest ranges (Aragunnu and Mallacoota) exhibited almost no heterozygotes at all, retaining a greater proportion of reference alleles among the homozygotes.

Genotype by environment analysis ofDurvillaea amatheiaeadaptive candidate SNPs. (a, b) Plots of allelic turnover along environmental gradients: (a) MaxSST warmer to cooler gradient showing allele turnover with changes in temperature; (b) SSTRange wider to narrower gradient showing allele turnover with changes in temperature differential between maximum and minimum SST. (c) Proportions of genomic variance explained by each environmental variable.

Stacked histograms of allele proportions of (a) MaxSST associated candidate SNPs grouped by population and ordered from warmer to cooler environmental conditions, and (b) Allele proportions of SSTRange associated candidate SNPs grouped by population and ordered from wider to narrower temperature range. Allelic state indicated by color.
The absence of an annotated genome forDurvillaea amatheiaemeans that exploration of the biological function of each candidate SNP had to be carried out by uploading each SNP sequence to the BLASTn algorithm (Johnson et al.,2008), available via the NCBI webportal, where they were compared with the global GenBank database (Clark et al.,2016). This process searches for and offers a percentage match score (>95%) for similar gene sequences for other taxa stored in Genbank that have been annotated with an identified physiological function. All 139 candidate sequences were tested, and no matches were identified (>95% confidence; Clark et al.,2016).
This study analyzed the genetic structure and adaptive genomic variability of vulnerableDurvillaea amatheiaepopulations on the eastern Australian mainland, a location of heightened marine warming (Hobday & Lough,2011).
Populations of bull kelp along the southeast corner of mainland Australia are highly isolated and inbred. There was high genomic differentiation across all populations and among all pairs of populations, suggestive of restricted gene flow. Moreover, allelic richness and heterozygosity across all populations were low. Mallacoota, despite being positioned in the geographic middle of the sampling range, exhibited the highest levels of genetic isolation with the largest pairwiseFSTestimates and the most private alleles, which may be a result of its geographic position tucked into an isolated part of the coastline. In contrast, Cape Conran and Green Cape exhibited evidence of some shared genetic material. The observation of low private allele counts at the two range‐edge populations, Aragunnu and Tathra, was most likely due to a combination of loss of genetic diversity due to long‐term inbreeding—with rare alleles being the most susceptible to loss in small, isolated populations (Frankham,1996)—and isolation due to their range‐edge position.
These observed patterns of genomic isolation likely arose from a combination of life‐history traits and the effect of regional oceanographic features. All species ofDurvillaeaare known to have a leptokurtic mode of reproductive dispersal wherein the majority of gametes disperse over very short distances with only a few adults moving further afield (Fraser et al.,2018). For a “non‐buoyant” taxon such asD. amatheiae, dispersal is thought to be very poor (Velásquez et al.,2020). Dioecious fucoid species often have reproductive strategies, such as gamete release at low or neap tides or during calm periods (Muhlin et al.,2011; Serrao et al.,1996), that have evolved to enhance fertilization success but that also limit dispersal of gametes. For otherDurvillaeaspecies, fertilized eggs generally settle in <12 h and as close as 1–2 m (rarely up to 8 m distant) from the parent (Dunmore,2006). Indeed, it is likely that only detached, fertile thalli can achieve successful dispersal over such a distance as to expand to a nearby rock platform (Velásquez et al.,2020). As a result, on the mainland Australian coast where the dominant current flows poleward, the opportunity for genetic replenishment into range‐edge populations (Aragunnu, Tathra and Merimbula) is highly reduced. There is some evidence, however, that ocean eddies and near‐shore countercurrents (Suthers et al.,2011) do deliver macroalgal propagules or rafting material further north than the original source, as has occurred inEcklonia radiata(Coleman et al.,2011,2013),Phyllospora comosa(Coleman & Kelaher,2009), and (rarely)Macrocystissp. (Layton et al.,2022). Nevertheless, the likelihood of successful northward recruitment in the leptokurticD. amatheiaeis very low. Previous oceanographic modeling for seaweed revealed that 50%–60% of particles could be transported toward the equator from these higher latitudes (Coleman et al.,2011), and lower temperatures in winter (when this species likely reproduces) can delay zygote attachment (Coleman & Brawley,2005), which may explain the higher admixtures in Tathra, Cape Conran, and Green Cape.
Where allelic turnover along thermal gradients results in the fixation of thermally adapted alleles at one end of the gradient (e.g. homozygotes at the warmest point), there may be little standing adaptive variation left to buffer against even higher temperatures under global warming (Alberto et al.,2013; Capblancq et al.,2020; Lancaster et al.,2022; Minne et al.,2025; Rêgo et al.,2025; Vranken et al.,2021). Several studies have identified that fixation of warm‐adapted alleles in the warmest part of a species's range creates a highly reduced mutational landscape for any continued adaptive response, a situation maintained when gene flow is unable to replenish genetic diversity (Alberto et al.,2013; Capblancq et al.,2020; Lancaster et al.,2022; Rêgo et al.,2025). In this study, we revealed that 139 SNPs were putatively under selection for temperature, and these SNPs were generally fixed for one allele across the majority of populations sampled but particularly among warmest populations (Aragunnu and Tathra), suggestive of strong directional selection and potentially reduced adaptive capacity to additional stressors. However, these results should be interpreted with caution given the limitations of data and the GEA analyses themselves. Factors such as high phenotypic plasticity, common in many seaweed species, may enable greater thermal resilience than predicted by genomic data alone. Additionally, stochastic environmental variation and the use of low‐resolution environmental datasets may obscure or confound actual GEAs, complicating our understanding of the adaptive landscape across populations. Furthermore, validation of reduced adaptive capacity would need to be confirmed through in vitro experiments that empirically tested thermal limits. Nevertheless, decades or even centuries of inbreeding among these disjunct populations may have resulted in the progressive loss of heterozygosity, which can occur even in the absence of selective environmental pressures (James et al.,2019). Maximum sea surface temperature was identified as a dominant driver of adaptive genomic turnover, with the most important allelic shift occurring at ~22°C. Bull kelp at Aragunnu, Tathra, Merimbula, and Green Cape are regularly exposed to MaxSST above 22°C, and these populations exhibited some signs of genetic stress, including fixation at those SNPs exhibiting signatures of selection and reduced heterozygosity. AsDurvillaeaare endemic to cool‐temperate waters (Fraser et al.,2009; Velásquez et al.,2020), these signs suggest that a potential thermal‐tolerance limit could be reached at these locations, and selection may have occurred. In the South Island of New Zealand, a marine heatwave (extended period of SST of ~23°C, and air temperature of >30°C) in 2017/2018 resulted in a mass mortality ofDurvillaea(Thomsen et al.,2019). At Pile Bay (44° S) there was a complete (100%) loss ofD. poha, accompanied by significant losses ofD. willanaandD. antarctica(Thomsen et al.,2019). Given the susceptibility of these cool‐temperate populations ofDurvillaeato marine heatwaves in the low 20s (°C), it stands to reason that the NSW populations ofD. amatheiaemay be preadapted to warmer conditions. For example, since August 1998, there have been 27 “strong” marine heatwaves (MHWs) recorded at Aragunnu, NSW, with a single severe event in late 2015 lasting 91 days with a maximum temperature intensity of 4.14°C (Marine Heatwaves International Working Group,n.d.). Although this MHW did not destroy the entire population, it is likely to have negatively affected kelp health, interrupted recruitment, and resulted in the mortality of many individuals, potentially only leaving the strongest genotypes as survivors (Coleman & Wernberg,2020). With ocean warming occurring two to four times faster than the global average in southeastern Australia (Hobday & Pecl,2014), such marine extremes may eventually push bull kelp past its upper thermal tolerance in NSW. The depauperate standing genomic diversity among mainland populations ofD. amatheiaemay make them vulnerable to future severe marine heatwaves on the NSW coast(Nicastro et al.,2013; Nimbs, Wernberg, et al.,2023; Oliver et al.,2019).
Heterozygosity of SNPs at the maximum temperature was highest at the two coolest sites, Cape Conran and Mallacoota, suggesting lower temperatures may reduce directional selective pressure and help maintain greater adaptive diversity within populations. These sites only occasionally experience the warmer waters of the east Australia current and are generally bathed by colder waters from the Southern Ocean/Bass Strait, which may result in the retention of heterozygosity at some temperature‐associated loci. These populations could, however, experience population declines and future directional selection with ongoing warming and increasing intensity and frequency of marine heatwaves in this region.
The bio‐cultural implications of losing bull kelp from mainland Australia are considerable. Although bull kelp in mainland Australia does not form extensive dense forests that underpin local biodiversity nor support unique infaunal communities (Davis et al.,2024), it has a long history of use among Indigenous Saltwater people (Irvine,1957; Thurstan et al.,2018). Indeed,Durvillaeahad the broadest cultural application of any macrophyte: Historically, it has been used as a roofing material, used to make footwear, molded into drinking cups and water‐carriers (the specific epithet ofD. potatorumrefers to its use in making a potable water carrier), and used as a nutritious food that could be preserved and easily transported (Thurstan et al.,2018). In the modern era, bull kelp is used in art for sculpting and painting (Hurd et al.,2023). Loss of bull kelp from NSW would represent a considerable decline in Sea Country diversity for Indigenous Australians. Moreover, the biomass that individual bull kelp represents is a significant input into local food webs and trophic pathways in the locations where it occurs (Cheshire & Hallam,1988; Mangan et al.,2023). Loss of this species from the south coast of eastern Australia would alter these important pathways.
Over the last 50 years, the northern distributional limit ofDurvillaea amatheiaein NSW has very gradually shifted south. In 1946, a putative population was known from Bermagui, NSW (36.42° S), some 20 km north of its present distributional limit (Davis et al.,2024; Hermon Slade Foundation,2001). Ongoing warming and marine heatwaves could maintain gradual southward range‐edge retraction over the coming decades. Although the trailing distributional edges of many marine species have contracted poleward under warming, stochastic anomalies like marine heatwaves can dramatically accelerate the rate of trailing‐edge extinctions through mass mortality events (Garrabou et al.,2022; Smith et al.,2023,2024; Wernberg et al.,2016). The present study has identified potential preadaptation to warmer waters but suggests that there may be limited future adaptive capacity among the NSW and eastern Victorian populations ofD. amatheiae.
Given the potential vulnerability of these populations, it is pertinent to identify potentially unique genomic material that may be thermally preadapted to warm‐temperate seas. With ongoing global warming, these populations could contain material that may be useful for future‐proofing populations located further south in the Bass Strait and Tasmania, where this species is also undergoing warming. Using tools such as the Reef Adapt climate‐adaptation tool (Wood et al.,2024) to select seedstock for assisted gene flow could help bolster the resilience of populations in Tasmania. Genetic sampling from bull kelp populations in Bass Strait and Tasmania is needed to assess vulnerability across the range of this species and to tailor assisted‐adaptation strategies to support the long‐term survival of this species.
Matt J. Nimbs:Conceptualization (lead); data curation (lead); formal analysis (lead); investigation (lead); methodology (lead); project administration (equal); validation (lead); visualization (lead); writing – original draft (lead); writing – review and editing (lead).Tom R. Davis:Conceptualization (equal); data curation (equal); formal analysis (supporting); investigation (supporting); methodology (equal); resources (supporting); validation (supporting); visualization (equal); writing – original draft (equal); writing – review and editing (equal).Melinda A. Coleman:Conceptualization (equal); data curation (supporting); formal analysis (supporting); funding acquisition (equal); investigation (equal); methodology (equal); project administration (equal); resources (equal); supervision (equal); validation (supporting); visualization (supporting); writing – original draft (supporting); writing – review and editing (equal).
Figure S1.SNP filtering, read depth distribution pre‐ and post‐filtration (min = 5, max = 30).
Figure S2.SNP filtering, call rate on individuals distribution pre‐ and post‐filtration (min = 0.2).
Figure S3.SNP filtering, call rate on loci distribution pre‐ and post‐filtration (min = 0.7).
Figure S4.SNP filtering for secondaries, top Boxplot = the distribution of the number of SNPs per tag; middle Observed Frequency of SNPs per Sequence Tag = how many sequence tags have 0, 1, 2, etc.; bottom Poisson Expectation (33,521 invariant loci) = the expected Poisson distribution of SNPs per tag, assuming random distribution of SNPs with the same mean as the observed data.
Figure S5.Isolation by distance plot showing the relationship between genetic differentiation (FST/(1−FST)) and geographic distance (km) amongDurvillaea amatheiaepopulations. Each point represents a pairwise comparison between populations. The solid line shows the fitted regression with 95% confidence intervals (shaded area).
Figure S6.Environmental variable collinearity assessment as a correlation matrix for environmental variables used in genotype‐environment association analyses. Upper panels show correlation coefficients with significance levels indicated by asterisks. Lower panels display scatterplots with fitted regression lines. Diagonal panels show variable names and distributions. High correlations (r> 0.7) between variables led to the exclusion of correlated predictors to avoid multicollinearity issues in subsequent analyses.
Figure S7.Structure analysis cross‐entropy plot showing cross‐entropy values plotted against the number of ancestral populations (K).
Figure S8.Eigenvalues (inertia) for the first two constrained axes from Redundancy Analysis examining associations between genetic variation and environmental predictors (MaxSST and SSTRange). Both axes were individually significant indicating that the environmental variables significantly explain patterns of genetic differentiation among populations.
Figure S9.LFMM2 histogram ofp‐value distributions for candidate SNPs associated with maximum SST.
Figure S10.LFMM2 histogram ofp‐value distributions for candidate SNPs associated with SST range.
Figure S11.Importance values for 139 non‐candidate SNPs included in a Gradient Forest control procedure. Total importance values <0.0055.
Table S1.Analysis of molecular variance using neutral population dataset.
Table S2.Permutational analysis of molecular variance test for RDA under a reduced model.
Table S3.Permutational analysis of molecular variance test for RDA under a reduced model.
The authors are grateful to Andy Benson for assistance in laboratory processing and Curtis Champion for permission to use curated daily sea surface temperature raster data sets. Collections were made under DPIRD's s37 Research Permit #FP23/55. This research was funded by the NSW Marine Estate Management Strategy, Initiative 3. Open access publishing facilitated by Southern Cross University, as part of the Wiley ‐ Southern Cross University agreement via the Council of Australian University Librarians.
Nimbs, M. J.
, 
Davis, T. R.
, & 
Coleman, M. A.
 (2025). Bull kelp (Durvillaea amatheiae) in southeastern Australia has compromised adaptive capacity to future ocean warming. Journal of Phycology, 61, 1092–1105. 10.1111/jpy.70086
Editor:C. Pfister
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
Figure S1.SNP filtering, read depth distribution pre‐ and post‐filtration (min = 5, max = 30).
Figure S2.SNP filtering, call rate on individuals distribution pre‐ and post‐filtration (min = 0.2).
Figure S3.SNP filtering, call rate on loci distribution pre‐ and post‐filtration (min = 0.7).
Figure S4.SNP filtering for secondaries, top Boxplot = the distribution of the number of SNPs per tag; middle Observed Frequency of SNPs per Sequence Tag = how many sequence tags have 0, 1, 2, etc.; bottom Poisson Expectation (33,521 invariant loci) = the expected Poisson distribution of SNPs per tag, assuming random distribution of SNPs with the same mean as the observed data.
Figure S5.Isolation by distance plot showing the relationship between genetic differentiation (FST/(1−FST)) and geographic distance (km) amongDurvillaea amatheiaepopulations. Each point represents a pairwise comparison between populations. The solid line shows the fitted regression with 95% confidence intervals (shaded area).
Figure S6.Environmental variable collinearity assessment as a correlation matrix for environmental variables used in genotype‐environment association analyses. Upper panels show correlation coefficients with significance levels indicated by asterisks. Lower panels display scatterplots with fitted regression lines. Diagonal panels show variable names and distributions. High correlations (r> 0.7) between variables led to the exclusion of correlated predictors to avoid multicollinearity issues in subsequent analyses.
Figure S7.Structure analysis cross‐entropy plot showing cross‐entropy values plotted against the number of ancestral populations (K).
Figure S8.Eigenvalues (inertia) for the first two constrained axes from Redundancy Analysis examining associations between genetic variation and environmental predictors (MaxSST and SSTRange). Both axes were individually significant indicating that the environmental variables significantly explain patterns of genetic differentiation among populations.
Figure S9.LFMM2 histogram ofp‐value distributions for candidate SNPs associated with maximum SST.
Figure S10.LFMM2 histogram ofp‐value distributions for candidate SNPs associated with SST range.
Figure S11.Importance values for 139 non‐candidate SNPs included in a Gradient Forest control procedure. Total importance values <0.0055.
Table S1.Analysis of molecular variance using neutral population dataset.
Table S2.Permutational analysis of molecular variance test for RDA under a reduced model.
Table S3.Permutational analysis of molecular variance test for RDA under a reduced model.
Articles from Journal of Phycology are provided here courtesy ofWiley
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894