An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agriculture Research Service, and by the Office of Science, U.S. Department of Energy, through the Midwestern Center of the National Institute for Climate Change Research.
Present address: Department of Environmental and Plant Biology, Ohio University, Athens, OH 45701.
Corresponding author; e-mailbernacch@illinois.edu.
The author responsible for distribution of materials integral to the findings presented in this article in accordance with the policy described in the Instructions for Authors (www.plantphysiol.org) is: Carl J. Bernacchi (bernacch@illinois.edu).
The online version of this article contains Web-only data.
Open Access articles can be viewed online without a subscription.
www.plantphysiol.org/cgi/doi/10.1104/pp.112.211938
Received 2012 Nov 30; Accepted 2013 Mar 17; Issue date 2013 May.
Rising carbon dioxide and rising temperature have opposing effects on yield, with variations causing slightly higher yields in one year and much lower yields in another.
Extensive evidence shows that increasing carbon dioxide concentration ([CO2]) stimulates, and increasing temperature decreases, both net photosynthetic carbon assimilation (A) and biomass production for C3plants. However the[CO2]-induced stimulation inAis projected to increase further with warmer temperature. While the influence of increasing temperature and[CO2], independent of each other, onAand biomass production have been widely investigated, the interaction between these two major global changes has not been tested on field-grown crops. Here, the interactive effect of both elevated[CO2](approximately 585 μmol mol−1) and temperature (+3.5°C) on soybean (Glycine max)A, biomass, and yield were tested over two growing seasons in the Temperature by Free-Air CO2Enrichment experiment at the Soybean Free Air CO2Enrichment facility. Measurements ofA, stomatal conductance, and intercellular[CO2]were collected along with meteorological, water potential, and growth data. Elevated temperatures caused lowerA, which was largely attributed to declines in stomatal conductance and intercellular[CO2]and led in turn to lower yields. Increasing both[CO2]and temperature stimulatedArelative to elevated[CO2]alone on only two sampling days during 2009 and on no days in 2011. In 2011, the warmer of the two years, there were no observed increases in yield in the elevated temperature plots regardless of whether[CO2]was elevated. All treatments lowered the harvest index for soybean, although the effect of elevated[CO2]in 2011 was not statistically significant. These results provide a better understanding of the physiological responses of soybean to future climate change conditions and suggest that the potential is limited for elevated[CO2]to mitigate the influence of rising temperatures on photosynthesis, growth, and yields of C3crops.
The global atmospheric concentration of CO2([CO2]) is predicted to rise from current concentrations of approximately 390 μmol mol−1to between 730 and 1,020 μmol mol−1by 2100 (Canadell et al., 2007;Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2007). An increase of[CO2]is expected to stimulate photosynthesis, as has been demonstrated experimentally for a wide range of C3species (Curtis and Wang, 1998;Bernacchi et al., 2003a;Long et al., 2004;Nowak et al., 2004;Ainsworth and Long, 2005;Ainsworth and Rogers, 2007). Increasing[CO2]coupled with the continued accumulation of other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere is predicted to increase the global average temperatures between 2.4°C and 6.4°C by the end of the century (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2007). While the thermal optimum for photosynthesis ranges between 20°C and 35°C for C3species (Sage et al., 2008), plants have considerable capacity to acclimate to long-term temperature increases under current[CO2]. Consequently, the combined changes in the atmospheric composition and climate are likely to impart significant effects on terrestrial ecosystems, because both CO2and temperature are critical determinants of photosynthetic rates (Sage and Kubien, 2007).
Soybean (Glycine max), grown in rotation with maize (Zea mays), represents the largest land use in the United States, combining to cover an estimated area of 67 million ha (National Agricultural Statistics Service, 2011). Soybean is the fourth most important commodity crop globally, with nearly 40% of world production coming from the midwestern United States. As one of the two crops that dominate the midwestern landscape, soybean strongly impacts regional ecosystem services, such as water quality, hydrologic cycling, and, as a grain legume, soil nitrogen production. Thus, global change-induced alterations in soybean production may have large-scale socioeconomic and ecological impacts.
Effective strategies to adapt agricultural production to global change require improved predictions of crop responses to global change scenarios. The Soybean Free Air CO2Enrichment (SoyFACE) research facility was developed to address the molecular, physiological, and growth responses of the midwestern crops soybean and maize to global change through the use of the Free Air CO2Enrichment technology (Miglietta et al., 2001). This technology provides in-field fumigation of CO2to simulate future atmospheric conditions while growing crops under otherwise natural field conditions using current agronomic practices. Previous results fromSoyFACEshowed that the daily integral of carbon uptake (A′) is increased by approximately 25% for soybean grown under elevated[CO2](Rogers et al., 2004;Bernacchi et al., 2006). This occurs despite the accompanying photosynthetic acclimation most evident as the reduction in the activity and/or content of the primary carboxylating enzyme Rubisco (Ainsworth and Long, 2005;Bernacchi et al., 2005). However, in soybean and other C3grain crops, CO2-induced increases in growth and yield are observed to be lower than the increase in net photosynthesis (Morgan et al., 2005;Long et al., 2006). In addition to increasing carbon assimilation (A) of soybean, elevated[CO2]also reduces stomatal conductance (gs) relative to plants grown in ambient[CO2](Ainsworth et al., 2002;Rogers et al., 2004;Bernacchi et al., 2006,2007). This reduction ingscan lead to lower canopy water use, improved water use efficiency, and conservation of soil moisture (Leakey et al., 2006;Bernacchi et al., 2007).
While Free Air CO2Enrichment experiments have improved our understanding of the plant physiological responses to a[CO2]-enriched atmosphere, the interactive effects of the two major global change factors, rising[CO2]and warming, have not been investigated by a direct manipulative experiment under field conditions for any crop. It has been shown that the stimulatory effect of elevated[CO2]onAis enhanced at higher daily temperatures (Bernacchi et al., 2006), in agreement with theory (Long, 1991). However, this analysis was based on the natural variation in temperature during 15 d over three growing seasons, thus confounding the correlation with other environmental factors and neglecting long-term acclimation effects to higher temperature (Long, 1991;Sage and Kubien, 2007). Recent multiple regression analyses of historical yield data and growing season temperatures indicate that yields of soybean are depressed in warmer years (Lobell and Field, 2007;Kucharik and Serbin, 2008), with a steeper decline in yield above, compared with the incline below, a critical temperature (Schlenker and Roberts, 2009). It is also predicted that a 0.8°C increase in temperature could increase soybean yields in the midwestern United States by approximately 1.7% based on the mean air temperature of 22.5°C but could decrease yields for the warmer conditions in the southern United States (Hatfield et al., 2011). The results from this review (Hatfield et al., 2011) suggest that the impact of warming on the yield of soybean is highly dependent on baseline conditions. Because of the empirical nature of these analyses, the mechanisms involved in the decline of soybean productivity above the thermal optimum are unclear (Ainsworth and Ort, 2010). Accurately projecting the impact of global change on crop productivity relies on understanding how rising[CO2]and increasing temperature together influence the photosynthesis, growth, phenology, and yield of major crop species.
The objectives of this study were to quantify and understand the biological processes involved in photosynthesis, growth, and biomass production for soybean under a warmer and CO2-enriched atmosphere. Specifically, we hypothesized that increasing the growing season temperature of a soybean canopy by 3.5°C above the current ambient conditions, an increase expected midway through this century for terrestrial areas (Rowlands et al., 2012), will result in lower photosynthesis, biomass productivity, and yields. This is consistent with what has been observed historically for warmer years. We further hypothesized that the combination of elevated[CO2]and warmer temperatures will yield higher photosynthesis, biomass accumulation, and yield relative to the elevated[CO2]treatment alone. Given the high interannual variability in climate, these hypotheses were tested over two growing seasons; we hypothesized that the responses to elevated[CO2], warmer temperature, and the combined treatment would be consistent across growing seasons.
The mean temperatures for July, August, and September were lower in 2009 and higher in 2011 when compared with the 30-year mean (Table I). The largest departure from normal in 2009 was observed in July, with temperatures approximately 2.9°C below average. In 2011, July had the highest departure, with mean temperatures 2.8°C above average. In both years, April and May experienced higher than average precipitation, ensuring that both growing seasons began with soil moisture near field capacity. The entire 2009 growing season experienced near-average precipitation, whereas in 2011, there were significant shortfalls of 60% in July and 47% in August compared with the 30-year means for those months (Table I). Growth stages (Supplemental Table S1) and specific meteorological conditions (Fig. 1;Supplemental Table S2) associated with each measurement day varied within and between growing seasons.

Meteorological conditions measured during the 2009 and 2011 growing seasons. The top panels show the daily total solar radiation (black circles) and the daily precipitation (gray bars) for the 2009 (A) and 2011 (B) growing seasons. The bottom panels show theVPD(gray lines), the daily mean air temperatures (Tair; black circles), and the maximum and minimum temperatures (top and bottom of the error bars) for the 2009 (C) and 2011 (D) growing seasons. Days on which field sampling occurred are indicated with triangles.
Measurements ofAwere collected throughout the daylight hours on seven days (2009) and six days (2011) throughout each growing season. The measurements were taken in conditions set to mimic the field conditions at each specific time (Supplemental Figs. S1 and S2). Diurnal measurements showed variable responses of the key gas-exchange parametersA,gs, intercellular[CO2](Ci), and intrinsic water use efficiency (iWUE) over the course of the two growing seasons (Supplemental Tables S3 and S4). Relative to the control, the elevated[CO2]and ambient temperature (eC) plots yielded higherA, the elevated temperature and ambient[CO2](eT) plots yielded lowerA, and the elevated temperature and elevated[CO2](eT+eC) plots yielded higherAover most of the time points (Supplemental Figs. S1 and S2).
The diurnal measurements ofAwere integrated across the daylight hours to obtainA′. Overall, the effect onA′ofeTand ofeCrelative to the control plots was consistent across both growing seasons, although the increase ineCand the decrease ineTwere greater in 2011 (Fig. 2). In 2009, there was a statistically significant temperature × CO2interaction. This interaction is explained by a lack of statistical difference between the control andeTplots, while theeT+eCplot had much higherA′relative to the control (Tables IIandIII). In 2009, botheCandeT+eCtreatments had significantly higherA′than the ambient[CO2]treatments (i.e. control andeT;Fig. 2;Table II), althougheCandeT+eCwere not detectably different from each other (Table III). The responses ofA′among the treatments in 2009 did not result in statistically significant interactions of main effects with day of the year (DOY;Table II;Supplemental Table S3).

A′(A and B),gs(C and D), andCi(E and F) for the 2009 (A, C, and E) and 2011 (B, D, and F) growing seasons. Each day represents the daily mean values collected using gas exchange (gsandCi) and eachA′. Seasonal means for each variable are also presented at the right of each graph. Error bars represent 1se.
The main effects are[CO2], temperature, andDOY. Statistically significant differences (P< 0.1) and nonstatistical significance (ns) are shown. Main effects not applied are indicated with dashes.
Negative values indicate reductions, while positive values indicate increases in the rates of parameters. Statistically significant differences of the pairwise comparisons are indicated with asterisks.
In contrast to 2009, in 2011, there were no statistically significant interactive effects of temperature and[CO2]onA′, suggesting that the main effects alone were responsible for the observed differences. Elevated[CO2]increasedA′within a temperature treatment (eCversus control andeT+eCversuseT), and elevated temperature decreasedA′within a CO2treatment (eTversus control andeT+eCversuseC;Tables IIandIII;Fig. 2). The CO2effect, based on percentage change, was greater than the temperature effect; thus, the combined influence of increasing temperature and rising[CO2]stimulatedA′in theeT+eCtreatment relative to the control, but the increase was lower than theeCversus control comparison (Table III;Fig. 2). This response was different from the pattern observed in 2009, whereA′ineT+eCshowed the highest value, although significantly different fromeC. The effect of temperature varied byDOYin 2011, when temperature did not have significant effects onA′on two measurement dates (DOY186 and 251;Fig. 2;Supplemental Table S4).
Over both years, elevated[CO2]and warming reducedgswhen treatments were applied independently and in combination (Fig. 2;Table II), with theeT+eCtreatment showing the lowestgsoverall for both years (Table III;Fig. 2). The influence of CO2relative to temperature, however, appeared to change from 2009 to 2011. In 2009, elevated[CO2]had a greater impact ongscompared with temperature, whereas in 2011, temperature had a bigger impact ongsthan[CO2](Fig. 2). The impact of elevated temperature and/or[CO2]ongsvaried based onDOYfor both years (Table II;Supplemental Tables S3 and S4). The[CO2]treatment differences were statistically significant on all but one day for each of the years. The temperature-induced reduction ingswas statistically significant on four of the seven measurement days for 2009 and on all measurement days in 2011 (Fig. 2;Table III;Supplemental Tables S3 and S4).
Over both growing seasons, elevated temperatures reduced and elevated[CO2]increasedCirelative to the controls (Tables IIandIII;Fig. 2). While the pattern of responses was similar over both growing seasons, the influence of temperature in 2011 was much greater than that observed in 2009. Despite a significant temperature × CO2interaction in 2011, the increase inCifor theeCtreatment and the decrease inCifor theeTtreatment appeared to have an additive effect on theeT+eCtreatment for both years.
The percentage change inA′within a[CO2]level (eTversus control andeT+eCversuseC) was plotted as a function of the daily maximum canopy temperature based on the temperatures measured in the heated plots (Fig. 3). The percentage change inA′between theeT+eCandeCtreatments increased with temperature in 2009 and decreased with temperature in 2011 (Fig. 3). The decline inA′foreT+eCrelative toeCin 2011 was rapid and stabilized at daily maximum temperatures above 34°C. TheeTtreatment decreasedA′slightly relative to the control in 2009 and remained about 20% lower for all daily temperatures in 2011 (Fig. 3).

Percentage deviation of integratedA′as a function of daily maximum canopy temperature for the 2009 (A) and 2011 (B) growing seasons. The percentage stimulation ofA′was calculated with the plot means between theeTand control treatments (black circles) and between theeT+eCandeCtreatments (white circles). Data were used from measurement days in each year that occurred after canopy closure and before senescence. The lines reflect second-order polynomials fitted to each comparison.
The relationship of instantaneousAtogsincreased to an asymptote for all treatments (Fig. 4). While it was difficult to discern differences within a[CO2]treatment (eTversus control andeT+eCversuseC), it was clear that for a givengs, the elevated[CO2]treatments had much higherA. AveragingAandgswithin each measurement day for both years to calculate the daily mean and seasonal meaniWUE(A/gs) indicated significant differences among the treatments (Table II). For both years, there were statistically significant increases iniWUEassociated with elevated temperature and with[CO2]treatment (Table III;Fig. 4). While the responses ofiWUEwere similar for both growing seasons, the CO2effect was greater in 2009 than in 2011 and the temperature effect was greater in 2011 than in 2009 (Table III;Fig. 4). For both years, it appears that the influence of the two main effects was additive (Table III;Fig. 4).

A and C, Relationship betweenAandgsper treatment for 2009 (A) and 2011 (C). Each point represents the plot mean (three subsamples per plot) for each hourly time point measured across all days within a season forAversusgs. B and D,iWUE, calculated asA÷gs, for all the measurement days during 2009 (B) and 2011 (D). Seasonal means for each treatment in both years are presented at the right of each graph. Bars are as inFigure 2. Error bars represent 1se.
Leaf water potential estimated using thermocouple psychrometry was determined on leaf tissue collected at midday of each measurement date. Temperature, regardless of the[CO2], had a small but significant effect on total water potential (WP) and turgor pressure (TP) in both years (Fig. 5;Table II). Elevated temperature decreased growing season meanWPby 7% in 2009 and by 16% in 2011 (Table III). While no statistically significant results were observed with osmotic potential (OP) for either year, the temperature main effect decreasedTPby 17% in 2009 and 16% in 2011. The seasonal and daily mean values ofWP,OP, andTPin 2011 were nearly one-half the values obtained in 2009 (Fig. 5).

WP(A and B),OP(C and D), andTP(E and F) for the days when measurements were done during 2009 (A, C, and E) and 2011 (B, D, and F). Seasonal means ofWP,OP, andTPfor each treatment in both years are also presented in the right in each graph. Bars are as inFigure 2. Error bars represent 1se.
The seasonal mean leaf-to-air vapor pressure deficit (VPD) obtained from the gas-exchange system during the in situ measurements showed higher values in the warmer (1.58 ± 0.022 kPa foreT, 1.77 ± 0.023 kPa foreT+eC) relative to the reference (1.27 ± 0.018 kPa for control, 1.49 ± 0.020 kPa foreC) temperature plots in 2009. The relative responses in 2011 were similar to those in 2009, with the heated plots showing higherVPD(1.93 ± 0.030 kPa foreT, 2.09 ± 0.033 kPa foreT+eC) relative to the reference temperature plots (1.51 ± 0.025 kPa for control, 1.68 ± 0.026 kPa foreC). These values gave percentage deviations from control of 24.7% foreT, 17.6% foreC, and 39.6% foreT+eCin 2009 and 28.1% foreT, 11.4% foreC, and 38.4% foreT+eCin 2011.
Both growing seasons resulted in statistically significant CO2× temperature interactions for aboveground biomass (AGB), indicating that a synergistic effect occurred between these two global changes. The treatment responses, however, were not consistent over both growing seasons. In 2009, the only two differences among the treatments were between theeT+eCcomparison with the control plot and theeT+eCcomparison with theeTplot (Tables IIandIII;Fig. 6). In 2011,AGBin theeCplots were higher than the control andeT+eCplots (Tables IIandIII;Fig. 6).

Means for theAGB(A and B),SY(C and D), andHI(E and F) for 2009 (A, C, and E) and 2011 (B, D, and F). Bars are as inFigure 2. Error bars represent 1se.
The general responses of seed yield (SY) for both growing seasons were relatively similar to the observations ofAGB; however, in 2009, the only statistically significant differences occurred between theeT+eCandeTtreatments, with theeTtreatment showing the lowestSYand theeT+eCtreatment showing the highestSY(Tables IIandIII;Fig. 6). The impact of temperature was strongly negative on yields in 2011, with theeTandeT+eCplots having lowerSYcompared with both the control andeCplots (Tables IIandIII;Fig. 6).
All treatments appeared to decrease the harvest index (HI) in both years (Fig. 6); however, in 2011, the only statistically significant differences were betweeneT+eCand the control (Table II). Overall, theHIin 2011 was much lower relative to 2009, and the response ofHIto the various treatments was amplified. In 2011, neithereTnoreCdiffered from the control plot, but theeT+eCtreatment differed from the control,eT, andeCplots (Table II). The differences between the treatments and the control in 2011 were greater than in 2009, although there was also much greater variance in the measurements (Fig. 6).
This study was designed to test the hypotheses that (1) increasing soybean canopy temperature above ambient will result in lower photosynthesis, biomass productivity, and yields, an effect that is historically characteristic of warmer years; and (2) concomitant increases in[CO2]and temperature will result in higher photosynthesis, biomass production, and yields compared with elevated[CO2]alone. The results only partially support the first hypothesis. Significant differences between the control andeTtreatments were observed only for photosynthesis (Fig. 2) andSY(Fig. 6) in 2011, the warmer of the two growing seasons. The results also indicate that the second hypothesis is not supported. In 2009, theeT+eCtreatment yielded significantly greaterAon only two sampling days relative to theeCtreatment, and in 2011, theeT+eCtreatment yielded significantly lower photosynthesis than theeCtreatment. Moreover, in 2011, the response of photosynthesis for theeT+eCtreatment, which was slightly higher than for the control plots, did not translate to increases inSY; rather, theeT+eCplot had lowerSYthan any other treatment. The combinedeT+eCtreatment yielded higher photosynthetic rates in both years compared with theeTtreatment, suggesting thateCis able to at least partially mitigate the negative effects ofeT, but this response did not lead to higherSYfor theeT+eCplot compared with theeTplot in 2011. In 2011, theeTplots, with (eT+eC) or without (eT) elevated[CO2], yielded lowerSYrelative to the control.
The influence of rising[CO2]on photosynthesis, growth, and yield has been well documented for soybean (Rogers et al., 2004;Bernacchi et al., 2006) as well as for other species (Bernacchi et al., 2003a;Long et al., 2004;Nowak et al., 2004;Ainsworth and Long, 2005;Ainsworth and Rogers, 2007). Consistent with previous research on soybean grown atSoyFACE(Leakey et al., 2009), significant increases in photosynthesis in elevated[CO2]were observed in both years (Tables IIandIII). The 2009 growing season was the only time out of 10 growing seasons atSoyFACEin which increases inSYwith elevated[CO2]were absent. One of the key benefits of an increase in photosynthesis under elevated[CO2]is the reduction of photorespiration (Long, 1991;Long et al., 2004;Ainsworth and Rogers, 2007). The smaller than predicted response in 2009 could be attributed to cooler temperatures, where the inhibition of photosynthesis due to photorespiration was low (Jiao and Grodzinski, 1996). This, coupled with a large decrease ings(Fig. 2) under elevated[CO2], could have contributed to the muted yield response in 2009. The 2011 growing season was warmer than typical; thus, the ability to suppress photorespiration at high[CO2]likely conferred a greater benefit under these conditions. The 2011 growing season showed higher biomass and yields for the elevated-[CO2]-grown plants, as observed for most growing seasons atSoyFACE.
The heated plots showed consistently reduced photosynthetic carbon uptake for both growing seasons relative to the control. It was clear that the increase in temperature had a greater effect on reducing photosynthesis in 2011 than in 2009, likely driven by the much warmer background temperatures in 2011. This is observed in the seasonal percentage deviation ofA′foreTversus control, which showed a slight decrease in 2009 and a much larger decrease in 2011 (Table III). This was also seen in the percentage deviation ofA′versus daily maximum temperature foreTversus control (Fig. 3). In 2009, as temperature in the heated plots increased, the percentage difference ofA′between theeT+eCandeCplots continued to increase. Contrary to this, the differences between theeTversus control plots declined, indicating greater heat-induced suppression ofA′with temperature. In 2011,A′was consistently lower in theeTtreatment relative to the control by approximately 20% regardless of daily maximum temperature, whereas the stimulation associated with theeT+eCplot dropped as temperatures rose (Fig. 3). These results suggest that in 2009, photosynthesis in the nonheated plots was below the thermal optimum, driving photosynthesis higher as heat was applied, whereas in 2011, photosynthesis for the nonheated plots was operating above the thermal optimum, such that any further increases in temperature drove photosynthesis down.
The potential importance of the interaction of elevated[CO2]and increased temperature on photosynthesis is well described using mechanistic theory (Long, 1991;Sage and Kubien, 2007) and demonstrated using correlative data collected over many days over different growing seasons (Bernacchi et al., 2006). The results presented here show that under field conditions, the importance of the elevated[CO2]and temperature effect on photosynthesis, growth, and yield is dependent on the extent of heating, on whether the temperature was above or below optimum at any particular time, and on the interaction with other environmental factors. Of particular importance is the role of changes associated with the underlying biochemistry of photosynthesis. Elevated[CO2]is shown to down-regulate the maximum velocity for carboxylation (Vc,max) for soybean grown in elevated[CO2]; however, this acclimation had little impact on photosynthetic rates, as soybean is notVc,maxlimited in elevated[CO2](Bernacchi et al., 2005). Acclimation has been shown to occur in response to higher growth temperature forVc,maxand maximum rate of electron transport (Jmax;June et al., 2004;Onoda et al., 2005;Kattge and Knorr, 2007). Over the same growing seasons and coupled with the measurements presented here, in-depth analysis ofVc,maxandJmaxfor soybean atSoyFACE(D.M. Rosenthal, U.M. Ruiz-Vera, M. Siebers, C.J. Bernacchi, and D.R. Ort, unpublished data) showed elevated[CO2]-induced down-regulation ofVc,max, consistent with previous reports on soybean, but not forJmax. The elevated temperature plots showed declines inJmax, regardless of whether[CO2]was increased (D.M. Rosenthal, U.M. Ruiz-Vera, M. Siebers, C.J. Bernacchi, and D.R. Ort, unpublished data).
To determine whether photosynthesis was predominately Rubisco or ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate (RuBP) regeneration limited over each diurnal for all treatments, we coupled the results from D.M. Rosenthal, U.M. Ruiz-Vera, M. Siebers, C.J. Bernacchi, and D.R. Ort (unpublished data) forVc,maxandJmaxwith the leaf photosynthesis model (Farquhar et al., 1980) corrected for temperature (Bernacchi et al., 2001,2003b). Using this modeled data, we determined whether photosynthesis is Rubisco orRuBPregeneration limited for all data points collected over the two growing seasons. This analysis showed that over 85% of all data points wereRuBPlimited (Supplemental Figs. S1 and S2). Because Rubisco-limited photosynthesis was rare, any down-regulation inVc,maxis likely to not influenceA. Given its importance forRuBPregeneration-limitedA, the down-regulation ofJmaxis likely to drive down productivity.
The responses of photosynthesis to elevated[CO2]and warmer temperature over these two growing seasons are not likely driven exclusively by the temperature and CO2sensitivity of Rubisco kinetics andRuBPregeneration (D.M. Rosenthal, U.M. Ruiz-Vera, M. Siebers, C.J. Bernacchi, and D.R. Ort, unpublished data). Previous research atSoyFACEshowed that elevated[CO2]resulted in an approximately 16% mean reduction ings(Bernacchi et al., 2006), which is substantially less than the reduction observed here (Table III). Thus, the pronounced reduction ofgsunder elevated[CO2]and/or temperature over both years is likely to influence the deviation of the observations from theoretical responses. Over two sampling dates in 2009 (DOY183 and 238), the differences ingswere minimal for theeT+eCversuseCtreatments (Fig. 2). The combined increase in[CO2]and temperature for these two days yielded much higherA′, consistent with the theory presented previously (Long, 1991). All other measurement days during 2009 yieldedgsvalues that were lower in theeT+eCrelative to theeCtreatment and did not show differences inA′between these treatments. The temperature-induced reduction ingsled to lowerCiwithin a CO2treatment (Fig. 2). The effect of temperature resulted in a much greater decrease forCiin 2011 than in 2009. In 2011,Ciin theeT+eCtreatment was only approximately 20% higher than the control despite atmospheric CO2being approximately 50% higher.
Despite the reductions ings, theeT,eC, andeT+eCtreatments showed higheriWUE(Fig. 4;Table III). This increase iniWUEis predicted for plants grown in elevated[CO2], as stomatal limitation to photosynthesis is consistently shown to be lower despite a decrease ings(Bernacchi et al., 2005; D.M. Rosenthal, U.M. Ruiz-Vera, M. Siebers, C.J. Bernacchi, and D.R. Ort, unpublished data). The elevated-temperature-grown plants also showed an increase iniWUEacross both growing seasons relative to the control. The increase iniWUEfor the heated treatments within a[CO2](eTversus control andeT+eCversuseC) was less than that measured within a temperature treatment (eCversus control andeT+eCversuseC). The increase associated with theeTtreatment relative to the control occurred as a result of the decrease ingsbeing proportionately greater than the decrease inA′(Table III). This indicates that while all treatments experienced a higheriWUE, the mechanisms behind these responses varied among treatments.
A characteristic of an experiment that heats the canopy instead of the air is that it will lead to an increase inVPDat the leaf surface, which likely leads to an increase in water use (Kimball, 2005,2011;De Boeck et al., 2012). Averaged across time points in which gas-exchange measurements were collected, the effect of heating increased the leaf-to-airVPDby 0.3 kPa in 2009 and 0.4 kPa in 2011 within a CO2treatment (eTversus control andeT+eCversuseC). Both growing seasons experienced significant precipitation during spring, and 2009 had ample precipitation throughout the season (Table I). Leaf water potential data for both years showed the same responses to temperature, with a general response of temperature within a CO2treatment showing more negativeWPrelative to the nonheated reference plots (Fig. 5;Table II). The differences inWP,OP, andTPin 2011 compared with 2009 indicate that the variability in climate between the two growing seasons had a dominant influence on leaf water potential relative to the treatment imposed by the infrared heating arrays. Moreover, pairwise comparison analysis showed no statistical differences among treatments for theWPandTPvariables in either year, suggesting that the photosynthetic and productivity values obtained for 2011 are representative for the environmental conditions tested and not artificially altered by the experiment. Thus, it is not likely that the additional water use in the heated plots had a substantial effect on growth and physiology during 2009.
With the exception of theeT+eCtreatment relative to the control in 2011, the responses observed forA′were similar to those observed forAGB. It is interesting, however, that the response ofSYto the various treatments did not follow the responses ofA′and ofAGB. In 2009, theAGBwas significantly higher in theeT+eCtreatment relative to the control, but theSYfor this treatment did not differ statistically from the control. The statistically significant increase inSYfor theeT+eCrelative to theeTtreatments was the only statistically significant difference inSYin 2009. This suggests that, in this year, the increase in[CO2]offset the losses typically associated with an increase in temperature. In 2011, there were no differences inSYbetween theeT+eCandeTtreatments, which implies that the benefit of both factors together is not universal. In 2011, increases occurred for bothAGBandSYin theeCtreatment relative to the control, but the loss inSYwas amplified in relation to the loss inAGBfor both heated treatments (Table III).
Within a growing season, increasing temperature appears to reduce yields (Table III;Fig. 6), despite the 13.5% decrease in 2009 not being statistically different from the control (P< 0.15). Recent multiple regression analyses of historical yield data and growing season temperatures indicate a negative relationship, meaning that yields of soybean are depressed in warmer years (Lobell and Field, 2007;Kucharik and Serbin, 2008), a phenomenon that is consistent with our findings. A separate analysis, however, suggests that increases in yields with rising temperatures are likely to occur in cooler areas (e.g. midwestern United States) while decreases in yields with temperature are to occur in traditionally warmer areas (e.g. southern United States;Hatfield et al., 2011). Our data indicate that additional heating did not confer an advantage toSY, even in a year when background temperatures were much cooler than the long-term mean (2009). A problem with historical trends is that they neglect other confounding factors that cannot be controlled for, such as an interaction with an increase in[CO2]. When the interaction between rising[CO2]and temperature was considered (Fig. 6), it was clear that the yield responses were not consistent with the observed photosynthetic responses and that they varied based on growing season conditions. The results from the 2009 growing season suggest that the increased[CO2]completely negated the detriment of increased temperature on yield. The 2011 growing season showed that the addition of[CO2]with higher temperatures did nothing to mitigate the influence of higher temperature. As the conditions associated with the 2011 growing season are predicted to become more common (Hayhoe et al., 2010), these results suggest that the assumptions, based on the theory that rising[CO2]and increasing temperature could synergistically increase yields, need to be reassessed.
All treatments in 2009 and the elevated-temperature treatment in 2011 resulted in decreases inHIcompared with the control. The decline inHIfor elevated-[CO2]-grown soybean is consistent with a number of previous studies on soybean (Amthor et al., 1994;Heagle et al., 1998;Ziska and Bunce, 2000;Morgan et al., 2005). Similarly, the influence of increasing temperatures drives theHIfor soybean down, with a decrease in seed size being a major factor for this response (Boote et al., 2005). All treatments in 2009 had a smaller percentage decrease onHIcompared with the control in 2009 than in 2011 (Fig. 6). This is consistent with previous reports for soybean that show an accelerated decline inHIas temperatures increase (Boote et al., 2005). While higher temperatures were not directly imposed upon theeCtreatments in 2011, the CO2-induced closure ofgswarmed canopies above the temperatures in the control plots, as reported previously (Bernacchi et al., 2007). The measured canopy temperature data used in the heating control system (Supplemental Fig. S4) indicate that season-mean increases in CO2resulted in approximately 1°C warmer canopy temperatures during midday hours. This CO2-induced warming, which was apparent in 2011 but not in 2009, could potentially contribute to the larger decline inHIfor the elevated-[CO2]treatment relative to the control. There were marked differences in biomass components, leaf physiology, and water potential between the 2009 and 2011 growing seasons. The factors that can influence each of these processes are complex and subject to a significant number of environmental factors. A full understanding of the drivers behind the differences between these two growing seasons would need to account for these factors and require analyses that extend beyond the measurements in this paper.
The results from this research show that increased temperatures reduced photosynthesis, growth, and yield in soybean. These responses were linked with reductions ings, although biochemical changes to photosynthesis (D.M. Rosenthal, U.M. Ruiz-Vera, M. Siebers, C.J. Bernacchi, and D.R. Ort, unpublished data) likely also influence these photosynthetic results. Moreover, the combined effects of elevated[CO2]and warmer temperature did not lead to significant increases in photosynthesis compared with an increase in[CO2]alone. In fact, the combined increases in[CO2]and temperature led to reduced photosynthesis relative to elevated[CO2]alone in one of the two years. The contrasting climatic conditions over the two years of measurements played a significant role in the different photosynthetic, growth, and yield rates observed. These results suggest that in future climate change conditions, the interactive effects of elevated[CO2]and warmer temperatures will likely not benefit soybean physiology, growth, and development as predicted from theory, due to overriding environmental factors.
This experiment was conducted on soybean (Glycine max‘Pioneer 93B15’) during the 2009 and 2011 growing seasons as part of the Temperature × Free Air CO2Enrichment experiment located at theSoyFACEresearch facility in Champaign, Illinois. The entireSoyFACEresearch farm consists of a 32-ha (80-acre) field in Illinois (40°2'30.49'' N, 88°13'58.80'' W, 230 m above sea level). Characteristics of the site and details of agriculture practices can be found in papers byAinsworth et al. (2004),Rogers et al. (2004), andBernacchi et al. (2006). The experiment consisted of a randomized complete block design with four blocks to account for field topographic and soil variations. Each block contained one control and one elevated-[CO2]plot; each plot had a diameter of 20 m, and they were separated from each other by 100 m as described previously (Miglietta et al., 2001). The target concentrations of 585 μmol mol−1in 2009 and 590 μmol mol−1in 2011 for the elevated[CO2]plots were maintained from sunrise to sunset and applied from emergence to harvest. Ambient[CO2]was approximately 385 μmol mol−1in 2009 and approximately 390 μmol mol−1in 2011. The Temperature × Free Air CO2Enrichment experimental areas consisted of a 3-m-diameter reference plot and heated plots nested within each of the four 20-m-diameter control and elevated-[CO2]plots.
Each heated plot contained six infrared heaters (Salamander Aluminum Extrusion Reflector Assembly Housing for Ceramic Infrared Heaters; Mor Electric Heating) each fitted with four infrared heating elements (Mor-FTE 1,000-W, 240-V heaters; Mor Electric Heating Association). The six heaters were arranged in a 3-m-diameter hexagonal pattern with a total heating area of 7.1 m2(Supplemental Fig. S3). The heaters were maintained 1.2 m above the canopy, tilted toward the center of the plot at a 45° angle as described byKimball et al. (2008). The heater output was regulated using a custom-built industrial dimmer system in which two thyristors (dimmers) were controlled using one circuit board, all of which were taken from one complete dimmer assembly (model LCED-2484, 240 V, 35 A; Kalglo Electronics). The dimmer circuit board controlled a range of output up to 24,000 W of infrared heating power. The actual 0- to 240-V alternating current output was scaled from a 0- to 10-V direct current input signal to the dimmer. Each heated plot was controlled using a datalogger (CR1000 Micrologger; Campbell Scientific). The datalogger used a proportional-integrative-derivative feedback control system, similar to the ones used byKimball (2005), to maintain an approximately 3.5°C increase over the ambient temperature 24 h per day throughout the growing seasons (Supplemental Fig. S4). The reference and heated canopy temperatures were measured using infrared radiometers (SI-121; Apogee Instruments) wired into the datalogger equipped with a voltage-output module (SDM-CV04; Campbell Scientific). Based on the canopy temperature difference between the heated versus reference plots, the voltage output module supplied the 0- to 10-V signal to the dimmer to maintain the target temperature rise of heated plots above the reference plots. The full experiment consisted of four treatments: control (ambient[CO2]and ambient temperature),eT(ambient[CO2]and +3.5°C in temperature),eC(585 μmol mol−1[CO2]and ambient temperature), andeT+eC(585 μmol mol−1[CO2]and +3.5°C in temperature).
Temperature, humidity, and solar radiation for the research site were obtained from a meteorological station associated with the Surface Radiation Network (40.05N, 88.37W;http://www.srrb.noaa.gov/surfrad/index.html) and processed as described byVanloocke et al. (2010). Precipitation was obtained from the Willard airport station (40.04N, 88.27W;http://cdo.ncdc.noaa.gov/qclcd/QCLCD). A record for 30-year mean temperature and precipitation for zone 5 of the Illinois climate division (which corresponds to Champaign) was obtained from the Midwestern Regional Climate Center (http://mrcc.isws.illinois.edu/).
Diurnal measurements of instantaneousAand other physiological data, such asCiandgs, were collected using portable open gas-exchange systems with incorporated infrared CO2and water vapor analyzer (Li-Cor 6400; Li-Cor) coupled with an integrated chlorophyll fluorometer (LI-6400-40 leaf chamber fluorometer; Li-Cor). The infrared CO2and water vapor analyzers were zeroed, and the gas-exchange systems were calibrated as described byBernacchi et al. (2006).
Gas-exchange sampling occurred every 2 weeks throughout both growing seasons starting with the V3 vegetative developmental stage (i.e. following the emergence of the third trifoliate) and ending with the approximately R6 developmental stage (full seed) based on the development classifications ofRitchie et al. (1993). There were a total of seven measurement days in 2009 and six in 2011 (Supplemental Table S1). The measurements were taken at 2-h intervals between 9amand 5pmon three plants per plot from the youngest fully expanded leaves. Four research teams each using matched instrumentation conducted measurements at each time point of the diurnal in different blocks to sample all 16 plots within 45 min. The order of sampling for each team was randomized among blocks. At the beginning of each time point measurement, photosynthetic photon flux density (LI-190; LI-COR) and air temperature (HMP-45C; Campbell Scientific [mounted in aspirated temperature shield model 076B; Met One Instruments]) were recorded from sensors located atSoyFACE. The block temperature of the gas-exchange systems was set according to ambient air temperature and adjusted to higher temperature (ambient + 3.5°C) for the heated plots. The sample relative humidity was between approximately 50% and 70%. The[CO2]in the gas-exchange system reference chamber was set to concentrations that corresponded to the control (400 μmol mol−1) or elevated (600 μmol mol−1)[CO2]plots. These concentrations, while above the mean concentrations in each plot, allowed for the leaf to draw CO2down in the sample chambers to closely match plot means and accounted for the difference in the control and elevated[CO2]for 2009 compared with 2011. The values ofA,gs, andCiwere calculated using the integrated software in the gas-exchange system according tovon Caemmerer and Farquhar (1981). TheA′was calculated from instantaneousAas described byLeakey et al. (2004).
Values forVc,max,Jmax, and respiration in the light at 25°C were obtained fromAversusCicurves measured within 1 to 2 d of each diurnal for both growing seasons (D.M. Rosenthal, U.M. Ruiz-Vera, M. Siebers, C.J. Bernacchi, and D.R. Ort, unpublished data). These parameters were used to modelAusing the leaf photosynthesis model (Farquhar et al., 1980) to determine which process, Rubisco orRuBPregeneration, was limiting photosynthesis at each time point for all treatments. The model was corrected for measured leaf temperature using the temperature functions provided previously (Bernacchi et al., 2001,2003b).
Percentage stimulation ofA′per plot for each day was calculated with the plot mean values foreTversus control and foreT+eCversuseC. The percentage stimulation was plotted as a function of the daily maximum temperatures for the heated plot. The values used were from four measurement days in 2009 (DOY197, 210, 224, and 238) and 2011 (DOY200, 214, 228, and 242), selected according to similarities in theVPDand solar radiation and adequate canopy cover to prevent the influence of soil in the measurements of canopy temperature (Leaf Area Index > 2). TheiWUEwas calculated withA÷gs.
Samples to determine leafWPwere collected during the midday time point on each measurement day with five subsamples taken per plot. Three leaf tissue discs of 1.2-cm diameter were excised per plant and sealed in psychrometer chambers (C-30; Wescor). The chambers were equilibrated in a controlled-environment growth chamber at 25°C as described previously (Leakey et al., 2006). After thermal equilibration,WPwas measured using a dew-point microvoltmeter (HR-33T; Wescor) integrated into the psychrometers. Upon measuringWP, the chambers were submerged into liquid nitrogen, and the potentials were recorded on the lysed plant tissue to determineOP. TheTPwas calculated asWP–OP. A calibration standard was obtained independently each year using Suc solutions ranging in concentration from 0 to 1.60m.
AGBwas obtained at the end of each growing season after full maturity (growth stage R8) was reached (DOY267 in 2009 andDOY298 in 2011). Five 1.5-m rows of soybeans per plot in 2009 and two 1.0-m rows per plot in 2011 were harvested by hand. At harvest, plants had few attached leaves, soAGBincluded only pods and stems. These biomass components are typically used for determiningHI. Each component was dried to constant weight (approximately 7 d) at 65°C and weighed. The pod tissues were then run through a thresher to isolate the seeds, and the seeds were weighed to obtainSY. TheHIwas calculated by dividingSYbyAGB.
Photosynthesis, water potential, andiWUEwere analyzed using a complete block repeated-measures mixed-model ANOVA using the PROC MIXED command with the Kenward-Roger method in SAS System 9.3 (SAS Institute). The fixed effects for the seasonal analysis were as follows:DOY,[CO2], temperature, temperature ×[CO2]interaction, andDOYwith the interaction of the other fixed effects. Statistical tests of within-day differences among the treatments were analyzed separately for each day using time of day, rather thanDOY, as the repeated factor in the analysis. TheAGB, yield data, andHIwere analyzed similarly to the previous variables but without includingDOYin the analysis. The differences of least-square means from Student’sttests were used to compare individual treatment means; this option is integrated into SAS System 9.3. To lower the possibility of a type II error, the statistical significance was evaluated at α ≤ 0.1.
The following materials are available in the online version of this article.
Supplemental Figure S1.Diurnal photosynthesis data for each measurement day in 2009.
Supplemental Figure S2.Diurnal photosynthesis data for each measurement day in 2011.
Supplemental Figure S3.Aerial view of experiment infrastructure.
Supplemental Figure S4.Temperature × Free Air CO2Enrichment temperature control data for 2009 and 2011.
Supplemental Table S1.Timeline of planting, measurement dates, and final harvest with corresponding development stages.
Supplemental Table S2.Meteorological data for each measurement date in 2009 and 2011.
Supplemental Table S3.Per measurement day statistical tables for each variable measured in 2011.
Supplemental Table S4.Per measurement day statistical tables for each variable measured in 2011.
CO2concentration
Soybean Free Air CO2Enrichment
daily integral of carbon uptake
carbon assimilation
stomatal conductance
intercellular [CO2]
intrinsic water use efficiency
elevated temperature and ambient [CO2]
elevated temperature and elevated [CO2]
elevated [CO2] and ambient temperature
day of the year
water potential
turgor pressure
osmotic potential
vapor pressure deficit
aboveground biomass
seed yield
harvest index
maximum velocity for carboxylation
maximum rate of electron transport
ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate
ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate
Articles from Plant Physiology are provided here courtesy ofOxford University Press
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894