An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
For correspondence. E-mailcourtney.collins@botany.ubc.ca
Received 2023 Aug 15; Revision requested 2023 Dec 5; Accepted 2024 Jan 19; Collection date 2025 Jan 1.
This article is published and distributed under the terms of the Oxford University Press, Standard Journals Publication Model (https://academic.oup.com/pages/standard-publication-reuse-rights)
The Arctic is warming at an alarming rate, leading to earlier spring conditions and plant phenology. It is often unclear to what degree changes in reproductive fitness (flower, fruit and seed production) are a direct response to warming versus an indirect response through shifting phenology. The aim of this study was to quantify the relative importance of these direct and indirect pathways and project the net effects of warming on plant phenology and reproductive fitness under current and future climate scenarios.
We used two long-term datasets on 12 tundra species in the Canadian Arctic as part of the International Tundra Experiment (ITEX). Phenology and reproductive fitness were recorded annually on tagged individual plants at both Daring Lake, Northwest Territories (64° 52' N, - 111° 35' W) and Alexandra Fiord, Nunavut (78° 49' N, - 75° 48' W). The plant species encompassed a wide taxonomic diversity across a range of plant functional types with circumpolar/boreal distributions. We used hierarchical Bayesian structural equation models to compare the direct and indirect effects of climate warming on phenology and reproductive fitness across species, sites and years.
We found that warming, both experimental and ambient, drove earlier flowering across species, which led to higher numbers of flowers and fruits produced, reflecting directional phenotypic selection for earlier flowering phenology. Furthermore, this indirect effect of climate warming mediated through phenology was generally about two to three times stronger than the direct effect of climate on reproductive fitness. Under future climate predictions, individual plants showed a ~2- to 4.5-fold increase in their reproductive fitness (flower counts) with advanced flowering phenology.
Our results suggest that, on average, the benefits of early flowering, such as increased development time and subsequent enhanced reproductive fitness, might outweigh its risks. Overall, this work provides important insights into population-level consequences of phenological shifts in a warming Arctic over multi-decadal time scales.
Keywords:Tundra, Arctic, phenology, reproductive fitness, flowering time, climate change, warming, directional selection, fruiting, International Tundra Experiment
Shifting plant phenology, i.e. the timing of life-cycle events, such as flowering, fruiting, leaf emergence and senescence, is one of the most striking manifestations of climate change in terrestrial ecosystems (Parmesanet al., 2003). Such phenological shifts can have profound implications for the growth, survival and reproduction of plant populations, but the consequences of these shifts at the population level are still poorly understood (McLeanet al., 2016;Ileret al., 2019,2021;Blocket al., 2020). Although phenological shifts are often assumed to be beneficial, this is not always the case, because advantageous changes in growth and reproductive timing can incur additional fitness costs. These costs include exposure to extreme weather events (e.g. late-season frosts) and altered biotic interactions, such as mismatches with pollinators or enhanced herbivory (Inouye, 2008;Postet al., 2008;Kudo and Ida, 2013;Meinekeet al., 2021;Panchenet al., 2021).
Earlier flowering is a commonly observed phenological response to warming temperatures across the globe, particularly in high-latitude or high-elevation ecosystems (Primacket al., 2004;Høyeet al., 2007;Parmesan, 2007;Prevéyet al., 2017;Büntgenet al., 2022). This trend is robust both in experimentally warmed systems (Arftet al., 1999;Collinset al., 2021) and with warming patterns in ambient climate (Oberbaueret al., 2013;Prevéyet al., 2019). Earlier flowering time in response to warming has been associated with increased reproductive fitness, including flower, fruit and seed production (Clelandet al., 2012;Ileret al., 2021). However, in many cases, it is unclear to what degree this increase in reproductive output is a direct response to climate and/or an indirect effect mediated by shifting phenology. This uncertainty is especially an issue for many temperature-limited species, where both phenology and reproductive fitness can be sensitive to warming (Wookeyet al., 1993;Henry and Molau, 1997;Arftet al., 1999;Kudo and Suzuki, 2003;Kladyet al., 2011). Therefore, it is essential to disentangle the direct and indirect effects of climate on plant phenology and reproductive fitness to understand the population-level consequences of phenological shifts under global change.
Advanced flowering phenology over time can reflect a combination of plastic responses to warming temperatures within individuals and differential fitness among individuals if earlier flowering is heritable (Andersonet al., 2012;Ehrlén and Valdés, 2020). Phenotypic selection analyses (i.e. selection gradients, trait–fitness relationshipssensuLande and Arnold, 1983) show that directional selection for early flowering is prevalent across systems (Andersonet al., 2012;Austenet al., 2017;Wadgymaret al., 2017). However, non-linear relationships between plant phenology and fitness might more accurately reflect how optimal flowering time shifts with growing season length (Weiset al., 2014). Life-history theory predicts that flowering too early (i.e. before the seasonal optimum), which might lead to reduced resources, has a lower cost than flowering too late, which might result in reproductive failure, thus favouring mid-season flowering phenotypes (Cohen, 1971,1976). However, the extent to which any of these fitness functions occurs in natural populations is difficult to predict for several reasons (Ollerton and Lack, 1998;Austenet al., 2017) and does not vary consistently across species with climate change (Colauttiet al., 2017). Thus, we require an improved understanding of how warming temperatures will alter phenology–fitness relationships.
Arctic tundra ecosystems are particularly vulnerable to climate change, with rapid warming leading to significant changes in plant phenology and in vegetative and reproductive productivity (Kladyet al., 2011;Postet al., 2019;Prevéyet al., 2019;Collinset al., 2021). However, although advancements in spring phenology are relatively consistent in the tundra, the net demographic (i.e. fitness) impacts of these phenological shifts for tundra plant species are much less predictable (Panchenet al., 2021) and, as a result, more poorly understood. This is likely to be for a number of reasons, including confounding effects of inter-annual climate on phenology and demographic rates that are often unaccounted for (but seeMortensenet al., 2016) or methodological limitations, including the effort involved with recording both individual plant phenology and fitness outcomes over long periods. Studies that have investigated these relationships in the Arctic show contradictory patterns, including strong effects (Mortensenet al., 2016) or relatively weak to no effects (Wipf, 2010) of changes in phenology on reproductive fitness under climate change. To overcome these limitations, we need additional empirical tests of whether plants that advance their phenology with warming temperatures have altered (positive or negative) reproductive fitness outcomes over long time scales and across multiple species.
The aim of our study was to investigate the relationship between tundra plant phenology and reproductive fitness in warming conditions. Specifically, we explored the effects of ambient and experimental warming on reproductive fitness, both directly and indirectly, through shifts in flowering time. We leverage two long-term (≥30 site-years in total) field monitoring datasets on tagged individual plants from 12 tundra species in the Canadian Arctic as part of the International Tundra Experiment (ITEX) (Henry and Molau, 1997). The species encompass a wide range of taxonomic diversity and plant functional types with circumpolar or circumboreal distributions (Fig. 1;Supplementary Data Table S1).

Circumpolar/boreal tundra species included in this study (also seeSupplementary Data Table S1). Species from Daring Lake are in the left two columns and from Alexandra Fiord in the right two columns. From top left, anti-clockwise:Eriophorum vaginatum,Rhododendron subarcticum,Oxytropis nigrescens,Vaccinium vitis-idaea,Salixspp. (pulchra/planifolia),Betula glandulosaandSaxifraga tricuspidata. Photograph credits: Karin Clark and Jacob W. Frank [Creative commons Attribution Generic 2.0(Oxytropis nigrescens)]. From top right, clockwise:Cassiope tetragona,Oxyria dignya,Dryas integrifolia,Papaver radicatumandLuzulaspp. (arctica/confusa). Photograph credits: Nicola Rammell, Katriina O’Kane, Anne Bjorkman and Erlend Bjoertvedt [Creative commons Attribution Share Alike 3.0(Luzula confusa)]. Please note that species with dual names (/) had two indistinguishable (and sometimes hybrid) congeneric species within the same plots, and their data were pooled.
Map of the Canadian Arctic research sites (Alexandra Fiord, NU-high Arctic, Daring Lake,NT-low Arctic) and images of the 12 plant species included in this study.
Our research questions are as follows.
[1] How does experimental and ambient warming influence the relationship between plant phenology and reproductive fitness (numbers of flowers and fruits) within tundra plant communities? In particular, we are interested to determine whether tundra plants that shift their phenology with warming temperatures have altered (positive or negative) reproductive fitness outcomes.
[2] How do the direct effects of warming on reproductive fitness compare with the indirect effects of warming on reproductive fitness mediated by shifting phenology?
[3] How does the relationship between flowering phenology and reproductive fitness shift under future climate warming scenarios?
Data were collected from two long-term experimental monitoring sites in the Canadian Arctic as part of the larger International Tundra Experiment (ITEX) network: Alexandra Fiord, NU (78° 49' N, - 75° 48' W), and Daring Lake Tundra Ecosystem Research Station, NT (64° 52' N, - 111° 35' W). Alexandra Fiord is a high Arctic tundra site on the coast of Johan Peninsula of east-central Ellesmere Island in subzone C of the Circum-Arctic Vegetation Map (CAVM). Daring Lake is located ~70 km north of the present-day treeline in the Southern Arctic Ecozone within the Tundra Shield Low Arctic Ecoregion (Ecosystem Classification Group, 2012), which is subzone E of the CAVM (Walkeret al., 2005). Over the last three decades, average spring (April and May), summer (June–August) and autumn (September and October) air temperatures at Daring Lake were −8.6, 10.9 and −0.46 °C and at Alexandra Fiord were −16.2, 3.7, and −9.6 °C, respectively.
Phenology and reproductive fitness data were collected from long-term monitoring programmes at both sites over the last three decades. At Daring Lake, repeat measurements were made from 2001 to 2022 on tagged individual plants within designated areas defined by the dominant plant species for seven common tundra species (n≈ 20 individuals per species per year) (Fig. 1;Supplementary Data Table S1). At Alexandra Fiord, repeat measurements were made from 1992 to 2003 on tagged individual plants in 1 m × 1 m plots either outside (control) or inside of experimental warming open-top chambers (OTCs) within designated areas defined by the dominant plant species (subsites) for five common tundra species (n≈ 10–75 individuals per species per year) (Fig. 1;Supplementary Data Table S1). Individual plants were revisited within the same growing season but not across all years at Alexandra Fiord, because new individuals were chosen after plant death or lost tags. Although there was no species overlap between sites, plant species at both sites incorporate a wide range of taxonomic diversity and plant functional types (woody, herbaceous, deciduous shrub, evergreen, shrub, graminoid, forb and cushion) and reflect circumpolar/circumboreal distributions (Fig. 1;Supplementary Data Table S1). We define flowering date as the date [i.e. day of year (DOY)] of the first mature (i.e. open) flower and the reproductive fitness as the total number of reproductive structures (flowers, fruits) in a given individual in a given year.
Climate data were collected from automatic weather stations (1.5–2 m height) at both sites, and snow-free dates were recorded from visual observations for each plot/species. Average growing season temperatures at Daring Lake have warmed substantially over the 21-year study period but show no consistent temporal trend at Alexandra Fiord over the 10-year study period. However, during peak flowering, OTCs warm tundra plant communities by between 1 and 2 °C at Alexandra Fiord depending on location and time of day (Hollisteret al., 2023see resultsClimate and experimental warming). Thus, we focused on the effects of ambient climate warming (i.e. air temperature) at Daring Lake and the effects of the experimental warming treatment (compared with control conditions) at Alexandra Fiord.
For the Daring Lake dataset, to determine which climate parameters best predicted annual phenology and reproductive fitness individually, we used a model selection approach with linear mixed effects models in the R packages lme4 (v.1.1-31) (Bateset al., 2014) and AICcmodavg (v.2.3-1) (Mazerolle, 2023). We included the following climate parameters in these models: site-level average daily growing season (June–August) temperature (in degrees Celsius) of: (1) the current year; (2) the previous year; and (3) snowmelt timing (DOY) in the current year. All models had all possible combinations of one, two or three of the above climate parameters and random intercepts of species, individual plant identity nested within species and calendar year. We then used Akaike's information criterion (AIC) model comparison to determine the most parsimonious model for both phenology (date of flowering) and reproductive fitness (numbers of flowers and fruits), respectively, and used the climate predictors from the best models in downstream analyses (Table 1).
Climate variable model selection. Results of corrected Akaike’s Information Criterion (AICc) model selection for climate variables at Daring Lake. Linear mixed effects models included the following climate parameters: (1) Tempt= average daily growing season (June–August) temperature (in degrees Celsius) of the current year; (2) Tempt−1= average daily growing season (June–August) temperature (in degrees Celsius) of the previous year; and (3) first date observed to be snow free for each species in the current year, and random intercepts of species, individual plant identity nested within species and calendar year. When the first and second models were significantly different (ΔAICc > 2), we chose the best model. When multiple models were equivalent (ΔAICc < 2), we chose the simplest of the best candidate models. Based on these criteria, the climate parameters for each response type [phenology (date of flowering) and reproductive fitness (numbers of flowers and fruits)] used in downstream analyses are shown in bold. We did not conduct model comparison on climate predictors at Alexandra Fiord because we used a categorical predictor of warming (i.e. treatment; OTC warming vs. control). Abbreviations: DOY, day of year of flowering; OTC, OTC warming effect.
Next, we used a piecewise structural equation modelling (SEM) approach in a Bayesian framework by fitting multivariate hierarchical models with default (non-informative) priors in the R package brms (v.2.18.0) (Bürkner, 2018). Our modelling approach is similar to those used byMcLeanet al.(2016)andMortensenet al.(2016). Initially, we used the best climate predictors from model selection (above) to predict individual plant flowering phenology (Table 1). Then, in an SEM framework, we predicted the reproductive fitness of the same individual plant in the same year with flowering time from the previous model and the best respective climate predictor (Fig. 2). For the number of flowers, this was the average growing season (June–August) temperature of the current year (Tempt;Table 1), and for the number of fruits, this was the average growing season temperature (June–August) of the previous year (Tempt−1;Table 1). In the fruit number SEM, we also included prior average growing season temperature (Tempt−1) as a predictor of flowering phenology for consistency between phenology and reproductive fitness models [eqn (1B)].

Structural equation meta-model, with proposed relationships and specific parameters measured for each node of the model. Climate parameters (blue circle) included: average growing season (June–August) air temperature (in degrees Celsius) of the current year (t) and the previous year (t−1) of field measurements for the Daring Lake dataset. For the Alexandra Fiord dataset, we used a categorical predictor of the experimental warming effect [open-top chamber (OTC) vs. control] as the climate parameter. Phenology parameters (green circle) included the date [i.e. day of year (DOY)] of flowering of an individual plant, and reproductive fitness parameters (orange circle) included the total number of flowers and/or fruits in an individual plant in the same year. Arrows indicating direct effects of climate are black, and the arrow indicating indirect effects of climate via phenology shifts is red. Black arrows were estimated with linear relationships, and the red arrow was estimated with both linear and quadratic relationships.
Conceptual diagram showing relationships between model parameters, whereby climate has a direct relationship with phenology and reproductive fitness, and phenology has an indirect relationship with reproductive fitness.
All Daring Lake models included random intercept terms for species, plant individual nested within species and calendar year. All data were mean centred, with a mean = 0, s.d. = 1, for comparison of parameter estimates across models [eqn (1A, B)]. We used Gaussian (or skew normal) distributions for all phenology and fitness response variables, and we logarithmically transformed count variables (number of flowers, fruits) for normality before modelling. Flower counts, by definition, were non-zero, because the same individual plant flowering phenology (DOY) was included as a model covariate. Fruit counts could be zero when an individual flowered but did not fruit. We included linear terms for all relationships in the model and an additional quadratic term to the phenology–fitness relationship to allow for stabilizing or disruptive selection gradients [eqn (1A, B);Fig. 2]. Although we do not have fruit count data for all species, for the species in which both fruit and flower counts were recorded, these metrics were positively correlated within individuals over time (Supplementary Data Fig. S2). Thus, flower counts can serve as a reasonable proxy for reproductive fitness in this system in the absence of fruit count data.
The number of flowers is given by:
The number of fruits is given by:
For the Alexandra Fiord dataset, we used a similar modelling approach; however, for climate we included a categorical predictor of treatment (OTC warming or control) [eqn (2);Fig. 2] rather than continuous air temperature, because we did not observe a warming trend at the site level over our study period, and we do not have plot-level temperature data. Thus, we initially estimated the experimental warming effect (OTC vs. control) on flowering phenology and then, in an SEM framework, we predicted reproductive fitness of the same individual plant in the same plot-year with its flowering time from the previous model and the direct effect of the warming treatment. We did not conduct model comparison on climate predictors at Alexandra Fiord because we used a categorical predictor of warming (i.e. treatment–OTC warming vs. control).
All Alexandra Fiord models included random intercept terms for species, experimental plot nested within experimental location (i.e. subsite), and calendar year [eqn (2)]. All (non-count) data were mean centred, with a μ = 0, s.d. = 1, for comparison of parameter estimates across models. We used Gaussian distributions for phenology responses and lognormal distributions (link=‘identity’) for all fitness (numbers of flowers and fruits) response variables.
The number of flowers or fruits is given by:
All models were run with three chains of 10 000 iterations each (warm-up 5000 iterations, no thinning) and Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling. We checked for convergence of chains for all parameters both visually with trace plots and with the R-hat convergence diagnostic. Trace plots showed that chains mixed well and converged to stationary distributions for all parameter estimates. R-hat values for parameter estimates of all models were <1.1. We calculated Bayesian credible intervals (CIs) for all fixed model parameters in the R package BayestestR (v.0.90) (Makowskiet al., 2019) using the equal tailed interval (eti) method and consider modelled parameter estimates to demonstrate an effect on the response variable when 95% Bayesian CIs did not contain zero. Because we were interested in broad patterns of phenology–fitness relationships across tundra species, we included group-level intercepts by species rather than group-level slopes. Model parameter estimates with group-level intercepts and slopes by species are very similar, but larger error estimates limited our ability to detect general patterns using group-level slopes.
We performed posterior predictive checks of model performance using the ‘pp_check’ function of brms and leave-one-out cross-validation in the R package loo (v.2.5.1) (Vehtariet al., 2017: p. 20) ensuring all paretokvalues reflected good data–model fit (k< 0.7). For one model that had observations with paretokvalues > 0.7, we re-fitted the model leaving out the problematic observations (n= 10, 2%) with the function ‘reloo’ and report both cross-validation results (Supplementary Data Appendix). Finally, we calculated leave-one-out-adjusted BayesianR2values for each model with the ‘loo_R2’ function in brms.
To illustrate the consequences of direct vs. indirect effects (mediated through phenology) of anticipated climate warming, we generated model projections over novel climate space for Daring Lake only, because Alexandra Fiord models used a categorical predictor of warming. To do this, we created three climate scenarios: +1, +3 and +5 °C warming over the average growing season temperature from 2001 to 2022 at Daring Lake (~10.9 °C). We then used existing models to project future changes in phenology and their corresponding effects on reproductive fitness (numbers of flowers and fruits) over the novel climate data with the ‘predictions’ and ‘posterior_draws’ functions in the R package marginaleffects (v.0.11.0) (Arel-Bundock, 2023). Our goal was to quantify potential changes in reproductive output under climate change with and without accompanying phenological shifts as estimated by our models. We acknowledge that the most extreme of these projections (historical +3 and +5 °C) include extrapolation outside the climate space experienced by our plants thus far, because the maximum recorded summer average for any year at Daring Lake was 13.4 °C in 2022. Thus, interpretation of these results depends on the capacity of the species studied to keep pace with continued climate warming, for which the evidence is mixed (Fuet al., 2015).
Average growing season air temperatures at Daring Lake, Northwest Territories increased by ~2.4 °C over the 21-year study period at this site (2001–2022) (Fig. 3A). This exceeds time-line projections for reaching 2 °C of Arctic warming as a whole over 1980–2005 levels (Postet al., 2019) and highlights the enhanced rate of warming in continental Arctic Zones, such as the Northwest Territories (Hayneset al., 2018). Snowmelt timing showed a slight, but not statistically significant, pattern of advancement over this period (Supplemenary Data Fig. S1A). However, AIC model selection indicated that growing season temperature was a better predictor of flowering phenology and reproductive fitness than snow-free DOY (Table 1).

Baseline climate (temperature) data at Daring Lake (A) and Alexandra Fiord (B) over the respective study periods. (A) Average growing season (June–August) air temperature at the site level (all plots, species) from 2001–2022. (B) Average air temperature differences (i.e. Δ) between warming [open-top chamber (OTC)] and control plots by calendar date (DOY) across two growing seasons (2001 and 2002; data fromHollisteret al., (2023)). The dashed black line indicates no difference in temperature between warming and control plots (i.e. 0), and the dashed red line indicates the average difference in temperature between warming and control plots across the growing seasons (~1.1 °C). Best-fitting lines (solid blue plus error) are plotted on raw data with the function ‘geom_smooth’ [method: lm (A) or loess (B)] in the R package ggplot2Wickham, 2009). Ambient air temperature for Alexandra Fiord across all years of the time series is shown in theSupplementary Data (Fig. S1B).
Scatter plots of air temperature over time showing long-term climate warming at Daring Lake and the warming effects of OTCs across the growing season at Alexandra Fiord.
At Alexandra Fiord, NU, for the two seasons when we have plot-level climate data (2001 and 2002), experimental warming increased the average temperature across the growing season by 1.13 °C in comparison to control plots (Fig. 3B, dashed red line), particularly during July (DOYs 190–210) when most plants are flowering (Fig. 3B, solid blue line). In contrast to Daring Lake, average growing season air temperatures showed a weakly positive but not statistically significant temporal trend over the full 10-year study period in ambient conditions (Supplementary Data Fig. S1B).
Warming (both warmer growing season temperatures and experimental warming) had a negative statistical relationship with flowering phenology (i.e. warmer temperatures led to earlier flowering;Table 2;Fig. 4). Structural equation modelling showed that flowering time advanced between 0.41 and 0.75 days °C−1of warming at Daring Lake and between 0.35 and 0.42 days earlier in warming versus control plots (~1.13 °C warming = approximate effect of OTC) at Alexandra Fiord (Table 2;Fig. 4). Model estimates (random intercepts) also showed that graminoid species [Luzulaspp. (arctica/confusa) andEriophorum vaginatum] flowered earliest at both sites, whereas evergreen shrub species (Rhododendron subarcticumandVaccinium vitis-idea) flowered latest at the low Arctic site (Supplementary Data Table S2). At the community level, the phenological responses to warming were relatively similar in magnitude at each site (~0.4 days advance per degree Celsius warming), with Daring Lake showing slightly stronger responses on average (Table 2;Fig. 4). Finally, although our statistical models were run at the community level (with species random intercepts), patterns in the raw data suggest that all species displayed negative (advancing) phenological responses to warming and that species exhibited responses of similar magnitude (Supplementary Data Fig. S3).
Structural equation modelling. Results of hierarchical Bayesian multivariate models (i.e. Bayesian structural equation models) corresponding toFig. 4for each site and reproductive fitness metric. Parameter estimates including the mean (Estimate) and standard deviation (Est. Error) for model intercepts and slopes for ‘fixed effects’ of climate and phenology with 95% Bayesian credible intervals (95 low, 95 high) and bulk ESS estimates. Abbreviations: DOY, day of year of flowering; ESS, effective sample size; OTC, OTC warming effect; Tempt, average growing season temperature in the current year; Tempt−1, average growing season temperature in the previous year.

Results of hierarchical Bayesian multivariate models (i.e. Bayesian SEMs) corresponding toFig. 2for each site and reproductive fitness metric: number of flowers (A, B) and number of fruits (C, D). Climate parameters (blue circle) included in each model are indicated on arrows (OTC = OTC experimental warming effect; Tempt= average growing season temperature in the current year; and Tempt−1= average growing season temperature in the previous year). Phenology parameters (green circle) included the date [i.e. day of year (DOY)] of flowering of an individual plant, and reproductive fitness parameters (orange circle) included the total number of flowers and/or fruits in an individual plant in the same year. Red/black lines indicate a negative/positive relationship, respectively, and grey lines indicate no evidence of a relationship based on Bayesian credible intervals. Parameter estimates (zero centred) for model slopes are shown on each line, and both linear and quadratic slopes are shown for the flowering phenology–reproductive fitness models (red arrow inFig. 2). All parameter estimates plus error are reported inTable 2.
Diagram of mean parameter estimates from structural equation models showing negative direct effects of climate on phenology, negative indirect effects of phenology on reproductive fitness, and inconsistent (positive, negative and neutral) direct effects of climate on reproductive fitness.
Warming (both warmer growing season temperatures and experimental warming) had weak to no direct relationship with reproductive fitness. Structural equation modelling showed that the number of flowers increased by 0.12 flowers per degree Celsius of warming at Daring Lake (Fig. 4B) and decreased by 0.11 flowers per degree Celsius of warming (i.e. approximate effect of OTC) at Alexandra Fiord (Fig. 4C), while the remaining two models (Fig. 4A,D) showed no direct effect of warming on reproductive fitness.
In contrast, the downstream effects of phenology (DOY flowering) exhibited consistently negative relationships with reproductive fitness (i.e. earlier phenology led to a higher number of flowers and fruits) across all species, sites and years (Table 2;Fig. 4). Structural equation modelling showed that reproductive fitness increased by 0.13–0.26 flowers and fruits per day advance of flowering phenology, and the average magnitude of this effect was comparable across sites (Alexandra Fiord and Daring Lake) (Fig. 4). Overall, the indirect effects of warming mediated through phenology were ~1.8–3 times stronger than the direct effects of warming on reproductive fitness based on mean parameter estimates within a given model (Table 2;Fig. 4).
Model estimates (random intercepts) showed that forb species (Saxifraga tricuspidata,Papaver radicatumandOxyria dignya) had the highest flower counts at both sites, and there was no clear pattern across functional groups for the number of fruits; however, we did not have fruit count data for all species (Supplementary Data Table S2). Although our statistical models were run at the community level (with species random intercepts), patterns in the raw data suggest that the majority of species exhibited negative relationships between phenology (i.e. timing of flowering) and reproductive fitness both under ambient warming (Daring Lake) and under experimental warming (Alexandra Fiord) (Supplementary Data Figs S4andS5). Yet for a handful of species, these relationships appeared neutral to weakly positive for the relationship between phenology and the numbers of flowers (Dryas integrifoliaandPapaver radicatum) and fruits (Vaccinium vitis-idea) (Supplementary Data Figs S4 and S5). However, all individual species responses are speculative, and we require more data to fit species-level models for all species.
ModelR2values indicate much higher predictive power for plant phenology than for reproductive fitness across sites (Fig. 4). Some models of reproductive fitness show poor predictive power despite evidence of phenology shifts, particularly with categorical rather than continuous temperature (Fig. 4).
Group-level parameters (i.e. random intercepts) showed different sources of variation in phenology and reproductive fitness between the two sites. At Daring Lake, species, followed by calendar year, accounted for the largest amount of the variation in flowering phenology, while species and individual plant identity accounted for the largest amount of the variation in reproductive fitness. Thus, intraspecific variation among individuals was much higher for reproductive output than for flowering phenology. Rather, flowering phenology varied mostly between species and across years (i.e. inter-annually). Interestingly, at Alexandra Fiord, we found a different pattern, whereby calendar year, followed by species, accounted for the largest amount of the variation in both flowering phenology and reproductive fitness. Plot (i.e. location) also accounted for significant variation in flowering phenology, but to a lesser extent in reproductive fitness, suggesting a potential role of microhabitat in flowering phenology (Table 3).
Summary of group-level effects. Group-level hyperparameters (i.e. s.d.) and residual error from hierarchical Bayesian multivariate models (i.e. Bayesian SEMs). Group-level terms (i.e. random intercepts) for each site and reproductive fitness metric correspond to eqns (1) and (2) in the main text.
We found consistent evidence of directional phenotypic selection for earlier flowering phenology under warming, in that all warming–phenology relationships are negative and all phenology–fitness relationships are also negative (i.e. warming leads to earlier flowering leads to higher fitness;Table 2;Figs 4and5). We found weak to no evidence for stabilizing or disruptive phenotypic selection. Only two quadratic terms had parameter estimates that did not include zero (Table 2) and were much smaller than the linear terms of the same relationship and very weakly concave (Figs 4and5B,D). Although a concave relationship can sometimes indicate disruptive selection, based on the range of the data included in our study, the quadratic term instead suggests a threshold effect, whereby extreme delays in flowering are no more detrimental to flower and fruit production than moderate delays.

Model prediction lines for the relationship between flowering phenology and reproductive fitness (red arrow inFig. 2) within hierarchical Bayesian multivariate models (i.e. Bayesian SEMs) for each site and fitness metric: number of flowers (A, B) and number of fruits (C, D). Black lines indicate model predictions over observed data, with 50, 80 and 95% Bayesian credible intervals (CIs) shown in increasingly light shades of blue. Dots show the raw data in each model (note distinctx- andy-axes for each panel).
Scatter plots with model prediction lines indicating the negative relationship between flowering time (DOY) and reproductive fitness, whereby individuals that flowering later have lower numbers of flowers and fruits.
Model projections of reproductive fitness under novel climate space illustrate how phenological shifts are key to increased reproductive output in warming conditions. For Daring Lake, under the historical (2001–2022) average growing season temperature +1 and +3 °C scenarios, both of which encompass historically observed temperatures at this site, models predict an advance in the median spring flowering phenology by ~6 and 20 days for +1 and +3 °C, respectively. This translates to a 129–238% increase in reproductive output for an individual that flowers at the projected median day of year [DOY 167 (+1 °C) and DOY 155 (+3 °C)]. However, if plants were not able to respond phenologically (e.g. if daylength or some other factor constrained the timing of flowering and thus the flowering period remained the same), we would only project a 114–145% increase in reproductive output owing to the direct positive effects of warming. (Fig. 6;Table 4). Under the historical average +5°C scenario, flowering times are projected to shift ~30 days earlier, corresponding to a 457% increase in reproductive output if flowering phenology keeps pace with the rate of warming, compared with a 231% increase in reproductive output from warming alone (Fig. 6;Table 4).

Model projections for the relationship between flowering phenology and reproductive fitness (number of flowers, logged) at Daring Lake with an increase in average growing season (June–August) air temperatures over historical values (2001–2022) by 1, 3 and 5 °C. Solid black lines indicate model projections over novel climate data, with 50, 80 and 95% Bayesian credible intervals (CIs) shown in blue. Dashed black lines indicate model predictions from historical values (Fig. 5B). Arrows correspond to the two model projections for reproductive fitness under each climate scenario (Table 4), including: (1) as a direct response of temperature only, holding flowering time at the historical median day of year (DOY) (178; orange arrows); and (2) as the combined direct response to temperature and indirect response to shifting phenology, illustrated here as the median predicted flowering DOY of that scenario (162, 158 and 141, respectively; red arrows) (Table 4). For each panel, the right arrow shows the percentage change in reproductive fitness from historical values if individual plants respond to warming only (are unable to shift flowering phenology), and the left arrow shows the percentage change in reproductive fitness from historical values if individual plants respond both directly to warming and indirectly to warming by advancing flowering times. We acknowledge that most extreme of these projections [historical (~10.9 °C) +3 and +5 °C] include extrapolating outside the climate space experienced by our plants thus far, because the maximum recorded summer average for any year at Daring Lake was 13.4 °C in 2022.
Line graph of projected flower counts under three warming scenarios (historic average + 1C, +3C, +5C) comparing direct warming effects to warming + phenology effects, whereby the latter is stronger.
Future model projections. Bayesian multivariate model projections over novel climate scenarios corresponding toFig. 6. Models predict flowering phenology (DOY) and reproductive fitness (number of flowers) at Daring Lake over four climate scenarios, including historical (2001–2022) growing season (June–August) average air temperature (10.9 °C) and an increase by 1, 3 and 5 °C above the historical average. Median flowering DOY reflects the median flowering date predicted in each scenario. For reproductive fitness, we predicted the corresponding mean number of flowers (logged) for each climate scenario two ways: (1) as a direct response of temperature only (Tempt), holding flowering time at the historical median DOY (173); and (2) the combined direct response to temperature and indirect response to shifting phenology to the median predicted flowering DOY of that scenario (Tempt+ phenology).
Documenting shifts in plant phenology under climate change has been an important scientific achievement of the past few decades, yet determining the potential demographic and population-level consequences of these shifts remains a challenge (Ileret al., 2021). This is probably attributable not only to methodological constraints (e.g. phenology and demographic studies require different monitoring capabilities, time frames), but also to the need for improved discussion across subdisciplines, because research questions framed for phenology often assume implicit links to fitness that might or might not exist (Kharouba and Wolkovich, 2023). Proposed approaches to make these mechanistic links include statistically relating demographic vital rates to phenology rather than analysing them separately and the use of SEMs to separate direct and indirect effects of climate on these processes (Ileret al., 2021). Here, we use both these approaches and a unique ≥30-year dataset of Arctic plant phenology to show that the effects of plant phenology on plant reproductive fitness (i.e. fecundity) might be larger than previously thought and between two and three times the magnitude of the direct effects of warming. Given the broad coverage of circumpolar species and functional groups in our study and the length of the observations of responses, we can expect that shifting phenology will have similar effects on reproductive fitness across the tundra biome.
A substantial body of work in tundra ecosystems has documented earlier timing of flowering, increased reproduction or both responses to warming (Wookeyet al., 1993;Henry and Molau, 1997;Arftet al., 1999;Totland and Alatalo, 2002;Kladyet al., 2011;Frei and Henry, 2022;Becker-Scarpittaet al., 2023). To date, no one has leveraged concurrent measurements on phenology and reproduction to ask whether warming temperatures directly stimulate plant reproduction regardless of flowering time or whether this climatic effect is driven by plant phenological responses. Here, we find that it is primarily the latter, and we find weak, inconsistent evidence of warming effects on reproductive fitness independent of flowering phenology. This suggests that the increased development time associated with advanced flowering in response to warming is the dominant pathway leading to enhanced reproductive performance.
We find evidence of strong directional phenotypic selection for earlier flowering across tundra plant species over multi-decadal time scales. Interestingly, we find little evidence of non-linear selection gradients reflecting stabilizing or disruptive selection; however, we cannot rule out the potential for higher-order polynomial or non-parametric relationships (Weiset al., 2014). Reproductive fitness is only one component of the life cycle of the plant and is not always correlated with changes in population growth or relative abundances of species (Ileret al., 2019). Furthermore, phenotypic selection can be dependent on the environmental context of flowering individuals (microhabitat quality etc.) (Austenet al., 2017). Although we do not have information on the individual-level microenvironment, model hyperparameters showed that intraspecific variation among individuals was much higher for reproductive output than for flowering phenology, suggesting that environmental or other contexts of individuals (age, size, pollinator availability etc.) might play an important role in their reproductive fitness. This also corresponds to much lower explanatory power for reproductive fitness than phenology models. Rather, flowering phenology varied mostly between species over time (i.e. inter-annually), reflecting a high level of macroclimatic control, which is consistent with modelled parameter estimates. Despite these caveats, positive fitness outcomes for earlier flowering individuals under warming highlights the capacity of these temperature-sensitive tundra species to acclimatize to warmer temperatures and might reduce the need for alternative intervention strategies, such as assisted migration of southern populations. These results are in line with a growing understanding of how intraspecific trait variation in tundra plant communities might slow species turnover and promote ecosystem resistance to climate warming in the Arctic (Jónsdóttiret al., 2023).
Although we find strong evidence that warming temperatures are shifting phenology and, as a result, reproductive fitness, there are many other ecological drivers at play in our system. General patterns indicated that although weak, the direct effects of warming at Alexandra Fiord tended to be negative, unlike at Daring Lake, where the effects were generally positive (Fig. 4). These patterns might suggest that other limiting factors, such as drought, accompanied warming at our high Arctic site, which might be a result of the experimental treatment, because OTCs have been shown to decrease soil surface moisture in some cases (Hollisteret al., 2023). In contrast, the increased flower production with warmer temperatures at Daring Lake follows predicted patterns of enhanced reproduction under more favourable climatic conditions for highly temperature-limited species (Scaven and Rafferty, 2013). Previous work at the Alexandra Fiord site has found both positive (Kladyet al., 2011) and inconsistent (positive, negative and no effect;Frei and Henry, 2022) direct effects of experimental warming on the reproductive output of dominant tundra species. However, these studies highlight that the effects of experimental warming on reproductive output can be modulated by other environmental factors, such as snowpack. Our work adds to this understanding by showing how the indirect effects of warming via shifting phenology are what primarily drives changes in reproductive fitness within an individual plant. Likewise,Wipf (2010)found that both phenology and fecundity of subarctic species were influenced by snowmelt date, particularly early in the growing season, whereas later-season phenophases were more driven by temperature (i.e. Growing Degree Days (GDDs)). Although we did not find strong effects of snowmelt date on fruit and flower production in our study, snowmelt date did influence flowering phenology, but only when combined with air temperature (Table 1). Other factors, including changes in snowpack depth, and sea ice thaw and extent, require further consideration (Assmannet al., 2019).
Under future climate predictions, individual plants showed a ~2- to 4.5-fold increase in their reproductive output (flower counts) under the most extreme model projections (+3 and +5 °C above historical growing season temperatures). However, if individual plants are unable to shift their flowering times concurrent with this rapid warming, ~20- to 30-day advances in the median flowering time, these projections are much more moderate (1.5- to 2.3-fold increase). There are several reasons why plants might become limited in their ability to shift flowering times by this magnitude, including photoperiod limitation, reduced chilling and/or stronger winter warming (Fuet al., 2015). In addition, temperature stress on tundra plants might even reduce flower or fruit production under extremely warm temperatures (Notarnicolaet al., 2023). A warmer Arctic will also be much cloudier, with potential for greater changes in precipitation from snow to rain (McIlhattanet al., 2020), which could affect advances in spring phenology, and the lack of direct sun might also affect flower production in some species. Although 5 °C warming is currently well within model projections for winter temperatures in the Arctic (Postet al., 2019), summer warming is less extreme (Bintanja and van der Linden, 2013), and thus we do not know with certainty whether these most extreme growing season temperatures will be observed in this century. Nonetheless, the Arctic is warming at four times the rate of the global average (Rantanenet al., 2022), with particularly alarming heat and wildfires in recent years in the Northwest Territories, Canada (Porteret al., 2019;Gaboriauet al., 2023), thus justifying the need for extreme projections outside of historically observed temperatures.
Finally, when considering the individual species within this study, we found notable interspecific variation in flowering phenology and reproductive output that were explained reasonably well by plant functional groups. For example, the two graminoid species [Eriophorum vaginatumandLuzulaspp. (arctica/confusa)] flowered earliest at both sites, and two evergreen shrubs (Rhododendron subarcticumandVaccinium vitis-idea) flowered latest but only at the low Arctic site (Daring Lake). In terms of reproductive output, three of the four forb species (Papaver radicatum,Oxyria digynaandSaxifraga tricuspidata) had the highest flower counts at both sites. We found no consistent patterns in fruit count, but only 6 of the 12 species had fruit count data. Despite these patterns, we require further data to understand how these baseline differences in phenology and reproductive output might or might not predict phenological responses to warming and downstream phenology–fitness relationships at the species and functional group levels. Previous Arctic syntheses have found mixed results in how different growth forms respond to warming, for both flowering phenology and reproductive success.Arftet al. (1999)found no differences in flowering phenology among growth forms but increases in forb and evergreen shrub reproductive output under experimental warming, whereasOberbaueret al.(2013)showed that in warmer ambient temperatures, graminoids and evergreen shrubs had the strongest advances in flowering phenology. However, no syntheses, to our knowledge, have assessed how phenological shifts in response to warming differentially alter reproductive fitness across different species. Therefore, this remains an open research question regarding what aspects of the life-history traits of plant species most inform the strength and direction of plant phenology–fitness relationships under warming.
In conclusion, this work provides valuable insights into both estimated and predicted fitness consequences of phenological shifts in a warming Arctic over multi-decadal time scales. In both current (1990s–2020s) and future climate scenarios, we can expect earlier flowering to benefit plant reproduction, given that phenological shifts can keep pace with warmer temperatures. Thus, flowering phenology might act as an important mechanism by which tundra plant populations acclimatize or adapt to changing environmental conditions. These findings have clear implications for predicting the impacts of climate change on Arctic ecosystems, while also providing potential insight for other temperature-limited systems with overlapping plant taxa, such as alpine tundra and boreal forests. However, unlike the results of our study, shifts in plant phenology and links to reproductive fitness in alpine tundra systems might be more sensitive to other (non-temperature) parameters, such as snowmelt timing and, possibly, photoperiod (Rixenet al., 2022). Furthermore, although the ‘borealization’ of Arctic ecosystems is predicted under climate change, recent global syntheses argue that this pattern has not occurred in any consistent way (García Criadoet al., 2023), potentially diminishing the ability to extend these generalities to non-tundra ecosystems. Further research is needed to determine how these changes in fitness as a result of advancing phenology will or will not scale up to changes in the abundance of tundra species worldwide.
Supplementary data are available atAnnals of Botanyonline and consist of the following.
Table S1: names, plant functional types, study site location and circumpolar/boreal distribution information for the 12 tundra species included in this synthesis. Table S2: species-level random intercepts for flowering phenology [day of year (DOY)], number of flowers and number of fruits for the 12 tundra species included in this synthesis estimated in hierarchical structural equation models. Figure S1: (A) Observed snow-free day of year (DOY) for a subset of individuals from each species in each year at Daring Lake from 2001 to 2022. (B) Average growing season (June–August) air temperature (1.5 m height) at Alexandra Fiord plotted by year from 1992 to 2003. Figure S2: relationships between number of flowers and number of fruits of individual plants across species. Figure S3: species-level flowering phenology [Julian day of year of mature flower (DOY flower open)] by temperature. Figure S4: species-level flowering phenology [Julian day of year of mature flower (DOY flower open)] by logged reproductive fitness. Figure S5: species-level flowering phenology [Julian day of year of mature flower (DOY flower open)]. Appendix: model performance.
We acknowledge that the research at Alexandra Fiord was conducted on Inuit-owned land and thank the Qikiqtani Inuit Association and the communities of Resolute Bay and Grise Fiord for their support. The field research was conducted under research licences from the Aurora Research Institute (Northwest Territories) from 1992 to 1998, and from the Nunavut Research Institute and the Nunavut Department of Environment from 1999 to 2015. Research in the Northwest Territories occurred within Wek’èezhìı, the management area defined under the Tłįcho Agreement and within the Chief DryGeese Territory, the traditional territory of the Yellowknives Dene First Nation. We thank all the field assistants, graduate students and postdoctoral researchers for their help in collecting valuable data over the years of these experiments. We are grateful to the Polar Continental Shelf Program and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police for providing logistical support for all the years of research at Alexandra Fiord. We are grateful to the Government of the Northwest Territories and the Aurora Research Institute for providing funding and logistical support for all the years of research at Daring Lake.The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
Courtney G Collins, 
Biodiversity Research Centre, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 
Department of Botany, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Amy L Angert, 
Biodiversity Research Centre, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 
Department of Botany, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Karin Clark, 
Department of Environment and Natural Resources, Government of the Northwest Territories, Yellowknife, NT, Canada.
Sarah C Elmendorf, 
Institute of Arctic and Alpine Research, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA; 
Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado, USA.
Cassandra Elphinstone, 
Biodiversity Research Centre, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 
Department of Botany, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 
Department of Geography, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Greg H R Henry, 
Biodiversity Research Centre, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 
Department of Geography, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Financial support over the years for research at Alexandra Fiord was provided through grants to G.H.R.H. from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Resource Council (NSERC) of Canada, the Northern Scientific Training Program (Polar Knowledge Canada), ArcticNet, and the Government of Canada International Polar Year program. C.G.C. was supported by a University of British Columbia Biodiversity Research Centre Postdoctoral Fellowship. S.C.E. was supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF OPP 1836839). C.E. was a Vanier Scholar, in addition to being funded by the Weston Foundation for Northern Research.
All data and scripts are available at:https://github.com/cour10eygrace/ITEX_pheno_demo: release for Annals of Botany manuscript DOI: 10.5072/zenodo.24695 (v1.0)
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
All data and scripts are available at:https://github.com/cour10eygrace/ITEX_pheno_demo: release for Annals of Botany manuscript DOI: 10.5072/zenodo.24695 (v1.0)
Articles from Annals of Botany are provided here courtesy ofOxford University Press
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894