An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Corresponding Author: Chethan Sarabu, MD, Department of Pediatrics, Stanford Medicine, 453 Quarry Rd, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA;chethan.sarabu@stanford.edu
Received 2022 Apr 20; Revised 2022 Jul 11; Accepted 2022 Oct 6; Collection date 2022 Dec.
This article is published and distributed under the terms of the Oxford University Press, Standard Journals Publication Model (https://academic.oup.com/journals/pages/open_access/funder_policies/chorus/standard_publication_model)
Establish a baseline of informatics professionals’ perspectives on climate change and health.
Anonymized survey sent to 9 informatics listservs March 31, 2022 to April 15, 2022.
N= 85 participants completed part or all of survey. Majority of participants worked at hospitals with 1000+ employees (73%) in urban areas (60%) in the United States. Respondents broadly reported general understanding of climate change and health (51%), but 71% reported unfamiliarity with technologies that could help clinicians and informaticians address the impacts of climate change. Seventy-one percent of surveyed wanted climate-driven environmental health information included in EHRs. Seventy-six percent of respondents reported that informaticians should be involved in institutional decarbonization. Seventy-eight percent of respondents felt that it was extremely, very, or moderately important to receive education on climate change.
General consensus on need to engage informaticians in climate change response, but gaps identified in knowledge dissemination and tools for adaptation and mitigation.
Informaticians broadly concerned about climate change and want to be engaged in efforts to combat it, but further education and tool development needed.
Keywords:medical informatics, climate change, decarbonization, medical education, environmental health
Climate change, driven by human greenhouse gas emissions, is contributing to the inequitable suffering of billions of people around the world, with heat waves, floods, wildfires, and disease outbreaks accelerating more rapidly and having more direct effects than previously anticipated.1While the brunt of climate impact will fall on people in low- and middle-income countries, industrialized nations have been major contributors to climate change, with the US healthcare sector accounting for 25% of global greenhouse gas emissions.2,3Informatics (people, process, technology) could prove essential for the rapid and necessary response to anthropogenic climate change. The thoughtful integration of electronic health record (EHR) information, socioeconomic determinants, and environmental data could assist in addressing current needs and in anticipating future demands related to energy usage, clinical care, technological transformation, and social organization.4,5However, a thorough understanding of the perspectives of informaticians on climate change and their role in this effort is lacking. We therefore distributed a survey to several, primarily US based, informatics groups to determine how they are thinking about and addressing the impacts of climate change.
Following the JAMIA Call for Papers on Health and Biomedical Informatics and Climate Change, we identified surveys of how clinical leaders and epidemiologists view the health impacts of climate change, but found limited information from the informatics perspective.6,7To investigate this we developed a pilot survey with the following key opportunity areas highlighted by JAMIA: data collection and analysis, monitoring and managing care delivery processes, tracking the trajectory of decarbonization, managing disease outbreaks, and ensuring resource availability. Guided by these topics and previous studies, we developed a pilot survey organized into 4 categories, “Disease Outbreak & Disaster Preparedness,” “Climate Change and Clinical Care,” “Tracking Climate Change Trajectories & Decarbonization,” and “Climate Change Education” (Figure 1). With our research team’s collective experience and training across informatics, environmental health, and climate change, we used an iterative consensus-driven process that was then piloted by a team of 4 physician-informaticians for length and flow, in order to develop a baseline survey. As climate health informatics is a relatively new discipline, all responses were optional so that participants could forgo answering questions on topics with which they were unfamiliar.

Overview diagram of relationship between health systems, communities, and climate change with key areas of focus.
From March 31, 2022 to April 15, 2022, we shared the survey across email listservs of 9 informatics organizations, working groups, and societies in order to capture the breadth of perspectives from various geographies and healthcare system settings, primarily in the United States. Participants completed the anonymous survey using Qualtrics (Provo, UT) software provided by Stanford Medicine. There were no defined eligibility criteria except having access to the survey, and this study was deemed exempt by the Stanford University institutional review board (IRB No. 60990). The full survey, list of the organizations contacted, and data analysis can be found in theSupplementary Material.
A total of 98 participants consented to participate, with 85 completing part or all of the survey. The demographics and descriptive statistics of the participants are detailed inTable 1, with the largest group being physician informaticians, 30%, and those at facilities with over 1000 employees, 63%.
Descriptive statistics of the participants in the survey
The vast majority of the respondents were from the United States and their geographical distribution is depicted inFigure 2A, with 38% from the West, 14% from the Midwest, 14% from the South, and 34% from the Northeast. The number of participants who experienced pairs of climate-related natural disasters and phenomena is depicted inFigure 2B, with severe storms identified as the most commonly experienced natural disaster, 55%. We examined the relationship between climate phenomenon experienced as well as climate change familiarity and other question responses, and no statistically significant association was found (Supplementary Figures S1 and S2, Bonferroni-adjusted Kruskal–Wallis test,P< .01).

The number of respondents by region (A) and natural disasters experienced (B). Responses to the natural disasters section of the survey (C).
When asked about the importance of having a health IT disaster plan for their organization the vast majority, 77%, felt it was “very or extremely important” with only 7% saying it was “not at all or only slightly important” (Figure 2C). With regards to having a formal climate change policy or groups working on climate and health initiatives, only 17% responded that they do with 47% being “not sure.” Of those that either reported “no or not sure” when asked about the importance of having either groups or policy around this topic 43% said it was “very or extremely important” and 28% said that it was only “slightly or not at all important.” A generalized sentiment of respondents who were more likely to be outliers shared in free text comments that they did not see this work being prioritized given all the other responsibilities that fall to informatics and health IT teams.
In terms of general knowledge around climate change and health, the majority of respondents, 51% were “extremely or very familiar,” with only 1 respondent indicating that they were “not familiar at all.” Furthermore, 65% of respondents think that climate change is “very or extremely significantly” impacting people’s health, while 6% of respondents indicate that there is “not a significant impact.” In terms of knowledge about technology that could help health systems respond to climate change, a large majority of those surveyed, 71% were “not at all or slightly familiar,” with only 11% saying they were “very or extremely familiar” (Figure 2). Moreover, when asked whether their healthcare organization has plans for technology to address the clinical impacts of climate change over the next 5 years, only 7% of respondents indicated affirmatively, while 44% said “no” and the remaining 49% said they were “not sure” (Figure 3, Clinical Care).

Responses to the clinical care (A), decarbonization (B), and education (C) sections of the survey.
On the topic of education, 50% felt it was “extremely or very important” for informatics professionals to receive training on the impacts of climate change and health, with an additional 28% indicating it was “moderately important,” only 7% felt it was “not at all important” (Figure 3, Education). Nine percent of respondents shared that their health system provided education on the impacts of climate change on human health, with a further 27% saying they were “not sure,” and the remaining 65% responded “no.” We further asked if their medical specialty, either through the degree or maintenance of certification (MOC) programs, had a climate change component, and only 9% said that they did. Those that did not have this educational opportunity were further asked how important it was for there to be a climate change component in their health education and the majority, 52% felt it was “extremely or very important,” with only 8% saying it was “slightly or not at all important.”
Forty-seven percent indicated that climate change should be “extremely or very significantly” considered in the clinical practice of medicine with only 7% stating it should not be included at all. Furthermore, when asked if they had seen clinical guidelines to respond to climate driven health effects (such as asthma treatment plans in response to worsening air pollution) 32% said “yes.” Finally, when asked if EHRs should incorporate information about environmental information, the vast majority of respondents, 71% said “yes” with only 8% saying “no,” and the remaining 21% indicating they were “not sure” (Figure 3, Clinical Care).
The majority of respondents, 52%, were “not at all or slightly familiar” with organizational decarbonization, with only 8% indicating that they were “very or extremely familiar” (Figure 3, Decarbonization). Conversely, the majority of respondents, 51%, felt that decarbonizing healthcare organizations is “extremely or very important” with another 32% believing that it was “moderately important.” Moreover, 40% also felt that it was “extremely or very important,” for informaticians and informatics departments to be involved in the efforts to decarbonize healthcare organizations, with only 23% stating it was “not at all or slightly important” for informaticians to be involved.
Our pilot survey of health informatics leaders, mostly from the United States, have similar knowledge of the impacts of climate change on health as other related surveys; for example, Salas et al6found that approximately 65% of clinicians recognize the health impacts of climate change at “moderate or high levels.” Our survey similarly found that 51% had “very or extremely high” familiarity with the impacts of climate change on health, and another 36% had “moderate familiarity.” At the same time, more training is needed as 77% of respondents indicated that it is “moderately to extremely important” that informatics professionals receive education on the impacts of climate change on health.
We further explored sources and opportunities for education around climate and asked about education from health systems and through education and across both settings there is limited to no education on climate change and health. Only 8% of respondents received education on the impacts of climate change on health through their health system and 9% indicated that their medical specialty, degree, or maintenance of certification (MOC) programs had a climate change component. When asked about which topics are most important to focus on, there was a fairly even distribution, with “anticipating patient healthcare challenges based on new acute and/or infectious diseases due to climate change,” being most prescient. We believe there is an important opportunity and imperative for medical educators to create content around climate change and health.
While survey respondents indicate they are relatively knowledgeable about the health impacts of climate change, they are largely unaware (71% have “limited familiarity”) of the technologies and informatics tools that may play a critical role in responding to climate change disasters. Furthermore, 44% indicated that their healthcare organizations are “unlikely to” implement technology (with another 49% “not sure”) to address the clinical impacts of climate change over the next 5 years. Although many of these technologies and processes may be in nascent stages, a small percentage of respondents indicated that they do have these plans in place, these may be an opportunity for testing new tools and disseminating knowledge and best practices.8As the brunt of climate change effects will fall on low- and middle-income countries, there is an opportunity for nations that develop these tools to disseminate them globally.
The frequency and severity of natural disasters are being accelerated by climate change.9They are one of the pathways between climate change and clinical care that we studied (Figure 1). When we asked which tools were important to focus on, IT disaster plans and downtime policies and procedures were rated as the most important (Figure 2C). One interesting point was that informatics tools for forecasting patient needs as opposed to patient loads due to natural disasters were considered to be more important on average, but it was also felt that the tools to forecast patient loads were more likely to be implemented. As there may be more heterogeneity across patient needs, it might be easier to predict patient loads. Finally, 3%–4% of respondents have already implemented these forecasting systems as well as environmental health dashboards that link healthcare organizations with public health systems; future studies that explore these early innovators may help advance the field.10
Climate change should not only be significantly considered in the clinical practice of medicine (85% rate this as “moderately to extremely significant”), but 71% say that climate-driven environmental health data also belong at the point of care in EHRs. While some free text comments shared that this information may be more impactful through population health dashboards and policy makers, there were many who felt integrating this data into clinical decision support (CDS) would be beneficial, with one respondent sharing that they were “exploring adding environmental impact of HFA inhalers and using CDS to nudge alternate inhalers.” Others elaborated that the data would be useful for “both documenting health effects associated with climate disasters as well as developing clinical protocols,” further emphasizing that “without gathering this data, they cannot correlate variations in care or outcomes associated with climate change effects,” which is in line with planetary health and clinical care guidelines.11
While there are large gaps in knowledge about organizational decarbonization, the process by which organizations reduce their carbon output, respondents not only believe that healthcare systems need to focus on decarbonization, but furthermore, 76% stated that it was “moderately to extremely important” for informaticians to be involved in the process.2Some may consider this to be an upstream factor from care delivery, however, specific clinical practices, such as the use of certain anesthetic gasses and certain types of inhalers, are potent greenhouse gasses, and so addressing this issue may require changes to clinical practice as well.12,13
Some limitations of our study include the fact that we had a largely US-centric view and limited global perspectives, the majority of responses were either from the Northeast or West, and very few health systems from rural communities were represented. With surveys sent to email listservs, there may be some level of selection bias with regards to the participants who decide to respond to the survey, and furthermore we did not know how many people were in the listserves. There were a small number of participants who questioned the scientific evidence around climate change, its role in accelerating natural disasters, and its impact on human health; while this goes against the mainstream scientific consensus, even in the community of informaticians, there is an array of viewpoints reflecting the diversity of perspectives on anthropogenic climate change. Finally, while we designed this pilot survey with some input from previous surveys, there are newer surveys of healthcare organizations on climate change with global perspectives that we would draw from in designing an updated version of our survey for health informaticians.14,15
In our pilot survey of nearly 100 informaticians on climate change perspectives, several key themes emerged. The respondents appeared to be broadly knowledgeable about the deleterious effects of climate change on health, however, big opportunities exist around education and development of informatics tools for addressing this environmental challenge. With specific strategic examples leveraging CDS, informaticians highlighted ways to bring environmental health information into the EHR and care pathways. Informaticians were also identified as potential key partners in institutional decarbonization efforts. Because our work as informaticians is often tied into quantification, process analysis, and behavioral nudging, we see ourselves as key advocates in broader conversations shifting culture and practice to confront climate change. Our hope is that this survey will be a first step towards further investigations on the links between our profession and this public emergency.
This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
All authors contributed substantially to the conception of the study, acquisition of survey results, analysis and interpretation of the data and drafting, editing, and review of the final manuscript for submission.
Supplementary materialis available atJournal of the American Medical Informatics Associationonline.
We would like to thank Vanitha Sampath for her work in reviewing and editing the manuscript.
None declared.
Chethan Sarabu, 
Department of Pediatrics, Stanford Medicine, Palo Alto, California, USA.
Andrew Deonarine, 
Department of Informatics, Northern Health, Prince George, Canada; 
Boston Public Health Commission, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
Stefano Leitner, 
Department of Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.
Oluseyi Fayanju, 
Department of Medicine, Stanford Medicine, Palo Alto, California, USA.
Myroslava Fisun, 
Albany High School, Albany, New York, USA.
Kari Nadeau, 
Department of Medicine, Stanford Medicine, Palo Alto, California, USA.
The data underlying this article will be shared on reasonable request to the corresponding author.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
The data underlying this article will be shared on reasonable request to the corresponding author.
Articles from Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association : JAMIA are provided here courtesy ofOxford University Press
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894