An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Corresponding author.
Received 2023 Mar 15; Accepted 2023 May 7.
This article is made available via the PMC Open Access Subset for unrestricted research re-use and secondary analysis in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for the duration of the World Health Organization (WHO) declaration of COVID-19 as a global pandemic.
Social science studies view community wellbeing to be a cumulative construct of multiple dimensions which include social, economic, environmental, physical, political, health, education indicators and more. The study of community wellbeing is compounded by climate change as it increases the frequency of disasters affecting all dimensions of community wellbeing. It becomes crucial for communities to build community resilience and address the impact on community wellbeing in the context of Disaster Risk Reduction and sustainable development. This systematic literature aimed to understand how community wellbeing is affected by climate change. It analysed 23 papers from Scopus, Web of Science, ProQuest, and Google Scholar, following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) method, to address three research questions: (i) how do climate change scholars understand community wellbeing, (ii) how community wellbeing is affected by specific climate change factors/conditions and the nature of impact, and (iii) how the impact on community wellbeing as a result of climate change is being addressed. The study found that climate change scholars hold mixed and multiple views or understanding of community wellbeing and climate change led to mental stress decreasing community wellbeing. The solutions to improve community wellbeing in the context of climate change suggests that adaptation should be the main policy instrument supplemented by mitigation strategies and recommends building a vibrant research culture in wellbeing and climate studies, among others. This review provides insights into the complex relationship between community wellbeing and climate change and identifies areas for future research and policy development.
Keywords:Community wellbeing, Climate change, Environment, Adaptation, Mitigation, Policy making
The two terms incommunity wellbeingare both “highly contested with no or little agreed consensus on their definition” (Atkinson et al.2019, p. 1904). As an idea, community wellbeing is both simple and complex (Merriam and Kee2014). It is simple because everyone understands the concept to suggest a prosperous and healthy living space for all members in a community irrespective of determinant factors like income, age, gender, culture etc. but the interactions of the same factors that are economic, social, cultural, and environmental make it difficult to have any universal definition of community wellbeing (Merriam and Kee2014). Contextualizing wellbeing within community dynamics, community wellbeing has been defined as “the combination of social, economic, environmental, cultural, and political conditions identified by individuals and their communities as essential for them to flourish and fulfil their potential” (Wiseman and Brasher2008, p. 358). It is thus integral to sustainability.
The study of community wellbeing is further compounded by climate change, which is perhaps the greatest contemporary challenge for modern society, bringing about drastic changes in the land, food, and ecosystems and alters the conditions for living which in turn impacts the wellbeing of communities (Abebe et al.2022; Doherty and Clayton2011; Hasegawa et al.2021; Chersich et al.2018). Climate change is defined as the shift in climate patterns which is primarily caused by human induced greenhouse gas emissions (Fawzy et al.2020). Greenhouse gases form layers in the atmosphere and it traps heat warming the earth causing global warming (Inman2019). The changes in climate indicators noted by the United Nations Climate Change Secretariat (UNCCS) includes temperature, precipitation, sea-level rise, ocean acidification and extreme weather conditions and climate hazards including droughts, floods, hurricanes, severe storms, heatwaves, wildfires, cold spells, and landslides (Fawzy et al.2020). These climate phenomena bring about global environmental changes and adversely impacts ecosystems disrupting services affecting human livelihood and wellbeing (Dietz et al.2020; Steffen et al.2018).
The study of community wellbeing is significant in understanding the progress and development of societies and evidence is compelling that promoting community wellbeing is key to improving individual mental health problems (Wiseman and Brasher2008). As climate change alters social, economic, environmental, and cultural conditions of communities (Lam & Seidel,2020), it presents numerous challenges affecting their wellbeing (Shaffril et al.2017). If no action is taken, climate change threatens to exaggerate the vulnerable population and extensively obstruct future progress with the possibility of reversing developments made to improve human wellbeing (Helldén et al.2021).
Most studies on wellbeing and climate change focus on one or more climate variable(s) and wellbeing is studied as a derivative of the variable(s). For example, recent (2017–2022) systematic literature reviews on wellbeing and climate change have focused on wellbeing, health, and climate change (Chersich et al.2018; Aldridge and McChesney2018; Krefis et al.2018; Moore et al.2018; Oh et al.2017), wellbeing and climate change mitigation (Creutzig et al.2021; Lamb and Steinberger2017a), wellbeing and climate change adaptation (Owen2020; Patel et al.2017), wellbeing, climate change, and agriculture (Brown et al.2018; Esposito et al.2020), and wellbeing, climate change, and sustainability (Savaget et al.2019; Sengers et al.2019). No systematic review has been undertaken oncommunity wellbeingas impacted by climate change specifically highlighting a gap in the literature.
This paper presents a systematic literature review of community wellbeing and how it is affected by climate change impacts. To this end, three research questions were explored:
How do climate change scholars view and understand community wellbeing?
How is community wellbeing affected by specific climate change factors/conditions and what is the nature of impact?
In what ways can impacts on community wellbeing as a result of climate change be addressed?
The findings show that climate change researchers hold mixed and multiple views or understanding of community wellbeing in the context of climate change impacts. The most common impacts on community wellbeing from climate change include direct effects resulting from changing physical conditions like heatwaves, rainfall, warming, sea-level rise etc. It is then followed by indirect effects following negative impacts on the ecosystems such as spread of diseases, reduced crops and similar conditions which lead to mental stress decreasing overall wellbeing of communities. The cumulative impact of climate change is a decrease in community adaptive capacity pushing communities into further poverty causing a never-ending cycle that keeps on worsening as climate change continues and intensifies. The solutions to address the impacts on community wellbeing as a result of climate change show adaptation to be used as the main policy instrument supplemented by mitigation strategies, a need to build a vibrant culture of research in wellbeing and climate change studies, all levels of government to become active players in combating climate change, and a need for a vibrant advocacy on climate change.
The findings of this research allow understanding community wellbeing as a result of the impacts of climate change. It presents the solutions to improving community wellbeing which will directly contribute to the literature of improving community resilience and disaster risk reduction leading to positive sustainable development.
In social sciences, community wellbeing is a multidimensional (Alidoust et al.2022) and complex (Harrison2022) concept and it entails a long-term approach (Kim and Lee2013) necessary for life to flourish within a community (Wiseman and Brasher2008; Merriam and Kee2014). Community wellbeing is identified by Gibson-Graham et al. (2013) as a key component in considering how economies are supporting people to “survive well together” (McKinnon et al.2021, p. 165). Nelson et al. (2022, p. 236) refer to Breslow et al. (2017) to define community wellbeing as “the state of being with others and the environment which arises when human and ecosystem needs are met, when individuals and communities can act meaningfully to pursue their goals, and when individuals and communities enjoy a satisfactory quality of life.”
Social science studies view community wellbeing to be a cumulative construct of multiple dimensions. Merriam and Kee (2014) asserts it to be a combination of quality of life, level of happiness, and access to resources and opportunities in life. Cox et al. (2010, p. 72) claims that it constitutes a “broad range of economic, social, environmental, cultural and governance goals and priorities identified as of greatest importance by a particular community, population group or society”. McKinnon et al. (2021, p. 162) refer to McCrea et al. (2016, p. 198) pointing to ‘dimensions of community wellbeing’ grouped under seven broad domains of social, economic, environmental, physical, political, health and place attachment and assert the domains “contribute to a more global measure of overall community wellbeing”. In a systematic review of 28 local government policy documents on community wellbeing from across the world, Alidoust et al. (2022, p. 15) identifies 13 key determinants of community wellbeing comprising community health; social justice and opportunity; climate and environmental management; transport; community connectedness; housing; public spaces; employment; governance; urban development and infrastructure; education; economy and self-sufficiency. The study claims that the definition of community wellbeing varied among different local governments across the world, and it was context-specific and aligned to the needs of the local community, challenges, and the opportunities and aspirations of the community (Alidoust et al.2022).
Climate change has significantly increased the frequency of disasters globally (Banholzer et al.2014) and climate fuelled disasters like floods, cyclones, storms, and heat waves has doubled since the early 1990s and are becoming more frequent (Dembedza et al.2023). Disasters can impact multiple dimensions of community wellbeing and it can be both immediate (Madrid et al.2006) and long-term (Noy and duPont IV2018), affecting physical (Lindell and Prater2003), emotional (Kargillis et al.2014), social (Kreimer2001), and economic aspects (Kreimer2001) of people’s lives.
Given that disasters—whether climate induced or other disasters like a pandemic—have a significant bearing on community wellbeing, it should be noted that community wellbeing is closely associated with the concepts of community resilience, Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR), and sustainable development. Community wellbeing is an “essential asset” to build a resilient community (Valinejad et al.2022, p. 322). Community resilience is a concept that describes the capacity of a community to absorb and endure the consequences of stressors, confront threats, and adjust to new situations following a disaster by reconfiguring, adapting, or acquiring knowledge and skills to manage the crisis (Lindemann et al.2022; Valinejad et al.2022). Having high accessibility to resources and their fair distribution are keys to an effective community resilience and how resources are distributed in a community can reveal community’s resilience against a disaster like Covid-19 (Valinejad et al.2022). Building a resilient community also entail effective management of disasters (Lindemann et al.2022). In the 1990s, there was a significant global shift in the way disasters were approached, transitioning from Disaster Management to Disaster Risk Reduction (Bhola et al.2023). Disaster Risk Reduction aims to not only prevent disasters but also to improve the ability of communities to cope with and recover from them (Bhola et al.2023). Studies in the United States show that investing in disaster research and preventive measures can greatly reduce the economic impact of natural disasters (Bhola et al.2023).
The concepts of community wellbeing, community resilience and DRR also align with principles of sustainable development which aim to mitigate climate change, ecological degradation, and biodiversity loss, while pursuing economic and social goals such as reducing hunger or poverty (Baffo et al.2023). Community wellbeing is a key component of sustainable development as it is essential for building thriving and resilient communities (Warburton2018). A community that is economically prosperous, socially just, and environmentally sustainable is more likely to have high levels of wellbeing (Shoeb-Ur-Rahman et al.2019). In turn, a community that is healthy, happy, and thriving is more likely to be sustainable over the long term (Warburton2018).
Community wellbeing and the impacts of disasters on community wellbeing in the broad area of social sciences is currently studied through a multidisciplinary approach that include areas like psychology, sociology, economics, and environmental science etc. (Kendra and Nigg2014). A key finding in the field is that disasters have significant negative impacts on community wellbeing, both in the short and long term, and the impact is particularly severe in vulnerable communities, where the community resilience to disasters is low (Bonanno et al.2010). As such, the focus is on building community resilience to deal with disasters (Bonanno et al.2010).
In the light of climate change triggering more disasters, there is a need for more research to understand the impact of disasters on the multiple dimensions of community wellbeing. An apparent gap that exists in the study of community wellbeing is lack of evaluation methods to understand community wellbeing (Lach et al.2022). Multiple studies have identified the need to consider how community wellbeing might be something other than an aggregate of individual subjective wellbeing (McKinnon et al.2021) and it requires a different approach of evaluation (Atkinson et al.2019). But, in practice, evaluation methods and frameworks continue to measure community wellbeing as an aggregate of individual wellbeing (Lach et al.2022; Atkinson et al.2019; McKinnon et al.2021) while conceptually, it is much more than the sum of its parts.
This systematic literature review (SLR) was based on the broad approach advocated by Kitchenham (2004), being a kind of secondary study providing the means to identify, evaluate, and interpret existing research to answer specific research questions. For the data collection component, the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) method was followed, utilizing four steps of identification, screening, eligibility, and inclusion to source and select literature for analysis (Moher et al.2009). First, relevant literature was identified using a search protocol, the screening process involved reading titles and abstracts, eligibility involved full text reading, and finally items were included or excluded from review (Rigolon et al.2018; Moher et al.2009).
Before identifying the final papers, to get a nuanced understanding of community wellbeing in broader social sciences studies, a search was conducted on Scopus search engine using “community wellbeing” in title, abstract, and keywords, and limiting it to the “social sciences” field and to “articles” in “English” in “journals” yielded 171 papers. Papers in the first quartile were screened to conceptualise the meaning of community wellbeing.
Four online databases, Scopus, Web of Science, ProQuest, and Google Scholar were used to identify primary articles. The search for evidence in SLR is only efficient if the right search strategy and appropriate search database(s) are used with Scopus, Web of Science, ProQuest being among the top 14 credible databases when used as principal search systems (Gusenbauer and Haddaway2020). Zhu and Liu (2020) note that Scopus and Web of Science are the two most popular search databases for conducting SLRs, while Clement and Rascoe (2013) promote ProQuest as it being the largest database of graduate works in the world. Google Scholar is a useful complement to these, being a good repository of both peer-reviewed and grey literature (Chouhan et al.2020).
To identify existing literature on community wellbeing in context of climate change impacts, keywords in English using the asterisk wildcard to expand the search included “Climate change” OR “global warming” OR “chang* climate” AND communit* OR rural OR remote OR coast* OR village OR agricultur* OR indigenous OR aboriginal OR societ* AND wellbeing OR well-being in the title of papers in November 2022. Articles were searched with no limitation of publication period to get a comprehensive representation of existing research.
The searches returned 65 items sourced from Scopus (14), ProQuest (14), Web of Science (13), and Google Scholar (24). Removal of the 29 duplicates reduced the sample to 36, all of which were published in English. Reading of full text and applying the inclusion/exclusion criteria left 23 works for final analysis.
Two inclusion/exclusion criteria guided this SLR. Firstly, the works needed to clearly discuss the community wellbeing as affected by climate change and six items (including three newspaper articles) were excluded because they did not clearly show a cause-and-effect relationship between community wellbeing and climate change. The second criterion was to include both academic papers and grey literature irrespective of peer-review processes. One PowerPoint presentation was excluded from review. To get the most comprehensive representation of existing research, there was no limitation imposed on the publication year.
An adaptation of the analysis framework questionnaire of Fatorić and Seekamp (2017) was used to analyse the 23 works (Table1), as tailored to understanding community wellbeing as impacted by climate change. Initial consideration was given to the general publication characteristics including a bibliometric analysis on the authors and co-authorship conducted using VOSviewer (version 1.6.18) (van Eck and Waltman2014). These results are presented in the next section. This was followed by specific focus on the research questions using thematic analysis (Tranfield et al.2003); discussed in Sections 4–6.
The analysis framework questionnaire adapted from Fatorić and Seekamp (2017)
•Authorship
•Publication type and details
•Publication period
•Geographical focus
•Community focus
1 How do climate change scholars understand community wellbeing?
2 How is community wellbeing affected by specific climate change factors/conditions and what is the nature of impact?
3 In what ways can impacts on community wellbeing as a result of climate change be addressed?
The general publication characteristics of the 23 works are summarized in Table2. They are ordered here according to geography focus rather than chronology or by first author name. The earliest papers within the results were two papers on Victorian communities in Australia in 2009 (Edwards et al.2014; Wiseman and Edwards2014), while the latest and largest single year of works published were in 2022. These results suggest that the study of community wellbeing in context of climate change impacts received a renewed focus within the social science community globally.
General characteristics of the 23 publications identified in the systematic literature review (ordered by geography)
It can be seen that the majority of items are co-authored, the exceptions being theses (as would be expected) and one report, with a total of 65 authors represented within the suite. There are three pairs of works co-authored by the same or at least one-overlapping author (i.e. items 4-5, 2-3, 8-9 in Table2) which have co-authorship total link strength scores (using VOSviewer) of 0, 2, and 4 respectively. The co-authorship total link strength shows the total strength of co-authorship links of an author with other authors (van Eck and Waltman2014). A total link strength of 0 indicates the absence of similar co-authors in the first two papers. A total link strength of 2 in the second set of papers indicate that the two first authors were co-authors in the other paper. A total link strength of 4 in the third set of two papers with the same first author had two other co-authors in both papers.
The majority of the publications are journal articles (n= 14, 61%) and remaining include book, book chapter, book section, and report chapter (n= 4, 17%), thesis (n= 2, 9%), working paper (n= 1, 4%), and an informal (unpublished) work (n= 1, 4%) written in the style of a journal paper. Clearly showcasing the interdisciplinary and multidimensional nature of community wellbeing in context of climate change impacts, the 14 journal articles are published in 14 different journals from the world over. While no journal exclusively focuses on community wellbeing or wellbeing, five are environmental journals namely,Science of the Total Environment, Current Research in Environmental Sustainability, Current Environmental Health Reports, Local Environment, andRegional Environmental Change. Two are health journals namely,Health Promotion and Chronic Disease Prevention in Canada; andHealth Issues. The remaining seven journals are from diverse disciplines and includesIdesia, Just Policy: A Journal of Australian Social Policy, EcoHealth, Sustainability, Maritime Studies, International Journal of Psychology, and Canadian Geographer.
Having only two repeat first authors and the weak total link strength among the 65 authors suggests that community wellbeing in context of climate change impacts, as a topic, is not dominated by a small group of experts located in one part of the world but rather attracts interests from researchers in diverse fields showcasing its interdisciplinary nature. The diversity of journals further suggests that although understanding community wellbeing in the face of climate change is gaining traction mainly in environmental and health journals, there is no journal dominating research on the topic.
The geographical distribution of papers includes all populated continents with most from Australia and Oceania (n= 10, 43%) comprising Australia (7), New Zealand (2) and Vanuatu (1). It is followed by Asia (n= 5, 22%) comprising Pakistan (2), India (2), and Bhutan (1). North America (n= 4, 17%) comes next comprising two each from Canada and United States. There is one (4%) paper each from Kenya in Africa, Chile in South America and one indigenous group spread over four countries of Norway, Sweden, Finland, and Russia in Europe. Finally, one paper (Neufeld et al.2022) has no specific country focus and studies 13 countries the world over. With five continents yielding papers in single figures, a literature gap for this topic of research is apparent. Nonetheless, the wide geographical spread shows that the interest in community wellbeing in context of climate change impacts is diverse in the international community.
Table2also records the community types considered in each publication. These fell into four types as follows:
Farming, rural, and remote communities (n= 9, 39%), with three (13%) featuring farming and agricultural communities in Pakistan (item 11), Chile (20) and Australia (1), and six (26%) focusing on rural and remote communities in Australia (6, 7), Canada (16), India (14), Kenya (21), and Bhutan (15) respectively.
Indigenous and aboriginal communities (n= 7, 30%) from Australia (items 4, 5), New Zealand (8, 9), Canada (17), and United States (19), a study of one indigenous group spread across the four northern European countries of Norway, Sweden, Finland, and Russia (22), and one study of multiple indigenous and Aboriginal communities with no particular country focus (23).
Fishers and coastal communities (n= 4, 17%) in the United States (item 18), Pakistan (12), three coastal cities in India (13) and the island nation of Vanuatu (10); and
Communities in the Australian state of Victoria (n= 3, 13%) in which items 2 and 3 simply addressed “Victorians” as their unit of consideration without distinguishing specific community types within this population (of approximately 7 million people) while item 6 focused exclusively on public housing residents in one regional community in the State.
There was no pattern evident in this spread of community types, beyond multiple studies involving at least one of the same authors addressing the same category. However, it reinforces the diversity of research that can be pursued in order to understand the community wellbeing in context of climate change impacts.
Further discussion of the characteristics of the 23 SLR items emerges in the thematic analysis for each of the three research questions in the sections that follow.
To understand how community wellbeing is expressed in the 23 works, the meaning ofcommunitywas first examined and this was found to take on two primary interpretations. First, it can be construed from the geographical location of a place (n= 13, 57%) including rural, remote, regional, Arctic, or coastal communities as part of a country or a nation as a whole. Second, it can be a collective of climate vulnerable group of people (n= 9, 39%) such as farmers, highlanders, fishers, or indigenous and/or aboriginal people living in one or more regions in any country or in multiple countries. As such, community, for the purpose of this study, can be understood to be a society confined together by geography of place and/or the collectiveness of a group of people similarly exposed to vulnerabilities from the impacts of climate change.
Irrespective of community type, a prominent feature of the publications is that many (n= 9, 39%) have combined to study the climate impacts on human health together with wellbeing as the study outcome (Addison2013; Green and Minchin2014; Green & Webb,2015; Jaakkola et al.2018; Johnson et al.2022; Johnson et al.2021; Kipp et al.2019; Neufeld et al.2022; Wiseman and Edwards2014). These works portray wellbeing to be a direct derivative of a healthy life. Some draw the meaning of health from the definition of the World Health Organization (WHO) as a state of complete physical, mental, and social wellbeing and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity (e.g. Addison2013; Petersen2021; Johnson et al.2021). In the context of indigenous communities, Johnson et al. (2021, p. 478) uses health and wellbeing synonymously, defining it to be a “state of balance” which is achieved when “interlinked components of spiritual, social, emotional, intellectual, cultural, and physical or material dimensions of a person’s being are equally nourished”. In contrast, Brown et al. (2022) considered wellbeing in terms of how an individual evaluated the “state of their life” (p. 3) rather than on externally observable characteristics like income or physical health. The dominant trend among researchers to combine health and wellbeing as one study outcome could be a result of the fact that the United Nations identify good health and wellbeing under the auspices of the third sustainable development goal (Sweileh2020).
Other studies within the SLR publications equate wellbeing with other related concepts like wellness (Tam et al.2013), cultural wellbeing (Jaakkola et al.2018), mental health (Petersen2021), liveability (Addison2013), quality of life (Addison2013; Alfaro and Cortes2020), social wellbeing (Green and Minchin2014), emotional wellbeing (Green and Minchin2014; Petersen2021), social and emotional wellbeing (Petersen2021), psychosocial health (Green and Minchin2014), livelihood (Mitra et al.2021; Nelson et al.2022), household welfare (Mitra et al.2021), social justice (Edwards et al.2014), a good life (Dorji,n.d.; Johnson et al.2021) and subjective wellbeing (Rishi and Mudalier2014; Alfaro and Cortes2020; Brown et al.2022; Dorji,n.d.). Thus, there are a broad range of wellbeing considerations under investigation in relation to the impacts of climate change.
None of the 21 publications specifically defined community wellbeing in light of climate change impacts, limiting consideration to discussion of wellbeing and related concepts. Wellbeing is broadly seen as a holistic concept (Edwards et al.2014; Petersen2021; Rishi and Mudaliar2014; Tam et al.2013; Brown et al.2022; Dorji,n.d.; Johnson et al.2021) which is subjective, intangible, and difficult to define and more difficult to measure (Petersen2021). On the other hand, the subjectivity of the concept also allows wellbeing to be defined and measured in numerous ways (Brown et al.2022). Key examples follow.
In the context of vulnerability to climate change, Nelson et al. (2022, p. 236) defines wellbeing as “the state of being with others and the environment which arises when human and ecosystem needs are met, when individuals and communities can act meaningfully to pursue their goals, and when individuals and communities enjoy a satisfactory quality of life”. A similar sentiment is found in Petersen (2021) (p. 18) who make the point that wellbeing is stable “when individuals have the psychological, social and physical resources they need to meet a particular psychological, social and/or physical challenge”, such as that posed by climate change.
Several publications emphasize subjective wellbeing, which is viewed from an individual perspective. For example, Brown et al. (2022, p. 3) take up the definition of Diener et al. (2018) as “the extent to which a person believes or feels that his or her life is going well”, while Rishi and Mudaliar (2014, p. 15) quote Diener et al. (1999) as “a broad category of phenomena that includes people’s emotional responses, domain satisfactions, and global judgments of life satisfaction.” Alfaro and Cortes (2020, p. 128) quote Cuadra and Florenzano (2003) to define subjective wellbeing as a “psychological and sociological term that indicates the value that human beings have regarding satisfaction with their life, happiness and their affective capacities.” Measures of subjective wellbeing serve as a useful tool to assess and compare wellbeing across different people and groups even among those with differing views (Brown et al.2022).
For the indigenous and Aboriginal community, wellbeing is intricately linked to concepts like connection to Country, culture, spirituality, family, ancestry, community, social community and kinship structure, traditional livelihoods, ethnicity, language, and living in harmony with the environment (Green and Minchin2014; Green & Webb,2015; Jaakkola et al.2018; Johnson et al.2021; Johnson et al.2022; Kipp et al.2019; Neufeld et al.2022; Tam et al.2013; Fitzhugh et al.2013). Wellbeing for aboriginal communities is a balance between four human dimensions that are spiritual, physical, emotional, and mental (Tam et al.2013) and includes social and cultural wellbeing dimensions for the community beyond physical individual wellbeing dimensions (Green and Minchin2014).
Community wellbeing in relation to the impacts of climate change is inherently linked to the dominant livelihood source of the community like traditional fishing lifestyle for fishing communities (Nelson et al.2022). For the Pueblo societies of New Mexico, growing traditional food like corn enables them to share healthy food with family and allows community collaboration, exchange of knowledge and to connect with ancestral roots through prayers and ceremony which is indigenous to their collective wellbeing (Johnson et al.2021). For communities in the Amazons like the Makuna of Colombia and Ashaninka of Peru, fishing, hunting, and growing gardens depict worldviews centered on human-nature connectedness which greatly influence their health and wellbeing. For rural and indigenous communities, traditional lifestyle like hunting bears special connection to mental and spiritual health and wellbeing, and game meat is associated with social and cultural values (Tam et al.2013). In this same study, it was noted that the changing environment has negatively impacted traditional hunting forcing community locals to shift to store-bought foods.
It is evident from the overall suite of SLR publications, that climate change scholars hold mixed and multiple views or understanding of community wellbeing in the context of climate change impacts.Communityis a society confined together by geography of place and/or the collectiveness of a group of people similarly exposed to vulnerabilities from the impacts of climate change. The scientific community largely equates wellbeing with human health, portraying wellbeing as a derivative of it. Beyond health alone, wellbeing is also understood in its multitude of derivations including wellness, cultural wellbeing, liveability, quality of life, social wellbeing, emotional wellbeing, livelihood, household welfare, social justice, a good life, and subjective wellbeing. Thus, wellbeing can ultimately be seen as a holistic and subjective concept making it difficult to define and measure, but at the same time, allowing it to be interpreted and utilized in multiple ways. The wellbeing of indigenous communities includes many social, cultural, and traditional values like the connection to Country and it must be included to truly reflect their wellbeing. This SLR review has scoped definitions of community and of wellbeing. What is needed now is a consensus on community wellbeing as a concept (in the context of climatic change). This is a promising avenue for future research.
To address this research question, the four categories of community type identified previously in the SLR publications are discussed in relation to the climate change factors that impact wellbeing, before distilling key findings.
In farming communities, the dominant climate-related risks noted by farmers include extreme temperature events, insect attacks, animal diseases, crop pests, soil problems (Abid et al.2016; Mitra et al.2021; Pelser and Chimukuche2022). Climate change impacts livelihood and farming systems with the occurrence and intensity of floods, droughts, and extreme temperature events (Abid et al.2016). In Chile, decrease in rainfall and extreme high temperature are two climate-related effects found to traumatize farming communities with intense droughts and soil erosion (Alfaro and Cortés2020). Soil erosion is caused when the top fertile soil layer is runoff ultimately leading to lower yield (Abid et al.2016).
The three most notable impacts in the farming communities in Chile included land degradation, disappearance of biodiversity, and decrease in agricultural yield (Alfaro and Cortés2020). Farmers in communities in Pakistan noted that the three most significant impacts of climate change were uncertainty or decrease in crop and livestock yields, changed cropping calendars, and water shortage (Abid et al.2016). As noted by Mitra et al. (2021), the Indian state of Odisha is ranked one of the most vulnerable states to cyclones, and the occurrence of extreme weather events like heatwaves, cyclones, droughts, and floods have increased over the years. Climate stress brought forward by cyclone, heatwaves, and flood negatively impacts the economy of Odisha and this climate stress displaces people and forces them to change livelihood activities severely impacting their wellbeing (Mitra et al.2021). The recognized threat to farmers’ wellbeing in Australia, apart from climate change, is land degradation and farmers, who are agricultural land managers, play the role of decision makers in managing the farm for agriculture and the onus to adopt the right approach to manage the land falls on them (Brown et al.2022).
For rural and remote communities, changes to the physical environment triggered by climate change include rising temperature, extreme weather events, cyclones, drought, sea level rise, and environment uncertainties (Kipp et al.2019; Mitra et al.2021; Pelser and Chimukuche2022). This negatively impacts people’s health and wellbeing through disruptions to their connections to social, cultural, and physical environments. For example, in Canada, the disruption to the wildlife, vegetation, and sea ice impacts many remote Northern First Nations and Inuit communities in their practice to hunt, forage, and fish (Kipp et al.2019).
Another distinct feature of rural and remote communities is the low adaptive capacity to climate impacts (Mitra et al.2021; Pelser and Chimukuche2022; Kipp et al.2019). The primary reasons are high poverty, poor access to finance, poor infrastructure, limited resources, and poor access to climate-resilient technology and practices (Mitra et al.2021; Pelser and Chimukuche2022; Edwards et al.2014). Low adaptive capacity makes Africa the most vulnerable continent to impacts of climate change (Pelser and Chimukuche2022). Poverty is dominantly a rural phenomenon (Abid et al.2016) and it does not allow them to build sustainable livelihood and even a small increase in extreme weather events or small loss in income has significant impacts for the farmers (Abid et al.2016; Mitra et al.2021; Pelser and Chimukuche2022). In Pakistan, 80% of the population live in rural areas where agriculture in the main source of livelihood. The two dominant livelihood activities in rural and remote Africa are agriculture and fishing and 85% of the population are dependent on agriculture and in Kenya, 75 to 80% of poor people are in the agriculture sector (Pelser and Chimukuche2022). In India, more than 70% of total population live in rural areas and their subsistence and livelihood are dependent on climate sensitive sectors like agriculture, forests, and fisheries and most of the farmers, forest dwellers, fisherfolk, and nomadic shepherds are poor (Mitra et al.2021).
Agricultural productivity has drastically decreased because of limited access to productive assets like land, labor, fertilizer, infrastructure and financial services (Abid et al.2016). Climate change has already altered rainfall pattern and overdependence on rainfed agriculture has increased community vulnerability (Pelser and Chimukuche2022). For sub-Saharan Africa, it is projected that by 2080, agricultural productivity will drop from 21% to 9% mainly because of climate change (Pelser and Chimukuche2022). One major concern for individual farmers identified in Mitra et al. (2021) is their inability to recognize climate change as the cause of environmental changes, seeing them instead as natural events.
Climate change impacts agriculture directly and indirectly (Mitra et al.2021; Pelser and Chimukuche2022). The direct impacts are through climatic factors like temperature and rainfall on agricultural produce. The indirect impacts are through the effect on factors of production like availability of water, soil fertility, and pests, among others (Mitra et al.2021). In rural and remote communities, climate change and its impacts worsen the spread of chronic illnesses and infectious diseases by increasing exposure to environment contaminants and vectorborne, foodborne, and waterborne diseases (Kipp et al.2019).
For rural and remote communities, adapting to change in the environment has risks of mental health and wellbeing. For example, indigenous Nunatsiavut Inuit in Canada maintain deep connection with their land for their wellbeing and when the access to their ancestral land was disrupted, it led to increased anxiety, fear, distress, anger, grief, and depression (Kipp et al.2019; Neufeld et al.2022).
Representing a unique scenario in the context of the SLR publications are the two remote highlander communities of Merak and Sakteng in Bhutan. Here, a majority (91%) of people “surprisingly” had a positive outlook towards climate change and were contented with its resultant changes (Dorji,n.d., p. 22). Located some 3000 m above sea level, the rising temperature with lesser snow and more rainfall has made it warmer and more comfortable, extended the growing season for agriculture, and made the natural environment more conducive for the growth of animal fodder. A shorter winter also gives these highlanders more time for other productive vocations and diversification opportunities like taking up contract work, carpentry or working for wages (Dorji,n.d.). Some negative impacts of climate change on the wellbeing of these two livestock dependent communities were also identified, such as increased outbreaks of animal diseases, concerns about human-wildlife conflict, invasive pests, and unsustainable harvesting of non-timber forest products (Dorji,n.d.).
Perhaps the greatest effect of climate change on the wellbeing of indigenous and aboriginal communities is associated with negative impacts on iconic species important to livelihood and traditional ways of life. For the only indigenous people in the European Union, the Saami, spread over Sweden, Finland, Norway, and Russia, environmental changes have drastically impacted the reindeer herding practice, which is their primary source of livelihood (Jaakkola et al.2018). Studies show that tree line is moving upwards and days with snow cover is decreasing, and it is leading to a change in their lifestyle, diet and morbidity of the Saami people threatening both physical and mental wellbeing (Jaakkola et al.2018). In Canada, the aboriginal communities of Beaver Creek, Yukon; Fort Providence, Northwest Territories (NWT); and Peawanuk, Ontario, noted major changes in migration of game species which has a direct bearing on sustenance and therefore their wellbeing (Tam et al.2013). The Inuit community has noted changing behavior of seal and walrus mainly because of changes in sea ice patterns and it has made hunting more unpredictable and such trends have a direct bearing on community wellbeing (Tam et al.2013).
The indigenous communities in the Arctic are considered to be the most vulnerable in the world to impacts of climate change mainly because the climate effects on environment conditions including temperature are most pronounced in the Arctic region (Jaakkola et al.2018). Here, the average temperature has increased by almost twice the global average in the last century, resulting in significant decline in permafrost, snow cover, sea ice thickness and duration of ice seasons (Tam et al.2013). It results in high albedo which reflects solar radiation back to the atmosphere causing further rise in temperature and it has direct impacts on Artic communities including the First Nations, Inuit, and Metis (Tam et al.2013). For the Arctic communities, the direct impacts of climate change include less snowfall, abrupt seasonal change, drastic weather condition, shorter cold seasons, longer warm season, and early spring melt. The indirect impacts include changes in traditional harvesting and animal behavior to changes in diet, socio-economic status, infrastructure, and wellbeing (Tam et al.2013; Kipp et al.2019).
For the entire indigenous communities in the Arctic, mental health remains a major issue because of high chronic psychosocial stress, which is projected to worsen, associated with rapid socioeconomic development (Jaakkola et al.2018; Neufeld et al.2022). In the Circumpolar region, the indigenous people have more health problems than the non-indigenous people (Johnson et al.2021). In northern Canada and Alaska, wildfires have resulted in alarming level of respiratory health problems in First Nation and Inuit communities (Neufeld et al.2022). For the Arctic indigenous communities in the United States, traditional responses to environmental changes are deemed inadequate to address the challenges brought forth by climate change (Fitzhugh et al.2013).
There are some common health problems associated with climate change with some indigenous and aboriginal groups globally and it is only projected to worsen with time as climate change intensifies (Kipp et al.2019; Tam et al.2013; Johnson et al.2021; Green and Minchen2014; Green & Webb,2015; Neufeld et al.2022). First Nations peoples of Australia, New Zealand, Northern Europe, and North America alike have higher incidence of diabetes, obesity, cardiovascular disease, cancer, substance addiction, depression, anxiety, suicide, and lower life expectancy than non-Indigenous peoples (Johnson et al.2021). Among the indigenous community in Mexico, respiratory diseases are twice as common than non-indigenous people (Neufeld et al.2022). Wildfires in Alaska and northern Canada have resulted in alarming level of respiratory stress and disease among the Inuit and First Nation communities (Neufeld et al.2022). Among the Torres Strait in Australia, compared to the non-indigenous people, indigenous people have higher incidences of diseases like tuberculosis, dengue, Ross River virus, melioidosis, and non-tuberculous mycobacterial infections (Neufeld et al.2022). Such diseases are indirectly linked to climate change which worsens with change in environment conditions (Tam et al.2013; Johnson et al.2021; Green and Minchen2014; Johnson et al.2021; Neufeld et al.2022). A typical example is the health implications due to prolonged exposure to heat (Petersen2021). The direct physical health impacts include physical adversities, including hyperthermia, heat rash, heat cramps and heat exhaustion (Petersen2021). The indirect effects of extreme heat include worsening existing health conditions and negatively impacting mental health and wellbeing (Petersen2021).
For Indigenous and Aboriginal communities, it has been noted that the impact of climate change on communities have “domino effects” where one change caused a chain of other repercussion significantly affecting community wellbeing (Tam et al.2013, p. 445).
For coastal and fishers’ communities, sea-level rise and frequent and intense storms threaten the marine ecosystems and affect the livelihood and food security impacting the health and wellbeing of the people (Nelson et al.2022; Salman2010; Rishi and Mudaliar2014; Edwards et al.2014).
In the four coastal Indian cities of Mumbai, Chennai, Daman, and Pondicherry, the Coastal Subjective Wellbeing (CSWB) was found to be higher for communities living near the coast and it correspondingly decreased as the distance from the coast increased (Rishi and Mudaliar2014). In the small island developing nation of Vanuatu, climate change has been recognized as the most significant threat to the ecosystems, livelihood, and wellbeing for the people (Sahin et al.2021). The island nation is vulnerable to tropical cyclones, sea-level rise, changing rainfall, temperature changes and coral bleaching events (Sahin et al.2021). The coral bleaching events are a major concern as coral reefs provide substantial ecosystem services for local communities whilst helping protect coastal assets from waves, aiding in carbon sequestration in the calcite growth of corals and providing cultural ecosystem services in tourism and recreation (Sahin et al.2021).
The coastal community of Keti Bunder in Pakistan has seen a radical shift in the last few decades with everyone becoming dependent on the fishing industry (Salman2010). In the past, the community had plenty of other sustenance options like poultry farming and growing betel leaf, banana, and coconut. But climatic variations like decline in freshwater and sea water intrusion literally ended agriculture and livestock options and left no choice for the locals but to crowd on to fishing which has been noted as an already depleting resource (Salman2010). Because of the lack of other livelihood options, the intense competition to fish has direct and indirect implications on community wellbeing (Salman2010). In the fishing communities supported by the California Current Large Marine Ecosystem in the United States, warming and acidification of the ocean seriously impacts on fish population and habit including salmon, Dungeness crab, and shellfish causing direct negative impact on fishers’ wellbeing (Nelson et al.2022).
Communities in Victoria are experiencing both direct and indirect impacts of climate change which are having negative impacts on their wellbeing (Petersen2021; Edwards et al.2014; Wiseman and Edwards2014). While the direct effects, like death toll from heatwaves, is acute (Petersen2021), the bigger threat is likely to manifest from indirect effects of climate change like poor access to food and water (Wiseman and Edwards2014). The indirect impacts manifests in the form of emotional distress and the indirect mental health impacts of climate change takes place when the determinants of mental health like economic security and participation, social inclusion and freedom from violence and discrimination are impacted (Wiseman and Edwards2014). The direct threats to physical health for Victorian communities include hyperthermia, heat rash, heat cramps and heat exhaustion, heat strokes, and increased hospitalization due to prolonged exposure to extreme heat reducing social and emotional wellbeing (Petersen2021).
For public housing residents in Victoria, extreme heat negatively affects moods reducing the ability to cope, provokes anxiety, causes worry and concern, exacerbates chronic mental health conditions, makes sleeping difficult and reduces social wellbeing of residents (Petersen2021). Extreme heat has also forced housing residents to isolate resulting in fewer social interactions, and conflicts in families, schools, and the overall community have risen during times of extreme heat which adversely affects community safety directly affecting wellbeing (Petersen2021).
Common impacts on community wellbeing as a result of climate change relate to the direct effect of changing physical conditions that humans experience, for example from heatwaves, rainfall (either drought or flood conditions), warming (changing ice, snow cover and seasons), cyclones and sea-level rise (changing ecosystems). Arising from these are the indirect effects because of negative impacts on the ecosystems upon which communities depend, such as spread of disease, reductions in crops or other production, change in game and fish habit and similar conditions which lead to mental stress decreasing overall wellbeing of communities. The cumulative impacts of climate change, irrespective of community type, constitutes a decrease in community adaptive capacity which pushes vulnerable populations into further poverty causing a never-ending cycle that keeps on worsening as climate change continues and intensifies.
Interestingly, the main focus of the SLR publications, as evident in the previous two sub-sections, has been on non-urban populations. This seems strange given that over half (55%) of the world’s population live in urban areas and the number is projected to increase to 68% by 2050 (United Nations2019). That said, an exception here were three studies of broad populations in the Australian state of Victoria (Green and Minchin2014; Green & Webb,2015; Petersen2021) which do not differentiate between urban and rural communities and one paper directed to coastal cities in India (Rishi and Mudaliar2014). Nevertheless, on balance, this appears to be a research gap as clearly understanding urban community wellbeing as a result of climate change impacts is equally important to know about.
The SLR literature on community wellbeing in context of climate change impacts primarily advocates policy innovation for adaptation supported by mitigation options. The desired end goal of adaptation must, in turn, be supported by a vibrant research culture in climate change and wellbeing studies; definite roles of governments with commitment from policymakers; multilevel collaboration among multiple stakeholders; and investment in advocacy towards managing perceptions with health workers in particular and social scientists in general playing role of climate ambassadors. Each of these key themes is addressed in turn.
While typically there are two basic policy alternatives for addressing climate change, namely mitigation and adaptation, (Mitra et al.2021), interestingly, all (n= 23, 100%) publications addressed adaptation, with only a small number (n= 6, 26%) mentioning mitigation and this was in the context of supporting larger adaptation options. As pointed out by Mitra et al. (2021), there was a time when mitigation received higher priority in the policy area, but it attracted slow response and did not make significant progress because of which adaptation has secured more interest today. Nevertheless, Kipp et al. (2019) emphasize that adaptation and mitigation should go hand-in-hand, further noting that while the focus may now be upon adaptation, it is equally important to realize the co-benefits from mitigation.
Adaptation to climate change refers to alterations in the system to minimize the negative impact and optimize the positive impacts of climate change (Mitra et al.2021). Adaptation can be practiced at the regional, national, subnational, and/or local levels. The United Nations Framework for Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) notes that local level adaptation is significant as local people are the ones bearing the brunt of climate change (Mitra et al.2021). Adaptation strategies are the end goal and effective adaptation strategies should be undertaken through a community-based participatory approach by involving the community (Tam et al.2013; Fitzhugh et al.2013). Every community is unique in terms of geography, culture, economics, and/or socio-politically and there is a need to evaluate climate change impacts at a local level to identify the right adaptation strategies (Tam et al.2013).
Adaptation for farming communities should focus to improve farm-level cooperation with institutional support to provide climate specific farm advisory services (Abid et al.2016). Salman (2010) emphasizes that adaptation programs will only work if there exists an enabling, accountable, and equitable institutional environment. For example, in rural agricultural communities, there is a need to strengthen the capacity of local institutions for effective adaptation implementation (Salman2010). To this end, farmers could be given farm-based trainings on advanced adaptation techniques including the use of water saving technologies, farm diversification, efficient use of farm resources etc (Abid et al.2016). Finally, Pelser and Chimukuche (2022) suggest that local and traditional knowledge needs to be merged with modern science to develop agronomical knowledge among farmers to cope with the impacts of climate change.
For rural and remote communities to adapt to impacts of climate change, Pelser and Chimukuche (2022) endorse the Sustainable Livelihood Approach which helps develop people-centric, dynamic, and responsive intervention strategies that are participatory and undertaken in collaboration with private and public institutions. Also oriented towards sustainable long-term adaptation, Brown et al. (2022) urges agricultural communities to practice regenerative agriculture (an approach to farming that aims to increase biodiversity, improve soil condition, and promote landscape resilience by integrating farming practices with the natural processes of the landscape), asserting that it builds farming self-efficacy and positively contributes to farmers’ wellbeing. For the remote highlander communities of Merak and Sakteng in Bhutan where residents are largely oblivious of the negative impacts of climate change, their adaptive capacity could be enhanced by developing a practical climate change adaptation framework (Dorji,n.d.). In remote Australia, it has been noted that environmental, social, and economic factors affect liveability and community wellbeing more than climate change and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and climate change researchers assert that these factors need to be strongly integrated with vulnerability assessments to design appropriate strategies (Addison2013).
Adaptation for fishing and coastal communities should focus on harmonizing legislation related to water and local fishing policies, adopt the right approach to adaptation, and uphold local practices that strengthen adaptive capacity of communities. For the fishing community of Keti Bunder in Pakistan, conflicting water and fishing policies result in negative consequences for the livelihoods affecting community wellbeing (Salman2010). Harmonizing federal water and fishing policies and broadening the policy scope to identify climate change as a cross-sectional issue through a participatory process involving the local institutions and fishing communities will build community resilience (Salman2010). Given the significant threats to the ecosystem in Small Island Developing States, Sahin et al. (2021) recommends a socioecological system (SES) approach to adaptation in Pacific SIDS like Vanuatu where key environmental, social, cultural, and economic dimensions are identified and connected. The SES approach combines ecological understanding with cultural dimension of resource use and management incorporating more contemporary western views of governance (Sahin et al.2021). The fishing community of Rusinga Island in Kenya form collective fishing groups using their boats and nets as cooperative assets. Such meaningful links with friends and families in the community provides adaptive opportunities in times of climate disasters and shocks (Pelser and Chimukuche2022).
Indigenous communities have been adapting to environmental changes for generations and their practices are rooted in principles and common values like solidarity, reciprocity, co-responsibility, and community (Neufeld et al.2022). The traditional environmental knowledge of indigenous and aboriginal communities enables them to cope with dynamic changes in complex systems brought forth by climate change and it should form the basis of adaptation strategies which is the end goal (Tam et al.2013). In fishing communities, locals use traditional methods like smoke, oil frying, salt-drying their catch to preserve it because modern preservation methods like using ice is not possible as it is expensive and inaccessible. Such traditional methods are effective in providing food and income during disaster spells (Pelser and Chimukuche2022). While adaptation possibilities for indigenous communities could be limited, focusing on the dominant livelihood vocation like reindeer herding for the Saami which is inherently linked to their social and cultural life, could improve community wellbeing (Jaakkola et al.2018). From the indigenous perspective, current adaptation approaches are found to be maladaptive, which refers to adaptation practices resulting in unintended consequences like shifting vulnerability from one group to another or disproportionately burdening marginalized communities (Johnson et al.2021). Maladaptation takes place when research excludes the groups targeted to benefit from adaptation and researchers interpret climate vulnerability and adaptive needs through their own worldviews and not from the target group which is common in the case of indigenous people (Johnson et al.2021).
Climate change mitigation can complement adaptation strategies to improve community wellbeing (Kipp et al.2019; Pelser and Chimukuche2022). Together with adaptation, mitigation efforts are critical for oppressed indigenous communities particularly in addressing effects of colonization which bears characteristic of historic and ongoing suppression of indigenous knowledge systems deemed essential in supporting community-led actions to reduce risks (Neufeld et al.2022). Mitigation efforts like reforestation, rehabilitation of degraded landscapes, and general landscape management help communities reduce their vulnerability to climate change impacts (Pelser and Chimukuche2022). A major drawback of mitigation efforts is the requirement of substantial funds and dedicated leadership to manage such projects (Pelser and Chimukuche2022).
Towards an equitable approach to climate change mitigation and adaptation, there is strong potential for innovation to invest in areas like public transport, energy efficiency and housing quality (Edwards et al.2014). It should be targeted to build resilience to support the provision of food, water and transport and investment towards inclusive green industries can drive renewed growth and provide and secure employment (Edwards et al.2014). However, the choice of mitigation and adaptation action should be taken with caution, and it should consider all possible effects to the health and wellbeing of local community members (Jaakkola et al.2018). For example, mitigation and adaptation projects like wind power or hydropower projects in the Saami region could increase the stress and mental pressure of the Saami people and stiffen competition on pasture negatively affecting community wellbeing (Jaakkola et al.2018).
Perhaps not surprisingly, all the studies in the SLR publications made calls for further research in relation to understanding community wellbeing in the context of climate change impacts. As pointed out by Abid et al. (2016), the most effective way to understand community vulnerabilities, which is fundamental in influencing policy makers to come up with the right and efficient policy to address wellbeing as a result of climate impacts, is through field-based research and studies. Similarly, Pelser and Chimukuche (2022) identified a pressing need for a vibrant culture of formative research to explore and study vulnerabilities to help design effective adaptation programs. Johnson et al. (2021) calls for a new research agenda that meaningfully includes the holistic, collective, and relational perspectives on health and wellbeing in the study of climate change. The research should, among others, place the perspective of indigenous people at the center of discussions on climate change (Johnson et al.2021). The new research agenda should evaluate climate impacts on human health outside of biomedical, psychological, and economic frameworks in ways that are more reflective of the lived experiences of people in the community (Johnson et al.2021; Johnson et al.2022). Petersen (2021) recommends researchers to use the mixed method research design in conducting research on social and emotional wellbeing as a result of climate impacts because it would add to the academic rigor where the qualitative findings can be corroborated with quantitative data.
Focused and credible research carries the credibility to explore effective ways of engaging communities in the issues of utmost public urgency which is critical in the fight against climate change (Fitzhugh et al.2013). The overall scope of new research should be broad and encompassing and case studies should focus on community level to highlight ground realities and emphasis should be to provide basic scientific knowledge for sustainable adaptation policies (Fitzhugh et al.2013). Highlighting the example of indigenous communities, Johnson et al. (2021) assert that despite a lot of research undertaken on indigenous knowledge and climate change, the knowledge and worldviews of the indigenous people are still integrated inadequately even in international bodies like the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and national policy worldwide (Johnson et al.2021).
To maximize sustainability and improve community wellbeing, Fitzhugh et al. (2013) highlight the need to develop research methods to assess community sustainability and resilience and evaluate current adaptation strategies; identify current vulnerabilities and their relationship with other socio-economic stressors; develop future projections and scenarios; and strengthen indigenous language and cultural heritage. Some communities have insufficient information making it difficult to assess their vulnerability and plan intervention strategies (Jaakkola et al.2018). For example, information on the Saami indigenous community in the European Union is inadequate as ethnic registries in the Nordic countries is forbidden because of which even the definition of a Saami stands disputed (Jaakkola et al.2018). There is an urgent need to conduct more research in such communities to design long-term plans to improve community wellbeing (Jaakkola et al.2018).
As the institution closest to the community impacted by climate change, local governments are considered to play the decisive role in easing the livelihoods and making it less sensitive by providing better infrastructure, easy access to inputs, markets, and information services (Abid et al.2016; Pelser and Chimukuchi2022). One example of an information service is the provision of meteorological forecasts that help fishers to avoid fishing in erratic thunderstorms and disaster managers to be better prepared for the conditions they will experience when responding to emergencies (Pelser and Chimukuchi2022).
Higher level governments should assist communities in adaptation plans and projects where the cost of adaptation is higher than the funding that can be generated locally (Addison2013). Government and public sector financial institutions should prioritize providing institutional finance for livelihood adaptation activities and such services could be tied up to climate friendly behaviors like provision to water-saving activities (Mitra et al.2021). Sustainable technologies like rainwater harvesting can help store rainwater in tanks for domestic and agriculture use, and it should be a priority for rural and agricultural communities (Pelser and Chimukuche2022). The government should prioritize viable diversification opportunities for people to provide alternative income opportunities to improve security and wellbeing in vulnerable communities (Mitra et al.2021). Governments around the world should also include the multiple subjectivities of the indigenous communities which impact their wellbeing while developing the National Adaptation Plans and Health National Adaptation Plans (Johnson et al.2022).
Policymakers need to understand multiple dimensions of climate change impacts in designing effective policies and programs to address the impacts of climate change (Addison2013). It is necessary to study the potential impacts at the local scale, identify the most vulnerable population, and scope their current adaptive capacity before designing policies (Addison2013). In addressing the irreversible changes brought forth by climate change, the responsibility to come up with solutions also falls on economists and they need to understand local realities and come up with solutions which are not only community-specific, but also community-owned and community-led (Salman2010).
Some crucial policy and political priorities to enhance community wellbeing as impacted by climate change as identified by Edwards et al. (2014) include; decision, action, and policy to be based on scientific evidence; develop effective and just climate change responses honoring intergenerational equity; recognize the role for the community sector in advocating urgent action ensuring equitable approach to adaptation and mitigation; and understand that reducing greenhouse gases will result in social justice and environment benefits. Thus, processes for political intervention that involve communities are inherently important, not just the measurable outcomes of wellbeing. In a similar integrated approach, Green and Minchin (2014) highlight that there are opportunities to adapt to climate change in ways that can benefit community health and wellbeing and propose a quadruple-bottom-line approach that balances cultural, environmental, economic, and social needs.
Ultimately, there is need for multilevel collaboration among multiple stakeholders. Fighting climate change will require concerted effort of all sectors at global, national, local, and household level because studies show that there will be adaptation tipping points where economic and social systems will fail the poor and the most affected (Wiseman and Edwards2014). It implies that despite the need to adapt to climate change, the absolute priority should be to prevent greenhouse gas emission with urgency which cannot be met without the multi-level collaboration among the multiple stakeholders involved. For example, adaptation in agriculture communities require an effective cooperation among public institutions, private organizations, and farming communities (Abid et al.2016). Such local collaborations can become a platform to access services like soil and water conservation methods and technologies, introduction of climate-smart and climate-resilient varieties, and reshaping cropping calendars to protect farmers from the harmful impacts of climate change (Abid et al.2016). A positive cooperation and collaboration at the community level like meaningful exchange of information and resources will improve the adaptative capacity and a conflict or negative interaction will lead to low adaptive capacity (Nelson et al.2022; Abid et al.2016).
Addressing the impacts on community wellbeing from climate change needs multipronged strategies in light of multidimensional issues associated to it. For Wiseman and Edwards (2014) and Mitra et al. (2021), there is an ardent need for advocacy, to share information and increase awareness regarding the impacts of climate change, because people are unaware about climate impacts mainly in rural and poor communities. Such approaches will help people to undertake self-initiated private adaptation practices and turn passive adaptors into active ones to minimize impacts and improve wellbeing (Mitra et al.2021). The government, the media, disaster management offices, local communities, and health professionals and social scientists need to play a pivotal role in disseminating information about climate change and its impacts (Rishi and Mudaliar2014; Wiseman and Edwards2014). For the latter group, Wiseman and Edwards (2014) maintain that health professional in particular and social scientists in general, should engage themselves in the advocacy of climate change impacts on human health and advocate the need to take urgent action.
The perception of community people about climate uncertainties, risks, and vulnerabilities influences the decisions they make in managing how they cope to the impacts of climate change both in the short and the long term (Abid et al.2016). While adaptive capacity of the community is dependent on access to technology, finance, information, institutions, and local interactions, the perception of community members, having accurate perceptions increases the chances of making the right decision and thus, results in higher adaptive capacity (Abid et al.2016). Understanding and evaluating validity of peoples’ perceptions is a crucial component of developing the right adaptation practices (Mitra et al.2021). For example, farmers in India grow eucalyptus tree despite knowing its negative hydrological consequence and the decision to grow the tree is based on their income security and not the concern for the environment (Mitra et al.2021). Similarly, in some cases, strong place-based identities can lower the willingness of indigenous people to take up seemingly better adaptive practices (Nelson et al.2022). For example, during droughts and water shortages, if water supply assistance is provided only to humans and not to livestock, pastoralists would encounter additional challenges and indigenous knowledge of adapting to drought through storing and sharing practices become valuable (Neufeld et al.2022).
Climate change is now recognized as a core health issue meaning that health professionals can and should play a crucial role in the fight against climate change (Wiseman and Edwards2014). First, health professionals should understand the climate change trends and its implication on human health. Second, in the fight against climate change, the impacts on human health become central arguments for urgent action and health professionals are well-placed to raise public awareness and advocate to governments. Third, there exists several opportunities for health professionals to support adaptation planning and action at local, national, and international levels (Wiseman and Edwards2014). To develop effective health-related strategies for communities, there is a need for drastic changes to existing adaptation strategies (Kipp et al.2019). It must include the use of multiple knowledge systems specific to sociocultural context, address non-climatic factors impacting adaptation, utilize innovative technology, improve and integrate health surveillance with environment monitoring, support sustainable development practices, enhance awareness of risk and response, expand knowledge of climate change impact, and develop capacity of the health sector to respond to climate change (Kipp et al.2019).
Social science studies view community wellbeing to be a cumulative construct of multiple dimensions (Merriam and Kee2014; Cox et al.2010; McKinnon et al.2021; McCrea et al.2016; Alidoust et al.2022) and this research shows that climate change impacts all the multiple dimensions of community wellbeing. Climate change has significantly increased the frequency of disasters globally (Banholzer et al.2014) and it forces communities to build resilience and take preventive measures to deal with risks related to disasters, to manage, cope and recover from disasters (Bhola et al.2023) which are necessary for sustainable development (Baffo et al.2023). Therefore, this research directly contributes to the broader current discourse on community wellbeing and resilience in Disaster Risk Reduction and sustainable development.
While there is extensive existing literature on wellbeing and climate change, this study represents the first systematic literature review that links community wellbeing to the impacts of climate change. Several preliminary insights are drawn from this research. Firstly, although research on community wellbeing in the context of climate change gained a new momentum only in 2009, it is a multidimensional study discipline attracting interest from researchers all over the world. Nevertheless, the sparsity of items from around the world (with the exception of Australia) points to a literature gap.
Secondly, the overall suite of the SLR publications reveal that climate change scholars hold mixed and multiple views or understanding of community wellbeing in the context of climate change impacts.Communityis a society confined together by geography of place and/or the collectiveness of a group of people similarly exposed to vulnerabilities from the impacts of climate change. The scientific community largely equates wellbeing with human health, portraying wellbeing as a derivative of it. Beyond health, wellbeing is also understood in its multitude of derivations including wellness, cultural wellbeing, liveability, quality of life, social wellbeing, emotional wellbeing, livelihood, household welfare, social justice, a good life, and subjective wellbeing. Thus, wellbeing can ultimately be seen as a holistic and subjective concept making it difficult to define and measure, but at the same time, allowing it to be interpreted and utilized in multiple ways. The wellbeing of indigenous communities includes many social, cultural, and traditional values like the connection to Country and it must be included to truly reflect their wellbeing. This SLR has scoped definitions of community and of wellbeing. What is needed now is a consensus on community wellbeing as a concept in the context of climatic change. This is a promising avenue for future research.
Thirdly, the common impacts on community wellbeing from climate change relate to the direct effect of changing physical conditions that humans experience, for example from heatwaves, rainfall (either drought or flood conditions), warming (changing ice, snow cover and seasons), cyclones and sea-level rise (changing ecosystems). Arising from these are the indirect effects because of negative impacts on the ecosystems upon which communities depend, such as spread of diseases, reduced crops or other production, change in game and fish habit and similar conditions which lead to mental stress decreasing overall wellbeing of communities. The cumulative impacts of climate change, irrespective of community type, is a decrease in community adaptive capacity and it pushes communities into further poverty causing a never-ending cycle that keeps on worsening as climate change continues and intensifies.
Finally, the main contribution of this research to the broader current discourse on community wellbeing and resilience in DRR and sustainable development is offered through the solutions to address the impacts on community wellbeing as a result of climate change. It primarily points to adopt adaptation as the main policy instrument which needs to be supplemented with four distinct solution options:
climate change mitigation strategies must be used to supplement larger adaptation policies (e.g. at the national level) and implemented by involving people in communities through participatory processes that integrate science with traditional knowledge and practice, and innovative investment in public infrastructure like transport, energy, and/or housing sectors;
there is a need to build a vibrant culture of research in wellbeing and climate change studies, that is broad and far-reaching but with a focus on assessment of community sustainability and resilience;
all levels of the government, from the local to the highest level, must focus on adaptation options like easing livelihood to financing large adaptation projects. Policy makers and economists must understand the multiple dimensions of climate change impacts in designing effective policies and programs and in designing solutions, respectively; and
there is an ardent need for advocacy, to share information and increase awareness regarding the impacts of climate change and effectively manage community perceptions. It would help people undertake self-initiated private adaptation practices, turn passive adaptors into active ones, and guide people toward making appropriate adaptation decisions.
For all of these solutions to make progress towards sustainability, there is a role for health and other professionals in particular and social scientists in general, to play in understanding climate science and using their position to raise awareness and advocate to governments.
Interestingly, the main focus of the 23 selected studies for this SLR is on non-urban populations with the exception of three studies of broad populations in the Australian state of Victoria and one study of coastal cities in India. This exclusive focus on non-urban communities is strange because over half (55%) of the world’s population live in urban areas and the number is projected to increase to 68% by 2050 (United Nations2019). This presents a clear research gap because it is equally important to understand urban community wellbeing in the context of climate change.
TD had the idea for the article and performed the literature search and data analysis. The first draft of the manuscript was written by TD and all authors contributed to critically revising the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this published article.
The authors declare no competing interests.
Since the study did not involve human participants, the study was exempt from Human Research Ethics Review by the Research Services of Edith Cowan University, Perth, Australia.
Publisher’s noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this published article.
Articles from Environmental Management are provided here courtesy ofNature Publishing Group
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894