An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Correspondence: Rachel Malena-Chan, c/o Rachel Engler-Stringer, Department of Community Health & Epidemiology, Rm 3247 - E wing - Health Sciences, 104 Clinic Place, Saskatoon, SK
S7N 2Z4; Tel: 306-966-7839; Email: ram322@usask.ca
Decades of widespread knowledge about climate change have not translated
into adequate action to address impacts on population health and health equity in
Canada. Research has shown that context-based perceptions and interpretations mediate
engagement. Exploring climate change engagement involves inquiry into contextual
experience.
This qualitative study has employed narrative methodology to interpret the
meaning of climate change among community leaders in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan,
Canada, age 20-40 (n = 10). Climate change narratives were explored both structurally
and thematically.
A model was developed to organize results and to describe concepts of fidelity
and dissonance within participant narratives. Findings suggested that knowledge of climate
change and personal motivation to act did not preclude narrative dissonance,
which served as a barrier to a meaningful personal response. Dissonance can result
where internal and external barriers mediate mobilization at moments in the plot:
(1) moving from knowledge of the challenge to a sense of agency about it; (2) from
agency to a sense of responsibility to choose to address it; (3) from responsibility to a
sense of capacity to produce desirable outcomes despite contextual challenges; and
(4) from capacity to a moral sense of activation in context. Without narrative fidelity,
meaningful mobilization can be hindered.
A narrative model is useful for exploring climate change engagement and
highlights opportunities for a population health approach to address the conditions that
hinder meaningful mobilization. By framing climate change narratives with emotional
and moral logic, population health framing could help young leaders overcome internal
and external barriers to engagement.
Keywords:climate change, engagement, narrative methods, public education
Climate action requires engagement
models that capture contextual and
cultural barriers experienced by
knowledgeable, motivated individuals.
This qualitative study examined
the narrative structure of meaningmaking
about climate change
among community leaders, 20 to
40 years old (n = 10).
Narrative dissonance could help to
explain immobilization, particularly
among those with enough
knowledge of climate change.
Modeling narrative dissonance
highlights opportunities to frame
the challenges, choices, and outcomes
related to climate change in
a way that mobilizes population
health stakeholders.
By addressing dissonance within
public narratives about climate
change in Canada, population
health professionals can contribute
to conditions for meaningful
mobilization.
Climate change is a serious threat to the
health of populations, representing both a
challenge and an opportunity for practitioners
and researchers.1-4Impacts are not
experienced uniformly, and existing health
inequities will be further exacerbated
without urgent action to mitigate greenhouse
gas emissions and to enhance community resilience.1-7Currently, Canada
is not on track to meet its commitments to
the Paris Agreement,8,9and there is disagreement
among stakeholders about the
future of Canada’s climate policies.10Systemslevel
action is necessary to address the
risks of climate change in a meaningful
way, but population health professionals
may lack frameworks and models for
overcoming the barriers to engagement.3,7
Professionals who employ an eco-social
lens11,12to understand health problems
have important roles to play in supporting
and leading climate action at multiple levels,3,7but gaps in knowledge remain about
the complex contexts that shape engagement.13-15Multi-scalar, multi-dimensional
eco-social health problems, such as climate
change, are experienced by populations
in the structural and social realities
of everyday life and, as Golden, McLeroy,
Green et al.16discuss, it is not immediately
clear how an individual might make sense of their personal response without models
to help navigate that which is outside of
individual control.
Bridging the gap between knowledge and
action involves engaging with the contextual
and cultural barriers to action.17The
goal of this study was to gain a deeper
understanding of the experience of
responding to climate change in context,
particularly among those motivated by
values of social and environmental justice.
The objectives were to: (1) employ
Ganz’s theories18about public narrative,
power, and collective action to interpret
perceptions of climate change amongst
knowledgeable, motivated community
leaders in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan,
Canada (age 20–40 years); and (2) to contribute
a model for conceptualizing
engagement narratively and for exploring
the meaning of eco-social problems like
climate change in the context of everyday
life.
This article is based on the author’s
Master’s thesis, submitted in partial fulfillment
of the requirements for the M.Sc.
degree in the Department of Community
Health and Epidemiology at the University
of Saskatchewan.19
Literature
Rather than attributing a lack of climate
change action to a lack of publicunderstandingabout climate science, over the
last decade, researchers have increasingly
pointed to the importance of publicengagementfor explaining the apparent
gap between knowledge and action.14In
contrast to information-deficit models,
which have emphasized increasing understanding,
an engagement approach involves
mental processes (cognition) as well as
emotional and evaluative processes (affect)
and processes of embodiment (behaviour).14Despite the limitations of the
information-deficit model, population
health professionals may lack alternative
approaches to climate change engagement.
For example, the 2017Lancet
Countdownargued that “insufficient
understanding of climate change [was]
one of the largest perceived barriers to
individual engagement”20when climate
change engagement literature has suggested
that knowing the facts about climate
change canresultin barriers to
engagement.13-15,21-23Public health frames
may be helpful for relaying information
about the risks of climate change in a clear way,24but questions have remained
about the impact of that understanding in
the context of everyday life.
Systematic reviews of literature about climate
change engagement14,15have found
that cultural and contextual factors have
mediated interpretations of climate change.
Emerging research has indicated a varied
landscape of climate attitudes, despite a
strong factual and moral basis for climate
action.13,21-23The literature about climate
change engagement has been widely
accepting of the limits of the informationdeficit
model, and has recommended
instead a focus on emotions, cultural values,
and audience-specific framing.13-15,21-23Literature has also demonstrated that climate
change can represent an existential
threat to self-identity,15,25-27which could
elicit emotional and social dynamics that
hinder meaningful engagement.18
Some qualitative researchers have explored
the psychological and sociological contexts
in which facts about climate change
are interpreted, deepening understanding
and outlining theories about the preconditions
for action. For example, Lertzman,27from a psychological perspective, argued
that individual meaning-making about climate
change is ripe with internal struggle,
offering theory about how “environmental
melancholia” impacts engagement. Lertzman
argued that personal climate change stories
are complex and she maintained that
an individual might comprehend that
what matters in life is being threatened
while also distancing that threat to cope
with it.27From a sociological perspective,
Norgaard25found evidence of internal
dilemma within groups of people who
understand climate change and she
explored how uncomfortable feelings are
shut down to preserve social norms.
Norgaard discussed “implicit denial” and
concluded that both individuals and collectives
look to public narratives to help
them manage unwelcome emotions about
climate change.25Thus, even those who
are convinced and concerned about climate
change could be hindered from
mobilization by a lack of social structures
and collective support to process resulting
emotional and moral implications.
Questions have remained about the complex
relationships between climate change
knowledge, values, emotions, and actions,
particularly among individuals who are
knowledgeable about climate change and who have espoused pro-environmental
values.28,29As population health professionals
aim to mobilize systems-level
change, models for engagement are
needed which, in addition to improving
general understanding about the health
impacts of climate change, serve to equip
communities to mobilize in a meaningful
way. This study was aimed at contributing
to research about the barriers to climate
change engagement by exploring the lived
experience of climate change among
young community leaders.
Narrative approaches have been emerging
more prominently in the climate change
engagement literature in recent years
because of their ability to capture experiences
in context.17,30-34As Paschen and
Ison30argued, for example, context-specific
perspectives have been gaining
momentum in the literature about climate
change adaptation, and narrative approaches
could play a critical role in closing knowledge
gaps about building local capacity.
Bushell et al.17described how strategic
narratives could be used to give meaning
to otherwise disconnected events to build
buy-in and support. Moezzi et al.33argued
that storytelling could influence and
engage audiences, describing stories “as
artefacts to be investigated in terms of
content, actors, relationships, power, and
structure…used to gather information,
provide insight, and reframe evidence in
ways that more science-ordered formats
miss”.33, p1In this study, a narrative methodology
was employed to gather and analyze
data.35,36
Humans draw on cultural values when
narrating their personal and shared experiences,
and the act of constructing self
and group narratives is theorized to reveal
the goals, motivations, pathways, and
plans deemed rational in context.37,38Ganz
maintained that personal narratives, or
“stories of self”, are nested in public narratives
based in relationships and cultural
context, or “stories of us and now”.18Within “stories of us,” the push-and-pull
of the context and characters’ agency is
negotiated discursively as the storyteller
draws on shared values, experiences, and
frames to convey the meaning of the
story.18By exploring individual perceptions
through Ganz’s framework for public
narrative,39researchers can gain a
deeper understanding about how barriers
to engagement operate in context.
Study activities
Interpretive studies draw on insights from
a homogenous sample to understand the
experience of a particular group.35Ten
individuals were recruited for the study in
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, each between
20 and 40 years old. At the time of their
participation in the study, participants
were leading diverse lives: some were
starting families or businesses, some were
students, and some worked in fields such
as: health, arts, education, governance,
and politics. All participants identified as
community leaders embodying a commitment
to social and environmental justice
values. To broaden the transferability of
the findings, recruitment continued until
the sample included a mix of men and
women (7 out of 10 were women) as well
as 3 out of 10 individuals self-identifying
as members of a First Nation. By looking
at this particular “story of us,”18it was
possible to gain a deeper understanding of
the perspectives of people knowledgeable
and motivated to act to address climate
change but who live in contexts where
many people do not accept the severity or
cause of the problem.
This study received ethics approval from
the Behavioural Research Ethics Board at
the University of Saskatchewan (Beh #17-
19). Because this study involved storytelling
about themes that may be outside the
scope of public attention,25as well as
themes that may elicit uncomfortable
emotions26and internal dilemma,27participants
were provided with the study rationale
and the open-ended interview
questions beforehand so that they could
begin to tune into their perceptions of climate
change. Semi-structured interviews
were held in a location of the participant’s
choosing and lasted an average of 60 minutes.
At the end of the interview, each
participant was given a journal with the
five research questions written inside, and
they were invited to write about their
experience and their story as thoughts
emerged in the weeks following the interview.
Participants were not asked to share
the contents of their journal, but during
follow-up contacts, they were invited to
add thoughts or reflections to their story.
This design allowed for an ongoing dialogue
to be established so that as the
interpretation of the results developed,
participants felt comfortable making additions
and changes to better reflect their
experience.35
Structural interpretation
Structure is intrinsic to the meaning-making
function of narrative. As Polkinghorne38argued, “[t]he question ‘What does that
mean?’ asks how something is connected
to something else...It is the connections
and relationships among the events that is
their meaning”.38,p6For example, the beginning
of a story has a relationship to the
middle of a story, as does the middle of a
story to the end of a story.40Ganz’s plotline
(Figure 1) consists of four sequential
parts: challenge, choice, outcome, and
moral.18Ganz argued that by framing
information as a narrative, humans “share
experiences with each other, counsel each
other, comfort each other, and inspire
each other to action”.18,p282Participant narratives
were coded according to this fourpart
structure using NVIVO to allow for
comparison and analysis of key themes
and patterns. By interpreting how participants
framed the challenge, choice, outcome,
and moral of their climate change
story, the connection points between the
parts of the whole could be explored.

After coding each part of the plot, additional
codes were applied to themes that
facilitate or hinder engagement, indicating
structural linkages between knowledge
and action.Figure 2visualizes a narrative
model for engagement that was developed
inductively throughout the study. The
model was used to organize thematic data
and to explore the meaning of climate
change as perceived by study participants.
“Mobilizing moments” in the narrative are
identified where themes could contribute
to narrative dissonance, shaping the transition
points between (1) sufficient knowledge
of the challenge of climate change
and a sense of agency about it; (2) between
a sense of agency and a sense of responsibility
to act; (3) between a sense of
responsibility and a sense of capacity to
achieve a desired future; and (4) between
a sense of capacity and a sense of activation
in the context of everyday life. By
structuring an exploration of connection points within and between participant
narratives, the model could contribute to
the theory about why knowledgeable,
motivated people feel immobilized about
climate change.

Thematic interpretation
Narrative patterns and relationships between
core themes within participant plots were
the subsequent focus of the thematic analysis,
with attention to those themes that
connected the parts of the whole. Participant
narratives were considered together
and individually until interpretations about
their perceptions emerged clearly. Using
the model to explore participant narratives
highlighted the concept ofnarrative
dissonance, the structural breakdown of a
given narrative because of emotional,
moral, thematic, or conceptual contradictions
within the story itself. According to
Ganz, those who lack meaningful public
narratives may experience immobilizing
emotions such as inertia, apathy, isolation,
fear, and self-doubt.18The termnarrative
fidelitywas useful for conceptualizing an
alternative interpretation, whereby dissonance
is overcome or reframed. This
interpretation could produce a more emotionally
meaningful and mobilizing story
that could elicit urgency, outrage, solidarity,
hope, and a sense of efficacy.18Fisher41argued that narrative fidelity is experienced
when a story “ring[s] true with the
stories they know to be true in their
lives”.41, p8In applying the concept of narrative
fidelity to climate change narratives,
Marshall42argued that it is a key
element in mobilizing action to address
climate change, because only by offering a more compelling story will faulty interpretations
of climate change be abandoned.
Together, the study’s thematic and structural
analyses served as a heuristic tool
for exploring perspectives in a given context
and for understanding how stories
facilitate or hinder engagement, and ultimately,
action.
Using a narrative model for engagement
(Figure 2),mobilizing momentswere identified
at transition points in the interpretive
process, representing key themes that
bridge or encompass aspects of both dissonance
and fidelity. These moments
could represent opportunities for transforming
knowledge into emotions that
mobilize collective action.18When public
narratives about eco-social problems like
climate change lack fidelity, or when they
are not apparent at all, the problems
themselves may be perceived as meaningless
in context, even by those who accept
the facts. Manifestations of narrative dissonance
and narrative fidelity within participant
narratives are described below,
organized along the trajectory of a storyline.
Thus, a narrative model of engagement
(Figure 2) has illuminated a pathway
from knowledge to action, outlining stumbling
blocks as well as strategies for overcoming
them along the way.
Experiences of agency
In locating their personal relationship to
climate change, participants demonstrated
a sense ofagency, not just “knowing
about” the problem but perceiving it as culturally and personally relevant to their
lives:
… you know, that’s not a thing that
hits me in the heart, it’s more like the
impacts of climate change, not the science
of climate change. That doesn’t
have the same kind of impact on me,
personally. But as soon as you start
talking about the impacts of climate
change and how we might have to
adapt to climate change, like this is
where people can really understand
that it’s like “Ok, so we might need to
change how we transport ourselves,
how we feed ourselves”...
Participant experiences of agency helped
illustrate why sufficient knowledge of climate
change is not directly related to
mobilization, as the process of interpreting
the risks of climate change was linked
by participants to feeling physically
drained and emotionally overwhelmed: “I
try to do what I can do, and I just sort of
emotionally shut down about all that
other stuff. But still stay aware, right?”
Table 1provides further examples of the
dissonance that can arise from knowing
about climate change, and some participants
spoke about minimizing overwhelming
emotions by actively reducing
the flow of information. They reported
limits to the attention that can be directed
towards climate change if mental and
physical health is to be maintained. Rather
than reflecting a lack of access to information,
participant narratives suggested
information abundance.43Participants perceived
themselves to be living in a story in
which climate change is a reality.
However, while participants consistently
expressed a sense of beinginthe story
about climate change, thetypeof story
being told and the type ofrolethey play
within it were not always clear.
Experiences of responsibility
The next stage of the model explores
movement from agency about the challenge
of climate change to a sense ofresponsibilityabout the choices implied.
Participant narratives indicated that they
understand how human actions and decisions
impact climate change. However, if
a meaningful role in the story about it was
perceived as untenable, or non-existent,
the narrative became dissonant. Rather
than denying that the problem of climate
change is real and important, examples inTable 1demonstrate how dissonance may
result from a lack of perceived power to intervene meaningfully as through individual
roles.
One participant pointed out that responsibility
to make personal sacrifices in the
face of climate challenges is often moralized,
positioned as the “good” or “right”
choice:
…how do we actually deal with this
problem in a way that also doesn’t fall
into a “lifestyle-ism” but actually tries
to change the conditions because, we
all can’t really come from a place of
not being totally educated about how
to not make greenhouse gases, or
being in the conditions we all need to
use fossil fuels at different times, and
then expect that everyone can just figure
it out themselves and we’ll be fine?
Personal, political, and economic contexts
can limit the availability of pro-environmental
choices. If moralizations backfire,
individuals may be cut off from personal
responsibility altogether, or may revert to
a dissonant position and emphasize the
limits of personal roles in contributing to
climate change. From this perspective,
economic conditions and transition timelines
may shape how a sense of responsibility
is experienced and interpreted.
AsTable 1exemplifies, several participants
described choices they already
made to address climate change through
the reduction of their personal emissions,
such as: through transportation, food
choices, career paths, and household-level
waste management and energy use.
However, participants struggled to locate
themeaningof these actions given the
scale and scope of the challenge of climate
change. Narrative fidelity about the story’s
choice-point occurred when an individual
identified meaningful choices through a
reflection upon their roles, values, selfand
cultural identities, and upon the timeline
within which their story takes place.
For example, First Nations participants
described a sense of responsibility to
address climate change intrinsically tied
to culturally-based multi-generational
thinking, which reflected a connection to
ancestors and to a future life, shifting the
stakes of the story: “…we’re constantly
thinking towards those generations more
than our current one. And a lot of the
things we make choices and decisions on
usually reflect not only our connection to
our ancestors, but also to the future.”
They were thinking about their responsibility through a multi-generational lens that is
not only political but personal, including
choices between life and not-life for participants
and their communities. Because
of this, participants perceived themselves
to be bound to a social change agenda to
ensure that their children and their communities
can thrive on a livable planet.
Experiences of capacity
In this model, for a participant to experience
narrative fidelity, the connection
point between a sense of responsibility
over the choice-point in the story correlated
with a sense ofcapacityto realize a
desirable future-state. AsTable 1illuminates,
despite adequate knowledge and
motivation, participants in this study
struggled to make sense of the outcome of
the story and their capacity to manifest a
positive future. While many participants
maintained a mix of pessimism and optimism,
participants perceived a decreasing
capacity to address climate change with
each generation to come, paradoxically
inverse to the responsibility to act to
address climate change, which can only
increase over time:
I guess, yeah, the best way to put it is,
it’s like, it’s almost like a looming
doom, because even though I can
experience certain aspects of climate
change myself, it’s not something
that’s affected me in a very intense
way or acute way, where the issue is
that I know it has for a lot of communities
and in the future, will affect way,
way more. So yeah, my general feeling
is just a looming doom.
Thus, dissonance has taken root between
responsibility and capacity: because the
challenge of climate change is too great in
scale and urgency, the role of this generation
was perceived to be out of alignment
with our capacity to manifest a livable
future. The choice-point becomes meaningless,
and action seemingly has become
unnecessary because visions of a positive
future have been blocked.
Accepting the reality of climate change
and internalizing its meaning was represented
in their stories as an act of courage
for young leaders because it involved
interpreting the discontinuity guaranteed
within one’s life course.Table 1provides
further examples of a mobilizing moment
related to capacity over outcomes, where
participants grappled with divergent
visions of the future. Participants discussed
coming to terms with the changes ahead, for their families and for families
around the world. Feelings of despair and
sadness emerged within participant narratives
as they described potential outcomes
of the story. However, participants also
recognized the potential to improve
conditions:
…we need to do a better job of painting
the future, of what a low-carbon
world would look like. And so, when I
think about that, I feel like I could picture
that more clearly, I just don’t
know what will happen. Because it
seems like there’s, you know, lots of
like, really good stuff that could
happen.
In such stories, the choice-point has begun
to revolve around planning for discontinuity
at systems-level and capacity centers
upon preparing for large-scale changes
that are currently dependent upon collective
decision-making. Future outcomes
are, thus, dependent on collective resistance
to the status quo, bringing into
focus the role of power-holders undermining
pathways toward crisis-aversion.
Experiences of activation
The final part of the model reflects the
moral of the story, conceptualized as a
sense ofactivation, defined as an ability
to identify and rationalize what “action”
looks like in context in a morally and
emotionally-logical way. While many participants
experienced narrative fidelity
regarding the source of their capacity to
confront climate change into the future,
barriers still hindered their experiences of
activation−their sense of being able to
turn plans into reality−given the hostile
contexts in which they embody their
story. Despite ample motivation and willingness
to create a more just society, dissonance
related to activation was common
among participants. They experienced
uncertainty about the degree to which
their embodied actions (their tactics) were
meaningfully contributing to their goals.
As one participant articulated, “sometimes,
I feel like I’m not doing things that
are very effective just because I’m not in
the position to be.” Across their efforts in
government agencies, representing their
communities, parenting children, teaching,
writing, organizing, and performing,
participants made efforts to increase their
spheres of influence and yet they still
experienced a lack of efficacy about their
response to climate change.
Table 1provides examples of how barriers
to activation have hindered a meaningful
moral of the story. AsTable 1demonstrates,
participants perceived themselves
to be but a “tiny little miniscule drop in
the global bucket,” which hinders the
meaning of their personal actions. Instead
of finding institutional leaders and organized
efforts to join in with, participants
who are actively responding to climate
change may experience negative consequences
from political, economic, and cultural
forces or strain in their family and
community relationships. As one participant
explained,
…there are little steps, and it’s like the
small steps that eventually climb
mountains, but there’s no way that
one person can emotionally deal with
the backlash that follows with trying
to change an unsustainable way of
living.
These themes contributed to dissonance
about a sense of activation, leaving the
story without a clear moral, blocking the
path to meaningful mobilization.
Some participants drew connections
between hostile conditions for meaningful
actions and the colonial and capitalist
context in which such actions take place.
As one participant argued,
this narrative of ‘low taxes are inherently
better, small government is
inherently better’ is incredibly detrimental
to being able to do anything
about the environment. To me, that’s
the biggest barrier.
Another participant explained:
I just feel like decolonizing will at least
help toward making better informed
choices, and taking actions, like you
know stopping the mining companies,
stopping the pipelines. Not being
afraid of... the consequences of like
chaining ourselves to pipelines and
doing road blockades, you know what
I mean? We’re so fearful and I just feel
like it would be a lot different if we
were decolonized, I guess.
Participants often defined effectiveness in
terms of their ability to contribute to
social movements building up capacity to
confront structures of power that have
perpetuated climate change:
I feel hopeful when I read about people
mobilizing and doing things to
change, and working on climate
change, because like, when I just read
about it by myself, and I do feel very
paralyzed, I would say. Because it’s
such a huge problem with so – there
isn’t, there will never be, like, one
thing you can do to fight it. It’s in so
many different areas and on so many
different levels.
Participants readily admitted that they are
stronger in collaboration with others, and
they aimed to focus on aspects of the
problem over which they could make a
difference, with one participant saying,
there’s also this immense feeling of
being small, and insignificant, and it’s
sort of this hopeless cause, but you
can’t live in that space day-to-day, or
you just totally fall apart right? You
can’t stay motivated.
Despite accepting climate change as a
complex eco-social problem, participants
who experienced fidelity about the scale
and scope of climate change could overcome
narrative dissonance and position
themselves meaningfully in relationship
to climate change.
This study has demonstrated how internal
and external barriers manifest within the
narratives of people who have accepted
climate science and who care about making
the world a better place. Findings have
suggested that simply raising awareness
of climate change may not be an adequate
strategy for increasing community capacity.
Local-level leaders may experience
narrative dissonance, and despite their
knowledge and motivation, they may confront
barriers to meaningful mobilization.
Sharing stories could be a means of bringing
difficult emotions about climate
change to the surface and could elicit feelings
of solidarity, which according to
Ganz, helps to overcome experiences of
isolation.18
Narrative dissonance, as it is conceptualized
here, relates to similar concepts
within climate change engagement literature,
such as implicit denial,25environmental
melancholia,27and unspoken
loss.26As such, the model outlined above
could serve as a tool for exploring alignments
across engagement research.
Participants also confirmed that, through
the lens of justice, climate change narratives
moralize resistance to the status quo
in political, economic, social, and cultural
terms. These intersections were inextricable
from participant experiences of climate
change, and as such, findings have suggested
alignments between meaningful
mobilization and contextual barriers such as
settler futurity,44socially organized denial,25and predatory delay.45Participant narratives
helped to contextualize these theories
about complex personal and social experiences
of climate change.
Modeling a population health response to
climate change narratively
In a Canadian context, where inadequate
policies to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions8have threatened to undermine public
health gains made in the last 50 years,1population health professionals arguably
have a responsibility to address the conditions
that contribute to narrative dissonance
among knowledgeable, motivated
stakeholders like those interviewed for this
study. Such individuals may be perceiving
public inattention to climate change and
could benefit from strategies for coping
with dissonance and for working through
mobilizing moments. AsTable 2demonstrates,
using the model developed during
this study, population health responses to
climate change can be analyzed for narrative
dissonance. By reflecting on the mobilizing
moments related to the challenge,
choice, outcome, and moral of climate
change, a “story” could emerge about the
meaning of climate change to the Canadian
public and the health system at large.
Rather than a formula for mobilization, a
narrative model for engagement with climate
change can serve as a guide for framing
the problem in a mobilizing way,
exposing moments in the story where barriers
to action could be taking root, even
among those who know about climate
change and who are motivated to act.
The model could be used as a tool to
explore how addressing climate change
aligns with existing population health
frameworks, such as the Truth and
Reconciliation CommissionCalls to Action.46Many participants in this study referenced
in their narratives a desire for greater control
over lands and decision-making by
First Nations, Métis, and Inuit peoples.
For example, drawing on environmental
justice frameworks like that described by
Tuck, McKenzie, and McCoy,44participant
narratives suggested “a refusal of settler
futurity”, as sustainable relationships
between peoples and lands cannot occur
“when those activities are accountable to
a futurity in which settlers continue to
dominate and occupy stolen Indigenous
land”.44,p17In framing climate change as an
environmental justice issue,7population
health professionals could contextualize action in terms of reconciliation and the
historical context of colonization.44Other
framework alignments between population
health and climate change could
include gender and reproductive rights,47mental health,26or One Health.48
Ultimately, this study’s findings have suggested
that continuing with an information-
deficit approach to climate change
engagement may not translate into strategic,
well-resourced plans for urgent and
disruptive systems change. As Steffen45implores, “We are about to begin the last
decade. The time has come to become the
people who can first re-imagine and then
remake the world in the time we have left”.
Despite the importance of this window of
time for meaningfully altering the trajectory
of planet-wide population health,
community leaders may struggle to overcome
narrative dissonance about climate
change. New models for addressing contextual
and cultural barriers to action could
be useful even for those who are knowledgeable
and who are motivated to act.
Strengths and limitations
This study has demonstrated that narrative
methodology can be useful for exploring
the barriers to climate change
engagement in context. Narrative models
for engagement could help in describing,
evaluating, and intervening upon the conditions
for meaningful mobilization. Tools
for engagement and communication about
climate change cannot be reduced to a
formula for social change, but narrative
models could help to illuminate the
contextual and cultural dimensions of
engagement.
Importantly, this study and its findings
must be considered in context. Theoretical
findings about engaging with climate
change are specific to the study but may
be transferrable to other contexts. Notably,
the study design included a small sample
and recruited only those individuals with
adequate time and interest in the study.
Conceptual results are exploratory, and
the structures and themes outlined here
can be built upon by other researchers to
deepen understanding about climate change
narratives, population health frameworks,
and the barriers to engagement.
By employing a narrative framework, this
study has provided a visual tool for
exploring the interplay of dissonance and
fidelity, and the mobilizing moments that
could shape interpretations about climate
change. Given that most individuals in
Canada believe that climate change is
happening,49it is worth exploring the
engagement barriers experienced by
knowledgeable, motivated people, and a
narrative lens captures the complexities
surrounding personal and public realms,
the nuance of emotional and moral reasoning,
and the contingencies that characterize
the context in which mobilization
occurs. While the model represented in
this article is exploratory, it has affirmed
literature about the contextual dimensions
of interpretation13-15,21-34. Without strategic
efforts to foster narrative fidelity, population
health professionals may fail to translate
knowledge about climate change into
meaningful action.
This study was funded by the College of
Medicine Graduate Students Award through
the University of Saskatchewan, and it
was made possible through the guidance
of my supervisor, Dr. Rachel Engler-
Stringer, and my committee members, Dr.
Sylvia Abonyi, Dr. Lori Hanson, and Dr.
Marcia McKenzie. I would also like to
acknowledge my participants and my colleague
Lise Kossick-Kouri for their insights
and support with data collection and
analysis.
None to declare.
The content and views expressed in this
article are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect those of the Government
of Canada.
Articles from Health Promotion and Chronic Disease Prevention in Canada : Research, Policy and Practice are provided here courtesy ofPublic Health Agency of Canada
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894