An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Correspondence: Elaina MacIntyre, Public Health Ontario, 480 University Avenue, Suite 300, Toronto, ON M5G 1V2; Tel.: 647-260-7506; Email: elaina.macintyre@oahpp.ca
Communicating risk to the public continues to be a challenge for public
health practitioners working in the area of climate change. We conducted a scoping literature
review on the evaluation of risk communication for extreme weather and climate
change to inform local public health messaging, consistent with requirements
under the Ontario Public Health Standards (OPHS), which were updated in 2018 to
include effective communication regarding climate change and extreme weather.
Search strategies were developed by library information specialists and used
to retrieve peer-reviewed academic and grey literature from bibliographic databases
(Medline, Embase, Scopus and CINAHL) and Google country specific searches, respectively.
The search strategy was validated through a workshop with experts and community
stakeholders, with expertise in environment, health, emergency management
and risk communication.
A total of 43 articles were included. These articles addressed issues such as:
climate change (n = 22), flooding (n = 12), hurricane events (n = 5), extreme heat
(n = 2), and wild fires (n = 2). Studies were predominantly from the US (n = 14),
Europe (n = 6) and Canada (n = 5).
To meet the OPHS 2018, public health practitioners need to engage in effective
risk communication to motivate local actions that mitigate the effects of extreme
weather and climate change. Based on the scoping review, risk communication efforts
during short-term extreme weather events appear to be more effective than efforts to
communicate risk around climate change. This distinction could highlight a unique
opportunity for public health to adapt strategies commonly used for extreme weather to
climate change.
Keywords:climate change, extreme weather, risk communication
We conducted a scoping literature
review, validated through a workshop
with experts and stakeholders,
on risk communication for
extreme weather and climate change
(EWCC) to inform local public
health messaging.
Risk communication efforts during
short-term extreme weather events
appear to be more effective than
efforts to communicate risk around
climate change.
This distinction could highlight a
unique opportunity for public health
to adapt strategies commonly used
for extreme weather to climate
change.
A conceptual framework is presented
to support EWCC risk
communication, build adaptive
capacity
and coordinate recommended
actions across short- and
long-term timescales.
Extreme weather and climate change
(EWCC) have well-documented impacts
on population health.1It is possible that a
changing climate will not only exacerbate
existing health issues but will also create
new health burdens for our population.2These impacts will likely have a greater
impact on vulnerable populations, such as
those living in rural and remote communities.3Local public health practitioners
have begun planning for health-related
climate impacts through activities such as
vulnerability assessments,4but the complexity
of EWCC continues to be a challenge
for activities at the local level.5
One aspect of EWCC that presents a
consistent challenge for public health practitioners is in communicating risk to
the public.6Risk communication is an
evidence-based approach to communicating
effectively with the public in times of
controversy,7and effective risk communication
is an important first step toward
reducing community vulnerability to
EWCC.8Unfortunately, risk communication
activities aimed at mitigating the
human health impacts of EWCC continue
to be challenging, despite their critical
importance.9This was recently described
by Pilla et al., in terms of communicating
flood risks to the public when households pay more attention to past flood events
than to scientific assessments of flood
risk.10During extreme weather, risk communication
tends to focus on short-term
messaging around the hazards and protective
actions that need to be taken by organizations
and individuals during these
events. In contrast, climate change often
requires long-term proactive risk communication
strategies that motivate adaptive
changes to infrastructure and the built
environment to ultimately improve climate
resiliency and safeguard the continuity
of operations of public health
institutions.11
Public Health Ontario supports public
health unit staff and other health professionals
throughout Ontario in the area of
EWCC by providing scientific and technical
evidence-based advice. In 2018, the
Ontario Public Health Standards (OPHS;
http://www.health.gov.on.ca/en/pro
/programs/publichealth/oph_standards/),
which identify the requirements for public
health programs and services to be delivered
by Ontario's 35*public health units,
were updated to include a requirement toeffectivelycommunicate with the public
regarding topics such as climate change
and extreme weather, based on an assessment
of local needs. This recent update
underscores the need for public health
practitioners to develop and assess risk
communication strategies in the area of
EWCC. We conducted a review of previous
research on the topic of risk communication
during EWCC, particularly theevaluationof risk communication strategies,
with the ultimate aim of supporting
public health practitioners. Given the
unique challenges for practitioners and
the limited evidence that exists in this
area, the review was designed as a scoping
review to incorporate a wider range of
domains relevant to the topic of risk communication,
extreme weather, and climate
adaptation. As the scoping review evolved,
an expert/stakeholder consultation workshop
was held to validate the scoping
review and provide additional insights
and perspectives on risk communication
gaps related to EWCC. This paper describes
the results of our scoping review and the
expert workshop; with particular focus on
the gaps and challenges that were identified
and later used to develop a conceptual framework to aid public health professionals
working in this area.
Prior to 2018 there were 36 local public health units in Ontario. There was a merger of two health units in 2018, resulting in a total of 35 local public health units across Ontario.
The scoping review was based on an
established methodological framework for
scoping reviews.12Four databases (Medline,
Embase, Scopus and CINAHL) were
searched for peer-reviewed literature in
the English language, published between
1999 and 2013. The search also included
grey literature identified from site-specific
non-commercial Google searches for
Canada, the US, Australia and international
organizations. No limitations were
placed on the bodies or agencies communicating
risk, or the audiences receiving
information. There were also no limitations
on the type of communication,
medium or article. Search strategies
(available upon request from the authors)
were developed and peer-reviewed by
Library Information Specialists. The
search strategies were built using keywords
and syntax specific to each database
to identify literature addressing one
or more of the following research
questions:
(i) What are the current practices in
communicating EWCC risks in the
peer-reviewed literature?
(ii) Which of these current practices
have been evaluated for effectiveness?
(iii) Which theoretical frameworks from
the literature explain current practices?
and/or
(iv) What are the research gaps in communicating
EWCC risks?
A one-day information-gathering and validation
workshop was held in Toronto
on February 10, 2014. The workshop:Communicating about A Different Ontario:
Risk Communications, Extreme Weather
and Climate Change, included thirty individuals
representing community stakeholders
with expertise in environment,
health, emergency management and risk
communications from local, municipal
(rural and urban), provincial and federal
jurisdictions. Participants worked in small
focus groups that reflected the diversity of
attendees. The thematic content areas
identified through the scoping review were presented to participants, who were
asked to describe experiences with any of
the practices identified through the scoping
review. Examples from lived experience
were sought to confirm or challenge
the findings from published literature. The
workshop was used to select the practices
identified through the scoping review that
municipal, provincial and/or federal public
health practitioners and allied stakeholders
viewed as effective or promising.
The workshop also provided additional
insights and perspectives on risk communication
gaps related to EWCC. Workshop
proceedings and evaluations were summarized
to enhance and validate the final
search strategy.
Following the workshop, the final search
strategies were executed on February 26,
2014†. Articles were screened and assessed
by two research coordinators. A flow diagram
illustrating the screening process is
shown inFigure 1. During the screening
process, reviewers relied on consensus
decision making to resolve any conflicts.
A total of 1880 articles were retrieved
from database and Google searches.
Articles were excluded if they were duplicates
(n = 326) or if they addressed psychological
responses and recovery of
individuals from extreme weather events
(as these articles focused on individuallevel
response instead of organizationallevel),
or if they reported solely on climate
change impacts in the absence of references
to extreme weather (n = 1449).
The remaining 105 articles were reviewed
and those not meeting the screening questions
(n = 67) were excluded. Three
screening questions were used:

(i) Does the article specifically include
risk communication or community
adaptation?
(ii) Does the article address some aspect
of extreme weather or climate change?
(iii) Does the article include an evaluation
of practices, tools, or frameworks
using qualitative, quantitative
or mixed research methods?
An additional 5 articles were included
based on hand searching of key references.
Articles were charted, or mapped, in Excel
spreadsheets to enable reporting of results.
These descriptive summaries captured country;
main objective and study design; population,
type of extreme weather, and key
findings (Table 1). Based on an established
framework for scoping reviews,12the narrative findings were presented in
two ways: (i) basic numerical analysis of
the nature and distribution of the studies;
and (ii) thematic grouping of studies by
research design and emerging topic. Using
this narrative synthesis approach, the following
common themes were identified:
risk communication, risk perception,
engagement of vulnerable populations,
community-based strategies, public
health, adaptation and resilience. The
theme of risk communication was examined
in detail by identifying and grouping
practices that were used to communicate
risk.
The original search was conducted in February 2014. A second search was conducted in March 2016. The updated literature search did not identify literature that departed from the original search.
The scoping review focused on the communication
media and practices used for
EWCC risk communication and did not
seek to assess quality or weight of evidence.12The 43 articles that were included
addressed various types of EWCC risk
communication: climate change (n = 22),
flooding (n = 12), hurricane events (n = 5),
extreme heat (n = 2), and wild fires
(n = 2)‡. The articles were of disparate
and complementary study types: five conceptual
models, eight reviews or systematic
reviews, five experimental studies,
eleven qualitative studies, eight surveys,
two case studies, and four commentaries.
There were fourteen studies from the
United States, six from Europe, and five
from Canada. The remaining eighteen
studies were from Australia, Asia or international
collaborations. Grey literature
was used to identify how EWCC messaging
was created and delivered rather than
for its content. Article summaries are presented
inTable 1.
A systematic review of environmental
health risk communication suggested risk communications should involve multimodal
delivery through many media
channels, including radio, television,
printed materials, classroom presentations,
and Internet-based campaigns.26In
total, the scoping review identified eight
unique risk communication practices
(Table 2). The two most common practices
were public media campaigns,
including radio and Internet-based messages,
and organization or expert-led presentations
or workshops to communities
affected by natural hazards. Public media
risk communication campaigns typically
originated in government and were
focused on uniformity and continuity to
effect behavioural intention and change.50Within Ontario, communication activities
such as promotional messaging, response
guidelines, and heat alerts and warning
systems were typical risk communication
tools used in practice.2
The topic of communicating uncertainty
around climate change was identified,
along with suggestions for improving
communication around uncertainty,
which included collaboration25and carefully
targeting messages to each unique
audience.42Bridging the expert-public
divide to improve risk communication was
also highlighted as necessary and could
include defining standards and increasing
knowledge exchange among different
domains of learning and practice.25
Risk communication themes
Key themes around successful risk communications
strategies were: risk perception,
targeting vulnerable populations,
and engaging with communities (Table 3).
The first theme, individual risk perception,
was influenced by factors such as
age, income, education, credibility, and
emotion.13,43For example, self-efficacy and
feelings of adequate preparedness were
positively correlated with risk reduction
behaviours in communities at high risk for
wildfires.37
A second theme involved engaging vulnerable
groups, such as low-income communities,
the elderly, racial and ethnic
minorities, and people with disabilities.
This theme highlighted the challenges
vulnerable communities face in seeking
and processing risk communication information,
including complex language,
information overload and contradictory information.45This was illustrated through
interviews with low-income residents fleeing
Hurricane Katrina where the low-prevalence
of car ownership resulted in heavy
reliance on public transportation infrastructure.24A disconnect was noted between
how well emergency managers perceive
they are protecting vulnerable groups, versus
how well vulnerable groups feel
accounted for in mitigation plans.30
The third and final theme addressed the
importance of leveraging social networks
and creating strategies housed [or based]
in communities. For example, people were
more aware of extreme weather risks and
more likely to initiate protective activities
if they were involved in a participatory
exercise.51Broader involvement of civil
society organizations was also highlighted
by a review that found that many CSOs,
such as the Red Cross and YMCA, play
important social roles in health adaptation
and community engagement.32The reviewed
studies suggest that public participation
measures with diverse community stakeholders
are the most effective means to
create awareness of potential disasters,
encourage individual responsive action,
and increase community trust and cooperation
in planning and messaging.23
Evaluation of risk communication
Community-based strategies were mostoften
evaluated for their effectiveness in
EWCC risk communication. For example,
the production of community-based flood
hazard and evacuation maps was identified
as an “effective method of raising
public awareness while fostering the
active participation of the community”.52Evaluations also identified increased
awareness of self- and mutual aid efforts
in community-based flood mitigation.
These results support community engagement
practices around a specific threat,
collaboration among key actors28, and
enhancing self-efficacy, as key factors in
successful risk communication.
One study described a community-based
scenario that involved government, private
sector and environmental groups
working together to explore the implications
of the proposed expansion of a major port facility.20A workshop presented
4 potential futures, ranging from
an ideal “showcase region” to the most
negative “development at all costs.” The
authors observed that the scenario exercise
did not motivate meaningful followup
actions. They concluded that the
scenario approach is valuable for enabling
“democratic dialogue” – and bringing
together diverse perspectives – but does
not act as an effective “catalyst for bringing
about consensus-driven collaborative
change in support of policy development
and planning.” The authors attributed
weak engagement to poor identification of
underlying value systems and a failure to
create a shared foundational knowledge
from which all participants could work.
A second study involved an iterative and
participatory process for communitybased
sentinel surveillance.23The process
developed community metrics to measure
the health impacts of climate change, and
the evaluation examined the effectiveness
of using community residents as central
communication sources. It also considered
how the process of collecting data
served to increase residents’ awareness of
climate change impacts in their community.
Community members became more
aware and informed of health-related
impacts and outcomes and became motivated
to contribute to ongoing data collection
and to plan for climate adaptation.
Effective risk communication was often
defined as a two-way exchange of information
between parties (e.g., government,
public, community, expert).35Involving
stakeholders in the risk communication
planning and discussion stages may
increase their commitment and overall
satisfaction with mitigation and preparedness
projects.16This highlights the importance
of bidirectional communication and
stakeholder engagement in EWCC risk
communications.
Information-gathering and validation
workshop
Comments and evaluations from the oneday
information-gathering and validation
workshop were used to validate our final
search strategy [updated in 2016]. Themes
from the scoping review were shown to
participants who described experiences
with relevant practices from the literature.
Two key themes arose during the workshop: challenges related to (i) communicating
uncertainty and (ii) communitybased
participation.
The stakeholder group identified two
EWCC risk communications strategies as
priorities: participatory flood/hazard mapping
and using case study examples in
messaging. Several articles in the scoping
review mentioned the power of stories
and personal narratives in making EWCC
messaging more readily accessible and
bidirectional. Unlike official messaging
from a government agency, community
residents can more easily relate to stories
and share their own experiences with
other community members.
Key priorities included: engaging community
stakeholders in the “broader social
fabric” (e.g., Boys and Girls Clubs, community
centres) on climate change issues;
expanding traditional networks to include
inter-institutional expertise among provincial,
municipal, and federal actors; and
developing differentiated risk-communication
strategies for rural and urban areas.
Practitioners agreed that communicating
EWCC risks effectively requires individuals and communities to develop self-efficacy
and empowerment. This is accomplished
by ensuring that community members
take an active role in developing preparedness
messages for fellow residents. Two
participants expressed concern that EWCC
risk communications with socioeconomically
vulnerable populations must be handled
sensitively because such vulnerable
audiences do not self-identify as being
vulnerable. Participants expressed concern
that EWCC risk communication
seems to only focus on physical infrastructure
and does not address sociodemographic
issues. Workshop participants
concluded that EWCC risk communicators
should use community-based approaches
that also connect with and support the
specific messaging needs of intergenerational
audiences.
Another theme from the workshop was
the need to support communities of practice
for EWCC risk communication. In
part, this workshop guidance reflects the
diverse range of audiences and outlets for
EWCC messaging and materials. Crosssectoral
communities of practice could
help to plan and communicate more
broadly and support more effective and integrated communications. Workshop participants
agreed that media partnerships
should be developed to create credible
and well-accepted messages that help
build social capacity for climate adaptation.
The scoping review and validation workshop
both identified factors that may
influence risk communication effectiveness—
self-efficacy, prior experience with
a hazard, trust in the risk communicator,
and duration of residence in risk-prone
areas—but these may have limited generalizability
to EWCC because they have
predominantly come from evaluations of
risk communications related to flooding.
Challenges to EWCC risk communication
include bridging shorter-term hazard preparedness
with long-term climate adaptation.
One model called “Local Climate
Change Visioning” outlined linking mitigation
and adaptation measures through
community scenario planning, a process
that includes facilitation.46This model
involved informal communication or storytelling
networks for flood and climate
change scenario planning in Vancouver,
British Columbia. It did not address the
use of specific risk messages but did highlight
participatory processes and inclusive
planning examples supported by other
retrieved studies.
A framework to address knowledge gaps
Workshop participants reported knowledge
gaps similar to those identified in the
scoping review (Table 4). One consistent
question revolved around whether to disentangle
EWCC from messaging, and how
to make messages sensitive to community
differences and characteristics. Some participants
believed referencing climate
change reduces the impact and absorption
of messages and that implying that
extreme weather events are caused by climate
change may be counterproductive.
The public has learned from various inaccurate
sources that the pattern of extreme
weather events is cyclical and normal
rather than well-correlated with a longterm
shift to a more unpredictable and
threatening climate reality. This led to a
debate about when it is effective to use
the term “climate change” in risk
communications.
While many studies recommended a multimedia
approach to risk communication,
there is little consensus on what this
should look like for EWCC, and the lack of
conceptual frameworks across disciplines and jurisdictions in the risk communication
field was noted in two systematic reviews.26,33
Following the scoping review and validation
workshop, a preliminary conceptual
framework was developed to address the
identified knowledge gaps and support
public health practitioners during EWCC
risk communication. The framework was
also intended to support the adaptive
capacity of public health practitioners and
decision makers. The preliminary conceptual
framework (Figure 2) encompasses
both a short-term timescale to address
risk communications for extreme weather
and a long-term timescale that addresses
risk communications for climate change.

The conceptual framework includes a
knowledge translation and dissemination
feedback cycle which involves communities
and public health policy decision-makers.
The feedback cycle intersects with horizontal
local and institutional efforts to
communicate EWCC risk, build adaptive
capacity and coordinate recommended
actions across short- and long-term timescales.
In the conceptual framework, communities
receive risk messages and share
feedback in the form of content and lived
experience with the public health practitioners
and decision-makers who then
intelligently adapt EWCC materials in
response to grassroots feedback as part of
an ongoing process. By applying several of
the methods highlighted in the scoping
review (e.g., community engagement, targeting
audiences, creating adaptive management
systems), this model visually
represents how public health policy makers,
decision makers and educators could
become integral to a risk communication
framework whose goal is to continually
enhance adaptive capacity to climate
change and build community resilience.
Some articles addressed more than one type of EWCC risk communication.
Results from the scoping review and information-
gathering and validation workshop highlight important features regarding
EWCC risk communication strategies and
related practices. The scoping literature
review covered diverse issues, jurisdictions
and decision-making bodies. It identified
methodological approaches and
gaps that can affect research outcomes.
Public media, community workshops and
expert presentations were the most common
practices cited for communicating
extreme weather risk. Eighteen articles
covered how inclusive community-based
approaches, such as hazard mapping and
scenario planning, allow decision-makers,
such as government, to work alongside the
general public in a way that encourages
mutual respect and increases individual
action. This type of communication practice
could present a unique opportunity for
public health practitioners, who often rely
on promotional messaging such as temperature
alerts, as EWCC risk communication
tools.2
Grey literature identified that humanitarian
organizations such as the Red Cross are
taking the lead in social media, disaster
preparedness, health adaptation and community
engagement.41These include preparedness
iPhone apps and combining
local radio, SMS and crisis mapping into
community-sourced-communication tools
for extreme weather events and citizen preparedness.54Public participation measures
with diverse community stakeholders
appear to be the most effective means to
raise awareness of disaster preparedness,
promote effective individual responses —
and increase community trust and cooperation
in planning and messaging.
A common theme among communication
articles was addressing risk perception.
Many variables affect how EWCC events
are perceived and addressed by individuals
and communities. Factors such as selfefficacy,
personal experience with hazards,
and how long individuals have lived in a
potentially affected location all contributed
to the perception of the level of threat
of an extreme weather event. The state of
individual and community risk perception
is important to consider in any EWCC risk
communication strategy. None of the
eighteen articles that addressed risk perception
evaluated risk communication
strategies, yet it appears some of these
factors influence risk perception (e.g.,
self-efficacy, duration of residence) while
others can predict whether individuals
will act (e.g., response efficacy).
Despite many authors highlighting that
risk communications should be understood
as a “two-way exchange between
parties,” the current literature suggests
that most communication is a uni-directional
warning from decision-makers to an
uninvolved public, rather than a dialogue.50Thus, EWCC is largely being discussed
at a high level through official
media or advocacy campaigns and less so
at the household or community level, and
is not well integrated across platforms.
Tailored, people-centered risk communication
practices have been shown to be
more effective than top-down approaches.55
Research gaps surrounding EWCC risk
communications included a shortage of
empirical studies and a limited amount of
applied theory in study design and execution.
Because extreme weather events
sometimes occur with little warning, measuring
pre-event preparedness and behaviour
change is difficult. Even so, the
reviewed literature is context specific and
difficult to use to generate programs and
frameworks because the approaches to
measuring variables such as risk perception
and a willingness to act are not cohesive
or consistent. Another gap in the
research was a lack of evaluation of current
risk communications strategies. Several
authors highlighted poor integration
of community-led initiatives in future
planning, often because such initiatives
were not properly evaluated. The final
major gap in the research base relates to a
focus on individuals, at the expense of the
household and extended family networks.
In relation to vulnerable communities
(and wider society), authors argued that research should address how decisionmaking
within families affects risk perception
and responses during extreme weather
events. Future research might therefore
include families and various intimate
social groupings as a starting point in theoretical
frameworks and allow analysis of
household dynamics as they pertain to
preparedness activity for EWCC risks. Due
to the English language restriction used to
search published and grey literature, it is
possible that relevant research and risk
communication efforts were not captured
in our scoping review.
The literature shows that a promising risk
communications strategy for decision
makers and scientists is to acknowledge
uncertainty to counter scepticism, improve
communication transparency, and enhance
trust and credibility.18,42Improved communications
about uncertain aspects of climate
change require collaboration25and
carefully targeting messages to each
unique audience.42Bridging the knowledge
divide between experts and the public
to improve risk communication is
necessary and could include developing
risk communications standards and
improving knowledge exchange among
complementary domains of learning and
practice.25
While the relationship between extreme
weather and climate change is increasingly
clear, the reviewed literature suggests
that researchers have not been able
to identify risk communication strategies
that span the short- and long-term
responses recommended for key audiences.
Some studies referred generally to
“climate change” but did not provide specific
examples of potential threats or climate
impacts, making it difficult to
identify key approaches that would be
effective in communicating a wide variety
of risks to a disparate set of audiences.
The conceptual framework presented here
is intended not only to support EWCC risk
communication, but also to build adaptive
capacity and coordinate recommended
actions across short- and long-term
timescales.
To meet the OPHS 2018 requirements,
public health unit staff need to engage in
effective risk communication that motivate
local actions to mitigate the effects of
extreme weather and climate change. The
issue for public health professionals is
that there is little evidence on which to
base risk communication strategies,56particularly
for the long-term impacts of climate
change. Best practices include
community engagement, initiatives to
enhance self-efficacy of individuals and
communities, targeting unique audiences
and bi-directional communications among
leaders and stakeholders. Promising practices
such as stakeholder coordination,
participatory workshops and addressing
vulnerable populations are similar to
emerging best practice.
Public health practitioners and decision
makers are important intermediaries in
EWCC risk communications and provide
necessary knowledge to motivate a
healthy response to evidence of accumulating
EWCC risks.57Extreme weather
related to climate change is a growing
threat to Canadians. Preparedness for and
actions taken at individual, family, community,
organizational and system levels
can mitigate risks associated with these
threats. Based on the evidence review, risk
communication efforts during short-term
extreme weather events appear to be more
effective than efforts to communicate risk
around climate change. This distinction
could highlight a unique opportunity for
public health to adapt strategies commonly
used for extreme weather to climate
change.
This project was funded by Public Health
Ontario. We thank the library services
team at Public Health Ontario for developing
and running the search strategies for
the scoping review, in particular Allison
McArthur, Susan Massarella, Lindsay
Harker and Sarah Morgan. We also thank
Cathy Mallove for sharing her communications
expertise throughout the project.
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
EM drafted and revised the manuscript.
SK designed the project, screened articles,
developed the conceptual framework and
reviewed the manuscript. AD reviewed
and screened articles for relevance, drafted
the workshop report and reviewed the
manuscript. RC supervised the project and
reviewed the manuscript. BS supervised
Health Promotion and Chronic Disease Prevention in Canada 154
Research, Policy and Practice Vol 39, No 4, April 2019
the project, developed the conceptual
framework and reviewed the manuscript.
The content and views expressed in this
article are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect those of the Government
of Canada.
Articles from Health Promotion and Chronic Disease Prevention in Canada : Research, Policy and Practice are provided here courtesy ofPublic Health Agency of Canada
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894