An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Email:b.james@northeastern.edu.
Email:cward@whoi.edu.
Received 2025 Apr 24; Accepted 2025 Aug 12; Revised 2025 Jul 28; Collection date 2025 Sep 2.
This article is licensed under CC-BY 4.0
Drinking straws present a simple form factor for evaluating
material
design strategies taken by manufacturers to achieve circular, sustainable,
and nonpersistent products in response to global restrictions and
consumer sentiment. We investigated 13 on-the-market drinking straws
of varying formulations, characterizing their physical, chemical,
and marine biodegradation properties. These data informed sustainability
metrics used for evaluating the effectiveness and trade-offs of design
strategies, ultimately arriving at four key conclusions. First, diverting
anthropogenic methane as an alternative feedstock to make polyhydroxyalkanoates
(PHAs) resulted in the only straw with a net-negative global warming
potential. Second, adding biogenic fillers to conventional polymers
(e.g., polypropylene) to minimize plastic usage is unlikely to produce
substantial environmental benefits compared to using alternative polymers.
Third, many marketing claims about circularity, sustainability, and
persistence were unsupported, likely magnifying the mismanagement
and environmental impacts of these products. Fourth, improper disposal
of compostable straws in landfills could increase the global warming
potential of the item by up to 6 times and offset numerous advantages
afforded by biodegradable materials, thereby warranting greater investment
in waste management infrastructure. The analysis of design strategies
and their trade-offs provided herein should be applied broadly when
developing and adopting future consumer products.
Keywords:ecodesign, design for degradation, design for
environment, sustainable engineering, plastic pollution, biodegradation


In the face of the plastic pollution crisis,
manufacturers of plastic
products are challenged to produce functional and profitable products
while at the same time meet the demands of policymakers and the public
to use more sustainable materials and processes. Presently, there
is no single, definite answer to this complex engineering design problem,
which is exacerbated by the lack of a uniform or agreed upon definition
for sustainability across sectors (i.e., government, industry, the
public, etc.). For example, should a product be made from biobased,
but persistent polypropylene (PP) or fossil-based, but compostable
poly­(butylene adipate terephthalate) (PBAT)? Making the most appropriate
material selection decision is imperative because, once entrenched,
transitioning products to new materials faces significant inertia.
It is currently unclear what successes and pitfalls companies are
facing while addressing this multiobjective design problem of functionality,
profitability, circularity, sustainability, and persistence. An analysis
of the product landscape and design strategies of drinking straws
may provide clarity surrounding this design problem.
Drinking
straws are polarizing, frequently littered, and pervasive
single-use products. Upward of 50 billion drinking straws are used
annually in the U.S., and these products
are often improperly disposed of (mismanaged), constituting ∼5%
of the plastic debris collected from coastlines globally. To curb their deleterious impacts as pollution,
regulations have targeted drinking straws globally from the municipal
to federal levels, banning products perceived as persistent in the
environment. In response to these restrictions and consumer sentiment,
a market for more sustainable and less persistent drinking straws
emerged. In recent years, the market has ballooned to include dozens
of brands (Table S1) claiming to be less
impactful to the environment. Such claims are predicated on the switch
to plastic formulations using different polymers, such as polyhydroxyalkanoates
(PHAs), and additives, such as organic and inorganic fillers.
Environmentally conscious consumers, businesses, and policymakers
face challenges navigating advertising for these new drinking straws. The details provided by brands and manufacturers
range from cryptic and vacuous marketing language to informative and
readily accessible messaging. This fact is belabored by the myriad
certifications and labels on product packaging that require a detailed
understanding of their test methods to fully appreciate the nuances
and reasonable claims that can be drawn from them. Two of the most
frequently used labels are from certifiers TÜV Austria and
the Biodegradable Products Institute (BPI),,which
provide certificates for home and industrial compostability. These
third parties certify polymer resins and products according to compostability
standards (e.g., ASTM 6400), as well as
their additional scrutiny. Other labels reflect claims of feedstock
renewability and global warming potential (GWP). The emphasis on certification
is a legal matter (e.g., under the U.S. Federal Trade Commission Act). Certification is necessary for businesses to
substantiate any environmental marketing claims, particularly those
related to degradability.
Addressing persistence has often been
met by designing straws for
degradation in engineered environments, such as industrial composting
facilities. This attribute is necessary for circular material schemes
following a managed life cycle. Yet, the safeguard solution to the
pollution of frequently mismanaged items is to imbue the items with
inherent degradability in all environments: engineered and natural. This feature has been advocated as one of six
key interventions for mitigating the potential impacts of plastic
pollution by embracing the principles of green chemistry and engineering
in material and product design.−
While many drinking straws
are certified as compostable and claim
biodegradability, few present evidence for their degradation in the
marine environment, where these items are ubiquitous. Many compostable polymers feature incongruent degradation
behavior with natural environments [e.g., poly­(lactic acid) (PLA)].−Additionally, while certificates for marine biodegradability exist,
the methods for evaluating marine degradation do not represent natural
conditions because of well-recognized bottle effects. In short, these methods provide evidence that marine microbes
can biodegrade a material, but they are incapable of estimating lifetimes
in natural settings. Having intrinsic biodegradability in the marine
environment is necessary for plastic products, such as drinking straws,
that frequently leak into the ocean.
Plastic pollution is not the only environmental impact drinking
straw manufacturers have aimed to avoid and reduce by switching to
alternative plastic formulations. Impacts across the entire life cycle
are being addressed to varying extents. The approaches manufacturers
take to reduce the life cycle environmental impacts of drinking straws
represent a microcosm of the broader landscape of approaches tried
by the plastics industry to address the impacts of feedstock and end-of-life
(EoL) disposal. Thus, drinking straws present a simple form factor
(a hollow cylinder) invariant across brands for quantifying the environmental
impacts of different commercially viable material design strategies
applied at scale for achieving sustainable plastic products.
Herein, drinking straws of varying formulations from different
manufacturers were investigated for their environmental impacts. These
straws encompass products manufactured by startups to multinational
corporations being adopted by local stores and international brands
alike. The straws were evaluated for their physical, chemical, and
realistic marine biodegradation properties (i.e., lifetimes and microbial
community composition), which informed, as part of an eco-audit, sustainability metrics related to renewability,
material efficiency, resource utilization, GWP, and environmental
persistence. This analysis identified successful design strategies
for sustainability and circularity, as well as their trade-offs that
should be applied broadly in designing future plastic products.
The drinking straws experimentally evaluated
in this study included three PHA-based straws produced by Aircarbon,
LifeMade, and Pura Vida Bioplastic, one calcium carbonate-filled straw
made with an undisclosed resin produced by Strawfish, one agave bagasse-filled
straw made with an undisclosed resin and produced by the Sustainable
Agave Company, and two straws made from proprietary or undisclosed
resins produced by Matter and LOLIWARE. An uncoated paper straw and
a conventional PP straw were used as representative biodegrading (positive
control) and nonbiodegrading (negative control) straws, respectively.
The Aircarbon, LifeMade, and Pura Vida Bioplastic straws were labeled
PHA1, PHA2, and PHA3. The Strawfish and Sustainable Agave Company
straws were labeled “CaCO3filled Resin”
and “Agave Bagasse filled Resin”. The Matter and LOLIWARE
straws were labeled Resin 1 and Resin 2. The positive and negative
control straws were labeled Paper and PP. The straws were characterized
to have sufficient information for comparison and calculating sustainability
metrics (see Extended Materials and Methods, Material characterization,
in theSupporting Information). Details
(Section S1) and findings (Table S2) on four additional drinking straws
previously investigated by our group were included in the analyses
for broader coverage of the design space. These straws include a cellulose diacetate (CDA) straw provided
by Eastman, two PHA straws produced by Phade and Beyond Green (labeled
PHA4 and PHA5, respectively), and a PLA straw produced by Plasticless
(labeled PLA).
The biodegradation
of drinking straws under coastal marine conditions was assessed by
three orthogonal and previously reported methods: short-term seawater
incubations measuring microbial respiration,,long-term incubations in a continuous flow natural seawater mesocosm
monitoring mass loss,,,,−and analysis of microbial
community composition.,The specific details of each
approach are provided in the Extended Materials and Methods in the
Supporting Information,Tables S3 and S4 and Figures S1–S6.
Several sustainability metrics
were calculated, including renewability, material efficiency, embodied
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, embodied water usage, projected environmental
lifetime in the marine environment, and managed and mismanaged EoL
GWP. Data were collated from literature sources for material properties
not measured or calculated in this study (Table S5). The specific embodied GHG emissions for the biogenic filler
materials (CaCO3and agave bagasse) were assumed to be
negligible, i.e., they were assumed to be 100% sequestering. Material
efficiency is the amount of material necessary to produce a functional
product which, in this case, is equivalent to the mass of the straw.
Embodied GHG emissions and embodied water usage were calculated as
the product of the mass of each straw and the specific embodied GHG
emissions and the specific water usage for its polymer and filler
(if present), respectively. Renewability was calculated as the fraction
of renewable material used in each straw. Managed and mismanaged EoL
GWPs were calculated for compost and landfill environments. For calculations,
the Agave Bagasse filled Resin was assumed to be 25% agave bagasse
(biocomposites of agave-derived bagasse typically include 20–30
wt % bagasse−). Based on the analyses described within, Resin 1
was determined to be a PLA/PBAT blend. It was then assumed that the
Resin 1 straw was a commercial blend of PLA and PBAT advertised for
profile extrusion of straws, consisting of 70% PLA and 30% PBAT. PBAT was assumed to be fossil-based. Metrics were not calculated for the Resin 2
straw because of a lack of reliable data for this material and its
exact composition.
The embodied
GHG potential of each biogenic material used in the straws was estimated,
assuming all the carbon (C) associated with the material removed atmospheric
carbon dioxide (CO2). Embodied GHG potential was calculated
according toeq, where
χCis the weight percent of C in the material (kg
C/kg material),nCO2nCis the stoichiometric ratio of CO2converted to C in the biogenic material (assumed 1),wCis the molar mass of C (12 g/mol), andwCO2is the molar mass of CO2(44
g/mol).
The values of χCwere
retrieved from reported values in the peer-reviewed literature. Calcium
carbonate is 12 wt % C, and agave bagasse has been reported to be
41.25 wt % C.
The EoL GWP of a biodegradable material was
estimated for landfill and composting environments. Only contributions
from methane (CH4) and CO2were included in
the estimates. The Buswell equation was
used to estimate the stoichiometric ratios for converting the biodegradable
material to CH4and CO2. For composting conditions
(aerobic conditions), all the carbon in the material was assumed to
be converted to CO2. The EoL GWP was calculated as the
sum of the contributions from CH4and CO2in
units of CO2-eq/kg material, which was calculated usingeq, where GWPCO2is the 100-year global warming potential of CO2equal to 1 kg CO2-eq/kg CO2, GWPCH4is the 100-year global warming potential of
CH4equal to 28 kg CO2-eq/kg CH4,nCO2nCis the stoichiometric ratio of C converted
to CO2(assumed 1 for compost and calculated for the material
using the Buswell equation for landfill),nCH4nCis the stoichiometric ratio of C converted
to CH4(assumed 0 for compost and calculated for the material
using the Buswell equation for landfill), andwCH4is the molar mass of CH4(16 g/mol).
The calculations for each straw material
are provided in theSupporting Information.
The social costs for the associated GHG
emissions due to the straws were calculated according toeq,
whereVGHGis
the social cost of GHG emissions for the straw, αGHGis the exchange constant for GHG emissions,CGHGis the specific GHG emissions for the material, andm0is the initial mass of the straw. GHG emissions
included CO2and CH4; a 50% capture efficiency
for landfill CH4emissions was assumed. The social costs related to the marine plastic pollution
of the straws were calculated following our previously reported method and usingeq,
whereVPis the
social cost of marine plastic pollution for the straw, αPis the exchange constant for marine plastic pollution, χPis the total fraction of plastic leaking into the ocean (0.11),fPis the fraction with which drinking straws
contribute to the total amount of leaked plastic (0.05),tLis the projected lifetime of the straw,l0is the initial length of the straw, andh0is the initial thickness of the straw.,The social cost calculation was adjusted by χPandfPbecause not every item leaks into the environment. All dollar values are presented in 2024 U.S.
dollars (US$).
Evaluating the potential environmental impacts
of drinking straws
requires knowing what material(s) were used to make the straws and
the dimensions and properties of the straws. For this case study,
nine commercial plastic straws were experimentally investigated: three
PHA straws advertised to be from different PHA polymers, four straws
of undisclosed resin several of which were advertised to include various
fillers, and two conventional straws (PP and paper). These straws
were investigated because they represent a mixture of the straws in
the marketplace (Table S1) and have received
notable press and recognition.−Information on the straws was
collected by reviewing product marketing, regulatory, and third-party
certification documents and databases, as well as characterizing the
thickness, mass, density, and composition of the straws. Overall,
the available information about the straws varied considerably between
brands. Paper straws were generally promoted as biodegradable and
compostable, often without emphasis on certifications. For PP straws,
marketing materials made little to no mention of sustainability. Despite
their differences, the unit price of each straw in 2023 U.S. dollars,
when purchased in bulk, ranged from 0.02 to 0.08 US$/straw. The properties
of each straw are summarized inTable.
In 2023 US$ for bulk purchasing.
Presented as the mean ±
standard
deviation of five measurements for the product.
Presented as the mean ± standard
deviation of 7–11 measurements.
Presented as the mean ± standard
deviation of three measurements; ND = not detected.
According to the manufacturer’s Web site,
product packaging, and regulatory documents,,the PHA1 straw was made of a poly­(3-hydroxybutyrate) (P3HB) produced
by Newlight Technologies and met several third-party biodegradation
certification standards for compostability (TÜV Austria Home
and Industrial S2100; BPI Certified).,To meet the
standards, the certifying bodies prescribed a maximum nominal thickness
for the straws of 152 μm (TÜV) and 182 μm (TÜV,
BPI), depending on the material and standard. Additionally, promotional
materials from the manufacturer labeled the straws as carbon-negative,
sequestering 52.5 g CO2-eq/straw (119.9 kg CO2-eq/kg material) as verified by SCS Global Services following ISO
14044:2006 for manufacturing and disposal. Carbon sequestration resulted from the use of diverted anthropogenic
CH4emissions as its feedstock. Analysis of the stable and radiocarbon isotopic composition for
the straw confirmed a fossil-derived methanogenic C source (Δ14C = −1000 ± 0.2‰, δ13C = −42.3 ± 0.1‰, andn= 3).
No inorganic additives were detected (Table).
The packaging of the PHA2 straw stated it was
made from a PHA material with the trade name Nodax, produced by Danimer
Scientific. In March 2025, Danimer Scientific filed for bankruptcy. Regulatory documents disclosed that the food-contact
approved grade of these materials is a random copolymer in which 3-hydroxybutyrate
units represent approximately 75% of the polymer, with 3-hydroxyvalerate,
3-hydroxyhexanoate, 3-hydroxyoctanoate, and/or 3-hydroxydecanoate
monomer units representing up to 25% of the polymer. Nodax PHAs are certified biobased (TÜV Austria S0292),
using vegetable oils as renewable feedstocks.,The straws met several third-party biodegradation standards for
compostability (TÜV Austria Home S2594; BPI Certified).,To meet the standards, the certifying bodies prescribed a maximum
nominal thickness for the straws of 190 μm (TÜV) and
203.2 μm (BPI). While not advertised, it had a measurable inorganic
additive content of 15.8 ± 1.3 wt % (n= 3).
Infrared (IR) spectroscopy and X-ray fluorescence (XRF) were used
to determine the composition of the inorganic additive content of
the straw. The IR spectrum reflected that of a PHA and included characteristic
peaks for CaCO3and elemental analysis by XRF of the inorganic
material detected only Ca in significant quantities (47.56% ±
3.16%;n= 3), indicating that its inorganic additive
content was most likely CaCO3(Figure S7). Calcium carbonate is often used as a filler in plastics
to reduce cost and modify mechanical and processing properties of
the material. Of TÜV Austria certified home compostable drinking
straws, Nodax was one of the most common materials used by different
brands (e.g., LifeMade S2594, Biolo S2166, Phade S1328, Eagle Beverage
S2332, Urthpact S0589, Greenprint S2380).
According to promotional documents and social
media posts,,the PHA3 straw was made of poly­(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hexanoate) (PHBH) produced by Kaneka Green Planet. Regulatory documents disclosed that the food-contact
grade of the material is poly­(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyhexanoate). The straws were
labeled a U.S. Department of Agriculture Certified 100% biobased product
and certified biobased (TÜV Austria S0318), using vegetable
oils as renewable feedstocks. No inorganic
additive content was detected (Table). The straws met several third-party biodegradation
standards for compostability (TÜV Austria Home and Industrial
S2541; BPI Certified).,To meet the standards, the certifying
bodies prescribed a maximum nominal thickness for the straws of 185
μm (BPI) and 320 μm (TÜV). The measured thickness
was greater than the specified limit for BPI certification (Table).
According to the manufacturer’s
Web site and promotional materials, the
CaCO3filled Resin straws were made with a resin filled
with calcium carbonate and unspecified enzymatic degradation additives. The calcium carbonate was derived from waste
oyster shells sourced from Mexico. Marketing materials claimed the
straws could biodegrade in 12–18 months in natural landfills
(ASTM D5526) and outdoor conditions through
aerobic and anaerobic processes. According
to the manufacturer’s Web site, the Agave Bagasse filled Resin straws were made with material from
the agave plant unused in tequila production and were biodegradable. The formulated resin was claimed to have a lifetime
of 10–24 months in soil. The manufacturers
of the CaCO3filled and Agave Bagasse filled Resin straws
did not disclose the polymer used to make their straws in marketing
materials. The IR spectra for the CaCO3filled Resin and
the Agave Bagasse filled Resin straws matched that of PP (Figures S8 and S9). Along with the characteristic
peaks for PP, the IR spectrum of the CaCO3filled Resin
straw included well-defined peaks for CaCO3at 1450, 1420,
and 874 cm–1. The measured inorganic additive content
was 17.8 ± 0.1 wt % (n= 3), presumably all
CaCO3.
Product packaging for the Resin 1 straw indicated
it was made from NatureStar resin, advertised as a biodegradable and
compostable biopolymer.,The product Web site
stated that, “straws will breakdown within 12 months, leaving
only biomass behind which can be used to enhance soil”. The straw met several third-party biodegradation
standards for compostability (TÜV Austria Home S2699; BPI Certified).,In conflict with the certifications, the product page on the retailer’s
Web site stated that the straw is only commercially compostable. To meet the standards, the certifying bodies
prescribed a maximum nominal thickness for the straws of 246 μm
(BPI) and 190 μm (TÜV). The measured thickness was greater
than the specified limit for TÜV certification (Table). The polymer used in the NatureStar
resin was undisclosed. No inorganic additive content was detected
(Table). The IR spectrum
for the Resin 1 straw suggested it was a PLA/PBAT blend, displaying
peaks for both polymers (Figure S10).,The IR spectrum of the Resin 1 straw included characteristic peaks
for PLA at 1754 and 757 cm–1and for PBAT at 1712,
1169, 1121, and 725 cm–1.
According to marketing materials and the product
Web site, the Resin 2 straw was made
from SeaTech resin, a seaweed-derived biopolymer blend compounded
with “shell powder” and “mineral color”.
More descript details on the material were disclosed in published
patents,,wherein the formulated resin can be composed
of at least κ-carrageenan, chitosan, glycerol, calcium carbonate,
and water. The measured inorganic additive content was 30.8 ±
0.1 wt % (n= 3), and elemental analysis by XRF of
the inorganic material detected K, Ca, Co, and Cr with relative abundances
of 6.22% ± 1.12% (n= 3), 24.49% ± 5.98%
(n= 3), 1.36% ± 0.51% (n=
3), and 1.07% ± 0.38% (n= 3), respectively.
The IR spectrum of the inorganic material included peaks for CaCO3, as well as several others. Presumably, some of these additional
IR peaks and the Co and Cr detected by XRF belong to the blue mineral-based
colorant (possibly cobalt chromite blue). The potassium likely came
from K2CO3, as it is mentioned as a possible
component in one of the published patents, and no other elements were
detected by XRF as possible anions.
Given
that biodegradability is a marketing point for many, if not all, of
the alternative drinking straws and the prevalence for drinking straws
to leak into the marine environment, the marine biodegradation properties
of the straws were evaluated. While short-term bottle incubations
help establish whether microbes can degrade a polymer, open mesocosm
systems provide more environmentally relevant evidence for microbial
degradation of a polymer over other available carbon sources in coastal
settings (e.g., natural organic matter). Thus, we incubated the straws
for 30 weeks in a continuous flow seawater mesocosm to assess the
mass loss rates of the straws under coastal seawater conditions. All
the straws developed appreciable biofilms throughout the incubation
(FigureA). By 30
weeks, the PHA straws lost 30–50% of their mass, the paper
straw lost ∼70%, and the Resin 1 straw lost ∼10% (FigureB,C). The PP-based
straws showed no mass loss (FigureC). Having established the potential for the biodegradability
of several straws and that our mesocosm is without mechanical action
and sunlight to cause fragmentation (Extended Materials and Methods
in theSupporting Information), any mass
loss was attributed to biodegradation.

Representative images
of each straw initially and after 4, 16,
and 30 weeks in a flow-through seawater mesocosm (A). Relative mass
loss of the PHA and paper straws (B) and the PP-based and Resin 1
straws (C). Data are presented as the mean ± standard deviation
of three replicates unless otherwise noted (Table S4).
The Resin 2 straw broke apart in the mesocosm and
developed a paste-like
consistency, preventing an assessment of its mass loss. When incubated
in the mesocosm, the straw broke apart and accumulated at the bottom
of the tank within 8 weeks (Figure S11).
Over the next 30 weeks, there was little visual change in the amount
of the Resin 2 material that settled to the bottom (Figure S11). Presumably, the material that collected at the
bottom of the tank and persisted was the inorganic material that made
up the Resin 2 straw, as it retained its blue color.
As orthogonal
measures of marine biodegradation to the mass loss
measurements, the microbial communities associated with the straws
were assayed for their oxygen respiration rates and characterized
for their community composition. Respiration rates greater than a
seawater-only baseline provide evidence that the associated microbes
can biodegrade the straws. These short-term bottle incubations over
3 weeks showed that the PHA1–3, Resin 1, and paper straws stimulated
microbial respiration to varying degrees above the baseline (Table S6), supporting marine biodegradability.
The Resin 1 and paper straws had comparable respiration rates, about
double those of the PHA1–3 straws. The PP-based straws (PP,
CaCO3filled Resin, and Agave Bagasse filled Resin straws)
had respiration rates comparable to seawater, discounting their marine
biodegradability. The Resin 2 straw was unable to be assayed due to
complications with the poisoning agent (Section S2).
In contrast to the agreement between microbial respiration
and
mass loss for the PHA, paper, and PP straws, the Resin 1 straw displayed
unique behavior (FigureC andTable S6). The Resin 1 straw had
a relatively large amount of mass loss at the first time point, followed
by a much slower mass loss rate for the remainder of the incubation
(FigureC). This behavior
is likely from the rapid leaching of a biodegradable additive,,consistent with the large oxygen respiration rate for the straw
measured in the short term respiration experiments.
Characterizing
the microbial communities associated with the drinking
straws can inform whether the microbes are using the material as a
growth substrate or simply a surface for attachment. Beta diversity
analysis by Bray–Curtis dissimilarity indicated distinct community
compositions in response to the different materials (PERMANOVA,p< 0.01) (Figure), suggesting the degradability (Figure) and material properties of the straws selected
for distinct microbial communities. The straws that degraded had unique
microbial communities, differentiating by the type of material. In
contrast, the three PP-based straws had similar community structures
and were separate from those of the degradable straws and seawater.
This result suggests that these straw materials mainly provided surfaces
for the colonization of microorganisms rather than substrates for
metabolism, an observation consistent with our previous findings. Microbial community composition analysis at
the family level revealed detailed differences between the PHA, PP-based,
Resin 1, paper straws, and seawater (Figure S12 and Section S3), paving the way for future investigations to
delve into the details of specific microbial species and functions
underlying plastic biodegradation in the ocean.

Beta diversity of microbial
communities based on Bray–Curtis
dissimilarity of 16S rRNA gene sequences visualized by principal coordinates
analysis.
The mass loss data were fit to a phenomenological surface erosion
model to derive the specific surface degradation rate (kd) of the straw materials. This material property quantifies
the rate of surface erosion of a material in a given environment,
accounting for the effects of material properties and environmental
conditions. The values ofkdfor the PHA
straws were 50 ± 6 μm/year for PHA1, 54 ± 5 μm/year
for PHA2, and 66 ± 8 μm/year for PHA3. Although minor,
the differences in the values ofkdfor
the PHA straws suggested an effect of the polymer, which should be
investigated further to understand the influence of PHA copolymer
composition on degradation rates. The values ofkdfor the paper and Resin 1 straws were 190 ± 18
and 7 ± 0.6 μm/year, respectively. The values ofkdfor the PP-based straws were constrained to
less than 0.5 μm/year.
With the values of thickness andkd, the projected environmental lifetimes of
the straws were calculated. The paper straw had the shortest projected
environmental lifetime of 11 ± 1 months. Values of projected
environmental lifetime for the PHA straws were 15 ± 2 months
for PHA1, 21 ± 2 months for PHA2, and 23 ± 3 months for
PHA3. The Resin 1 straw had a projected lifetime of 197 ± 20
months. The projected environmental lifetimes for the PP-based straws
were constrained to a minimum of 1800 months. No environmental lifetime
was projected for the Resin 2 straw.
Drinking straws reflect the broader challenges
to create products
that (i) work as intended, (ii) meet consumer preferences, (iii) are
inexpensive and profitable, andnow(iv) satisfy
circularity, sustainability, and degradability goals. Achieving these
objectives for a drinking straw, an arguably simple product, is not
so simple, as evidenced by the different straws investigated in this
study. Each product satisfies these four criteria to varying degrees
and via different approaches. For the first three criteria, each straw
works as intended, meets consumer preferences, and is inexpensive
to differing extents (Section S4).
To satisfy circularity, sustainability, and degradability goals,
each straw approached them through different combinations of feedstock,
plastic formulation, and EoL management. To semiquantitatively assess
these approaches, an eco-audit framework was used that included sustainability
metrics of renewability, material efficiency, embodied GHG emissions,
embodied water usage, and EoL impacts. An eco-audit is often employed
in material selection when precise data about a product or process
is unknown (e.g., early on in engineering design or where specifics
about the manufacturing of a product are limited) and comparison between
choices is of interest. It is similar
in nature to the life cycle assessment of technologies at early stage
technology readiness levels. All but
the Resin 2 straw was included in this analysis because of a lack
of reliable data for this material. Nonetheless, a brief general discussion
on the sustainability of seaweed-based materials is presented inSection S5. Additionally, the straws investigated
in our previous study (CDA, PLA, PHA4,
and PHA5; seeSection S1) were included
to reflect the broader design space of drinking straws. Primary research
and experimentally determined biodegradation rates for these four
other straws are included inSection S1 and Table S2.
To fit into a circular economy framework,
a renewable feedstock is one in which the carbon has been recirculated,
including carbon obtained from biomass, industrial byproducts, waste
CO2or CH4, or recycled plastics. Most straws were made from 100% renewable materials
(FigureA). Only those
with fossil-based polymers (i.e., PP and Resin 1) were partially or
entirely made from nonrenewable materials.

Comparison of sustainability
metrics: renewability (A), material
efficiency (B), embodied GHG emissions (C), embodied water usage (D),
EoL GWP (E), and persistence in the ocean (F). The Agave Bagasse filled
Resin and the CaCO3filled Resin are abbreviated as PP
+ AB and PP + CaCO3, respectively. Note that the y-axis
of (F) is on a log-scale.
The investigated PP-based straws appear to use
comparable amounts
of polymer to that of a pure PP straw, negating the otherwise would
be benefit of the renewably sourced filler. PP is primarily produced
using nonrenewable petroleum sources, and ∼5.5% is recycled. Biogenic fillers (i.e., oyster-derived CaCO3and agave-derived bagasse) can, in principle, reduce the
total amount of polymer by replacing it with a renewable material.
However, the CaCO3filled Resin was ∼18 wt % CaCO3, meaning that ∼612 mg of the straw was PP, effectively
the same amount of material as the pure PP straw (∼615 mg).
PHAs are produced by fermentation, using various carbon sources
as feedstocks. The PHA used in the PHA1
straw uses CH4diverted from anthropogenic sources (e.g.,
wastewater, cattle farming, landfills, and coal mining) as the carbon
source, yielding a carbon offsetting material. While the C in PHA1
was determined to be from a fossil-derived source, the recirculation
of CH4by a carbon capture method into P3HB polymer makes
the material renewable. In contrast,
the PHA2–5 straws use agricultural products, such as vegetable
oils, to produce their PHA materials. PHA2 was not 100% renewable
because of its fraction of CaCO3of unknown origin (assumed
nonbiogenic).
Similar to PHAs, PLA is synthesized using lactic
acid produced
by the fermentation of agricultural products. Therefore, PHAs and PLA made using these feedstocks can be certified
as 100% biobased. The Resin 1 straw was determined to be a blend of
PLA and PBAT, and so was partially biobased, due to its PLA content.
PBAT is predominantly fossil-based, but efforts are being made to
circularize its feedstocks to include those from recycled materials
and biobased sources.
Historically, CDA has been a mixed feedstock
wherein the cellulose
was bioderived, and the carbon within the acetyl modification was
derived from coal. Recognizing the nonrenewability of coal as a carbon
source, more sustainable grades of CDA are being produced by deriving
the acetyl C from molecularly recycled mixed waste.
Material efficiency quantifies
the amount of material used to make a functional product. Optimizing the material efficiency of a plastic
product has the added benefit of reducing many other environmental
impacts (e.g., GHG emissions and freshwater usage) because these impacts
are largely proportional to the amount of material used.−Material efficiency also affects environmental impacts related to
shipping because fuel efficiency decreases with increasing cargo weight
by a nontrivial amount.,Because all the straws
have the same function, their mass is a measure of their material
efficiency. The PHA1 straw had the greatest material efficiency, followed
by the PP straw (FigureB). The PHA1 straw used ∼33% less material than the PP straw.
The other PHA and PP-based straws were less materially efficient,
using more material to produce a functional product. The paper straw
was one of the least efficient, requiring ∼60% more material
than the PP straw.
A first estimate for the GHG
emissions of a product are the emissions associated with the production
of its materials. Because the specific embodied GHG emissions of plastics
are within an order of magnitude of each other, as were the masses
of each straw, differences in GHG emissions between products were
expected to be marginal. Every straw,
except for PHA1, was carbon-positive, ranging from 0.80 kg CO2-eq/1000 straws for the paper to 3.45 kg CO2-eq/1000
straws for the Resin 1, PLA/PBAT-based straw (FigureC).
PHA1 was the only straw with net-negative
embodied GHG emissions (FigureC), due to diverted CH4emissions as its feedstock.
Scaling this approach could impact the global C cycle and climate
change. For instance, if all the C used in plastic packaging globally
(∼142 Mt/yr) were P3HB (∼56
wt % C) and came from anthropogenic CH4, then ∼106
Mt CH4(∼3.0 Gt CO2-eq) would be needed.
Adopting this strategy would offset ∼30% of the ∼9.7
Gt CO2-eq of annual global anthropogenic CH4emissions, thereby highlighting the
promise of scaling this design strategy.
Relative to selecting
materials with more renewable feedstocks,
the effectiveness of biogenic fillers appears negligible. The theoretical
maximum offset in GHG emissions for oyster-derived CaCO3is ∼0.44 kg CO2-eq/kg CaCO3. Based
on its formulation, the theoretical maximum reduction in embodied
GHG emissions compared to the PP straw is only 4% for the CaCO3filled Resin straw. The value of the theoretical specific
embodied GHG emissions for agave-derived bagasse is greater than oyster-derived
CaCO3, offsetting ∼1.51 kg CO2-eq/kg
agave-derived bagasse. In practice, these values are likely less because
of GHG emissions associated with processing the materials. While the
amount of agave-derived bagasse used in the Agave Bagasse filled Resin
straw was not disclosed, biocomposites of agave-derived bagasse and
PP typically include 20–30 wt % bagasse.−Within this
range, the estimated reduction in embodied GHG emissions for the Agave
Bagasse filled Resin straw compared to the PP straw was 8 to 28%.
An impact of growing concern is
a material’s embodied water usage because of the scarcity and
diminishing quality of freshwater resources globally.,Generally, plastics derived from agricultural products have greater
embodied water usage than petroleum-derived plastics, due to the water
used in agriculture and downstream processing. However, these impacts
can be an order of magnitude less than those resulting from paper
production. Paper and pulp mills pollute freshwater ecosystems and
diminish their value, as well. Reported
values for the embodied water usage of PP, PHA, and paper are 32,
240, and 1700 L/kg, respectively. Thus,
while the paper straw can have some of the lowest embodied GHG emissions
(∼2–3 times less than the others, excluding PHA1), it
can have substantial embodied water penalties (∼10–80
times more than the others) (FigureD). Water is a valuable natural resource; thus, reducing
its usage as much as possible will benefit society.,
The strategies advertised and promoted
for the managed EoL of the straws varied with the material. The PP-based
straws were intended to follow a linear EoL path with disposal in
landfills. The PHA-based, paper, and Resin 2 straws were intended
to follow a more circular EoL path with disposal in industrial or
home composting systems. The Resin 1 straw was intended to be industrially
composted.
Today, most managed plastic waste is landfilled, some is incinerated, and even less is recycled
and composted. While PP is recyclable,
PP straws are often not accepted by municipal recycling facilities
because of their size and shape, and contamination from food. In the
U.S., ∼ 63% of municipal solid waste is landfilled. In many instances, it is the only waste management
option available.
The filled PP straws were claimed to biodegrade
in landfills. The
CaCO3filled Resin straw was advertised for disposal in
landfills and to be formulated with an enzymatic package to support
its biodegradation in that environment. These additives are designed to stimulate enzymatic degradation
of the polymer by fouling microbes under anaerobic conditions, though
their effectiveness has been dubious.,Collectively,
the respiration, mass loss, and microbial community composition analyses
suggest these additives were not stimulating the biodegradation of
the PP matrix in aerobic marine conditions. The Agave Bagasse filled
Resin straw was advertised for “avoiding landfills”
but did not mention where it was intended to go. Being PP, this straw
likely could only be properly disposed of by landfilling or incineration.
There is little evidence to support the possibility of either straw’s
biodegradation in landfills (i.e., no third-party certificates for
the products). However, taken at face value, assuming the claims hold
that the filled PP straws can biodegrade in terrestrial and landfill
environments, their disposal in landfills would result in biogenic
CH4emissions (FigureE). Landfills contribute ∼10% of global anthropogenic
CH4emissions, and their leachates can diminish fresh and
groundwater resources. Because of biogenic
CH4emissions, promoting landfilling as the managed EoL
strategy can have significant associated GHG emissions for all but
the nonbiodegradable straws (FigureE).
Composting can be an alternative EoL strategy.
Unlike landfilling,
composting is an aerobic microbial degradation process that converts
organic matter to biomass and CO2, not CH4.
As a result, the GWP can be an order of magnitude less for compost
than landfill (FigureE). Composting can be operated on the industrial scale using elevated
temperatures or at the individual scale using ambient conditions (i.e.,
home composting). Some materials are only certified industrially compostable
(e.g., PLA), while others are certified home-compostable (e.g., PBAT,
PHA, and CDA). For food-soiled, single-use items, composting affords
a strategy well-equipped to handle such waste alongside food scraps.
Nonetheless, composting has its challenges. Presently, composting
is rarely practiced and lacks available infrastructure at the municipal
level. In the U.S., it has been estimated that only ∼4% of
food waste is composted. Thus, while
products are meant for and designed to be composted, they may rarely
follow that intended path and instead enter landfills or incinerators.
Moreover, composting is not without its environmental impacts, as
well. Improperly aerated compost can result in CH4emissions
in the same way as landfills. For composting to be broadly adopted,
it will require greater investment by consumers and communities in
composting capabilities for biodegradable plastics.
Drinking straws can be mismanaged at
their EoL by being littered or disposed of in the wrong waste stream
(e.g., landfilled instead of composted). In the event of littering,
several of the straws will persist in the coastal ocean despite claims
of their degradability in other environments (e.g., compost or soil).
The PP-based and Resin 1 straws were estimated to persist for decades
or much longer if leaked (FigureF). Notably, the Resin 1 straw exhibited ∼10%
mass loss after 30 weeks of incubation (Figure). However, the microbial community structure
was similar to that of the PP-based straws (Figure), which is unexpected if the community was
adapting to metabolize the polymer blend. Considering this finding
and those of others investigating PLA/PBAT blends, further analyses of the Resin 1 material are necessary
to confirm whether the shallow mass loss rate after the first time
point was due to a residual additive slowly leaching, the slow metabolism
of the polymer by fouling microbes, or other processes. Conversely,
because the PHA- and CDA-based straws were shown to biodegrade in
the coastal ocean, they were estimated to last 1–2 years, slightly
longer than paper. For the straws that were not persistent, their
differences in estimated environmental lifetimes reflected trade-offs
in material and geometric properties.
Disposal of drinking straws
in landfills intended for compost results in additional and more potent
GHG emissions that otherwise would not have been produced. This outcome
is because anaerobic landfill conditions produce CH4during
the biodegradation of the material that escapes collection. The added
GWP from improper disposal of compostable materials in landfills was
estimated to range from 4.64 to 13.44 kg CO2-eq/1000 straws
(FigureE), resulting
in approximately six times more GWP per straw. The conventional PP
straw, in contrast, has zero GWP in compost or landfills because of
its presumed recalcitrance in these environments.
Social costs were used to quantify, contextualize, and compare the
environmental impacts of marine plastic pollution and GHG emissions.
Social costs reflect the external costs to society associated with
a good, service, or outcome. The exchange constant (the conversion
factor of environmental impact to monetary value) for the social cost
of marine plastic pollution was proposed to range between 4.58 to
45.8 US$/year kg plastic. Using the lower
value for a conservative estimate, switching from persistent to nonpersistent
plastics for drinking straws can equate to savings for society of
∼3 US$/1000 straws (Table S7). Scaled
to the estimated number of straws that leak into the environment in
the U.S. annually, the switch represents a potential savings of ∼150
million US$/year.
Social costs were also quantified for GHG
emissions associated with producing straws and improper disposal of
compostable straws in landfills. The exchange constants for social
costs of CO2and CH4have been estimated to
be 0.22 US$/kg CO2and 3.40 US$/kg CH4, respectively.,The social costs for the embodied GHG emissions of the straws (excluding
PHA1) ranged from 0.18 to 0.92 US$/1000 straws and scaled to the annual
consumption rate of drinking straws in the U.S. could cost 9–46
million US$/year. PHA1 was unique because it had negative embodied
GHG emissions at the beginning of life from using diverted anthropogenic
CH4as a feedstock. As a result, it was estimated to equate
to savings of 11.55 US$/1000 straws or ∼578 million US$/year.
The social costs from the added GHG emissions due to landfilling a
compostable drinking straw ranged from ∼0.21 to 0.61 US$/1000
straws (Table S7) and scaled to the estimated
annual U.S. drinking straw consumption rate, representing a potential
burden of 11–31 million US$/year.
From this analysis,
three key points emerged. First, conventional
PP straws do not contribute to societal costs in terms of GHG emissions
at EoL regardless of whether they accumulate in compost or landfill
because they are nonbiodegradable; however, they contribute sizably
to societal costs when littered in the marine environment for that
same reason. Second, for PHA1, the societal costs at EoL, regardless
of the scenarios investigated, could be entirely offset by the savings
to society by using diverted CH4emissions as a feedstock
to produce the polymer. Lastly, the added societal costs from the
improper disposal of compostable and marine-biodegradable straws (i.e.,
paper, PHA, and CDA) in landfills (i.e., the difference between the
landfill EoL GWP and compost EoL GWP) were estimated to be 18–36
times greater than the social costs from their improper disposal as
marine litter (Table S7). While this analysis
only discusses the social costs of two environmental impacts (plastic
pollution and GHG emissions), of which there are several others (e.g.,
resource utilization and eutrophication), it was instructive for contextualizing
the relative burden of the different drinking straws at EoL.
The outcomes of the eco-audit are not without
limitations and caveats. It should be reiterated that the eco-audit
is largely based on average literature values, which are useful for
semiquantitative comparison. The GWPs were estimated using a theoretical
equation and actual values will vary with time and local conditions.
For example, reports on the anaerobic biodegradation of PLA and PBAT
in landfills have been variable,−and thus the values presented
for them should be interpreted as an upper theoretical value. Likewise,
the actual environmental lifetimes for the straws will vary with environmental
conditions (e.g., temperature and location). Moreover, for those materials that do not
biodegrade in the ocean,,but nonetheless experience
hydrolysis (e.g., PLA), the projections
of their environmental lifetimes are less confident. PLA can be expected
to persist for decades in the ocean based on estimated hydrolysis
rates; which is still much longer than
those of more readily biodegradable materials. Multiyear studies of
PLA products in marine settings are necessary to constrain this potential
uncertainty. Additionally, ecotoxicity
was not directly included in the eco-audit, which may reveal differences
between the polymers, particularly over their lifecycle.−Building on this point, plastics are composed of polymers and additives. The impact of small molecule organic additives
was not considered in the eco-audit and may sway the outcomes.,The development of new eco-audit frameworks for material selection
will be necessary to address the trade-offs between function and ecotoxicity.
From this case study of drinking straws,
four valuable lessons were learned. First, the combination of approaches
taken by the PHA1 straw resulted in a product that qualitatively and
quantitatively could be the least impactful. It fits within a circular
materials framework, had the greatest material efficiency, was nonpersistent
in the coastal ocean, and was carbon–offsetting by utilizing
diverted anthropogenic CH4emissions as a feedstock. These
design decisions are a promising set that could be adopted for other
materials and products. Second, inorganic fillers can offset GHG at
EoL, and biogenic wastes can be repurposed as fillers into new products,
sequestering carbon as well. However, merely adding fillers to the
status quo polymer (e.g., PP) will likely not produce significant
benefits for the environment compared to using an alternative polymer.
Third, many of the claims made by brands about circularity had limited
supporting data, which likely will lead to the mismanagement of their
products and unreliable outcomes. Thus, additional or a set of required
certifications are needed to give credibility to life cycle claims
and the impacts that can result from different life cycle scenarios.
In this way, much like a nutrition facts label, consumers could evaluate
the sustainability and environmental impacts of products. Lastly,
improper disposal of compostable products in landfills can have sizable
environmental impacts, thereby warranting greater investment in infrastructure
to manage compostable plastics and associated food waste properly.
Otherwise, many of the advantages afforded by these materials will
be nullified. Moving forward, from our analysis, consumers, brands,
and policymakers should support products that divert anthropogenic
GHGs for use as renewable feedstocks, promote the design of products
for material efficiency and minimal persistence, and bolster proper
disposal of compostable products by enhancing consumer education and
supporting investment in industrial and home composting facilities.
The authors are grateful to Rick
Galat (WHOI) and the facilities
staff that maintain the Environmental Systems Laboratory at WHOI,
as well as Amy Apprill (WHOI) for the use of microbiology equipment.
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.est.5c05448.
Extended materials and methods, details of previously
investigated drinking straws (Section S1), interference by the poisoning
agent (Section S2), microbial community composition analysis at the
family level (Section S3), discussion of nonsustainability-related
design considerations for drinking straws (Section S4), discussion
of the sustainability of seaweed-based materials (Section S5), plots
of relative mass loss data for each straw with curve fit (Figure S1),
random samplings of straw thickness,kd, and projected environmental lifetimes (Figures S2–S6), IR
spectra of select drinking straws (Figures S7–S10), photographs
of Resin 2 in the mesocosm (Figure S11), microbial community compositions
at the family level (Figure S12), list of drinking straws on the market
(Table S1), properties of previously investigated drinking straws
(Table S2), mass loss data (Table S3), relative mass loss data (Table
S4), global warming and resource utilization properties (Table S5),
short-term microbial respiration rates (Table S6), calculated social
costs (Table S7), and additional references (PDF)
B.D.J., Y.S.,
and C.P.W.: conceptualization and writingreview and editing.
B.D.J. and C.P.W.: methodology and writingoriginal draft.
B.D.J., Y.S., K.P., and B.I.: investigation and visualization. C.P.W.:
funding acquisition and project administration.
This work was
supported by an award to C.P.W. from the National Science Foundation
(Project CAS-MNP-2202621). Additional support was provided by the
Seaver Institute.
The authors
declare no competing financial interest.
Published
as part ofEnvironmental Science & Technologyspecial issue“Advancing a Circular Economy”.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
Articles from Environmental Science & Technology are provided here courtesy ofAmerican Chemical Society
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894