An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Correspondence: A. M. Niclou (alexandra.niclou@pbrc.edu).
Corresponding author.
Call for Letters – Viewpoint: Aligning Thermal Physiology and Biometeorological Research for Heat Adaptation and Resilience in a Changing Climate
Received 2024 Apr 15; Accepted 2024 Apr 16.
Keywords:climate change, diabetes, thermoneutrality
to the editor: Global annual temperature has risen by 0.18°C per decade since 1980, twice the rate of increase since 1880. The increasing frequency of climate change-induced heat waves indicates humans are more often exposed to acute and chronic heat stress. Simultaneously, epidemiological studies have found that warmer ambient temperatures are associated with greater diabetes prevalence (1). To mitigate the detrimental effects of climate change on human health, Vecellio and Vanos (2) are calling for large-scale and in-depth collaborative investigations into the health consequences of heat stress. Paradoxically, passive heat stress may also have potential health benefits. Prolonged heat exposure results in changes in hepatic glucose regulation, contributing to decreased fasting glucose levels which lowers the risk of diabetes (3). We posit that the discrepancies between population- versus individual-based data reflect the impact of heat stress on behavior.
High outdoor temperatures promote changes in physical activity behaviors such as increased sedentary time, less time spent outdoors, and more time spent in temperature controlled or thermoneutral environments (4). Energy expenditure, cardiovascular function, and glucose metabolism are lowest at thermoneutrality, increasing the risk of chronic diseases (5). Beneficial thermoregulatory responses to environmental transitions are muted as time spent in thermoneutrality removes the necessary stressors associated with thermoregulation and metabolic stimulation. Such behavioral adjustments not only mitigate but reverse any potential benefits of passive heat exposure on glucose metabolism. Thermoneutrality, more so than exposure to extreme temperatures, is thus likely contributing to increases in chronic diseases by decreasing thermogenesis and thermogenic capacity (5).
Studies are needed to examine the interaction between behavioral and physiological responses to heat. As the climate crisis worsens, it is imperative we not only focus on research to understand the direct effects of high temperatures on physiological and behavioral adaptations, but also to develop novel interventions designed to counteract trends in reduced physiological capacities, such as lower energy expenditure and glucose metabolism associated with a human drive toward thermal comfort. This goal is twofold:1) to understand the mechanisms underlying thermoregulation to acute and chronic heat stress and,2) to elucidate both the proximate and ultimate causes of the negative health outcomes associated with nontypical responses at thermoneutrality. As the climate crisis forces more individuals (e.g., outdoor workers) to suffer the consequences of heat stress while at the same time confining others to increased periods at thermoneutrality (e.g., office workers), research is needed to better define the safe implementation of appropriate tools to mitigate the effects associated with either end of the thermal comfort spectrum. As such, our goal is to determine the short and long-term impacts of reduced thermogenic adaptation and capacity to heat stress associated with prolonged time at thermoneutrality. This necessitates the development of controlled mechanistic studies in people with and without chronic diseases and interdisciplinary collaborations integrating population, clinical, and behavioral research perspectives. These translational approaches can ensure the minimization of the ongoing damages of global warming on public health by providing holistic preventative interventions accounting for the breadth of interacting factors associated with climate change and health.
A. M. Niclou is supported by the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases of the National Institutes of Health under Award No. T32DK064584.
The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.
No conflicts of interest, financial or otherwise, are declared by the authors.
A.M.N. drafted manuscript; A.M.N., K.Y.C., and L.M.R. edited and revised manuscript; A.M.N., K.Y.C., and L.M.R. approved final version of manuscript.
Articles from Journal of Applied Physiology are provided here courtesy ofAmerican Physiological Society
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894