An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Author Contributions
S.J.D. and D.T. designed the study. D.T. performed the analyses, with
the additional support from Q.Z., Y.Z. and C.S. on datasets and K.C., C.H.
and Y.Q. on analytical approaches. D.T. and S.J.D. led the writing with
input from all coauthors.
Corresponding authors:dtong3@uci.edu,qiangzhang@tsinghua.edu.cn,sjdavis@uci.edu
Issue date 2019 Aug.
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the
content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, subject
always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Net anthropogenic CO2emissions must approach zero by
mid-century to stabilize global mean temperature at the levels targeted by
international efforts1–5. Yet continued expansion of
fossil fuel energy infrastructure implies already ‘committed’
future CO2emissions6–13. Here
we use detailed datasets of current fossil fuel-burning energy infrastructure in
2018 to estimate regional and sectoral patterns of “committed”
CO2emissions, the sensitivity of such emissions to assumed
operating lifetimes and schedules, and the economic value of associated
infrastructure. We estimate that, if operated as historically, existing
infrastructure will emit ~658 Gt CO2(ranging from 226 to 1479
Gt CO2depending on assumed lifetimes and utilization rates). More
than half of these emissions are projected to come from the electricity sector,
and infrastructure in China, the U.S.A., and the EU28 represent ~41%,
~9% and ~7% of the total, respectively. If built, proposed power
plants (planned, permitted, or under construction) would emit an additional
~188 (37–427) Gt CO2. Committed emissions from existing
and proposed energy infrastructure (~846 Gt CO2) thus
represent more than the entire carbon budget to limit mean warming to 1.5
°C with 50–66% probability (420–580 Gt
CO2)5, and
perhaps two-thirds of the budget required to similarly limit warming to below 2
°C (1170–1500 Gt CO2)5. The remaining carbon budget estimates
are varied and nuanced14,15, depending on the climate
target and the availability of large-scale negative emissions16, Nevertheless, our emission
estimates suggest that little or no additional CO2-emitting
infrastructure can be commissioned, and that earlier than historical
infrastructure retirements (or retrofits with carbon capture and storage
technology) may be necessary, in order meet Paris climate agreement
goals17. Based on
asset value per ton of committed emissions, we estimate that the most
cost-effective premature infrastructure retirements will be in the electricity
and industry sectors, if non-emitting alternative technologies are available and
affordable4,18.
International efforts to limit the increase in global mean temperature to well
below 2 °C and to “pursue efforts” to avoid 1.5 °C entail a
transition to net-zero emissions energy systems by mid-century1–5.
Yet recent decades have witnessed an unprecedented expansion of historically long-lived
fossil fuel energy infrastructure, particularly associated with rapid economic
development and industrialization of emerging markets such as China and India9,10and a shift towards natural gas-fired power plants in the U.S.
Although such expansion may be slowing19,20, substantial new
electricity generating capacity is proposed—and in many cases already under
construction12. Consequently,
there is a tension between dwindling carbon emissions budgets and future CO2emissions locked-in or “committed” by existing and proposed energy
infrastructure6,21,22.
A 2010 study estimated that operating fossil energy infrastructure would emit
~500 Gt CO2over its lifetime8. Subsequent studies estimated that existing power plants alone
committed ~300 Gt CO2as of 2012 and 20169,12, and
existing and proposed coal-fired power plants represented 340 Gt CO2as of
201611(Extended Data Table 1). Other studies have used integrated
assessment models (IAMs) to assess the economic costs of “unlocking”
emissions under stringent climate goals23,24, and to identify
“points of no return” where no new infrastructure can be built without
exceeding the 2°C target25.
Most recently, Smith et al.13explored
the potential climate responses to committed emissions, using a reduced-complexity
climate model and an idealized phase-out of fossil infrastructure to argue that
aggressive mitigation of non-CO2forcing could yet limit global warming to
1.5°C. However, it has been nearly a decade since a comprehensive bottom-up
assessment of fossil infrastructure and committed emissions was made, during which years
China’s economy has grown tremendously, there has been a global financial crisis
and a natural gas boom in the U.S., and the Paris Agreement was ratified and entered
into force. Substantial new fossil energy infrastructure has been commissioned over this
time period, proposals of new power plants have waxed and waned, and climate mitigation
efforts have grown more ambitious in many countries.
Here, we present region- and sector-specific estimates of future CO2emissions related to fossil fuel-burning infrastructure existing and power plants
proposed as of the end of 2018, as well as the sensitivity of such estimates to assumed
lifetime and utilization rates, and the economic value of associated energy assets. Our
analyses are based upon a compilation of the most detailed and up-to-date datasets of
energy infrastructure available, as described in theMethods section. Our central estimates assume historical lifetimes (e.g., 40
years for power plants and industrial boilers, 15 years for a light-duty vehicle, etc.)
and utilization rates (e.g., region- and fuel-specific power plant capacity factors,
region-specific averages of vehicle fuel economy and annual kilometers traveled).
Figure 1shows future CO2emissions from existing and proposed energy and transportation infrastructure by sector
(Fig. 1a) and country/region (Fig. 1b). We estimate that cumulative emissions by existing
infrastructure, if operated as historically, will be 658 Gt CO2. Of this
total commitment, 54% or 358 Gt CO2is anticipated to come from existing
electricity infrastructure (mainly power plants), reflecting the large share of annual
emissions from electricity infrastructure (46% in 2018) and the long historical
lifetimes of generating infrastructure. Another 25% of the total, or 162 Gt
CO2, is related to industrial infrastructure, and 10% or 64 Gt
CO2is related to the transportation sector (mainly on-road vehicles;Fig. 1a). This difference reveals the effect of
infrastructure lifetimes: although industry and road transportation sectors have similar
annual CO2emissions (6.2 and 5.9 Gt CO2in 2018, respectively),
vehicle lifetimes are roughly a third as long as industrial capital. Finally, existing
residential and commercial infrastructure represent 42 Gt CO2and 18 Gt
CO2of all committed emissions, respectively.

Estimates of future CO2emissions by industry sector
(a; see alsoTables S1andS2) and country/region (b), assuming historical
lifetimes and utilization rates. Emissions from existing infrastructure are
shown by darker shading, and emissions from proposed power plants (i.e.
electricity) are more lightly shaded.
Global committed emissions are now at the apex of a 20-year trend. Between 2002
to 2014, as China emerged as a global economic power, total committed emissions grew at
an average annual rate of 9% per year (Extended Data Fig.
1a). Meanwhile, committed emissions related to infrastructure in the U.S. and
EU28 have been shrinking since 2006 (Extended Data Fig.
1c). Since 2014, the rate of infrastructural expansion in China and India has
also fallen, and committed emissions in China declined by 7% between 2014 and 2018, even
as committed emissions in the Rest of World have continued to climb (Extended Data Figs. 1aand1c). These most recent trends may reflect nascent shifts in China’s
economic structure19and global
trade20, and may be important
harbingers of future changes in regions’ annual CO2emissions9.
Figure 2shows the age distribution of
electricity generating units worldwide. Overall, the youth of fossil generating units
worldwide is striking: 49% of the capacity now in operation worldwide was commissioned
after 2004, and this share is 79% and 69% in China and India, respectively. The average
age of coal-fired power plants operating in China and India (11.1 and 12.2 years,
respectively) is thus much lower than those in the U.S. and the EU28 (39.6 and 32.8
years, respectively;Fig. 2b), with correspondingly
longer remaining lifetimes. The predominance of young Chinese infrastructure (which
extends to the industrial and transportation sectors;Extended Data Figs. 2and3) reflects
the scale and speed of the country’s industrialization and urbanization since the
turn of the century. As a result, infrastructural inertia is greatest in China,
accounting for 41% of all committed emissions (270 Gt CO2;Fig. 1b). In comparison, infrastructure in India, the U.S.,
and the EU28 represents much smaller commitments: 57 Gt, 57 Gt, and 49 Gt
CO2, respectively (Fig. 1b;Table S1 in Supporting
Information).

The operating capacity of gas- and oil-fired electricity-generating
units (a) and coal-fired units (b) where the youngest
units are at the bottom. Lighter shaded bars at the bottom show proposed
electricity-generating units according to the year they are expected to be
commissioned. Recent trends in Chinese and Indian coal-fired units (red and
orange at lower right, respectively) and U.S. gas-fired units (green at left) is
apparent. Note that 0 years old means the power units began operating in
2018.
In addition to existing infrastructure, new power plants are being planned,
permitted, or constructed, and the committed emissions related to such proposed plants
may be estimated11,12. As of the end of 2018, the best-available data
showed 579 GW, 583 GW, and 40 GW of coal-, gas-, and oil-fired generating capacity were
proposed to be built over the next several years, respectively (~20% of it in
China;Fig. 2). If built and operated as
historically, this proposed capacity would represent an additional 188 Gt CO2committed: 97 Gt CO2from coal-, 91 Gt CO2from gas-, oil-, and
other-fuel-fired generating units (Table S2).
Together, committed emissions from existing infrastructure and proposed power
plants total 846 Gt CO2if all proposed plants are built and all
infrastructure operated as historically (Fig.
1).
Existing electricity and industry infrastructure accounts for 79% of total
committed emissions if operated as historically (i.e. with a 40-year lifetime and 53%
utilization rate;Fig. 1a). However, the lifetime
and operation of such infrastructure will ultimately depend on the relative costs of
competing technologies, in turn influenced by factors such as technological progress and
the climate and energy policies in each region22,26.Figure 3highlights the sensitivity of committed emissions
(Figs. 3aand3b) and the rate of annual emissions reductions (Figs. 3cand3d; seeMethods) to the assumed lifetime and
utilization rates (i.e. capacity factors) of industry and electricity infrastructure
(n.b. lifetimes and operation of infrastructure in other sectors are not varied from
historical averages), with the star in each panel indicating historical average values.
For example, total committed emissions related to existing infrastructure decrease to
~200 Gt CO2if lifetimes are and capacity factors decrease to 20 years
and 20%, respectively, but increase to almost 1500 Gt CO2if lifetimes and
capacity factors increase to 60 years and 80%, respectively (Fig. 3a). These ranges of lifetimes and utilization are quite
wide, at the low end probably exceeding economic feasibility for recouping capital
investments and covering fixed operating and maintenance costs. When proposed power
plants are included, total committed emissions over the same range of lifetimes and
capacity factors increase to 263–1906 Gt CO2(Fig. 3b). Maintaining historical capacity factors, a 5-year
difference in the lifetime of existing infrastructure represents roughly 70–100
Gt of future CO2emissions (Fig. 3a), or
about 90–130 Gt if proposed power plants are included (Fig. 3b). Maintaining historical lifetime and changing the
assumed capacity factor by a comparable 9% (e.g., from 46% to 55%) results in roughly
the same changes in committed emissions, suggesting these factors have a similar
influence.

Contours show estimates of committed emissions related to existing
infrastructure (a) and existing infrastructure and proposed power
plants (b) when the assumed lifetimes and utilization rates of
electricity and industry infrastructure are varied from 20–60 years
20–80%, respectively. Across the same ranges of lifetime and utilization,
corresponding annual rates of emission reduction span from 3% to 30%
(candd). Hatched orange and red zones indicate
carbon budgets and mitigation rates likely to limit mean warming to 1.5°C
and 2°C, respectively (seeMethods),
and stars denote committed emissions and mitigation rates if existing/and
proposed infrastructure is operated as historically.
For comparison, the hatched red and orange zones inFigures 3aand3bshow
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s (IPCC) most recent estimated
ranges of remaining cumulative carbon budgets spanning 50% to 66% probabilities of
limiting global warming to 1.5°C and 2°C relative to the preindustrial
era5. Excluding proposed power
plants, our central estimate of committed emissions (658 Gt CO2; star inFig. 3a) exceeds the range of the remaining
1.5°C budget (420–580 Gt CO2)5. When proposed plants are included, our estimate
of committed emissions (846 Gt CO2; star inFig. 3b) is two-thirds of the lower estimates of the 2°C budgets
(1170–1500 Gt CO2)5.
This suggests that, unless compensated by negative emissions technologies or retrofitted
with carbon capture and storage, 1.5°C carbon budgets allow for no new emitting
infrastructure and require substantial changes to the lifetime or operation of already
existing energy infrastructure (e.g., decreasing lifetimes to <25 years or
capacity factors to <30%;Fig. 3a).
Moreover, CO2emissions related to the extraction and transport of fossil
fuels27and non-energy
CO2emissions (e.g., due to land use change)28are not included in our estimates and will
further reduce the remaining carbon budgets.
Climate targets have also sometimes been contextualized by the annual rate of
emissions reduction they imply. For example, Raupach et al.29showed, as of 2013, the cumulative carbon
budgets likely to avoid 2°C of mean warming implied necessary average annual
reductions in global CO2emissions (i.e. mitigation rates) of ~6% per
year. The hatched areas inFigures 3cand3dshow that such mitigation rates, recalculated from
the latest carbon budgets, are about 5% per year for the 2°C budgets
(4.5–5.7%) and about 13% per year for 1.5°C budgets (11.4–15.7%).
In comparison, the contours in the figure show mitigation rates if no new emitting
infrastructure is commissioned (10.1%; star inFig.
3c) or only proposed power plants but no other emitting infrastructure is
commissioned (7.9%; star inFig. 3d). Again the
international targets leave little or no room for new infrastructure if existing plants
operate as they have historically (stars) unless fully compensated by negative emissions
or retrofitted with carbon capture and storage technologies.
Given the constraints of 1.5°C and 2°C carbon budgets, we also
explore the economic value of existing infrastructure relative to its associated
committed emissions.Figure 4ahighlights the
disproportionality of committed emissions per unit asset value. Together power and
industry infrastructure (purple and dark blue inFig.
4a, respectively) represent >75% of total committed emissions (519 of
658 Gt CO2) but <25% of the estimated economic value of
CO2-emitting energy infrastructure (~$5 trillion of $22 trillion;Extended Data Fig. 4;Table S3; seeMethodsfor details of how asset values were amortized). In contrast,
transportation infrastructure, with shorter average lifetimes but high capacity costs
and a vast number of discrete units, represents roughly two-thirds of the value of
emitting assets and less than 10% of committed emissions (Fig. 4a). This analysis suggests that efforts to reduce committed emissions
might cost-effectively target early retirement of electricity and industry
infrastructure—despite their often powerful influence on policy and
institutions6,21,22—if non-emitting alternative technologies are affordable: the
magnitude of commitments in these sectors is large and a single dollar of asset value is
related to >10 kg of future CO2emissions (Fig. 4b; red rectangle). Industry and electricity sectors in
China represent especially prime targets for unlocking future emissions: nearly half
(46%) of these sectors’ committed emissions are associated with Chinese
infrastructure (Fig. 4a).

Rank ordering of CO2-emitting assets by committed emissions
per dollar value reveals large disparities (a; colored by sector).
Horizontal red lines inaindicate 50%, 75% and 90% of total
committed emissions (658 Gt CO2) if operated as historically, and the
top ten most valuable region-sectors are labeled (seeExtended Data Fig. 4for region-specific versions).
Plotting emissions per value (kg CO2/$) against committed emissions
suggests targeted opportunities to “unlock” future CO2emissions if alternative technologies are affordable (region-sectors in the
pink-shaded quadrant inb; showing 95% confidence intervals with
regions denoted by symbols).
Detailed and up-to-date analysis of existing and proposed
CO2-emitting energy infrastructure worldwide reveals incredibly tight
constraints of current international climate targets even if no new
emitting-infrastructure is ever built. Although climate and energy analysts have
emphasized that avoiding 1.5°C of warming, for example, remains
“technically possible”5,
our results lend vivid context to that possibility: we would have a reasonable chance of
achieving the 1.5°C target with (1) a global prohibition of all new
CO2-emitting devices—including many or most of the already
proposed fossil fuel-burning power plants, and (2) substantial reductions in the
historical lifetimes and/or utilization rates of already existing industry and
electricity infrastructure.
Barring such radical changes, the global climate goals adopted in the Paris
Agreement are already in jeopardy and may be contingent upon widespread retrofitting of
existing emitting infrastructure with carbon capture and storage technologies (which
retrofits would be tremendously expensive30), large-scale deployment of negative emissions
technologies16, and/or solar
radiation management4. On the other
hand, our results suggest that the level of future warming in excess of the Paris
targets is largely dependent on infrastructure that has not been built yet (Extended Data Fig. 5).
Some important caveats and limitations apply to our findings. The trajectory of
future emissions depicted inFigure 1represents a
scenario in which existing (and proposed) emitting infrastructure “ages
out,” and no new emitting infrastructure is ever commissioned. These constraints
are not intended as realistic; rather, they allow us to isolate and quantify
infrastructural—and related economic—lock-in of energy-related
emissions22. Indeed,
technological trends and climate-energy policies that encourage growth in renewable
electricity (e.g., solar and wind) may lead to earlier than historical retirements of
existing fossil fuel power plants in some regions, although recent growth of renewable
generation has not always displaced fossil generation18. It is also instructive to compare our estimates
of committed emissions to plausible energy-emissions scenarios generated by much more
sophisticated (but less transparent) IAMs that calculate infrastructure lifetimes and
capacity factors endogenously. For example, a recent IAM study of 1.5°C scenarios
found that large-scale carbon dioxide removal may be necessary to compensate for
“residual” emissions from long-lived and difficult-to-decarbonize sectors
of the energy system (e.g., freight, aviation, and shipping4)31.
The size of carbon budgets associated with a given temperature target is also a
complicated matter that is sensitive to a host of factors such as climate sensitivity
and non-CO2emissions14,15. The budgets from the recent IPCC
Special Report are estimates of cumulative net global anthropogenic CO2emissions from the start of 2018 until net-zero global CO2emissions are
achieved (i.e. climate is stabilized) with a 50–66% probability of limiting an
increase of mean near-surface air temperatures to 1.5°C or 2°C with
limited (<0.1°C) or no overshoot5(seeMethodsfor further
discussion).
Although ambitious climate targets such as 1.5°C may help to motivate and
accelerate the transition toward net-zero energy systems, their feasibility is often
evaluated by the existence of consistent scenarios from IAMs. However, these models have
been used to analyze a very large possibility space, and some scenarios may thus reflect
aspirational trajectories of energy demand or technological progress and scale whose
likelihood may be difficult to evaluate32,33. Our data-driven
assessment of existing, operating, and valuable energy infrastructure may therefore help
to elucidate the infrastructural and economic implications of such targets, and also
help to identify targeted regional and sectoral opportunities for unlocking future
CO2emissions.
We extend the approach of Davis et al9to quantify the committed emissions from existing energy
infrastructure by integrating more detailed and up-to-date data of energy
infrastructure available, including country- and duty-specific vehicle sales
data, and unit-level details of global power plants and Chinese cement kilns and
blast furnaces10,34–39. We also estimate committed emission from proposed
power plants by collecting all proposed power generators from the latest
available databases34,37, in recognition of substantial
changes in the pipeline of planned power plants (especially coal) in recent
years34. Energy
infrastructure as quantified in this study is categorized into eight sectors:
(1) electricity, (2) industry, (3) road transport, (4) other transport, (5)
international transport, (6) residential, (7) commercial and (8) other energy
infrastructure (seeTables
S4andS5).
Emissions from electricity infrastructure in this study include all
emissions under category 1A1 of the IPCC’s Revised Guidelines40. Electricity infrastructure
here mainly includes main activity electricity and heat production (1A1a), and
petroleum refining (1A1b), as well as manufacturing of solid fuels and other
energy industries (1A1c) (Table S5).
Previously, we built and published a comprehensive global thermal
power plants database in 2010 (named GPED) by integrating high-quality
national databases (China, India, and the U.S.)10. Here we update the GPED database to
the year 2018 (named GPED-2018) using the latest power plant database from
China (CPED)36and the
Platts World Electric Power Plant (WEPP) database for other
regions37,
including all retired and operating units through the end of 2018. We obtain
data and estimates of unit-based CO2emission intensity (i.e.
gCO2/kwh) for all units that were operating in 2010 from
GPED-2010. For units retired prior to 2010 or commissioned since 2010, we
estimate unit-level CO2emission intensity by the methods of
Davis et al9based on the
Carbon Monitoring for Action (CARMA) database35(for older units) or else use
national or regional average CO2emission intensity for units
with the same fuel type and similar nameplate capacity. As prior studies
have done, we assume these emissions intensities are constant over a
unit’s lifetime8,9.
In the resulting GPED-2018, global average lifetimes of retired
coal-, nature gas-, and oil-fired power units is 35.9, 37.1, and 33.9 years,
respectively. Consistent with prior study9have done, we simplify these ranges to a single
reference lifetime of 40 years for all electricity-generating units for our
“as historically” case, and show the sensitivity of committed
emissions to this assumption inFigure
3. When units already operating beyond their assumed lifetime,
these units are randomly retired over the next 5 years in order to avoid
unrealistically abrupt changes in emissions between 2018 and 2019.
In addition, we assume that the age structure and lifetime of
autoproducers (industrial and commercial facilities which generate their own
electricity on-site)40and
other energy industries are similar to the main activity power plants in
each region. Therefore, committed emissions from existing electricity
infrastructure are quantified by employing the survival curves derived from
main activity power plants, scaled to include these other types of
electricity infrastructure using country-level electricity emissions totals
in 2018 from the International Energy Agency (IEA). It is noted that the
country-level CO2emissions from fossil fuel combustions for 2018
were derived from multiplying country-level CO2emissions in 2016
by projected change rates during 2016–2018 due to data
availability41.
Finally, we quantify the cumulative future CO2emissions
from proposed power plants by the same procedure (assuming historical
average unitization rates and lifetimes) using a database of proposed
coal-fired units that has been developed by CoalSwarm34and the planned units fired with
other fossil fuels from the Q4 2018 WEPP database37.
Industrial emissions in this study include all emissions under category
1A2 of the IPCC’s Revised Guidelines40. For all countries but China, we estimate cumulative
future emissions from industry infrastructure using country-level emissions data
for the year 2018 obtained from the IEA and assuming that the age distribution
and survival curves of each region’s industry infrastructure is
consistent with its electricity infrastructure. To derive China’s
industrial survival curves, we use unit-level details of cement kilns and blast
furnaces (iron & steel) currently operating in China (Extended Data Fig. 2), obtained from China’s
Ministry of Ecology and Environment (MEE) (unpublished data, hereinafter refer
to as the MEE database).
The detailed data of Chinese infrastructure represent an important
improvement in the current study over prior estimates of committed emissions, as
we China alone accounts for ~47% of total industrial emissions41. In particular, the iron/steel
and non-metallic minerals (e.g., cement and glass) industries account for
~50% of all industrial CO2emissions in recent years41, and China produced 49.6% of
the world’s raw steel and 57.3% of the world’s cement in
201642. The unit-level
data of China’s industrial infrastructure thus substantially decreases
uncertainty of committed industry emissions by alleviating the need for
assumptions related to almost half of global industry infrastructure (i.e. 9.0%
of global CO2emissions from all sources41). Moreover, we observed that the age
distributions of electricity and industry infrastructure in China are quite
similar (Extended Data Fig. 6), which
lends support to our assumption that this is the case in other regions where we
lack detailed data of industrial infrastructure.
Transport emissions in this study include all emissions under category
1A3 of the IPCC’s Revised Guidelines40, which includes emissions from road transport, other
transport and international transport (Tables S4andS5).
Cumulative future emissions from road transport were calculated
following the approach in Davis et al.8and further updating the activity rates with updated
country-, region-, and duty-specific vehicle sales data38,39(i.e. 18% of global CO2emissions from all
sources41).
Specifically, we use the number, class, and vintage of motor vehicles sold
during 1977–2017 from 40 major countries and regions38,39(information for 2018 was derived by projecting
2016–2017 rates of change one additional year;Extended Data Fig. 3). We then estimate the number of
vehicles remaining on the road over time using class- and model year-specific
survival rates of U.S. and Chinese vehicles to represent developed and
developing countries or regions due to data availability, respectively43,44. We then calculate annual vehicle emissions based on
the average miles driven per year (MPY) per vehicles by class and carbon
emission factors of 10.23 and 11.80 kg CO2per gallon of gas and
diesel, respectively, and scale our estimated emissions to match country-level
road transport emissions in 2018 as reported by the IEA41.
“Other transportation” infrastructure includes existing
aviation, rail, pipeline, navigation and other non-specified transport.
International transport infrastructure includes international marine bunkers and
international aviation bunkers in this work (Table S4). Again, we follow Davis
et al.8, estimating cumulative
future CO2emissions from existing other and international transport
using country-level emissions data of 2018 from IEA, and assuming lifetimes and
age distributions similar to motor vehicle fleets in each country/region.
Residential and commercial emissions are included under category 1A4 of
the IPCC’s Revised Guidelines40, and “Other energy” emissions include,
e.g., emissions from agriculture, forestry, fishing, and aquaculture under
category 1A4 as well as and stationary, mobile, and multilateral operations
under category 1A5 of the IPCC’s Revised Guidelines. Cumulative future
emissions from this infrastructure were calculated using country-level emissions
data of 2018 derived from the IEA41, and assuming age distributions and lifetimes of
residential, commercial and other energy infrastructure in each region were
similar to electricity infrastructure in the same region in the absence of
better information.
The least-supported methodological assumptions we make thus concern this
residential, commercial and other energy infrastructure (~10% of total
fossil fuel CO2emissions in 201641), where we lack any unit-level data. In order to test
the sensitivity of total committed emissions from this infrastructure, we
performed additional analyses of different assumed lifetimes. We found the
committed emissions from residential, commercial, and other energy
infrastructure are 29, 74, and 135 Gt CO2when lifetimes of 20, 40,
and 60 years are assumed, respectively (Extended
Data Fig. 7). That is, our estimates of total committed emissions
from all existing energy infrastructure decrease by 7% (to 613 Gt
CO2) if lifetimes of residential, commercial, and other energy
infrastructure are assumed to be 20 years, and increase by 9% (to 719 Gt
CO2) if the lifetimes are assumed to be 60 years. In comparison
to the carbon budgets associated with targets of 1.5 °C and 2 °C,
these are relatively small effects, and not substantial enough to affect the
main conclusions of our study.
Other studies have analyzed committed emissions of various
infrastructure in different ways, as mentioned in the text and summarized inExtended Data Table 18,9,11–13.
For example, both Edenhofer et al.11and Pfeiffer et al.12reported committed emissions related to existing and
planned power plants using 2016 data. Although the latter analyzed committed
emissions of all fossil electricity infrastructure12, the former focused particularly on
coal-fired units11.
Importantly, the 2018 data used in the current study reveals that substantial
cancellations of proposed plants have occurred over the intervening two years:
whereas the previous studies estimated ~150 Gt CO2and 210 Gt
CO2were committed by proposed coal plants, we estimate only
~100 Gt CO2, 50–100 Gt CO2less,
respectively (or 10–20% of the remaining carbon budget consistent with
1.5°C, respectively). Moreover, our study contains more detailed
estimates of regional commitments and the sensitivity of these commitments to
assumed lifetime and capacity factor.
Most recently, Smith et al.13estimated the global warming related to committed
emissions using a reduced-complexity climate model (FaIR). Their study also
included estimates of committed emissions from all sectors, but these relied on
past estimates of the age distribution of fossil fuel infrastructure and an
idealized, linear phase-out of such infrastructure13. Because turnover of infrastructure has
decreased the median age of electricity generating capacity in many regions
(Fig. 2), our estimates of electric
power sector commitments (358 Gt CO2) are ~13 Gt
CO2greater than those used by Smith et al13(345 Gt CO2). Our data-driven
approach also permits region-specific results, analysis of the trend in
commitments over time, inclusion of proposed power plants, and an assessment of
the economic value of underlying infrastructures. Yet, because Smith et
al.’s estimates of CO2emissions committed by other
infrastructure are larger than our bottom-up estimates (Extended Data Table 1), the overall estimate reached
by their idealized approach (715 Gt CO2) is nonetheless similar to
that of the current study (658 Gt CO2).
In turn, Smith et al.13assess the global climate responses to the committed
CO2and conclude that the world is not yet committed to
1.5°C13.
However, it is difficult to directly compare the magnitude of the CO2emissions in Smith et al.’s phase-out scenarios with the SR1.5 carbon
budgets for two reasons: First, although SR1.5 also used the FaIR model in its
procedure of evaluating non-CO2forcing, it did not use the FaIR
model’s transient climate response to cumulative emissions (TCRE), which
is smaller and would have led to considerably larger carbon budgets. Second, the
mitigation scenarios evaluated by Smith et al. also assumed that
non-CO2emissions are completely phased out in parallel to
CO2, while the integrated assessment model scenarios on which the
SR1.5 report’s non-CO2forcing (and carbon budgets) are based
do not completely eliminate non-CO2emissions this century45.
As described above, cumulative future committed emissions from
electricity and industry infrastructure depend on utilization rates and assumed
lifetimes. The longer the assumed lifetime and higher the utilization, the
greater the estimate of committed emissions will be. In this study, we therefore
test the sensitivity of committed emissions to assumed lifetimes and utilization
rates of energy and industry infrastructure across lifetimes from 20 to 60 years
and utilization rates of 20% to 80%.
As described in the text and discussed in recent literature, the size of
carbon budgets associated with a given temperature target is a complicated
matter that is sensitive to a host of factors14,15, including (1) whether the budget reflects cumulative net
emissions until the temperature target is exceeded or cumulative net emissions
that limits global temperature increase to below the target (i.e. climate is
stabilized), (2) whether there can be a temporary overshoot of the temperature
target (and by how much)46,
(3) the climate responses to CO2and non-CO2forcings47, (4) the
magnitude and Earth system response to negative emissions48, (5) how global temperature is
calculated, (6) the pre-industrial baseline used49, (7) whether Earth system feedbacks such
as permafrost thawing are included50–53, and
(8) future emissions of non-CO2greenhouse gases and
aerosols54,55.
The magnitude of non-CO2forcing is particularly relevant to
assessments of committed emissions because non-CO2forcing is
inversely related to the remaining carbon budget54,55, and because some non-CO2greenhouse gases and
aerosols are directly related to the current energy system (e.g., fugitive
methane56) or are
co-emitted with CO2by fossil fuel-burning infrastructure. Other
large sources of non-CO2gases and aerosols exist outside of the
energy system, such as agriculture57. For the SR1.5 budgets, non-CO2forcing was
estimated using integrated assessment model scenarios and a pair of
reduced-complexity climate models (MAGICC and FaIR), with substantial
uncertainties associated with both scenario variations (±250 Gt
CO2) and climate responses (-400 to 200 Gt CO2) for
the 1.5°C budget5.
Non-CO2greenhouse gases and aerosols decline but do not reach
zero in any of the scenarios assessed by the SR1.5 report. In contrast, the
recent study by Smith et al. modeled the complete phase-out of
non-CO2emissions in parallel with energy-related CO2emissions, a formidable scenario that was found to have a high probability (64%)
of limiting warming to 1.5°C13.
In this study, we compare our estimates of committed emissions to the
SR1.5 budgets5. As defined by
the recent SR1.5 report, remaining carbon budgets are the cumulative net global
anthropogenic CO2emissions from a given start date (January 1, 2018)
to the year in which such emissions reach net zero that would result, at some
probability, in limiting global warming to a given level5. By this definition, budgets are not
simply cumulative emissions until the time when mean temperature exceeds a given
threshold14, but
rather what have been called “threshold avoidance” or called
“stabilization” budgets. The SR1.5 budgets were derived from the
transient climate response to cumulative CO2emissions in climate
model simulations that have been further adjusted to include additional climate
forcing related to non-CO2greenhouse gases and aerosols45. They do not include Earth
system feedbacks (which the report suggests could reduce the remaining budgets
by 100 Gt CO2over the century).
However, as remaining budgets associated with mean surface warming of
1.5°C dwindle, uncertainties in transient climate response to
CO2emissions15,47and the current and future
non-CO2forcing loom large53–55. In
order to make our results as useful, transparent, and comparable as possible, we
report positive, CO2-only commitments from existing and proposed
fossil fuel-burning infrastructure and compare to these to the remaining
(stabilization) carbon budgets reported by the SR1.5 report to give a
50–66% probability of limiting warming to 1.5°C and 2°C
with little (0.1°C) or no overshoot: 420–580 Gt CO2and
1170–1500 Gt CO2, respectively (See Table 2.2 in
ref.5). Thus, if not
offset by negative emissions, the total committed emissions we estimate if
existing infrastructure operates as it has historically (i.e. 658 Gt
CO2) would make it likely that global temperatures will exceed
1.5°C unless the remaining carbon budgets in the SR1.5 are substantially
wrong. For example, the climate response to CO2could be less than
expected based on the climate model simulations the SR1.5 assessed and/or
non-CO2forcing in the future could be much less than it is on
average in the integrated assessment model scenarios that were assessed by the
SR1.5. Indeed, Smith et al.13analyzed a future where both are true.
We estimate annual rate of emissions reduction (“mitigation
rates”) following Raupach et al (2014)29:
where f(t) is the emissions at timet,f0is the emissions at the start of mitigation
(t= 0),ris an initially linear growth
rate, andrandmboth have units of per year.
When the necessary annual rate of emission reductions to meet quota q from t=0
onward (with emission time T = q/f0), we estimate the annual rate of emission
reductions, m, as:
We use initial emissionsf0at 2018 and
growth ratesraveraged over 2013–2018. Therefore,f0= 32.7 Gt and r = 0.028% used obtained from
IEA41when estimating
mitigation rates under different cumulative CO2emissions, which we
assumed to be equivalent to the carbon quota,q.
We estimate the asset value by sector and by country/region using the
following equation:
wherei,s,n,yrepresents country/region, sector, years,
and combustion/production technology, AV represents asset value, TC represents
equivalent total capacity, CC represents capital costs, RV represents the ratio
of residual value, and 5% is applied for all the infrastructure; DR represents
depreciation rate,PYrepresents present year, referring 2018
in this study.LTrepresents lifetimes.
We adopt sector-dependent method, and apply straight-line and geometric
models for different infrastructure, as shown inTable S6. Data on capital costs
used to estimate the asset value was collected from previous
literature12,21,23–25,58,59and various reports60–64.
Wherever possible, we use interannual and national average capital costs for
different combustion/production technology and equipment. Where an interannual
and national averages were not available, we instead use an average of all the
countries in the same region where capital cost data were available.
We estimate the total value of fossil fuel electricity-generating assets
according to each unit’s power generating capacity (kW) and age, as well
as fuel- and technology-specific capital costs ($/kW).
The assumed lifetime of coal power plants is 40 years. Although plants
can operate for considerably longer periods, shutting down a plant after its
assumed lifetime will not result in any stranded capital investment since the
initial capital cost will have been fully paid24. Thus, our estimates only include the
asset value of operating electricity-generating units that are now less than 40
years old. Unit-level details of electricity-generating technologies were
obtained from GPED-2018 database.
In addition, part of committed CO2emissions in electricity
infrastructure are from heating plants. The asset value of combined heat and
power (CHP) plants have been evaluated along with other power plants, but we
estimate the asset value of individual heating plants separately, using IEA data
on heating output (TJ)65,66to estimate the capacity of
such heating plants and converting this to an equivalent power capacity (GW)
assuming they operate with the average utilization rates of power generating
units in the same region.Table S6summarizes the assumptions of estimating asset value of
individual heating plants.
Industrial infrastructure includes various facilities and systems from
different sub-industrial sectors (Tables S4andS5). Considering the difficulty of
collecting the operating capacity for all the sub-industrial sectors, we
estimate the value of industry infrastructure as the combined asset values of
cement, iron and steel plants, and industrial boilers. As described above, only
the asset value for cement, iron and steel capacity operating less than 40 years
was estimated in this work. Asset value from cement, iron and steel industry are
quantified through total capacity and capital investment per unit (Table S6).
We estimate total capacities (t/h) of industrial boilers at country- or
region-level by fuel type by through total energy consumptions obtained from
IEA65,66. The utilization rates of industrial
boilers are assumed to be the same as the average utilization rate of
electricity infrastructure. The related assumptions are shown inTable S6.
We quantify the value from road transport, other transport and
international transport assets separately. For road transport infrastructure, we
estimate asset value by number of annual vehicle sales, annual average new car
prices, and a depreciation rate function. The data sources of number of annual
vehicle sales is described above, and we further collect annual average new car
prices by vehicle type and country/region39. Because depreciation rates tend to be considerably
lower in developing countries than industrialized countries67, we adopt different depreciation rate
functions for developing and developed countries67.
For international transport infrastructure, we estimate the value of
international ships and international airplanes. Due to limited data
availability, we use the same approach as with heating infrastructure, basing
our estimates on the total energy consumption (fuels) for international aviation
and international navigation from the IEA, and converting to the number of
reference narrow-body aircraft and standardized international freight ships by
such fuel consumption. Specifically, we assume 2 million-km/year per aircraft
and 149 MJ/airplane-km for reference narrow-body aircrafts21(Table S6); 940 million annual
ton-km and an average ship energy intensity of 0.125 MJ/ton-km for international
freight ships21. We use the
same total average depreciation rates for international transport as we do for
road transport infrastructure.
We use a similar approach for other transport (i.e. domestic ships,
domestic airplanes, and non-specific transport), adopting the same assumptions
applied in the international transport for domestic ships and domestic
airplanes. For non-specific transport, we quantify asset values by converting to
the number of conventional diesel heavy-duty freight truck. The corresponding
assumptions are shown inTable
S6.
We quantify the asset values of residential, commercial and other energy
infrastructure separately using sector- and fuel-specific energy consumption
data from the IEA65,66.
Residential and commercial infrastructure use energy for space heating,
heating water, and cooking. Other energy infrastructure includes uses of energy
for agriculture, fishing and other activities. Given very limited data, we
quantify the value of residential and commercial infrastructure by according to
an equivalent capacity of normalized space heating units, water heating units,
and cooking equipment. In the other energy infrastructure, we quantified the
asset value by converting to normalized agriculture machines, fishing boats and
boilers. We then apply the total average depreciation rates of electricity
infrastructure to these residential, commercial and other energy
infrastructures.
Our estimates of asset values are subject to uncertainty due to
incomplete knowledge of operating capacities, their age structure, and the
capital costs per unit. In order to more completely assess uncertainties in our
results, we perform a Monte Carlo analysis of asset values by sector and by
country/region in which we vary key parameters according to ranges in the
literature58,68,69and collected capital costs data above. The error bars
shown inFigure 4depict the results of
this analysis, showing the lower and upper bounds of a 95% confidence interval
(CI) around our central estimate. The Monte Carlo simulation uses specified
probability distributions for each input parameter (e.g., capital cost per unit,
and the ratio of residual value) to generate random variables68. The probability distribution
of asset value is estimated according to a set of runs (n=10,000) in a Monte
Carlo framework with probability distributions of the input parameters. The
ranges of sector- and -region-parameter values vary in part due to the quality
of their statistical infrastructure69.Table S7summarizes the probability distributions of the asset value
estimation-related parameters.
The numerical results plotted inFigures
1–4are provided with the
manuscript. Our analysis relies on six different datasets, each used with
permission and/or by license. Five are available from their original creators:
(1) the GPED database:http://www.meicmodel.org/dataset-gped.html, (2) Platt’s
WEPP database:https://www.spglobal.com/platts/en/products-services/electric-power/world-electric-power-plants-database,
(3) the CARMA database:http://carma.org/, (4) the CoalSwarm database:https://endcoal.org/tracker/, and (5) vehicle
sales data:https://www.statista.com/markets/419/topic/487/vehicles-road-traffic/.
The sixth dataset includes unit-level data of Chinese iron, steel and cement
infrastructure which we obtained directly from the Chinese Ministry of Ecology
and Environment. We do not have permission to share the raw data, but we provide
it in an aggregated form (Extended Data Figure
2).

Estimates of future CO2emissions every four years by
industry sector (a) and country/region (b) from
1998 to 2018 (1998, 2002, 2006, 2010, 2014, and 2018), assuming historical
lifetimes and utilization rates. Panels (c) and
(d) show corresponding changes in remaining commitments by
industry sector (c) and country/region (d).

The operating capacity of raw steel in iron and steel industry
(a) and clinker in cement industry (b) where
the youngest units are at the bottom.

This figure shows the population of vehicle sales by
country/region.

Cumulative committed CO2emissions in the order of
committed emission per value (kg CO2per $) (from high to low) by
country/region and sector. Dash horizontal lines indicate 50%, 75% and 90%
of total committed emissions if operated as historically, respectively.

This figure shows historical CO2emissions from fossil
fuel energy infrastructure (black area), and future CO2emissions
from existing (red area) and proposed energy infrastructure (dark red area),
as well as future infrastructure (dark grey area) under representative
concentration pathways (RCPs: RCP8.5, RCP6, RCP4.5, and RCP2.6).

This figure shows survival curves of power sector (peachblow line),
cement industry (orange line), and iron and steel industry (blue line) in
China under the assumption of 40-year lifetimes.

This figure shows future annual CO2emissions from
residential, commercial, and other energy infrastructure under the
assumptions of 20- (peachblow line), 40- (orange line), and 60-year (blue
line) lifetimes.
Comparison of committed emissions by sector estimated in the current
study and prior studies. Note that in some cases, the totals may not
correspond to the sum of underlying sectors due to rounding.
The range represents the committed emissions estimated under the
assumptions of 30–50 years’ lifetimes for all the sectors
except transportation sector (12–18 years’ lifetimes).
The age distribution of infrastructure was assumed to be the
same as 2009, but annual emissions from the infrastructure was adjusted
up to 2018 levels.
D.T. was supported by NASA’s IDS program (80NSSC17K0416). Q.Z. was
supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (41625020). C.H.,
Y.Q., and S.J.D. were supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation (INFEWS
grant EAR 1639318).
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
The numerical results plotted inFigures
1–4are provided with the
manuscript. Our analysis relies on six different datasets, each used with
permission and/or by license. Five are available from their original creators:
(1) the GPED database:http://www.meicmodel.org/dataset-gped.html, (2) Platt’s
WEPP database:https://www.spglobal.com/platts/en/products-services/electric-power/world-electric-power-plants-database,
(3) the CARMA database:http://carma.org/, (4) the CoalSwarm database:https://endcoal.org/tracker/, and (5) vehicle
sales data:https://www.statista.com/markets/419/topic/487/vehicles-road-traffic/.
The sixth dataset includes unit-level data of Chinese iron, steel and cement
infrastructure which we obtained directly from the Chinese Ministry of Ecology
and Environment. We do not have permission to share the raw data, but we provide
it in an aggregated form (Extended Data Figure
2).
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894