An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Electronic supplementary material is available online athttps://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.c.5704491.
Corresponding author.
Received 2021 Jun 16; Accepted 2021 Oct 29; Issue date 2021 Nov 24.
Published by the Royal Society. All rights reserved.
Climate change has led to phenological shifts in many species, but with large variation in magnitude among species and trophic levels. The poster child example of the resulting phenological mismatches between the phenology of predators and their prey is the great tit (Parus major), where this mismatch led to directional selection for earlier seasonal breeding. Natural climate variability can obscure the impacts of climate change over certain periods, weakening phenological mismatching and selection. Here, we show that selection on seasonal timing indeed weakened significantly over the past two decades as increases in late spring temperatures have slowed down. Consequently, there has been no further advancement in the date of peak caterpillar food abundance, while great tit phenology has continued to advance, thereby weakening the phenological mismatch. We thus show that the relationships between temperature, phenologies of prey and predator, and selection on predator phenology are robust, also in times of a slowdown of warming. Using projected temperatures from a large ensemble of climate simulations that take natural climate variability into account, we show that prey phenology is again projected to advance faster than great tit phenology in the coming decades, and therefore that long-term global warming will intensify phenological mismatches.
Keywords:seasonal timing, phenology, climate change, selection, great tit
In climates with strong seasonality, life-cycle events, such as reproduction, can only successfully take place during a relatively short period in the annual cycle. In many species, the timing of this period to favourable conditions varies strongly between years as its timing is temperature dependent. Individuals therefore need to adjust the timing of their life-cycle events to these different annual conditions, and consequently these events exhibit a high degree of phenotypically plasticity [1]: individuals adjust their seasonal timing (or phenology [2]; the annual timing of life-cycle events) by responding to the relevant environmental variables or ‘cues’.
Warmer temperatures due to climate change have led to the advancement of phenology in a wide range of species [3,4]. However, these phenological shifts are often insufficient to keep up with the changes in the species' environment [5]. Furthermore, the rates of phenological shifts often vary between species within the same food chain [4], leading to increased phenological mismatches [6]. Higher trophic levels generally advance at slower rates than lower trophic levels [7], which is consistent with theoretical predictions [8]. These increased phenological mismatches may have critical consequences for population viability [9–11], though in some instances mismatches can be buffered by ecological processes such as density dependence [12].
Climate warming-induced phenological mismatches often lead to a higher fitness for individuals being earlier or later than the population average, and these differences in fitness between individuals result in directional selection on phenology. To reduce the phenological mismatch, such selection will—in the long term—require that species adapt genetically to the changed phenology of their prey [13]. Only a few examples of genetic changes in response to phenological mismatch exist [14–16]. Importantly, monitoring the strength of directional selection on seasonal timing in order to estimate whether selection intensifies or weakens over time allows one to infer whether the population is catching up with phenological changes at other trophic levels. Such studies can be especially informative when conducted with long-term population studies. Moreover, identifying the ecological drivers of this selection enables the forecasting of the strength of directional selection under future climate scenarios.
One of the earliest and best-known examples of climate change-induced phenological mismatches and resulting directional selection on seasonal timing comes from a study of a Dutch great tit (Parus major) population [17]. That study showed that great tits were not advancing their laying dates despite a strong shift in the peak date of caterpillar biomass, a proxy for the phenology of the main nestling food. Great tit laying dates were affected by temperature during a different period of spring than caterpillar peak dates, and the temperatures during the temperature-sensitive period of the great tit increased at a slower rate than those of the temperature-sensitive period linked to the timing of the caterpillar biomass peak. As a result, the phenology of the caterpillar biomass peak advanced faster than the laying date of great tits, and the increasing phenological mismatch led to increasing directional selection for earlier laying [18].
Climate change is not a smooth process of continuously increasing temperatures. Instead, warming trends are characterized by significant slowdowns and speedups on decadal timescales. Indeed, while climate change is characterized by a global warming trend caused by elevated levels of greenhouse gases, other processes occurring over a broad range of temporal and spatial scales generate natural variability in the climate system (e.g. volcanoes [19]). This natural variability can generate a period of slowdown in the rate of warming, such as observed during the decade of the 2000s due to a combination of volcanic influences and internal climate variability [20,21], while the climate forcing continued. Importantly, we can make use of this natural variability to better understand how temperature relates to the phenologies of trophically linked species in the food chain, as well as the resulting mismatches and strength of selection, as it overcomes the problem of spurious relationships due to a number of variables all changing unidirectionally over time.
Here, we make use of a period of slowing down of spring temperature warming that affects the timing of peak caterpillar biomass. We show that in the 25 years after the data analysed in the 1998 study [17] (1973–1995; current study: 1973–2020), selection for laying date has weakened. We explore why this has happened by analysing changes in great tit laying date, timing of maximal food abundance, phenological mismatch, temperature during different periods in spring and strength of directional selection. We find that the increase in temperatures relevant to the caterpillar biomass peak has slowed down, and that this has led to a halt in the advancement of the timing of the food peak. At the same time, great tit laying dates continued to advance as the temperatures relevant for their phenology kept increasing. This has led to a decreased mismatch and a relaxation of selection on great tit laying dates. Further, our findings strongly suggest that the relationships described in the 1998 paper [17] are robust and not due to spurious relationships between different variables simply because they all change over time.
Furthermore, we project future timing of great tit laying dates, caterpillar biomass peak dates and the phenological mismatch by using projected temperatures for several climate forcing scenarios, and thus include uncertainties in socio-economic pathways over the coming decades due to anthropogenic emissions as well as land-use changes. For this, we used a large ensemble of climate outputs from a coupled atmosphere-ocean general circulation model (AOGCM) which explicitly takes natural climate variability into account [22] and show that in the next decades the phenological mismatch will again intensify.
We used 48 years of data (1973 to 2020) from a long-term study of a great tit population at the National Park de Hoge Veluwe (The Netherlands; 52°2'26.59″ N, 5°51'20.63″ E). The study area consists of mixed pine/deciduous wood covering 171 ha (1 ha = 104m2) and is supplied with approximately 450 nest-boxes. Nest-boxes were checked weekly to determine laying date and clutch size, and daily during the days immediately prior to predicted hatch date to determine specific hatching date of the young. Nestlings were ringed on day 7, and their parents were identified. From these measurements, we obtained data on laying date of the first clutch for all females in the population (assuming that one egg a day was laid).
Annual peak dates of caterpillar biomass were defined as the date on which the caterpillar biomass peaks using frass-fall samples from the Hoge Veluwe (1985–2020, excl. 1991) [23,24]. The annual phenological mismatch was defined as the difference in the mean laying date of the great tits plus 33 days minus the peak date of caterpillar biomass [24,25]. This measure of phenological mismatch has been shown to be a better predictor for both offspring recruitment and selection on timing than measures that aim to quantify the temporal overlap between the phenological distributions of laying dates and caterpillar biomass [24,26], primarily because the latter measure is based on assumptions that are hard to verify (see [24]). The addition of 33 days is based on mean clutch size, incubation duration and taking into account that nestlings have the highest demand for food 10 days after birth [23] and thus the absolute degree of mismatch may vary with a few days between broods. This largely depends on spring temperatures, as birds may already start incubating before the last egg is laid, thereby reducing the interval between laying date and hatching date. In addition, the use of hatching date, as done in some studies [10], has a major disadvantage in that any clutch where no chicks hatch (which will be a non-random group with respect to laying date) will be omitted from the analysis and thus selection will be underestimated.
Temperature data were obtained from the De Bilt station of the KNMI (Royal Dutch Meteorological Institute), less than 50 km from the Hoge Veluwe field site. We used ClimWin [27] to find the best correlating temperature periods for both the great tit laying date (using mean annual laying dates and including year in the analysis to avoid spurious relationships [27]) and the caterpillar biomass peak date (using annual values). We used the ClimWin randomization test with 20 repeats to test the probability that we identified a temperature period by chance. Data on oak (Quercus robur) bud burst were available for 1988–2020 [28] and data on beech (Fagus sylvatica) crop, the key environmental variable that affects winter survival in great tits, were available for 1977–2020 [29].
Annual standardized selection differentials were calculated by regressing relative fitness (i.e. individual fitness divided by annual mean fitness) against annually standardized laying dates following [30]. Laying dates were standardized within years by subtracting the annual mean and dividing by the annual standard deviation. For the selection analysis, broods that were manipulated (i.e. brood size manipulation) were excluded from the analysis. We estimated fitness as the number of offspring produced by a female in the breeding season (from first, replacement and second broods) that recruited (i.e. were recorded as breeders) in the study population in subsequent years (great tits already can recruit the year after they hatched), but note that this fitness estimate combines fitness components of the parent (number of offspring) with the fitness of their offspring (the survival to recruitment) [31].
All time trends were analysed with a generalized additive model (GAM), which allows the fitting of relationships withouta prioriexpectations about the shape of the relationship. All GAMs were fitted with the package mgcv in R [32], allowing us to estimate the smoothness of model terms as part of the fitting procedure. To test whether the ‘nonlinear’ fit of a GAM was better than a linear fit, the AICs of the GAM and the linear model were compared and the ΔAIC reported. If the estimated degrees of freedom (EDF) for the smoothed term were 1, indicating a linear relationship, results from a linear regression are also reported. For relationships where the dependent variable was regressed against temperature or mismatch, we havea prioriexpectations of linear relationships and thus linear regression was used. In the analysis of selection differentials, we weighted the datapoints by s.e.−2[33]. In the analysis of laying date, we did not weight the datapoints as the variance in laying date is mostly biologically determined and not driven by sampling error.
For the annual standardized selection differentials, we then analysed whether phenological mismatch explained the year effect [18], and next, to explain the remaining year effect we substituted year with a number of annual variables: mean number of recruits produced (to test for the effect of mean fitness on the strength of selection [34,35]), total number of fledglings (testing for possible competition effects), the height of the caterpillar biomass peak (testing for possible harsh spring conditions), beech crop index (testing for possible winter food conditions that affect both adult and juvenile survival [29]) and the spring temperatures in the following year when recruits need to settle (testing for harsh conditions when early recruits start breeding; see [36] on pied flycatcher where there was such an effect). For annual laying date and annual biomass peak date, we tested whether changes over time were fully explained by the change in temperature over years. As this was not the case, we tested whether temperature fully explained the year effect and for the annual biomass peak date whether the remaining year effect could be explained by the variation in the annual oak bud burst date. We reportF-statistics andp-values for each variable at point of removal from the model. Note that the degrees of freedom can vary as the number of years an environmental variable was recorded varies among variables (see above). All analysis were done using R v. 4.0.4 [37].
To forecast phenological mismatch over the period from 2021 to 2100, we projected the laying date of the great tits and the peak date of caterpillar biomass from the relationships between phenology and temperature using daily temperatures projected under five climate scenarios (see electronic supplementary material, appendix S1 for details on the climate scenarios, electronic supplementary material, appendix S2 for details on projection of temperatures, electronic supplementary material, appendix S3 for the validation of the climate scenarios and electronic supplementary material, appendix S4 for the projection of laying dates and food peak dates). The RCP8.5 baseline scenario projects temperatures without policy intervention and RCP4.5 scenario projects temperatures with a pathway of various climate mitigation measures based on environmental, social, technical, economic and cultural change. To explicitly evaluate future climate trajectories under the Paris Agreement temperature targets relevant to the 1.5 and 2°C goals, we used three additional climate scenarios developed by Sandersonet al. [38].
Including uncertainties related to natural climate variability required multiple climate ensemble members from a single fully coupled AOGCM in order to diagnose the influence of internal climate variability on projections [22]. To specifically use emissions scenarios designed to assess the Paris Agreement targets, we used climate outputs from the Community Earth System Model. Electronic supplementary material, appendices S2 and S3 detail the climate simulations, and the comparison of observed and simulated data demonstrating that the temperature and phenological trends simulated, respectively, by the AOGCM and climate-phenological model overlapped well with the range of observations over the ‘historical period’ from 1985 to 2020.
In our long-term population of great tits, climate change initially led to increasing directional selection for earlier laying, followed by weakening selection (s(year): EDF = 2.27,F= 3.31,n= 47,p= 0.04, ΔAIC = 5.10;figure 1), where the year with the largest mismatch is around the year 1998. Mismatch showed a similar trend over time (s(year): EDF = 1.84,F= 1.62,n= 35,p= 0.20, ΔAIC = 2.28), which is due to a continuous advance in mean laying date (s(year): EDF = 1;F1,46= 20.56,p< 0.001,b= −0.248 (s.e. 0.055)) combined with an initial advance, followed by a period of no further advancement, in the phenology of the caterpillar peak date (s(year): EDF = 1.89,F= 7.13,n= 35,p= 0.002, ΔAIC = 2.43;figure 2a–c; seetable 1for statistical details).

Annual standardized selection differentials for great tit laying date between 1973 and 2020. Negative values indicate selection for earlier laying. Error bars are s.e. of the annual regression slopes of relative fitness on standardized laying dates. The line is the fit of the GAM (table 1).

(a) Great tit laying date (in April dates, i.e. 31 March is day 0) over years. (b) Date of the peak in caterpillar biomass (in April dates, i.e. 31 March is day 0) over years. (c) Annual phenological mismatch between great tit laying date and date of peak caterpillar biomass (in days) over years. The annual phenological mismatch is defined as the difference in the mean laying date of the great tits plus 33 days minus the peak date of caterpillar biomass, positive values thus indicate that the birds breed too late to be matched with their food. (d) Annual standardized selection differentials are linearly related to mismatch with an additive year effect. This effect is illustrated by the three lines, each illustrative for a particular period: blue line, 1985; green line, 2002; magenta line, 2019. (Online version in colour.)
Details of statistical analyses of time trends. For non-significant variables, significance and coefficients are given at the point of removal from the model. Details of GAM of the different dependent variables versus year. Given are the estimated degrees of freedom (EDF),F-ratio (F),p-value (p), the minimized generalized cross-validation score (GCV), all for s(year), the sample size (n)and in case the model yielded a linear fit the slope (b).
Selection differentials were negatively related with mismatch but in addition there was also a year effect (mismatch: b = −0.014 (s.e. 0.0054),F1,31= 9.60,p= 0.004; year:b= 0.009 (s.e. 0.004),F1,31= 7.96,p= 0.008); for the same degree of phenological mismatch, directional selection for laying date got weaker (figure 2d). To explain this year effect, we tested a number of hypotheses by fitting annual variables in a model with year to test whether they could explain the year effect. The year effect was not explained by the mean number of recruits produced (testing for the effect of mean fitness on the strength of selection [34,35]), the total number of fledglings (testing for possible competition effects), the height of the caterpillar biomass peak (testing for possible harsh spring conditions), beech crop index (testing for possible winter food conditions that affect both adult and juvenile survival [29]), or the spring temperatures in the following year when recruits need to settle (testing for harsh conditions when early recruits start breeding, see [36] on pied flycatcher where there was such an effect). Seetable 2for statistical details. Thus, we cannot offer an explanation for the year effect that, in addition to the mismatch, affects the strength of selection.
Details of statistical analyses of variables potentially affecting the relationship between selection differentials and mismatch. For non-significant variables, significance and coefficients are given at the point of removal from the model.F-ratios (F), degrees of freedom (d.f.),p-values (p) and coefficients (b) of the variables that were tested to explain the year effect in the relationship between selection differentials and mismatch.
aDenominator d.f. increase by more than one because additional years can now be included in the analysis.
To determine whether the advancement of laying date over time (figure 2a) is explained by an increase in temperature we first identified the window over which temperatures are correlated with laying date. The ClimWin analysis showed that laying date was strongly correlated with the mean daily temperature from 11 March to 20 April (F1,45= 75.9,p <0.001;table 3), with an additional year effect where laying date gets earlier for the same temperature over time (F1,45= 4.86,p= 0.033;table 3;figure 3a). The ClimWin randomization test clearly showed that this window was not selected by chance (p <0.0001). There is no change in temperature sensitivity over time (F1,44= 0.22,p= 0.64;table 3). The mean daily temperature from 11 March to 20 April increased linearly over the years (s(year): EDF = 1,F1,46= 14.1,p= 0.0005, ΔAIC = 0.0;table 1;figure 3c), leading to the earlier laying dates.
Details of statistical analyses of relationships between phenology and temperatures. For non-significant variables, significance and coefficients are given at the point of removal from the model.F-ratios (F), degrees of freedom (d.f.),p-values (p) and coefficients (b) of the variables determining laying dates and food peak phenology.
aNote that the temperature effect differs between the two models because fewer years are included in the analysis due to missing bud burst data.

(a) Great tit laying date (in April dates, i.e. 31 March is day 0) versus temperature (mean daily temperature from 11 March to 20 April, in °C). The additive year effect is illustrated by the three lines, each illustrative for a particular period: blue line 1985, green line 2002 and magenta line 2019. (b) Date of the peak in caterpillar biomass (in April dates, i.e. 31 March is day 0) versus temperature (mean daily temperature from 6 March to 14 May, in °C). The additive year effect is illustrated by the three lines, each illustrative for a particular period: blue line 1985, green line 2002 and magenta line 2019. (c) The temperature best correlating with great tit laying date temperature (mean daily temperature from 11 March to 20 April, in °C) over time. (d) The temperature best correlating with the date of the peak in caterpillar biomass (mean daily temperature from 6 March to 14 May, in °C) over time. (Online version in colour.)
The caterpillar biomass peak date was also strongly correlated with mean daily temperature but for a different period: 6 March to 14 May (F1,32= 130.8,p <0.001;table 3). This relationship did not change across years (F1,31= 0.53,p= 0.47;table 3), but again an additive year effect was found, with an earlier food peak for a given temperature over the years (F1,32= 14.8,p= 0.0005;table 3;figure 3b). The ClimWin randomization test clearly showed that this window was not selected by chance (p <0.0001). The year effect can be explained from the advancement of oak bud burst date; when budburst date is fitted (F1,29= 8.79,p= 0.006) year is no longer significant (table 3), and budburst date strongly advances over time (s(year): EDF = 1,F1,31= 11.35,p= 0.002, ΔAIC = 0.0;table 1). When analysing the mean daily temperature for 6 March to 14 May over the same years as for mean daily temperature from 11 March to 20 April (1973–2020), temperature was significantly nonlinearly related to year (s(year): EDF = 2.03,F= 12.4,p< 0.001, ΔAIC = 3.16;table 1), where temperature initially got warmer but then warming slowed down (figure 3d).
The five climate scenarios (RCP8.5, RCP4.5, 1.5degOS, 1.5degNE and 2.0degNE) showed that temperatures relevant for the phenology of the great tit and for the food peak will increase from 2020 to 2100 (2020–2080 for the RCP4.5 climate scenario; electronic supplementary material, figure A1). As a consequence, the phenology of the birds and of their food will advance, but at different rates under the different scenarios. Specifically, the date of the food peak will advance faster and hence the phenological mismatch will again increase in the next 80 years (60 years for the RCP4.5 climate scenario). The mismatch is forecast to be 14.6 days in 2100 under the RCP8.5 scenario, 10.0 days in 2080 under the RCP4.5 scenario, and 7.3, 8.0 and 8.7 days in 2100 under the 1.5degOS, 1.5degNE and 2.0degNE scenarios, respectively (figure 4;table 4). Interestingly, under the Paris Agreement scenarios the mismatch stabilizes after 2050, while for the RCP8.5 and RCP4.5 the increase is continuously (and linearly) increasing.

(a) Projected laying dates, (b) food peak dates and (c) phenological mismatch from 2006 to 2100 for five climate scenarios (RCP8.5, RCP4.5, 1.5degOS, 1.5degNE and 2.0degNE). For each scenario and phenotype, the running mean over an 11-year period over ensemble runs within the respective scenario with 90% confidence interval (CI) is plotted (note: for illustration purposes only, the analysis was done on annual values as plotted, see electronic supplementary material, figure A4 for plots of these annual values). Please note that the RCP4.5 scenario provides projected temperatures until 2080 (rather than 2100). (Online version in colour.)
Mean with 90% CI of (a) projected laying dates, (b) food peak dates and (c) phenological mismatch for five climate scenarios (RCP8.5, RCP4.5, 1.5degOS, 1.5degNE and 2.0degNE) in 2075 (left) and 2095 (right). Mean corresponds to the eleven-year running mean over ensemble runs within the respective scenario. Please note, that the RCP4.5 scenario provides projected temperatures until 2080 (rather than 2100).
In our population of great tits, climate change has initially led to an increasing mismatch between the birds' laying date and the timing of their caterpillar prey, leading to directional selection for earlier seasonal breeding [17]. Over the past 20 years, selection has significantly weakened (figure 1), probably driven by a slowdown in the increase in late spring temperatures resulting in a no longer advancing date of peak caterpillar food abundance. However, great tit laying dates continued to advance, resulting in a smaller phenological mismatch and hence weaker selection for earlier breeding. Importantly, all relationships between temperature, phenology of prey and predator, and selection on predator phenology are still present, as reported 25 years ago [17], demonstrating that these relationships did not arise spuriously through common time trends and that future dynamics can be projected with high confidence. We show, using five climate scenarios, that the current weakening of selection is likely to be temporary, as climate predictions indicate that spring temperatures will continue to increase and that phenology of the caterpillar peak date will again advance at a faster rate than bird phenology, resulting in increasing selection for early breeding.
We found an additive (negative) year effect on the relationships between temperature and the phenologies of prey and predator, as well as selection on predator phenology, which we did not find in the benchmark 1998 study. Selection differentials were related to mismatch, as we found earlier [18]. While mismatch does not change significantly over years, selection differentials do. This may be due to the additional year effect in the relationship between the selection differentials and the mismatch: for the same degree of phenological mismatch, directional selection for laying date got weaker over time. We tested a number of hypotheses for why this could be the case (the mean number of recruits produced, total number of fledglings, the height of the caterpillar biomass peak, beech crop index and the spring temperatures in the following year when recruits need to settle; see Methods) but none of these variables explained the year effect. Another possible mechanism is that the caterpillar frass used to estimate the caterpillar biomass [23] no longer accurately captures this biomass because other caterpillar species, that do not produce frass, have become more important. Although there is no direct data available to test this idea, it is striking that the annual height of the caterpillar biomass peak in spring correlates very well with the annual number of female winter moths caught on the trees the winter before (b= 0.50 (s.e. 0.10 (on a log-log scale),p= 0.0001; M.E.V. 2020, unpublished data), indicating that winter moths, which produce frass collected in the frass nets, are to a large extent responsible for the caterpillar biomass peak.
Second, there was also an additive year effect in the relationship between laying date and spring temperature; laying date got earlier for the same temperature over the years. This could be because laying date is also affected by temperatures in another time of the season but the ClimWin analysis did not detect such a second period. There are numerous other environmental variables that will have changed over the years that may affect laying dates, including the phenology of the food used by the great tits at the time of egg laying (and thus lift a constraint for earlier laying [39]). Although the observation is consistent with a genetic response to selection, this is an unlikely explanation given the low heritability of laying date [40].
Third, in addition to the effect of spring temperature in the analysis of the phenology of the food peak, an additive year effect was found. This year effect was no longer significant when we included oak bud burst date in the model and hence the advancement of the oak bud burst date may have led to an earlier food peak date at the same temperatures indicating that the date of the food peak is affected both by the oak bud burst date (start of caterpillar feeding) and temperature (rate of caterpillar growth).
While there was no significant advancement of laying date over time in the 1998 paper [17], we found such an advancement for the 1973–2020 period. It seems that the advancement is now significant simply due to the increased number of years as the two slopes of laying date versus year (years 1973–1995 [17]:b= −0.215 ± 0.152; years 1973–2020:b= −0.248 (s.e. 0.055)) are not statistically different (t= 0.20, d.f. = 67,p= 0.58).
The projected mismatch for the end of the century differs under the different climate scenarios. Under the RCP8.5 scenario the mismatch is projected to be much larger than under the RCP4.5 scenario (in 2080, the last year of the RCP4.5 scenario). The projected mismatch increase is because the phenology of the birds advancing less rapidly than the phenology of their food (figure 4). By contrast, the three climate scenarios based on the Paris Agreement (1.5degOS, 1.5degNE and 2.0degNE) show a smaller projected mismatch at the end of the century and, interestingly, the projected mismatch stabilizes after 2050 as under these scenarios the increase in temperatures end at that time point due to climate mitigation. Note also that the projected mismatch under the RCP8.5 scenario in 2100 (15 days;figure 4c) is 2–3 times larger than the peak mismatch observed in the past (5–10 days;figure 2c) and is in fact as large as the extreme mismatch observed in 2007. On the other hand, the three Paris Agreement scenarios project a mismatch of the same order of magnitude as the historical peak mismatch period (5–10 days). Thus, under all climate scenarios, there will be sustained mismatches between the phenology of the birds and their prey, and thus sustained selection for earlier laying.
Our results show that the mismatch is forecast to show the steepest increase under the RCP8.5 scenario, and thus leads to the largest phenological disruption. Schwalmet al. [41,42] concluded that RCP8.5 is the preferred choice for assessing climate impacts risks throughout the mid-century as RCP4.5 would be a definitive underestimate of physical climate risk. Indeed, the Climate Action Tracker reports that the current policy pathways have a greater than 97% probability of exceeding 2°C. The projected mean global warming is 2.4°C (likely range: 1.7 to 3.2) under RCP 4.5 and 4.3°C (likely range: 3.2 to 5.4) under RCP 8.5 above pre-industrial level [43].
The key reason why the directional selection on laying date has weakened over the past decades is that the temperatures correlated with great tit egg laying date have continued to increase, while the increase in temperatures correlated with food peak phenology has slowed down. The increase in greenhouse gases since the industrial revolution is imposing climate changes on time scales from decadal to centennial. In addition to an anthropogenic climate change signal characterized by a secular trend, there is a noise from unforced variability generated internally within the climate system (e.g. weather) or associated with external forces to the climate system (e.g. such as due to changes in aerosol loading or solar variations or volcanoes), referred to as natural or internal variability [44]. Such noise can lead to a slowdown in the increase in temperatures as observed recently in the 2000s due to a combination of volcanic influences and internal climate variability [20,21]. Taking this natural climate variability into account, we project that the temperatures correlating with food peak phenology will become warmer again, and that this will lead to an increased phenological mismatch, and as a consequence, increased directional selection for earlier laying dates. Our prediction of the mismatch does not take into account any potential evolutionary response in temperature sensitivity of great tits, which will make only a small contribution at best [40], or other potential constraints on advancing laying or hatching dates [39]. Another weakness in our predictions is the unexplained year effect in the relationships between laying date and temperature (figure 3a) and food peak phenology and temperature (figure 3b).
Thus, we conclude that the relationships reported 25 years ago still hold, and that the recent weakening of the selection for earlier egg laying dates is caused by a recent, and probably temporal, slowdown of late spring temperature warming. The fact that our relationships are robust allows us to predict future mismatches from climate predictions with confidence, albeit this assumes that the relationships between phenology and temperature will remain as we have identified them. These future projections show that temperatures will continue to increase over the decades to come, and that the phenology of the caterpillar peak date will again advance, faster than great tit laying dates, and hence selection for early breeding will again increase. Climate change will thus continue to lead to an evolutionary lag, with potential effects on population viability [10,12]. Our results also make clear that the rate of climate change has been, and may be again in the near future, too high to be matched by the rate of adaptation for our population, either through phenotypic plasticity or micro-evolution [13]. The Paris Agreement is a first step in reducing the rate of climate change, which is important as only substantially reducing this rate to historical rates of warming, perhaps even by as much as a factor of 100 [45], will allow species to keep up via genetic change, as they have always done on our ever-changing planet.
We thank the board of the National Park ‘de Hoge Veluwe’ for their permission to work within their reserve for all these years. We also thank the numerous fieldworkers over the years, Louis Vernooij for managing the database, Tom Reed, Christiaan Both and Melissah Rowe for constructive comments on a previous version of the manuscript, and Ally Phillimore and an anonymous reviewer for their helpful comments.
The research was carried out under licence AVD801002017831 of the Centrale Commissie Dierexperimenten (CCD) in the Netherlands. Fieldwork at the National Park de Hoge Veluwe was carried out with permission of the Park.
Additional methodology and analysis are provided in the electronic supplementary material [46].
M.E.V.: conceptualization, data curation, formal analysis, methodology, resources and writing-original draft; M.L.: formal analysis, writing-review and editing; P.G.: conceptualization, formal analysis, writing-review and editing; M.C.L.: data curation and funding acquisition; S.J.: formal analysis, funding acquisition, methodology, writing-review and editing.
All authors gave final approval for publication and agreed to be held accountable for the work performed therein.
We declare we have no competing interests.
S.J. and M.C.L. acknowledge the support of NASA grant (grant no. 19-IDS19-0028).
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
Additional methodology and analysis are provided in the electronic supplementary material [46].
Articles from Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences are provided here courtesy ofThe Royal Society
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894