An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Correspondence, 
Eric V. Regehr, 
Email:eregehr@uw.edu
Corresponding author.
Revised 2025 Apr 20; Received 2024 Nov 5; Accepted 2025 Jun 19; Issue date 2025 Dec.
This is an open access article under the terms of thehttp://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited and is not used for commercial purposes.
Climate warming is expected to impact global biodiversity, especially in the rapidly warming Arctic. There is an urgent need to evaluate the demographic effects of climate warming under different greenhouse gas emission pathways to guide wildlife management and inform listing decisions under protected species legislation. We used forecasted environmental variables to drive a novel demographic model for the ringed seal (Pusa hispida), a circumpolar Arctic marine mammal and critical subsistence resource for Indigenous people. Under the most demographically plausible conditions and assumptions, the projected abundance of ringed seals in the Chukchi Sea west of Alaska, USA, changed by an average of −7% (range −25% to 4%) by 2058 and −71% (range −96% to −8%) by 2100. The choice of greenhouse gas emissions pathway was the most important determinant of population outcomes through its influence on two habitat variables, snow‐on‐ice depth and sea‐ice area. The choice of climate model, the intrinsic population growth rate, density dependence, and polar bear predation had a moderate influence on population projections, while harvest by Alaska Natives had a small influence. Modeling results suggest that ringed seals in the Chukchi Sea can exhibit stable or increasing recruitment at average April snow‐on‐ice depths below 20–30 cm. Given that declining snow depth was central to listing the species as threatened under the U.S. Endangered Species Act, our work both represents the first quantitative investigation of future abundance for Alaskan ringed seals and is relevant to conservation assessments for the species.
Keywords:Arctic, climate warming, demographic modeling, Endangered Species Act, greenhouse gases, marine mammal, population projections,Pusa hispida, ringed seal, sea ice
The Arctic has warmed nearly four times faster than the rest of the world in recent decades (Rantanen et al.,2022), resulting in physical and ecological changes that affect the distribution, abundance, and persistence of species (IPCC,2021; Post et al.,2019). Arctic marine mammals are long‐lived animals with low reproductive rates and specialized habitat requirements, and many species depend on sea ice that is rapidly disappearing (Laidre & Regehr,2018). Vital rates for Arctic marine mammals are often unknown, and abundance estimates are too imprecise or infrequent to identify population trends (Laidre et al.,2015). Consequently, population projections in relation to climate warming are often unavailable and assessments of conservation status are based on qualitative ecological relationships (Gulland et al.,2022) rather than quantitative applications of the demographic criteria found in protected species legislation (e.g., DeMaster et al.,2004; IUCN Standards and Petitions Committee,2022).
Demographic models such as projection matrices (Caswell,2001) and their extensions are useful for investigating population dynamics and extinction risk (Williams et al.,2002). Increasingly, such models are coupled with forecasts from general circulation models (GCMs) to explore the potential effects of future environmental conditions on wildlife (e.g., Jenouvrier et al.,2012). This can be informative even when species‐ or population‐specific data are sparse, provided it is possible to borrow model inputs from related systems (James et al.,2021) for the purpose of sensitivity analysis (e.g., Earl,2019) or scenario planning (Cook et al.,2014). Demographic models were not referenced in listing decisions for three of the four species of Arctic marine mammal that are currently classified as threatened or endangered under the U.S. Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended (16 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.; ESA). These include the bowhead whaleBalaena mysticetus, bearded sealErignathus barbatus, and ringed seal. For the polar bearUrsus maritimus, a matrix projection model for the Southern Beaufort Sea subpopulation (Hunter et al.,2010) was referenced. Not having a quantitative modeling framework (or, to a lesser extent, not having one at the scale of the listed entity) can have ramifications for management and conservation, including (1) uncertainty about whether the strength and functional form of relationships (e.g., between environmental variables and life history) necessary to warrant listing are biologically plausible, (2) a limited understanding of the sensitivity of species status to different factors or threats, and (3) difficulty establishing objective and measurable recovery criteria (Doak et al.,2015).
Ringed seals are the smallest and most abundant Arctic marine mammal (Frost & Lowry,1981; King,1983). They have a circumpolar distribution, are the primary prey of polar bears, and represent an important nutritional, cultural, and economic resource for Indigenous people (Nelson et al.,2019). Ringed seals can maintain breathing holes through sea ice, and in most regions, females give birth and rear pups in lairs beneath the rubble ice of pressure ridges or dug into snow accumulated on top of the ice (Smith & Stirling,1975). Birth lairs are important for protection from predators and hypothermia until pups are weaned, at which point they have adequate blubber for insulation while wet (Smith & Stirling,1975). The global abundance of ringed seals is thought to be between 1 and 7 million animals (Kelly et al.,2010).
Ringed seals are considered a species of least concern under the Red List of the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (Lowry,2016). In the United States, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration completed a status review for ringed seals in 2010 (Kelly et al.,2010) and listed the species as threatened throughout its range under the ESA in 2012 (77 FR 76706; December 28, 2012). This determination was based primarily upon anticipated impacts on pup survival resulting from declining snow‐on‐ice depth (SID) and sea‐ice area (SIA), both of which are needed to construct birth lairs. A central assumption of the ESA listing was that pup survival starts to decline at an average April SID of 30 cm, with complete reproductive failure occurring below 20 cm. Kelly et al. (2010) compared this relationship against GCM forecasts under unmitigated greenhouse gas emissions pathways and concluded that snow cover will be inadequate for the formation and occupation of birth lairs over most of the species' range by 2100. However, the status review, ESA listing, and subsequent actions (e.g., designation of critical habitat; 87 FR 19232; April 1, 2022) have not linked ringed seal demography to environmental forecasts in a manner that allows population projections, sensitivity analyses, or assessment of the effects of epistemic uncertainty and environmental variation. Furthermore, although observable changes are occurring throughout the Arctic (Huntington et al.,2020), sustained declines in population indices (e.g., body condition, age at maturity, pregnancy rate, and population composition) have not been detected for ringed seals in Alaska, USA (Crawford et al.,2015; Quakenbush et al.,2020), Svalbard, Norway (Andersen et al.,2021), or Hudson Bay, Canada (Chambellant et al.,2012, Young et al.,2015—but see Ferguson et al.,2020). Taken together, the lack of a modeling framework that incorporates climate warming, the 100‐year timeframe of the ESA listing, spatial variability in environmental and ecological dynamics, and the scarcity of empirical evidence for negative climate effects result in a high degree of uncertainty about when and where ringed seals will decline.
We developed a matrix‐based demographic model for ringed seals in the Chukchi Sea (CS) region, located between Alaska, USA, and Chukotka, Russia (Figure1). The model projects stage‐structured populations forward in time as a function of vital rates, density dependence, predation, harvest, and the effects of environmental variables (SID and sea‐ice availability) on ringed seal life history. We evaluated model behavior under a range of conditions and assumptions and explored the potential response of CS ringed seals to past and future climate warming using different climate models and greenhouse gas emissions pathways. We also compared results to those from a previous matrix model for ringed seals in Canada (Reimer et al.,2019), which was published after the ESA listing and served as a template for some parts of our analysis. Our work provides novel insights into the conservation status of ringed seals and establishes a generalizable framework for future assessments of this and other, similar species.

Study area to which input data for ringed seal demographic modeling were referenced (black line). The area is defined by the management boundary of the Chukchi Sea polar bear subpopulation, as recognized by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (i.e., the “CS region”).
We projected the ringed seal population using the equation:
wheren(t) is a stage distribution vector representing the number of animals in each life‐cycle stage at timestept, andA(t) is a Leftkovich (i.e., stage‐structured) matrix with entries defined in terms of vital rates. We used a 40‐stage projection matrix (AppendixS1: FigureS1), where stage 0 represents pups; stages 1 through 6 represent juveniles aged 1–6 years, respectively; stages 7–38 represent adults aged 7–38 years, respectively; and Stage 39 represents adults aged ≥39 years. Transitions among stages are defined by the parametersSi, the unharvested survival probability of a seal in stageifrom the spring of calendar yeartto the spring of yeart+ 1; andfi/2, the expected number of female offspring produced per female in stagei. Analyses reflected female seals only because they are most important to population growth (Eberhardt,2002), and, as a polygynous species (Cassini,1999), we did not suspect that male ringed seals would become a limiting factor in reproduction. Our projection matrix assumed a 1:1 female‐to‐male sex ratio at birth (Holst et al.,1999) and used a post‐pupping census, under which the reproductive contribution of a female seal in stageiwas calculated as the product of the female surviving one annual timestep, with probabilitySi, and then producingfi+1/2 female offspring immediately before transitioning to stagei+ 1 (Kendall et al.,2019).
At each timestep of the projections, the following operations were performed. (1) Relative population density was determined as the total abundance of female seals (Nt) divided by environmental carrying capacity for females (Kt). Vital rates corresponding to this density were obtained from density‐dependent curves (seeVital ratesandDensity dependence). (2) The potential effects of insufficient SID and sea ice were applied using negative, density‐independent modifiers on pup survival (S0; seeEnvironmental variablesandRelationships between environmental variables and pup survival). (3) The resulting vital rates were used to project the population forward 1 year using Equation (1). (4) Abundance was decremented to account for polar bear predation. Using this sequence of operations, excess predation could be allocated to older age classes in years with few pups due to recruitment failures (seePredation). (5) Abundance was decremented to account for harvest by humans (seeHarvest).
We used estimates of age‐specific fertility (fi) based on samples of 133 subsistence‐harvested ringed seals in the Chukchi and Bering seas from 2010 to 2019 (Conn & Trukhanova,2022). Estimates of survival probability were obtained from a hierarchical meta‐analysis for multiple phocid species (Conn & Trukhanova,2022). Recent estimates of population abundance were available for both ringed seals (592,577 seals, 95% CI = 478,448–733,929; Boveng et al.,2025) and polar bears (2937 bears, 95% credible interval = 1552–5944; Regehr et al.,2018). Abundance estimates and environmental variables apply to marine waters within the boundary of the CS polar bear subpopulation as recognized by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature Polar Bear Specialist Group (Figure1; Regehr et al.,2018).
The density‐dependent functions in our model (see below) required input vital rates corresponding to the maximum intrinsic growth rate (Rmax). We assumed thatRmax= 0.12 as recommended under the U.S. Marine Mammal Protection Act (MMPA) for data‐deficient pinnipeds, including ringed seals (NMFS,2016). This value was higher than the asymptotic intrinsic population growth rate (R) of 0.095, calculated as the log of the dominant eigenvalue of the projection matrix using vital rates from Conn and Trukhanova (2022). Therefore, we additively adjusted the baseline vital rates on the logit scale until they corresponded toR= 0.12 (AppendixS1: TableS1). We also performed population projections using alternative vital rates corresponding toRmax= 0.10 and 0.14 (Tables1and2, Scenarios 2a and 2b, respectively). In this and other scenario‐based analyses, we subjectively selected a range of inputs (often ±20% of the baseline) that was both biologically plausible and large enough to affect population outcomes.
Scenarios representing different conditions and assumptions for population projections of female ringed seals in the Chukchi Sea region, with closely related scenarios identified by the same number followed by a different letter (e.g., Scenarios 2a and 2b usedRmax= 0.10 and 0.14, respectively).
Abbreviations: GCM, general circulation model (used to forecast environmental variables); Harv., harvest; MNPL, maximum net productivity level (expressed as a fraction of carrying capacity); NA, not applicable; Pred., predation; SSP, Shared Socioeconomic Pathway (used by the general circulation model, which determined the level of atmospheric greenhouse gases).
Rmaxis the maximum intrinsic growth rate.
Threshold value (day of year).
Threshold value (in centimeters).
PsnowandPiceare unitless modifiers on pup survival resulting from insufficient snow‐on‐ice depth or sea‐ice availability, respectively.
D¯is the mean relative density (i.e., abundance divided by environmental carrying capacity) during the final 5 years of historical projections. Historical projections were performed over the period 1980–2014.
All scenarios are IPSL‐CM6A‐LR except for the members of the GCM multi‐model ensemble listed in the main text.
Not applicable other than scenarios 8a, 8b, and 8c with April sea‐ice area, threshold values (1000 × km2) of 534, 711, and 889, respectively.
Predation and harvest were included in the vital rates of Reimer et al. (2019).
Population outcomes for projections during 2015–2100 of female ringed seals in the Chukchi Sea region.
Robsis observed population growth rate.
P¯snowandP¯iceare the mean observed values of the unitless modifiers on pup survival resulting from insufficient snow‐on‐ice depth or sea‐ice availability, respectively.
N¯is the mean proportion of starting abundance.
Pextis the probability of extirpation.
Density‐dependent functions of the vital rates allowedRto vary from negative values at high population densities, to 0 atN=K, toRmaxat low population densities (Figure2a). We developed the functions based on population theory following the example of Regehr et al. (2017; AppendixS1). All projections included a proxy forKwith interannual variability corresponding to CV(K) = 0.10, the approximate amount of variability in April SIA in the CS region during 1980–2014. The mean value ofKwas calculated from the current estimate of abundance and an assumed value for relative density (i.e.,N/K; seeRetrospective projections to calibrate the model). Carrying capacity did not include a temporal trend because the progressive effects of climate warming were accounted for through climate‐mediated modifiers onS0(seeRelationships between environmental variables and pup survival). For baseline projections, we parameterized the density‐dependent functions so that the maximum net productivity level (i.e., the population size that results in the greatest net annual increment in numbers resulting from reproduction minus losses due to natural mortality, expressed here as a fraction of carrying capacity; MNPL) was 0.70, resulting in a right‐skewed yield curve typical of long‐lived species (Taylor & DeMaster,1993; Figure2b). During scenario‐based analyses, we considered alternative density‐dependent functions corresponding to MNPL = 0.56 and 0.84 (Scenarios 3a and 3b, respectively).

Sample graphs showing the model of density dependence in the demographic model for female ringed seals. Density is expressed as the ratio of abundance (N) to environmental carrying capacity (K) on thex‐axis. (a) Density‐dependent curves of the vital rates.Siandfirefer to natural survival and fertility of seals in life‐cycle stagei, respectively. The vertical line corresponds toN/K= 1 at carrying capacity. (b) The corresponding yield curve. The vertical line corresponds toN/K= 0.70 at maximum net productivity level (MNPL).
We linked ringed seal pup survival to GCM forecasts of SID and sea ice. For baseline population projections, we used model IPSL‐CM6A‐LR (Boucher et al.,2020). This GCM has midrange climate sensitivity (Douglas & Atwood,2022), meets criteria of the Sea Ice Model Intercomparison Project (Notz and SIMIP Community,2020), and provided a better fit to historical observations than other GCMs (see below). To reflect internal GCM variability, each population projection used forecasted environmental variables from one of six randomly selected model variants. We forced model IPSL‐CM6A‐LR using four different Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs), which reflect different assumptions about human activities and global climate policy and therefore different future levels of atmospheric greenhouse gases. We considered SSP3‐7.0, a medium–high emissions pathway within the “regional rivalry” socioeconomic family (Meinshausen et al.,2020), as the baseline. We also evaluated two lower emissions pathways (SSP1‐2.6 and SSP2‐4.5) and one higher emissions pathway (SSP5‐8.5; Scenarios 4a, 4b, and 4c, respectively).
To evaluate the effects of climate model‐selection uncertainty, we performed additional projections using a multi‐model ensemble with four more GCMs: ACCESS‐CM2, CanESM5, MPI‐ESM‐1‐2‐HAM, and NorESM2‐MM. These are members of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6 ensemble for which daily forecasts of climate variables were available under the SSP3‐7.0 emissions pathway from the Earth System Grid Federation (https://esgf-node.llnl.gov/projects/cmip6/, accessed March 2023). We accounted for differences in model performance with a weighting scheme that considered agreement with historical observations and model interdependencies (Knutti et al.,2017). We included the multi‐model ensemble as a scenario‐based analysis (Scenario 5), rather than using the ensemble for all population projections, so that the increased variance of population outcomes did not confound the assessment of other conditions and assumptions.
We used GCM outputs to derive annual values of the environmental variables that influenced ringed seal demography (seeRelationships between environmental variables and pup survival). Average April SID was defined as the mean SID (GCM variablesisnthick) in the CS region on 15 April, weighted by sea‐ice concentration. Our primary metric for sea‐ice availability, spring sea‐ice breakup date, was calculated as the day of year (DOY) on which SIA (derived from the GCM variable for sea‐ice concentration,siconc) dropped below the midpoint of the observed summer minimum and winter maximum ice areas for the period 1980–2014 (Stern & Laidre,2016). Average April SID and spring breakup date were additively adjusted to minimize the root mean square error between historical GCM forecasts and observed data. Climate modeling details are provided in AppendixS2.
We quantified hypotheses for reductions inS0resulting from declining SID and sea ice (Kelly et al.,2010; Reimer et al.,2019) and calibrated the relationships using historical data for ringed seals and environmental conditions in the CS region. Variability inS0was modeled as density‐independent because abiotic factors are expected to impact the structure of birthing lairs regardless of abundance. First, we defined a unitless modifier (Psnow) onS0that was equal to 1 if average April SID exceeded a threshold value and declined linearly with a slope of 0.1 for each centimeter of snow below the threshold (Figure3a). During baseline projections,Psnowhad a lower limit of 0.2 based on observations of successful pupping when snow accumulation is insufficient for birth lairs for ringed seals in the Sea of Okhotsk (Fedoseev,1965) and for Caspian seals (Pusa caspica; Wilson et al.,2017), which are closely related and have a similar life history to ringed seals (Frost & Lowry,1981).

Assumed relationships between environmental variables and the unitless modifiers on ringed seal pup survival (S0) resulting from insufficient snow‐on‐ice depth or sea‐ice availability (PsnowandPice, respectively). Threshold habitat requirements, defined as the value of habitat variables below whichS0started to decline in the projection model, are the upper inflection points of the curves. (a) The effect of mean April snow‐on‐ice depth onPsnow. (b) The effect of spring sea‐ice breakup date onPice. (c) The effect of April sea‐ice area onPice. In each panel, the three lines represent progressively more rigorous habitat requirements (from left to right) that were evaluated during scenario‐based analyses. In all population projections,S0was affected byPsnowand one formulation ofPice(i.e., based on either breakup date or April sea‐ice area). The threshold values for habitat requirements were calibrated using historical data for ringed seals in the Chukchi Sea region.
Second, we defined a unitless modifier (Pice) onS0that was equal to 1 if breakup occurred after pups were weaned and declined linearly with a slope of 1/39 for each day that breakup occurred prior to weaning (Figure3b). The date of weaning was calculated as the sum of a nominal pupping date plus a 39‐day weaning period (Hammill & Smith,1991). We also considered an alternative formulation ofPicethat was equal to 1 if April SIA exceeded a threshold value and declined linearly with a slope of approximately −0.09 for each 10,000 km2that ice area was below the threshold (Figure3c). During baseline projections, both formulations ofPicehad a lower limit of 0.2 because observations of ringed seal pups on low‐concentration pack ice suggest that pupping after breakup may not result in complete mortality (Fedoseev,1965; Pilfold et al.,2014). For bothPsnowandPice, alternative lower limits of 0 were considered during scenario‐based analyses (Scenarios 5a, 6a, and 7a). Methods to estimate the threshold values for habitat requirements (i.e., the amount of snow or ice below whichPsnoworPice<1) are described inRetrospective projections to calibrate the model.
We estimated that polar bears remove 8.9% of ringed seals annually (AppendixS3). This calculation was based on published values of sex‐ and age‐specific polar bear energetic requirements (Pagano et al.,2020; Regehr et al.,2017; Stirling & Oritsland,1995), polar bear diet composition (Rode et al.,2021), the age distribution of ringed seals killed by polar bears (Stirling & Oritsland,1995), age‐specific caloric values of ringed seals, and estimated abundances of ringed seals (Boveng et al.,2025) and polar bears (Regehr et al.,2018) in the CS region. The proportional allocation of predation among pups, juveniles, and adults was 0.38, 0.18, and 0.44, respectively, based on observations of ringed seals killed in the adjacent Beaufort Sea region during 1985–2011 (Pilfold et al.,2012). Within each age class, predation was distributed as a multinomial random variable with probabilities proportional to the numbers of seals of each numeric age (e.g., within the adult age class, the same predation rate was applied to 7, 8, 9, … 39‐year‐old seals). If an age class was depleted, excess energetic requirements were met by removing seals in the next older age class. During scenario‐based analyses we considered alternative predation rates of 7.1% and 10.7% (Scenarios 8a and 8b, respectively).
Ringed seals are legally harvested for subsistence by Alaska Natives. During population projections, we used a time‐constant female harvest rate of 1%. This is based on an annual removal of 8180 total (i.e., female and male) ringed seals, the mean of “average” and “liberal” harvest estimates in the CS region based on community surveys conducted during 1992–2014 (Nelson et al.,2019). We multiplied this harvest level by 0.34, the mean proportion of females in the harvest from 1980 to 2014 based on 2513 seals sampled by the Alaska Department of Fish and Game (Quakenbush et al.,2020), and divided by 296,289, the estimated number of female ringed seals in the CS region (Boveng et al.,2025) assuming an equal population sex ratio. The proportional allocation of harvest among pups, juveniles, and adults was 0.60, 0.22, and 0.18, respectively, based on the mean age class composition of 2958 harvested seals (Quakenbush et al.,2020). In the demographic model, harvest within each age class was nonselective. During scenario‐based analyses, we considered alternative harvest rates of 0 and 2% (Scenarios 9a and 9b, respectively), as well as a fixed‐level harvest equivalent to 2% of starting female abundance, which corresponded to approximately 5562 female seals removed annually (Scenario 10c).
We defined 24 scenarios corresponding to different modeling conditions and assumptions (Table1). A scenario consisted of 10,000 population projections with fixed values for demographic parameters, relationships between environmental variables andS0, predation, harvest, climate model, and greenhouse gas emissions pathway. At each timestep, we recorded the mean proportion of starting abundance (N¯), mean values ofPiceandPsnow, and the probability of extirpation (Pext), defined as female abundance falling below an assumed quasi‐extinction threshold of 2.5% of starting abundance. We summarized long‐term trends by calculating an observed population growth rate (Robs) using the methods of Humbert et al. (2009).
Populations were initialized at a relative density of 0.74 in 1980, which is approximately the equilibrium density corresponding to baseline vital rates, predation rate, harvest rate, and density‐dependent functions in the absence of negative modifiers onS0. For each environmental variable (i.e., SID, breakup date, SIA), we calibrated the demographic model by repeating retrospective projections over the period 1980–2014 with incrementally more stringent habitat requirements until a threshold was reached at whichPiceorPsnowfell below 1 (Figure3). During scenario‐based analyses, we also evaluated a higher threshold value for habitat requirements, corresponding to an environmental variable's mean value during the historical period (i.e., such thatPsnoworPice< 1 during approximately half of the years from 1980 to 2014); and an intermediate threshold, calculated as the midpoint between the baseline and high thresholds. We calibrated the model independently for Scenario 5, which used the GCM multi‐model ensemble and therefore was driven by different values of environmental variables than those of other scenarios.
Our approach to calibrating the demographic model assumed that, as of 2014, survival of ringed seal pups in the CS region had not been negatively impacted by insufficient SID or sea ice. This assumption was based on published studies (seeDiscussion) and estimated relationships between environmental variables in the CS region and an index of pup survival (Quakenbush et al.,2020), calculated as the annual proportion of pups in the harvest during the open‐water season (approximately June–October; seeResults).
Forward projections from 2015 to 2100 started with 296,289 female seals, the current abundance estimate (Boveng et al.,2025), referenced to a relative density obtained from the final 5 years of retrospective projections (i.e., 2010–2014). Scenarios 1 through 10 represented scenario‐based analyses, as previously described (Table1). Scenario 11 reproduced the model of Reimer et al. (2019), the only study we are aware of that projects ringed seals as a function of GCM forecasts, using their low‐sensitivity (i.e., most optimistic) relationships between environmental variables andS0. Specifically, pup survival was assumed to start declining at an average April SID of 25 cm, and weaning occurred on the DOY 130 based on a nominal pupping date of 01 April (DOY 91) and a 39‐day weaning period (fig. 2 in Reimer et al.,2019). Scenario 11 forced the model of Reimer et al. (2019) using forecasted environmental variables for the CS region from IPSL‐CM6A‐LR under SSP3‐7.0, because the objective was to compare population outcomes when our model and theirs were subject to the same drivers.
Analyses were performed using novel code in the R computing language (version R 3.4.0; The R Project for Statistical Computing;http://www.r-project.org). Matrix projection models used the package ‘popbio’ (Stubben et al.,2008).
Under the GCM IPSL‐CM6A‐LR, forecasts of average April SID in the CS region declined under all emissions pathways during 2015–2058 and then stabilized under the lower emissions pathways (SSP1‐2.6 and SSP2‐4.5; Figure4a). Forecasts of breakup date declined relatively slowly under all emissions pathways during 2015–2058 and then declined more rapidly under the higher emissions pathways (SSP3‐7.0 and SSP5‐8.5; Figure4b). During 2000–2014, the proportion of ringed seal pups in the subsistence harvest was not correlated with average April SID (linear regression slope = −0.01/cm, SE[slope] = 0.01,p= 0.32) or breakup date (linear regression slope = 0.00/day, SE[slope] = 0.01,p= 0.90), suggesting that recruitment has not been limited by these factors in recent years.

Forecasted climatic variables from the general circulation model IPSL‐CM6A‐LR for marine waters in the Chukchi Sea region. Future levels of greenhouse gases are determined by the Shared Socioeconomic Pathway (SSP), which progress from lower emissions to higher emissions pathways in the following order: SSP1‐2.6, SSP2‐4.5, SSP3‐7.0, SSP5‐8.5. Thin orange lines are a sample of stochastic forecasts (1980–2100) under the baseline SSP3‐7.0, thick black lines are observed data for the historical period (1980–2014), and thick colored lines are smoothed, average forecasts for the four pathways. Forecasted climatic variables were additively adjusted to minimize the root mean square error between the general circulation model (GCM) and observed data. (a) Mean April snow‐on‐ice depth. (b) Spring sea‐ice breakup date.
The model calibration process suggested that CS ringed seals exhibited stable or increasing recruitment during 1980–2014 at average April SID values as low as 5 cm, and nominal pupping dates as late as DOY 87 (28 March; alternatively, an April SIA of approximately 535,000 km2). We considered these to be baseline threshold values and explored more stringent habitat requirements in other scenarios (Table1, Figure3). Under 16 of 24 scenarios, the relative density of ringed seals was above MNPL at the end of retrospective projections in 2014 (Table1). These scenarios—which we considered the most demographically plausible, given positive population indices for CS ringed seals—led to mean values ofN¯= 0.93 (range 0.75–1.04; equivalently, an average decline of 7% [range − 4% to 25%]) during 2054–2058 andN¯= 0.29 (range 0.04–0.92; equivalently, an average decline of 71% [range 8%–96%]) during 2096–2100 (Table2and Figure5). Recruitment failures due to reducedS0resulted in populations with a low and fluctuating number of pups, and few juveniles. For example, under Scenario 1, the mean proportion of juveniles declined from 0.58 during 2010–2014 to 0.31 during 2096–2100.

A visual summary of population outcomes for ringed seals in the Chukchi Sea. Thex‐axis displays the mean proportion of starting abundance in 2096–2100 (N¯; black circles) or the probability of extirpation (Pext; red triangles). The y‐axis corresponds to different scenarios. Scenarios that were considered demographically plausible (i.e., for which relative density was above maximum net productivity level [MNPL] at the end of retrospective projections in 2014) have filled symbols and black grid lines. Less plausible scenarios have open symbols and light‐gray grid lines. Scenarios were defined as follows: Scenario 1: Baseline, Scenario 2: Maximum potential growth rate, Scenario 3: Strength of density dependence, Scenario 4: Shared Socioeconomic Pathway, Scenario 5: General circulation model (GCM), Scenario 6: April snow‐on‐ice depth, Scenario 7: Nominal pupping date, Scenario 8: Aprils sea‐ice area, Scenario 9: Predation rate, Scenario 10: Subsistence harvest, Scenario 11: The reproduced model of Reimer et al. (2019).
In forward projections during 2015–2100 under the baseline Scenario 1 (Figure6), mean relative abundance declined toN¯2054−2058= 0.93 andN¯2096−2100= 0.22 (Table2). Declines were driven by reductions inS0of similar magnitude resulting from reduced SID (via the modifierPsnow) and reduced sea ice (as represented by breakup date, via the modifierPice). The chance of extirpation by 2100 (Pext) was 0, although probabilistic outcomes should be viewed with caution (seeDiscussion). Scenarios 2 and 3 suggested that population outcomes were moderately sensitive toRmaxand the strength of density dependence, with the most optimistic inputs resulting in 2–3 times more seals in 2100 compared to the least optimistic inputs (Table2). Specifically, a lower potential for growth (Rmax= 0.10, Scenario 2a) led toN¯2096−2100= 0.13, whereas a higher potential for growth (Rmax= 0.14, Scenario 2b) led toN¯2096−2100= 0.33. Weaker density dependence (MNPL = 0.56, Scenario 3a) led toN¯2096−2100= 0.15, whereas stronger density dependence (MNPL = 0.84, Scenario 3b) led toN¯2096−2100= 0.28. The greenhouse gas emissions pathway, as determined by the choice of SSP, was the most important determinant of population outcomes. The average number of seals at the end of the century under SSP1‐2.6 and SSP2‐4.5 (N¯2096−2100= 0.84, Scenarios 4a and 4b), the lower emissions pathways, was 6.0 times higher than the average number of seals under SSP3‐7.0 and SSP5‐8.5 (N¯2096−2100= 0.14, Scenarios 1 and 4c; Table2), the higher emissions pathways. Population trajectories under the four pathways were similar through mid‐century, after which they diverged with the higher emissions pathways declining more rapidly.

A sample of population projections for female ringed seals from the baseline Scenario 1 during 1980–2100. The thin gray lines are individual stochastic projections and the solid black line is the median value of projected abundance. In the background, the dashed light‐gray line is the mean environmental carrying capacity (K) and the light‐gray polygon represents the 95% CI onK.
Under Scenario 5, which used the GCM multi‐model ensemble, the baseline IPSL‐CM6A‐LR provided the best fit to historical observations, receiving 72% of model weight for average April SID and 50% of model weight for spring breakup date (AppendixS2: TableS1). Calibrating the demographic model for Scenario 5 led to different threshold values for relationships between environmental variables andS0compared to other scenarios. Because the multi‐model ensemble predicted an absence of springtime snow in several years during 1980–2014, it was not possible to identify a nonzero threshold for average April SID below which CS ringed seals were unaffected. Therefore, we used the baseline threshold of 5 cm for Scenario 5, even though it led to slight reductions inS0under historical environmental conditions (Table1). For spring breakup date, a nominal pupping date of DOY 65 (6 March) avoided negative effects onS0during the historical period. Using the GCM multi‐model ensemble, the magnitude of projected declines (N¯2054−2058= 0.88 andN¯2096−2100= 0.38; Table2) was similar to the baseline Scenario 1, although population outcomes were more variable (e.g., SD [N¯2096−2100] = 15,808 seals and 5116 seals, for scenarios 5 and 1, respectively). This led to a nonzero probability of extirpation under Scenario 5 (Pext= 0.01) despite a higher mean abundance in 2100 compared to Scenario 1.
Scenarios 6–8 evaluated the model response to assumed relationships between environmental variables andS0, with forecasted changes in SID, breakup date, and SIA having a similar influence on population outcomes over the ranges of values considered. The most stringent habitat requirements for SID (i.e., Scenario 6c, a minimum depth of 13.4 cm to avoid impacts onS0) and breakup date (i.e., Scenario 7c, corresponding to a nominal pupping date of 25 April [DOY 115]) led to large declines by mid‐century (N¯2054−2058= 0.32 and 0.59, respectively) and extirpation by 2100 (Table2). Scenarios 6c and 7c, however, may be overly pessimistic given that they would have resulted in population declines during the historical period (D¯in 2010–2104 = 0.59 and 0.68, respectively; Table1), which is not consistent with the available data. Population outcomes were similar for scenarios that used temporal metrics (i.e., breakup date; Scenarios 6a, b, and c) versus spatial metrics (i.e., April SIA; Scenarios 7a, b, and c) for sea ice. Removing the lower limit of 0.2 onPsnoworPicehad only a small effect on population outcomes (e.g., from 2096 to 2100,P¯snow= 0.49 and 0.46 for Scenarios 1 and 5a, respectively), although we would expect nonzero lower limits to be more important under scenarios with more stringent habitat requirements.
Scenarios 9 and 10 explored the effects of polar bear predation and harvest, respectively. Population outcomes were moderately sensitive to the range of predation rates considered, with the low rate of 7.1% leading to 2.8 times more seals in 2100 (N¯2096−2100= 0.33, Scenario 9a) compared to the high rate of 10.7% (N¯2096−2100= 0.12, Scenario 9b). Population outcomes were less sensitive to human harvest, with zero harvest leading to 1.5 more seals in 2100 (N¯2096−2100= 0.26, Scenario 10a) compared to the high harvest rate of 2% (N¯2096−2100= 0.17, Scenario 10b). We note that 2% is twice the current harvest rate in the CS region and may not be plausible considering that ringed seal harvest appears to be decreasing in the adjacent Bering Sea, due in part to sea‐ice loss making it difficult for hunters to access seals (Huntington et al.,2020; Olnes et al.,2022). In contrast, Scenario 10c demonstrated that doubling the current number of removals could accelerate population declines toward the end of the 21st century, leading toN¯2096−2100= 0.05, if harvest occurred at a fixed level rather than at a fixed rate under which the number of removals declined with decreasing abundance (Scenario 10c).
Scenario 11, which reproduced the model of Reimer et al. (2019), led to the most negative population outcomes of any scenario. Abundance declined toN¯2054−2058= 0.04 followed shortly by extirpation, due mostly to recruitment failures resulting from insufficient SID (e.g., meanPsnow= 0 during 2054–2058, Table2). Although Scenario 11 followed the approach in Reimer et al. (2019) of assuming relationships between environmental variables andS0, instead of calibrating these relationships through retrospective projections, we ran post hoc projections from 1980 to 2014 to evaluate population outcomes when the model was driven by observed conditions in the CS region. Under the most optimistic version of the Reimer et al. (2019) model, the CS ringed seal population would have declined by approximately 90% during this period (i.e.,N¯2014= 0.11), which is inconsistent with empirical evidence for population productivity.
This study provides the first quantitative investigation of future abundance for Alaskan ringed seals. Results suggest that the habitat requirements used to list the species as threatened under the ESA should be revisited. The demographic model in this paper has potential applications to both short‐term population projections to guide management (e.g., over one human generation) and longer term projections to evaluate conservation status.
Modeling results support the conclusion that, like for some other Arctic marine mammals (e.g., polar bears; Amstrup & Bitz,2023), greenhouse gas mitigation is key to the long‐term persistence of ringed seals. Using the baseline climate model IPSL‐CM6A‐LR, lower emissions pathways that incorporate mitigation (SSP1‐2.6 and SSP2‐4.5) led to higher abundances compared to higher emissions pathways (SSP3‐7.0 and SSP5‐8.5; Table2). For example, at the end of the century there were approximately 18 times more seals under the sustainable pathway SSP1‐2.6 (i.e., approximately 545,000 seals, based on the current abundance estimate and an assumed 1:1 male‐to‐female sex ratio) and 15 times more seals under the middle‐of‐the‐road pathway SSP2‐4.5 (327,000 seals), compared to SSP5‐8.5 (30,000 seals), which represents the high end of potential fossil‐fuel development (Meinshausen et al.,2020).
The additional GCMs included in the multi‐model ensemble provided a poor fit to observed environmental data, resulting in low model weights compared to the baseline model IPSL‐CM6A‐LR (AppendixS2: TableS1). After adjustment to match average historical conditions, the multi‐model ensemble predicted an average April SID of zero in some years during 1980–2014, which precluded model calibration for this variable. Furthermore, the calibration process for spring breakup date suggested a nominal pupping date of 06 March, which is earlier than has been reported for the CS region (Frost & Lowry,1981). Although these issues made interpretation of Scenario 5 difficult, the increased variability of projected environmental variables when using the multi‐model ensemble had potentially important demographic consequences, resulting in a nonzero probability of extirpation by 2100. We recommend that future population projections for ringed seals use additional or updated GCMs, as they become available, and evaluate the sensitivity of population outcomes to different bias‐adjustment and model‐weighting procedures.
The SID thresholds used in the ESA listing for ringed seals were based on the average amount of snow on flat ice required to create localized drift accumulations of 50–65 cm, the depth needed for ringed seals to construct birth lairs (Kelly et al.,2010). Average April SID in the CS region during 1981–2014 was 13.4 cm when weighted by sea‐ice concentration (range 6.6–21.8 cm; Liston et al.,2020). From 2003 to 2012, ringed seals in the Alaskan Bering and CS grew faster, had thicker blubber, stable pregnancy rates, matured earlier, and pups comprised a larger portion of the subsistence harvest compared to 1975–1984 (Crawford et al.,2015). These indices were lower in years of high sea‐ice concentration, which is consistent with other observations that ringed seals were historically limited by heavy sea ice that reduces pelagic productivity (Stirling & Lunn,1997) and makes it difficult to maintain breathing holes (Harwood et al.,2012). Based on these studies, and on our finding that the proportion of pups in the harvest was not related to snow or ice conditions during 2000–2014, we calibrated the demographic model under the assumption that insufficient snow did not negatively affectS0in any year during 1980–2014. We subsequently explored more stringent habitat requirements because harvest‐monitoring methods can be insensitive to minor perturbations, and it is possible thatS0was reduced in some individual years. Modeling results indicated that, if snow started to negatively impactS0at values of average April SID below 13.4 cm, recruitment failures resulting in an approximately 20% decline in abundance would have occurred in the CS region during 1980–2014 (Table1). It is unlikely that this happened without a signal in population indices that could be detected through scientific studies or Indigenous Knowledge (Gryba et al.,2021). Therefore, our results suggest that CS ringed seals can be productive at average April SID at or below 10–15 cm. We caution that, although the historical estimates of SID used to calibrate the model (Liston et al.,2020) represent the best available information, these values are subject to uncertainty and are lower than SIDs derived from satellite passive microwave data over first‐year sea ice (Stroeve et al.,2020).
The availability of drifts for lair construction likely helps explain the productivity of ringed seals in our study. Values of SID represented average snow depths at the scale of GCM output variables (i.e., degrees latitude and longitude) and did not reflect localized habitat features. The CS region, however, includes a marine area of approximately 1,117,000 km2(Stern & Laidre,2016) and is characterized by spatial and ecological variation at multiple scales. During aerial surveys, Lindsay et al. (2021) found a positive association between ringed seal counts and SID within 25 × 25 km grid cells. At a finer scale, sea ice forms pressure ridges that range from meters to kilometers in length and allow drifts to form downwind, even when average snow depths are low (Liston et al.,2018). In other polar deserts with limited snowfall, such as Northeast Greenland, similar heterogeneous conditions also provide productive ringed seal habitat (Laidre & Stirling,2020).
The importance of considering finer scale habitat features that create localized accumulations of snow, rather than focusing on a single value of average snow depth, has been documented for other Arctic species. For example, polar bears require a minimum snowdrift depth of approximately 2 m to construct maternal dens (Durner et al.,2003). Durner et al. (2013) found that approximately 63% of pregnant bears in the Southern Beaufort Sea subpopulation relied on terrestrial habitats for maternal denning, despite average winter snow depths ranging from 10 to 40 cm. Of the total land area considered by Durner et al. (2013), only about 1% included topographic features such as riverbanks, bluffs, and industrial gravel pads that formed drifts deep enough for den construction.
Because ringed seals require sea ice as a platform to construct birth lairs, we also explored the potential effects of declining sea ice. A nominal pupping date between 28 March and 11 April (Scenarios 6a and 6b, respectively) did not lead to recruitment failures during retrospective projections and therefore appears plausible. This is consistent with other studies suggesting that pupping generally occurs in March through April when snow depth is maximal (Kelly et al.,2010). Population outcomes were similar whetherS0was a function of temporal or spatial sea‐ice metrics, which in the CS region were correlated (for GCM projections during 2015–2100 using the baseline climate model IPSL‐CM6A‐LR under SSP3–7.0, Spearman's rank correlation between breakup date and April SIA = 0.89,p< 0.001 versus null hypothesis of no correlation). Taken together, our findings affirm that the strength of relationships between environmental variables andS0is an important area for future research.
The point estimate of 8.9% of female ringed seals removed annually represents the most rigorous assessment of polar bear predation to date (AppendixS3). We modeled predation and harvest as stage‐specific because they are selective and the mean reproductive value of prime‐age female ringed seals (7–12 years), calculated from the dominant left eigenvector of the matrix projection model, was approximately twice that of female pups. Despite its high value in relation to ringed sealRmax, predation had only a moderate influence on long‐term projections. This is logical given that we modeled predation as a time‐constant rate, reflecting the close association between abundances of ringed seals and polar bears (Stirling & Parkinson,2006) and the expectation that polar bears will decline with sea‐ice loss (Atwood et al.,2016; Regehr et al.,2016). Because we did not know the relative contributions of predation, hypothermia, or other factors to increased pup mortality when habitat was insufficient, pups that died in the model due to reductions inPsnowandPicedid not contribute to meeting the nutritional demands of polar bears. This approach may have led to more pessimistic outcomes than if the model had allowed bears to benefit nutritionally from climate‐mediated reductions inS0.
Our analyses demonstrate the value of harvest monitoring for ringed seals (Quakenbush et al.,2020), which provided most of the information used to calibrate the demographic model. The current subsistence harvest rate in the CS region of approximately 1% of ringed seals removed annually had a relatively small influence on population outcomes. Results suggested that harvest would remain a secondary factor even if this rate were doubled, provided that future removals occur at a fixed rate (Scenario 10b) rather than a fixed level (Scenario 10c). Removing a constant fraction of abundance annually (i.e., a fixed‐rate harvest) is demographically safer than removing a constant number of animals regardless of potential changes in abundance (Quinn & Deriso,1999).
The concept of density dependence is central to marine mammal management under the MMPA (Wade,1998) and is necessary to explain interacting demographic processes for long‐lived animals (Williams,2013). Within plausible ranges for ringed seal vital rates and density‐dependent curves (i.e.,Rmax= 0.10–0.14 and MNPL = 0.56–0.84), details of population dynamics had a smaller influence on projections compared to most of the other factors considered. Furthermore, the global abundance of ringed seals (several million) and their pan‐Arctic distribution suggest some flexibility in ecological requirements and resilience to regional catastrophes. For example, ringed seals have recently been observed to haul out on land more often in Alaska (Gryba et al.,2021), Svalbard (Lydersen et al.,2017), and Hudson Bay (S. Fergusonpersonal communication). Giving birth on top of the ice without the use of lairs may become more common as climate warming progresses, although it would increase vulnerability to hypothermia and predation. Our analyses focused on the two main proximate threats to ringed seals (i.e., reduced SID and sea ice). It is possible that the species will experience additional climate effects, including the potential for increased rainfall to collapse birthing lairs (Stirling & Smith,2004), exposure to new pathogens (e.g., Sonne et al.,2020), changes in biological productivity (Frey et al.,2023), and disruptions in the Arctic food web (e.g., Flores et al.,2023).
Reimer et al. (2019) developed a matrix projection model for ringed seals in Amundsen Gulf and Prince Albert Sound, Canada. When subject to the same drivers (i.e., forecasted environmental variables for the CS region), our model led to more positive population outcomes compared to the most optimistic version of the Reimer et al. (2019) model (Scenario 11, Table2), under which the CS population would have exhibited large declines prior to 2015. This discrepancy arose from several methodological differences. First, Reimer et al. (2019) used a maximum annual population growth rate of 0.013 and did not include density dependence. This limited the resilience of simulated populations because it did not allow mortality to be compensated for by increased productivity. Second, Reimer et al. (2019) assumed thatS0starts to decline at average April SID below 25–35 cm, rather than inferring these relationships using empirical data. Their medium‐sensitivity scenario (i.e., an average April SID threshold of 30 cm) led to reducedS0under the conditions observed in their region during 1979–2016, despite evidence that late breakup and heavy ice conditions were limiting factors during much of this period (Harwood et al.,2000; Stirling,2002). Third, their model did not include lower limits on the pup survival modifiers (PsnowandPice, in our study) and therefore assumed complete mortality at low levels of SID and sea ice. Fourth, their model did not explicitly include stage‐specific predation or harvest and, if an age class was depleted, did not apply excess removals to a different age class. While the first three factors made the Reimer et al. (2019) model more pessimistic than ours, the effects of the fourth factor are unclear.
Our analysis provides insights into ringed seal demography and establishes a starting point for discussions about the future abundance of CS ringed seals. Nonetheless, quantitative population outcomes should be interpreted with caution. First, we did not consider all possible combinations of factors (e.g., high‐end greenhouse gas emissions and low‐end intrinsic growth rate) or attempt to propagate all types of uncertainty (environmental, sampling, model‐selection, etc.) through each scenario. Second, we modeledS0as linear functions of environmental variables averaged over a large area (Figure3), whereas these relationships are likely more complex due to spatial and temporal interactions among biotic and abiotic factors and the influence of pup age as they grow rapidly during the first months of life (Kelly et al.,2010). This and other aspects of the demographic model could potentially be informed by Indigenous Knowledge (Lindsay et al.,2023). Third, we inferred threshold values on habitat requirements under the untested assumption thatS0will be negatively impacted when environmental variables fall incrementally below the conditions observed in the CS region during 1980–2014. If ringed seals are more robust to habitat loss, our analyses may have overstated the magnitude of potential declines. On the other hand, it is possible that observed conditions during 1980–2014 had negative demographic impacts that existing monitoring methods could not detect. In this case (i.e., if ringed seals are more sensitive to habitat loss than assumed), our analyses may have understated potential declines.
The demographic model in this paper provides a framework to conduct power analyses and evaluate quantitative biological hypotheses against new data (Houlahan et al.,2017). For example, simulations could be performed to identify the monitoring sample sizes necessary to detect climate effects, like Reimer et al. (2019), or estimate the probability that human‐caused mortality will result in population declines. Our findings also suggest directions for future research. First, projections of ringed seal abundance could be used in demographic (Regehr et al.,2021) or energetic (Amstrup & Bitz,2023) models for polar bears, which in the past have relied on sea‐ice metrics as a proxy for prey availability. Second, the apparent productivity of CS ringed seals in recent decades—despite lower average SIDs than were previously assumed necessary for pupping—indicates that future habitat assessments should consider the timing, distribution, and depth of snow accumulations on deformed sea ice (e.g., using snowdrift models; Liston et al.,2016,2018). Third, the relative insensitivity of population outcomes to intrinsic growth rate and the details of density dependence suggest that obtaining precise, population‐specific estimates of demographic parameters may not be the most efficient way to reduce uncertainty in assessments of long‐term persistence for ringed seals.
The abundance of CS ringed seals was projected to remain relatively stable until mid‐century, after which declines accelerated (mean population growth rate of −0.04 from 2058 to 2100). Population outcomes were most sensitive to future greenhouse gas levels, with higher emissions pathways leading to greater losses of snow and ice, both of which are needed to construct birth lairs. Although habitat requirements for ringed seals are not fully understood, our findings suggest that a primary assumption when listing the species as threatened under the ESA—that pups require an average April SID of 20–30 cm to survive until they are weaned—does not apply in the CS region, where the population has exhibited stable or increasing recruitment at lower average SIDs. Future habitat assessments should consider the fine‐scale distribution of snow during the pupping season due to the importance of drifts for lair construction.
The model in this paper integrates the fundamental components needed to explain the population dynamics of long‐lived species. These include sex‐ and age‐specific vital rates, density dependence, stage‐specific predation and harvest, and the influence of environmental conditions on demographic parameters. The model can be applied to ringed seals or—with appropriate reparameterization—adapted to other species or systems. We acknowledge that, as a generalizable framework, our approach requires relatively detailed demographic information that is not available for many species of concern. It also does not consider additional factors, such as individual variation or metapopulation dynamics, that influence viability (Merrick & Koprowski,2017) and can be relevant under protected species legislation (e.g., Wolf et al.,2015). When data are sufficient, however, the methods in this paper are applicable to wildlife management and conservation assessments that use quantitative criteria, such as projected changes in abundance (e.g., Red List; IUCN 2022) or estimates of extinction risk (e.g., ESA; Smith et al.,2018).
Eric Regehr contributed to conceptualization (equal); formal analysis (lead); methodology (lead); software (lead); visualization (lead); writing—original draft (lead); and writing—review and editing (lead). Lori Quakenbush contributed to conceptualization (equal); funding acquisition (equal); project administration (lead); and writing—review and editing (supporting). Andrew Von Duyke contributed to conceptualization (equal); funding acquisition (equal); writing—review and editing (supporting). John Citta contributed to conceptualization (equal); funding acquisition (equal); methodology (supporting); and writing—review and editing (supporting). Jessica Lindsay contributed to formal analysis (supporting) and writing—review and editing (supporting).
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Appendix S1.
Appendix S2.
Appendix S3.
Support for E. Regehr was provided by the Alaska Department of Fish and Game (ADF&G), the North Slope Borough (NSB), and the University of Washington. Support for L. Quakenbush was provided by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Wildlife and Sport Fish Restoration Program. Support for J. Citta and A. Von Duyke was provided by the NSB Department of Wildlife Management. Support for J. Lindsay was provided by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program under grant number DGE‐1762114. Additional support was provided by National Petroleum Reserve‐Alaska Program funds (Grant # 23‐NPRA‐04), made available through the State Department of Commerce, Community, and Economic Development.
Regehr, Eric V.
, Quakenbush Lori, Von Duyke Andrew L., Citta John J., and Lindsay Jessica M.. 2025. “Projecting the Future of a Threatened Marine Mammal in Relation to Climate Warming.” Ecological Applications
35(8): e70127. 10.1002/eap.70127
Handling Editor:Allison M. Louthan
Data from ringed seal harvest monitoring (Quakenbush et al.,2020) are not provided publicly because the species is listed under the U.S. Endangered Species Act and is a subsistence resource. Data may be available upon reasonable request to L. Quakenbush (lori.quakenbush@alaska.gov) at the Alaska Department of Fish and Game. Data from general circulation models were retrieved from: Earth System Grid Federation (ESGF) for CMIP6 data athttps://esgf-node.llnl.gov/projects/cmip6/. Data for snow‐on‐ice depth were retrieved from Liston et al. (2020). Code (Regehr,2023) is available in Zenodo athttps://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10211498.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
Appendix S1.
Appendix S2.
Appendix S3.
Data from ringed seal harvest monitoring (Quakenbush et al.,2020) are not provided publicly because the species is listed under the U.S. Endangered Species Act and is a subsistence resource. Data may be available upon reasonable request to L. Quakenbush (lori.quakenbush@alaska.gov) at the Alaska Department of Fish and Game. Data from general circulation models were retrieved from: Earth System Grid Federation (ESGF) for CMIP6 data athttps://esgf-node.llnl.gov/projects/cmip6/. Data for snow‐on‐ice depth were retrieved from Liston et al. (2020). Code (Regehr,2023) is available in Zenodo athttps://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10211498.
Articles from Ecological Applications are provided here courtesy ofWiley
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894