An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
E-mail:jbaxter@drexel.edu.
E-mail:mc4298@drexel.edu.
Received 2025 Jun 12; Accepted 2025 Sep 12; Revised 2025 Sep 11; Collection date 2025 Oct 14.
This article is licensed under CC-BY 4.0
The wind energy sector
is a growing contributor to global electricity
generation. The increasing deployment of wind turbines also creates
significant waste when turbine materials reach their end-of-life.
Glass fiber reinforced polymer composites, which comprise the majority
of a wind turbine blade’s mass, are difficult to separate into
their component parts for recycling. This study employs a cradle-to-gate
life cycle assessment to evaluate the environmental impacts of utilizing
waste wind turbine blade material in cement clinker and fiberglass
production. We find that incorporating waste blades as 15% of the
feedstock in a cement clinker production plant reduces global warming
and human health–respiratory impacts by 9 and 34%, respectively,
compared to using virgin materials only. For a fiberglass plant, this
substitution increases global warming impacts by 11% but decreases
respiratory health impacts by 3%. Each kilogram of secondary product
diverts approximately 0.25–0.32 kg of WTB waste from landfills.
The projected rate of blade decommissioning of ∼800,000 tonnes
per year would replace less than 1% of the overall virgin material
demand for the cement clinker industry and up to 8% for the fiberglass
industry, indicating plenty of capacity for these industries to accommodate
this waste blade material in their feedstocks.
Keywords:life cycle assessment, circular
economy, wind
energy, wind turbine blade, fiber reinforced polymer
composite, end-of-life, cement coprocessing, pyrolysis


Wind energy accounted
for 6.7% of global electricity in 2021,,and installations
are projected to double in the coming years. However, growth in this sector also generates
an increasing stream of solid waste as the wind turbine blades (WTBs)
are decommissioned after approximately 20 years of service life. A
global total of 13–43 million tonnes (t) of decommissioned
blade material is expected by 2050.−These blades are made
of about 85% fiber reinforced polymer composites (FRPC) by mass, with
smaller quantities of foams, adhesives, and wood−(see inset inFigureoutlined in black).
65–90% of FRPC in the wind industry exclusively uses glass
fibers; the balance are a hybrid that include carbon FRPC in specific
segments of the blade to increase strength and reduce weight, enabling
longer blades and higher power turbines.,Glass FRPC comprises a thermoset epoxy matrix,and either borosilicate glass called E-glass or a boron-free variation
with improved chemical resistance and mechanical properties known
as E-CR glass.,These glasses are low in cost,
high in strength and stiffness, and provide chemical resistance.,Recent efforts to design for recycling focus on thermoplastic resin
systems,,alternate thermoset chemistries with dynamic
covalent bonds, or carbon fiber composites.−These emerging material technologies represent significant advances
for the future of waste recovery.,,,However, most blades
that will be decommissioned in the next few decades will be made from
epoxy-glass composites, and technical solutions to address this growing
solid waste stream are needed.

Life cycle stages of linear (gray), downcycled
(yellow), and circular
(green) life cycles. The downcycled and circular life cycles produce
secondary raw materials cement clinker and glass cullet, respectively.
The inset figure shows the structure, components, and materials commonly
found in a wind turbine blade.
Linear, downcycled, and circular options for decommissioned
glass
composite-based WTBs are in various stages of development. Currently,
direct disposal to landfill is the dominant pathway in the US due
to a lack of established alternatives for glass FRPC (see gray system
boundary inFigure). Direct recycling of the individual components in a WTB is challenging
because of the strong interfacial adhesion between the nonrecyclable
thermoset polymer and the fiberglass, which inhibits their separation. Chemical recycling has not been implemented
at scale,,−but there are multiple
pyrolysis facilities that process blade waste to recover the reinforcing
fibers and produce a pyrolysis fuel.,,Alternatively, WTB composites can be diverted from
landfill by downcycling into lower-value products through minimal
segmentation to repurpose in parks, bridges, or roofs,,−or recycled by mechanical grinding for use in injection-molded
paneling or filler.,,,Repurposing pathways only divert a small
amount of material from the landfill and are limited by scalability
to process all waste WTB. Waste disposal in a cement kiln has been
implemented in Europe,,and a cement coprocessing blade
recycling program in the US was started in 2020 by General Electric
and Veolia.,
In this work, we systematically
evaluate the environmental impacts
of two industrially available strategies for converting composite
waste from WTBs into secondary raw materials: cement clinker, produced
by cement coprocessing, and glass cullet recovered from pyrolysis
(Figure, yellow and
green outlines). Although the wind industry only accounts for 10–24%
of glass and carbon FRPC in the composites industry,,wind farms provide a highly concentrated point source of waste composites
from the blades. The proposed alternative end-of-life (EoL) options
can be piloted on the wind waste stream and later extended to address
glass FRPC materials from other sectors including construction, automotive,
maritime, or defense.
In typical
cement clinker production, raw materials (e.g., limestone,
sand, bauxite,etc.) are extracted, ground, and fed
into a preheating chamber. They are heated to ∼900 °C
and release carbon dioxide (CO2) as the virgin materials
thermally decompose to their oxide forms (calcium oxide, silica, alumina,
etc.).,The materials then
enter the kiln, where they are heated to >1400 °C for 20–60
min and react further to form the cement clinker product. Cement coprocessing
is the use of waste materials as alternative fuels and raw materials
in cement kilns during clinker production. This process enables simultaneous
energy recovery and material recycling, as the high temperatures ensure
complete combustion and incorporation of inorganic residues into the
final product. When waste blades are used in cement coprocessing,
the glass portion of the blade serves as an alternative feedstock
of oxides in the cement clinker, which reduces the demand for virgin
raw materials and the associated direct CO2emissions from
the decomposition reactions. Additionally, the organic materials in
the waste blade combust within the preheater and provide a source
of localized heating, which offsets a portion of fossil fuels required
for standard kiln operation.,
Pyrolysis is
a thermal treatment performed in an inert environment
to suppress standard combustion reactions of organic materials while
promoting production of amorphous carbon char and high-energy hydrocarbon
molecules (e.g., methane, ethane, etc.).,These high-energy molecules can be collected as pyrolysis fuels
and combusted as an alternative heat source to offset natural gas. The organic polymers in the blades thermally
decompose between 300–800 °C.,These temperatures are below the melting point of glass, allowing
the fibers to be recovered, although they are mechanically weakened
and entangled,,limiting the applications for
direct reuse. The recovered fiberglass can be additionally purified
by thermal oxidation to remove amorphous carbon char that could participate
in side reactions that create defects in the next glass product.,The purified fiberglass can then be used as a cullet feedstock to
the glass furnace, substituting for 15–30% of virgin materials.−
The raw materials in a standard glass batch react at 1400
°C
for 10–15 h to produce the final glass composition, releasing
CO2in the process.,,Cullet utilization offsets virgin materials needed to manufacture
glass, reduces direct CO2emissions from decomposition
reactions, and reduces energy demand to operate the glass furnace.,−Additionally, remelting glass removes defects and enhances its mechanical
properties. Currently, cullet utilization
in E-glass production is minimal in the glass industry due to strict
manufacturing requirements,,which could limit this
alternative EoL pathway. However, in-house cullet (i.e., manufacturing
scrap) is already used in fiberglass production, which indicates the potential for fiberglass cullet implementation,
if the recovered cullet is clean from contaminants and has a compatible
composition. If E-glass fibers can be used as cullet to form new fibers
and manufactured into new blades, then both the wind and glass industries
could move toward a more circular economy.
Prior analyses have
demonstrated that cement coprocessing and pyrolysis
are technically viable EoL solutions for WTBs.,,,A techno-economic
analysis by Ghosh et al. indicates that the cost of cement coprocessing
is not a barrier to the transition toward a more circular EoL for
WTBs in the US. Additionally, the variable
operational cost of cement coprocessing is low, around $0.18 per kilogram
of recycled material, due to low capital equipment needs to implement
the process in the cement industry. The
cost of virgin E-glass fibers is low ($1–3 per kilogram), while
the cost of epoxy resin is up to twice as expensive.,The variable operational cost of pyrolysis is greater than that
of cement coprocessing, at about $0.22 per kilogram of recycled material. However, the environmental impacts on the cement
and glass industries resulting from the use of waste blades as feedstock
require greater attention. In particular, analyses of pyrolysis have
identified the challenges of strength loss and entanglement in fiber
recovery,,,but have not assessed the impacts of recovering the
fiberglass as cullet for recycling into glass manufacturing.
In this work, we use attributional life cycle assessment (LCA)
to quantify the environmental impacts of producing cement clinker
and fiberglass with blended fractions of FRPC from waste WTBs to replace
raw materials, and we benchmark these pathways with conventionally
produced cement clinker and fiberglass without waste feedstock integration.
We consider the energy and material inputs and emissions of greenhouse
gases (CO2eq) and fine particulate matter (PM2.5, <2.5 μm). Scenarios with waste feedstock assume 15% of
feed to the cement kiln or fiberglass furnace comes from waste WTBs.
Below we describe the goal and scope, life cycle inventory, life cycle
impact assessment, and interpretationincluding sensitivity
analysesof LCA results for a case study in the Midwest region
of the United States.
A cradle-to-gate
attributional LCA was used to compare the environmental
and energy impacts of cement clinker and fiberglass production with
and without waste WTB material input following the ISO 14040/44 standards.,We treat the retired WTB as waste and develop an inventory for size-reducing
and transporting the waste feedstocks to cement and pyrolysis processing
facilities. We use system expansion rules to credit offset raw materials
used to produce the WTB-co-blended cement clinker
and fiberglass products. Thus, the burden to produce a WTB was not
included in this analysis, as the blades were a waste material. Bottom-up
mass and energy balances were used to calculate material and energy
quantities and model the process flows for each product, based upon
literature values related to material compositions, operation energy
requirements, and emission factors. Thermogravimetric analysis was
performed to experimentally determine the combustion temperature and
production of amorphous carbon char during pyrolysis of organic materials
in the WTB.
The functional unit was defined as 1 kg of secondary
material (cement
clinker or fiberglass). An alternative functional unit of 1 kg of
waste WTB considered by others,does not facilitate
comparison of cement clinker and fiberglass with and without waste
feedstock. We used SimaPro PhD Release 9.1.0.7 and the ecoinvent V3
database to apply the TRACI 2.1 life cycle impact assessment (LCIA)
method for the US to assess the midpoint environmental burdens of
the secondary material production pathways.,Global warming (GW) and human health–respiratory (HHR) impacts
were included in this inventory, measured by carbon dioxide equivalents
(CO2eq) and PM2.5emissions, respectively. These
impact categories were selected because significant CO2eq and PM2.5emissions result from both cement clinker
and glass production processes. While other TRACI 2.1 impact categories
are also important, we focused on these two categories because of
their relevance to high-temperature processes and relative availability
and degree of certainty in the data.
The goal of this LCA
was to determine the environmental impacts of utilizing waste WTB
material as a feedstock in the cement and glass industries. A waste
input rate of 15% of the feedstock to a cement kiln and fiberglass
furnace was selected to reflect typical waste and cullet input rates
in cement coprocessing and glass manufacturing plants.,−In cement coprocessing, the waste fed to the kiln included both
organic and inorganic (i.e., glass) content from the waste blade.
In fiberglass manufacturing, the waste fed to the glass furnace comprised
only the recovered glass cullet, excluding organic content in the
waste blade. The feed of each virgin material was varied independently,
based upon the composition of the waste glass, to achieve a target
clinker or glass composition. The system boundaries for this analysis
are shown inFigure. The burden to produce wind turbine blades was not included in this
analysis, as the blades were a waste material. WTB decommission and
metals recovery were out-of-scope for this analysis.

System boundaries for
the process steps to produce cement clinker
and fiberglass using only virgin raw materials (yellow) or a mixture
of virgin and waste-derived materials (purple/teal).
The majority of onshore wind turbines in the US
(∼61.5%)
are located in the Midwest; therefore,
this analysis includes the Midwest Reliability Organization (MRO)
electric grid and processing facilities generally located in Missouri.
The locations of facilities and quarries, along with the distances
between them used in the analysis, are detailed inTables S1 and S2. A pyrolysis facility does not currently
exist in Missouri, so the location of the Carbon Rivers facility in
Tennessee was used. A sensitivity analysis on these transportation
distances is provided inSection. Details of assumptions and the approach to develop
the life cycle inventory are provided below.
Baseline inventories
for the LCA were developed with consideration of material, energy,
and transportation inputs, CO2eq and PM2.5emissions,
and energy credits for each process step within the system boundaries.
The compositions of E-glass and cement clinker are provided inTable. Virgin materials
to produce cement clinker included limestone, sand, bauxite, iron
ore, magnesite, and soda ash. For borosilicate E-glass production,
kaolin was chosen as the source of alumina rather than bauxite and
boric acid was the source of boron oxide, according to common industry
practice.,,Kaolin provides
a second source of silica in addition to virgin sand. Both virgin
materials were considered in the calculation of the mass of silica
in the final fiberglass product. Thermal decomposition reactions of
these virgin materials are shown inTable.
The compositions of E-glass,,and the benchmark cement clinker,were sourced from literature. The cement clinker waste scenario
composition was calculated using mass balances (seeSI) and thermal decomposition reactions of the virgin materials
(seeTable). The
composition of E-glass was consistent between the recovered cullet
and the benchmark and waste scenarios.
In the waste scenarios, the oxides in the waste glass
offset a
portion of virgin materials. For example, calcium oxide (CaO) was
present in the composition of both cement clinker and recovered fiberglass;
the mass of CaO in the glass portion of the waste blade contributed
to the total mass of CaO in the final composition of the clinker.
The remaining mass of CaO in the final clinker product was then sourced
from limestone. Similar considerations were made for the other components
of the clinker and glass products. Boron oxide is a component of E-glass
that is not in a standard cement clinker composition. In the waste
feedstock scenario, we targeted the same compositional ratios in the
waste-free clinker product while also accounting for boron oxide from
E-glass in the waste blade. The modified composition of the clinker
was assumed to have no effect on quality, as noted in prior research
by Andersen et al. and Sproul et al. Following literature guidance, the alternative
fuel for cement coprocessing should contain less than 0.2% chlorine
to avoid adverse effects on cement clinker quality. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) is used in some models of blades,,but it was not present in the blade composition for this analysis,
which represents more common material choices.,,,Coprocessing
plants receiving blades containing PVC may need to use a ratio of
waste to virgin feed of less than 15%.
We assumed that cement
coprocessing required 3.5 MJ per kilogram
of clinker produced, including energy
for the preheater, precalciner, and kiln, with a fuel mix of 75% coal
and 25% natural gas based upon the coal-heavy mixes reported by other
analyses on cement clinker production.,,This energy input represents the total required to
form the clinker phase and was assumed to be the same in both the
benchmark and waste scenarios. Clinker formation reactions were assumed
to be unchanged between scenarios and were not explicitly modeled.
In the waste feedstock scenario, the masses, heat capacities, and
combustion temperatures of each material in the waste blade were used
to calculate the energy to heat these materials in the preheater.
Net heats of combustion,−less an assumed 15% loss, were used to determine the energy credit from
combusting them within the preheater (seeTable S3). We assumed that the energy credit had the same fuel mix
as the cement kiln. The kiln operation energy in the waste feedstock
scenario was less than that in the benchmark scenario because: (1)
there was a lower mass of virgin materials in the waste scenario,
and (2) the organic materials in the waste blade only had to be heated
to their combustion temperatures, which were lower than the temperatures
of the preheater or the kiln. Complete combustion reactions of the
organic materials in the waste blade were considered to calculate
the mass of CO2emitted by combustion of these materials
in the waste scenario.
We assumed that the fiberglass furnace
required 15.0 MJ per kilogram
of fiberglass produced and used a fuel mix of 76% natural gas and
24% electricity; electricity is used to power batch preparation and
fiber forming steps, and natural gas is used as heat for melting,
refining, and postforming process steps within glass manufacturing. In the waste feedstock scenario, pyrolysis recovers
glass cullet from the waste blade and produced amorphous carbon char
and pyrolysis fuel. An oxidation step removed the carbon char from
the recovered cullet by reacting it with oxygen to form CO2. Pyrolysis and oxidation required 5.65 MJ per kilogram of feed material and were heated by natural gas. The pyrolysis
fuel was collected and burned as an alternative heat source in the
pyrolysis reactor. The pyrolysis fuel mix analyzed by Coughlin et
al. was used to model pyrolysis fuel in this analysis (Table S4); it had an energy content of 16.5 MJ
per kilogram and provided an energy credit for natural gas.
Due to the differences in clinker and
glass production processes,
and the focus in this analysis on a consistent quantity of product,
the amounts of waste WTB fed to these processes differed. With a waste
input rate of 15%, the cement industry could process 0.245 kg of waste
WTB per kilogram of clinker produced, while the glass industry could
process 0.316 kg of waste WTB per kilogram of fiberglass produced
(Table S5). This may be surprising, given
that these waste quantities are greater than 15% of the 1 kg functional
unit. However, the waste utilization rate applies to the feedstock
into the cement kiln and fiberglass furnace, not the final products.
As such, material losses due to gaseous byproducts factor into the
total quantities of waste blade material that enter each process.
Size reduction process steps were modeled by a gyratory crusher,
cone crusher, and ball mill. Particulate
matter emissions were calculated using emission factors,and material flow for each process step (Table S6 and Figure S1).
We present
TRACI 2.1 midpoint results for global warming and human health–respiratory
impacts from the use of 15% waste WTB feedstock in cement clinker
and fiberglass production, benchmarked relative to WTB-free production
pathways.
There
are two types of CO2equivalent emissions within our system
boundaries: direct emissions resulting from chemical reactions (e.g.,
thermal decomposition, combustion, and oxidation) during the process
steps, and indirect emissions resulting from the operation energy
to power the process steps. Direct CO2eq emissions were
calculated using the thermal decomposition and complete organic material
combustion reactions and are provided inTable S7. Indirect emissions were calculated through ecoinvent database
selections and the TRACI 2.1 impact method. Allocated CO2eq emissions from each process step are provided for each product
scenario inFigure.

Global warming impacts for cement clinker and fiberglass production
with and without waste WTB feedstock. Impacts are shown as relating
to transportation (teal), material quarrying and extraction (yellow),
size reduction (purple), kiln operation (mauve), polymer combustion
(brown), pyrolysis (orange), glass manufacture (red), and energy credits
(green). The black bars indicate net totals of all inputs, outputs,
and credits.
In the benchmark scenario, we
calculated 1.06 kg CO2eq emissions per kilogram of cement
clinker produced (black bar inFigure), which is slightly
greater than other literature estimates of 0.7–1.0 kg CO2eq.,,This impact range can largely be attributed to variations in kiln
operation energy and specific fuel mixes.,Kiln operation energy and CO2eq emissions from the decomposition
reactions of virgin materials in the kiln contributed 94% of the total
GW in this benchmark scenario. Virgin material quarrying, size reduction,
and transportation contributed relatively little GW by comparison.
The GW from producing 1 kg cement clinker with 15% waste WTB input
was 0.96 kg CO2eq, which was about 9% less than our benchmark.
This reduction in emissions for the waste scenario aligned with results
from other analyses.,When including waste WTB in the
feedstock, indirect CO2eq emissions from kiln operation
energy were 4% less than the benchmark scenario due to a reduction
in the amount of virgin materials that entered and reacted within
the kiln. Additionally, direct CO2eq emissions were 6%
less than the benchmark scenario because portions of the CaO, MgO,
and other components in the clinker product were sourced from the
glass in the waste blade rather than virgin materials. Combustion
of the polymeric materials in the waste WTB within the kiln resulted
in direct CO2eq emissions, which accounted for 29% of the
total GW impact. However, the local heating from this combustion offset
some of the heat from fossil fuels and was therefore considered an
energy credit to the system.
The GW to produce 1 kg of fiberglass
in the conventional benchmark
process was 1.95 kg CO2eq (Figure), which was within the range of other literature
estimates of 1.7–2.5 kg CO2eq,−10% of the GW in this benchmark scenario was from
quarrying virgin materials. 75% of the GW was from glass manufacturing,
due to the high temperature and long residence time of the glass melt
stage, and from use of the coal-heavy
MRO electric grid to supply 24% of the furnace operation energy.,10% of the GW impact resulted from direct emissions by decomposition
reactions and 4% resulted from transportation. The long transportation
distances for raw materialsparticularly boric oxide sourced
from Boron, Californiaresulted in a transportation component
of GW that was nearly five times greater for fiberglass than for cement
clinker.
Fiberglass manufacturing using 15% glass cullet recovered
from
waste WTB generated 2.17 kg CO2eq emissions11%
greater than the benchmark scenario (Figure). Use of cullet reduced GW from virgin material
extraction by 19%, direct CO2eq emissions from decomposition
reactions by 18%, and indirect emissions from glass manufacturing
by 4% compared to the benchmark scenario. Additionally, a natural
gas energy credit was applied to account for the offset from energy
generated by combusting the pyrolysis fuels. However, the pyrolysis
and oxidation processes needed to recover and clean the glass culletalong
with emissions from pyrolysis fuel combustioncontributed 20%
of total GW emissions in the fiberglass waste scenario, ultimately
outweighing the upstream benefits. This overall increase in GW emissions
with pyrolysis aligned with findings by Sproul, et. al.
Fine particulate matter (PM2.5)
is emitted during fuel
combustion, size reduction processing, and cement kiln and fiberglass
furnace operation. A removal efficiency of 95% of PM2.5emissions, typical of standard industry filtration practices, was
applied to direct particulate emissions from the in-scope process
steps.−Direct PM2.5emissions from the size reduction processes
were minimal compared to those from other process steps due to the
low PM2.5emission factors; note that larger particulate
sizes were out of scope for this analysis. The direct PM2.5emissions from each process step are
provided inTable S7, and the allocated
HHR impacts for each production scenario are shown inFigure.

Human health–respiratory
impacts for cement clinker and
fiberglass production with and without waste WTB feedstock. Impacts
are shown as relating to transportation (teal), material quarrying
and extraction (yellow), size reduction (purple), kiln operation (mauve),
polymer combustion (brown), pyrolysis (orange), glass manufacture
(red), and energy credits (green). The black bars indicate net totals
of all inputs, outputs, and credits.
For cement clinker, the HHR impact dropped by 33.6%,
from 1.07
to 0.71 g PM2.5eq per kilogram, primarily due to the energy
credit from polymer combustion. Coal has a high PM2.5emission
factor (0.2 g per MJ), while natural gas emits significantly less
(0.01 g per MJ). In the cement coprocessing
scenario, 75% of the 2.4 MJ of energy produced from polymer combustion
offsets coal use and just 25% offsets natural gas, leading to a substantial
reduction in PM2.5emissions. This overall PM2.5reduction mirrors the GW trends observed between the benchmark and
waste feedstock scenarios.
For glass production, the HHR impact
declined more modestly (by
3%, from 4.29 to 4.16 g PM2.5eq per kilogram) when waste
WTBs were used. Though the reduction was small, it was still meaningful,
especially given that PM2.5emissions in glass production
are inherently higher than in clinker production due to the greater
operation energy.
When recovered cullet was incorporated, PM2.5emissions
from virgin material quarrying dropped by 19%, and those from glass
manufacturing decreased by 4% compared to the benchmark scenario.
These reductions outweighed the additional emissions introduced during
the cullet recovery process (pyrolysis, oxidation, and combustion
of pyrolysis fuels), resulting in a net benefit for HHR. The pyrolysis
fuel energy credit was modeled entirely as natural gas, which has
a lower PM2.5emission factor compared to coal. Additionally,
the pyrolysis fuel provided an energy credit of 1.9 MJ, which was
lower than that in the cement clinker waste scenario. As a result,
the avoided PM2.5emissions were lower in the glass waste
scenario than in the cement clinker waste scenario.
For context
on the scale of the emissions presented in this section,
a standard passenger vehicle emits 0.2 kg CO2eq and 0.039
g PM2.5per km driven.,These CO2eq and PM2.5emission factors equate the manufacture
of 1 kg of cement clinker (or fiberglass) to driving about 5 (10)
km and 20 (110) km, respectively.
Sensitivity
analyses were performed on the rate of waste incorporation, glass
composition, and transportation requirements. Results are shown inFigureand discussed below.

Sensitivity
results for waste rate set at 30% (green), glass composition
(orange), and transportation (blue) compared against the baseline
results (horizontal bars) for GW (top) and HHR (bottom).
The rate of waste incorporation was 15% in the
baseline analysis
to represent a realistic waste input rate used in cement coprocessing
and a common cullet input rate used in glass manufacturing.,−This fraction may increase as recycling in cement clinker and fiberglass
manufacturing matures. Therefore, we doubled the waste incorporation
rate to 30% waste feedstock to the kiln and fiberglass furnace in
the sensitivity analysis to represent more mature recycling in both
industries. The same trends observed between the benchmark and waste
feedstock scenarios for clinker and fiberglass held true as the waste
rate increased.
The composition of E-glass can vary depending
on the desired application
and the specific manufacturer.,,,The composition of B2O3in the final glass can range from 0 to 10% of the total
composition; a composition of 0% B2O3represents E-CR glass rather than E-glass. In
recent years, the fiberglass industry has been adopting E-CR glass
in place of E-glass due to its improved chemical resistance and mechanical
strength. For the baseline scenario,
the B2O3composition was set at 5%, and a sensitivity
analysis explored variations within the 0–10% range; the glass
compositions tested in the sensitivity analysis are provided inTable S8. The impacts from cement clinker production
were insensitive to the boron content of the glass fibers in the WTB.
However, it is important to limit the addition of boron in clinker,
as its presence can slow cement cure times. The GW and HHR impacts from both fiberglass production scenarios
increased as B2O3content increased due to the
higher impact associated with boric acid. Fiberglass production with
no B2O3content and no waste in the feedstock
resulted in the lowest GW impact out of all fiberglass production
scenarios tested because it avoided the higher impacts from boric
acid and did not have additional emissions from glass recovery.
Transportation accounted for 5% or less of the total GW and HHR
impacts for both the cement clinker and fiberglass production processes,
which was much less than direct and other indirect emissions from
these processes. When the transportation distance was decreased by
a factor of 50% compared to the baseline requirement to represent
improvements in the supply chain, it accounted for 3% or less of GW
and HHR impacts for the tested scenarios. When this distance increased
by a factor of 5x to represent poorer supply chain infrastructure,
it accounted for 8–23% of GW and HHR impacts.
This
work considers two
waste utilization pathways for WTBs with
mature technology readiness: cement coprocessing and pyrolysis coupled
with glass cullet recovery and remanufacturing. These options divert
waste blades from the landfill and increase material circularity from
the wind industry. We assumed the blades are primarily made of an
epoxy polymer matrix that is reinforced with fiberglass. The fiberglass
content can offset typical virgin materials in cement clinker and
fiberglass production, while combustion of the organic portion of
the blades can provide an energy credit to offset standard fuel mixes
to power a cement kiln and pyrolysis reactor. Increasing the incorporation
of glass cullet from waste blades into fiberglass production increased
GW, which indicates that the GW benefits of using cullet in fiberglass
manufacturing may not outweigh the GW emissions from recovering clean
cullet with current methods and supply chains. In contrast, increasing
the incorporation of waste blades into cement clinker production reduced
GW and HHR impacts.
To increase circularity, there must be an
alignment between availability
and demand in material supply chains. The rate of decommissioned WTBs
could reach 800,000 t/year globally by 2050, with a cumulative total of 13–43 million tonnes.−The cement industry produced ∼4.1 billion tonnes of cement
globally in 2020, and the fiberglass
industry produced ∼9 million tonnes globally in 2023. Given these annual production rates, the projected
rate of blade decommissioning would account for much less than 1%
of the total feedstock to the cement industry and up to 8% of the
total feedstock to the fiberglass industry, indicating ample capacity
for both industries to accommodate blade waste. Additionally, adoption
of coprocessing at a cement plant requires little to no adjustments
to cement kilns as they exist and operate today.
This work provides quantitative insight into the
environmental
impacts of incorporating composites from waste WTBs in cement clinker
and fiberglass manufacturing. While WTBs were used as an example,
similar logic applies to other sectors of the composites industry.
We provide a data-driven impact assessment that should be combined
with consideration of economics, material properties, and supply chain
logistics to design sustainable waste-to-resource pathways across
interconnected industries.
The authors acknowledge NSF CBET-2350073
and BSF
2023709, as well as the Stein Family Fellowship and Longsview Fellowship
of Drexel University, for support of this work.
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.est.5c07978.
Additional details about
model inputs: facility locations;
material compositions; material and energy quantities; database selections;
and detailed calculations (PDF)
Excel file used to develop life cycle inventor
(XLSX)
The authors
declare no competing financial interest.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
Articles from Environmental Science & Technology are provided here courtesy ofAmerican Chemical Society
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894