An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Authors for correspondence:Mattia Pierangelini,Tel:+32(0)43 66 38 40,Email:mattia.pierangelini@gmail.com,Pierre Cardol,Tel: +32(0)43 66 38 40,Email:Pierre.Cardol@uliege.be
Corresponding author.
Received 2020 Mar 14; Accepted 2020 May 30; Issue date 2020 Nov.
This is an open access article under the terms of thehttp://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.
Disentangling the metabolic functioning of corals' endosymbionts (Symbiodiniaceae) is relevant to understanding the response of coral reefs to warming oceans. In this work, we first question whether there is an energetic coupling between photosynthesis and respiration in Symbiodiniaceae (Symbiodinium,DurusdiniumandEffrenium), and second, how different levels of energetic coupling will affect their adaptive responses to global warming.
Coupling between photosynthesis and respiration was established by determining the variation of metabolic rates during thermal response curves, and how inhibition of respiration affects photosynthesis. Adaptive (irreversible) responses were studied by exposing twoSymbiodiniumspecies with different levels of photosynthesis–respiration interaction to high temperature conditions (32°C) for 1 yr.
We found that some Symbiodiniaceae have a high level of energetic coupling; that is, photosynthesis and respiration have the same temperature dependency, and photosynthesis is negatively affected when respiration is inhibited. Conversely, photosynthesis and respiration are not coupled in other species. In any case, prolonged exposure to high temperature caused adjustments in both photosynthesis and respiration, but these changes were fully reversible.
We conclude that energetic coupling between photosynthesis and respiration exhibits wide variation amongst Symbiodiniaceae and does not determine the occurrence of adaptive responses in Symbiodiniaceae to temperature increase.
Keywords:adaptation, alternative oxidase, CO2acquisition, climate change, coral reefs, metabolism, symbiosis, temperature
The Symbiodiniaceae family (dinoflagellates, LaJeunesseet al.,2018) comprises microalgae species capable of establishing endosymbiotic relationships with animal hosts such as Cnidaria, Porifera and Mollusca (Leggatet al.,1999; Weber & Medina,2012; Achlatiset al.,2018). This association between Symbiodiniaceae and their hosts is key to the integrity and functioning of coral reef ecosystems world‐wide. Under current climate change conditions, alterations of global temperatures have been identified as major threats to coral reefs (Spalding & Brown,2015; Hugheset al.,2017a,b). Increasing mean water temperatures, together with extreme climatic events such as heat waves, are disrupting the endosymbiotic relationship between Symbiodiniaceae and their cnidarian hosts, and causing reef death if these events are persistent and severe (Suggettet al.,2017; Hugheset al.,2018; Fordyceet al.,2019; Goyenet al.,2019).
In the future, the response of coral reefs to changes in temperature will depend on the ability of both Symbiodiniaceae and their hosts to adapt to the new climatic conditions (Chakravartiet al.,2017; Tordaet al.,2017; Comeauet al.,2019). Because of their large population size, short generation times (at least under a free‐living lifestyle) and high genetic diversity, Symbiodiniaceae species are expected to have a faster adaptive capacity to climatic changes than their hosts (Collins,2011; Tordaet al.,2017; Comeauet al.,2019; González‐Pechet al.,2019). Thus, studies of isolated Symbiodiniaceae provide valuable contributions to the understanding of the mechanisms underpinning corals' adaptation to ocean warming. Recent studies focusing on the responses of these organisms to long‐term temperature increases have shown that some isolated Symbiodiniaceae are capable of relatively fast adaptation (c. 2.5 yr and 80 cell generations) to elevated temperature conditions (Huertaset al.,2011; Chakravartiet al.,2017; Chakravarti & van Oppen,2018).
Adaptation (long‐term irreversible responses, usually requiringde novomutations in the genome or species sorting) to warming conditions could imply modifications of the two most important metabolic processes of the algal cell, photosynthesis and respiration. In photosynthetic organisms (both plants and algae), photosynthesis and respiration occur in different organelles (chloroplasts and mitochondria, respectively), and their activities are very often coupled (Raghavendra & Padmasree,2003; Cardolet al.,2009). In the green algaChlamydomonas reinhardtii, mitochondrial respiration can supply ATP to the chloroplast, influencing net CO2fixation (Cardolet al.,2009) and affecting the photosynthetic response under high light intensity conditions (Larosaet al.,2018). Similarly, energetic interaction (exchanging ATP and NADPH) between the mitochondrion and the chloroplast occurs in diatoms (Bailleulet al.,2015). In regard to Symbiodiniaceae and other dinoflagellates, it is still unknown whether respiration activity is energetically connected to photosynthesis. The possible presence of phenotypes with multiple degrees of photosynthesis to respiration coupling is also unexplored. Disentangling the extent of photosynthesis dependence on respiration is fundamental to clarifying the adaptive capability of photosynthesis and respiration of Symbiodiniaceae under future climatic conditions.
In relation to other species, thermal response curve (TRC) analyses (i.e. by measuring photosynthetic and respiratory responses to acute increases in temperature), showed that green algae adaptation (over several hundred cell generations) to high (above‐optimal) temperature conditions involves either increasing the rates of photosynthesis or lowering the rates of respiration (Padfieldet al.,2016; Schaumet al.,2017). By contrast, in the marine diatomThalassiosira pseudonana, adaptation to different warming scenarios caused a similar decline in both photosynthetic and respiration rates (Schaumet al.,2018). However, these studies did not establish whether the effects were due to adaptation or acclimation (i.e. short‐term reversible responses) (Ravenet al.,2017). Particularly for respiration, exposure to elevated temperatures may also cause two types of response in the respiration TRCs: type I (involving changes of the slope of the TRCs) and type II (reduction in the elevation of the TRC) (Atkin & Tjoelker,2003; Smith & Dukes,2013). In this work, using Symbiodiniaceae as model species, we question the extent to which the degree of coupling between photosynthesis and respiration influences adaptive responses (measured through TRCs) to warming conditions (Atkinet al.,2006).
Photosynthetic adaptation to increasing temperature will also possibly require adjustments in mechanisms of inorganic carbon (Ci) acquisition. To acquire Ci, Symbiodiniaceae possess a CO2‐concentrating mechanism (CCM), that is, structural and functional components which enhance intracellular levels of Ciand favour the carboxylation activity of their form II Rubisco (Leggatet al.,1999; Bradinget al.,2011,2013; Roset al.,2020). Generally, CCM activity is modulated by the changing of thermal conditions (Beardall & Giordano,2002; Giordanoet al.,2005), and CCM functioning could be linked to species adaptation to cold (or warm) habitats (Kranzet al.,2015; Ravenet al.,2017). In the case of Symbiodiniaceae, Oakleyet al. (2014a) showed that acclimation to high thermal regimes over several wk resulted in a higher photosynthetic affinity for Ci(reflecting enhanced CCM activity), which could be induced by the lower CO2solubility in water or a lower Rubisco CO2: O2selectivity factor (Tcherkezet al.,2006; Ravenet al.,2017). However, no information is currently available on the adaptive capability of CCMs in Symbiodiniaceae under long‐term changes in temperature conditions.
In this work, we first aimed to establish whether there is an energetic coupling between photosynthesis and respiration, and the extent to which this interplay occurs in Symbiodiniaceae (from three genera, namelySymbiodinium,DurusdiniumandEffrenium). Second, we explored the consequences of two different levels of coupling between photosynthesis and respiration for the adaptive capabilities of Symbiodiniaceae to a 1‐yr increase in temperature. Finally, we assessed the extent to which adaptation of photosynthesis to warmer conditions is associated with phenotypical adjustments of CCM activity.
Four species belonging to three different genera of the Symbiodiniaceae family (SymbiodiniumFreudenthal,DurusdiniumLaJeunesse andEffreniumLaJeunesse et Jeong) were studied. These includedSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir),Symbiodiniumsp. (Stylodid),Durusdinium trenchii(provided by Annika Guse, University of Heidelberg), andEffrenium voratum(Table1). To confirm the classification of these species at the genus and/or species level, the sequencing of 5.8S rDNA internal transcribed space 2 (ITS2) regions was carried out as described in Humeet al. (2018). For all the experiments, cells were cultured in F/2 medium, prepared with sea salt (Coral Pro Salt, Red Sea; Red Sea Fish Pharm, Verneuil d'Avre et d'Iton, France) and Guillard's (F/2) Marine Water Enrichment Solution (Sigma‐Aldrich), with a total dissolved inorganic carbon (Ci) content of 4 mM (CO2= 20 μM; HCO3−= 3495 μM; calculated using the CO2Sys.xls application, Lewis & Wallace,1998), Alk = 4.5 mEq l−1, a salinity of 34 PSU, and buffered at pH 8.1 using 20 mM Tris‐HCl. Cultures ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir and Stylodid) andE. voratumwere maintained in a plant growth chamber (Grobanks; CLF Plant Climatics GmbH, Wertingen, Germany) and exposed to a continuous photosynthetic photon flux density (PPFD) of 100 μmol photons m−2s−1. Because this light regime was not suitable for the growth ofD. trenchii, this species was maintained with a PPFD ofc. 20 μmol photons m−2s−1under a 12 h : 12 h, light : dark photoperiod. Experiments were conducted forD. trenchiiat least 3 h after the onset of the light period. For the control temperature condition, cultures ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir and Stylodid),E. voratumandD. trenchiiwere maintained at 25°C. During the experiments, cell concentration in the culture was maintained below 150 000–200 000 cells ml–1by regular sub‐culturing with fresh F/2 medium. Although cultures were not axenic, bacterial concentration was always low (as verified by regular microscope inspection).
Symbiodiniaceae species used in this study.
Species
(Former clade)
Host species
(Type of host)
Geographic origin
(Temperature min–max)
Symbiodiniumsp.
(A)
Anemonia viridis
(Sea anemone)
Mediterranean Sea, France
(13–25°C)
Paola Furla,
University of Nice
Symbiodiniumsp.
(A)
Stylophora pistillata
(Coral)
Red Sea
(21–28°C)
Centre Scientifique
De Monaco collection
Montastraea faveolata
(Coral)
Tennessee Reef, Florida Keys, Florida, USA
(22–28°C)
Effrenium voratum
(E)
Wellington, New Zealand
(22–26°C)
Cell concentration was determined using a Coulter counter (Z2; Beckman, Indianapolis, IN, USA). The cell‐specific division rates (µc) ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir),Symbiodiniumsp. (Stylodid), andE. voratumwere calculated from the slope of the natural logarithm plot, obtained from the exponential phase of the population growth in the culture. AsD. trenchiiwas maintained under a lower light regime and a light : dark cycle, conditions which would affect the comparison with cells exposed to continuous light (Quigget al.,2012), its µcvalue was not estimated.
For the long‐term exposure to elevated temperature, three independent replicate cultures ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir and Stylodid) were transferred at 32°C and kept under this regime for 1 yr. These two species have been previously assessed for short‐term acclimation responses at 33°C (Danget al.,2019), and as they belong to the same genus and both have a facultative symbiotic lifestyle, they provide a solid basis for the present comparison. We chose 32°C because it reflects the warming conditions that tropical algal species might experience in future years due to climate change (IPCC,2014; Jin & Agustí,2018; Aranguren‐Gassiset al.,2019). During the 1 yr of incubation at 32°C, cultures were diluted with new F/2 medium (pH 8.1; CO2= 17 μM; HCO3−= 3368 μM) every 7 d in the case ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) and every 14 d forSymbiodiniumsp. (Stylodid), according to their different µcunder the 32°C treatment (Fig.5). The µc, photosynthesis and respiration activities were analysed after 5, 7 and 12 months from the start of the 32°C incubation period. According to their µcvalues, the 1‐yr‐long experiment equated toc. 310 and 190 cell generations forSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) andSymbiodiniumsp. (Stylodid) respectively. To test whether the physiological traits displayed during such long‐term exposure were stable and adaptive, at the end of the 1‐yr period of warming, cells were returned for at least 1 wk to the control temperature of 25°C (Chakravartiet al.,2017). Only measurements showing adaptive photosynthetic and/or respiratory adjustments were repeated.

Cell‐specific division rate (μc) and gross maximal photosynthesis (Pmax) ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) andSymbiodiniumsp. (Stylodid) growing at 25°C (0 months) and during the 1‐yr‐long experiment at 32°C. Measurements were performed for at least three independent biological replicates. The connecting line fits through the raw data. Vertical bars indicate the standard deviation.
Rates of photosynthetic O2evolution as a function of irradiance (P vs I curve) and dark respiration (Rd) were measured with a Clark‐type oxygen electrode (Hansatech, Norfolk, UK). P vs I curves were measured for all species grown at 25°C andSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir and Stylodid) at 32°C. For each experiment, cells were concentrated through centrifugation at 2200gfor 2 min. As Symbiodiniaceae cells are large (c. 10 μm, Robertyet al.,2014), harvesting by low centrifugation force allows the sinking and formation of a pellet at the bottom of the centrifuge tube, and the separation of the smaller prokaryotic cells which remain in the supernatant (Malerbaet al.,2018). After centrifugation, the cells were resuspended in 1 ml of fresh culture F/2 medium (+2 mM NaHCO3) and placed into the electrode chamber. Before each P vs I measurement, the cells were dark acclimated for 15 min, with the final 5 min of this incubation period used to measure theRd. After the dark pre‐treatment, O2evolution inside the chamber was measured over a range (4–1350 μmol photons m−2s−1) of PPFD, provided by an LED light source peaking at 630–640 nm. Gross photosynthesis (P) was calculated as the sum ofRdand net photosynthesis. During the experiments, to avoid the possibility of photorespiration (Oakleyet al.,2014a; Roset al.,2020) and a potential underestimation of O2evolution rates due to O2saturation, the O2concentration in the chamber was maintained belowc. 80% of air equilibrium.
We carried out TRCs as in Karsten & Holzinger (2012) and Pierangeliniet al. (2019). For these analyses, cells were harvested from the culture by centrifugation (2200g, 2 min), resuspended in 1 ml of fresh culture F/2 medium (+2 mM NaHCO3), and placed into a Clark‐type oxygen electrode chamber (Hansatech). TRCs were measured for all species grown at 25°C andSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir and Stylodid) at 32°C. For TRCs, cells were exposed to rising temperatures from 15 to 40°C. In the case ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) growing under control condition of 25°C, the starting temperature for TRCs was set at 10°C. The use of this lower initial temperature did not cause changes in the shape of the TRCs (Supporting Information Fig.S1a,b). However, when growing at 32°C, photosynthesis ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) became more susceptible to low temperature (Fig.S1c), and TRCs were started at 15°C. At each temperature, cells were initially incubated in the dark for 25 min, with the last 10 min of this incubation period used to measure respiration. After the dark period, cells were exposed to a saturating PPFD of 700 μmol photons m−2s−1(LED light source peaking at 630–640 nm) for 10 min, with the final 5 min used to calculate the photosynthetic O2evolution. For each assay temperature, the oxygen electrode was calibrated (with air and N2) and the oxygen electrode drift (O2depletion related to non‐biological processes) was estimated in order to correct the raw O2evolution and consumption data. Gross P was calculated as the sum ofRdand net photosynthesis. The activation energies (how quickly the trait varies as a function of temperature; Padfieldet al.,2016) of gross P (EaP) and respiration (EaR) were calculated from the slopes of the TRCs, using the Arrhenius equation logek= −Ea/R(1/T) + logeA.
The effects of a respiratory inhibitor on photosynthesis were measured for all species grown at 25°C andSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir and Stylodid) at 32°C. For these experiments, O2evolution and relative electron transport rate through the photosystem II (rETR) were recorded simultaneously with an optical O2meter – FireStingO2(Pyro Science, GmbH, Germany) and a JTS‐10 spectrophotometer (Bio‐logic, Claix, France) respectively, following the procedures of Robertyet al. (2014) and Vega de Lunaet al. (2019). Prior to measurements, cells were incubated in the dark for 15 min. Salicylhydroxamic acid (SHAM) was diluted in DMSO (stock solution 1 M), and added at the beginning of the dark incubation period, with a final concentration in the cell suspension of 8 mM. This SHAM concentration is expected to cause ac. 20% reduction in respiration rates (Oakleyet al.,2014b). O2evolution and rETR were measured by exposing cells to a progressive increase (everyc. 6 min) of PPFD (14—890 µmol photons m−2s−1) provided by an LED array emitting at 660 nm. During each light step intensity,Fs(stationary fluorescence level in light) andFm′(maximum fluorescence emission induced by a saturating pulse > 5000 µmol photons m−2s−1) were measured, and the effective quantum yield of photosystem II at steady state (φPSII) was calculated as follows: (Fm′−Fs)/Fm′(Gentyet al.,1989). The rETR was calculated as the product of φPSII and the actinic PPFD (Ralph & Gademann,2005). Gross P was calculated as the sum ofRdand net photosynthesis.
The photosynthesis ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) under increasing inorganic carbon availabilities (P vs Ci) was measured using a Clark‐type oxygen electrode (Leggatet al.,1999; Treveset al.,2016; Ruanet al.,2017). For these measurements, we prepared F/2 culture medium depleted of Cithrough acidification (pH ≤ 2) and bubbling with N2gas for at least 1 h. Shortly before the analysis, the F/2 Ci‐free medium was re‐adjusting to pH 8.1 with an NaOH pellet. For the experiment, cells were harvested from the culture, concentrated by centrifugation (2200g, 2 min), washed in 20 ml of F/2 Ci‐free, resuspended in 990 µl of F/2 Ci‐free, and placed in the electrode chamber, where they were exposed to a light saturating photosynthesis of 700 µmol photons m−2s−1(LED light source peaking at 630–640 nm). Photosynthesis was allowed to take place until the residual Ciin the F/2 medium and/or the intracellular Cipool (Leggatet al.,1999) were consumed, and a stable O2evolution rate was reached (afterc. 2 h, minimizing potential photodamages related to Cidepletion). Photosynthetic rates were then measured over ascending NaHCO3concentrations (0–2000 µM), obtained by sequential additions (1–2 µl) of freshly prepared NaHCO3solutions (20, 100, 200 mM) into the O2electrode chamber. To estimate the photosynthetic affinity for CO2, the slope of the CO2‐limited part of the P vs CO2curve, and the half saturation constant for CO2‐dependent photosynthesis (K0.5CO2), were calculated (Pierangeliniet al.,2014; Ruanet al.,2017). Slope of the Ci‐limited part of the P vs Cicurves (not shown), and the half saturation constant for Ci‐dependent photosynthesis (K0.5Ci) were also calculated.
Chl cell contents were quantified as in Danget al. (2019). Briefly, cells were harvested by centrifugation (2200g, 2 min), resuspended in 100% methanol and lysed in a TissueLyser II (30 Hz, 5 min, 4°C; Qiagen) in the presence of glass beads (710—1180 μm; Sigma‐Aldrich). After debris removal at 4°C (by centrifugation at 10 000g, 10 min), Chlaandcconcentrations were determined by spectrophotometry according to the equations of Ritchie (2006) for dinoflagellates.
To evaluate whether the presence of different degrees of metabolic coupling between photosynthesis and respiration are associated with a different subcellular organization, analysis by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was performed forSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) andE. voratum, the two most distant strains when considering interaction degree between respiration and photosynthesis. Cells samples for TEM were fixed in a vacuum bell for 2 h at 4°C with 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M Sörensen’s phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) and postfixed for 1.5 h with 2% osmium tetroxide. After washing in Sörensen's buffer, cells were dehydrated through graded ethanol solutions and then processed for embedding in Epon. Ultrathin sections of samples were contrasted with uranyl acetate and lead citrate before examination in a JEM 1400 transmission electron microscope at 80 kV (Jeol (Europe) BV, Zaventem, Belgium). Analysis of the TEM images and measurements of the sizes of the organelles were performed using theitemsoftware (Olympus Soft Imaging Solutions GmbH, Münster, Germany). The number of mitochondria‐chloroplast surface contacts were estimated in relation to the total number of chloroplastic sections contained in the cell, using at least 10 different randomly photographed cells. To estimate chloroplastic and mitochondrial sections sizes, at least 20 measurements were performed for each organelle.
Experiments were performed with at least three (unless otherwise stated) biological replicates per species. Comparisons between two treatments/species were made using two‐tailedt‐tests. When comparison involved more than two treatments/species, one‐way ANOVA was used. Changes of parameters as a function of increasing temperature (TRCs) and changes during the yr‐long experiment were tested using repeated measures (RM) ANOVA. All analyses were followed by Tukey's multiple comparisons test. The analyses were performed using the softwaregraphpad prism 5(GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA), setting the threshold of significance at 95%.
To first establish whether gross O2evolution and dark respiratory O2consumption rates have either similar or different responses to an acute increase in temperature, we carried out TRCs. For the four Symbiodiniaceae (twoSymbiodiniumsp.,D. trenchiiandE. voratum), gross P increased from 10–15°C to 25–30°C, and declined beyond this range of temperatures (Fig.1). The photosynthetic rates ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir and Stylodid) andE. voratumreached at 25°C were also comparable with the measures obtained with the P vs I curves (Table2) (t‐tests:F3,2= 17.38,P= 0.3554;F3,2= 1.296,P= 0.0583;F2,2= 1.694,P= 0.1420, respectively), indicating that the rapid changes in temperature imposed during the TRCs did not impact the cell metabolisms. By contrast, the photosynthetic rates ofD. trenchiiwere lower than those of the P vs I curves (Table2) (t‐tests:F2,3= 2.437,P= 0.0261), reflecting a susceptibility of the species to the relatively low (15°C) initial temperature of the TRCs. In contrast to photosynthesis, respiration increased steadily during the heat exposure and did not decline at temperatures as high as 40°C. The comparison of the activation energy (Ea) parameter (in electron volts, eV), indicated that whereas the photosynthesis of the four species had different sensitivities to temperature (different EaP) (ANOVA:F2,7= 91.01,P< 0.0001), sensitivities of their respiratory activities to temperature were equivalent (similar EaR; ANOVA:F2,7= 2.821,P= 0.1264) (Fig.2a). Comparing results in each species, differences were found in the temperature dependence of photosynthesis and respiration. The results showed that EaP was higher than EaR in bothSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) (t‐tests:F3,3= 10.14,P= 0.0004) andD. trenchii(t‐tests:F2,2= 4.120,P= 0.0021). Conversely, in the case ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Stylodid) andE. voratum, EaP was identical to EaR (t‐tests:F2,2= 57.36,P= 0.7885;F2,2= 4.737,P= 0.1803), indicating that both photosynthesis and respiration were equally sensitive to the temperature increase. These differences and similarities in temperature dependence were also indicated by theRd: gross P ratios (Fig.2b,c). Whereas forSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) andD. trenchii, theRd: gross P ratio declined between the lowest and optimal temperatures (RM ANOVA:F4,3,12= 9.507,P= 0.0011 and,F2,2,4= 14.72,P= 0.0143), theRd: gross P did not change (RM ANOVA:F3,2,6= 0.7479,P= 0.5620 and,F3,2,6= 3.342,P= 0.0972) forSymbiodiniumsp. (Stylodid) andE. voratum.

Thermal response curves of gross maximal photosynthesis (Pmax, lefty‐axis) and respiration (Rd, righty‐axis) forSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir),Symbiodiniumsp. (Stylodid),Durusdinium trenchiiandEffrenium voratumgrown at 25°C. Measurements were performed for at least three independent culture replicates. The connecting line fits through the raw data. Vertical bars indicate the standard deviation.
Cell‐specific division rate (µc), photosynthetic characteristics (P vs I curves), dark respiration (Rd), and Chl cell contents ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir and Stylodid),Durusdinium trenchii(CCMP2556) andEffrenium voratum(CCMP421) cultivated at 25°C.
Values in brackets represent standard deviation (n≥ 3).

(a) Comparison between activation energies (in electron volts, eV) of gross photosynthesis (EaP) and respiration (EaR) ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir),Symbiodiniumsp. (Stylodid),Durusdinium trenchiiandEffrenium voratumcultivated at 25°C. The Eawere extrapolated from the slopes of thermal response curves (Fig.1) using the Arrhenius equation. Asterisks indicate statistically significant differences of EaR in comparison to EaP (*,P< 0.05). (b) Respiration (Rd) to gross maximal photosynthesis (Pmax) ratios as a function of increasing temperature inSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) andD. trenchii. (c)Rdto grossPmaxratios as a function of increasing temperature inSymbiodiniumsp. (Stylodid) andE. voratum. All measurements were performed for at least three independent culture replicates. The connecting line fits through the raw data. Vertical bars indicate the standard deviation.
The impact of inhibition (in the presence of SHAM) of the mitochondrial alternative oxidase (AOX) respiratory pathway on maximal photosynthetic capacity is reported in Fig.3. Although chemical inhibitors might affect cell physiology at multiple levels (e.g. Robertyet al.,2014), several studies have described SHAM as being capable of inhibiting the activity of the mitochondrial AOX pathway (but not other respiratory pathways) in several model algal species (Bailleulet al.,2015; Larosaet al.,2018; Muriket al.,2019), including Symbiodiniaceae (Oakleyet al.,2014b). In our study, addition of 8 mM SHAM caused a mild 20–25% decrease inRdinSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) (t‐test:F3,3= 1.223,P= 0.0391),Symbiodiniumsp. (Stylodid) (t‐test:F2,2= 1.570,P= 0.0001),D. trenchii(t‐test:F2,2= 1.746,P= 0.0177), andE. voratum(t‐test:F5,5= 1.103,P= 0.0328). In relation to photosynthesis, addition of SHAM toSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir), caused ac. 30% increase in the maximal rates of gross P (t‐test:F5,5= 2.179,P< 0.0001) but no changes in maximal rETR (t‐test:F5,5= 2.465,P= 0.6271) (Fig.3). In the case ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Stylodid), the addition of SHAM caused a reduction in both maximal gross P (20%,t‐test:F5,5= 1.702,P= 0.0339) and maximal rETR (40%,t‐test:F5,5= 1.306,P= 0.0047). ForD. trenchiiandE. voratum, the addition of SHAM caused no alteration to their maximal gross P (t‐test:F5,5= 1.582,P= 0.9962;F5,5= 4.829,P= 0.1053, respectively) but ac. 30% and 22%, respectively, decrease in the maximal rETR (t‐test:F5,5= 1.651,P< 0.0001;F5,5= 1.367,P= 0.0004, respectively).

Comparison of maximal gross oxygen evolution (grossPmax) and maximal relative electron transport rate of photosystem II (rETRmax) inSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir),Symbiodiniumsp. (Stylodid),Durusdinium trenchiiandEffrenium voratum. Measurements were performed both in the absence and presence of salicylhydroxamic acid (SHAM), an inhibitor of mitochondrial alternative oxidase activity. All the measurements were performed for at least three independent culture replicates. Box plots show the interquartile range (box), median (horizontal line), and range (vertical bars). *,P< 0.05.
Transmission electron micrographs (Figs4,S2) showed that bothSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) andE. voratumcontained an average of 10 chloroplastic sections (Lajeunesseet al.,2010) per cell (t‐test:F13,13= 3.736,P= 0.6960). The number of mitochondrial sections in contact per chloroplastic section wasc. 0.5 (± 0.1) forSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) and 0.6 (± 0.3) forE. voratum, with no differences between the two species (t‐test:F12,10= 7.595,P= 0.6510). The average values of chloroplastic section area per cell were 857 (± 199) and 824 (± 202) µm2forSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) andE. voratum, respectively, with no differences between the two species (t‐test:F5,5= 1.033,P= 0.7799). The average values for mitochondrial section area per cell were 258 (± 77) and 276 (± 51) µm2forSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) andE. voratum, respectively, with no differences between the two species (t‐test:F5,5= 2.293,P= 0.6546).

Transmission electron micrographs illustrating subcellular organization ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) (a, c) andEffrenium voratum(b, d). Arrows show the mitochondrial–chloroplastic contacts. Bars: 2 μm (a, b); 0.5 μm (c, d). C, chloroplast; M, mitochondria with tubular cristae; P, pyrenoid.
We then exposed the twoSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir and Stylodid) to 32°C temperature conditions for 1 yr. Both strains were shown to be able to tolerate such temperatures over the course of a couple of wk (Danget al.,2019) but exhibited different degrees of photosynthesis to respiration coupling under an optimal range of temperatures (Figs2,3); that is, photosynthetic activity is not coupled to respiration in Avir and is coupled in Stylodid. The twoSymbiodiniumsp. displayed differential responses to long‐term exposure to elevated temperature. We measured a stablec. 37% increase in µcinSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) throughout 1‐yr of warming (RM ANOVA:F3,2,6= 11.10,P= 0.0073) (Fig.5). ForSymbiodiniumsp. (Stylodid), µcwas lower when cells were cultivated at 32°C, although it showed a mild recovery after 1 yr at this temperature (RM ANOVA:F3,2,6= 9.910,P= 0.0097). With respect to photosynthesis, we measured a higher and stable maximal gross P after 7 months of cultivation at 32°C (RM ANOVA:F2,5,10= 5.819,P= 0.0211) forSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) but no change of maximal gross P inSymbiodiniumsp. (Stylodid) (RM ANOVA:F2,5,10= 2.857,P= 0.1043) (Fig.5). TRCs (Fig.6) showed that both respiration rates and the slopes of respiratory TRCs declined (flattening of the slope and decline of EaR) forSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) during the 1 yr of incubation at 32°C (Fig.6b). This reflects a progressive decline in the temperature dependence of this metabolic process. By contrast, forSymbiodiniumsp. (Stylodid), no change in respiration rates was observed (Fig.6e). However, the comparison of EaP with EaR inSymbiodiniumsp. (Stylodid) (Fig.6f), indicates that exposure to 32°C conditions caused a divergence in the temperature dependence of photosynthesis and respiration (i.e. 2.2‐fold higher EaP than EaR;t‐test:F5,5= 9.756,P< 0.0001), with respect to the cells growing at 25°C. This metabolic uncoupling is also reflected by the slight increase in net O2evolution (although not statistically significant after 1 yr;t‐test:F5,5= 1.282,P= 0.0707) in the presence of SHAM (Fig.S3), which is similar to the uncoupled phenotype ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) (Fig.3). However, for bothSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) and (Stylodid), these photosynthetic and respiratory changes observed during the 1 yr of warming were rapidly reversed (within 1 wk) when cells were returned to the control conditions of 25°C (FigsS4, S5). ForSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir), the Chl‐acell content declined from 1.9 to 1.4 pg cell−1during the 1‐yr period at 32°C but recovered to 1.6 pg cell−1when cells were returned to 25°C (RM ANOVA:F3,2,6= 6.949,P= 0.0223). ForSymbiodiniumsp. (Stylodid), no changes in the Chl‐acell content were measured during the 1‐yr period at 32°C (RM ANOVA:F2,2,4= 1.474,P= 0.3315).

Changes in thermal response curve characteristics during the 1‐yr‐long experiment at 32°C, in comparison to cells kept at 25°C. (a, d) Gross maximal photosynthesis (Pmax) ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) andSymbiodiniumsp. (Stylodid). (b, e) Respiration (Rd) ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) andSymbiodiniumsp. (Stylodid). (c, f) Activation energies of gross photosynthesis (EaP) and respiration (EaR) ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) andSymbiodiniumsp. (Stylodid). All measurements were performed for at least three independent culture replicates. The connecting line fits through the raw data. Vertical bars indicate the standard deviation.
The photosynthesis ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) under different inorganic carbon availabilities was finally analysed (Fig.7, Table3). The slope of the CO2‐limited part of the curve was higher for cells grown at 32°C after 7 months and 1 yr (n= 2), than for cells cultivated at 25°C (one‐way ANOVA:F2,6= 8.189,P= 0.0193). The corresponding K0.5was not different between cells at 25 and 32°C (one‐way ANOVA:F2,6= 1.462,P= 0.3040). Neither the slope nor the the K0.5of the Ci‐limited part of the curve measured for cells exposed to 32°C conditions over the course of 1 yr were statistically different from the 25°C control condition (one‐way ANOVA:F2,6= 3.727,P= 0.0887;F2,6= 2.276,P= 0.1839).

Photosynthetic response to inorganic carbon (P vs CO2curves) ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) when exposed to 25°C temperature conditions and during the 1‐yr‐long experiment at 32°C. Vertical bars indicate standard deviation of at least two independent replicates.
Parameters extrapolated from the photosynthetic response to CO2and inorganic carbon (Ci) ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) exposed to temperature conditions of 25°C and 1 yr at 32°C.
‘Slope CO2’ is the slope of the CO2‐limited part of the P vs CO2curve (Fig.7) (Ruanet al.,2017); K0.5CO2is the CO2concentration needed to give half‐maximum photosynthetic activity; ‘Slope Ci’ is the slope of the Ci‐limited part of the P vs Cicurve (not shown); K0.5Ciis the Ciconcentration needed to give half‐maximum photosynthetic activity. Values in brackets represent standard deviation (n≥ 2). Asterisks indicate statistically significant differences from the 25°C condition (*,P< 0.05).
In this study we have shown the following: first, Symbiodiniaceae species have different degrees of photosynthesis to respiration coupling; second, coupling between photosynthesis and respiration is strongly controlled by temperature, influencing how species respond to temperature changes; and third, photosynthesis to respiration coupling does not define the capability of species to adapt to long‐term temperature increase.
Thermal response curves for photosynthesis and respiration have been used to describe species' ability to cope with fluctuating temperature conditions (Karstenet al.,2016; Prelleet al.,2019) and adaptation to habitats with contrasting thermal regimes (Berry & Bjorkman,1980; Collieret al.,2017). Our TRCs showed thatSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) can tolerate a wide range (10–35°C) of temperatures and rapidly fluctuating temperatures, in comparison to other Symbiodiniaceae. This could relate to the species' association to a host – a sea anemone,Anemonia viridis, which inhabits intertidal and sublittoral zones of temperate latitudes (Suggettet al.,2012; Robertyet al.,2016) (i.e. areas characterized by relatively wide daily and seasonal changes of temperature conditions, Table1). By contrast, species asD. trenchii, which are found in tropical regions exposed to high thermal regimes (Pettayet al.,2015; Silversteinet al.,2015), exhibited the lowest tolerance to low (15°C) and/or oscillating temperatures.
With regards to the TRCs, the comparisons between the temperature‐dependent increases, in the 10–30°C range, of photosynthesis and respiration are of particular interest. InSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) andD. trenchii, respiration is less sensitive (lower EaR, and decliningRd: gross P) than photosynthesis, and so metabolic changes appear uncoupled (Figs1,2). This is also consistent with the early work of Iglesias‐Prietoet al. (1992) in which a lower temperature dependence of respiration in comparison to photosynthesis inS. microadriaticumwas reported. By contrast, forSymbiodiniumsp. (Stylodid) andE. voratum, we interpret the same temperature dependency of both respiration and photosynthesis (same Eafor R and P, and constantRd: gross P) as evidence that the two energetic processes are strongly coupled (Figs1,2). Analogue variations of respiration and photosynthesis in TRCs have been previously observed for green algae (Pierangeliniet al.,2019) and in a marine diatom (Schaumet al.,2018), and they can be directly linked to the tight coupling of respiratory and photosynthetic activity in these organisms (e.g. the exchange of metabolic substrates and/or re‐routing of the reducing power generated in the chloroplast towards mitochondria and the import of mitochondrial ATP into the chloroplast) (Cardolet al.,2009; Bailleulet al.,2015). Above 30°C, there is a rapid decline in photosynthesis but no negative effects on respiration, reflecting the lower sensitivity of this metabolic pathway to high temperatures (Iglesias‐Prietoet al.,1992; Grégoireet al.,2017; Bartonet al.,2020), and showing that such temperatures disrupt the respiration–photosynthesis coupling. Taken together, the presence of an interspecific diversity in thermal metabolic sensitivity of Symbiodiniaceae reflects a differential degree of coupling between their photosynthetic and respiratory metabolisms.
To further determine whether respiratory metabolism is coupled to photosynthesis, we compared the changes in photosynthetic O2evolution and rETR capacity caused by exposure to SHAM (Fig.3). We reasoned that if photosynthesis depends on respiration, then an inhibition of respiration should affect photosynthesis, as well. InSymbiodiniumsp. (Stylodid) andE. voratum, inhibition of the AOX respiratory pathway was concomitant with a significant decrease in photosynthetic rETRmax. Since the inhibition of respiration has a greater impact on rETR than on maximal gross P, this suggests that an electron flow from water (i.e. at the PSII donor side) to oxygen (i.e. reduced by mitochondrial AOX) takes place in the absence of an inhibitor (Cardolet al.,2008; Robertyet al.,2014) in these species. This result is also very similar to that obtained for the marine diatomPhaeodactylum tricornutum, for which an interaction between the two metabolic processes is necessary to balance the levels of ATP and NADPH in the plastid (Bailleulet al.,2015; Muriket al.,2019). In the case ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir), we found no effect related to the inhibition of AOX on rETRmax. As in Symbiodiniaceae, AOX activity accounts forc. 25–30% of the respiration (Oakleyet al.,2014b); the 30% increase ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) maximal gross P could be related to a reduced O2consumption, rather than any effect on photosynthesis. These results provide further evidence that the photosynthetic activity ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) is uncoupled from respiration. By contrast, photosynthesis ofD. trenchiiwas downregulated when AOX activity was inhibited, reflecting the occurrence of metabolic coupling. However, for this species, this is in contrast to the different temperature dependences of photosynthesis and respiration observed in the TRCs. Thus, we describeD. trenchiias a phenotype with a photosynthesis coupled to respiratory activity, but its photosynthesis was easily disengaged from respiration, following exposure to (stressful) conditions such as low temperatures (onset of the TRCs).
It has been suggested that a physiological coupling between photosynthesis and respiration could be favoured by an intracellular placing of mitochondria in close proximity to chloroplasts (Prihodaet al.,2012). Nonetheless, here we found that this positioning of organelles occurred in bothSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) andE. voratum, regardless of their differential levels of photosynthesis–respiration interaction. This suggests that the cross‐talk between mitochondria and chloroplasts is not related to their spatial organization, but rather to different capacities to exchange metabolites.
Our ultrastructural analysis seems also to indicate that in bothSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) andE. voratum,as well as in other Symbiodiniaceae (Leggatet al.,2002; Shoguchiet al.,2013; Leeet al.,2015), some pyrenoids are not immersed in the chloroplast, as in green algae (Treveset al.,2016; Mackinderet al.,2017; Pierangeliniet al.,2017) and haptophytes (Stojkovicet al.,2013; Heureuxet al.,2017). This may suggest that this micro‐compartment may not necessarily work as proposed for the latter, that is, being the aggregation site of Rubisco, and favouring CO2accumulation in proximity to this enzyme (Meyer & Griffiths,2013; Freeman Rosenzweiget al.,2017). However, we do not exclude the possibility that the pyrenoid position and functioning may change under environmental conditions regulating CCM activity or whenin hospite(Leggatet al.,2002).
For species asSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir), which are characterized by uncoupled photosynthesis–respiration, exposure to prolonged elevated temperature conditions (32°C) is expected to make photosynthetic and respiratory metabolisms work even more independently, without compromising cell growth. In particular, throughout the 1‐yr period at 32°C, the photosynthetic metabolism of this species responded following the ‘hotter is better’ model (Jin & Agustí,2018), with increased performance under hotter conditions but exhibiting susceptibility to lower temperatures (10°C, Fig.S1c). The higher photosynthetic performance could also be linked to a slight enhancement of the CCM activity, reflecting a higher cell need for CO2. We must also point out that changes in both µcand photosynthetic performance showed no progressive increasing/decreasing trend during the 1‐yr period (Fig.5). The decline of K0.5Ci(although not statistically significant) observed here is also comparable to what was reported by Oakleyet al. (2014a) after exposing Symbiodiniaceae to elevated temperature for a few wk. This indicates that the overall cell response arose shortly (within days) after exposure at 32°C temperatures, and thus, the changes are related to acclimation rather than adaptation. This is also supported by the quick recovery of photosynthesis when cells returned to 25°C conditions (Fig.S4).
In contrast to the increase in photosynthesis, respiration rates ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) became progressively lower and less temperature dependent during the long‐term warming period. Following the TRC respiration responses (type I and II) described for plants exposed to warm conditions (Atkin & Tjoelker,2003; Smith & Dukes,2013), our results show that the type I response (indicated by the lower slope of TRCs) and type II response (reduction in the elevation of TRCs) co‐occur inSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) when cells are grown at an elevated temperature. Our results also show that the two responses take place over a different time scale, with the type I response occurring later than the type II response. However, neither type I nor type II responses were adaptive, and respiratory metabolism was rapidly reversed when cells were returned from 32 to 25°C conditions.
In contrast toSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir), for which photosynthesis is not coupled to respiration, other Symbiodiniaceae such asSymbiodiniumsp. (Stylodid), which do exhibit photosynthesis–respiration coupling, will be more negatively affected by prolonged exposure to elevated temperature. Our results suggest that whenSymbiodiniumsp. (Stylodid) was cultivated at 32°C, interaction between photosynthetic and respiratory metabolism is prevented (showing higher EaP than EaR, Fig.S3), and despite the 1‐yr acclimation time, adaptive responses to re‐establish the connection between metabolisms did not occur. This probably contributed to the observed decrease in µc. Negative effects on cell growth inSymbiodiniumsp. (Stylodid) were also reported by Danget al. (2019), after 2 wk of exposure to high temperature conditions (33°C), supporting the occurrence of the µcdecline shortly after heat exposure, and lack of adaptive response in this species.
The presence of either a coupled or uncoupled photosynthetic activity to respiration in Symbiodiniaceae, may also have implications for our understanding of their life in symbiosis. It is known that whenin hospite, the Symbiodiniaceae cell division is strictly controlled and reduced by the animal hosts (Falkowskiet al.,1993; Xianget al.,2020). As cell division is directly linked to respiratory metabolism (which converts carbohydrates produced during photosynthesis into cellular metabolites used in the construction of cells; Falkowskiet al.,1985; Geider & Osborne,1989), respiration rates must also be kept low whenin hospite(Rädeckeret al.,2018; M. Pierangelini, unpublished). However, at the same time, photosynthesis must be maintained in order to guarantee the translocation of the fixed carbon to the host (Matthewset al.,2017,2018; Kruegeret al.,2020). Thus, we put forward the idea that having photosynthetic activity which can function independently from respiration could represent an advantage for Symbiodiniaceae in establishing successful endosymbiosis. Nonetheless, the coupling of photosynthesis to respiration could still be advantageous to hosts by facilitating the coordination of the overall metabolic activity of the photosymbionts; that is, by directly controlling respiration, hosts can rule on photosynthesis, as well. Overall, our observations suggest that photosynthesis–respiration interaction could play a role in determining the metabolic compatibility between Symbiodiniaceae and their hosts (Morriset al.,2019).
This work shows that the coupling between chloroplastic and mitochondrial energetic metabolisms occurs to different extents amongst Symbiodiniaceae. Species of this family are characterized by having photosynthetic activity that is either coupled to or uncoupled from respiratory metabolism (including intermediate phenotypes). The coupling between metabolisms is also disrupted upon changes in thermal conditions, both below and above the optimum, influencing how species perform during stable or fluctuating temperatures. During long‐term exposure to high and/or above‐optimal thermal regimes, the two Symbiodiniaceae (with a photosynthetic activity coupled or uncoupled to respiration) displayed no evidence of adaptation, despite the high numbers of cell generations (310 and 190 forSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) and (Stylodid), respectively). In both species, adjustments of energetic metabolism occurred shortly after heat exposure and were fully reversible even after the 1‐yr period of warming. This suggests that neither a coupled nor an uncoupled phenotype provides an advantage in terms of defining the capacity of a given species to adapt to global warming. However, we cannot exclude the possibility that other responses have been developed in long‐term heat‐stressed cells (Chakravartiet al.,2020). Ecologically, this lack of adaptive capabilities in Symbiodiniaceae confirms the susceptibility of coral reefs to ocean warming. At this stage, more studies are also necessary to predict the impact that one or another of these energetic metabolic traits will have on the susceptibility of the Symbiodiniaceae‐hosts’ endosymbiotic relationships to ocean warming.
MP and PC conceived the research, analysed the data, and wrote the manuscript; MP performed the physiological analyses; MT performed the TEM analysis; all authors reviewed the manuscript.
Fig. S1Comparison of thermal response curves started at 10 and 15°C, for gross maximal photosynthesis and respiration ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) cultivated at 25 and 32°C.
Fig. S2Transmission electron micrographs illustrating subcellular organization ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) andEffrenium voratum.
Fig. S3Comparison of maximal net oxygen evolution and maximal electron transport rate of photosystem II inSymbiodiniumsp. (Stylodid) cultivated at 32°C for 7 months and 1 yr.
Fig. S4P vs I curves ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) andSymbiodiniumsp. (Stylodid) showing the recovery of their gross photosynthetic activities when cells cultivated at 32°C were returned to 25°C conditions.
Fig. S5Thermal response curves forSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) showing the recovery of the respiration activity and activation energy of respiration when cells cultivated 32°C were returned to 25°C conditions.
Please note: Wiley‐Blackwell are not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting information supplied by the authors. Any queries (other than missing material) should be directed to theNew PhytologistCentral Office.
PC acknowledges financial support from the Belgian Fonds de la Recherche Scientifique FRS–FNRS (PDR T.0032, CDR J.0079) and European Research Council (H2020‐EU BEAL project 682580). We thank Annika Guse, Heidelberg University, for providing us withD. trenchii. We thank Stephane Roberty and Felix Vega de Luna for their help maintaining the algal cultures, genotyping of the species, assistance with fluorescence analyses, and valuable suggestions. We thank Nataly Hidalgo for her comments, supportive discussions and statistical advice. Finally, we thank the reviewers for their constructive comments. PC is Senior Research Associate from Fonds de la Recherche Scientifique – FNRS.
Mattia Pierangelini, Email: mattia.pierangelini@gmail.com.
Pierre Cardol, Email: Pierre.Cardol@uliege.be.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
Fig. S1Comparison of thermal response curves started at 10 and 15°C, for gross maximal photosynthesis and respiration ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) cultivated at 25 and 32°C.
Fig. S2Transmission electron micrographs illustrating subcellular organization ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) andEffrenium voratum.
Fig. S3Comparison of maximal net oxygen evolution and maximal electron transport rate of photosystem II inSymbiodiniumsp. (Stylodid) cultivated at 32°C for 7 months and 1 yr.
Fig. S4P vs I curves ofSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) andSymbiodiniumsp. (Stylodid) showing the recovery of their gross photosynthetic activities when cells cultivated at 32°C were returned to 25°C conditions.
Fig. S5Thermal response curves forSymbiodiniumsp. (Avir) showing the recovery of the respiration activity and activation energy of respiration when cells cultivated 32°C were returned to 25°C conditions.
Please note: Wiley‐Blackwell are not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting information supplied by the authors. Any queries (other than missing material) should be directed to theNew PhytologistCentral Office.
Articles from The New Phytologist are provided here courtesy ofWiley
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894