An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Rita Issa, Department for Global Health,
University College London, London WC1N 1EH, UK Email:rita.issa@ucl.ac.uk
Issue date 2021 Nov.
This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) which permits
any use, reproduction and distribution of the work without further
permission provided the original work is attributed as specified on the SAGE
and Open Access page (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).
There are a growing number of organisations working to address the
connections between climate change and health. This article introduces the
concept of ‘theories of change’ – the methodology by which organisations or
movements hope to bring about social change – and applies it to the current
climate change and health movement in England. Through movement mapping, the
article describes and offers reflections on the climate change and health
ecosystems in England.
Organisations working on climate change and health in England were identified
and publicly available information was collated to map movement
characteristics, target stakeholders and methodologies deployed, using an
inductive, iterative approach.
A total of 98 organisations working on health and climate change (and/or
sustainability) were initially identified, of which 70 met the inclusion
criteria. Most organisations target two or more stakeholders, with
healthcare workers, management structures, and government being most
commonly cited. Methodological approaches identified include Formal
education programmes; Awareness-raising; Purchasing-procurement power;
Advocacy; Financial; Media-messaging; Networking; Knowledge generation; and
Policy making, of which education, awareness-raising, and advocacy are most
commonly used.
There is a tendency for climate change and health organisations in England to
focus on individual level and sectoral change over system change. More could
be made of the potential for the healthcare professions’ voice and messaging
for the wider climate movement. Given the rapid boom of climate change and
health organisations in recent years, a mind-set shift that recognises
different players as part of a cohesive ecosystem with better coordination
and collaboration may reduce unnecessary work, and facilitate more cohesive
outcomes.
Keywords:climate change, sustainability, health, theory of change, social movements, policy change
The UCL-Lancet commission on climate change and health was published a decade ago,1but despite its warning that climate change was the greatest threat to health
of the 21stcentury, the UK government has only achieved 2 of the 31
milestones set out in the Progress Report by the Climate Change Commission, and as
of 2018 was ‘off track to meet its own emissions targets in the 2020s and 2030s’.2Globally, the story is no brighter. Countries are far from meeting the
targets set out by the 2015 legally binding intergovernmental Paris Agreement, and
predictions point towards a rise in global temperatures of greater than 1.5 degrees
Celsius by the middle of the century.3
Awareness and concern regarding climate change – once the domain of climate
scientists and fringe groups – has moved into public consciousness, in line with the
rise of movements like ‘School Strike for Climate’ and ‘Extinction Rebellion’. In
parallel, the medical community has been working through a variety of institutions
and methodologies to push for measures to mitigate the climate crisis’ impact on
health and the health sector’s contribution to the crisis. In a seeming
acknowledgement of these concerns, in 2019 the British government declared a climate
emergency, and in October 2020, the Greener NHS England Programme published a target
of achieving net-zero by 2040. However, achieving these aims requires ongoing
action.
This article introduces the concept of ‘theories of change’ (Box 1) – the methodology by which
organisations or movements hope to bring about social change – and applies it to the
current climate change and health movement in England. Through movement mapping,
this article describes and offers reflections on the climate change and health
ecosystems in England.
Organisations currently working on addressing health and climate change (and/or
sustainability) were identified through the authors’ prior knowledge and expanded by
(1) crowd-sourcing submissions and recommendations for organisations through climate
and health networks on Twitter,7and (2) Google and Ecosia search engines using keywords,‘Climate
change’ or ‘Sustainability’ and Health. Organisations were defined
according to the criteria inBox 2. Publicly available organisational information was inputted into
an online spreadsheet and reviewed by two authors, with disagreements reviewed by a
third author. The information included in the spreadsheet was designed to help meet
the study aims and included year founded, website, organisational size, membership
demographics (if applicable), target stakeholder(s), methodology, and organisational
aims. Ethical approval was not required as the study utilises data in the public
domain.
A framework outlining the health system in England and change pathways for climate
change as it relates to and interacts with health was developed based on the
structure of NHS England and the author’s experiences of working in climate change
and health advocacy, and an inductive and iterative approach was taken when defining
and mapping the categories of the methodological approaches and stakeholders
targeted by different organisations. An inductive approach was chosen because it can
help elicit new themes, frameworks, and unexpected findings in a relatively
understudied area.8
A total of 98 organisations working on health and climate change (and/or
sustainability) were initially identified, of which 70 met the inclusion criteria.
Once similar groups had been combined – (1) NHS Trust-based advocacy groups, (2)
groups working through the Royal Colleges, and (3) higher education institutions –
32 groups remained for analysis. There is a steady increase in the number of
organisations founded (Figure
1).

Organisations working on climate change and health, by year founded
Identified target stakeholders and their relationships are mapped inFigure 2. Of the
organisations analysed, most target two or more stakeholders. A total of 19
organisations included healthcare workers among their targets, with 17 organisations
targeting management structures (Trusts, Clinical Commisioning Groups (CCGs)
replaced by Integrated Care Systems), and 15 organisations aiming to influence
Government (Figure 3).

Stakeholder map for the climate change and health space in England
At the time of writing, the public health landscape in England is undergoing
significant change with the announcement that Public Health England will be
removed and its roles divided between existing and new organisations. In
particular, the new UK Health Security Agency will take over responsibility
for public health protection and infectious disease capability across the
UK.
Note: Professional bodies are interchangeably referred to as ‘Royal Colleges’
in the text.

Target stakeholders for organisations working on climate change and health in
England
Groups employ a variety of different methods in order to achieve their impact on the
target stakeholders (Box
3), with up to four different methods being used by each organisation.
Most frequently used methods included ‘Awareness Raising’ (14), ‘Advocacy’ (13), and
‘Education’ (12) (Figure
4).

Organisational methodology to impact climate change and health
There are a range of organisations working across England, using different
methodologies and targeting different stakeholders to influence action on climate
change and health. The rapid rise in the number of organisations working on these
themes over recent years shows increasing interest and opportunity: from a small
number of fore-runner/early advocate organisations who worked in relative isolation
on what was viewed as a ‘fringe’ issue, to representation today which spans
academia, hospital trusts, the royal colleges, social movements, and specialised NHS
bodies. These organisations hold different theories of change, which may be implicit
or explicit. No one theory of change can be applied to this ‘climate change and
health’ movement, and as such, this discussion explores different theories of change
by delineating the movement based on the targetdomainof influence
(individual vs sectoral vs systems change), and themeansof change
across these domains (Figure
5). While the broad movement around climate change is multifaceted and
spans in focus from individual-level action to radical system or structural change,
the climate change and health space is somewhat skewed towards actions at the
individual and sectoral levels.

Domains and means to influence change
Individualised actions to address the climate crisis aim to encourage individuals
to change their lifestyle voluntarily to reduce their CO2emissions.
This includes promoting recycling or active travel, purchasing green and
re-usable products, and consuming a vegetarian or vegan diet. The assumption is
that if a sufficiently large number of people can be persuaded to change their
behaviour, a large-scale reduction in emissions can be achieved. There is some
tension arising from differing theories of change about whether the focus should
be individual or structural change.
The world’s richest 10% produce around half of the world’s CO2emissions, and someone from the richest 1% of the world’s population uses on
average 175 times more carbon than someone from the bottom 10%. The NHS is
responsible for 5.4% of the UK’s total carbon emissions. Given that this is the
case, particular theories of change would posit that influencing the course on
climate change will require cumulative individual behaviour and norm change
within the populations and sectors that are most consumptive. Shifts in social
norms can often underpin change by guiding individual behaviour; individual
behaviours, in turn, influence social norms.9This is the case with the phenomenon of ‘flight shame’, where domestic
air travel in Sweden decreased by 15.4% per month between 2018 and 201910in response to a social norm shaming the environmentally harmful impact
of flying. Flight shame is an example of ‘self-categorisation theory’;11the phenomenon whereby individuals self-categorise as part of a group and
produce behaviours associated with that group to signal membership (in this
case, with the identification of being ‘environmentally conscious’).
For the climate change and health movement, individual-level action is
represented by groups such as Eco Medics, who utilise social media to influence
individual behaviour.12However, achieving the substantial shift to bring about change at the
speed required may not be met through individual action and normative change
alone, nor is it feasible for vast sections of the population.13This focus on individual action – as seen in the wider climate movement –
is unsurprising. ‘Climate change helplessness’ or ‘climate anxiety’14may lead to a focus on personal behaviour – empowering when faced with
structural or systems-based approaches to change that may be perceived to be
time-consuming, difficult to engage with, and overwhelming. The concept of
‘individual responsibility’15is already pervasive in healthcare – for example taking an individual
versus systems view on ‘lifestyle’-driven diseases, and there may be a sense
that individuals can’t take action on a systems level, or would be hypocrites to
try, until sufficient personal change has been made. Finally, given historical
and present-day examples of health workers and institutions engaging in the
political realm, action at the systems level may also be deemed by health
workers to be too ‘political’, tying in to concerns of professional
accountability, duties of care, and a professional respectability that is
nominally ‘apolitical’.
Climate change and health groups in the UK are working through and targeting
stakeholders from across the NHS, including within their places of work,
managerial structures, regulatory bodies, and Royal Colleges (Figure 2). There are a
significant number of groups working at the hospital trust level (e.g. Greener
Barts), through local general practice networks or directly in GP practices
(e.g. Greener Practice), and to exert speciality-specific influence through
Royal Colleges, advocacy organisations, or in local regions (e.g. the RCEM
special interest group, GASP (Greener Anaesthesia and Sustainability Project),
or ‘Sustainable Anaesthesia in Peninsula’ respectively). Many of these groups
set their target stakeholders within the ‘health’ space, for example,
influencing NHS procurement, other health workers, or Royal Colleges. Working to
influence individual trusts or practices is an extension of the individualised
theories of change outlined above which focus on individual behaviours over
structural reform; however, given the significant contribution of the health
sector to carbon emissions, these approaches may be ultimately impactful,
especially if groups with similar targets across geographical regions or within
the same speciality engage in cross-collaboration, skill-sharing, and lessons
learnt, to reduce duplication of work, inefficiencies, and burn-out, and
maximise chances of success.16
The benefits of a national health service mean that coordination and
collaboration can be facilitated centrally. The Sustainable Development Unit was
established in 2008, and the Greener NHS campaign was launched in 2020 to ‘build
on the work of trusts, share ideas on how to reduce the impact [of climate
change] on public health and the environment, save money and reach net carbon zero’.17The formation of the these centralised initiatives means the UK health
service is heralded as being one of the most progressive in the sustainable
healthcare field, as the only healthcare system globally to have estimated its
carbon footprint and set reduction targets.
The growing number of healthcare organisations declaring a climate and
ecological emergency (CEE) – including 10 hospital trusts since 2019 – is a
product of the success of a mass movement towards climate action. Declaring
a CEE can be an important step for an institution, particularly for those
without a record of climate action. For members and organisations, it can be
a direct way to ‘act within your sphere of influence’ to achieve tangible –
and comfortable – goals. There are limitations to the effectiveness of this
strategy, however. Declaring an emergency is merely a symbolic act unless
followed up with further concrete action. For example, the Canadian
government signed up to the expansion of an oil pipeline the day after
becoming the second country to declare a climate emergency in June 2019.18The vast majority of CEE declarations avoid being prescriptive about
specific policies in order to be palatable to a wider range of the political
spectrum. As such, the declaration of an emergency needs to be followed by a
detailed plan of implementation. By declaring a climate emergency, health
organisations publicly acknowledge the gravity of the crisis and realign
their organisational goals in line with an overarching aim of cutting carbon
emissions. If this is an introspective pursuit and the goal is to just act
on institutional or specialty behaviour, the implied assumption is that
other organisations will come on board with similar approaches, otherwise,
the overall impact is negligible. However, the declaration of a CEE gives
the institution the backing of its members to pursue broader advocacy:
communicating with members and the public about the public health dimension
of the climate crisis, and putting pressure on policy-makers through
political advocacy, though it may still fall short of political discourse
aimed at transforming public policy in the way necessary to meet the climate
crisis.
There is an implied assumption that the early adopters of public statements
such as declaring a CEE will be joined by other players in the ‘network’ –
hospital trusts, royal colleges, and organisations – to achieve a critical
mass and norm change across institutions. Utilising networking as a theory
of change methodology draws from coalition theory,19where coalitions come together by agreement over shared core beliefs
about policies, and who can then explore and pursue multiple avenues for
change – for example, by engaging in legal advocacy or working on changing
public opinion – often simultaneously, to find a route that will bear fruit.
A number of organisations exist to formally facilitate such networking and
skill sharing, for example, the UK Health Alliance on Climate Change (UKHACC)20– which connects established health organisations, and ‘Health Declares’,21which connects regional and speciality groups – made up of members –
through a framework of action to influence institutions providing healthcare
(such as Trusts) as well as governing bodies (such as the Royal Colleges).
In these examples, we note how groups operating at a similar ‘level’ of
influence (e.g. member groups vs organisational governing bodies) seem to
benefit from organisations that facilitate networking, but that networking
seems relatively constrained to beingwithinbut notacrossthese levels.
Of the organisations identified, relatively few are focused on changing economic
and political systems beyond the healthcare sector. Those that do may broadly
share certain aims, for example, the need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions,
but have differing views on how decarbonisation should be achieved, as well as
at what speed. Many of these groups also differ greatly in the methods they
employ to achieve their aims. Organisations exist on a spectrum between
‘incremental system change’ and ‘radical system change’, which maps to the
tactics utilised, including ‘insider’ and ‘outsider’ approaches (Box 4).
Relatively few organisations formally seek to reframe climate change as a
public health issue in the public domain, though this may be a ‘side-effect’
of the work of research institutions and other campaigning organisations.
When campaigners successfully articulate a political frame that ‘resonates’
with sufficient numbers of people in society, large-scale change is possible.23Research suggests that broad sections of the population respond
positively to taking action on climate change when the issue is presented
through a public health framing: it generates support for efforts at
mitigation and adaptation to climate change among groups who are
unresponsive to its traditional presentation as an ‘environmental issue’,24and in some cases has been cited as the most convincing argument to
take action. From the 1990s onwards, the healthcare profession helped to
reframe smoking in enclosed venues from being a matter of personal choice to
being a public health concern, paving the way for the 2007 smoking ban in
England. These approaches draw on a ‘messaging and frameworks’ theory of
change, which understands that individuals develop different preferences
based on how options are presented or framed; and ‘diffusion theory’,19where policy makers are influenced by new ideas which have been
accepted by a critical mass of the population, having been communicated by
trusted messengers.
Healthcare professionals are among the most trusted professions;25there is therefore scope for healthcare leaders to be persuasive
advocates. However, few organisations were identified that included using
the healthcare voice or messaging for the wider climate change movement in
its aims or methodology. Doctors for Extinction Rebellion, a subgroup of the
‘Extinction Rebellion’ movement who have sought to make the connection
between the climate crisis and public health ‘visible’ in this way, using
‘outsider’ tactics such as street action and stunts to gain media coverage.
Medact members are building cross-sectoral collaboration through the
campaign ‘Health for a Green New Deal’, which provides a public health
framing for the creation of green jobs, offering a ‘health-voice’ to
strategically build social pressure in support of key policies at both local
and national levels of government.
Groups engaged in political action on climate change and health exhibit one
of two broad political approaches for addressing the social determinants of
health, as described by Dennis Raphael.26The first is a ‘professionally-oriented’ approach that involves the
dissemination of knowledge and advocacy by healthcare professionals with the
aim of convincing policy-makers to enact health-supporting policies. This
corresponds to what political scientists term a ‘pluralist’ understanding of
the political process as relatively open and responsive to competing
interest groups and guided by the quality of ideas in the public arena, and
draws on the ‘policy window’19theory of change whereby problems, policies and politics converge,
and where policy options developed through research and publications have
the opportunity to be adopted. These approaches generally require good
relationships and reputations, both of which are generally afforded to and
the remit of ‘insider’ organisations, who influence change by working
directly with those with power to influence decision making.19Such approaches are generally aligned with incremental system change,
as utilised by organisations like the UKHACC, who uses its position as a
network of established health organisations to exert sort power and
influence on decision makers, with demands that are relatively in line with
political consensus. There are nonetheless limitations to a professionally
oriented approach focused purely on engaging policy-makers and other elite
stakeholders with scientific findings. It may be that policy-makers are not
receptive to these findings or that the prescribed policy solutions conflict
with core tenets of their ideology. Alternatively, fossil fuel companies and
other powerful corporate actors who benefit from the status quo may ‘veto’
any proposed change through the informal power they wield over the
policy-making process.
The second political approach for addressing the social determinants of
health is a ‘movement-based’ one26that mobilises collective political action as a means to confront
power-holders and drive change. A movement-based approach aims to mobilise
public opinion and shift social norms through action that takes place
outside official institutions, and more often (though not exclusively)
aligns with ‘outsider’ tactics, and with a more radical view on change. Such
tactics have been used by groups such as Doctors for Extinction Rebellion,
whose use of nonviolent direct action (NVDA) with varying degrees of success
in creating ‘dissensus politics’,27or the ‘positive effects of polarisation’,28provokes those with power to clarify their position on a particular
issue and shift popular opinion either in support of or in opposition to
them. Other movement-based organisations – such as Medact – may also be more
radical in their climate targets and are more likely to be ‘intersectional’,
linking the climate crisis and policy demands to broader interconnected
social and economic issues.
Actions demanding health institutions divest any holdings in the top 100
fossil fuel companies saw a degree of success in the mid 2010s and moved
from being a relatively ‘outsider’ issue to a ‘norm’ adopted by professional
institutions such as UKHACC and the BMJ. Presently, though there are active
divestment campaigns targeting medical indemnity organisations, the number
of health institution divestment campaigns has declined, and despite
previous divestment campaigns – such as the 2015 Wellcome Trust divestment
campaign led by Medact and the Guardian29– institutions still maintain investments in fossil fuels at odds
with their organisational priorities, which may be reflective of the ongoing
dominance of the fossil fuel economy.
A whole system mapping would ordinarily include groups who would impact a system
even if not explicitly aiming to do so; however, we excluded groups not directly
aiming their work at influencing climate change and health – such as those
working on plant-based diets – from our analysis. Combining trust groups, Royal
College groups, and educational institutions skewed our figures in terms of
numerical values, though still hold weight in qualitative analysis. As with any
research, there is potential influence from the authors. The majority of the
authors of this article are active within the field of climate change and
health, and as such, have their own potential biases and assumptions; however,
we have attempted to mitigate for this by ensuring the representation of a
number of different types of organisations in the authorship team, and by a
process of self and collective reflection during the writing process.
Ecosystem mapping the climate change and health movement in England has highlighted a
number of key themes for consideration. Overall, there is a focus on individual
level and sectoral change, over system change. For groups working at the local level
– be it through CCGs, GP practices, specialities, and/or Royal Colleges – there may
be benefit from better coordination, collaboration, and a degree of centralisation
for certain tasks, which may be fulfilled by the Greener NHS as it becomes more
established. Similarly, certain activities could focus on centralised policy change
for expediency and impact: for example, lobbying NICE to introduce an ecological
component to prescribing guidelines versus working to change the prescribing choices
of GPs on a practice-by-practice basis. For organisations operating to influence
change on a systems level, many unsurprisingly utilise the insider influence that is
afforded to the health professions resulting from respectability and societal
position. More could be made of the potential to utilise the healthcare professions
voice for the climate movement more broadly – through the media, or to support in
wider messaging to influence public opinion and policy – in light of the evidence
that a public health framing on the climate works. A shortcoming of the ‘movement’
is that it may not see itself as such and thus not take steps to work in a
coordinated manner. What remains is an amorphous, complex system of multiple,
passionate players left exposed to the ‘tyranny of structurelessness’ – where an
apparent lack of structure can result in unaccountable leadership. Recognising that
there is value in working to influence change across various points in an ecosystem,
and given the rapid boom of climate change and health organisations in recent years,
there may be benefit in a mind-set shift within the climate change and health space
in England: with more coordination and collaboration to reduce unnecessary work and
duplication, better identify movement gaps, and lead to more cohesive outcomes.
Conflict of Interest:The author(s) declared the following potential conflicts of interest with respect
to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: R.I. was a
co-founder of Doctors for Extinction Rebellion. R.S. is currently employed as a
Education Fellow at Centre for Sustainable Healthcare. R.A. is currently
employed by Medact. A.G. is a member of Health Declares. C.B., G.A., and M.E.
declare no conflicts of interest.
Funding:The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article.
ORCID IDs:Rita Issahttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-0051-5595
Megan Evanshttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-3516-414X
R Issa, Department for Global Health, University College London, London WC1N 1EH, UK.
C Baker, University Hospitals Sussex, Brighton, UK.
R Spooner, Centre for Sustainable Healthcare, Oxford, UK.
R Abrams, Medact, London, UK.
A Gopfert, Torbay Council, Torquay, UK.
M Evans, Centre for Environmental Health and Sustainability, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK.
G Aitchison, Politics and International Studies, Loughborough University, Loughborough, UK.
Articles from Perspectives in Public Health are provided here courtesy ofSAGE Publications
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894