An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Email:marcos.d.b.watanabe@ntnu.no.
Received 2025 Sep 4; Accepted 2026 Jan 15; Revised 2026 Jan 14; Collection date 2026 Feb 3.
This article is licensed under CC-BY 4.0
Prospective life
cycle assessment (pLCA) is a future-oriented approach
that estimates the environmental impacts of products and systems under
future technological changes, market dynamics, and policy shifts.
However, pLCA lacks consistent prospective characterization factors
(pCFs) to assess the climate impacts of future emissions and align
the inventory and impact assessment phases. This work produces pCFs
by integrating gas-specific climate parameters with future emission
scenarios from the Integrated Assessment Models (IAM). Prospective
Global Warming Potential (pGWP20, pGWP100) and
Global Temperature change Potential (pGTP50, pGTP100) are computed for emission years until 2050. Relative to present-day
CFs, methane pGWP100varies from −8% to +23%, and
nitrous oxide varies from −17% to +7%. CH4pGTP100shifts from −24% to +22%, while N2O pGTP100shifts from −27% to +8%. For non-CO2-dominated
activities such as rice production, climate impacts increase by 8%
in terms of pGWP100.With pGTP100, impacts of
ammonium nitrate decrease by 9%. When pCFs are combined with prospective
background inventories, impacts are substantially lower in sectors
such as steel (−44%), road transport (−58%), and cement
(−31%) under pGTP100. Overall, the availability
of pCFs for multiple climate metrics and IAM scenarios enables a consistent
coupling of impact assessment with future-oriented inventory data,
improving the robustness and coherence of pLCA.
Keywords:prospective life cycle assessment, characterization
factors, integrated assessment models, climate impacts, life cycle impact


Prospective life cycle
assessment (pLCA) is an emerging methodology
designed to evaluate the future environmental impacts of technologies
and their associated products. In recent
years, the application of pLCA has grown significantly, triggering improved definitions and methodological
frameworks to increase consistency and transparency in comparative
assessments.−Despite these advancements, progress across the quantitative stages
of pLCA has been uneven. While several methods have been developed
to advance the Life Cycle Inventory (LCI) phase, the life cycle impact
assessment (LCIA) phase notably remains underdeveloped. Addressing this gap is critical, as unresolved
limitations in LCIA can undermine an accurate and consistent evaluation
of environmental burdens, potentially leading to incomplete or misleading
conclusions.,
In LCI, developments entailed
both foreground and background system
processes. Many studies explored approaches to scale-up foreground
inventories to assess emerging technologies within a more realistic
industrial-scale context, using methods
based on process-based calculations, learning
curves and scaling factors,,,expert elicitation through interviews,,and the integration of technical parameters with assumptions on
efficiency improvements. In parallel,
aligning background inventories with projections from Integrated Assessment
Models (IAMs) has emerged as a crucial step in recent years to improve
pLCA studies and make them more consistent among each other and with
the main future global policy scenarios.−Scenario-based modeling in IAMs captures possible future developments
in technology and emissions, and it offers a structured and scientifically
robust foundation for defining key parameters in pLCAs. The further
development of the open-source toolPremiseconsolidated this approach into a transparent
and reproducible framework for generating background databases among
practitioners.
Despite these advances in modeling future LCIs,
the corresponding
progress in the LCIA phase has not occurred at the same pace or depth.
CFs are based on present-day environmental conditions and are assumed
to remain constant when used in pLCA, even if these conditions change
in the future. For example, CFs used to estimate climate change impacts
in LCA rely on climate metrics computed using radiative efficiencies
and impulse response functions that reflect the current atmospheric
concentration of GHGs and the saturation levels of terrestrial and
ocean carbon sinks. Using these CFs to
characterize GHG emissions occurring far in the future is therefore
inconsistent as the background conditions of the atmosphere receiving
an emission in the future may substantially differ from those on which
the CFs are originally based.
Existing studies on time-dependent
CFs for climate change impacts
are limited, as most of the discussions focus on dynamic rather than
prospective LCIA aspects. A few examples
that are relevant in the context of the prospective analysis exist.
Reisinger et al. (2011) linked Representative
Concentration Pathways (RCPs) to projections of Global Warming Potentials
(GWPs).,Although not explicitly connected to the
LCA field and to the need for pCFs, this work shows how future background
concentrations of GHGs influence radiative efficiencies (RE) and climate–carbon
cycle feedbacks, thereby affecting the GWPs of methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O). The findings suggest potential
increases in GWP of up to 20% for CH4and approximately
30% for N2O by 2100. However, a direct applicability of
these metrics as CFs in LCA is hindered by several barriers, such
as the lack of integration with IAM-based scenarios, the use of complex
and nonopen-source climate models, the challenge to adjust metric
values to the specific year at which emissions occur, a lack of regular
updates, and the absence of alternative metrics such as the Global
Temperature change Potential (GTP).,More recent
work provided new projections of climate metrics for CH4and N2O by incorporating changes in RE in line with only
RCP scenarios. However, these results
follow a different trajectory than that reported by Reisinger et al.
(2011), do not incorporate IAM-based
prospective scenarios, and do not consider other climate indicators
such as GTP.
In this study, we address the gap of missing CFs
for climate change
impacts in pLCA by proposing an approach that is consistent with the
method used by the IPCC to compute climate metrics, such as GWP and
GTP. RE and impulse response functions (IRFs) for the three most important
GHGs (CO2, CH4, and N2O) are adapted
to future changes in background concentrations as those underpinning
IAM scenario outputs that are used to modify background process inventories.
The study considers IRFs for CO2that are specific to each
main RCP scenario and relies on the most updated parameters from the
IPCC Sixth Assessment Report to estimate
changes in RE, and hence CFs, for methane (CH4) and nitrous
oxide (N2O). Prospective metrics for both GWP (pGWP100and pGWP20) and GTP (pGTP100and
pGTP50) are computed for emissions of GHGs occurring between
2030 and 2050. To facilitate their adoption from pLCA studies and
tools, the pGWPs and pGTPs are provided in tabular form for emission
years up to 2050 and open-access code is available to reproduce the
method to compute pCFs within different modeling frameworks and to
generate values through 2100. This approach extends beyond previous
efforts by incorporating the full range of Shared Socioeconomic Pathways
(SSPs) and enabling the calculation of year-specific metrics for any
future pulse emissions. The new pCFs are applied to a range of case
studies to explore how much and under which circumstances they can
affect LCA results, either in isolation (i.e., relative to the use
of existing CFs) or within a full pLCA framework that includes both
pCFs and changes in background process inventories. This investigation
also shows how the choice of IAM type can influence results, even
under the same climate policy scenario.
The method
to estimate pCFs follows the equations and definitions of climate
metrics that are used by the IPCC in its series of periodical assessments.,,The GWP is formulated as
where AGWPi(H) is the absolute global warming
potential associated with
a pulse emission of gasifor the time horizonH(year), which is computed as the integrated radiative
forcing (RFi) exerted by the gasiuntilH. The denominator denotes the
same but for CO2, which is the gas used as reference (hence
the characterized results are expressed in CO2-equivalents).
RFiis, in turn, described byeq:
where REiis the
radiative efficiency of gasiand IRFiis the impulse response function, which indicates
the fraction of speciesiremaining in the atmosphere
over time after a pulse emission. The RE of a greenhouse gas is defined
as the instantaneous radiative forcing per unit mass or concentration
increase of that gas, and it is expressed in terms of watts per square
meter per ppm increase or kg emission (W m–2ppm–1or W m–2kg–1). For CO2, the REivalues
can be calculated through a logarithmic relationship with CO2concentration ineq:
WhereCis the new
CO2concentration andC0is
the reference concentration. Alternatively, they can be estimated
from the derivative of radiative forcings:
where RFiis the
radiative forcing (in W m–2) andCiis the concentration of species in
the atmosphere (ppb). Considering the time-dependent nature of REiandCi, it is
possible to project time-specific REi(in
W·m–2·ppb–1) for CO2, CH4, and N2O. To secure consistency
with the prospective inventories, the projections for RE are produced
according toeqs, , and . REiare extracted from changes in both radiative forcings and
GHG concentrations from the outputs of IAM-SSP marker scenarios, based
on time steps for the period 2030–2050 as follows:
Wheretdenotes a
given year andt′represents the preceding
time step from the IAM.Equations, , and  follow the average RE approach to align
with the IPCC method to estimate GWP and GTP, which are derived from
the marginal formulation (eq) using finite differences of RF and concentration over 5-year
intervals. This interval reflects the temporal resolution of publicly
available IAM outputs and therefore provides a numerical approximation
of the marginal efficiency. To derive annualized results, the RE values
calculated at each five-year step are linearly interpolated, providing
a continuous one-year time series suitable for finer-resolution analyses.
Our paper focuses on the 2030–2050 period to ensure a readable
size of figures and tables, and because 2050 is a key target year
for the time frame of many of the existing sustainable policies and
mitigation goals. However, the codes and data provided in theSupporting Information (SI) file allow users
to compute prospective characterization up to 2100.
In line
with the IPCC method, the IRF for CO2is based
on Joos et al. (2013). The default climate
metrics provided by the IPCC use IRF parameters of a multimodel mean
based on the atmospheric background CO2concentration in
2010 of 389 ppm (and thereby held constant in the calculation of the
metric values). IRFs are also available for pulse emissions in 2100
under different future scenarios of background concentrations: 421
(RCP 2.6), 538 (RCP 4.5), 670 (RCP 6.0), and 936 ppm (RCP 8.5). However,
while the standard IRF of CO2typically used in GWP calculations
is derived from a multimodel ensemble of 16 Earth System Models (ESMs), the ones for future conditions are produced
from the Bern3D-LPJ model,only. To overcome this
inconsistency, we apply a delta function to reproduce the relative
differences between the Bern3D-LPJIRFCO2and the multimodelIRFCO2observed at 2010’s concentration
to IRF curves under varying background atmospheric CO2concentrations.
This enables us to estimate futureIRFCO2for different RCP scenarios that can be
used to estimate climate metrics to be used as pCFs maintaining consistency
with the IPCC framework. For the non-CO2GHGs, the IRF
is modeled as a simple exponential decay based on the atmospheric
lifetime of each gas (11.8 years for CH4and 109 years
for N2O) according to the IPCC-AR6. These lifetimes have remained relatively stable over time:
for CH4(and N2O), they were 12 (and 114) years
in the 2001 IPCC-TAR, 12 (and 114) in
the 2007 IPCC-AR4, and 12.4 (and 121)
in the 2013 IPCC-AR5, despite increases
in atmospheric concentrations of these gases (from 1,750 to 1,896
ppb for CH4and from 316 to 335 ppb for N2O).
Therefore, the IRFs for these gases are less sensitive to changes
in background concentrations than those of CO2and can
be considered to remain constant.
The time-varying IAM-RCP-specific
REs derived fromeqs, , and  are input
intoeq. This equation
is then combined with the RCP-specific
IRF curves to derive the AGWPs and the pGWPs, as described ineq. In the AGWPs, the carbon
cycle responses and other indirect contributions from both CH4and N2O are also included by using parameter values
from IPCC-AR6. These include carbon cycle
feedbacks, CH4-induced effects on tropospheric ozone (O3) and stratospheric water vapor, as well as the indirect effects
of N2O on stratospheric O3and the lifetime
of CH4. Although AGWPs are calculated by using time-varying
RE over the integration horizon, our approach remains consistent with
the GWP definition adopted by the IPCC, where the impact of a given
pulse emission is assessed in an atmosphere with constant background
concentrations and a steady-state climate system. This means that
for a given pulse year (e.g., 2040), the RE value from that year is
used and then held constant throughout the entire integration horizon.
The absolute
global temperature change potentials (AGTPs) associated with the pulse
emission of gasiare based oneq:,
whereHdenotes
the time
horizon at which the temperature change is evaluated, andτrepresents earlier times from 0 toH. The termR(H–τ) captures the climate system’s response at
timeHto a forcing that occurred at timeτ. The temperature responses to changes in RFs are
modeled using the framework established in the IPCC-AR6. Our approach considers a two-layer energy balance
model, representing the surface layer (comprising the upper ocean
and atmosphere) and the deep ocean layer. This model incorporates
key parameters such as the efficacy of deep ocean heat uptake, the
surface–deep ocean heat exchange rate, and the radiative damping
coefficient. To facilitate the reproducibility of the results, our
calculations build on the modeling framework developed by Persson
and Johansson (2022), which reflects
the equations and parametrizations used for estimating GHG metrics
in the latest IPCC-AR6.
After computing
the AGTPs based on IAM-specific emission trajectories, we derive the
prospective global temperature change potentials (pGTPs) for CH4and N2O usingeq:
While GWP compares the integrated RF
of a pulse emission of a given
species relative to that of CO2over a specified time horizon, GTP compares the resulting temperature change
at a specific point in time from a pulse emission to that caused by
an equivalent pulse of CO2. The GTP accounts for both the
time-dependent radiative forcing of different species and the temporal
response of the climate system’s temperature. Therefore, the
GTP reflects changes at the end of the chosen time horizon, whereas
the GWP represents the integrated impacts over that period. As noted by Tanaka et al. (2019), emission metrics are also sensitive to the selected
time scale, particularly for species whose atmospheric lifetimes differ
substantially from that of CO2. For instance, CO2can persist in the atmosphere for centuries or even millennia, whereas CH4largely disappears within
several decades after emission. As noted
by Allen et al. (2016), the GWP100of CH4is approximately equivalent to GTP40, indicating that the cumulative radiative forcing over 100 years
has a climate impact similar to the instantaneous temperature increase
observed 40 years after an emission pulse. This means that GWP100can be interpreted as a metric to assess temperature impacts
after about 40 years (midterm impacts), while GTP100assesses
impacts after 100 years (long-term impacts). GWP20or GTP50are instead more suitable to evaluate impacts in the short
term. Because of these complementary perspectives, using multiple
metrics and time horizons has been recommended to better capture how
impacts change under different temporal dimensions.−No single climate
metric can fully represent the temporal profile of the climate response
to emissions of GHGs with varying lifetimes, making a multimetric
approach essential to disentangle short- and long-term impact dynamics.
We
assess the sensitivity of climate change impacts to pCFs in two steps.
First, the analysis starts with two representative products extracted
from the ecoinvent 3.9 database: production
of nonbasmati rice in India (IN) and nitric acid in 50% solution state
from the European market (RER w/o RU). These processes are selected
due to their relatively high emission factors of non-CO2GHGs, particularly N2O and CH4. The analysis
is executed with Brigthway2 after loading the new sets of IAM-specific
CFs for climate change impact assessment presented above (pGWP100, pGTP100, pGWP20, and pGTP50). For simplification, apLCAlimited to the year
2040 is considered in this paper. Although the set of new CFs enables
more detailed dynamic-prospective analyses (i.e., considering the
specific years at which emissions will occur in the future), selecting
a single pulse year better isolates the sensitivity of climate impacts
from different product systems to the new CFs. Because of the differences
in functional units and product systems, we further normalize the
comparison of variability in characterized results to the percentage
difference relative to the case in which the present-day CFs from
IPCC-AR6 are used. The second part aims
to extend the approach to cover a broader group of activities from
ecoinvent 3.9 including power generation,
transport, food, materials, and chemicals production.
The combination of evolving background systems and
changes in climate change CFs is jointly investigated to explore the
effects of integrating the prospective LCI and LCIA phases. Background
transformations were implemented for the year 2040 using the Premise
tool (version 2.2.7), which modifies
the ecoinvent database to reflect future conditions projected by IAMs.
As only the REMIND-MAgPIE model provided projected databases for more
than one RCP scenario in the Premise tool (RCP 2.6 and RCP 8.5), our
analysis was limited to this IAM and these two scenarios. In addition
to transforming background databases, Premise also introduces changes
in foreground systems of sectors, such as power generation, cement,
steel, transport, fuels, and heat production. As a result, the IAM-based
projected technological improvements directly modified the foreground
inventories for the following activities: electricity production from
natural gas using combined cycle power plants; Portland cement production;
unalloyed steel production via a converter; and the market for freight
transport by unspecified lorry.
Climate impacts were recalculated
using pCFs, and the results were expressed as percentage deviations
from a reference case based on present-day characterization factors
from IPCC-AR6 and the unmodified ecoinvent
3.9 database. Activities were then ranked
according to their sensitivity to these changes.
The evolution
of prospective REs, IRFs, AGWPs, and AGTPs is shown inFigurefor the different RCPs connected
to the REMIND-MAgPIE-SSP5 scenario. Results for IMAGE-SSP1, MESSAGE-GLOBIOM-SSP2,
AIM-CGE-SSP3, and GCAM4-SSP4 are presented inFigures S1–S30in theSI.

Prospective radiative efficiencies (RE), impulse response functions
(IRFs), absolute global warming potentials (AGWP), and absolute global
temperature change potentials (AGTP) under different RCP scenarios
for the REMIND-MAGPIE-SSP5 scenario. Panels
(a–c) show REs for a one ton pulse of CO2, CH4, and N2O under RCPs 2.6, 4.5, 6.0, and 8.5 from
2030 to 2050. Panels (d–f) show the IRFs for CO2, CH4, and N2O under varying concentration
pathways. Panels (g–i) present AGWPs and panels (j–l)
show AGTPs for pulse emissions of CO2, CH4,
and N2O at different future years (2030–2050) and
for the investigated RCP scenarios.
The RE of CO2steadily declines under
the least stringent
climate scenario (RCP 8.5), reaching approximately 1.01 × 10–5W·m–2·ppb–1by 2050 (Figurea). This represents a 25% reduction compared with the IPCC-AR6 reference
value of 1.33 × 10–5W·m–2·ppb–1. Generally, as the atmospheric concentration
of a gas increases, its RE decreases. This trend reflects the logarithmic
relationship between CO2concentration and its absorption
of infrared radiation (eq), which diminishes the marginal impact of additional CO2on radiative forcing. Under RCP 2.6,
CO2RE remains relatively higher than in other scenarios
but still falls to 1.13 × 10–5W·m–2·ppb–1by 2050, which is 15%
lower than the current reference value. A similar declining trend
is observed for N2O (Figurec). Under RCP 8.5, the RE of N2O decreases
more sharply, reaching 3.00 × 10–3W·m–2·ppb–1by 2050 (6% below the
IPCC AR6 reference of 3.20 × 10–3W·m–2·ppb–1). For other RCPs (2.6,
4.5, and 6.0), the RE values remain relatively similar until 2050,
ranging between 3.03 and 3.04 × 10–3W·m–2·ppb–1. CH4, which
has a shorter atmospheric lifetime, exhibits a different pattern (Figureb). RE values under
RCPs 2.6 and 4.5 tend to increase up to 2050, reflecting a faster
rise in RF relative to the increase in CH4concentrations.
In contrast, RE remains nearly constant under RCP 6.0, while under
RCP 8.5 it declines to around 3.75 × 10–4W·m–2·ppb–1, a 4% decrease from
the IPCC AR6 reference value of 3.89 × 10–4W·m–2·ppb–1. These
dynamics reflect the varying CH4atmospheric concentration
under these scenarios (lower for RCPs 2.6 and 4.5, and higher for
RCPs 6.0 and 8.5).
The IRF of CO2is sensitive to
the background conditions
of the gas (Figured). In general, a pulse emission of CO2emitted to the
atmosphere is never fully reabsorbed by the climate system within
millennial time scales, with the fraction that remains in the air
depending on the saturation of the carbon sinks. This long-term legacy of CO2atmospheric perturbation
underpins the irreversibility of CO2-induced global warming
and the need to bring net anthropogenic emissions down to zero to
stabilize temperature changes.−The fraction of CO2remaining in the air 100 years after a pulse emission increases
from 41% (present-day IRF) to 46%, 53%, 56%, and 66% for RCPs 2.6,
4.5, 6.0, and 8.5, respectively. In all cases, the IRFs follow a similar
decay for about 20 years, but thereafter their patterns start to diverge.
The decay continues for RCP 2.6, as this is the scenario with the
lowest addition of carbon to the atmosphere and in which the carbon
removal rates of the natural carbon sinks (oceans and terrestrial
vegetation) are more efficient. By increasing CO2concentrations,
the carbon sinks become increasingly saturated and less efficient
at removing CO2from the atmosphere.,In RCP 4.5, the fraction of CO2remaining in the air
tends to stabilize after about 40 years. In the cases of RCPs 6.0
and 8.5, the CO2fraction declines for the first 30 years,
but then there is a sharper increase in the fraction remaining in
the air until year 100. This is due to the relatively high CO2emission levels in these scenarios that lead to an excess
of atmospheric CO2that is beyond the absorption capacity
of the natural sinks, which become saturated. More technical descriptions
about the behavior of the global carbon cycle at varying atmospheric
CO2concentrations are available elsewhere.−As discussed in the methods, the IRF for CH4(Figuree) and N2O (Figuref) is simpler
and follows a single exponential decay model that is rather insensitive
to their background atmospheric concentrations.
By combining
IRFs with REs, the AGWPs associated with the emission
of 1 ton of CO2for multiple pulse years under various
RCP scenarios can be estimated (Figureg). Across all RCPs, AGWP values tend to decrease for
later pulse years, primarily due to a consistent decline in RE values
over the 100 year evaluation period. In RCPs 8.5 and 6.0, this downward
trend in REs offsets the slight increase in IRFs observed around 40
years after the emission pulse, yet AGWP values remain relatively
higher compared to those of other scenarios. When benchmarked against
the IPCC AR6 reference estimate (where the 100-year AGWP for CO2is projected to reach 0.090 nW·m–2per ton of CO2), only the 2030 pulse emissions under
RCPs 6.0 and 8.5 exceed this threshold. By contrast, for 2050 pulse
emissions, AGWP values converge to approximately 0.084 nW·m–2across all RCPs, which is about 7% lower than the
IPCC AR6 reference. This reduction reflects the reduced marginal impact
of a CO2emission in a future atmosphere with elevated
background CO2concentrations.
For CH4AGWPs (Figureh),
RCP scenarios that result in higher radiative forcing
by 2100 are associated with lower REs, leading to a reduction in AGWP
values for later pulse years. This downward trend is reversed in RCPs
4.5 and 2.6, where AGWPs increase slightly over time. The variability
in CH4AGWPs by 2050 is notably greater than that observed
for CO2, highlighting the larger sensitivity of CH4’s RE values to different RCP scenarios. In contrast,
N2O (Figurei) exhibits the lowest AGWP variability, as the relative differences
in RE values across RCPs are much smaller than those for CO2and CH4. Interestingly, N2O AGWPs are slightly
higher under RCP 8.5 compared to RCP 2.6, a pattern opposite to that
of CH4. Although N2O REs decrease from RCP 2.6
to 8.5, this effect can be offset by the reduction in CH4REs under RCP 8.5, which leads to less spectral overlap and reduced
competition for infrared absorption. This interaction may enhance
the effective radiative impact of N2O in high-CH4-concentration scenarios.
When analyzing the AGTPs, the response
curves for the CO2peak within approximately a decade following
the emission pulse
and then gradually decline under RCPs 2.6, 4.5, and 6.0 (Figurej). In contrast,
for the earliest pulse years (2030–2035) under RCP 8.5, AGTP
values continue to increase beyond the initial peak, primarily driven
by a more rapid rise in AGWPs associated with those pulse yearsas
previously shown inFigureg. While the greater variability in CO2AGTPs largely
reflects the diversity in RE trajectories across scenarios, the AGTP
curves for later pulse years begin to closely mirror the trends of
the IRF curves shown inFigured. As with AGWPs, later pulse years consistently correspond
to lower AGTP values across all RCPs. This again illustrates the declining
marginal warming impact of a CO2emission in a future atmosphere
with elevated background concentrations. AGTPs of RCP 2.6 can approach
a value close to that based on current IPCC parameters (which stabilize
at around 4 nK per ton of CO2after 100 years) for the
earliest pulse emissions. However, for later pulse years under RCP
2.6, AGTP values decline to approximately 3.8 nK after 100 years,
which is about 5% lower than the present-day reference values. Conversely,
under RCP 8.5, AGTPs can reach 4.5 nK, or 12% above the reference
level, highlighting the amplified warming potential of CO2in a high-emissions trajectory due to a higher fraction of CO2remaining airborne at more saturated ocean and terrestrial
carbon sinks.
The CH4AGTPs exhibit a different pattern
than that
of CO2and N2O (Figurek). Although the temperature response peaks
around 5–6 years after the emission pulse, all trajectories
converge to the same value of approximately 2 × 10–4nK per ton of CH4by the end of the 100-year period.
This sharp decline reflects methane’s short atmospheric lifetime
and the rapid adjustment of radiative forcing as CH4concentrations
decay over time. Unlike CO2and N2O, CH4is classified as a short-lived climate pollutant, with warming
effects that are largely reversible within decades after a single
emission pulse.,In the first three decades following
a pulse, CH4AGTPs behave differently depending on the
scenario: AGTP values increase for later pulse years under RCP 2.6,
while they decrease under RCP 8.5. Nonetheless, by year 100, AGTPs
across all RCPs converge to a value slightly below the one derived
from present-day IPCC parameters (∼4 × 10–4nK after 100 years), further highlighting the short-term nature
of methane’s warming influence.
For N2O (Figurel), the AGTP values
show minimal variability across RCPs and
pulse years. Although RCP 2.6 yields slightly higher AGTPs, the values
for all scenarios practically overlap within a narrow range of 0.091–0.095
nK after the 100-year period. These are slightly higher than the estimate
derived using current IPCC parameters (∼0.090 nK) and indicate
relatively stable long-term warming impacts of N2O under
future emission scenarios.
Figureshows the
projected pGWP100and pGTP100values, derived
from evolving background concentrations of GHGs under various IAMs,
for selected pulse years from 2030 to 2050 at five-year intervals.

Prospective
global warming potential over 100 years (pGWP100) and global
temperature change potential 100 years (pGTP100) after
a pulse emission at year 2030–2050 for methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O). Results are based on
outputs from multiple Integrated Assessment Models (IAMs) for different
RCPs; the green and purple shaded bars illustrate the possible span
of the CH4and N2O metric values, respectively,
for each pulse year. Mean values are calculated based on the results
obtained from the 18 different IAM-RCP combinations.
For CH4(Figurea), the average pGWP100increases
from 28.1
±
1.2 in 2030 to 31.4 ± 1.7 in 2050 (mean ± one standard deviation
across all future IAM-RCP scenario combinations). Among individual
estimates, the lowest pGWP100value is 25.6, or 8% below
the present-day CF, which occurs for a 2030 pulse under the GCAM4-SSP4
RCP 8.5 scenario. This lower value is primarily driven by the higher
CO2AGWPs in this scenario, which increase the denominator
in the GWP equation and thereby reduce methane’s relative warming
impact. In contrast, the highest pGWP100value is 34.5,
or 23% above the present-day value, and it occurs for a 2050 pulse
in the IMAGE-SSP1 RCP 2.6 scenario. In this case, the CH4AGWPs peak and the CO2AGWPs peak are at their lowest,
amplifying the ratio. Overall, CF values tend to rise with later pulse
years with most projections exceeding the present-day CFs described
in IPCC-AR6. In general, values are higher
at lower RCPs. The findings are consistent with Reisinger et al. (2011), where the lowest projected GWP100values for CH4are reported for RCP 8.5, largely due
to the rapid near-term increase in CH4concentrations that
reduces RE and the methane’s marginal climate impact over a
100-year time frame.
For N2O pGWP100,
the mean values increase
from 248.2 ± 9.2 in 2030 to 272.0 ± 10.1 in 2050. As shown
inFigureb, all mean
values remain slightly below the present-day GWP100value
of 273, with only a few exceptions. The lowest projected pGWP100value, 228, is associated with a 2030 pulse under the MESSAGE-GLOBIOM-SSP2
RCP 8.5 scenario. This low value results from the relatively higher
CO2AGWP, which increases the denominator in the GWP equation,
thereby lowering the overall pGWP100for N2O.
Unlike CH4and CO2, no consistent trend with
the RCP level is observed for N2O pGWP100. Notably,
the maximum value of 292, which is about 7% above the present-day
GWP100, is found under RCP 8.5, namely, the AIM/CGE-SSP3
scenario for a pulse year in 2050. Reisinger et al. (2011) also identified RCP 8.5 in 2050 as yielding
the highest pGWP100values for N2O, while values
across RCPs were relatively similar in 2030. Our findings, however,
highlight a stronger influence of the underlying IAM framework on
projected GWP values, rather than RCP trajectory alone. In general,
the highest pGWP100values for N2O are driven
by the AIM/CGE-SSP3 scenario, while the lowest originate from MESSAGE-GLOBIOM-SSP2.
The pGTP100for CH4increases from 4.92 ±
0.52 in 2030 to 5.47 ± 0.62 in 2050 (Figurec), exhibiting a trend similar to that of
pGWP100, with values rising over time. The minimum and
maximum projected values are 4.1 and 6.6, respectively, and represent
changes of −24% and +22% relative to the present-day GTP100value of 5.38. Across various RCP and IAM scenarios, this
pattern mirrors that of pGWP100, with lower values associated
with RCP 8.5 and higher values linked to RCP 2.6. For the pGTP100of N2O (Figured), values increase from 201.7 ± 19.9 in 2030
to 218.9 ± 15.9 in 2050, with the lowest values occurring under
RCP 8.5. The pGTP100values for N2O are generally
lower than the present-day N2O GTP100of 233,
a behavior largely driven by the increased AGTP of CO2,
which exceeds current levels, particularly in scenarios with earlier
emission pulses. In contrast to CH4, the REs of N2O do not increase over timeand consequently AGTPconsistently
decline across all RCP scenarios. The lowest value, 168.6, represents
a 27% decrease relative to current GTP100. Exceptions to
this trend occur in both the AIM-CGE-SSP3 and REMIND-MAGPIE-SSP5,
where the maximum value of 252 is observed under RCP 4.5 for a 2050
pulse year, which is an increase of approximately 8% relative to the
present-day value.
Figurepresents the sensitivity to pGWP100and pGTP100of the life-cycle climate change impacts of two production
activities, namely, nonbasmati rice and nitric acid. For this example,
a prospective LCA fixed at the year 2040 without updates to the background
database is considered. Climate change impacts for rice characterized
with pGWP100range from −1.7% to +7.5% relative
to the results calculated with present-day CFs (blue bars inFigurea). The largest deviation
occurs under the IMAGE-SSP1 RCP 2.6 scenario, which yields the most
extreme CFs. Since CH4and N2O contribute 38%
and 9% of rice life-cycle impacts, respectively, pGWP100values can reach up to 1.62 kg of CO2-eq per kg of rice,
compared to about 1.5 kg of CO2-eq with current CFs. For
nitric acid (Figureb), impacts are lower and less variable, with deviations from −2.8%
to +0.5% relative to the baseline of 0.94 kg of CO2-eq.
This is largely due to the higher share of N2O (18%) compared
to that of CH4(7%) in its impact profile. Since N2O CFs under pGWP100can be lower than present-day
values, they partially offset CH4increases, resulting
in net changes typically between −1% and +0.5%.

Sensitivity analysis
of climate impacts in 2040 for nonbasmati
rice production and nitric acid production in 50% aqueous solution.
Panels (a,b) illustrate the sensitivity to pGWP100and
panels (c,d) pGTP100. Blue bars represent percentage changes
relative to the present-day characterization factors from IPCC-AR6
(indicated by dashed lines).
Under pGTP100(Figurec,d), the largest reductions for both rice
and nitric
acid occur under the GCAM-SSP4 and MESSAGE-GLOBIOM SSP2 models with
RCP 8.5, which yield the lowest combined CFs for CH4and
N2O. Nitric acid shows slightly more pronounced negative
deviations, with the lowest reaching −4.9% due to its strong
dependence on N2O emissions. For rice production, a slightly
broader range of changes from the reference (blue bars inFigure) is observed compared
to nitric acid due to the greater contribution from CH4.
Figureshows
the
sensitivity to pCFs of a group of activities, including power generation,
transport, food, materials, and chemicals production. The most affected
by the changes in CFs are rice and cheese production, which show the
highest sensitivity to both metrics. For pGWP100(Figurea), cheese can achieve
life cycle impacts up to 8% higher than the reference, largely driven
by CH4(27%) and N2O (13%) impacts originating
from ruminant digestion and the production of feed used in cow milk
production. Within the food sector, trout farming in semi-intensive
systems ranks fifth, as it is particularly impacted by upstream N2O emissions (which represent 6% of total life cycle impacts)
linked to soybean cultivation for trout feed. The chemical sector,
represented by ammonium nitrate and nitric acid production, is among
the activities with the largest sensitivities represented inFigurea. The nitrogen-based
fertilizer has the highest contribution of N2O to total
life cycle impacts (35%) among all activities investigated in this
study. Such a value is reflected in the lowest change relative to
the reference to pGWP100(−3.6%), as the prospective
N2O CFs used to calculate pGWP100can fall below
the present-day CF. As CH4emissions are practically zero
in this activity, the sensitivity profile of ammonium nitrate is dominated
by the uncertainty of CFs associated with N2O. For other
activities such as transport, power generation, and cement production,
the sensitivity to pGWP100is much lower because CO2impacts are predominant.

Ranking sensitivity to pCFs for the life-cycle
climate change impacts
of the selected ecoinvent 3.9 activities in the year 2040. Panel (a)
illustrates the sensitivity of activities to global warming potential
over 100 years (pGWP100) while panel (b) shows the sensitivity
to global temperature change potential 100 years after emission (pGTP100). Colored bars represent the percentage change relative
to the present-day characterization factors from the IPCC Sixth Assessment
Report (AR6), indicated by dashed lines.
Activities are arranged from left to right in order of decreasing
sensitivity.
With pGTP100(Figureb), ammonium nitrate
shows the largest potential decrease
(−9% relative to the present-day value). This is primarily
due to the dominant role of N2O in its life cycle impacts
combined with CFs that are lower than the reference. Rice production,
which ranked highest in sensitivity under pGWP100, decreases
its sensitivity under pGTP100. This shift reflects the
higher CH4-to-N2O ratio in its life cycle emissions.
Since CH4is a short-lived greenhouse gas, its relative
importance decreases when using a metric like GTP, which captures
the instantaneous impact at a specific time horizon rather than integrating
effects over time as GWP does. In contrast, activities dominated by
fossil CO2emissionssuch as transport, power generation,
steel, and cement productionexhibit sensitivity even lower
under pGTP100than under pGWP100. This aligns
with their emission profiles, which are largely unaffected by non-CO2GHGs. As discussed in detail elsewhere, the differences betweenFigurea and b highlight how the choice of the climate
metric can affect the estimated climate impact of a given product,
especially when there is a high share of non-CO2GHG emissions.
Figureshows the sensitivity of the estimated climate change
impacts to changes in the background database by adapting ecoinvent
v.3.9 to the prospective REMIND-SSP5 scenarios RCP 2.6 and RCP 8.5
for the year 2040, in comparison to the cases where the background
database is not transformed and only the CFs are prospective. These
REMIND-RCP scenarios were chosen because they are the only ones currently
available in the Premise tool that fully
align with the IIASA marker scenarios, and they represent the two
extremes of the RCP range examined in this study. When only the pCFs
are modified, represented by the blue bars, there is a general trend
of net increases in climate impacts assessed with GWP100for CH4-emission dominated activities and net decreases
when GTP100is used for activities dominated by N2O emissions compared to the reference case (i.e., no prospective
inventories nor pCFs). However, adding changes in the background database
significantly alters the outcomes, as indicated by the colored bars
inFigure.

Sensitivity
of activities to prospective climate change characterization
factors (CFs) and prospective ecoinvent 3.9 data under REMIND-SSP2-2.6
and REMIND-SSP5-8.5 scenarios for the year 2040. Panel (a) illustrates
the sensitivity of activities to global warming potential over 100
years (pGWP100) while panel (b) shows the sensitivity to
global temperature change potential 100 years after emission (pGTP100). Activities are ordered from left to right by decreasing
the sensitivity. The bars indicate the percentage deviation from the
reference case, which is based on the fixed ecoinvent 3.9 database and present-day CFs (represented by the dashed line). Blue bars isolate the effect of
changing only the CFs, i.e., keeping the present-day background database.
Steel production emerges as the most affected activity
by changes
in the background scenario under pGWP100(Figurea), representing a significant
shift in sensitivity compared to the fixed background analysis (Figurea) where it ranked
sixth. In steel production, net reductions in impacts range from −5%
to −44%. These reductions are driven by progressive improvements
in energy efficiency and declining direct emissions from both steel
and pig iron production. The maximum
reduction corresponds to the RCP 2.6 scenario, which aligns with the
adoption of technologies such as carbon capture and storage (CCS).
Similarly, road transport is significantly influenced by changes in
the prospective databases, reflecting shifts in fleet composition
such as the introduction of electric trucks and enhanced energy efficiency
as well as a growing share of renewable fuels in internal combustion
engines by 2040. Relative to the fixed background analysis, road transport
achieves the largest reduction in impacts across all assessed activities,
reaching −58% under the RCP 2.6 scenario. Other CO2-intensive activities, such as cement production, also become increasingly
responsive to changes in process inventories, showing consistent reductions
in pGWP100across all RCP scenarios. For Portland cement,
projected decreases in fuel consumption (e.g., coke) and associated
CO2emissions reflect ongoing improvements in the foreground
system, particularly in clinker production. In the RCP 2.6 scenario,
the adoption of CCS further amplifies these reductions, potentially
lowering the impacts by up to 31%. By contrast, maritime transport
and aviation exhibit lower sensitivity to changes in background scenarios
due to the limited representation of future developments in fleet
composition and fuel mix for ships and aircraft in current prospective
scenario modeling.
In terms of pGTP100(Figureb), steel production
also experiences the
highest sensitivity, primarily due to the reduction in fossil-CO2emissions driven by cleaner production technologies, with
the variability of the impacts ranging from −5% to −45%.
When compared with the use of pGWP100, rice production
is the activity that shows the most pronounced change in sensitivity
when shifting to the pGTP100. The relative contributions
of CH4and N2O to the total direct emissions
(from rice cultivation and fertilizer use) increase alongside the
significant reduction of fossil CO2from background activities
(such as fuel mixes, road transport, and fertilizer production). As
a result, the variability associated with CFs becomes even more impactful
under REMIND-SSP5 RCP 2.6, which represents the scenario with the
greatest level of decarbonization in the supply chain.
We further
exemplify how pCFs can influence LCA outcomes for similar
products but produced from different value chains, a perspective that
is relevant when LCA is used as a decision support tool by assessing
rice production in 2040 in the United States and India using pGTP100under the REMIND-SSP5-RCP 8.5 scenario. With conventional
pCFs, the U.S. rice production has higher impacts (758 vs 750 kg of
CO2-eq/ton). When applying prospective CFs, the results
reverse, and rice production in India exhibits higher impacts (704
vs 714 kg CO2-eq/ton). A similar trend is found for “market
for nitric acid, without water” when comparing Rest of the
World (RoW) and UN-Oceania. Without pCFs, UN-Oceania shows higher
impacts (1,840 vs 1,709 kg CO2-eq/ton for RoW), but applying
pCFs reverses the results (1,604 vs 1,595 kg CO2-eq/ton).
This occurs because the use of pGTP100makes results particularly
sensitive when relatively high emissions of N2O are present.
The results of both examples can be found inFigures S31 and S32in theSI.
Comparing the pCFs estimated
in
this study with those available
in the literature is challenging, as no previous publication has projected
pCFs across multiple climate metrics using the IAM-SSP marker scenarios.
Our results for CH4pGWP100for the period 2030–2050
range from 25.6 to 34.5, and slightly differ from the projections
by Lan and Yao (2022), who reported values
between 29 and 41. For N2O, their estimated range of 280–380
is broader than our findings, which fall between 232 and 292. Although
their method accounts for changes in REs, they do not clearly specify
the IAM model or SSP scenario used in their analysis, limiting the
comparability of their results. Moreover, unlike our approach, their
study does not incorporate variations in the CO2IRFs across
RCPs, a factor that likely contributes to the observed differences.
To our knowledge, no studies have examined other climate metrics (e.g.,
GTP100) in this context under such conditions.
Potential
future changes in GWPs were originally modeled by Reisinger
et al. (2011), who incorporated both
changes in REs and climate–carbon cycle feedback under different
RCPs. Although their study provided projections for the GWP of N2O and CH4, a direct comparison with our quantitative
results is not feasible, as their analysis did not link their data
directly to specific IAM outputs. Nevertheless, some trends in their
findings align with ours. For instance, our results for methane’s
projected GWP100also lead to the lowest GWP100values under the RCP 8.5 scenario. This outcome is primarily attributed
to the rapid increase in CH4concentrations in the near
term, which reduces its RE and, consequently, its marginal climate
impact over a 100-year horizon. Their analysis of the 2030–2050
period further identified the highest GWP100values under
RCP 2.6, which is in line with our finding.
A key limitation
in our analysis is the absence of a multimodel
mean for the IRFs of CO2across different RCP scenarios,
which led us to adopt an indirect approach to address this gap. It
is also important to note that the IRF used by the IPCC for estimating
metric values in its last assessment report (dated 2019) is the one from Joos et al., which is based
on a background atmospheric concentration of CO2of 389
ppm, which refers to the year 2010. This
is lower than the current concentration of 427 ppm. As such, there
is an inconsistency as the IRF available for CO2becomes
progressively outdated and does not reflect present-day conditions
nor align with updated RE values. Addressing this issue requires simulations
from complex climate models to replicate experiments such as those
in Joos et al., requiring competencies and tools that go beyond the
current capabilities of the LCA community. Given the importance of
IPCC climate metrics for LCA, establishing a collaborative dialog
with climate scientists can stimulate the development of an updated
set of IRFs that reflect current climate conditions and span multiple
future RCPs. Although future changes in the IRFs for CH4and N2O are expected to only have a minor influence on
our results given the relative stability of their lifetimes across
the historical IPCC assessment reports, the future availability of
more refined and time-dependent IRFs could improve the accuracy of
the estimated pCFs.
The radiative forcings and GHG concentrations
from the IAM-SSP-RCP
marker scenarios used in this study are based on the best available
data from the IIASA Legacy Database. Incorporating
other or more recent IAM results could potentially enrich the pCFs
and affect the mean statistics elaborated in this paper.
The
coupling between pCFs and prospective background databases
is hindered by the limited number of IAM scenarios that are currently
available within existing prospective tools. In the current version
of Premise (v. 2.2.7), only the REMIND-MAgPIE-SSP5 scenario is available
in more than one RCP. Extending the availability of prospective databases
to match other IAM marker scenarios can be beneficial for prospective
LCA studies aiming at combining changing CFs with changes in background
databases. As the Premise framework is open to add more IAM scenarios,
this gap can be covered by future studies such as the one that coupled
the TIAM-UCL model with Premise and ecoinvent.
This study focuses on the three primary GHGs (CO2, CH4, and N2O) with the goal of introducing
and demonstrating
a consistent methodological approach for estimating pCFs. These gases
are a logical starting point to showcase the method to compute pCFs,
and they dominate most of the LCA applications. The same approach
can be reiterated to estimate pCFs of other GHGs, including chlorinated
and fluorinated compounds, for which data are available. Expanding
the method to include short-lived climate forcers such as carbon monoxide
(CO), nitrogen oxides (NOx), and sulfur
oxides (SOx) will require additional consideration
due to their complex atmospheric behavior and indirect effects. Future
research should aim to adapt and refine the framework to accommodate
these substances, supported by more comprehensive data sets and modeling
tools.
The pCFs computed in this study are timely given the
increasing
number of pLCAs conducted in recent years. Unlike previous studies, we provide analytically derived and updatable
CFs tailored to LCA that include multiple metrics and align with IPCC
methods and IAM scenarios used in pLCA. These features ensure consistency
with frameworks for modifying background databases and enable straightforward integration into existing pLCA
tools using tabulated values (Tables S.2–S.9 of the SI). The provided REs, IRFs, and Python codes for AGWP,
AGTP, pGWP100, pGWP20, pGTP50, and
pGTP100enable extended calculations of pCFs of up to 2100.
Emission inventories can be adapted to the year at which the emission
occurs, a procedure that can be facilitated by integrating these pCFs
with dynamic LCA tools that are becoming increasingly available.,For more generic applications or uncertainty considerations aiming
to provide insights on how alternative scenarios influence LCA results,
mean CFs per RCP with the associated standard deviations can be used.
This approach enables the exploration of how a single climate target
can be met through different pathways, offering insights into the
variability arising from alternative socioeconomic and technological
assumptions. In cases in which a specific future climate target is
not specified, the average and ranges from all of the available CFs
for each given pulse year can be considered. Conversely, averaging
CFs across SSPs for different RCPs is likely less meaningful, given
the substantial variability in impacts that can occur across SSPs.
In all cases, the aggregation method used for pCFs should be consistent
with the type of IAM-RCP combination considered for projecting process
inventories. This variety of applications can be enhanced by uploading
individual and aggregated pCFs (for pGWP100, pGWP20, pGTP50, and pGTP100) into existing LCA tools
such as Brightway2. Ultimately, we emphasize the need for a harmonized
framework that integrates prospective metrics across impact categories
beyond climate change, thereby supporting the broader implementation
of pLCA.
As presented in the sensitivity analysis, the use of
pCFs can result
in significant variations in life-cycle climate change impacts across
activities, even for identical products sourced from different regions
or supply chains. As exemplified by rice and nitric acid production,
pCFs can exert a greater influence on decision-making involving value
chains in which nitrous oxide emissions play a larger role.
The outcomes of this study are primarily intended for the LCA community,
aiming to strengthen the methodological consistency of pLCA and apply
the prospective analysis to both the inventory and the LCIA phase.
The availability of pGWPs and pGTPs is a step forward in developing
dynamic, time-dependent climate impact assessment, where CFs vary
with the emission year and evolving background conditions. By integrating
pulse-year-specific CFs into temporally explicit modeling frameworks,
our approach enhances the accuracy, consistency, and policy relevance
of future-oriented climate impact evaluations. The prospective CFs
developed here are presented in table format in theSI, together with the code to generate them, and as such,
they can be readily implemented in pLCA tools to be consistently coupled
with the IAM scenarios used to produce future background databases.
Alternatively, CFs averaged by a specific RCP can be used in more
streamlined applications to reflect a range of plausible futures or
to explore scenario-induced variability in an uncertainty analysis.
While this study focuses on CH4and N2O, future
work can extend this framework to generate pCFs for the remaining
GHGs, enabling the creation of complete and harmonized data sets for
other climate forcers. This research ultimately supports a robust
evolution of pLCA approaches toward greater alignment with forward-looking
climate policies and decision-making contexts.
We acknowledge the support of the Horizon Europe
projects LCA4Bio (number 101135371) and ALIGNED (number 101059430).
absolute
global temperature change
potential
absolute
global warming potential
IPCC Fourth Assessment Report
IPCC Fifth Assessment Report
IPCC Sixth Assessment
Report
carbon
capture and storage
characterization factors
methane
carbon dioxide
Earth system models
global temperature change
potential
global
warming potential
integrated assessment models
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
impulse response function
life cycle inventory
life cycle impact
assessment
nitrous oxide
ozone depletion potentials
prospective global temperature change
potential over 100 years
prospective global temperature change potential
over 50 years
prospective global warming potential over 100 years
prospective
global warming potential over 20 years
prospective life cycle assessment
PRospective EnvironMental
Impact AsSEssment
representative concentration pathways
radiative efficiency
shared socioeconomic pathways
Supporting Information
IPCC Third Assessment Report
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.est.5c12391.
(XLSX)­GTP100_CH4_table
(XLSX)­GTP100_N2O_table
(XLSX)­GWP100_CH4_table
(XLSX)­GWP100_N2O_table
(XLSX)­IPCC2021
GTP100
(XLSX)­IPCC2021 GTP50
(XLSX)­IPCC2021 GWP100
(XLSX)­IPCC2021 GWP20
(XLSX)­pIRF_CH4
(XLSX)­pIRF_CO2
(XLSX)­pIRF_N2O
(XLSX)­pRE_CH4_AIM
(XLSX)­pRE_CH4_GCAM4
(XLSX)­pRE_CH4_IMAGE
(XLSX)­pRE_CH4_MESSAGE
(XLSX)­pRE_CH4_REMIND
(XLSX)­pRE_CO2_AIM
(XLSX)­pRE_CO2_GCAM4
(XLSX)­pRE_CO2_IMAGE
(XLSX)­pRE_CO2_MESSAGE
(XLSX)­pRE_CO2_REMIND
(XLSX)­pRE_N2O_AIM
(XLSX)­pRE_N2O_GCAM4
(XLSX)­pRE_N2O_IMAGE
(XLSX)­pRE_N2O_MESSAGE
(XLSX)­pRE_N2O_REMIND
(XLSX)­selected_flows
This file provides complementary results,
supporting
figures, supporting pGWP and pGTP tables, and supporting files and
codes (PDF)
The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
Articles from Environmental Science & Technology are provided here courtesy ofAmerican Chemical Society
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894