An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
C. P. Weaver,weaver.chris@epa.gov
Issue date 2019 Sep.
A critical charge for science to inform environmental protection is to characterize the risks associated with climate change, to support development of appropriate responses. The nature of climate change, however, presents significant challenges that must be overcome to do so, including the need for integration and synthesis across the many disciplines that contain knowledge relevant for achieving environmental protection goals. This paper describes an interdisciplinary research framework organized around three “Science Challenges” that directly respond to the needs of environmental protection organizations. Broadly, these Science Challenges refer to the research needed to: inform actions to enhance resilience across a broad range of environmental and social stresses to environmental management endpoints; actions to limit GHG emissions and slow the underlying rate of climate change; and the transition to sustainability across the full spectrum of climate change impacts and solutions; all as situated within an overarching risk management perspective. These Challenges span all media and systems critical to effective environmental protection, highlighting the cross-cutting nature of climate change and the need to address its impacts across systems and places. While this framework uses EPA’s programs as an illustrative example, the research directions articulated herein are broadly applicable across the spectrum of environmental protection organizations. Going forward, we recommend that climate-related research to inform environmental protection efforts should accelerate its evolution toward research that is inherently cross-media and cross-scale; explicitly considers the social dimensions of change; and focuses on designing solutions to the specific risks climate change poses to the environment and society.
Keywords:Climate change, Environmental protection, Interdisciplinary research
Climate change is a central concern of environmental protection because it poses substantial risks to societal interests in protecting—and legislated mandates to protect—air quality, water quality, public lands, ecosystems, and human health across multiple levels of governance. In addition, many environmental protection organizations have a statutory role in developing and implementing policies and regulations to control air pollutant emissions, including of greenhouse gases (GHGs). Finally, responses to climate change may also have environmental impacts of their own that will fall under the responsibilities of these organizations. Research intended to support environmental protection by providing the best available science to decision makers implementing national, state, provincial, tribal, and municipal environmental laws must take into account that such actions are now, and increasingly will be, influenced by climate change.
This paper puts forward a framework for the climate-related research needed to most effectively support environmental protection with the intention of facilitating dialog and engagement with the broader scientific community. This framework envisions integration and synthesis of relevant knowledge streams from multiple disciplines around key scientific questions central to environmental protection in the face of long-term climate change. The paper begins by reviewing the unique and significant challenges posed by climate change to institutional environmental quality and public health missions, challenges that encompass the analytic tools and methods of public health and environmental risk assessment. It then outlines three major “Science Challenges” that can serve as organizing principles for such research going forward, both in terms of bringing together existing insights from multiple disciplines to help address environmental protection needs today, as well as new research that can help fill critical research gaps, and key integrative elements that cut across these three Challenges.
Over the next few decades, climate change is expected to intensify current air and water quality issues and increase stresses on public health and environmental systems (U.S. EPA 2009,2012;USGCRP 2016,2018). Managing these trends will involve applying, and potentially adapting, regulatory and other environmental management mechanisms to ensure their continued effectiveness in an environment with shifting temperatures, more frequent and severe heavy rainfall events, longer and deeper droughts, larger and more widespread wildfires, rising seas, and ocean acidification (IPCC 2014a;Melillo et al. 2014;USGCRP 2017,2018). It also will involve assessing the systemic environmental threats posed by accelerating climate change and designing and implementing actions to manage them. Characterizing both specific and system-wide risks from climate change, and supporting the development of appropriate response options, is therefore a critical charge for organizations whose mission it is to ensure environmental quality and associated public health outcomes. The unique nature of the climate change problem, however, presents significant challenges for such efforts that ultimately must be overcome if these organizations are to maintain efficient and effective policy and decision-making in the face of climate change (Morgan et al. 1999;Sussman et al. 2014). This charge, and set of challenges, is situated within a larger conversation about the value of framing climate change, as a scientific-societal issue, from within a risk perspective (Sutton 2019; Weaver et al. 2017;King et al. 2015), a conversation in which environmental protection organizations should be expected to play a leading role, given their extensive experience with environmental risk assessment and risk management.
Developed over a long and successful application to critical environmental problems, risk assessment methods, practices, and tools have provided the foundation for the ability of EPA and other environmental protection organizations to leverage the best available science in meeting their missions to protect human health and the environment (Ruckelshaus 1983;NRC 1983,1996). Combining approaches and methodologies from fields such as human exposure research, environmental toxicology, and epidemiology, the risk assessment paradigm has served as a coherent framework for the environmental protection community to identify and manage hazardous exposures in populations and ecosystems from pollutants and toxins in the environment. Nevertheless, the expected and potential impacts of climate change challenge traditional risk assessment in five fundamental ways.
First, climate change calls into question the assumption of stationarity, which explicitly or implicitly underpins a wide array of risk assessment tools and methods (Milly et al. 2008). Stationarity assumes that the future is a close statistical analog of the past, and that past climatic conditions therefore provide the basis for projecting future impacts and developing corresponding policy responses. Increasingly, though, this assumption is no longer valid as weather and climate conditions move beyond the envelope of observed patterns within which all environmental regulations and management practices have been developed and implemented (USGCRP 2017). Climate change also is likely to alter causal links between processes affecting pollutant formation and transport and subsequent health and ecosystem effects (e.g.,Greaver et al. 2016). Furthermore, because climate change is a global phenomenon, potentially affecting everything, everywhere, with impacts that cut across geographic region, ecosystem type, population group, or socioeconomic sector, it challenges traditional, media-specific regulatory boundaries. This inability to assume stationarity thus applies to risk assessment within and across all such media and systems.
Second, while great scientific advances have been made over the last few decades in climate science, this nonstationarity challenge is compounded by remaining large and often hard-to-characterize uncertainties associated with future climate change and its impacts (Lempert et al. 2004;Weaver et al. 2013). These uncertainties result from limitations on the predictability of specific consequences of climate change due to the complexity of key climate system processes and forcings, including potentially large but uncertain climate feedbacks, the uncertain trajectory of future GHG emissions, and natural, internal variability of the climate system (Hawkins and Sutton 2009). Although there is growing confidence in the long-term, global-scale consequences of climate change, limits on climate system predictability are experienced most strongly at precisely the space and time-scales most relevant for environmental management, such as the regional and local scales of watersheds and communities, or for short-term extremes such as stagnation episodes and heavy rainfall events (Dawson et al. 2014;Johnson et al. 2015). What this means in practical terms is that, not only is the past no longer a reliable guide to the future, but our ability to project into the future through other means, such as model simulations, also has limits. Applying new approaches to risk assessment and management will therefore often be necessary if we wish to overcome these constraints (Weaver et al. 2013).
Third, basing long-term environmental protection planning on “most likely” or “best-guess” future conditions is no longer fully appropriate in the context of climate change. Core principles of risk management applied across a diverse range of sectors, from insurance and finance, to aircraft and power plant safety, recommend planning approaches based on limiting the risks of catastrophic damages, not just damages resulting from marginal shifts in average conditions (Kunreuther et al. 2013;de Perez et al. 2014;Heal and Millner 2014). What is clear is that climate change will shift the distributions of key metrics like temperature and precipitation, significantly increasing both the frequency and severity of extreme meteorological conditions locally, as well as the potential for worst-case scenarios, in terms of melting ice and carbon cycle feedbacks (NRC 2013). Accounting for such shifts is critically important in assessing and managing overall climate-related risk, since the total risk from climate change is not symmetrical with respect to the distribution of future outcomes, but is instead heavily skewed toward low-probability, high-consequence futures (Hinkel et al. 2015;King et al. 2015).
Fourth, most of the risks from climate change result not from the direct toxicity of GHGs, as with other pollutants, but through the diversity of effects due to warming-induced shifts in weather patterns and baseline environmental conditions (one exception is ocean acidification). Such shifts can be direct (e.g., flooding due to heavy rainfall or sea level rise) or indirect (e.g., changes in ecosystem structure and function), each of which can affect human health and human systems (IPCC 2014a;Melillo et al. 2014). Although the proximal effect of increasing emissions is a global increase in GHG concentrations and global-mean temperature, specific impacts can be highly local, with the populations experiencing the greatest impacts in many cases not those generating the most significant GHG emissions. Furthermore, climate change impacts on a given management endpoint will be the result of complex interactions among these climatic stressors and other, nonclimatic stressors that also change over time. These interactions include the intersection between phenomena occurring over multiple space and time-scales: for example, the implications for terrestrial ecosystems of an increasing frequency of heat waves, leading to heat stress, drought, and vegetation-damaging high ozone events, combined with a longer growing season, expanding ranges of pest and invasive species, and more frequent and intense wildland fires (USGCRP 2018). Such climate-driven changes in forests and other land ecosystems also have the potential to affect water quality by reducing the natural capacity of those ecosystems to process pollutants. These multistressor interactions also include the joint impacts of changing climate and simultaneous socioeconomic trends, such as in population and demographics, land use, nutrient inputs, economic growth, technological innovation, and even adaptation responses to climate change (Bierwagen et al. 2010;Georgescu et al. 2014). Climate change is a “risk multiplier” that interacts with other stressors to create new, or alter existing, risks (DoD 2014). Many of the greatest potential risks from climate change will be a consequence of cascading (or cumulative) impacts and feedbacks among these interlinked components in ways that are hard to anticipate. This complexity confounds simple causation models, making more difficult the development of robust exposure assessments and risk characterization in support of rulemaking.
Fifth, the climate change problem challenges our ability to value the full range of impacts, quantitatively or sometimes even qualitatively (USGCRP 2011;Sussman et al. 2014). Though some recent efforts have improved our ability to quantify certain economic impacts of climate change (U.S. EPA 2015;Risky Business Project 2014;O’Neill et al. 2017), there are many other types of impacts that are more difficult to capture with the economic valuation methods used in these studies. For example, some impacts, such as loss of cultural heritage, are largely intangible, and therefore difficult to define and measure, but represent meaningful losses nevertheless. In addition, the most severe potential impacts challenge fundamental assumptions of marginality (along with other core precepts of economic analysis) and are thus difficult to capture accurately as damage functions in current large-scale economic models (Weitzman 2011;Weyant 2014). Furthermore, because of the long lag built into the climate system between emissions and the experience of the largest impacts, the consequences of both climate change, and the policy choices made today in response, will span decades to generations. The result is an unprecedented degree of long-range thinking called for in policy and planning, with close attention paid to the challenging economic problems of intergenerational equity and discounting (Heal 2009).
The inertia of the climate system is such that impacts may remain manageable, if increasingly severe, for the next few decades under plausible scenarios of GHG emissions—at least for the developed world (see, however,Xu et al. (2018)about the potential for global warming to accelerate over the next two decades). Beyond this time, however, if cumulative GHG concentrations continue to build in the atmosphere, rapidly increasing global temperatures are expected to drive increasingly large changes in extreme weather, sea level, and ecosystem response, with associated impacts beyond what all countries, developed and developing, may be able to readily manage (Lenton et al. 2008;NRC 2013). Avoiding the worst of these impacts, and averting potentially catastrophic tipping points in physical, biological, and socioeconomic systems, seemingly implies that within a few short decades we will need to restructure our global energy system to bring emissions of GHGs rapidly to near zero (IPCC 2014b). Such an enormous undertaking would itself be expected to profoundly affect society and the environment. Because of the inter-connectedness of natural and human systems, the environmental effects of technologies and interventions deployed to mitigate the causes of climate change would likely create challenges for environmental health and human well-being that would also need to be managed, and hence would themselves become the concern of environmental protection organizations. In other words, we soon will be faced with either transformational impacts or transformational responses—and likely a combination thereof. Both will challenge environmental protection efforts in ways that transcend any policy precedent.
Implicit throughout the previous discussion is the need to understand linked biophysical and social processes of change, and to do so in a way that supports societal responses to this change (Hackmann et al. 2014). This means that planning and implementing climate change-related research to inform environmental protection will require integrating the full range of disciplinary perspectives and contributions from across the scientific enterprise, including the disciplines spanning the social and behavioral sciences. It is people, and their communities, institutions, and governments, who are key drivers of climate change. In addition, climate change impacts ultimately depend on social context. And climate change solutions, both in terms of reducing emissions and increasing resilience, will require greater understanding of how decisions are made by individuals and communities; the key characteristics of socio-environmental systems that lead to reduced vulnerability and enhanced resilience to climate change impacts; and the nature of sustainable environmental management under conditions of change, transition, and transformation (Dunlap and Brulle 2015). The future of climate-related research in support of environmental protection should thus explicitly recognize and incorporate the social sciences as both an important part of the integrated knowledge base for understanding the causes, consequences of, and solutions for climate change and its impacts, and a source of guiding principles that can help put this knowledge to work (Weaver et al. 2014).
These challenges of climate change as it intersects with organizational missions to protect public health and the environment, just discussed, define a space for climate-related environmental protection research efforts. As articulated, climate change poses significant near- and long-term challenges to achieving these missions, and to the traditional methods and practices by which EPA and analogous organizations conduct science-informed policy and decision-making. Drawing on a prior articulation of this research framing (seeU.S. EPA 2017), while generalizing to apply more broadly across the spectrum of environmental protection organizations and efforts, these challenges, and the research portfolio needed to address them, can be organized into three distinct, high-level categories of research effort, summarized as follows:
Broadly, these Science Challenges refer to the research needed to inform (1) adaptation actions to enhance resilience across a broad range of environmental and social stresses and continue to deliver clean air, clean water, and healthy communities and ecosystems in the face of climate change, (2) mitigation actions to limit GHG emissions and slow the underlying rate of climate change, and (3) the transition to sustainability across the full spectrum of climate change impacts and solutions. These “big bins” of climate-related research for environmental protection span media and systems, highlighting both the cross-cutting nature of climate change and the corresponding need to address its impacts across multiple policy domains simultaneously. The boundaries between these Science Challenges are fluid—and they represent a progression. For example, quantitatively assessing the range of benefits and costs of GHG policies, underScience Challenge 2, will require leveraging the full suite of media-, system-, and sector-focused climate impacts research carried out underScience Challenge 1. Similarly, research related to vulnerability, resilience, and adaptation on the one hand, and the environmental impacts of mitigation options and practices on the other, provide crucial bridges fromScience Challenges 1and2to the exploration of long-term, sustainable solutions underScience Challenge 3.
To fully support decision-makers in addressing climate change within their environmental protection missions, scientific efforts falling under these Challenges necessarily represent a balance across different modes and phases of research, including laboratory and field measurements, model development, synthesis and assessment, and development of decision support tools. It also must represent engagement and science translation around existing and newly emerging data, tools, and findings, often involving integration of key insights or data streams from across typically disparate disciplines, as well as complementary long-term, exploratory research—“horizon scanning”—in anticipation of future decision maker needs.
In the following subsections, we discuss the specific research topics underlying each of these three Science Challenges, highlight critical research gaps that will need to be addressed in the near term, and identify key integrative elements that point the way toward a long-term synthesis.
The large-scale, long-term changes in Earth’s climate due to increasing GHG concentrations in the atmosphere manifest themselves, locally and over shorter time-scales, as shifts in the statistics of a wide array of weather- and climate-related extremes (Herring et al. 2016;USGCRP 2017;Wobus et al. 2018;Sanderson et al. 2019). That such extremes—including heat waves, heavy rainfall events, droughts, wildfires, stagnation events, hurricanes, and winter storms—strongly influence air quality, water quality, human health, community vulnerability, and ecosystem integrity and services is well understood (USGCRP 2018), even though the pathways connecting these meteorological and climatological phenomena with ecological and human systems can be complex. In addition, increasing global temperatures caused by rising GHG concentrations drive trends in key baseline environmental conditions closely tied to environmental protection organizational missions, including increased proportions of precipitation falling as rain versus snow, lengthening of the growing season, elevated stream temperatures, sea level rise, permafrost melting, and ocean acidification (Melillo et al. 2014;U.S. EPA 2016c;USGCRP 2018). Many of these impacts can interact with each other to drive additional environmental changes, and/or have effects that cut across a range of media-specific endpoints, such as the direct and indirect role of wildfires in air quality, terrestrial ecosystems, and water quality.
The immediate challenge is to understand how the profound changes in driving climate conditions, both means and extremes, are now affecting, and will increasingly affect, water and air quality, ecosystems, and human health and communities, given the loss of stationarity and deep uncertainty about future changes. These insights into the diverse environmental impacts of climate change are a foundational need for improving the scientific support provided to the development and implementation of regulations, guidance, tools, and capabilities for managing these impacts as they evolve.
Successfully addressingScience Challenge 1relies, first, on integrating the existing research strengths of the public health and environmental sciences communities with the complementary research carried out within the climate science community (e.g., seeAnderson et al. 2019). Research that falls underScience Challenge 1uses scientific information on the changing statistics of climate, leveraging analysis of observed trends as well as outputs from climate model simulations, and integrates this knowledge base with observational and experimental data, modeling tools, and analytic approaches for assessing exposures, toxicity, and health outcomes. For example, to support the evaluation of climate change impacts within EPA, researchers build on core strengths in air pollution, watershed, and exposure modeling. A key task within this research portfolio is the adaptation of existing models (e.g., the Community Multiscale Air Quality model) for use in targeted assessments of vulnerabilities and emerging risks. Such model adaptation involves building capability within the models to assess climate change effects, e.g., by modifying them to receive future scenarios of key driving climate variables as inputs or by updating climate-sensitive model parameterizations. Other critical tasks include developing improved climate-related vulnerability and risk assessment methodologies; innovative decision analytic approaches and frameworks to help decision-makers manage uncertainties associated with future climate change; scenario products for use in these new approaches and frameworks; new indicators of system change to support monitoring and adaptive management under both climate change and other interacting stressors; and scientific syntheses of integrated climate change effects relevant for environmental management.
Table 1provides examples, situated within an EPA context but more broadly applicable, of key research topics, and associated knowledge gaps, related toScience Challenge 1, organized according to their focus on specific media and type of impacts: including water quality, air quality, health, and ecosystems and land, while acknowledging that a priority direction for future research is to focus more strongly on interactions of effects across media and systems (see theScience Challenge 3subsection ahead).
Critical climate-related research topics and knowledge gaps underScience Challenge 1, by major environmental media (adapted and synthesized from research narratives provided inU.S. EPA 2017)
In addition to the media- and system-specific research gaps identified inTable 1, there are several conceptual and analytical challenges that cut across all media and systems. For example, climate change is only one of several linked, local-to-global changes that will affect the environment. These include changes in population and demographics, economic growth, technology, land use, biogeochemical cycles, and environmental toxins. A critical element of climate-related research for environmental protection must be to improve understanding of how these stressors interact and coevolve with climate change to alter climate-driven impacts (e.g.,Post et al. 2012;Hewitt et al. 2016;Morefield et al. 2018). Similarly, climate change will likely impact multiple environmental management endpoints simultaneously. For example, climate change is likely to alter the fate and transport of toxic chemicals in the environment and even the sensitivity of humans and other organisms to their effects (Noyes et al. 2009;Balbus et al. 2013;Hooper et al. 2013), as well as increase risks to treatment infrastructure and waste sites, with corresponding public health consequences, as illustrated recently with hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and Maria in 2017.
Furthermore, as already discussed, climate change calls into question the assumption of stationarity which underpins a broad range of risk assessment tools and approaches. Although challenging, this reality of the climate change problem does not preclude effective risk assessment and risk management. Much progress can be made by adapting and applying core principles of risk assessment in a climate change context (King et al. 2015; Weaver et al. 2017). These include working backward from identifying the type and magnitude of impacts that would create important risks, to then examine the scientific plausibility of climate change triggering those risks, including low-probability but high-consequence outcomes (Brown et al. 2011;Kunreuther et al. 2013). This perspective aligns with emerging thinking in other areas of concern in environmental protection, such as chemical risk assessment (e.g., seeGwinn et al. 2017). While this type of approach can help clarify the extent and timing of needed response actions, it will also create new demands on the kind of information needed from the climate science community—for example from climate models—potentially opening up new research avenues as well (Weaver et al. 2013).
Finally, as introduced earlier in the paper, a greater role for knowledge and expertise from a broad range of social sciences disciplines in research related to climate impacts on public health and environmental management endpoints has been recommended by multiple review bodies (e.g.,BOSC 2016). In response, some environmental protection organizations, including EPA, have been increasing their efforts to integrate social sciences into their research programs in response (U.S. EPA 2016a;Costa and Hubbell 2016). For example, one major priority for this interdisciplinary integration underScience Challenge 1should be to improve understanding of the disproportionate impacts of climate change on environmental justice communities, including Tribal communities and communities of color, that exacerbate existing disparities (e.g.,Harlan et al. 2015;Maldonado et al. 2013;USGCRP, 2016;Mikati et al. 2018;USGCRP 2018).
The basic need underScience Challenge 2is for research to both inform the development, implementation, and assessment of actions, regulatory and otherwise, that effectively control emissions of GHGs and short-lived climate forcers over the long term, and improve understanding of the potential for both co-benefits and adverse impacts of these actions (Anenberg et al. 2010;Smith et al. 2014;Miller and Gage 2011;Potočnik and Khosla 2016;Shindell et al. 2016;West et al. 2013). Research to date related toScience Challenge 2has mainly fallen within the following categories: (1) emissions measurements and projections; (2) benefits assessment across multiple GHG emissions scenarios; and (3) analysis of the mutual co-benefits of air quality and GHG regulatory actions and transitions to alternative energy technologies. As withScience Challenge 1andTable 1,Table 2summarizes key research topics, and associated knowledge gaps, related toScience Challenge 2.
Critical climate-related research topics and knowledge gaps underScience Challenge 2(adapted and synthesized from research narratives provided inU.S. EPA 2017)
One major, cross-cutting research need is to improve understanding of how the environmental impacts of GHG emissions reduction strategies can become increasingly important as the scale of implementation grows. For instance, biofuels and natural gas have long been seen as important components of a long-term GHG mitigation strategy (Pacala and Socolow 2004;Winchester and Reilly 2015). As the production of these fuels has grown, however, environmental protection organizations have had to respond to environmental concerns over both these approaches, including changes in land use and nutrient runoff, and potential impacts on groundwater and air quality (U.S. EPA 2011;U.S. EPA 2016b;U.S. EPA 2018;Colburn et al. 2011;Vidic et al. 2013). More broadly, understanding the environmental consequences of GHG emissions reduction approaches, and developing methods to avoid adverse impacts, is critical to developing environmentally sustainable responses to climate change.
In addition, understanding the costs of mitigation must be accompanied by understanding the benefits (and co-benefits) of mitigation actions. To support such comparisons, damage functions in economic and integrated assessment models need improvement (Weyant 2014;NASEM 2016). Development of effective damage functions involves considerably more than estimating dollars per unit impact; information is needed for a wider range of impacts and to represent existing impacts more accurately (e.g., quantifying spatial and temporal variation), including impacts that cut across, or involve interactions among, sectors. Substantial work will be needed to improve estimates of benefit and impact valuations to support comprehensive benefits and co-benefits assessment at the national and subnational scale, particularly for co-benefits other than those related to air pollution. In addition, unmasking of GHG-induced warming in the coming decades resulting from continued steady reductions in conventional air pollutants is a complicating factor in designing response actions that simultaneously address both direct public health effects and climate change (Xu et al. 2018).
Finally, as withScience Challenge 1, the need for improved integration of the social and natural sciences also cuts acrossScience Challenge 2. The questions related to valuation inherently require application of economics knowledge, for which numerous key gaps exist (USGCRP 2011;Sussman et al. 2014). These include the challenges associated with valuation of nonmarket impacts, such as culturally important sites or activities (Rockman 2015). Other critical gaps exist regarding intergenerational equity and discounting, dealing appropriately with non-marginal climate change impacts, and aggregating damages over multiple regions, sectors, or impact types (Heal 2009;Neumann and Strzepek 2014). In addition, the social sciences can provide information to support planning processes and the design of policy mechanisms that better account for the deep uncertainties associated with climate change and lead to robust decision outcomes despite the uncertainties (Lempert 2014;Li et al. 2014). Finally, the integration of social science expertise is also crucial for understanding the processes of technology innovation, evolution, and adoption, including how individuals and institutions respond to economic, policy, and other drivers of change.
The fundamental, long-term challenge of climate change is the choice between transformational impacts and transformational responses—or, perhaps more likely, a combination of the two.Science Challenge 3encompasses the research needed to address the transformational nature of climate change and our responses to it, through improved understanding of the inherent complexities and interactions among affected systems, both natural and human. The scope ofScience Challenge 3is to look farther into the future, and more broadly across systems, in an effort to understand, holistically, the impacts of climate change on human health and the environment, and to apply that understanding in developing sustainable responses to those impacts. As such, it represents a synthesis across, and a logical progression from, the research directions articulated underScience Challenges 1and2.
Research categorized underScience Challenge 3is more aspirational than that described underScience Challenges 1and2, and much of what is included represents research needs or gaps. It is important in the near term, however, to begin laying the groundwork for supporting long-term organizational, institutional, and societal responses to potential impacts of climate change for which we have little, if any, past experience upon which to draw.
In this context, research to address the issues contained withinScience Challenge 3should:
Be predicated on a systems science approach that prioritizes inherently cross-media, cross-scale, and cross-discipline research.
Explicitly consider the social dimensions of change, both as part of the fundamental socio-environmental nature of climate change as a scientific problem, and as an essential element for moving the results of that science into action.
Focus ultimately on designing solutions to the risks that climate change poses to public health and the environment, evolving from the current focus on risk identification and risk characterization to the science needed to support risk management.
This approach emphasizes not only synthesizing basic climate science knowledge around key environmental management endpoints, such as air and water quality, waste management, and ecosystem health, but also across those endpoints, accounting for their critical interdependencies. Many complex, emerging challenges that will define environmental protection in the 21st century, such as the growing prevalence and severity of wildfires, and the effects on ecosystems of interactions between altered climatic conditions and environmental contaminants, will cut across stressors, media, and management targets—and will also be more difficult to address from within the confines of existing, individual, narrowly defined environmental regulations (Esty 2017). As such, addressing these issues will require planning and implementing climate-related environmental protection research from within a translational science framework, as an inherently participatory, trans-disciplinary process that relies on ongoing interactions between researchers and stakeholders across all stages of the research process, along with synthesis, assessment, and systematic public health and environmental communication efforts.
With respect to the evolution of research programs that primarily addressScience Challenges 1and2, to those capable of addressingScience Challenge 3, part of the need to is to move beyond considering the types and extent of climate change impacts projected as most likely to occur, in the near term. As climate moves increasingly outside its historical range, the potential for very large-scale, system-wide impacts grows.Science Challenge 3encompasses forward-looking risk assessment approaches that seek to understand, bound, and quantify these impacts (King et al. 2015), for example as plausible upper-bound scenarios for individually large effects, or as the consequence of complex system dynamics resulting in cascading impacts that ultimately might create substantially more severe hazards than any single initiating event. Such impacts are those we would consider unmanageable given our current state of preparation, tools, governance, and institutional infrastructure (Weitzman 2011;Bettis et al. 2016). An example of the former is sea level rise that is higher and occurs more rapidly than indicated by the central modeled projections, creating a host of new risks for densely populated coastal area (Hinkel et al. 2015;DeConto and Pollard 2016;Kulp and Strauss 2017). An example of the latter is the cascading failures that revealed previously unknown vulnerabilities experienced during Superstorm Sandy (Kunz et al. 2013), for example as impacts to emergency response or backup power during such events put healthcare systems at risk just when they are needed most (USGCRP 2018), or flooding that overwhelms wastewater treatment facilities (Hummel et al. 2018). Substantial knowledge gaps involving contributions from the social sciences limit our ability to develop sustainable responses and solutions to these risks, including understanding the characteristics of socio-environmental systems that lead to reduced vulnerability and enhanced resilience in the face of climate impacts. There is a substantial body of work (e.g.,Berkes et al. 2000;Young 2010), beyond what can be summarized here, addressing resilience from within a socioeconomic systems framework that serves as a foundation upon which to build. This understanding is crucial to developing, for instance, needed systematic review and evaluation of actual, on-the-ground adaptation and resilience practices, including for adaptive management approaches that enable ongoing evaluation and adjustment as new information is gained. Such approaches require flexibility in the environmental management paradigm, an understanding of the risks that are to be managed, and an appreciation for the risks inherent in the management strategies. They also require an enhanced capacity for monitoring and an ability to adopt alternative approaches within an overall management portfolio, as monitoring reveals more about how the future is unfolding (Brown et al. 2011;Wilby 2011).
In addition, as noted previously underScience Challenge 2, explicit actions at large scale to mitigate GHG emissions are relatively recent and represent only initial reductions relative to those anticipated being needed to effectively limit climate change over the long term. Such actions, and the potential for associated environmental consequences, are expected to expand substantially. Part of the challenge is that the global energy system is intricately connected with many other major systems—water, transportation infrastructure, agriculture, and ecosystems, among others; as such, it is fundamentally linked to the overall structure of the global economy (Geri and McNabb 2011;Hibbard et al. 2014). Large-scale changes in any of these complex systems will have consequences for the others in ways that might not be immediately apparent.Science Challenge 3incorporates life-cycle and systems analyses, including complex systems behavior (e.g., chaos, self-organization, and consequence cascades), that can provide insight into critical inflection points to inform decision makers (Bale et al. 2015). Such efforts are inherently integrative and require close interaction with researchers across agencies, institutions, and private sector organizations. Again, this area of research requires collaboration with social scientists, given the interplay between social and technological change related to energy (e.g.,Miller et al. 2013;Steg et al. 2015). Understanding the social dimensions of technology evaluation is essential for understanding barriers to adoption of new technologies and the social and economic consequences of technologies, given their effects on the net environmental impacts and benefits of energy production and use (e.g.,Sovacool 2009). For example, the availability of low-cost transportation fuel has led to social changes and attitudes that are far beyond what the developers of automobiles could have imagined (Flink 1988). Current trends in electric vehicles, ride-sharing, and autonomous driving have the potential to create transformational technological and social change at least as profound as the original introduction of the automobile. Understanding the potential for both co-benefits and adverse impacts, social as well as biophysical, provides important information for decision makers as they develop mitigation strategies. The “energy paradox”—the potential for increased total energy use as efficiency increases—is one of numerous social drivers and impacts having direct implications for climate mitigation and adaptation, including governance, behavior, institutional dynamics, communication, education, and public engagement (Sorrell 2009). Current research efforts within environmental protection organizations are only just beginning to develop more holistic approaches for understanding these types of complex systems and their critical linkages and feedbacks. As Jorgenson et al. (2018) note, “current knowledge about transitions to a low-carbon economy and deep decarbonization is limited by a lack of empirical evidence: there are no known cases in which societies or nations have deliberately and systematically deeply decarbonized.”
Ultimately, climate change will require environmental protection organizations to respond with transformational actions, moving beyond the incremental, nearer-term changes in existing programs discussed underScience Challenges 1and2. Research into the nature of sustainable environmental management under conditions of change, transition, and transformation will be needed to meet this challenge over the next few decades, necessitating a greater role for knowledge and expertise from a broad range of social science disciplines in research related to climate change, including in areas such as governance, conflict, institutional behavior, and public trust in and acceptance of science (e.g.,Dunlap and Brulle 2015;Young 2010). Conducting this necessary interdisciplinary research brings its own challenges and opportunities, many of which have been identified through research on interdisciplinary teams (e.g.,NAS 2005). Despite these challenges, such knowledge and expertise will be critical in bridging the gap between our understanding of natural systems and how that understanding can be transferred to and applied by communities and social institutions that seek to respond to environmental conditions that are outside the range of historical norms.
This paper puts forward a framework for an integrated, interdisciplinary research portfolio specifically designed to improve understanding of how climate change, now and in the future, intersects with fundamental organizational missions to protect human health and the environment. This framework is based on the needs of environmental protection decision makers for actionable knowledge, information, data, and tools to support their management responses to the risks posed by climate change, as well as the similar needs of their many diverse stakeholders. It encompasses the major scientific questions, knowledge gaps, and opportunities for continued progress within climate-related research portfolios intended to support environmental protection missions. It also highlights areas where integration across traditionally disparate bodies of existing disciplinary knowledge can lead to improved decision support today, and transformation of environmental protection to meet future needs.
This framework is intended to provide guidance rather than a blueprint, given the multitude of different issues faced by different organizations. In essence,Science Challenges 1and2address environmental issues with which we have considerable experience; they will become increasingly challenging to address as nonstationarity becomes more apparent, the energy system evolves, and solutions involve greater direct public participation. The changing climate and large-scale changes in energy technologies, along with other global-scale drivers, will transform environmental problems beyond past experience, requiring analogous transformation in research topics and approaches as described underScience Challenge 3.
Organizations dedicated to environmental protection face enormous challenges from climate change. Over the past few years, EPA and its sister organizations have made substantial strides toward conceptualizing the research needed to face those challenges. The framework presented here is intended to capture something of that effort and to initiate a broadening of the conversation to engage a wider swath of the relevant scientific communities outside, as well as inside, the government.
While this paper has benefited greatly from conversations with colleagues within and beyond EPA’s Office of Research and Development, the opinions presented here represent those of the authors and not necessarily the views and policies of EPA. In addition, the authors would like to thank two anonymous reviewers whose comments and suggestions helped to significantly improve the paper.
Conflict of InterestThe authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
Publisher’s note:Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894