An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Email:olgabeatrice.carcassi@polimi.it. Phone: +39 331 210 6578.
Received 2021 Sep 3; Accepted 2022 Mar 23; Revised 2022 Mar 22; Issue date 2022 Apr 19.
Permits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

The climate crisis
is urging us to act fast. Buildings are a key
leverage point in reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, but the
embodied emissions related to their construction often remain the
hidden challenge of any ambitious policy. Therefore, in this paper,
we explored material GHG neutralization where herbaceous biobased
insulation materials with negative net-global warming potentials (GWPs)
were used to compensate for building elements that necessarily release
GHGs. Different material diets, as well as different building typologies,
were modeled to assess the consequences in terms of biobased insulation
requirements to reach climate neutrality. Our results show that climate-neutral
construction can be built with sufficient energy performance to fulfill
current standards and with building component thicknesses within a
range of 1.05–0.58 m when timber- and bamboo-based construction
is chosen. Concrete-based ones require insulation sizes that are too
large and heavy to be supported by the dimensioned structures or accepted
by urban regulations. Moreover, a time horizon of 20 years is more
appropriate for assessing the contribution of material shifts to biobased
materials in the transition period before 2050. This paper demonstrates
that this is technically feasible and that climate neutrality in the
construction sector just depends on the future that we choose.
Keywords:climate-neutral construction, embodied GHG, fast-growing biobased material, GWPbio, material GHG compensation
This article explores the consequences
in terms of material
choices to reach climate neutrality at the construction scale. To
reverse the current material pyramid, three material diets are designed:
cement-based, timber-based, and bamboo-based. With these optimized
material selection strategies, high- and low-carbon material emissions
are compensated by the appropriate amount of climate-negative or herbaceous
biobased materials to reach climate-neutral construction.
The
climate crisis is prompting an intensive examination into the
reduction of anthropogenic greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.1Because the latest IPCC report highlighted that
limiting warming to close to 1.5 °C or even 2 °C will be
beyond reach without immediate, rapid, and large-scale reductions
in GHG emissions,2the question of budgets
and orientations for future industries has become more stringent.3The new Green Deal in the EU4and many national climate-neutral initiatives have been
engaged.5,6Although current efforts are still clearly
not in line with planetary boundaries,1the objective of a net-zero emission target by mid-century is an
accepted goal.
Buildings are clearly identified by policy makers
as a key leverage
point to reduce GHG emissions.7Current
research has traditionally focused on the use-phase emissions of buildings
(called operational GHG emissions),8,9while neglecting
the emissions arising from the manufacturing and processing of building
materials (called embodied GHG emissions).10,11However, the embodied GHG emissions of energy-efficient buildings
are approximately responsible for 45–50% of the total GHG emissions
when a full life cycle is considered, unlike 20–25% of buildings
that follow the current energy performance regulations.12,13Evidently, a compromise between embodied and operational emissions
exists.14Nonetheless, when normalizing
for the building service life and transforming the values to the combined
sum of embodied and operational GHG emissions throughout the years
of the life cycle,12the operational emissions
can be cut with the energy transition toward low-carbon alternatives
and virtuous user behavior.11In addition,
the production and construction emissions are actuated in the early
building life-cycle stage according to today’s energy mix and
material production technologies without the possibility of being
diminished.11,15,16In fact, embodied emissions are manifested as a “carbon spike”,
that is, a consistent amount of emissions occurring now in a short
span of time,17,18with the risk of consuming the
remaining GHG budget that should be employed to manufacture low-carbon
energy production plants and meet the climate neutrality target for
2050.19,20
Strategies for mitigating embodied
construction emissions currently
focus on the reduction of building construction and demolition waste,21on the enhancement of material efficiency9or by choosing alternative materials characterized
by lower embodied emissions.22Although
these strategies could reduce the emissions for construction by 50%,
they cannot stop releasing GHGs and, as a consequence, reach “absolute
zero” emissions.23For example,
most buildings require cement for concrete foundations or structures,
and complete decarbonization is not possible due to energy-intensive
manufacturing processes and emissions related to calcination reactions.24−26New frontiers for carbon-neutral concrete solutions have been explored27,28but cannot cope with the scale of the construction boom due to future
urbanization29and the pace of decarbonization
required to stay within planetary boundaries.30
Unlike absolute zero emissions, “net zero” implies
the possibility of offsetting the remaining GHG emissions with carbon
dioxide removal or “negative emission” strategies.31Biobased materials fall into this category,
as they are able to remove carbon dioxide through photosynthesis with
the growth or regrowth of the plant once the biomass is harvested.32,33Accordingly, the replacement of concrete by timber in construction
is an interesting option, as it simultaneously reduces the emissions
coming from concrete production and allows for the storage of carbon
in the building stock. Buildings can then be considered a global carbon
sink,33but the question of resource availability
limits the extent of a full transition from concrete to timber for
structural materials.35Depending on the
local conditions, economic constraints, and resource availability,
timber cannot be imposed everywhere in the world without the risk
of reducing carbon sinks from forests, as has been recently observed
in Europe.36In the Global South, bamboo
is a promising solution to avoid massive deforestation of tropical
forests.33,37Additionally, recent studies have demonstrated
the efficiency of substituting GHG-intensive materials with fast-growing
or herbaceous biobased materials, for example, bamboo and straw, due
to their carbon removal potential and reduced life-cycle emissions.32The advantage of choosing these biomasses instead
of woody ones is that they exhibit a shorter rotation period of regrowth
(approximately 1 year), hence a higher yield,35and they are usually byproducts of croplands that can be transformed
into high-value applications,38which avoids
land use competition between buildings and food production. Nonetheless,
in the literature, there is no consensus on how to model biogenic
carbon released and reabsorbed during the biobased material life cycle.39The established approaches can be summarized
as static 0/0 or +1/–140,41and dynamic,42,43with carbon uptake before or after construction, which is able to
include the impact of timing of the carbon emissions and the influence
of the rotation period related to the biomass growth.44Moreover, Guest and coauthors45proposed an index, the biogenic global warming potential index (GWPbio index), which is able to directly compute the carbon
dioxide regeneration with the biogenic CO2pulse emissions.
Indeed, this index is capable to consider the storage period of harvested
biomass with different rotation periods in the anthroposphere as a
negative value to be considered at the beginning of a standard life
cycle assessment (LCA), both for a 100 or 500-year time horizon, in
a semistatic way. Among them, the dynamic one is able to include the
impact of the timing of the carbon emissions and the influence of
the rotation period related to the biomass growth.44The benefit of using a dynamic approach can also be appreciated
in solving the inconsistency of different time frames observed with
traditional LCA when replacing building assemblies and components
during building service life.12Only when
considering these dynamics can the potential of achieving climate
neutrality be estimated, and stakeholders can be assisted in defining
optimized material selection strategies.
Unfortunately, not
all construction materials can be replaced with
herbaceous materials, and a compromise between GHG emissions and biobased
materials should be made. In fact, by leveraging their negative biogenic
GWP, this research proposes a new way of approaching the design of
climate-neutral construction by quantifying herbaceous biomass, or
climate-negative materials, needed to bring to net-zero the total
embodied emissions of emitting, or climate-positive, materials. While
looking for analogies with other human activities,46we would like to position the debate in this current paper
on the appropriate material diet required to build climate-neutral
construction. Under this innovative vision, the thickness of insulation
was designed for climate neutrality rather than for energy efficiency,
as it is clear that, under the current energy transition goal, the
net-zero emissions embedded in materials have to be the primary objective
to pursue.47
In this paper, the dynamic
LCA approach was used to consider the time dependence of biogenic
carbon and of building element replacement. We assessed three different
material diets by decomposing the building into six construction elements
that play a major role in building embodied emissions,48namely, aboveground and underground structures,
windows, waterproofing membranes, finishing—divided into internal
pavement, walls, ceilings, and exterior walls—and insulation.
By mixing more conventional, for example, concrete, and unconventional,
for example, bamboo, ingredients as building materials, we designed
different material diets to achieve climate neutrality. The material
diets were defined according to the gradual use of herbaceous materials,
from the insulation up to the structural level: cement-based, timber-based,
and bamboo-based (Figure1a). Each material is classified as climate-positive or climate-negative
(Figure1b) according
to its carbon release and removal potential. More precisely, the materials
used were divided into three main categories (i) high-carbon, (ii)
low-carbon, and (iii) climate-negative materials, according to their
resulting net-GWP value. The net-GWP is the sum of the GWP at a 100-year
index of each material and the CO2eqremoval of biobased
materials calculated according to the accounting approach proposed
in Paragraph 2.3. The concrete-based diets with concrete structures
represent the reference to the “business as usual”,
as concrete will remain the reference material for a majority of construction.49For all diets, the insulation materials were
herbaceous ones, in particular, reed mats, straw, and hemp fibers
with different carbon removal capacities. The replacement of building
elements was considered. In particular, the building service life
was assumed to be 60 years.50The service
life of the structural elements corresponds to that of the building,
that is, 60 years, together with the waterproof membrane in polyethylene.14All finishing, window and window frames have
a service life of 30 years.51Regarding
the biobased insulation, 60 years were chosen as suggested by Göswein
et al. 202152(see Paragraph 1.4 in theSupporting Information).

(a) Material diets. From
left: Concrete-based, timber-based, and
bamboo-based material diets. (b) Material classification according
to the net-GWP value that divides them into climate-positive (high-carbon
and low-carbon) or climate-negative materials (seeParagraph S2.3).
The essential information
of the materials used in the project
are collected in Table S4 in theSupporting Information. The λ-values were noted only for finishing and insulation
materials because they were useful in evaluating the thermal performance
of the external envelope, while the rest of the data were used to
evaluate the net-GWP for each material.
To test climate neutrality,
we focused on new residential building
typologies in the European context because the European Union aims
to become the first climate-neutral continent by 2050 with the “Green
Deal for Europe” in line with the Paris Agreement.4However, the building decomposition used, with
insulation designed to compensate emissions and not to fulfil the
energy requirements of building codes, makes these building typologies
much more appropriate to a wider context than Europe. In particular,
we utilized the four typical building typologies (BT), namely, single-family
house (SFH), terraced house (TH), multifamily house (MFH), and apartment
block (AB) to create the geometrical reference buildings from the
Tabula/Episcope database.53We reported
the results only for the statistically significant values of these
data sets, which are the low whisker (0th quartile), up whisker (4th
quartile), and median (2nd quartile) (see Figure SI1, Table SI1, and
Paragraph 1.1 in Extended Methods in theSupporting Information), to obtain three geometrical configurations that
would represent the whole data set. For these geometrical configurations,
a parametric model was set up to quantify the structural mass incidence
per gross floor area of a given structure over the total number of
stories of the building. Consequently, we computed the material quantity
(kg/mRES2) and the related GHG emissions (kg
CO2eq/kg) to calibrate the climate neutrality for the three
diets. The herbaceous material quantity corresponds to a specific
insulation thickness whose architectural and structural feasibility
is assessed to respond to the maximal linear loads allowed according
to the structural preliminary dimensioning (seeSupporting InformationParagraph 1.2.4) and passive house
requirements for the operational energy targets.54Finally, the 100-year time horizon global warming potentials
(GWP100) and the 20-year time horizon global warming potentials
(GWP20) for each BT and material diet are compared for
evaluation, as a long-term horizon may hide the contribution of material
shifts to biobased diets to reach climate neutrality by 2050 (seeSupporting InformationParagraph 3). All data
were normalized according to the reference energy surface (RES).
To define
the carbon footprint of the different structural systems, a parametric
model was set up in MATLAB55(seeSupporting InformationAnnex A for the script
andSupporting InformationParagraph 1.2
for extended methods) to quantify the material incidence per gross
floor area of a given structure over the total number of stories of
the building. Reinforced concrete as well as timber and engineered
laminated bamboo were chosen for the abovementioned ground structures,
while the foundation was made with reinforced concrete and eventually
deep foundation out of steel when needed. Moreover, four different
structural configurations were defined (see Figure S2 in theSupporting Information). A reinforced concrete
(RC) structural scheme was designed for concrete-based diets as in
situ cast concrete columns and walls supporting a reinforced concrete
plate. The structural scheme for timber-based diets represents a platform
timber frame (PTF) system composed of walls with offsite assembled
load-bearing elements (massive sawn timber and OSB panels) and beams
in solid wood. Engineered cross-laminated bamboo (CLB) was used for
the bamboo-based structural scheme, which was modeled as load-bearing
walls and floor panels. Finally, a post and beam (PB) frame structure
with diagonal bracing and floor panels was specifically designed for
high-rise structures for both timber- and bamboo-based buildings with
more than 10 stories. All values were finally normalized according
to the gross floor area of the module to obtain normalized values
and were applied to the different building typologies according to
the diets and building height (see Figures S4–S8 in theSupporting Information).
To quantify total CO2eqemissions,
we performed a dynamic LCA for all construction materials. In particular,
when the materials are produced at year 1, the dynamic method can
be simplified with tabulated values of the GWP as defined by the IPCC
2013 method (GWP100,IPCC), and Guest and co-authors simplified
semistatic indices (GWPbio index) to account for the
biogenic carbon cycle.45When building
elements are replaced after 30 years, both the fossil emissions (GWP100,dyn) and the CO2uptake (GWPbio index,dyn 31–60) are calculated with the “DynCO2” calculation tool.56The net-GWP of construction materials is the
sum of the GWP at the 100-year index of each material expressed in
kg CO2eq/kg and the CO2removal of biobased
materials, here called GWPbio.45Details of the GWPbiocalculation can be found in Paragraph
1.5 in theSupporting Information. In this
study, ISO Standard 14067:201857was used
for fossil-related emission calculations, whereas EN 15804:202158was assumed to define scope and objectives,
functional unit, and system boundaries. Here, the calculation was
limited to the cradle to gate stages (Modules A1-3) as well as waste
disposal (Module C4). For biobased materials, the waste disposal scenario
considered was incineration; for steel, it was recycling, whereas
for residual materials, it was landfilling.
After the computation
of the total mass of the construction product used in the building,
we multiplied it for each net-GWP value for the four BT and the three
material diets as calculated in the climate neutralityeq1
where
GWPnet,bis the specific net-GWP value calculated
for each diet,
GWPnet,iis the net-GWP
value of each material, expressed in kg CO2eq/kg,
miis the
mass of each construction material, expressed in kg/mRES2.
The total construction
positive GWP100, based on fossil
emissions, needs to be neutralized by the fast-growing biobased insulation
(see Figure S11 and Table S6 in theSupporting Information). The mass of insulation to be installed in the
envelope that can compensate through negative CO2emissions
and the positive GWP100of material production and final
disposal can be calculated according toeq2
where
minsis the mass of insulation
needed to achieve climate neutrality in 100 years normalized according
to the RES (kg/mRES2),
GWPnet,iis the net-GWP
value of a generic noninsulating material, expressed in kg CO2eq/mRES2,
GWPbio,insis the GWPbiovalue
of the selected insulation material, expressed in kg CO2eq/kg.
We performed this calibration with
three herbaceous biobased insulation
materials. From the Ecoinvent59databases,
we chose reed mats, which exhibited the highest net-GWP value (max),
hemp fibers, which exhibited the lowest value (min), and straw characterized
by a value between the two (med).
In conclusion, we evaluated
the architectural and thermal feasibility
of the quantity of insulation obtained. First, the wall thickness
was calculated according toeq3
where
twis the mean thickness
of the envelope,
minsis the mass of insulation,
in kg/mRES2,
ρinsis the volumetric mass of the
insulation, in kg/m3,
Seis the total surface
of the envelope, in m2/mRES2.
The total surface of the envelope
(Se) is the sum of the exterior wall,
roof, and basement
area because we made the assumption of filling each envelope element
with a constant insulation level. Second, we checked if theU-value of the three different material diet wall assemblies
fulfilled the most stringent European passive house (U/value ≤0.10 W/m2K60) standards.
Once the different biobased wall insulation thicknesses
and their
related thermal performance are computed, it is possible to calculate
the corresponding line load on the structure to control that it does
not exceed the one considered during the structural dimensioning for
different material diets (see Paragraph 1.7 in theSupporting Information).
Figure2shows the
material quantities
required for climate-neutral construction depending on the diet and
the BT.

(a) Material diets shown as a pyramid logic in a wind rose graph
representing the quantity (kg) of materials needed to have climate-neutral
construction per mRES2(Material Intensity).
The quantity of the material is expressed for the four building typologies.
Each building typology is represented here by the median geometrical
configurations and median herbaceous insulation, that is straw, for the three diets, namely, CEM =
cement-based diet; TIM = timber-based diet; and BAM = bamboo-based
diet. (b) Zoomed in view of the windows and the waterproofing membrane
to appreciate their values because they are of another order of magnitude
in comparison to the other building elements. See Table S8 in theSupporting Informationfor the rest of the data
and for the other geometrical configurations and biobased insulations.
The graph was implemented in JavaScript starting with theHighcharts.comscript available
online.
Cement-based diets are the most
mass-intensive diets for all building
typologies. The insulation required to bring to zero the total construction
emissions ranges between 449 and 608 kg/mRES2depending on the BT when straw is used. In contrast, bamboo-based
diets are the least mass-intensive and require between 65 and 110
kg/mRES2of straw to reach climate neutrality,
even if bamboo is transported from Asian countries.61Future local cultivation of bamboo in some southern European
regions would further decrease the impact of bamboo-based construction.
The timber-based diets are closer to the bamboo-based diets (115–170
kg/mRES2). Structure and foundation control
building weight, regardless of diet. In contrast, windows and membranes
have a small influence on the final mass.
To
select climate-negative materials for building envelopes, we performed
an architectural feasibility analysis. First, the mass quantities
were converted into volumetric quantities to define the spatial footprint
that designing climate-neutral construction would demand. Second,
to compensate for the use of climate-positive materials with climate-negative
materials, the necessary volumetric ratios among these two material
families, or material diet indices (MDIs), were calculated (Figure3). The greater the
value is close to 1, the greater the two material volumes (negative
vs positive) are similar. The MDIs are usually greater than 1, except
for one bamboo-based diet when using reed mats in an apartment block
typology and up whisker building geometry. Usually, climate-negative
material volumes are larger than climate-positive material volumes,
whereas for this specific bamboo-based exception, we need fewer climate-negative
materials to reach climate neutrality. Depending on BT and material
choices, MDIs range between 0.74 and 26.46 m3/m3, indicating that every cubic meter of a carbon-emitting material,
for example, glass, concrete, and so on, should be compensated by
0.74–26.46 m3of climate negative-materials, that
is, biobased ones. Additionally, the results highlighted that for
each diet, the insulation material choice controls the MDI regardless
of building typology.

Box plot to show the MDIs between the volume of climate-negative
and climate-positive materials (yaxes) needed to
reach climate-neutral construction with the use of three different
biobased materials for the three diets (xaxes),
namely, hemp fibers (min), straw (med), and reed mats (max). The three
diets are CEM = cement-based diet; TIM = timber-based diet; and BAM
= bamboo-based diet. The graph is implemented in JavaScript starting
with theHighCharts.comscript available online. For the data, see Table S7 in theSupporting Information.
The results for the envelope thermal
performance (Table1) show two possible situations. The first one is when the construction
obeys the strictestU-value defined for the passive
house standard and fulfils the operational energy requirements with
the established envelope thickness. The second one is when construction
does not cope with the energy requirement and therefore requires a
higher insulation level. This would contribute to an additional increment
of the carbon removal potential, and this extra contribution can be
spent on other building components or installations, for example,
PV systems and energy storage. The latter appears in very few cases,
mainly for timber and bamboo-based diets, as the demonstration that
the envelope composition obtained with a climate-neutral construction
design strategy in most cases is able to meet the energy requirements.
Consequently, designing for climate neutrality with material GHG compensation
also allows energy-efficient building standards to be reached.

Red values representU-values
> 0.10 W/(m2/K), for example, that do not respect
the most stringent value for passive house standards, with the necessity
of adding the insulation material to achieve the energy performance
goals. Yellow-filled values represent line-load > 0.29 kN/m, for
example,
the maximal value calculated for the insulation material during structural
predimensioning. Bold values in green cells represent thicknesses
respecting both the passive house energy and structural requirements.
The three geometrical configurations are Up whisker, Low whisker,
and Median. The four building typologies include SFH, TH, MFH, and
AB. The three diets are CEM = cement-based diet; TIM = timber-based
diet; and BAM = bamboo-based diet for the three herbaceous insulations,
namely, hemp fibers (min), straw (med), and reed mats (max).
All thicknesses reported inTable1correspond to climate-neutral
construction depending
on insulation type and BT. However, only the bold values in green
cells meet both the thermal and structural requirements. For the hemp
fibers (with the worst net-GWP value), the wall thicknesses can reach
unfeasible values as high as 10.44 m depending on structural choices
and building typology. Even with timber or bamboo structures, some
BT (e.g., AB) would require 1.2 to nearly 3.38 m of hemp materials.
The straw values remain for most construction solutions within an
acceptable range for the wall thickness when timber or bamboo structures
are used, except for the timber-based AB case with a 2.24 m wall thickness.
They are usually smaller than 1 m and can be in a range of 0.39–1.16
m for many BT. With a concrete structure, the straw wall thicknesses
would be larger than 2 m. For timber- and bamboo-based diets, the
use of reeds results in thicknesses that are smaller than the necessary
ones to respond to the thermal requirements and close to 2 m for concrete-based
diets. Regardless, its larger density (180.5 kg/m3) with
respect to straw (95 kg/m3) could make it less favorable
when controlling the line load for structural capacity (e.g., timber-based
diet for the MFH). In northern Europe, current construction usually
accounts for a wall thickness of 40–50 cm.53,62,63This paper showed that with straw or reed
insulation, it would be possible to build similar wall dimensions
with timber and bamboo structures. In contrast, concrete construction
requires insulation sizes that are too large and heavy for the dimensioned
structures or accepted by urban regulations, even if complying with
thermal needs. Indeed, all calculated insulation thicknesses are representative
of climate-neutral construction. Nonetheless, larger thicknesses correspond
to more thermal performant walls but heavier and urban-impeding solutions,
as in the case of cement-based diets; in contrast, lighter but less
thermal performant solutions are correlated to smaller thicknesses,
such as in the case of bamboo-based diets. The timber-based ones are
similar to the bamboo-based construction but still require a more
insulation material. These results highlight the need for a tradeoff
between material embodied emissions and structural and thermal performances.
Hence, once the basic requirements in terms of GHG emissions are set
and the corresponding dimension of insulation is defined, the typical
iterative design process should be performed to ensure an optimal
configuration of the final building in terms of other performances
(e.g., structural consistency, operational energy, sound proofing,
fire resistance, etc).
Our findings demonstrate that it is possible
to build climate-neutral construction thanks to the use of herbaceous
biobased insulation materials. The building element dimensions can
be controlled, and the thermal performance is for most cases satisfied
in accordance with the high-energy efficiency standard. In fact, the
contemporary construction built with straw has similar thicknesses
(e.g., architect Werner Schmidt’s straw-bale construction with
0.80 m thick walls64). Hence, new climate-neutral
construction would have a similar appearance as the nonconventional
biobased ones currently built in northern countries, and construction
technologies already available on the market can be used. The only
exception is the CLB, which is used as the structural material for
tall construction, that is, more than three stories, is limited thus
far.65We included the scenario of having
multistory construction with CLB in the perspective that the market
will move in this direction soon.
According to our results,
we can then build climate-neutral construction that complies with
the operational energy requirements and avoids the carbon lock-in
situation that is feared when energy-saving requirements are implemented
without considering the consequential embodied emissions.19
Regarding the structural design, we did
not dimension the timber
and bamboo elements according to fire safety requirements. Nevertheless,
no exposed structural membranes are assumed in the design because
protecting layers out of gypsum or clay plaster are assumed for fire
protection.66Another assumption we made
is the possibility of adopting biobased insulation for basement insulation,
which is not recommended due to the high water absorption risk and
consequential fast decay. To reduce the risk, we added a waterproofing
membrane that increases embodied emissions but removes high-moisture
content risks. An alternative biobased solution would be cork due
to its nonputrescible properties, but costs and availability make
it difficult to reach the full European market.67,68
Finally, it is important to mention that the GHG-fossil emissions
linked to the use of concrete could be further reduced by implementing
low-carbon concrete solutions.27,28Another strategy is
the optimization of structural concrete design, which could be facilitated
in the near future by BIM and automation construction.69−71In this paper, we used conventional concrete emissions to represent
the business as usual in our construction practices, but available
alternatives allow us to reduce concrete-based emissions by a factor
of 2.23,26This would lower the insulation volume by
the same order of magnitude and therefore lead to the possibility
of building concrete climate-neutral construction with wall dimensions
similar to those of current construction but still larger than those
needed in the case of timber and bamboo structures. Finally, the results
show that some building typologies are much more favorable for climate-neutral
construction than others. MFHs and THs require a much lower wall thickness
than ABs. This should provide a strong incentive for city planners
to densify cities where MFH and TH are more favorable than AB.
Our work provides a practical approach that can be used by policy
makers to propose incentives for climate-negative technologies for
the building and construction industry. Moreover, thanks to this concept,
designers can be assisted during the early-design phase and become
aware of the embodied GHG emissions resulting from their construction
material choices and the physical ratios (MDIs) among the climate-negative
and climate-positive ones. These preliminary considerations could
guide them in the choice of the structural solutions and the resulting
envelope dimensions that could be limited by urban-planning regulations.
It is important to note that all calculations
presented in the current work were performed with the GWP100impact assessment method within a 100-year time horizon. Although
this is the calculation method used in most climate models and LCA
calculations of construction, a long time horizon may hide the contribution
of material shifts to biobased climate neutrality in the transition
period before 2050. The closest calculation method to approximate
this immediate climatic goal would be to calculate the GWP with a
time horizon of 20 years (GWP20).Figure4shows the deviation of the results between
GWP100and GWP20for each BT and material diet
when all materials, except the compensating insulation, are considered
(seeSupporting InformationParagraph 3).
More precisely, the total construction emissions to be neutralized
by means of biogenic insulation are presented. It clearly shows that
no significant differences can be seen for concrete and timber-based
diets, whereas emissions from the bamboo-based diet become negative
even without insulation. This is due to the very short rotation period
of bamboo and would indicate that the construction is climate-negative
after 20 years (in 2040) and finally becomes climate neutral in a
longer time span (by 2120) when biogenic CO2is emitted
at the end of the building service life. Consequently, it confirms
the main results of this paper, showing that it is possible to reach
climate neutrality at the building scale and before 2050, when biobased
insulations are used and combined with appropriate building typology
(MFH and TH).

Emissions expressed in kg CO2eq/mRES2to neutralize by biobased insulations. The values are
reported
for all material diets, building typologies and if the GWP used is
with a time horizon of 20 or 100 years. The four building typologies
include SFH, TH, MFH, and AB. The three diets are the cement-based
diet, timber-based diet, and bamboo-based diet.
We thank the master’s
students Marco Lolli,
Toni Maksan, Pietro Minotti, and Dario Quaglia (ETH Zurich) for their
precious contribution and support in the development of this work
in all its phases.
greenhouse gas
global warming potential
life cycle assessment
biogenic
global warming potential index
building typologies
single-family house
terraced house
multifamily house
apartment block
Supporting Information
reinforced concrete structural
scheme
1
platform timber
frame structural
scheme 2
engineered
cross-laminated bamboo
structural scheme 3
posts and beams structural scheme
4
reference
energy surface
material diet index
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.est.1c05895.
Methods and results and
MATLAB Script (PDF)
The authors declare no
competing financial interest.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
Articles from Environmental Science & Technology are provided here courtesy ofAmerican Chemical Society
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894