An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Email:timothy.skone@netl.doe.gov.
Received 2022 Jan 11; Accepted 2022 May 10; Revised 2022 May 6; Issue date 2022 Jun 21.
Permits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Renewable natural gas (RNG) sources
are being considered in future
energy strategy discussions as potential replacements for fossil natural
gas (FNG). While today’s supply of RNG resources is insufficient
to meet U.S. demands, there is significant interest in its viability
to supplement and decarbonize the natural gas supply. However, the
studies compare the life cycle global warming potential (GWP) of various
RNG production pathways are lacking and focus mostly on a singular
pathway. This effort is an attempt to close this gap and provide a
comparison between the life cycle GWP of three major RNG pathways
and the FNG pathway. The three RNG pathways evaluated are anaerobic
digestion (AD), thermal gasification (TG), and power-to-gas (P2G)
using various feedstocks. The functional unit is 1 MJ of compressed
RNG ready for injection into the natural gas transmission network.
The results show that RNG production is not always carbon neutral
or negative. Depending on the pathway, the GWP impact of RNG production
can range from −229 to 27 g CO2e/MJ compressed RNG,
with AD of animal manure and AD of municipal solid waste being the
least and the most impactful pathways, respectively, compared to the
10.1 g CO2e/MJ impact for compressed FNG.
Keywords:life cycle analysis, renewable
natural gas, greenhouse gas, global warming potential, natural
gas, anaerobic digestion, thermal gasification, power-to-gas
Renewable natural gas (RNG) is being
considered an alternative
to fossil natural gas. This study finds that not all pathways for
RNG production are carbon negative or neutral.
Renewable
natural gas (RNG) sources are being considered in future
energy strategy discussions as potential replacements for fossil natural
gas (FNG). There is significant interest in the viability of RNG;
however, there is a lack of resources that compare the life cycle
global warming potential (GWP) of various RNG production pathways.
In this paper, we model all major RNG pathways using a single, consistent
framework.
This work is a life cycle assessment (LCA) of three
RNG pathways
with multiple feedstocks and technologies. The three pathways evaluated
are anaerobic digestion (AD), thermal gasification (TG), and power-to-gas
(P2G). AD generates biogas by breaking down organic matter in the
absence of oxygen. Feedstocks in the AD pathway include animal manure,
landfill gas, municipal solid waste, and wastewater sludge, within
which the biogas from wastewater sludge can be upgraded to RNG using
one of the three biogas upgrading technologies: methyl diethanolamine
(MDEA) scrubbing, monoethanolamine (MEA) scrubbing, or high-pressure
water scrubbing (HPWS). The TG pathway uses a wood waste feedstock
and represents three gasification technologies: air, catalyst, and
steam gasification, where a controlled amount of air, steam, or catalysts
reacts with available carbon in the biomass in a gasifier at high
temperatures to generate syngas, which is then cleaned, upgraded,
and passed through methanation to produce RNG. The P2G pathway uses
renewable electricity (wind power) to produce hydrogen (H2) from water electrolysis, which is then reacted with CO2to produce RNG.
The combinations of pathways, feedstocks,
and technologies result
in a total of 10 different scenarios, whose system boundaries start
at the AD unit for the AD scenarios, transport of feedstock for the
TG scenarios, and electrolysis of water for the P2G scenarios. The
boundary ends in all of the scenarios with the compression of produced
RNG to the required pressure for injection into the natural gas transmission
network. The RNG scenarios have a functional unit of 1 MJ of compressed
RNG. We also compare the RNG scenarios to their corresponding business-as-usual
(BAU) scenarios, which have a functional unit of 1 MJ of processed
FNG before it enters the transmission network and waste management
of the same amount of feedstock that is needed in its corresponding
RNG scenario to produce 1 MJ of RNG. We model the pathways using two
analytical approaches:
Attributional LCA of RNG pathways
compared to the corresponding BAU scenarios
System expansion LCA of RNG pathways
As with any energy technology, including
FNG, RNG is going to have
similar potential risks in handling and may occasionally lead to extreme
leak/escape events. While we recognize that these extreme events will
lead to significantly higher emissions in a short period of time,
this study models steady-state operations and does not represent any
unexpected extreme events.
RNG presents interesting
decarbonization opportunities as a substitute
for FNG since RNG can be a direct drop-in replacement that is not
coal or liquefied natural gas (LNG). The American Gas Foundation1reported that RNG deployment could achieve 101–235
million metric tons (MMT) of greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reductions
by the year 2040.
Within RNG pathways, studies have already
compared many of them
at a high level. Fendt et al.2compared
the three main pathways in terms of their respective development states,
efficiencies, and economics. The authors determined that the thermochemical
pathway (i.e., TG) had the highest efficiency at the time of publication,
though all three concepts needed outside intervention to be competitive
in the natural gas market. Di Salvo and Wei3presented a case study for the industrial sector in California,
focusing on RNG from the TG and P2G pathways and its injection into
the existing natural gas pipeline. Findings included that RNG produced
via the TG and P2G pathways could displace about 17 and 6% of 2050
levels of industrial natural gas demand in California, respectively.
Other existing research in this field mainly focuses on certain
specific pathways or certain stages of the supply chain. Li et al.,4Lee et al.,5and Mills
et al.6performed LCA of different AD pathways
using wastewater sludge. Patterson et al.7and Walker et al.8also analyzed AD but
with food waste or wheat feed and dairy farm manure as feedstocks,
respectively. Walker et al.9performed
an LCA of a P2G pathway based in Ontario, Canada. These individual
studies provided values to which the results from this report can
be compared.
A more recent study, Lee et al.,10performed
an LCA on anaerobic digestion of multiple wet waste feedstocks of
which the wastewater sludge and swine manure feedstock pathways align
with the pathways in this study. The boundaries of the two studies
are in alignment except for the RNG compression stage, which is not
included in Lee et al. They estimated the GWP impact of AD on wastewater
sludge and swine manure to be 27 and −146 g CO2e/MJ
RNG, respectively.
The three RNG production pathways examined
here are also compared
with the BAU pathway (i.e., traditional FNG). Previous works by the
United States (U.S.) Department of Energy (DOE) National Energy Technology
Laboratory (NETL) have evaluated FNG systems. Littlefield et al.11performed an LCA of the extraction and power
generation of FNG, finding that the life cycle GHG emissions from
the current U.S. natural gas supply chain are 19.9 g carbon dioxide
equivalents (CO2e)/MJ based on the 2016 data year. Rai
et al.12used 2017 data to determine that
the average U.S. natural gas system emits 14.1 CO2e/MJ
of delivered natural gas.
Our work builds and expands on the
current state of literature
by providing a robust analysis of multiple production pathways from
start to finish of the supply chain, as well as standardizes the results
to a single functional unit. In doing so, all of the major RNG production
pathways and their results can be directly compared with each other
and with the FNG business as usual, all within a consistent framework.
We model a waste-to-energy (WTE) RNG case
and a BAU case to compare
the production of RNG to the production of FNG and conventional waste
treatment.
In the RNG case, we model three different
pathways—AD, TG, and P2G—using a variety of feedstocks.
The AD pathway begins with an anaerobic digestor unit, the TG pathway
begins with feedstock transport, and the P2G pathway begins with electrolysis,
and all pathways conclude with compression of the RNG product for
injection into the natural gas transmission network. The RNG scenarios
have a functional unit of 1 MJ of pipeline-ready RNG from various
feedstocks. Upstream emissions associated with waste production are
excluded from the RNG case boundary because waste is not being specifically
produced for RNG production but rather would have already been produced
in a BAU case. As we applied the cutoff approach for waste products
and assumed their carbon content was 100% biogenic, no positive CO2emissions are accounted for in the RNG process releases and
there are no negative CO2emissions associated with CO2uptake. Additionally, feedstock transport is excluded from
the AD boundaries because it is assumed that the anaerobic digester
is located on-site, where waste management would conventionally take
place. More details on pathway-specific boundaries are discussed in
the following sections.
AD is the natural
process of breaking
down organic materials in the absence of oxygen, generating a biogas
composed of methane (CH4), carbon dioxide (CO2), and small amounts of water vapor (H2O) and other trace
gases. The natural process of AD can be mimicked in a built system
called an anaerobic digester.13We model
AD using the following feedstocks as the organic material input:
The source of AM feedstock was calculated
from Argonne National Laboratory’s (ANL) Greenhouse gases,
Regulated Emissions, and Energy use in Technologies (GREET) model
RNG database.14Of the operational facilities
in the database producing AM-based pipeline-ready RNG, 25% of the
animal population feeding the digester is dairy cow, while the remaining
75% is swine. The boundary for AD via AM begins with the AD process
and ends with compression of RNG for pipeline injection.
In the LFG pathway, the landfill
acts as an anaerobic digester, and LFG refers to the capture of gas
released during the decomposition of waste in the landfill. While
LFG is listed as an AD feedstock, it is technically the equivalent
of the biogas output in the other AD pathways. The LFG pathway boundary
begins with upgrading and cleaning of the LFG and ends with compression
of RNG for pipeline injection.
In the
MSW pathway, the organic portion of waste conventionally going to
landfill is diverted to an anaerobic digester. The breakdown of the
contribution of organic materials to the U.S. average mixture of landfilled
waste is 8.1% wood, 21.6% food, and 7.9% yard trimmings.15The MSW pathway boundary begins with AD and
ends with compression of RNG for pipeline injection.
In the WWS pathway, the sludge
output of the wastewater treatment process is the input to the RNG
pathway. Although WWS has the highest moisture content of all of the
AD feedstocks, no pretreatment is necessary to prepare it for the
AD process. The WWS pathway boundary begins with AD and ends with
compression of RNG for pipeline injection.
The biogas obtained
from the AD process is cleaned and upgraded at a co-located facility
to remove CO2, H2O, and other trace gases to
produce an ∼99% CH4content RNG product. The RNG
is then compressed to make it pipeline-ready. We model three biogas
cleaning and upgrading technologies:16
HPWS: This is a
two-stage process
with a high-pressure reactor column in the first stage. In this stage,
cold water flows downward, while biogas flows upward under high pressure.
The soluble gases like CO2dissolve in water, leaving mostly
CH4to exit this column. The second stage consists of a
depressurization column, where CO2is degassed by releasing
the pressure from the solution.
Amine scrubbing using MDEA: This is
a two-stage process with an adsorption and a desorption tower. In
the first stage, an amine scrubbing solvent reacts chemically with
the CO2in the biogas and adsorbs and retains it in a solution
and the CH4portion of the biogas passes through this tower
untouched, thus creating a concentrated stream of bio-CH4. In the second stage, the solution containing the amine solvent
and the adsorbed CO2is heated to its boiling point, which
reverses the chemical reaction, and the CO2is discharged
into the atmosphere and the regenerated amine solution is cooled and
reused. MDEA is a common chemical used as a scrubbing solvent.
Amine scrubbing using
MEA–This
is the same process as item (2) above, except MEA is the amine in
the scrubbing solvent instead of MDEA.
We model HPWS technology as the default cleaning and upgrading
technology for biogas from AM, LFG, MSW, and WWS feedstocks; the additional
two technologies mentioned above are also modeled for the WWS feedstock.17−20The AD pathway also produces a digestate as a co-product that can
displace the production and application of fertilizer to land. However,
since our system boundary does not include upstream burdens associated
with acquiring feedstock, we exclude the digestate to prevent double-counting
of avoided emissions from upstream agriculture processes related to
RNG production.Figure1shows the supply chain and the boundary for the AD pathway.

RNG case AD
supply chain and boundary (upstream burdens of feedstock
acquisition are not included in the boundary).
TG uses wood waste—which
is traditionally landfilled—as the feedstock, which is pretreated
to dry and resize the biomass before feeding it into the gasification
unit.21
Gasification is a thermochemical
process through which biomass is converted to syngas, which is composed
of CO2, CH4, H2, carbon monoxide
(CO), nitrogen (N2), H2O, higher hydrocarbons,
and other impurities. During the gasification process, a controlled
amount of air, steam, or catalysts reacts with available carbon in
the biomass in a gasifier at high temperatures.22We model three gasification methods—air, steam,
and catalyst—and use data from the literature to estimate the
input and output energy, product, and GHG flows.
The resultant
syngas from the gasification goes through multiple
screening, scrubbing, heating, and cooling cycles and reacts with
catalysts that remove all impurities, H2O, and heavy hydrocarbons.
We model a simplified process wherein we account for all energy, product,
and GHG flows associated with syngas cleanup. This process is based
on the specifications defined by the Gas Technology Institute (GTI)
in their report on RNG.21
The resultant
clean syngas goes through a methanation reactor,
where the H2, CO2, and CO in the clean syngas
react to form bio-CH4or RNG, which is then compressed
in preparation for pipeline injection.Figure2shows the supply chain and the boundary
for the TG pathway.

RNG case TG supply chain and boundary (upstream burdens
of feedstock
acquisition are not included in the boundary).
The P2G pathway uses renewable electricity
to produce H2from water electrolysis, which is then reacted
with CO2in the methanation step to yield RNG, which is
compressed for pipeline injection.Figure3shows the supply chain and the boundary
for the P2G pathway.

RNG case P2G supply chain and boundary.
The RNG produced from all pathways
must be compressed to a sufficiently high pressure for injection into
the existing natural gas transmission network. The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) suggests an inlet pressure of 50–1000
pound-force per square inch gauge (psig) depending on the pipeline
and the interconnect location.23We use
a conservative approach and model compression of RNG to 1000 psig
using a reciprocating compressor. We model the compression by deriving
a reduced-order relationship from NETL’s unit process for fluid
compression.24Using this equation, we
calculated an energy requirement of 1.03 × 10–4kg of natural gas to compress 1 MJ RNG to 1000 psig.Section S3shows the equation used to estimate
the energy requirement and discusses the method for generating that
equation.
The BAU case
has a functional
unit of 1 MJ of processed FNG and the amount of waste managed via
conventional methods for each RNG feedstock that would otherwise be
needed to produce 1 MJ of RNG. For example, if “x” kg of animal manure is needed to produce 1 MJ of compressed
RNG, then the BAU represents 1 MJ of FNG and waste management of “x” kg of animal manure. Since we evaluate pathways
with different feedstocks, there is a BAU scenario corresponding to
each feedstock for each pathway.
Figure4shows the generic supply chain and the boundary
for the BAU case.

BAU case supply chain and boundary (upstream burdens of
waste acquisition
are not included in the boundary).
We use the 2017 U.S. average GHG
profile for FNG from NETL’s ONE Future Phase 2 report12to model the BAU cases. The production, gathering
and boosting, and processing stages of the natural gas supply chain
are included, and the results are scaled to represent 1 MJ of processed
FNG before it enters the transmission network. The resultant GWP impact
for FNG is 10.1 g CO2e/MJ of compressed gas.
We evaluate the GHG profile
for the conventional waste management of each feedstock in the RNG
WTE pathways and add it to the FNG GHG profile (detailed calculations
are presented inSection S2); the resulting
aggregate GHG impacts are the BAU values against which we compare
the RNG production GHG profiles. Our methods for accounting for conventional
waste management are as follows:
We assume the same split in feedstock
as described in theAnaerobic Digestionsection above for the BAU waste management case. Dairy cow manure
and swine have conventionally been managed via one or more of the
following techniques: flush systems, deep pit, liquid/slurry, anaerobic
lagoon, solid storage, daily spread, or scrape/slurry systems.25We use dairy cow- and swine-specific U.S. GHG
Inventory emissions data to estimate a GHG emission rate of 0.12 g
of CO2e per g of AM for conventional management of feedstock
in the BAU case.
Landfills that emit more than 25 000
metric tons of CO2e per year are required to report their
emission and activity
data to the U.S. EPA’s Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program (GHGRP).
We use this reported data to evaluate an average GHG emission rate
of 0.27 g CO2e/g of landfill waste for the conventional
management of these feedstocks in the BAU case.26This emission rate is applicable to the LFG, MSW, and wood
waste BAU cases since all of these feedstocks would have been conventionally
managed in a landfill.
The sludge
from wastewater
treatment plants can either be applied to land, incinerated, or landfilled.
In the U.S., 50% of the available sludge is not beneficially utilized,
and the remaining 50% is applied to land.27For the BAU scenario, we assume sludge to be applied to land and
estimate a GHG emission rate of 0.009 g CO2e/g of untreated
liquid sludge.28
In this work, we use publicly available literature
and data sources
to model flows and processes.Section S1 and Table S1show the estimated values of all parameters and their sources.
We construct a process-based life cycle model for the RNG pathways
defined in the sections above and compare their GWP impacts to the
BAU scenarios for the same unit of feedstock used and energy generated.
We used the open source openLCA software for modeling and constructed
a unit process for each block of the pathways, as shown inFigures1–44. We use a 100-year GWP
of 1, 36, and 298 for CO2, CH4, and N2O, respectively, as developed by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) in its fifth assessment report (AR5).29
In this work, we use data points from various literature
sources
and model a range of values in openLCA to represent this variability.
We use the average value of the literature data as the expected model
value for flows that are informed by two data points. For the flows
informed by three data points, we assign a triangular probability
distribution function and use the central data point as the expected
model value, while the two end data points are used to establish the
bounds of variability. For flows informed by four or more data points,
we again use a triangular approach, where the end data points are
used to establish the bounds of variability, while the average of
the central points is calculated and used as the expected model value.
We also model two subscenarios for each feedstock and pathway,
one where the process of RNG generation uses a parasitic flow of the
RNG product to satisfy internal heat requirements and the other where
the process of RNG generation uses purchased FNG to meet internal
heat requirements. These subscenarios differ not just due to the emission
profile of FNG or parasitic RNG flow but also because it changes the
feedstock requirement for the production of 1 MJ RNG.
The BAU
scenario accounts for a functional unit of 1 MJ of processed
FNG before it enters the transmission network and waste management
of the same amount of feedstock that is needed in its corresponding
RNG scenario to produce 1 MJ of RNG. The FNG profile is modeled using
the NETL life cycle natural gas model11and by scaling the results to represent 1 MJ of processed FNG before
it enters the transmission network. The data from the sources listed
inTable S1are used to perform an attributional
LCA for waste management of the different types of feedstocks.Table S2lists the amount of feedstock required
to generate 1 MJ of RNG for the two subscenarios, one where parasitic
RNG is used and the other where purchased FNG is used to supply the
internal heat requirements. Note that more feedstock is needed in
the parasitic RNG scenarios compared to FNG to account for the RNG
that is being used for internal heat purposes.Section S2also shows the data behind the estimated GWP impacts
of conventional waste management of different feedstocks.
Our results are expressed in terms of CO2e per MJ of
natural gas ready for pipeline transport and include attributional
boundaries that account for the cradle-to-gate burdens of RNG with
comparisons to conventional (BAU) natural gas pathways and system
expansion boundaries that include displacement of conventional waste
management methods.
The cradle-to-gate
GWP impact of various RNG pathways when using a parasitic RNG flow
to meet the internal heat requirements was in the range of 17.1–68.1
g CO2e/MJ compressed RNG compared to 17.2–65.1 g
CO2e/MJ compressed RNG when using purchased FNG. In both
cases, the pathway with the smallest impact is LFG, and the pathway
with the largest impact is AD of MSW. We can better understand the
relative GHG impacts from RNG by comparing them to corresponding BAU
scenarios.Figures5and6show the GWP impact of all of the RNG
pathways along with their corresponding BAU scenarios, using parasitic
RNG flow and purchased FNG in the RNG cases, respectively (Section S5shows the numerical data behind these
figures). The TG pathway generates excess electricity in the methanation
step, which is included in the attributional LCA boundary through
system expansion. The error bars in these figures show the variability
in the data from the literature that is used to calculate the parameters
in the model. However, there is not enough data to understand the
variability behind the BAU scenarios; hence, the BAU bars in the figures
do not have error bars to represent this variability.

BAU and RNG cases’
GWP impacts, when using a parasitic RNG
flow to meet internal heat requirements.

BAU and
RNG cases’ GWP impacts, when using purchased FNG
to meet internal heat requirements.
AD of AM is the most beneficial method of generating RNG as compared
to its BAU scenario. This is mainly because in BAU scenarios, AM emits
a significant amount of CH4during traditional management
techniques; therefore, capturing this CH4to produce RNG
reduces the GWP impacts by 79 and 78% for the pathway with parasitic
RNG flow and purchased FNG, respectively.
This analysis also
shows that not all pathways are beneficial in
terms of GHG emissions as compared to BAU. The AD pathway with MSW
and WWS as feedstock has a higher GWP impact when these feedstocks
are used to generate RNG as compared to BAU. And although the P2G
pathway does not have a corresponding waste management scenario since
it is only using renewable electricity to generate RNG and not a waste
feedstock, it is still more impactful than producing FNG.
Along
with understanding the total GWP potential of the scenarios,
it is also important that we understand the breakdown of the impacts
of various GHGs in the proposed scenarios. The detailed breakdown
of the GHGs is shown inSection S4.
To evaluate the
GHG impacts of the RNG pathways from a system expansion approach,
the GWP impact of the waste management in the BAU scenarios is subtracted
from the total GWP impact from the corresponding RNG scenario. The
impact of 1 MJ of processed FNG is not subtracted in the system expansion
approach because the production of RNG does not displace the same
unit of FNG directly, although it does displace the unit of waste
directly that would otherwise have to be treated and/or managed.Figures7and8show the results for the system expansion LCA of all of the
RNG pathways with parasitic RNG flow and purchased FNG, respectively.
AD of AM is the least impactful pathway, with a net GWP impact of
−229 and −188 g CO2e/MJ compressed RNG for
scenarios using parasitic RNG flow and purchased FNG, respectively.

System
expansion LCA GWP impacts of all RNG pathways using a parasitic
RNG flow to meet internal heat requirements.

System
expansion LCA GWP impacts of all RNG pathways using purchased
FNG to meet internal heat requirements.
In contrast to the attributional perspective, the system expansion
perspective has higher impacts for AD of AM, AD of WWS, and TG scenarios
using purchased FNG to meet internal heat requirements as compared
to the respective scenarios using parasitic RNG. This is because less
feedstock is now required to produce RNG, thus reducing the waste
management credit for these scenarios.
This study does not include
the upstream of the CO2source
for the P2G scenario. However, if we were to assume that the CO2comes from a nearby saline aquifer and use the GWP impact
of 14.78 kg CO2e/kg CO2sequestered,30then the GWP impact of the P2G pathway would
increase by ∼5%. This number would vary depending on the source
of CO2.
This LCA shows that the
process of RNG production in itself is
not always carbon neutral or carbon negative. The GWP impact of RNG
production is highly dependent on the production pathway and feedstock.
The system expansion approach shows that RNG production via AD
of AM and TG of wood wastes via air and catalyst gasification technologies
leads to net negative GHG emissions ranging from −229 to −13
g CO2e/MJ of compressed RNG when using a parasitic RNG
flow, as compared to a GWP impact of 10.1 g CO2e/MJ of
compressed FNG (production through processing stages).11
The LFG pathway and TG of wood wastes
via steam gasification have
net positive GHG emissions ranging from 6.2 to 9.0 g CO2e/MJ of compressed RNG when using a parasitic RNG flow. However,
these pathways are still preferable as they have a smaller GWP impact
as compared to the 10.1 g CO2e/MJ impact for compressed
FNG.11The AD MSW, AD WWS, and P2G pathways
have higher GWP impacts than the production of FNG.
The AD of
wastewater sludge and animal manure pathway results are
comparable to the results from Lee et al.,10and the difference between the manure feedstock pathway can be attributed
to the difference between the source of manure. This study assumes
a 75–25% mix of swine and dairy cow manure, while Lee et al.
represent 100% swine manure.
With this paper, we hope to provide
a thorough GWP impact analysis
for multiple waste-to-RNG pathways that can be utilized by communities
to evaluate the best waste management approach based on their waste/feedstock
availability and generate a renewable fuel in the process. The attributional
results of this analysis were intended to express relative differences
between various waste product feedstock systems for producing RNG
and should not necessarily be used as an unmodified data source in
other LCAs, as additional flows (e.g., biogenic CO2emissions)
may be needed. The system expansion results may be used directly (i.e.,
without additional flows), but the LCA practitioner will need to consider
whether the BAUs as modeled here also apply to their systems. Investment
decisions about particular feedstock pathways for RNG production should
also consider techno-economic aspects, which were not considered in
this study.
The authors would like to thank Donald J. Remson,
Matthew
B. Jamieson, H. Scott Matthews, and Michelle Krynock for their overall
guidance and review of the draft versions of this paper.
anaerobic digestion
animal manure
Argonne National Laboratory
fifth assessment report
business-as-usual
methane
carbon monoxide
carbon
dioxide
carbon dioxide equivalent
Department of Energy
Environmental Protection Agency
fossil natural gas
gram
greenhouse gas
Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program
greenhouse gases, regulated
emissions,
and energy use in technologies
Gas Technology Institute
global warming potential
hydrogen
water
vapor
high-pressure
water scrubbing
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change
kilogram
life cycle assessment
landfill gas
liquefied natural
gas
methyldiethanolamine
monoethanolamine
megajoule
million metric tons
municipal solid
waste
nitrogen
National
Energy Technology Laboratory
power-to-gas
per square inch gauge
renewable natural gas
thermal gasification
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.est.2c00093.
Additional modeling parameters,
conventional waste management
data, equation for RNG compression, speciated emissions for the pathways,
and more detailed inventories of life cycle GWP impacts than provided
in the manuscript (PDF)
The manuscript
was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have
approved the final version of the manuscript.
This project was funded
by the Department of Energy, National Energy Technology Laboratory,
an agency of the United States Government, through a support contract.
Neither the United States Government nor any agency thereof, nor any
of its employees, nor the support contractor, nor any of their employees,
makes any warranty, express or implied, assumes any legal liability
or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of
any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents
that its use would not infringe privately owned rights. Reference
herein to any specific commercial product, process, or service by
trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise does not necessarily
constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by
the United States Government or any agency thereof. The views and
opinions of the authors expressed herein do not necessarily state
or reflect those of the United States Government or any agency thereof.
All images in this paper were created by NETL, unless otherwise noted.
The authors declare no
competing financial interest.
S.R. is now an employee
of GTI Energy, and
J.L. is now an employee of Aramco Americas.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
Articles from Environmental Science & Technology are provided here courtesy ofAmerican Chemical Society
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894