An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Address correspondence to: Caleb Dresser, Department of Emergency Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 1 Deaconess Rd, Boston, MA 02215 (email:cdresser@bidmc.harvard.edu).
Corresponding author.
Revised 2023 Nov 21; Received 2023 Jun 4; Accepted 2023 Dec 22; Issue date 2024 Jun.
The US health care system faces mounting pressure to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and adapt to the impacts of climate change; motivated institutions and an engaged health care workforce are essential to the development, implementation, and maintenance of a climate‐ready US health care system.
Health care workers have numerous profession‐specific and role‐specific opportunities to address the causes and impacts of climate change.
Policies must address institutional barriers to change and create incentives aligned with climate readiness goals.
Institutions and individuals can support climate readiness by integrating content on the health care implications of climate change into educational curricula.
Keywords:climate change, workforce, education
Climate change is increasingly recognized as a preeminent healththreat.1,2It has numerous direct and indirect health impacts and exacerbates health inequities.1,2,3Recent health‐related activity on climate change has focused on public health research, climate mitigation policy and advocacy, and efforts to improve sustainability at health care institutions.4,5,6Much of this work is being done on an ad hoc or volunteer basis and is often focused on the role of specific professionals such as doctors, nurses, and epidemiologists or single‐issue or single‐item institutional sustainability initiatives.
The need for a climate‐ready health care system, defined as one that minimizes greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and is prepared for and resilient to the impacts of climate change on facilities and patients, is becoming increasingly apparent. Recent climate‐related natural disasters and the development of climate readiness initiatives by the US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) have made the urgency of this issue clear.1,7Achieving a climate‐ready health care system will entail a substantial reframing of incentives and activity throughout the health care system.
Moving the US health care system toward a climate‐ready posture will depend on two key factors: creating motivation for institutions to overcome existing barriers and become climate ready and engaging the US health care workforce in achieving climate readiness. Experience with previous systemic changes in US health care suggests that achieving large‐scale transformation depends on aligning the actions of millions of health care workers with new goals and that to do so institutions must be incentivized to achieve these goals and provide avenues for their staff to engage effectively. Historical experience with achieving Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) compliance and implementing electronic health records (EHRs) provides important lessons for policymakers, health care leaders, educators, and health care workers as they seek to address the escalating impacts of climate change.
In the following perspective, we explore opportunities to move the US health care system toward climate readiness through institutional motivators, efforts to address barriers to action, and broad‐based engagement of the health care workforce.
Climate change is a threat to the US health care system and the patients it serves.1,8In the near term, climate‐responsive hazards, including wildfires, hurricanes, flooding, and severe weather, threaten health care facilities while heat waves affect the health of millions of patients, in some cases leading to increased mortality and health care use.9Over longer time periods, rising sea levels and aridification will affect the operation of many health care facilities while drought, food insecurity, and related social impacts are expected to result in poverty, migration, and mental health impacts for many people. Marginalized populations, including people who identify as Black, Indigenous, and People of Color (BIPOC) are disproportionately impacted by these negative sequelae of climate change, which intersect with other racial health inequities.10Present‐day and future intensification of these impacts is the result of ongoing use of fossil fuels, such as coal, oil, and natural gas, which leads to harmful air pollution and rising levels of heat‐trapping GHGs such as carbon dioxide and methane.11
The US health care system faces mounting pressure to achieve climate readiness, which includes both actions to reduce health care's contributions to climate change (mitigation) and actions to improve the ability of the health care system to provide care and protect patients’ health despite the escalating effects of climate change (adaptation and resilience). Recent climate impacts emphasize the urgency of this issue. Hospitals in the northeast and midwest have evacuated in the face of extreme rainfall and flooding made more probable by climate change.12,13Emergency department volumes and emergency medical services (EMS) response times increased dramatically during heat waves in Texas, California, the Pacific Northwest, and elsewhere.13,14At least one hospital has burned to the ground, and several others have evacuated during wildfires in the west.15Nursing home residents have died during and after hurricanes in the south as have patients with chronic illnesses who found themselves suddenly unable to access health services.16,17As climate change intensifies, such tragedies are expected to occur with increasing frequency unless steps are taken to prevent them.
Medical societies, government agencies, health care workers, and patients have begun to demand that the US health care system work toward sustainability and plan for the effects of climate change. The National Academy of Medicine now hosts an Action Collaborative on Decarbonizing the US Health Sector,18and more than 100 medical societies have joined the Medical Society Consortium on Climate and Health.19Health care workers and health professions students have become increasingly active advocates with a variety of initiatives, including the Nurses Climate Challenge and the Planetary Health Report Card, which exert pressure on health care institutions and medical and nursing schools.20,21The HHS recently created a federal Office of Climate Change and Health Equity, joined 50 other nations in committing to “resilience in our communities and decarbonization in our health systems,”22and announced plans to work with the National Health Service of the United Kingdom to develop sustainable health care supply chains.23Further changes to federal policies related to climate change, health, and health care are anticipated in the future.
The US health care industry is responding to these pressures with a variety of sustainability and resilience initiatives. More than 60 hospitals and health care systems have committed to the Biden administration's White House Climate Pledge to achieve net zero GHG emissions by 2050 and build more climate‐resilient systems,24and many others have made commitments or taken steps to reduce their carbon footprint and adopt sustainable practices and supply chains. The Joint Commission has joined the White House Climate Pledge, is urging GHG emissions reductions of 50% by 2030 and net zero emissions by 2050, and plans to engage with the HHS and other segments of the health care sector to support a comprehensive effort for decarbonization in health care.25Outside organizations including Health Care Without Harm and Practice Greenhealth are developing programs to help health care organizations improve their sustainability in a cost‐effective manner.26Health professional education is adapting to the needs of a new generation of health care workers who expect to face escalating impacts throughout their careers, and many programs now offer climate‐related content to their students.21,27These actions represent the forefront of what will need to become a large‐scale, whole‐of‐health–care transformation if climate readiness is to be achieved throughout the US health care system.
Actions to achieve climate readiness in health care can be grouped into three broad categories: mitigation, meaning the reduction of GHG emissions; adaptation, the steps taken to prevent health or health care impacts from climate‐related hazards; and resilience, which in this context means the ability to continue to provide health care or maintain health despite impacts that have occurred.
Immediate, aggressive reductions in GHG emissions are essential to minimize future climate change.1,2Health care accounts for approximately 8.5% of US GHG emissions and about 4% of worldwide GHG emissions.28Institutions and their staff can take steps to reduce health‐care–related emissions through approaches, ranging from leadership or peer group tone‐setting to technical solutions that affect energy use and supply chains.29Health professionals and health care institutions can also leverage their role to advocate for societal actions that support a clean energy transition in health care and beyond.5,6,8
Escalating hazards related to climate change, ranging from extreme heat and wildfires to severe storms and flooding, are already affecting health care systems and the patients they serve.1,3The health care workforce and leadership can take steps to prepare health systems and patients for the effects of climate change so that hazards do not translate into damage or health harms. These steps may include hardening health care facilities, advocating for improvements to infrastructure that support health care such as the power grid, and interventions to prevent impacts on patients who are medically vulnerable.
When impacts from climate‐related hazards do occur, it is important that health systems continue to serve their patients and that patients continue to maintain their health in the community. Resilience actions range from wellness check‐ins for community‐dwelling elders during heat waves to planning for continuity of hospital operations if the primary power, water, and communications infrastructure is disrupted.
Climate change mitigation, adaptation, and resilience can be implemented at scales ranging from federal policy initiatives to individual patient care plans. As the US health care system takes steps to mitigate and adapt to climate change, it is important that these actions also address existing health inequities and avoid creating new ones—a principle that is aligned with the concept of a “just transition” and supported by the federal government's Justice40 Initiative.30
Although climate readiness initiatives focused on reducing GHG emissions and preparing for the impacts of climate change appear to be an obvious solution, it is important that proposed policies address existing barriers to action.
First, financial and regulatory constraints are omnipresent. The US health care system is highly regulated, complex, and operates on narrow and unstable margins.31Reimbursement changes, staffing costs, maintenance costs, and other financial stressors can limit discretionary spending for social responsibility, long‐term planning, and preparation for rare but impactful events. In some systems, long‐term survival of the institution itself is in doubt,32which can curtail long‐term investments and expose institutions to risk of closure following climate shocks.
Second, understaffing can limit ability to address emerging issues.33Recommendations that staff counsel patients on health risks associated with heat waves or to take extra steps to appropriately dispose of waste may be unachievable if they are already stretched beyond safe limits. In addition, most health care systems still lack dedicated staff members focused on health care sustainability, waste reduction, health care system resilience, and other relevant technical domains; budget shortfalls may also constrain future hiring.
Third, lack of knowledge remains a substantial obstacle to effective planning and action.34Whereas medical education and, to some extent, other curricula are beginning to include climate change‐related content,21,27these initiatives principally affect trainees entering the health care workforce. Education of current health care system leadership and health care workers on clinical and institutional impacts of climate change and opportunities for climate readiness remains limited. When education is available, it is typically voluntary.6
Together, these challenges mean that most health care institutions require a clear source of motivation to undertake climate readiness actions, and the actions undertaken must be achievable with existing personnel and be either cost‐neutral, externally funded, or involve new revenue streams.
Health policies are often directed at key motivators of institutional behavior, including regulation, certification and accreditation, and financial incentives including reimbursement.35Each policy serves a different role in motivating the behavior of health care institutions and involves a different set of external institutions or government bodies that define standards and guidelines, conduct inspections and audits, or assign value.36
Regulatory action is most useful for defining minimum allowable standards or requiring actions that are necessary but not otherwise incentivized. Useful cases in health care range from mandating medical screening examinations for patients with emergencies to defining mandatory nursing ratios.37,38In the context of climate readiness, regulatory opportunities range from defining minimum hospital wildfire protection standards to requiring prearranged cross‐credentialing of clinical staff from adjacent health care organizations to allow cross‐system staffing after hospital evacuations.39
Certification and accreditation are important motivators that can encourage institutions to achieve excellence in specific domains. For example, opportunities to achieve benefits associated with stroke center accreditation have likely contributed to improved access to this resource.40Accreditations for institutional sustainability and climate resilience could provide specific metrics and motivation for achieving goals aligned with national climate change mitigation and adaptation policies.41As increasing amounts of federal funding become available, such certifications and accreditations could help institutions compete for future funding. Institutions may also see benefits related to public image and competitive advantage against other health care organizations.
Financial considerations, including reimbursement, are a substantial motivator of overall institutional strategy. Whereas many health policies focus on reducing costs, for example through alterations to the fee‐for‐service model, in some cases reimbursement has been tied to specific clinical metrics or outcomes with the goal of incentivizing certain institutional behaviors: reimbursements tied to compliance with sepsis management guidelines are one example.42A similar approach could be used to motivate institutions to address inequitable health outcomes associated with climate change or incentivize timely and effective treatment of key climate‐responsive pathologies such as heatstroke.
In addition to regulation, certification, and reimbursement, other factors can sometimes motivate institutions toward change.35Grant funding, particularly for research, is a powerful motivator for the development of infrastructure and capabilities at academic medical centers. Targeted grants could increase research attention toward climate change impacts, adaptation, and related health inequities.43Block funding contingent on specific institutional indicators and actions has been used to good effect, for example, as an incentive for health care organizations to adopt meaningful use of EHRs.44Similar approaches could be used to reward achievement of key climate readiness goals. Competition with other health care systems is also a powerful motivator. If organizations perceive mitigation or adaptation as providing a competitive advantage through improved public image, better access to care, or improved outcomes during climate‐related extreme weather events, it is possible market forces could supplement other motivators, though further study of this topic is needed.45
Finally, access to information is an underappreciated institutional motivator. Information on actual institutional risk exposure can change the calculus for health care leadership: investments in flood protection might suddenly appear prudent in comparison to potential impacts from future flooding.46,47Health care sustainability initiatives often result in cost savings. One study, examining the impact of waste reduction, reduced energy use, and improved operating room efficiencies, estimates that implementation of programs at health care institutions nationwide could save more than $5.4 billion over a five‐year time span.48Organizations such as Health Care Without Harm and Practice Greenhealth have been developing methodologies, case studies, and communities of practice to help health care institutions understand opportunities to achieve cost savings through improved efficiency and reduced waste, even in the absence of new state or federal funding.26Some organizations may be motivated to act by increased awareness of existing opportunities to improve institutional risk posture or operating efficiency.
Workforce engagement has been essential during past transformations of the US health care system and will be essential to achieving climate readiness. There are more than 18 million health care workers in the United States, each with specific connections to climate change, health, and health care.49Health care professionals have an important role to play in moving the US health care system toward sustainability and ensuring that it provides high‐quality, equitable care despite the escalating impacts of climate change.6,8
Previous transformations of the US health care system have relied heavily on the engagement of health care workers across a wide spectrum of professions and roles. Starting in 2009, the move from paper to EHRs became a feature of federal health care policy. This process included substantial financial incentives but created challenges including altered workflows, training, and institutional procedures.50Implementation required systems’ development in collaboration with end users, high‐level institutional commitments, transition programs, widespread retraining, and uptake by millions of health care workers.44,50Similarly, whereas HIPAA created legal requirements around medical record confidentiality, it has been the actions of millions of individual health care workers and administrative staff that have kept records safe in the decades since 1995. Sustaining these policies requires ongoing engagement and education of the health care workforce; therefore, universal mandatory training of health care workers on both EHRs and HIPAA has become standard.
Achieving climate readiness will depend on comparable levels of engagement across the health care workforce. Although regulators and payers can set standards and provide incentives, climate readiness implementation will depend on the actions of millions of health care workers. Roles will vary dramatically depending on profession. Some actions, such as decarbonizing health care systems, will be transformative, while others, such as counseling patients on how to protect themselves from heatwaves and wildfire smoke, will require indefinite effort.
Every health care worker has opportunities to advance climate readiness (Table1). These opportunities are a function of the decision‐making authority, technical skills, trust, patient contact, and other characteristics associated with each profession and role. Specific opportunities for health care workers are explored in the following sections. Supporting health care workers in taking these actions will be an important aspect of climate readiness at health care institutions.51
Health Care Worker Climate Readiness Opportunities by Field
Set institutional sustainability, adaptation, and resilience goals.
Build a culture of efficiency and preparedness.
Design financially sustainable initiatives.
Source from sustainable and disaster‐resilient supply chains.
Develop waste diversion and recycling programs.
Advise on strategic direction and coordinate sustainability efforts.
Analyze metrics to reduce environmental impacts and adhere to regulatory requirements.
Coordinate hospital response during crises.
Integrate climate science into planning for future hazards.
Integrate sustainability messaging into institutional trainings and communications.
Incorporate sustainability into job descriptions, operational roles, and performance evaluations.
Lead food waste reduction initiatives.
Move toward plant‐based menu options.
Reduce facility‐level GHG emissions and waste.
Identify and address institutional vulnerabilities to climate hazards.
Lead initiative to reduce pharmaceutical waste and improve medication‐related efficiencies.
Take steps to ensure patients have access to key medications during and after disasters.
Educate patients who are considered vulnerable on ways to stay safe from climate hazards.
Develop disaster and evacuation plans that reflect unique mobility or physical limitations of their patients.
Act as trusted advocates for both mitigation and adaptation efforts in response to climate change.
Help patients develop individual disaster plans and plan strategies for avoidance of heat‐related illness and limiting exposure to polluted air.
Lead efforts to reduce waste and health‐care–related GHG emissions.
Counsel patients on protecting themselves from climate‐related hazards.
Encourage institutional changes for climate mitigation and resilience.
Communicate health risks associated with climate change and the importance of reducing GHG emissions.
Educate patients, peers, and policymakers on the health implications of climate change.
Guide policies to address climate change causes and impacts from a health and health care perspective.
Develop and lead evidence‐based approaches for health protection and continuity of health care services in a changing climate.
Work with patients to address anxiety and postevent mental health impacts related to anticipation and impacts of climate change.
Identify plans and resources for high‐risk individuals to avoid exposure to climate hazards such as heat and flooding.
Connect impacted persons with shelter, housing, or social services after climate‐related disasters.
Develop and implement sustainability plans in clinical and office areas.
Address climate vulnerabilities through staff training and unit‐level preparedness.
Discontinue use of harmful anesthetic gasses such as desflurane.
Implement processes to reduce waste, including avoidance of single‐use equipment when possible.
Reduce energy use through equipment sharing and energy‐efficiency.
Take steps to ensure continuity of essential services and avert loss of specimens during disasters.
Ensure safe sustainable use of medical devices (reusable when possible) and appropriate use of personal protective equipment.
Ensure surveillance for regionally novel pathogens and ongoing education of the workforce about emerging infectious disease threats.
Lead sustainability initiatives in the reuse or disposal of equipment.
Ensure equipment and staff are available during and after disasters.
Work with patients to identify and mitigate risks in their home.
Ensure continuity of care and connect patients with resources during and after climate‐related disasters.
Ensure that the person they care for can continue to receive key medications, access medical care, and travel to safety during a disaster.
Reduce GHG emissions by minimizing idling time and investing in electric ambulances.
Ensure access to emergency care during climate‐related disasters through prior planning for anticipated hazards and patient needs.
EMS, emergency medical services; GHG, greenhouse gas.
Health care leaders are in a position to translate institutional motivators into transformative changes that focus on accountability, scalability, and standardization in achieving climate mitigation, adaptation, and resilience throughout their organizations. It is important that these efforts include clear financing strategies or leverage cost savings associated with sustainability initiatives.52Adapting to an evolving regulatory, accreditation, and reimbursement environment will be increasingly important as climate‐oriented health policies are developed and implemented at national and subnational scales. Health care leaders will also need to anticipate and respond to escalating physical impacts from climate hazards.
Certain health care leadership roles are associated with specific climate readiness opportunities. Supply chain emissions account for 82% of health care attributable GHG emissions.28Purchasing managers can address these emissions by implementing circular supply chains and embedding sustainability considerations into purchasing policies, processes, and contracts.53Tools exist to estimate carbon emissions associated with these decisions.54Purchasing and pharmacy managers can also establish resilient sourcing or reserves of items that are vulnerable to supply chain disruptions, as occurred during the national saline shortage following Hurricane Maria.55EMS leaders can plan for surges in call volume that accompany extreme weather events, including heat waves, and can take steps to reduce GHG emissions by investing in electric ambulances.56Sustainability officers can coordinate institution‐level sustainability priorities; support program design and implementation by bringing knowledge, best practices, and resources from outside the institution; and analyze metrics to increase transparency, assess opportunities, and adhere to present and future regulatory requirements and reporting requests. Emergency management and incident command teams have the opportunity to integrate climate science and local climate impact projections into their planning, thus enhancing operational resilience to future hazards—including those that exceed local historical extremes. Human resource and internal communications officers can integrate sustainability and hazard preparedness messaging into trainings and communication channels. As prospective employees increasingly seek workplaces that deliver on their environmental commitments,57health care systems may be able to attract and retain some workers by incorporating sustainability into job descriptions, operational roles, and performance evaluations. Food service managers can reduce GHG emissions through food waste reduction and shifting toward plant‐based proteins.58
Managers of outpatient clinics and inpatient hospital units have the opportunity to develop and implement sustainability plans at the unit level, either as standalone projects or as part of larger institutional initiatives. Health care leaders are well‐positioned to guide organizations toward sustainable operations and proactive approaches that address climate vulnerabilities.
Clinical staff have opportunities to help patients prepare for and adapt to the impacts of climate change. They are also trusted voices within health care institutions and their communities and can be important advocates for climate readiness. Doctors, nurses, advanced practice providers, therapists, students, and other clinical staff can educate patients, peers, and policymakers on the health implications of climate change and specific actions that enhance individual, institutional, and systemic preparedness for climate impacts.6Physical and occupational therapists have opportunities to help patients develop personal evacuation plans that reflect their unique mobility or physical limitations,59and can be persuasive advocates for local or regional planning to ensure their patients who are less mobile are safe—or safely evacuated—in a climate emergency.60Nurses are consistently identified as the most trusted and powerful voice for patients and families,61making them effective advocates for both climate readiness efforts in their communities and key communicators that can help patients develop individual hazard mitigation plans. Mental health professionals can aid people experiencing mental health harms related to climate change,62,63provide trauma‐based cognitive therapy for individuals impacted by disasters, and help patients finds ways to live meaningful lives in the face of escalating climate change.64Operating room staff can promote sustainability by reducing waste, avoiding single‐use equipment, and transitioning away from harmful anesthetic gasses such as desflurane.65Pharmacists have substantial opportunities to influence medication use, which represents nearly 20% of health‐care–associated GHG emissions.28The use of prefilled syringes can reduce waste and improve patient safety,66and transitioning certain medications from infusions to push dosing reduces costs and plastic waste.67Together, clinical staff can play an important role in supporting both sustainability and preparedness for their clinical units and the patients they serve.
Facilities and maintenance staff, laboratory staff, infection control personnel, and others working in technical and support roles have opportunities to reduce energy and material consumption through implementation of more efficient practices and sourcing. Examples include equipment sharing, powering down inactive equipment, “chilling up” freezers, ensuring appropriate use of personal protective equipment, and introducing reusable devices when appropriate. These individuals are also well‐positioned to identify vulnerabilities to locally relevant climate hazards and propose solutions to institutional leadership. It is important that there be institutional support for these actions, ideally with aligned institutional goal setting and tracking of relevant sustainability and preparedness metrics.
Primary prevention of individual health harms related to climate change depends on resources and education focused on patients in their homes and communities. Home health workers, including visiting nurses, hospice nurses, and palliative care staff, can help patients identify and mitigate climate‐related risks in their homes. Before and after disaster situations, home health professionals can also provide a link to emergency services, assist with evacuation of vulnerable people, and help ensure continuity of care.68Personal care assistants or attendants may be the only advocates aware of an individual's immediate needs and can play a crucial role in ensuring that the person they care for is able to continue to receive key medications, access medical care, and—if necessary—travel to safety during climate‐related extreme weather events. Social workers can help identify resources for high‐risk individuals: for example, connecting individuals with cool locations during a heatwave or helping reestablish housing after a flood. EMS personnel can reduce GHG emissions by minimizing ambulance idling time and playing an important role in linking patients with the health care system during emergencies. As flooding, storm surges, and wildfires become more common, EMS teams may face physical barriers to patient access and threats to their personal safety.69Addressing these barriers will require proactive communication and planning with nursing homes, outpatient practices, group homes, private residences and other locations with high 911 call volume, and in some cases new equipment. Institutional support for community‐facing health care workers, including appropriate training and resources, will be essential.
Climate readiness policies must address the causes and impacts of climate change, motivate health care institutions to act, be feasible to implement, and be financially sustainable from the standpoint of the health care industry. The final point is of particular importance: some organizations are already fragile, and new regulations or requirements could negatively impact institutional viability unless they are coupled with new sources of financial and technical support that will allow already‐stressed institutions to succeed in the new landscape. For this reason, purely regulatory approaches should be approached with caution. Regulations paired with new funding streams, support, or operational flexibility will be more acceptable from the standpoint of health care organizations and more successful at achieving policy objectives.
The wide range of urgent needs and the complex sociopolitical landscape surrounding climate change call for a portfolio of complementary policies that leverage diverse motivating mechanisms and financing structures. The following policy recommendations are designed to advance climate readiness in a manner that is feasible for the health care industry and practicable within the current policy context.
Some actions that support continuity of the operation of health care in the face of escalating climate hazards will require regulation because they are not aligned with other incentives. These precautions range from physical infrastructure planning for far‐future hazards to cross‐credentialing staff across systems in high‐risk regions to maintaining functional surge capacity.
These actions are complex and expensive. To be effective and avoid harm to fragile institutions in an already‐stressed health care finance environment, regulations will need to be both accompanied by federal or state funding streams to support institutions in achieving regulatory compliance and also developed and promulgated several years before they go into effect to allow sufficient lead time for health care organizations to achieve compliance. This approach depends on legislators to allocate funding alongside any regulations that are developed, arguing for a tight focus on continuity of health care system functioning to have the broadest possible appeal across legislative bodies.
Whereas legal mandates with attached funding would provide powerful and actionable motivators for change, accreditation‐based incentives coupled with increased emphasis on identifying opportunities for associated costs savings may provide a more practicable path forward in the near term.
Initially, efforts should focus on opt‐in opportunities to document and showcase the effectiveness of leading institutions.70These opportunities can create visibility for sustainability efforts at a national level and develop an expanding body of case studies and health care industry experience with decarbonization, while simultaneously avoiding putting new stresses on institutions that are unable to act because of financial instability or lack of resources. Recent action by The Joint Commission to create voluntary sustainability accreditation standards highlights the feasibility of this approach.41It is important that standards be paired with an expanded array of external services to help institutions take advantage of these opportunities. External organizations that help facilities identify simultaneous cost saving and GHG emissions reductions opportunities are likely to find increasing opportunities for engagement with health care organizations.26Expansion of activity in this space may help drive down costs and increase access to such services in the future.
Long‐term inclusion of key sustainability metrics in the universal accreditation of health care facilities could provide a means to motivate lagging institutions. By the time universal sustainability metrics are implemented and assessed as part of general health care accreditation, it is hoped that the growth of health care industry experience and capability in the sustainability sphere, coupled with the expansion of external consulting and supporting organizations and new financing opportunities, will facilitate the successful extension of these activities to a broader range of institutions.
Climate change is exacerbating existing health inequities; therefore, it is important to ensure that preventive care, counseling on climate‐related health hazards, real‐time health warnings, and other interventions are developed, tested, and made accessible to minoritized populations in a language with which each population is comfortable. These actions will require both research on the effectiveness of specific interventions to address health inequities and incentives for ongoing efforts to address disproportionate health harms in at‐risk populations.
The Climate Change and Health program at the National Institutes of Health has recently begun to provide funding for research on climate‐related health inequities and interventions to address these issues, providing an important model for other agencies.43Addressing these issues within health care organizations will likely require both targeted programs to meet the needs of at‐risk populations as well as broader institutional incentives to achieve and maintain equitable health outcomes as climate impacts escalate. The former provides a near‐term solution that can be financed through targeted federal or state grants or programs, and the latter is a longer‐term, systemic approach that would likely depend on linking aspects of hospital reimbursement to health equity performance metrics—a concept that would benefit from detailed study regarding feasibility, effectiveness, and potential for unintended consequences.
The integration of information about climate change and its implications for health and health care into training programs will provide important framing and baseline knowledge as students enter the workforce and go on to positions of increasing responsibility and authority. Many medical school curricula now integrate climate topics,21,27and, though progress in other parts of the field has been more limited,27an increasing number of institutions now offer electives or experiential learning related to climate change and health equity or embed climate content in core curricula.6,21Educational integration will ideally be guided by national associations or licensing bodies and should be expanded to include all health‐care–related fields. Organizations responsible for training and educational standards, licensing, and certification have opportunities to drive large‐scale improvements in the readiness of the health care workforce for climate change.
Although integration into educational curricula addresses future needs, it does not provide an immediate solution for educating the existing workforce. Interprofessional training modules and in‐service education provide one means to address this gap. These resources can continually reinforce awareness of key concepts and actions and, if created by national organizations, can be deployed at minimal cost to health care organizations.71Just as most health care workers complete EHR orientation and annual HIPAA and bloodborne pathogen training, similar modules could communicate specific actions health care workers can take to address the carbon footprint of health care activities and the health impacts of climate change on their patients. Continuing medical and nursing education is another means whereby practicing clinicians can receive updates on aspects of climate change that may affect their practice.6
Achieving health care climate readiness at scale will require institutional incentivization and integration of climate readiness goals, metrics, and practices into existing operating plans, performance reviews, and job descriptions. Just as integration of HIPAA and EHR requirements were transformative moments for the health care sector, the shift away from ad hoc action by volunteers and “green teams” toward a clearly defined organizational priority affecting the roles and responsibilities of numerous employees will ensure sustained investment in climate readiness at the institutional level, institutionalize the expertise and multidisciplinary working groups essential to this work, and signal the importance of addressing this issue to subsidiary health care business units.29It will be important to support professionalization and institutionalization of climate readiness through incentive and accreditation programs. Just as the achievement of HIPAA and EHR goals became a core aspect of institutional workstreams—expectations, annual reporting, and specialist cadres developed to meet these needs—similar institutional prioritization and professionalization of climate mitigation, adaptation, and resilience activities will call for integration of these skills into new and existing roles.72Formalization of these roles and the training pathways for future health care climate readiness specialists will support effective and aligned efforts across the health care sector.73
These policy approaches can help create a climate‐engaged health care workforce and enhance motivation to achieve and maintain climate readiness at the scale of health care systems. It is hoped that policymakers—whether in legislative bodies, regulatory agencies, accreditation organizations, or leadership roles in health care and health education—will take advantage of this opportunity to guide the US health care system toward a sustainable and climate‐resilient future.
Climate change presents a large‐scale, long‐term challenge for the US health care system. Pressure to achieve climate readiness comes from government, professional organizations, workers, patients, and climate‐responsive hazards themselves. Institutional motivation and health care workforce engagement are integral to efforts to improve sustainability and adapt to the escalating impacts of climate change. Both institutions and individual health care workers can take a wide variety of actions to address the causes and impacts of the climate crisis but will require necessary support, resources, education, and frameworks to guide action. Policy opportunities include hazard preparedness regulations coupled with grants to achieve compliance, creation of accreditation frameworks and cost saving guidance to motivate GHG emissions reductions, reimbursement‐based incentives for achieving equitable health outcomes, education on climate readiness for all health care workers, and professionalization of climate readiness activities.
Dr. Dresser received funding from the Climate and Health Foundation to support publication of this article. The work was conducted byPatrice Nicholaswhile she was a scholar in the Inaugural 2023 National Institutes of Health Climate and Health Scholars program. The work was conducted whenSuellen Breakeyand Patrice Nicholas participated in the Environmental Health Research Institute for Nurse and Clinician Scientists grant supported by the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences under Award R25ES033452.
Dr Dresser serves as principal investigator on research studies at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health funded by Biogen and Johnson & Johnson and serves as faculty on a continuing medical education course on climate change at Harvard Medical School. The other authors do not have any potential conflicts of interest to report.
Articles from The Milbank Quarterly are provided here courtesy ofMilbank Memorial Fund
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894