An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Susannah Mayhew, Global Health Department,
London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, 15-17 Tavistock Place, London
WC1H 9SH, UK. Email:Susannah.Mayhew@lshtm.ac.uk
Issue date 2014 Apr.
This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution 3.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/) which
permits any use, reproduction and distribution of the work without further
permission provided the original work is attributed as specified on the SAGE
and Open Access page (http://www.uk.sagepub.com/aboutus/openaccess.htm).
At last, climate change does appear to have entered mainstream consciousness. In
the scientific community, the climate change debate has shifted from focusing on
establishing the truth of the claim that climate change is a reality to warming
public opinion to the cause and acknowledging that climate change will have
far-reaching effects on how we build, organize and manage climate-responsive
social systems including health care systems. There is particular urgency to the
debate for health services and systems in low income countries where some of the
worst effects of climate change will be felt and where health systems are
already over-stretched due to long-term lack of investment, a double burden of
disease (preventive and non-communicable), a crisis in human resources and
governance deficiencies. Despite the urgency, the health care systems
development community appears insular in its interests and actions, and a clear
leader that could coordinate the activities of different researchers, research
bodies, policy makers and international organizations across relevant sectors
including disaster management, climate and health care systems, has yet to
emerge. This essay considers the political landscape, possible leaders and why
it is necessary for health systems’ professionals to move beyond the health
sector in order to secure support for health and health care systems development
in a post-Millennium Development Goals development framework that is defined by
climate change.
Keywords:climate change, health systems, sustainable development
The 2012 Rio+20 summit and the recently concluded 18th Climate Change Summit in Doha
reiterated the commitment to developing a timely and ground-breaking new post-Kyoto
Protocol, indicating that climate change does finally appear to have irrevocably
entered mainstream consciousness.
In the scientific community, the climate change debate has shifted from focusing on
establishing the truth of the claim that climate change is a reality to warming
public opinion to the cause1and acknowledging that climate change will have far-reaching
effects on how we build, organize and manage climate-responsive social systems
including health care systems. There is particular urgency to the debate for health
services and systems in low-income countries (especially states with particular
vulnerabilities to the impact of environmental variability) where some of the worst
effects of climate change will be felt and where health care systems are already
over-stretched due to long-term lack of investment, a double burden of disease
(preventive and non-communicable), a crisis in human resources and governance
deficiencies.2Climate change-responsive health care systems must
proactively respond to rapid and significant population fluctuations caused by
movements of people leaving areas hit by drought or floods, desertification, and
damage to traditional crop and livestock farming. Such climate change-triggered
migration often results in rapid urbanization.3Changing disease patterns as a
result of climate change further increase the need for health systems
decision-making to be flexible and able to manage uncertainty, since clinical care
and limited resources must be adjusted to reflect evolving population
needs.2Other factors including continued population growth and political strife in fragile
states may further compound the problem and may further destabilize the response
capacity of already weak systems.
In 2010, the WHO established Health Systems Global, which is (in its own words) ‘the
first international membership organization fully dedicated to promoting health
systems research and knowledge translation’. This represents an extraordinary
opportunity to promote thinking on how health systems and service delivery can
respond to climate issues, and start defining the goals and challenges that complex
health care systems need to respond to. How surprising then that a sense of urgency
has been totally missing from its two Global Symposia on Health Systems Research in
Montreux in 2010 and in Beijing in 2012, where, as the conference proceedings
illustrate, no research was presented on the implications of climate change for
health care systems. This apparent lack of interest makes the health care systems
research community look insular and out of touch with the current global debate
about a post-Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) agenda as well as other related
health fields like disaster management. While the exact configuration of the
post-2015 development framework remains emergent, it is highly likely that the
‘sustainable development goals’ (for which the process was launched at the Rio+20
conference), which seem likely to be combined with the MDGs successors (though to
date the conversations are largely separate), will be game-changing and the place of
health and health care systems funding in this context is by no means certain.
The health care research community must contribute to the shaping of the sustainable
development research agenda to promote understanding of the implications of climate
change on health and health care systems, connecting different levels in the system.
There is a renewed focus on complexity in health care systems that means health
researchers are well-positioned to join a trans-disciplinary effort with other
system researchers to understand how to build adaptive health care systems that
co-evolve with other social-ecological systems.
Kula et al.4highlight a number of issues to be addressed in order to develop climate-resilient
health care systems. Adaptive capacity needs to be built and more resilient health
care facilities and supply chains developed, considering how these will be affected
by extreme climate events (floods, heatwaves, droughts and so on). This includes
improving the capacity of health services and human resources to cope with
additional disease burdens associated with extreme weather events, including timely
provision of medical supplies for increased or changing infectious disease
transmission. They also call for a cross-disciplinary research agenda to promote
understanding of the health effects of climate change in different settings, linking
meteorology, climatology, other relevant sectors and health. This would encourage
the development of seasonal forecasting and early warning systems for extreme events
affecting health (e.g. heat and flood-health warnings) and for infectious diseases
(e.g. epidemic malaria) as well as other health protection surveillance systems for
vector- and water-borne diseases. Connections must also be better made to other
relevant, well-established bodies of work, particularly in disaster risk reduction,
impact mitigation and response. Many of the challenges associated with climate
change have resonance with work done over the decades on disaster preparedness and
response, and this may be a useful lens with which to consider health systems’
responsiveness to climate change. For example, hazard analysis and vulnerability
reduction have long been part of disaster management practice, advocacy and
research.5Drawing on the knowledge and experiences of this field could
facilitate, for example: the increased response capacity of health systems to absorb
migrant populations following climate events (emergency preparedness); improved
governance capability to coordinate inter-sectoral action at local level (on health
and food security, emergency preparedness) to improve efficiency; and leverage
collective action among communities related to disaster and emergency preparedness
to protect health. Importantly, action needs to be taken to promote better
understanding in both the climate change and public health communities of the
‘health dividend’ of many actions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions: for example,
funding alternatives to polluting and respiratory-harming traditional
wood/coke-burning cooking stoves. A better understanding of potential mutual
benefits would encourage concerted and coherent action to protect health and health
care systems in the context of climate change.4So in the cooking stove example,
the benefit for the health care system is that less-polluting alternatives may
reduce the opportunity cost related to chronic respiratory diseases, freeing up
funds spent on curative care for preventive care or for other more pressing health
demands.
But is the health research community up to this job? The health research community is
fragmented and has been slow to take up the challenge of investigating the impacts
of climate change on health and health care. Studies are only now emerging to
establish the effects of climate change on health outcomes, but findings are still
ad hoc and limited.6–9There is virtually no research
on the impact of climate change on health systems,and there is an
urgent need for research on how to strengthen health care systems to be resilient
and responsive to the challenges posed by climate change.4Lynch10calls for a defined goal that
health care systems actors can coalesce around and is realistic enough to allow
‘players in the health system to realize that climate change is a game changer but
not necessarily a game destroyer’ (p. 248). There is much uncertainty also about
funding and whether climate funding might draw funding away from regular public
health activities. Climate change requires that health care organizations – and
health care systems – make new connections and rethink how services are organized,
funded and delivered; it may be risky. Who will provide the leadership: the ‘policy
and research community’; or institutions such as the World Bank or the WHO?
Currently, there are no clear leaders who could define such a goal. Nevertheless,
there are emerging players and initiatives. The Rockefeller Foundation invested over
$50 million in a project in Asia specifically addressing the issue of climate change
and health (Asian Cities Climate Change Resilience Network). This network is
beginning to demonstrate tangible outputs in changing health systems to respond to
climate change. The World Bank recognized earlier than many global institutions the
importance of climate change for development and is undertaking a re-structuring to
make climate issues core to its development work, although the links between health
and climate change in its current work remain weak.11The WHO has not shown global
leadership on climate change and health, although it has a long history of work on
environmental health and disaster management. There has been recent (2008)
institutional commitment to working on climate change and health resulting in a
World Health Assembly resolution and some slowly emerging briefing papers and
reports.12–15Nevertheless, the WHO’s work
on climate change has been hampered by its inability to interact with the growing
and changing range of stakeholders involved in global health, while its health
systems work also remains siloed.16This is compounded by
institutional reform weakness on issues of accountability, especially to external
stakeholders, where changing challenges and stakeholder demands, for instance
arising from climate change, have not led to any tangible change of institutional
policies and systems over the past decade, quite different from the trajectory of
other organizations.17–19Also on a
health policy level, the organization has been accused of inertia.20More recently,
WHO has begun to engage (very belatedly) with global climate change decision-making
processes. At the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change 15th Conference of
Parties (COP) (to the Kyoto Protocol) in Copenhagen in 2009, the WHO submitted a
detailed paper entitled ‘Protecting the health of vulnerable people from
humanitarian consequences of climate change and climate related disaster’. It also
lobbied for the inclusion of health-relevant indicators to achieve ‘co-benefits’ at
the June 2012 Earth Summit and at the 18th COP (Doha, December 2012) where it hosted
a side-event on ‘Building sustainable health systems: Focus on Climate
Resilience’,21although it is unclear if any commitments from COP
participants were achieved.
Yet despite these laudable attempts and initiatives, what is clearly missing is
dedicated and visible leadership that coordinates the activities of different
researchers, research bodies, policy makers and international organizations across
relevant sectors including disaster management, climate and health care systems. WHO
– the obvious leader on global health issues, as the only global institution
dedicated to health – has not shown itself to be proactive in engaging with multiple
cross-sector stakeholders on issues of global importance beyond its narrow health
field. Yet, the nature of climate change means a global view beyond WHO’s
traditional health sector comfort zone is essential. The World Bank has proved far
better at understanding and promoting the connections between multiple stakeholders
required for a response to climate change and sustainable development, although its
actions on health have been more limited. Unless the WHO can significantly ramp up
its engagement with, and traction in, international decision-making processes for
sustainable development and climate change, the World Bank may consider it necessary
to move to fill the gap on health and climate change, which it is well-positioned to
do. Only through such leadership can health and health care systems’ development be
effectively promoted in a post-MDG development framework that is defined by climate
change. The cost of failure will be high.
The authors' time for this perspectives article was funded by the ESRC-DFID (poverty
reduction scheme).
Articles from Journal of Health Services Research & Policy are provided here courtesy ofSAGE Publications
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894