An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
E-mail:lpviegas@ci.uc.pt.
Received 2025 Nov 16; Accepted 2026 Feb 6; Revised 2026 Feb 6; Collection date 2026 Mar 3.
This article is licensed under CC-BY 4.0
Accurate assessment of the climate impact of fluorinated
compounds
is crucial for guiding regulatory decisions and mitigating global
warming. We present a novel methodology for calculating the radiative
efficiency of diverse fluorinated molecules with minimized error,
adaptable to any electronic structure method and basis set. By incorporating
full conformer populations and three scaling parameters, we approximate
the experimental infrared spectra more effectively, enhancing the
reliability of our predictions. The optimization of vibrational frequencies
and intensities for a diverse data set of 38 fluorinated compounds
enables us to refine radiative efficiency calculations and seamlessly
integrate them into our lifetime calculating protocol. We obtain theoretical
global warming potential (GWP) values with well-defined error bars,
offering a significant improvement over existing computational methods.
This enhanced framework provides a powerful tool for assessing the
climate effects of fluorinated compounds, aligning with the objectives
of the Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol. By delivering robust
and reliable GWP estimates, our methodology informs policy decisions
on the phasedown of high-GWP hydrofluorocarbons and the search for
sustainable alternatives. Our findings contribute to advancing theoretical
approaches for quantifying radiative forcing, supporting global efforts
to mitigate anthropogenic climate change.
Keywords:radiative efficiency, global warming potential, fluorinated compounds, infrared scaling parameters, Kigali Amendment


Following the discovery
that chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) compounds
contribute to ozone depletion and global warming,−theoretical and experimental efforts
to identify environmentally friendly CFC alternatives have significantly
increased. As a result, almost 200 nations adopted the Kigali Amendment
to the Montreal Protocol in October 2016,
an international agreement that aims to phase down−the production and consumption
of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), as these second-generation replacements
are well-known to have a strong contribution to global warming.,Besides dealing with this phasing down process, the Kigali Amendment
also promotes alternative technologies by encouraging the adoption
of climate-friendly refrigerants and energy-efficient solutions. For example, hydrofluoroolefins, alcohols, aldehydes,
esters, ethers and ketones are potential candidates to replace HFCs
in industry.
In the framework of
the Kigali Amendment, once a particular compound
is categorized as a possible HFC substitute, it becomes crucial to
find what is the climate impact of its emission into the atmosphere.
The most widely used emission metric in climate policy is the global
warming potential (GWP), introduced by the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC) in 1990, which
compares the heat-trapping ability of different greenhouse gases over
a specific time horizon. GWP has been widely used in environmental
research−and adopted in climate policies: the Kyoto Protocol adopted GWPs for a time horizon of 100 years, GWP(100),
as its metric for implementing a multigas approach. At UNFCCC COP24 it was decided to use GWP(100) for reporting
national emissions to the Paris Agreement. The GWP is based on the time-integrated radiative forcing (RF) due
to a pulse emission of a unit mass of a gas. It can be given as an
absolute GWP for gasX(AGWPX) (usually in W m–2kg–1year) or as a dimensionless value by dividing AGWPXby the AGWP of a reference gas, normally CO2. Thus,
the GWP for gasXover a time horizon ofHyears is defined as
withAGWPCO2(100)=8.947×10−14Wm−2year(kgCO2)−1. Assuming first order chemical loss for
compoundXand a linear regime consistent with small
perturbations in mixing ratio, the radiative forcing of compoundXcan be written,as RFX= REX· exp­(−t/τX), where REXis the radiative forcing per unit change in the
mixing ratio of compoundX, a quantity also known
as radiative efficiency, RE. The exponential term gives the time-dependent
mixing ratio response after the pulse emission, which is then integrated
fromt= 0 tot=H. The AGWP for gasXcan then be expressed as
where REXis given
in W m–2ppbv–1and the 109factor cancels out the ppbv–1units. Additionally,M̅dry atm.is the average of the molar
masses of a dry atmosphere andmtotdry atm.is the total mass of a dry atmosphere. Both quantities are known with values ofM̅dry atm.= 0.02897 kg mol–1andmtotdry atm.=5.1352×1018kg. For each compoundX, its AGWP over a time horizon ofHyears is therefore
given byeq, which
depends on three quantities: itsM(X) molar mass (in kg mol–1), its atmospheric lifetime
(τX, in years) and its radiative
efficiency (REX). While the molar mass
is easily determined, obtaining τXand REXis far more challenging, as
it requires complex experimental setups or computational methods.
Such complexity is particularly evident in the theoretical calculation
of τX. Halocarbons in general and
fluorocarbons in particular have two main degradation pathways:,−stratospheric photolysis and OH-initiated tropospheric
oxidation, such that,
where the photolytic process with rate constantJdepends on the altitude,and is only
relevant for aldehydes and ketones−since these two families
of compounds contain a carbonyl group which absorbs radiation in the
ultraviolet region due to itsn→ π*
transition. Moreover, the fluorination
of aldehydes and ketones results in a bathochromic shift in the UV
absorption bands of the carbonyl groups−enabling a better overlap
with the actinic flux available at lower altitudes and decreasing
the value ofτXphotolysisto a range between a few days and a few
weeks.−For fluorocarbons possessing hydrogen atoms, other than aldehydes
and ketones, photolysis will not be relevant and the atmospheric lifetime
will strongly depend on the OH tropospheric oxidation reactions, in
such a way we can write
wherekOHis the
OH-oxidation rate constant and [OH] is the global average concentration of OH, usually set at [OH] = 1 × 106molecules cm–3. Consequently, in order
to obtain τX, thekOHoxidation rate constant must be obtained, which can
present complicated challenges to theoretical models, particularly
due to increasing system size and its associated conformational complexity.
To address these issues, we have recently developed,and improved−a computational protocol for the cost-effective calculation of bimolecular
rate constants in the high-pressure limit for the reaction between
OH radicals and fluorinated compounds of moderate/large size. This
protocol is based on multiconformer transition state theory (MC-TST)−and a method for performing transition state sampling called constrained
transition state randomization (CTSR).,Our MC-TST/CTSR
protocol was very recently tested,with 12 different fluorinated compounds belonging to five different
families, namely hydrofluoroalcohols, hydrofluoroaldehydes, hydrofluoroesters,
hydrofluoroethers and hydrofluoroketones. The calculated rate coefficients
at 298.15 K were found to agree, on average, with the recommended
experimental values within a factor of
2 or better.
Having established a cost-effective computational
method for calculatingτXOH, the remaining component needed to theoretically
determine the GWP within the framework of our protocol is the calculation
of the REXradiative efficiency. As with
the atmospheric lifetime, the RE, which depends on the infrared (IR)
absorption cross-section spectrum, can be obtained via experiments
or theoretical calculations. Although most Fourier transform IR spectrometer
(FTIR) measurements focus on frequencies above ∼500 cm–1, the overlooked low-frequency region below this threshold
deserves attention, as it represents approximately 16% of the total
IR irradiance. Moreover, obtaining high-quality
IR spectra experimentally is challenging due to factors such as impurities,
temperature and pressure control, path length limitations, and potential
equipment errorschallenges that are especially pronounced
for low vapor pressure (less-volatile) substances [ref  and references therein].
Consequently, these limitations could hinder future efforts to obtain
reliable IR spectra (and thus reliable RE values) for molecules that
have not yet been experimentally characterized. Under these constraints,
theoretical approaches stand out as the most viable path for accurately
determining the RE. The computational investigation of the RE has
seen sustained and significant development over the years,,−with some investigations delving into the framework of machine learning;,however, these methods remain in an initial stage of development,
and their results are still subject to extensive validation. Although
the current methodologies take important conformational aspects into
account, they attempt to replicate RE values as accurately as possible
using previously published scaling factors for vibrational frequencies
that may not be completely adequate to the specific problem being
studiedthe Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol. In other
cases, efforts have gone further, such as in the work by Betowski
et al., where vibrational intensities
were identified as the primary source of error in RE calculations.
To address this, scaling factors were also applied to the vibrational
intensities, resulting in greater flexibility and improved accuracy
(extra parameter). However, in addition to lacking a description of
the methodology used to obtain the vibrational intensity scaling factors,
many of the molecules included in the database employed in this work
would not be permitted or deemed relevant under the frameworks of
the Montreal Protocol and/or the Kigali Amendment. This limitation
ultimately impacts the reliability of the results for fluorinated
compounds of current genuine regulatory and environmental interest.
More recently, Alvarado-Jiménez and Tasinato have proposed a methodology based on the more
accurate anharmonic approach, which in principle should bring the
calculated IR spectra closer to the experimental ones and should be
considered, when computationally feasible, the recommended methodology.
However, such an approach has the well-known drawback of significantly
increasing computational costs, which in some cases may act as a deterrent
for the routine use of anharmonic calculations. Indeed, this limitation
may have influenced the selection of molecules in the study by Alvarado-Jiménez
and Tasinato; of the 23 molecules examined, the majority are relatively
small, with 20 containing 8 atoms or fewer and only one reaching 12
atoms. Indeed, anharmonic frequency calculations face a 2-fold scaling
challenge as molecular size increases. First, the computational cost
of an individual frequency calculation rises steeply with the number
of atoms. Second, larger molecules possess a more complex conformational
landscape, resulting in a greater number of stable conformers that
must each be independently evaluated. The total computational effort
is therefore compounded: not only does each individual anharmonic
frequency calculation become more expensive, but a larger volume of
these calculations is required. While there are very useful methodological
developments aimed at computationally efficient anharmonic calculations−these are currently unavailable in the anharmonic procedures of
the open source software we employ. Therefore,
for the molecules studied in this work, a methodology based on scaled
harmonic calculations is justified and the only practically applicable
choice. All things considered, recent harmonic approaches to RE calculations
reflect careful attention to fundamental theoretical aspects, but
none are specifically tailored to the specific set of classes of fluorinated
compounds of real interest in the context of the Montreal Protocol
and its Kigali Amendment. Given these specificities and the current
state of development of efficient anharmonic computations, the establishment
of an improved computational methodology based on the harmonic approximation
is still justified and essentialone that focuses on the enhancement
of the accuracy of previously mentioned approaches and ensures reliable
theoretical estimates of the RE for the more restricted set of fluorinated
molecules of any size in the absence of experimental data.
The
objective of this investigation is thus to accurately model
the radiative efficiency of any chosen fluorinated compound, in such
a way that we can: 1) easily include the REXcalculation in our MC-TST/CTSR protocol and 2) adapt and generalize
the REXcalculation procedure to any model
chemistry besides the M08-HX/pcseg-2,electronic
structure calculations used in our MC-TST/CTSR protocol. The procedure
presented in this work will allow us to have a fully operating computational
protocol for the determination of the GWP of fluorinated molecules,
which can be used to make predictions for unstudied systems and assess
the discovery of new greener,fluorinated molecules
with low GWP: providing solutions to reduce human impact on the climate
is of utmost importance within the framework of the Kigali Amendment
to the Montreal Protocol. At the same time, our procedure will also
offer a systematic approach for obtaining precise radiative efficiency
values across various methods and basis set combinations, making it
accessible and flexible for use by any researcher or research group.Figureoutlines our multistep
computational process for determining the GWP for fluorinated substances,
along with its principal objectives in the framework of the phase-down
of HFCs under the Kigali Amendment.

Flowchart outlining the fundamental steps
used to theoretically
calculate GWP values for fluorinated compounds. GWP predictions can
inform policy decisions, emission reduction targets, and the transition
to low-GWP alternatives as mandated by the Kigali Amendment to the
Montreal Protocol.
InSectionwe
will explain how the RE is calculated and how we can adjust it to
any chosen model chemistry, while inSectionwe apply this procedure and evaluate the
values of the RE calculated with the M08-HX/pcseg-2 model chemistry.
We finalize with a discussion over the importance of such a tool in
the context of the Kigali Amendment.
The
electronic structure calculations performed in this work exactly reproduce
the ones employed in a specific part of our MC-TST/CTSR protocol−since that is the methodology we use to calculate the OH oxidation
rate constants, which are then employed in the calculation of τX. The first step of our MC-TST/CTSR protocol
starts with the calculation of the reactant (fluorinated molecule)
conformers. This is an important step, since the growing size of these
fluorinated compounds will lead to larger molecular chains and an
increase in the number of rotatable bonds, therefore resulting in
a higher number of rotamers. An account
of these rotamers is essential in obtaining accurate values for the
OH oxidation rate constants and therefore
accurate atmospheric lifetimes. The determination of these rotamers
starts withconfab, a knowledge-based
conformer generation tool that utilizes force fields and a database
of allowed torsion angles. We then minimize the generated conformers
with theObminimizeprogram, using the same
force field as in theconfabcalculation, in this case MMFF94. TheconfabandObminimizeprograms are available in Open Babel. These structures are then used as starting geometries for optimization
at a chosen level of theory, in this
case M08-HX/pcseg-2, which we perform with GAMESS. We then use a superimposing algorithm in order to perform a similarity evaluation between all
minimized conformers. This identifies identical structures and enantiomers
in our pool of optimized reactants, which we can then safely eliminate,
leaving us with the final set ofNconfunique reactants
for any given fluorinated compoundX.
The means for computing the RE from computed IR spectra is based
on the pioneering work of Pinnock et al., who calculated the instantaneous, cloudy-sky, radiative forcing
(RF) per unit cross-section as a function of wavenumber for the global
and annual mean atmosphere (GAM) and used it to obtain an expression
for the final RE as a function of the RF and the absorption cross-section
for the compound under study. Papasavva et al. first demonstrated the use of this method with computed
IR spectra using frequencies determined at the MP2/6-31G** level of
theory, building on their earlier work validating the use of quantum
chemistry methods for the calculation of vibrational frequencies and
intensities.,This approach has been successful
and widely employed in the calculation of the RE for greenhouse gases,−as outlined in the Introduction.
The radiative forcing curve
obtained by Pinnock et al. has been improved
over the years. In 2013, Hodnebrog et al. used the Oslo line-by-line model to generate the radiative forcing
at 1 cm–1resolution, an enhancement of the 10 cm–1resolution of Pinnock et al. More recently, Shine and Myhre have
determined an improved version for the latter spectrally resolved
radiative forcing curve by including
a wavenumber dependent stratospheric temperature adjustment (STA)
and an improved representation of water vapor and clouds. Note that
the STA was originally included as a
1.1 correction factor for REXineq. As such, the instantaneous
RE for compoundXcalculated with the Shine and Myhre
RF curve can be obtained via
whereFi(ν̅i) is the spectrally resolved radiative forcing per unit cross-section,
per wavenumber (W m–2cm (cm2molecule–1)−1) obtained by Shine and Myhre, evaluated at the wavebandi, while σi(ν̅i) is the absorption cross-section in
wavebandi(cm2molecule–1) averaged over the wavenumber increment Δν̅i(cm–1), which is
1 cm–1for the Shine and Myhre curve.
The instantaneous radiative forcing developed
by Pinnock et al. assumes an atmospheric
well-mixed distribution
of gases across altitude and latitude. However, it has been shown
that when such conditions are not met, a multiplicative correction
factor for the gas lifetime (τX)
needs to be applied to the instantaneous (well-mixed) RE calculated
ineq, which accounts
for variables like emission distribution and varying vertical temperature
profiles in order to obtain an effective
RE,REXeffective. The following equations present the gas
lifetime corrections, depending on whether the dominant removal process
is tropospheric OH degradation (applicable lifetimes ranging from
10–4< τX<
104years) or photolysis in the stratosphere (10 < τX< 104years), respectively
For compounds with τX≥ 104years, it has been recommended that
no correction should be applied for either case, i.e.,f(τX) = 1.
With theFi(ν̅i) tabulated data
available, the σi(ν̅i) absorption cross-section needs to be calculated for any compoundX. According to IUPAC, σi(ν̅i) (in SI units) is given by
which we will need to express in units of
in cm2molecule–1. Theεi(ν̅i) variable represents the molar napierian
absorption coefficient for bandicentered on thekth vibrational mode which can in turn be calculated as
whereAkis the integrated absorption coefficient of vibrational modekandgV(ν̅i-ν̅k, γL, γG) are the values of the continuous
Voigt line shape function evaluated at the specificν̅ivalues. The Voigt function incorporates
the combined effects of the Lorentzian broadening resulting from natural
line width and pressure (collisional) effects and also of the Doppler
broadening (corresponding to a Gaussian profile) resulting from the
thermal motion of molecules.−In situations where both effects
are appreciable, such as in high-resolution (IR or microwave) spectra,
the Voigt profile is generally adopted as a more physically realistic
representation of the line shape than either a pure Lorentzian or
pure Gaussian function alone. While we have adopted the Voigt profile
to maintain generality, a simplified treatment utilizing one of the
Lorentzian or Gaussian broadening functions mentioned above typically
suffices for simulating molecular IR spectra under standard atmospheric
conditions. The Voigt line profile is calculated through the convolution
of the Gaussian and Lorentzian profiles,
where γLand γGare the pressure- and temperature-dependent
Lorentzian and Gaussian half widths at half-maximum calculated by,,
where γ0is the transition
dependent collisional broadening parameter atTref(given in cm–1atm–1),nis a fitting parameter,pis
the pressure (in atm) andMis again the molar mass.
While γGis straightforward to evaluate,
the same cannot be said about γL, since the line-by-line pressure broadening parameters γ0andnare very difficult to obtain and are
typically unavailable for most molecules. As a result, we have used γLas
a fitting parameter in our procedure, which we will delve into in
the next subsection.
The practical evaluation of the Voigt function
at eachν̅ivalue has been
performed with a Fortran90 implementation of a highly efficient novel
algorithm that calculates the Voigt function
with an accuracy in the order of 10–6.
TheAkintegrated
absorption coefficient can be calculated theoretically as
whereeqof ref  has to be divided by 4πε0in order to convert to the SI electromagnetic units.Ikrepresents the transition intensity
of thekth theoretically calculated vibrational mode,
evaluated from the change in dipole moment μ in the molecular
principal axes (a,b,c) along the normal mode displacementQk, which in GAMESS is given in units of (D/Å)2amu–1and needs to be converted to SI units.
The quantitiesε0andcrepresent the vacuum permittivity and the speed of light, respectively,
both in SI units.
Substitutingeqand  ineqone finally obtains the absorption cross-section
for bandicentered on thekth vibrational
mode
If we consider the possibility that
compoundXhasNconfconformers
withNatoms
each, we can rewrite the absorption cross-section by taking into account
the 3N–6 vibrational modes of each conformer
according to
wherepXjis the fractional population of conformerjcalculated via
withGX1being the lowest Gibbs free energy. Note
that the Voigt profile of wavebandinow depends
on thekth mode of conformerj.
In the spirit of the important developments reported in a previous
work, where vibrational intensities were
found to be the main source of error in RE calculations, we will scale
both our vibrational modes,and respective intensities
with the relationsν̅j,k=λFν̅j,k′+bandIj,k=λIIj,k′, where the primed variables are the ones
extracted from GAMESS and the (λF,b,λI) set of
scaling parameters are targeted for optimization. We can write the
final expression for our calculated well-mixed RE value for compoundXas
which we can directly compare to the RE values
collected from the most recent World Meteorological Organization scientific
assessment on ozone depletion (WMO2022). We will henceforth designate these data as REexp. A more
direct procedure could be envisioned by optimizing the scaling parameters
against the errors associated with the calculation of the integrated
absorption cross-section given by
with the σi(ν̅i) cross
sections being given byeq. However, the calculation of
REexpis performed by using multiple sources of cross-section
data and reanalysis, with these details not being disclosed. Because
the actual final form of cross-section data behind each individual
REexpcalculation is unknown, obtaining the corresponding
integrated absorption cross-section value is not possible. Fortunately,
our approach employs the exact sameFi(ν̅i) radiative forcing curve than
the one used in the WMO2022 report. This means that minimizing the
errors associated withREXwell‐mixedis equivalent to minimizing the errors
associated with the σi(ν̅i) cross sections, weighted by theFi(ν̅i) radiative forcing. This weighting
function effectively prioritizes the C–F bond stretching region,
which is the most critical region of the spectrum for evaluating the
RE of fluorinated compounds.
The effective RE, which is the
quantity that actually enters the
calculation of AGWPX(H) ineq, can be then
theoretically calculated by
The effective RE values that enter the GWP
calculation in the WMO2022 report also include a relatively small
low frequency IR absorption adjustment, since the vast majority of
experimentally measured IR absorption spectra do not provide data
below ∼500 cm–1. OurREXwell‐mixedvalues given byeqinclude this low frequency data by definition.
In addition, the WMO2022 report includes a tropospheric adjustment
to the calculation ofREXwell‐mixed.
In order to calculate the final set of (λF,b, λI)
scaling parameters, we developed the procedure presented below. It
should be noted that although the scaling parameters we calculated
in this work were optimized for the M08-HX/pcseg-2 level of theory,
the procedure is valid for any combination of electronic structure
method and basis set. This process can be summarized according to
the following steps:
1. Define a molecular data set from WMO2022 and gather the experimental well-mixed RE values
for a number of selected compounds (REexp). In this work,
the selection of fluorinated compounds was done by consulting Table
A-5 from the WMO’s Annex, with the chosen compounds being marked
with the R2 footnote label stating that the “radiative efficiency
was taken from the recommendation given in Hodnebrog et al. ″ with this recommendation being “based
on a combination of literature review of experimental data and reanalysis″;
2. Define our (λF,b,λI) grid by specifying the domain over
whichλF,bandλImay vary;
3. Perform a conformational
analysis (subsection) for each molecule of
our chosen molecular dataset;
4. Selecting
a value forγL,
calculate theREXwell‐mixedvalues (subsection) for all grid points defined in step 2,
for each compoundXof the molecular dataset;
5. Calculate the respective mean absolute
percentage
error (MAPE) for each set of (λF,b,λI) values from the grid;
6. Repeat the two previous steps with different values
ofγL. Compare
the set of MAPE values associated with eachγLand select the one yielding the lowest
MAPE values;
7. For the predeterminedγLvalue, find the approximate
location of
the MAPE (λF,b,λI) global minimum. This can be accomplished by mapping this function
via multidimensional interpolation−over a dense grid in
the (λF,b,λI) parameter space.
8. Perform a refined
minimization of the MAPE by recalculating
theREXwell‐mixedvalues. This process utilizes a dense grid
of points in the parameter space adjacent to the initial, interpolated
(λF,b,λI) location
determined in the previous step, with the goal of finding a new set
of (λF,b,λI) parameters that lower the MAPE value of the previous step.
Considering the core objective of this workdeveloping
a method to derive scaling factors for the accurate determination
of radiative efficiencies across a broad range of fluorinated compoundswe
constructed our data set using various classes of organic compounds
with accurate experimental well-mixed RE values (REexp). The presence of these different classes
allows us to have compounds with a wide range of chemical environments
affecting the important C–F bond, which strongly absorbs in
the IR region of the electromagnetic spectrum that overlaps with the
peak of the spectral radiative forcing per unit absorption cross section known as the atmospheric window,in the region of 700–1300 cm–1. It is well
established that the unhindered transmission of outgoing longwave
radiation via the atmospheric window constitutes a fundamental cooling
pathway for the terrestrial system. Consequently, the introduction
of molecular species that exhibit absorption cross sections within
these transparent spectral frequencies (seeFigure) imposes a significant radiative imbalance,
leading to an intensified greenhouse effect. To evaluate these impacts,
the present study utilizes the WMO2022 report to select a diverse suite of compounds from various classes focusing
on those of moderate molecular size (N̅≈
11 ± 3 andNmax= 19). The utilization
of the WMO2022 report guarantees that the REexpvalues
were calculated using the most recent radiative forcing curve and that the GWP values use the most recent
values for the atmospheric lifetimes (τX).

Experimental,absorption cross-section spectra
[σi(ν̅i)] of ethyl 2,2,2-trifluoroacetate (solid blue line) and
1,1,1,3,3,3-hexafluoropropan-2-one (solid black line) superimposed
to the radiative forcing [Fi(ν̅i)] per
unit cross-section (solid orange line). The light-green transparent
rectangle represents the atmospheric window.
The choice of λF,band λIdomain
intervals was made
according to what is commonly used in the literature. For λFwe chose an interval of [0.90, 1.04] (with
steps of 0.02) based on typical published values−for vibrational scaling factors. Similarly, for thebparameter we chose,an interval of [1, 15] cm–1(with steps of 1 cm–1). In contrast,
information about λIintensity scaling
values is much less frequent in the literature. However, although there is no detailed explanation of how
the following values were obtained, Betowski et al. report λIscaling factors
of 0.699 and 0.570 for calculations performed at the B3LYP/6-31G*
and B3LYP/6-311++G** levels of theory, respectively. Thus, we opted
for an interval of [0.5, 1.0] with steps of 0.1 for the λIscaling factors, which resulted in a (λF,b, λI) grid of 8 × 16 × 6 = 768 points for each
fixed value of γL.
The MAPE,
which is our objective function to be minimized in the
procedure above, was calculated according to
whereREiwell‐mixedis our theoretical prediction for the RE
of compoundicalculated at the M08-HX/pcseg-2 level,REiexpis the associated experimental RE prediction
extracted from the WMO2022 report andn= 38 is the
number of compounds in our molecular data set: five hydrofluorocarbons,
five perfluorocarbons, five hydrofluoroolefins, five hydrofluoroethers,
five hydrofluoroalcohols, three hydrofluoroesters, five hydrofluoroaldehydes
and five hydrofluoroketones. We will henceforth refer to this data
set as the CFM2025 data set with CFM standing for concise fluorinated
molecule.
We started theREXwell‐mixedcalculations with γL= 10 cm–1. Increasing γLto 12.5 cm–1led to a generic
increase of the MAPE values, so we procedeed in dropping the value
of γLto 7.5 cm–1. After observing a decrease in MAPE values, we continued with this
approach and arrived at a value of γL= 4.5 cm–1.
In the following step we then
used the MAPE values associated with γL= 4.5 cm–1and performed a multidimensional
interpolation over a dense grid in the (λF,b, λI)
parameter space. The Fortran90 interpolation code provided four possibilities for interpolating functions,
but we tested a few more in order to evaluate the error of the interpolating
function against the provided MAPE values at the grid points. This
led us to the final choice of theC4-continuous
Wendland function for three dimensions:ψ4,2=(1−r)+6(35r2+18r+3). The interpolation procedure yielded a
calculated MAPE value of 5.93% corresponding to the following interpolated
scaling parameters:λinterpF=0.978,binterp=
1.328 cm–1andλinterpI=0.861. Using these parameters in the actual calculation
ofREXwell‐mixedfor our CFM2025 data set yields a MAPE
of 6.15% and a mean absolute error (MAE) of 0.014 W m–2ppbv–1.
In the final step, we recalculatedREXwell‐mixedfor our CFM2025 data set in a region around
the interpolated scaling parameters. With this procedure we were able
to minimize the MAPE to a value of 6.00% with the final scaling parameters
being: λF= 0.978,b= 0.395 cm–1and λI= 0.855. We should note that the M08-HX/pcseg-2 unscaled calculations
(λF= 1,b= 0
cm–1and λF=
1) yield a higher error, namely MAPE = 9.82%.
Our detailed results
for the CFM2025 data set can be seen inTablewhere, besides comparing
our REwell‑mixedvalues with the recommended ones (REexp) we also report: 1) the
number of conformers for each fluorinated compound and 2) a comparison
between the calculated GWP(100) values based on our REwell‑mixedresults and the latest recommended GWP(100) values. Note that our calculated RE and GWP use the atmospheric
lifetimes also reported in WMO2022.
The agreement between our GWP(100) values and the
recommended ones is excellent, with an
associated MAPE value
of only 7.8%. However, it only reflects 23 compounds from our CFM2025
data set, since the remaining 15 are reported as being below 1, seeTable. Notably, our calculations show that all our GWP(100) calculations
for these 15 compounds also yield values below 1. Such a good agreement
was expected, since the main difference between both sets of GWP calculations
is the value of the REthe lifetime is the same. However, it
is important to note that the GWP(100) values in the WMO2022 report
include a tropospheric adjustment ineq, which is absent from our calculations.
The tropospheric adjustment is generically assumed to be 0 ± 13%, and for the four molecules inTablefor which the value
of the experimental and calculated REwell‑mixedis
the same (PFC-218, PFC-31-10, PFC-41-12 and HFO-1234yf), we calculatedREXeffectiveand extracted values of 2.2, 1.6, 1.9 and
2.2% for the tropospheric adjustment, respectively. This methodological
difference accounts for the small variations between our calculated
GWP(100) values and those in the WMO2022 report whenREiwell‐mixedandREiexpare equal. The variety of results forREiexp(the highestREiexpvalue is 228 times higher than the lowestREiexpvalue) was the reason why we chose a relative
error measure (MAPE) as the objective function to minimize, instead
of an absolute error measure (MAE). Clearly, a difference of, for
example, 0.003 W m–2ppbv–1betweenREiwell‐mixedandREiexpcarries different significance depending
on whetherREiexpis 0.004 or 0.464 W m–2ppbv–1. Usage of the MAPE accounts for this variation,
allowing us to accurately reflect it in our results.
To evaluate
the robustness of our approach, we have compared our
results against previous works that have also considered a fitting
of scaling parameters and an evaluation of the quality of the respective
REwell‑mixedvalues. Specifically, we have evaluated
the methodology outlined in three publications,,against our CFM2025 data set. Two of these
previous publications,present a unique challenge: they
derived their scaling parameters by fitting their REwell‑mixedvalues against experimental values different from the ones included
in the WMO2022 report and they also calculated REwell‑mixedusing an older radiative forcing curve. Consequently, testing the parameters from these two publications
serves as a valuable assessment of their long-term robustness against
updated scientific standards. On the other hand, the scaling parameters
reported by Van Hoomissen et al. were
calculated by fitting their data to the WMO2022 report and using the
most recent radiative forcing curve to
calculate REwell‑mixed, as we did with our approach.
It should also be mentioned that within this set of four investigations,
the one reported in this work is the only one using the more fundamentally
sound Voigt line shape profile and the only one that simultaneously
fits the three scaling parameters. Bravo et al., Betowski et al. and Van Hoomissen
et al. used a Gaussian line shape function,
which we coded for comparison purposes as
where Γ is the full width at half-maximum
(fwhm).Tableshows
a summary of the comparison between the four investigations, where
we can observe the distinctive features of each implementation.
Note that the fwhm reported in
this work was calculated as fwhm = 2 γL.
Tableshows that
the methodology applied in this work yields the lowest MAPE. However,
it should be mentioned that the results obtained with the parameters
calculated by Bravo et al. are also excellent,
despite having been obtained with a fit to data concerning only six
perfluorocarbons and in the conditions mentioned above. In contrast,
the scaling parameters obtained in this work, and even more so in
the works of Betowski et al. and Van
Hoomissen et al, were obtained by considering a larger and more diverse
data set of chemical substances: 38, 235, and 118 molecules, respectively.
We should also note that Betowski et al. calculated the REwell‑mixedvalues at several
different levels of theory. We chose the B3LYP/6-31G­(d) level of theory
from their work for calculating REwell‑mixedbecause
it is the combination that yielded their lowest error results. As
for comparisons with the work of Alvarado-Jiménez and Tasinato, we could only compare two compounds: HFC-134a
and HFE-125. For these two cases, the error (REwell‑mixed– REexp) reported by Alvarado-Jiménez and
Tasinato is 0.01 and 0.02 W m–2ppbv–1, respectively. Rounding our RE results to two significant digits
as done by Alvarado-Jiménez and Tasinato, we obtain errors
of 0.01 and −0.02 W m–2ppbv–1, respectively. While a sample size of only two molecules is insufficient
for drawing definitive conclusions, a comparison of our results with
those reported by Alvarado-Jiménez and Tasinato (using a highly
robust and computationally demanding anharmonic approach), Bravo et
al., Betowski et al., and Van Hoomissen et al., suggests
our method may offer an improved balance between accuracy and computational
cost for estimating the radiative efficiency of structurally complex
fluorinated molecules.
One aspect of the calculations that is
also worthwhile commenting
is the difference between an RE calculation considering only the lowest
energy conformer and the RE calculation with the inclusion of all
conformers. From the small set of 22 compounds with more than 1 conformer
available, we observe a slight increase in the relative error [lowest
conformer calculation with respect to the full conformer calculation
ofeq] as a function
of the number of available conformers: 1.4% for compounds with six
or less conformers and 3.0% for compounds with seven or more conformers.
A more precise evaluation of this trend requires a much larger number
of molecules, covering a vast number of available conformers.
As mentioned above, although we do not fit the cross sections directly,
our procedure does fit them indirectly via theFi(ν̅i) radiative forcing curvewhich we can think
of as acting as a weight function. It then becomes necessary to evaluate
the difference between our M08-HX/pcseg-2 scaled calculations (λF= 0.978,b= 0.395 cm–1, λI= 0.855) for
the cross sections and the unscaled calculations (λF= 1,b= 0 cm–1, λI= 1). We recall that we do
not have the information of how the different cross-section data enters
the calculation of the RE for each specific compound in the WMO2022
report. Because of this, and to make the proposed comparison the least
problematic possible, we used the experimental integrated absorption
cross sections for compounds that only had one source of data in the
paper by Hodnebrog et al. We should also
note that this experimental data was determined with varying values
forν̅1andν̅2(see theSupporting Informationof ref  where
the values ofν̅1andν̅2are given for each compound),
while our integrated absorption cross-section values are calculated
in the complete [0,3000] cm–1range defined ineq. The results can be
seen inTable.
It is clear from the data presented inTablethat the scaled cross sections
represent
a significant improvement with respect to the unscaled ones. This
improvement can be understood by looking atFiguresand , where we show,
for ethyl 2,2,2-trifluoroacetate and 1,1,1,3,3,3-hexafluoropropan-2-one
respectively, the differences between the experimental,unscaled (λF= 1,b= 0 cm–1, λI= 1) and scaled (λF= 0.978,b= 0.395 cm–1, λI= 0.855) absorption cross-section spectra obtained in this
work at the M08-HX/pcseg-2 level of theory. Each set of absorption
cross-section spectra is superimposed to the radiative forcing per unit cross-section curve in an interval
that highlights the overlap with the atmospheric window.

Comparison
of experimental,and theoretical cross
sections for ethyl 2,2,2-trifluoroacetate. The experimental data (solid
black line) are compared against theoretical results calculated in
this work at the M08-HX/pcseg-2 level. The theoretical cross sections
are presented in both unscaled (dashed purple line) and scaled (solid
blue line) forms to facilitate a direct comparison of the effects
of the scaling factors against the experimental results. The cross
sections are overlaid with the radiative forcing per unit cross-section (solid orange line).

Comparison of experimental,and theoretical
cross
sections for 1,1,1,3,3,3-hexafluoropropan-2-one. The experimental
data (solid black line) are compared against theoretical results calculated
in this work at the M08-HX/pcseg-2 level. The theoretical cross sections
are presented in both unscaled (dashed purple line) and scaled (solid
blue line) forms to facilitate a direct comparison of the effects
of the scaling factors against the experimental results. The cross
sections are overlaid with the radiative forcing per unit cross-section (solid orange line).
In both figures we can clearly see the effect of
the scaling factors,
which shift the unscaled cross sections to lower wavenumbers with
a reduced intensity, clearly approaching the experimental cross sections.
For ethyl 2,2,2-trifluoroacetate (Figure), the shift from the unscaled to the scaled
cross-section leads to an improvement of the REwell‑mixedvalue from 0.265 to 0.277 W m–2ppbv–1, compared with the experimental value of 0.315 W m–2ppbv–1. This difference to the experimental value
is probably caused by the fact that our calculations cannot reproduce
the experimental cross-section around 1150 cm–1.
Here, anharmonic calculations are most likely the only way to effectively
improve the REwell‑mixedvalue. On the other hand,
for 1,1,1,3,3,3-hexafluoropropan-2-one (Figure), the shift from the unscaled to the scaled
cross-section leads to an improvement of the REwell‑mixedvalue from 0.267 to 0.284 W m–2ppbv–1, almost coinciding with the experimental value of 0.289 W m–2ppbv–1. This excellent agreement
can be rationalized from the huge overlap between the experimental
and scaled cross sections in the atmospheric window.
In order to test the λF,band λIparameters beyond the CFM2025 data set, we chose five additional
fluorinated compounds of increased conformational complexity: an HFC
of 17 atoms (HFC-43–10mee, CASRN of 138495-42-8), an hydrofluoroalcohol
of 24 atoms (undecafluoroheptan-1-ol, CASRN of 185689-57-0), an hydrofluoroether
of 16 atoms (HFE-338pcc13, CASRN of 188690-78-0), an hydrofluoroolefin
of 18 atoms (3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,6-nonafluorohex-1-ene, CASRN of 19430-93-4)
and a perfluorocarbon of 23 atoms (PFC-61–16, CASRN of 335-57-9).
The results are presented inTable. Notably, even for these larger molecules the errors
remain low. For the five fluorinated compounds ofTablewe obtain MAPE = 9.8% and MAE
= 0.05 W m–2ppbv–1. If we now
consider these five molecules plus the CFM2025 data set we obtain
MAPE = 6.4% and MAE = 0.02 W m–2ppbv–1, just slightly above the errors for the CFM2025 data set alone,
with its errors absorbing the errors associated withTable. Due to the quality of the
results obtained with the parameters of Bravo et al. (seeTable), we have also calculated REwell‑mixedfor these
five extra compounds with their approach. It can be seen inTablethat our methodology
yields a radiative efficiency closer to the experimental one for three
cases, while the parameters of Bravo et al. yield a better result
for CHF2OCF2CF2OCHF2.
For the n-C7F16molecule, both approaches yield
the same result.
In addition to the compounds tested inTable, we were asked by one of the
reviewers to
extend our methodology to a few emerging greenhouse gases: heptafluoroisobutyronitrile [(CF3)2CFCN, CASRN of 42532-60-5], 1,1,1,2,2-pentafluoro-2-(trifluoromethoxy)­ethane
(CF3OCF2CF3, CASRN of 665-16-7) and
perfluoromethyl vinyl ether (CF3OCFCF3, CASRN
of 1187-93-5). Trisna et al. report the following values: REwell‑mixed= 0.201 ± 0.008 W m–2ppbv–1for (CF3)2CFCN, REwell‑mixed= 0.544 ± 0.022 W m–2ppbv–1for CF3OCF2CF3and REwell‑mixed= 0.328 ± 0.013 W m–2ppbv–1for CF3OCFCF3. We report REwell‑mixedvalues of 0.258, 0.450, and 0.326 W m–2ppbv–1, respectively, which corresponds to relative errors
of 28.3, 17.2 and 0.6%. A cautious interpretation of these results
is essential, since our prior analyses utilizes the curated experimental
REwell‑mixedvalues from the WMO2022 report. The
absence of this curation process in the current data set warrants caution when drawing conclusions based
on these comparisons. We should add that a value for REwell‑mixedof (CF3)2CFCN based on another experimental
IR spectrum is reported in the WMO2022 document: 0.223 W m–2ppbv–1. This lowers the error from 28.3 to 10.9%.
We further investigated the 17.2% error for CF3OCF2CF3, as Trisna et al. were the first to report
the REwell‑mixedvalue for this compound in their
very recent paper.Figureshows the comparison between
the experimental and theoretical IR spectra.

Comparison of experimental and theoretical
cross sections for CF3OCF2CF3. The
experimental data (solid black line) are compared against theoretical
(scaled) results calculated in this work at the M08-HX/pcseg-2 level
(solid blue line). The cross sections are overlaid with the radiative
forcing per unit cross-section (solid
orange line).
Both spectra show a good agreement except, interestingly,
in the
region between 1100 and 1200 cm–1, similar to what
we observed for ethyl 2,2,2-trifluoroacetate (Figure). This small difference between both spectra
is enough the cause the 17.2% error in the value of REwell‑mixed. A more definitive assessment will be possible only once the updated
benchmarks from the forthcoming World Meteorological Organization
report become available.
Finally, in this subsection
we present the results concerning the calculation of GWPX(100) (henceforth simply referred to as GWPXin the equations below) for three compounds of the
CFM2025 data set: the HFE-236ea2 ether CHF2OCHFCF3and two alcohols, CF3CF2CH2OH and
CHF2CF2CH2OH. However, in this case,
the atmospheric lifetimes were determined by resorting to the respective
previously published MC-TST/CTSR OH oxidation
rate constants,kOH(calc). We extracted
the respective Arrhenius-Kooij parameters fromTableof ref  and calculated the three rate constants at 272
K.,The lifetimes were then obtained viaeq, with the associated ΔτXerror being given by
where we have ignored the error associated
with [OH]. Here, ΔkOH(calc) is the
error associated with each rate constant, calculated with eq (30)
of ref  for an
updated σB= 138 K value, which
reflects the MAE concerning the lowest
hydrogen-abstraction barrier heights for the set of reactions studied
so far,with the MC-TST/CTSR protocol.
The
uncertainty in the GWPXvalue is given
by
with the uncertainty ofAGWPCO2(100)(second term in the square root) having
an estimated value of 26%. The calculation
of ΔAGWPXis expressed as
with several factors affecting theREXwell‐mixedand τXuncertainties. Contributions to theREXwell‐mixeduncertainties (Tableof ref ) can be associated with experimental absorption
cross sections (neglected far IR and shortwave bands), radiation scheme,
clouds, spectral overlap and water vapor distribution, surface emissivity
and temperature, atmospheric temperature, tropopause level, temporal
and spatial averaging, stratospheric temperature adjustment and nonuniform
vertical profile. Contributions to the τXuncertainties can generically be attributed to the uncertainty associated with OH concentration, reaction
rate coefficients (namely the extrapolation of the laboratory based
determinations to low atmospheric temperatures), stratospheric photochemical
loss determinations, stratospheric transport and circulation, and
radiative transfer and atmospheric opacity. In what follows we will
focus on the theoretical contributions to the uncertainties.
The partial derivatives ofeqwere calculated numerically with the central differences
formula. For the ΔREXerror we used our calculated MAE value of 0.014 W m–2ppbv–1. The results are given inTable.
In addition we also include the
ΔGWP(100) error estimation.
For each molecule, an analysis of the two terms present
in the
square root ofeqshows that the largest contributions for ΔGWP come from the
term that depends on Δτ. The difficulties in theoretically
calculating the atmospheric lifetimes are vastly recognized in the
literature, with the discussion about the uncertainties in the experimental
values of GWP being also common.,,,However, a discussion
and presentation of errors for theoretically calculated lifetimes
and radiative efficiencies and how they propagate in the respective
GWP calculations is rarely (if ever) seen in theoretical and computational
investigations. Although our analysis was limited to three compounds,
the results are encouraging as the predicted GWP values are generally
in qualitative agreement with the experimental values, especially
considering the large uncertainties inherent to the atmospheric lifetimes.
We add that the rate constantJfor photolysis would
be necessary for lifetime calculation in fluorinated ketones and aldehydes.
In this article, we have developed a methodology for performing
low error calculations for the radiative efficiency of several different
classes of fluorinated molecules. Our approach uses the most recent
radiative forcing curve and can be applied to any combination of electronic
structure method and basis set (model chemistry). Our method uses
all available conformer population at 298 K for each compound, thus
approximately replicating the existent fractional population of molecules
when the experimental IR spectra are obtained. By minimizing the relative
error of the radiative efficiency for a data set of 38 fluorinated
compounds of different classes, we can easily find optimum values
for the vibrational frequency and intensity scaling parameters for
a given model chemistry without the need to go beyond the harmonic
approximation, keeping the procedure computationally feasible. The
application of this procedure to M08-HX/pcseg-2 calculations allows
us to effortlessly incorporate accurate radiative efficiency calculations
to our MC-TST/CTSR protocol and thus obtain theoretical values of
the GWP metric. These GWP results are given with error bars, which
together with the quality of the atmospheric lifetimes and radiative
efficiencies can be seen as an upgrade to the current theoretical
methodologies that calculate GWP values.
The methodology developed in this study enables a theoretical estimation
of the radiative efficiency for the diverse classes of fluorinated
compounds relevant to the Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol
with an accuracy that, to the best of our knowledge, surpasses existing
approaches based on the harmonic approximation. The high reliability
of this method supports its application in scenarios where experimental
IR spectra are either inaccessible or lack the necessary accuracy.
Furthermore, the designed protocol for the calculation of the scaling
parameters inSectionenables straightforward recalibration of the computed scaling
factors, should the experimental radiative efficiency values or the
radiative forcing curve undergo what is deemed a substantial revision
by the scientific community. This adaptability enhances the method’s
long-term applicability and the use of three scaling parameters may
offer advantages over the more rigid approaches that employ just two.
While the quantified uncertainties for the GWP metric are substantial
for direct use in regulatory compliance (e.g., strict application
of thresholds mandated by the EU’s F-gas regulation (EU) 2024/573),
our methodology provides crucial early stage screening and prioritization,
rapidly identifying high-risk and promising candidates to focus and
accelerate subsequent resource-intensive experimental measurement.
This is particularly relevant for the phasedown of HFCs, as mandated
by the Kigali Amendment, where reliable theoretical predictions and
their uncertainty estimates can complement experimental data to efficiently
identify environmentally safer alternatives from thousands of potential
compounds. Ultimately, our approach contributes to a more precise
evaluation of the radiative effects of fluorinated compounds, aiding
global efforts to mitigate climate change.
We acknowledge funding from the Coimbra Chemistry
Centre – Institute of Molecular Sciences (CQC-IMS) which is
supported by the Fundação para a Ciência e a
Tecnologia (FCT), Portuguese Agency for Scientific Research. CQC is
funded by FCT through projects UID/PRR/00313/2025 (10.54499/UID/PRR/00313/2025), UID/PRR2/00313/2025 (10.54499/UID/PRR2/00313/2025) and UID/00313/2025
(10.54499/UID/00313/2025) and IMS through special complementary funds provided by FCT project
LA/P/0056/2020 (10.54499/LA/P/0056/2020). L. P. V. acknowledges FCT for the
Assistant Researcher contract 2021.01367.CEECIND (10.54499/2021.01367.CEECIND/CP1656/CT0002).
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.est.5c16501.
Cartesian coordinates for all calculated rotamers, with
each coordinate file also containing the M08-HX/pcseg-2 electronic
energy, the Gibbs correction, and the corresponding integrated absorption
cross-section; the respective IR cross-section data for each rotamer;
the final Boltzmann weighted IR cross-section; a results file containing
the relative Gibbs energies for all rotamers; the integrated absorption
cross-section corresponding to the final Boltzmann weighted IR cross-section;
the well-mixed radiative efficiency values (contribution of all conformers
and of the lowest energy one); global warming potential values and
their derivatives (ZIP)
The authors
declare no competing financial interest.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
Articles from Environmental Science & Technology are provided here courtesy ofAmerican Chemical Society
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894