An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Email:evanroijen@ucdavis.edu.
Received 2025 Jan 3; Accepted 2025 Mar 19; Revised 2025 Mar 18; Collection date 2025 Apr 8.
Permits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Transforming building
materials from net life-cycle CO2e emitters to carbon sinks
is a key pathway towards decarbonizing
the industrial sector. Current life-cycle assessments of materials
(particularly “low-carbon” materials) often focus on
cradle-to-gate emissions, which can exclude emissions and uptake (i.e.,
fluxes) later in the materials’ life-cycle. Further, conventional
CO2e emission characterization disregards the dynamic effects
of the timing of emissions and uptake on cumulative radiative forcing
from processes like manufacturing, biomass growth, and the decadal
carbon storage in long-lived building materials. This work presents
a framework to analyze the cradle-to-grave CO2e balance
of building materials using a time-dependent global warming potential
calculation. We apply this framework in the dynamic accounting of
carbon uptake in the built environment (D-CUBE) tool and examine two
case studies: concrete and cross-laminated timber (CLT). When accounting
for dynamic effects, the long storage time of biogenic carbon in CLT
results in reduced warming, while the slow rate of uptake via concrete
carbonation does not result in significant reductions in global warming.
The D-CUBE tool allows for consistent comparisons across materials
and emissions mitigation strategies at varying life-cycle stages and
can be adapted to other materials or systems with different lifespans
and applications. The flexibility of D-CUBE and the ability to identify
CO2e emission hot-spot life-cycle stages will be instrumental
in identifying pathways to achieving net-carbon-sequestering building
materials.
Keywords:carbon sequestration, greenhouse gas emissions, materials, time-adjusted warming potential, construction, life-cycle assessment, concrete, cross-laminated
timber
Typical global warming potential calculations
do not consider
the timing of emissions. The presented framework enables assessment
of dynamic fluxes of long lifespan materials, more accurately informing
decarbonization efforts.
Buildings and infrastructure
are responsible for approximately
40% of United States (US) energy consumption and greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions.1To achieve goals of net carbon
neutrality by 2050, we need to both reduce these emissions and create
carbon-uptake and storage mechanisms, potentially using the built
environment as a carbon storage reservoir.2−100Numerous permutations
of conventional materials have been proposed to store carbon in the
built environment, including concrete,3wood and other biomass,4and plastics.5,6Such materials can reduce net GHG emissions via their carbon uptake
and by replacing higher-emission counterparts.7,8Past
research on building materials has often focused on cradle-to-gate
GHG fluxes (i.e., emissions and uptake).9However, meaningful GHG fluxes can occur later in the material
life-cycle (e.g., decomposition at end-of-life (EoL)). Accurate accounting
of fluxes at later life-cycle stages is necessary to ensure carbon
sequestration on a time scale that is relevant for societal climate
change mitigation goals. Cradle-to-gate impacts for building materials
have been well studied; however, there is substantial uncertainty
in EoL materials management decades in the future, thus consideration
of multiple EoL pathways is crucial to determining the range of carbon
sequestration outcomes.
Traditional global warming potential
(GWP), a methodology derived
from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), is calculated
assuming that all life-cycle emissions occur at the same time.10To determine carbon storage in materials that
is relevant for meeting climate change goals, both the quantity and
the time period in which these fluxes occur should be addressed. Similar
to how acute toxicity (a large dose of a toxin at one time) has a
different effect on the human body than chronic toxicity (repeated
exposure of smaller doses of toxins), a rapid pulse of GHG emissions
has a different impact on cumulative radiative forcing than a slow
release of GHG emissions over time. Given the varying timelines for
both material production (e.g., tree growth, emissions from energy
resources),11application of building materials,4and their subsequent disposal, the timing of
emissions release and uptake can have a significant impact on cumulative
radiative forcing and the potential for a material to act as a sequestering
resource, but these timing effects are often overlooked for building
materials.12Dynamic characterization of
GHG fluxes more accurately reflects the contribution of emissions
in a time-sensitive manner. This methodology has been around for over
a decade, with multiple models having been developed with varying
approaches. Some models apply discount rates to emissions in the future,13,14some account for both the timing of emissions and change in background
GHG concentrations over time,15and some
focus specifically on biogenic carbon fluxes.16,17These dynamic warming potential models have been utilized in a variety
of applications, such as energy technologies15,18and building life-cycles.19−21However, a recent review of these
various models shows that slight changes in methodologies can have
a significant impact on results.22
While some excel-based tools for dynamic GHG characterization already
exist, such as dynCO2,23these tools only
allow users to examine the total impacts of a product or process,
and do not provide a breakdown of emissions based on lifecycle stage.
At present, there is a limited understanding of when upfront emissions
may be justifiable in exchange for prolonged material use. As a result,
many important questions arise when discussing material sustainability
and efficient architectural design: when is it justifiable to accept
higher emissions at the outset of a product’s life cycle if
long-term CO2uptake or a prolonged lifespan can compensate
for it? How much carbon sequestration or increased durability would
be necessary to effectively counterbalance higher initial emissions?
If a material can be engineered to have a significantly lower environmental
impact per unit but requires more frequent replacement, what implications
does this have for overall sustainability? Additionally, if the ability
to influence only one stage of a material’s lifecycle exists—due
to constraints in the value chain—what is the most impactful
intervention that could be made? Possible strategies include prioritizing
the use of repurposed materials, elongating material use, or developing
mechanisms to support carbon uptake throughout the material’s
lifespan. The tool presented herein allows users to examine the dynamic
GHG impacts of each lifecycle stage of a product and investigate the
possibility of a secondary lifecycle, therefore enabling rapid decision
making for sustainable material design.
Another issue that often
arises for building materials is how to
characterize biogenic carbon. Often times, biogenic carbon is treated
as having zero or neutral impacts in life cycle assessments. This
approach assumes that the carbon released when biomass is used (e.g.,
in wood products) is offset by the carbon absorbed during the biomass’s
growth phase. This simplification can distort the impacts associated
with biomass use, partly because of the long growth period of some
biomass such as forests, and also because of the long use-phase of
materials such as wood in the built environment. To try and improve
efforts for tracking carbon, the +1/–1 approach is sometimes
applied, which essentially treats biogenic carbon the same as fossil
carbon: where any emissions to the atmosphere have a “positive”
impact on radiative forcing (i.e., they contribute to climate change),
and any CO2taken out of the atmosphere has a “negative”
impact, offsetting emissions. This method provides a straightforward
way to account for carbon flows but fails to consider the timing of
when the carbon is released and when it is absorbed. Therefore, by
applying the +1/–1 approach with dynamic carbon accounting
methods, this tool can provide a more accurate understanding of the
impacts of biobased materials in long-term applications.
This
tool, the dynamic accounting of carbon uptake in the built
environment (D-CUBE), utilizes GHG fluxes and the time period of each
material life-cycle stage to determine time-sensitive impacts on cumulative
radiative forcing, as well as to determine GHG emission hot-spots.
Given the multidecade time horizons for materials in infrastructure
applications, emissions are calculated based on time-adjusted warming
potentials (TAWPs).10While D-CUBE is developed
for application to carbon-storing building materials, life-cycle stages
that are reflective of other products could replace those presented
herein. Next, two case-study applications of the developed framework
are provided for an emerging biobased building material, yellow poplar
(YP) cross-laminated timber (CLT), alongside a conventional mineral-derived
building material, Portland cement concrete. Scenario analysis is
performed to examine the effects of factors such as varying production
routes and EoL states (e.g., landfilling, combustion, gasification,
or pyrolysis for biomass). D-CUBE can be applied to determine the
relative contribution of each life-cycle stage to aid in accurately
determining material carbon sequestration potential across the entire
material life-cycle and to inform production, use, and disposal pathways
that can support desired carbon sequestration capacity.
In this work,
we have derived a framework, that pairs a TAWP method, based on work
by Kendall,10with the dynamic GHG fluxes
that occur throughout a material’s life-cycle and then apply
this framework in a developed tool, D-CUBE. Manufacturing emissions
and EoL emissions generally occur on very different time scales. For
some building materials, carbon can be stored within the material
for decadal time horizons. The effects of emissions and removals timing,
as well as quantifying benefits of carbon removals shorter than 100
years is of increasing importance as efforts aim to decarbonize the
built environment and new materials are engineered to store or utilize
carbon. Building from different approaches, including work by Van
Roijen et al. (2024)24which focuses on
time-dependent impacts of concrete carbonation, this framework assembles
a unified method for addressing dynamic GHG fluxes throughout a material’s
life cycle and allows for modification of end-of-life assumptions
and life-cycle time horizons.
To
implement D-CUBE, a scope of assessment and inventory of GHG fluxes
are needed. While all GHGs can be modeled using this tool, we present
an implementation of the method derived in a simplified calculator
in theSupporting Information. CO2, CH4, and N2O emissions have been reported
as the most prevalent GHG emissions from building materials production,25and therefore we focus on these gases. D-CUBE
facilitates three primary types of inputs: (1) the CO2,
CH4, and N2O emissions (in units of kg/unit
product) associated with each life-cycle stage; (2) the CO2uptake (kg/unit product) associated with each life-cycle stage;
and (3) the duration of specific life-cycle stages (in years), namely
raw material acquisition (e.g., rate of photosynthetic carbon uptake
in biomass), use/maintenance (e.g., the length of time the product
is in service), and EoL (i.e., the time horizon over which end-of-life
fluxes are anticipated to occur, such as material decay). It is assumed
that manufacturing/assembly, transportation from raw material acquisition
to construction, and construction cumulatively occur within one year,
and it is assumed that removal/demolition and transportation to waste
treatment together occur within one year.
D-CUBE requires several
key inputs. First, for the material or product of interest, define
a scope of analysis. This scope could include factors such as anticipated
shifts in material use (e.g., demand for repair), potential EoL management
pathways, and the expected time horizons for material synthesis, use,
and EoL. Further, scenario analyses could be outlined that consider
future changes in energy grids, material availability, and alternative
production pathways (e.g., using carbon capture and storage for energy
facilities, and use of renewable energy resources). We outline these
key phases to consider while determining the scope of assessment inFigure1. After defining
a scope, the practitioner must address anticipated GHG uptake and
emissions at each of the eight primary stages presented inFigure1. Namely, an inventory
of the CO2, CH4, and N2O emissions
and uptake must be determined per unit of material. These GHG fluxes
must also be quantified for any permutations of interest (e.g., electricity
grid mix variations). With these inputs and outputs, the methodology
can be implemented (as discussed in the subsequent sections).

Data considerations
to determine for the scope of assessment, greenhouse
gas fluxes to consider, implementation, and iteration for the proposed
method. (Note: only example parameters are listed, additional parameters
may exist).
The outputs of D-CUBE provide
mechanisms to assess
the cradle-to-grave
life-cycle time-adjusted global warming effects for a building material.
The case studies are presented in terms of 1 m3of product;
however, the calculation approach described is inherently functional
unit independent. More complex material systems can be modeled if
input fluxes are normalized to that specific system, as the method
is agnostic to product type. Results output a traditional GWP value
as well as a TAWP value. The TAWP value considers the impact of the
timing of emissions and the resulting impact on cumulative radiative
forcing. In addition, D-CUBE provides the percent contributions of
each life-cycle stage (i.e., resources, processing, manufacturing,
construction, use, demolition, end-of-life, and cumulative transportation-related
emissions throughout the system) to the overall TAWP. This breakdown
allows users to determine hot-spots of uptake and sequestration, and
as a result, they can alter parameters to understand manufacturing,
use, and disposal pathways that drive desired net fluxes. For the
D-CUBE outputs, note that if the overall TAWP is negative, then any
life-cycle stages with positive emissions will have a “negative”
percent contribution, and any life-cycle stages that have negative
emissions (GHG uptake), will have a “positive” percent
contribution, and vice versa (seeSupporting Information). In addition, the relative contribution of each GHG (CO2, CH4, and N2O) flux in each life-cycle stage
is presented. Both traditional GWP and TAWP are calculated with a
100 year time horizon using data from the IPCC’s AR5 report.26
The impacts due
to radiative forcing of a specific GHG are dependent on the year at
which the flux (i.e., emissions or uptake) occurs and the magnitude
of that flux, as seen ineqs1and2below. We assess net emissions
associated with a product as a function of the inventory of fluxes
and the TAWP to capture the radiative forcing from those fluxes as
follows:
whereQis the quantity of
GHG emissions or uptake,yis the year of emission
(wherey= 0 at the beginning of the analytical period),iis the type of GHG (here focusing on CO2, CH4and N2O), and TAWP is the time-adjusted warming
potential for an emission of gasi, in yeary. To allow for comparisons with conventional GWP characterization
factors,eq1is also
implemented with the IPCC’s AR5 GWP 100 factors.26In this permutation, the GWP characterization
factors for each GHG are used to replace the TAWP factors.
To
determine an appropriate TAWP, cumulative radiative forcing is assessed
by calculating the integral of radiative forcing over a given time
horizon. The timing of emissions is captured by the variabley, as defined byeq1. By subtractingyfrom the time horizon,
the time horizon for integration of radiative forcing is more accurately
captured than with a traditional GWP factor.10
Ineq2, RFiand RFCO2refer to the radiative
forcing of GHGiand CO2, respectively.
These calculations are based on background GHG concentrations reported
in IPCC AR5, and do not reflect changes of background GHG concentrations
in the future.ATrefers to the analytical time horizon.
In the case studies presented herein, a time horizon of 100 years
is utilized to draw comparisons to traditional GWP results. By using
a 100 year time horizon, the analytical period for cumulative radiative
forcing is truncated at 100 years from the beginning of the analytical
period. For example, if an emission occurs at year 20, then only 80
years of cumulative radiative forcing will be accounted for.Figure2illustrates how
the impacts of emissions for a typical building might be considered
using various time horizons.

Qualitative representation of the impact of
a chosen analytical
time horizon on resulting GHG characterization using TAWP. An example
of a 20, 100 and 300 year time horizon is shown in orange, yellow
and green, respectively. Navy blue arrows depict the lifetime of a
hypothetical greenhouse gas. Note that the atmospheric lifetime of
different greenhouse gases varies by type.
Using a longer analytical time horizon for integration
of radiative
forcing will capture more of the warming effects of emissions, especially
those with longer atmospheric lifetimes; it can also result in undervaluing
the immediate impacts of shorter-lived GHG emissions such as CH4. This phenomenon has been well documented, and it has led
to much debate regarding the appropriate method for selecting an analytical
time horizon. It is also important to note that under longer time
horizons, the difference in results between static and dynamic GHG
characterization methods will be less pronounced. For example, Kendall
shows that under a 100 year time horizon, dynamic GHG characterization
results in 30% lower impacts on global warming for a commercial building
lifecycle, while under a 500 year time horizon it is only 5% different.27Given the importance and sensitivity of the
time horizon on the results, D-CUBE allows users to select a time
horizon of 20, 30, 50, 100, 300, or 500 years to analyze the appropriate
time horizon for their work or to examine the change in results between
time horizons.
The outputs
of D-CUBE can be used to drive materials, products, and systems engineering.
For those desiring to develop materials that can act as a CO2reservoir and store either atmospheric CO2or CO2captured from flue gas, thus bypassing the need for geological
reserves. This method can capture the decadal benefits of potential
temporary and long-term storage that are not captured with GWP characterization
factors. Maximum storage potential for any given material will depend
on the chemical composition of the material, manufacturing methods,
potential in-use longevity, and disposal pathways. Yet, D-CUBE facilitates
an understanding of guiding principles to target alternative measures
throughout the material’s life-cycle that would increase net-uptake
and sequestration potential. As would be expected, at any life-cycle
stage, minimizing GHG emissions and maximizing CO2uptake
will drive down net fluxes and increase net storage potential. However,
depending on the magnitude of uptake versus emissions, the longevity
of different life-cycle stages will have varying effects. To drive
maximum carbon uptake and storage, typically, elongating periods where
CO2is stored and accelerating the rate for which a certain
quantity of CO2is removed from the atmosphere are desirable.
By implementing this tool, users can systematically quantify the
benefits of various decarbonization strategies for the built environment.
These can include factors such as trade-offs between high emissions
upfront and longer lifespan (potentially reducing maintenance, repair,
or replacement), which is a common debate in engineering long-lived
infrastructure materials.28−30Herein, the effects of how prolonging
carbon storage or reducing replacement-related emissions compared
to a pulse of emissions at the onset through material production can
be quantified. Further, the influence of varying future decarbonization
of energy resources, varying future resource inputs, and varying future
waste management on the efficacy of materials acting as carbon storage
can be assessed. By varying inputs, stages of the life-cycle that
have the greatest effect on net fluxes, and thus should be optimized
to drive desired emissions profiles for the material, can be determined
through sensitivity analyses.
Assessment using
TAWPs should consider timing, type, and magnitude
of GHG emissions throughout the life-cycle of a material or product.
During raw material formation and extraction, uptake in mineral materials
primarily occurs at geological time scales that do not contribute
to relevant CO2removal and storage,31and in photosynthetic biogenic materials, uptake occurs
at annual (agricultural crops) or decadal (forestry) time scales.32Emissions occur from both mineral and biogenic
materials due to energy use during extraction or harvesting,33as well as from other emissions sources, such
as those associated with fertilizer use and land management.34,35During material processing, conversion, manufacture, assembly, and
construction life-cycle stages, emissions are dominated by energy
use as well as chemical reactions during processing (e.g., cement
production36,37). During the use phase, some
materials, such as concrete, are capable of certain degrees of CO2uptake during use under the appropriate exposure conditions.38Notably, this life-cycle stage also defines
how long the material’s lifespan is, during which, if there
is bound carbon, the in-use material may act as a temporary GHG reservoir.
At EoL, emissions associated with energy use for demolition and material
processing should be considered, and some EoL pathways may result
in emissions due to material decomposition (e.g., combustion of biomass).
The EoL for a material may occur decades after production, with common
practices varying by material type and locally available waste management
infrastructure, making the EoL scenario highly uncertain. Therefore,
it is advantageous to consider multiple EoL pathways to assess the
effects of dynamic GHG fluxes of various potential pathways. Transportation
may occur between and during all stages described above, resulting
in GHG emissions. Additional GHG fluxes may occur due to material
waste during all stages prior to use or during transportation. Waste
can result from factors such as overordering, damage during handling
or storage, and incorrect installation, and this waste drives increased
material production and associated GHG fluxes.39SeeSupporting InformationSection
2.4 for a complete description of fluxes at each life-cycle stage.
In the D-CUBE tool, a user should consider shifts driven by material
performance and durability if applicable to the scenarios being considered.
As D-CUBE is independent of the functional unit (GHG fluxes can be
normalized to any unit of material), it can easily be adapted to functional
units that consider these critical performance metrics and, therefore,
their associated GHG fluxes. D-CUBE follows the life-cycle of an individual
material, so if material replacement or maintenance is necessary during
the use phase of the whole system, additional material production
would be required, which may vary in timeline to the original material.
If a loss in material performance influences emissions tied to other
systems (e.g., an increase in thermal conductivity with time, leading
to greater HVAC system requirements), those additional emissions can
be modeled at the user’s discretion. The D-CUBE model assumes
linear carbon uptake within each life cycle stage, which simplifies
the nonlinear growth dynamics of biomass (e.g., trees or agricultural
residues). While this approach does not capture the details carbon
flux within each stage, the effect on the final TAWP is typically
minor, as the total carbon content at the end of each stage remains
the same. This simplification ensures the model remains practical
and easy to use, but users should be aware of this limitation when
interpreting the results.
In this section,
we exemplify the implementation of D-CUBE through two case studies
to provide context for framework implementation. These case studies
compare D-CUBE results to conventional GWP characterization factor-based
assessments. Here, we assess the GHG fluxes associated with each life-cycle
stage of Portland cement concrete and CLT. Concrete was selected due
to its ubiquity as the most widely used building material, and it
represents a class of mineral-based building materials. This choice
also facilitates comparisons with findings from existing literature.
CLT, another commonly used building material, is a biogenic-based
material that demonstrates superior mechanical performance compared
to other wood-based materials like glulam and plywood. Furthermore,
CLT has the potential for use in mid- to high-rise construction, positioning
it as a viable alternative to conventional materials like concrete.
Here, we consider CLT made with YP. We aim to highlight the carbon
sequestration potential of these materials and assess how they are
affected by varying parameters such as energy systems, in-use lifespans,
EoL scenarios, and material processing.
A functional unit of
1 m3of material is used for this assessment. In both cases,
emissions associated with maintenance in the use-phase and transportation
emissions are excluded, given the high uncertainty in maintenance
depending on spatiotemporal drivers (e.g., susceptible to extreme
weather events or not) and the high variability in transportation
distances, which are specific to a particular facility and location.
A 50 year service life is assumed for the baseline scenario for both
concrete and CLT (Figure3), and a 21 year growth period for biomass growth is assumed.

Life-cycle
stages for Portland cement concrete and yellow poplar
(YP) cross-laminated timber (CLT), showing the length of time and
primary sources of carbon fluxes for each life-cycle stage (seeSupporting InformationTables 1 and 2 for complete
flux sourcing). Arrow sizes approximate the proportional magnitude
of GHG fluxes.
For concrete, the inventory modeling assumptions
and data sources included inputs from raw material acquisition through
concrete disposal at the end of a service life within a building (Table S1). For the baseline case, a Portland
cement concrete mixture is modeled, in which there are no supplementary
cementitious materials (SCMs) considered, and the compressive strength
at 28 days is 25 MPa.40The GHG emissions
from raw materials extraction, processing and manufacturing of cement
were determined using the OpenConcrete LCA tool by Kim et al. (2022).41Carbon uptake occurring during the use-phase
and EoL stages as a result of carbonation are modeled based on results
from Van Roijen et al. (2024).24Further,
the GHG emissions generated during the construction and demolition
phases were based on Guggemos and Horvath (2005).42SeeSupporting Informationfor
a detailed description of modeling assumptions and data sources (Table S1 and Section 3.1).
For the YP CLT,
the inventory modeling assumptions and data sources included inputs
from raw material acquisition (in this case, YP cultivation and harvest)
through disposal (modeled based on an assumption of combustion with
energy recovery, seeSupporting InformationTable S2 and Section 3.2). The acquisition of the biogenic YP included
aspects such as growing and logging operations. It was assumed that
YP was harvested after 21 years of growth32using shelterwood harvesting. Only aboveground biomass was considered
in this study and the GHG fluxes do not include long-term changes
in soil carbon stocks, as these are highly uncertain and dependent
on the land use history, local soil type, and climate. To address
bound carbon resulting from photosynthesis during cultivation, a carbon
content of 50 wt % of total wood was used to quantify the CO2uptake during biomass growth.43These
long-duration uptake flows were paired with a pulse of emissions from
the extraction of materials processing (saw mill operations) and manufacturing
(e.g., kiln drying and CLT production).44Unlike the concrete case, CLT does not take up CO2during
the use phase. Therefore, because we exclude impacts from maintenance
and repair in these models, no emissions or uptake is considered in
the use phase for CLT structures. The baseline model assumes direct
combustion of the YP CLT at its EoL.45
As part of this work, we also aim to present a proof of concept of
theoretical maxima of sequestration of materials. As noted earlier,
the maximum uptake a material can offer will depend on GHG fluxes
and duration due to composition, manufacturing methods, installation,
use, and disposal pathways. To present a proof of concept as to how
this framework can be implemented to understand potential maximum
sequestration, we hold several parameters constant and investigate
the influence of others on driving down cumulative radiative forcing.
In a full scenario analysis, all potential permutations could be considered
(e.g., varying chemical composition, improving manufacturing efficiency,
fuel switching, prolonging in-use, and EoL carbon storage). For all
decarbonized energy grid scenarios, we include decarbonization of
the electricity grid (i.e., no GHG emissions from electricity) and
use of natural gas as opposed more carbon-intense fuels (e.g., coal)
for any thermal energy sources used in material processes. Emissions
from chemicals in the harvest stage of CLT were also considered to
be negligible in those scenarios, assuming that more environmentally
friendly sources were to be used to replace the herbicide and lubricant
in CLT harvest process.
For concrete, seven mitigation scenarios
are considered to investigate the impact on overall life-cycle emissions
to demonstrate how strategies for altering material production and
disposal could inform the pathway leading to maximum uptake. These
seven scenarios were: (1) decarbonized energy grid, (2) 20% substitution
of cement with fly ash, (3) 50% substitution of cement with ground
granulated blast furnace slag, (4) landfilling of concrete at EoL,
(5) extending the use-phase of concrete to 80 years, (6) extending
the end-of-life stage of concrete to 5 years, and (7) combining a
decarbonized energy grid, an extended use phase, and 20% replacement
of cement with fly ash. The decarbonized electricity grid was assumed
to generate zero emissions, and no allocation of emissions from the
generation of industrial byproducts used to substitute cement were
considered (i.e., for the fly ash and the blast furnace slag). Specific
conditions were considered for the concrete use phase and EoL exposures
to capture the effects of carbonation. It was assumed the concrete
was exposed in an urban environment (reflective of CO2concentration)
without coatings during the use phase. It was also assumed that carbonation
during the EoL phase happens in an exposed, industrial environment
where the demolished concrete is crushed to small (1–40 mm)
pieces and carbonated for 1 year, with carbonation based on Van Roijen
et al. (2024).24In the landfill scenario,
the concrete is assumed to be crushed to coarse (100–500 mm)
pieces. SeeSupporting Informationfor
detailed assumptions for each scenario.
For the CLT, five mitigation
scenarios were considered, primarily
focusing on the influence of EoL management. The baseline scenario
used herein is direct combustion at a power plant with the baseline
energy grid. The following mitigation scenarios at EoL were assessed:
(1) gasification (baseline energy grid), (2) slow pyrolysis (baseline
energy grid), (3) direct combustion (decarbonized energy grid), (4)
gasification (decarbonized energy grid), and (5) slow pyrolysis (decarbonized
energy grid). For the scenarios with decarbonized electricity grid,
the emissions from raw materials stage to demolition stage were assumed
to be zero, and carbon uptake in the biomass growth period and emissions
from combustion were considered. The GHG fluxes for these different
pathways remain the same from the raw material acquisition phase up
to demolition. For the pathways that produce biochar (e.g., slow pyrolysis),
no carbon fluxes from life-cycle stages after the production of biochar
(e.g., avoided emissions from the agricultural application or material
replacement or emissions from biochar degradation) were included.
For example, this considers the utilization of the char for a second
life, where the carbon that remains bound can be stored for the longevity
of another building application (e.g., in a concrete mixture). For
the EoL pathways that resulted in bio-oil production, the heating
value of the bio-oil was compared to that of petroleum fuels to determine
the emissions trade-off for an equivalent amount of heat. For example,
if the bio-oil was to be blended in very small quantities and coprocessed
with crude oil, then it could offer a partial replacement to the fossil
oil.46We did not consider the transportation
or processing for these subsequent use phases. The variations in emissions
only occur at the EoL stage to show a proof of concept. Emissions
from the biomass power plant were taken into account,47and the generated electricity was compared to average emissions
from the national power grid to determine the emissions trade-off
for an equivalent amount of generated electricity. Electricity generation
efficiencies for different biomass power plants were sourced from
the literature, resulting in varied efficiency rates across the three
pathways. SeeSupporting Informationfor
detailed assumptions and modeling details for each scenario.
A synthesis of emissions outputs
by life-cycle stage, both with
the use of GWP characterization factors and with the use of TAWPs
are presented inFigure4a for the baseline cases of 1 m3concrete and CLT.

(a) Total emissions
by life-cycle stage (bars) and net emissions
per life-cycle stage for the baseline concrete and CLT scenarios (“total
CO2e” represents the implementation of GWP 100a
characterization factors to assess cumulative emissions throughout
the life-cycle). (b) Life-cycle GHG emissions (in terms of TAWP) for
concrete and CLT under various mitigation scenarios. Decarb. e-grid
= decarbonized energy grid.
In the baseline case for concrete, if conventional
GWP100 characterization
factors are applied (as are conventionally used in reports such as
Environmental Product Declarations), the cumulative life-cycle GHG
emissions are 334 kg CO2e/m3. As expected, most
emissions are generated during the processing phase (e.g., calcination,
thermal energy for cement production). The construction phase is the
second largest contributor, contributing 28% of the total GHG emissions.
While carbonation of concrete is gaining attention as a potential
direct air capture mechanism,3,48the CO2uptake
during the use phase and at EoL resulting from concrete carbonation
is small compared to the total GHG emissions. When TAWPs are considered,
the total life-cycle emissions become 98.5% (330 kg CO2e/m3) of the GHG emissions when TAWPs are not considered.
In this baseline case, the TAWP and GWP methodologies result in similar
life-cycle emissions due to most emissions occurring within the first
few years. However, the TAWP method used in the D-CUBE tool results
in a slightly lower overall life-cycle warming potential due to the
reduced impact of emissions occurring in later stages (i.e., emissions
from construction and demolition).
Unlike concrete, CLT life-cycle
GHG fluxes result in a net-uptake
due to the large quantity of atmospheric CO2that is taken
in during biomass growth (Figure4a). For CLT, most GHG emissions are generated at the
EoL phase from combustion. When accounting for the dynamic effects
of GHG fluxes via TAWPs, CLT results in sequestration of −334
kg CO2e/m3over the life-cycle. However, when
GWP100 characterization factors are used, net life-cycle GHG fluxes
are near net-zero. These near net-zero emissions when using GWP are
a result of later life-cycle stages (e.g., construction, disposal),
resulting in GHG emissions that counteract the uptake during biomass
cultivation. However, when the dynamic effects of early CO2uptake and carbon storage during use are considered relative to
periods in which GHG emissions occur with TAWPs, the beneficial effects
of CLT on cumulative radiative forcing (CRF) becomes apparent.
Previous LCAs of CLT focused on cradle-to-gate (i.e., harvesting
through manufacturing) emissions of CLT, ranging from about 80–200
kg CO2e/m3CLT.49,50Excluding
sequestration and postmanufacturing stages, our findings are similar
(185 kg CO2e/m3), but results can vary based
on lumber source, processing and manufacturing energy demands, electricity
grid mix, and other supply chain characteristics.
For concrete, the GHG emissions notably
exceed the CO2uptake. However, specific interventions
can result in higher uptake
and lower emissions over the life-cycle. Of the scenarios considered,
the greatest reduction in life-cycle emissions was achieved by decarbonizing
the energy grid and using low-carbon fuels in cement production. This
decarbonization strategy resulted in negligible GHG emissions during
the use and end-of-life phases, allowing the carbonation at these
stages to support a small net-CO2uptake. As shown inFigure4b, a greater reduction
in GHG emissions but a similar quantity of CO2uptake from
carbonation was achieved with the “Combined” scenario,
where cement substitution by SCMs (20% fly ash), an extended service
life (80 years as opposed to 50 years), and decarbonized energy grid
and low carbon fuels are considered. The “Combined”
scenario leads to 123 and 93 kg CO2e per m3concrete
over the complete life-cycle, using TAWPs and traditional GWPs, respectively.
In the scenarios for concrete in which a zero-emissions energy
grid and low-carbon fuels are considered, the TAWP results are higher
than when GWP characterization factors are used (seeSupporting InformationFigure S1). This is because no GHG
emissions are occurring during the construction and demolition phases,
which, in the baseline scenario, outweigh the quantity of carbon uptake
from carbonation. As a result, all emissions occur during the first
year, and therefore, the climate benefits of the carbon uptake, are
much smaller when accounting for the long-time horizon over which
they occur. When the dynamic effects of how much later this uptake
is occurring are considered, they are not as beneficial as GWP characterization
factors would suggest. Extending the end-of-life phase from 1 to 5
years and reducing the diameter of the demolished concrete particles
has a minor effect on the sequestration potential for concrete in
this case.
Given that the EoL emissions for CLT contribute the
most to overall
life-cycle emissions, various EoL pathways were considered (Figure4b). The life-cycle
GWPs per m3CLT when assuming combustion, gasification,
and slow pyrolysis as EoL scenarios are 37 kg, −70 kg, and
−417 kg CO2e, respectively, while the TAWP values
are −334 kg, −374 kg, and −491 kg CO2e, respectively. Regardless of the EoL scenario examined, near-zero
or negative life-cycle emissions were achieved using both GWP and
time-adjusted methods. This trend is primarily due to the photosynthesis
of biomass during growth, which absorbs 3.8 and 4.3 times the amount
of GHGs associated with raw material acquisition, processing, manufacture,
construction, and demolition combined for GWP and the dynamic method
used herein, respectively. Notably, greater net benefits to cumulative
radiative forcing were found when considering the dynamic effects
of these fluxes. This shift is due to the CLT acting as a temporary
carbon pool during the 50 year use phase, which delays the EoL GHG
emissions and thereby reduces the impact on cumulative radiative forcing
during the analytical time horizon. This dynamic benefit of temporarily
storing carbon is not reflected by GWP characterization factors. Further,
at the EoL stage, carbon in the biomass is partially stored in the
ash (combustion) or char (gasification and pyrolysis), while the rest
is emitted via oxidation. For example, the carbon emission from decay
and combustion comprised 97.3% of the total carbon in the biomass.
The TAWP result for the gasification scenario is 40 kg CO2e lower than that of direct combustion, attributable to the increased
yield of solid-phase materials (char) that sequester more carbon.
Similarly, slow pyrolysis exhibits a 47% lower TAWP result compared
to combustion due to a higher char yield. However, the energy generated
from biomass through combustion can replace conventional energy sources
and their associated GHG emissions. As such, we still see reduced
TAWP from combustion even though most of the carbon was released.
The emissions benefits from displacing electricity and energy from
the grid may be reduced when cleaner energy (i.e., via a decarbonized
energy grid) is being substituted. However, the overall TAWP was 36%
lower in the combustion scenario when a decarbonized energy grid was
used due to the elimination of energy-derived GHG emissions from the
raw materials stage to the removal stage. Notably, a landfilling scenario
for CLT shows high spatial variability in emissions and uncertainty
in future landfilling practices.51If landfilling
were considered, emissions would occur over a time period of greater
than a year, they would be highly spatially variable, and a larger
fraction of emissions would be in the form of methane rather than
CO2, depending on exact landfilling practices and methane
capture. Our analysis of the landfill scenario, which assumes EoL
emissions (based on ref (52)) occur over 10 years and all other life-cycle stages emissions/uptake
are the same as the baseline (combustion) scenario, indicated that
the GWP and TAWP were 349 and −277 kg CO2e, respectively.
Additionally, material reuse or recycling is an important EoL pathway
for CLT, with ease of reuse being often touted as a key benefit of
CLT over other wood products.53Consideration
of second life and beyond emissions would provide key insight into
the role of avoided emissions and dynamic warming effects in the circular
economy broadly. The CLT recycling scenario, which assumes a 20 year
secondary use-phase, the same emissions from construction and demolition
as in the first use-phase, and combustion at EoL, resulted in reduced
TAWP (−509 kg CO2e) compared to combustion without
recycling (−334 kg CO2e) due to delayed GHG emissions
after recycling. The rotation cycle varies among wood products. As
such, a sensitivity analysis of the rotation cycle of the CLT, considering
17 and 25 years of growth period of the YP, was conducted. Results
showed only −6% and 5% differences in terms of TAWP compared
to that of the 21 year combustion scenario. We note, however, that
care should be taken to consider uncertainty (e.g., in potential ranges
of energy grid decarbonization) in future avoided emissions from material
replacement with recycled material to accurately reflect the range
of emissions reduction possible with future reuse and recycling scenarios.
Our analysis of the concrete and timber case studies revealed similar
patterns in life-cycle GHG flux, aligning with trends observed in
existing literature. This finding underscores the dynamic differences
in GHG characterization between GWP and TAWP. In some cases, CO2uptake through concrete carbonation is regarded as having
a notable influence on the decarbonization of cement and concrete.54−56However, in the concrete scenario presented here, GHG emissions
exhibited minimal variation across life-cycle stages, as they are
predominantly concentrated in the early stages of the analyzed time
horizon.57A previous study comparing CO2uptake scenarios with decarbonization strategies found similar
results, indicating that CO2uptake during service life
has a minor impact on GWP. In contrast, the use of SCMs and alternative
fuels offers the greatest potential for reducing life-cycle CO2emissions, unless the concrete is crushed at EoL to carbonate
over decades.58In contrast, the carbon
uptake by biomass and its delayed release during energy generation
affects the atmospheric CO2balance, leading to significant
differences between GWP and TAWP.59−61This is consistent with
the findings of Ericsson et al. (2013),62who demonstrated that the timing of carbon fluxes in bioenergy systems,
such as short-rotation coppice willow, plays a critical role in determining
their climate impact. Unlike conventional LCA, which omits these temporal
dynamics, our D-CUBE model incorporates the CO2e flux over
time allowing for identification of the most effective strategies
for reducing emissions and achieving near-zero emissions or net-carbon-storage
goals.
By breaking
down emissions
by life-cycle stage, as well as examining
the impact of the timing of emissions on cumulative radiative forcing,
this tool allows for a robust understanding of current hot spots in
the life-cycle of materials or processes. Furthermore, it allows for
comparisons of various scenarios using consistent methodologies, which
can help enable material developers, policymakers, and other stakeholders
to investigate pathways toward reducing GHG emissions and drive maximum
sequestration in the built environment. This calculation method offers
a reliable method for evaluating the warming potential of novel construction
materials, which in turn aids in identifying potential sustainable
materials and construction strategies.
In this work, we see
that accounting for the timing of GHG emissions
release and uptake is especially important for materials and processes
that have considerable GHG fluxes and storage capacity spanning over
a long-time horizon (e.g., decadal use of building materials). In
the case of CLT, we see that EoL strategies that allow for greater
quantities of carbon sequestration, such as gasification and slow
pyrolysis, result in significantly lower life-cycle GHG emissions
than processes that result in CO2release, such as combustion.
For concrete, we see that production-related mitigation strategies
(such as decarbonizing energy sources and implementing SCMs) have
a larger impact on life-cycle emissions than end-of-life strategies,
such as concrete crushing during demolition.
To properly assess
potential mitigation strategies, it is important
to consider environmental and human health impacts outside of GHG
emissions, such as particulate matter emissions, eutrophication, ecotoxicity,
and biodiversity loss. Therefore, future work can expand upon this
tool to consider more inputs than just GHG emissions. Furthermore,
the current tool does not allow for a detailed understanding of the
timing of emissions occurring within a multiyear life-cycle stage,
such as maintenance occurring during use. Rather, it uses an assumption
that the emissions occur at a consistent rate throughout the time
period of the life-cycle stage. Therefore, future work could expand
upon this tool, to generate a more accurate understanding of the emissions
occurring during long life-cycle stages. Further, the authors note
that future climate changes can influence the representativeness of
the warming potentials used in this tool, hence, to reflect potential
changes, the GWPs should be continuously updated based on values reported
by IPCC. In this study, scenario analyses were performed to understand
the impact of different end-of-life assumptions on the lifecycle impacts
of concrete and CLT. In addition to performing a scenario analysis,
it is also important to understand the inherent uncertainty associated
with the emissions fluxes of each lifecycle stage, which is not a
built-in capability of this tool. Therefore, future work should expand
upon this tool to enable robust uncertainty analyses.
D-CUBE
is a straightforward yet powerful tool for assessing the
climate impacts of long-lived products, such as buildings. Unlike
static methods with fixed time horizons, D-CUBE enables a comprehensive,
time-sensitive comparison that highlights critical design choices,
including the selection of different time horizons and end-of-life
options, including reuse and recycling, in decision-making. This capability
is especially valuable in supporting informed decisions in response
to the climate change challenge. Additionally, by requiring only inputs
of life-cycle stage timing and emissions by GHG type, this tool aims
to reduce the data requirements of dynamic GHG accounting, by performing
dynamic characterization calculations in the background, making application
and meta-analysis of dynamic warming effects more accessible to LCA
practitioners, material developers, policymakers, and other stakeholders.
S.K., J.F., B.B., T.H., C.D.S.,
and S.M.’s
contribution to this work was funded through the US Department of
Energy, Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy (ARPA-E, Grant #DE-AR0001625).
J.O., E.V.R.’s contribution to this work was funded through
the US National Science Foundation (NSF, Grant #CBET-2143981). This
article represents the views of the authors, not necessarily those
of the funder. This work was supported in part by the U.S. Department
of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Biological and Environmental
Research, through contract DE-AC02-05CH11231 between Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory and the U.S. Department of Energy. The U.S. Government
retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for publication,
acknowledges that the U.S. Government retains a nonexclusive, paid-up,
irrevocable, worldwide license to publish or reproduce the published
form of this manuscript, or allow others to do so, for U.S. Government
purposes.
The Supporting
Information is
available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.est.5c00080.
Detailed description of
how to use the D-CUBE tool and
further information regarding case study methods and assumptions (PDF)
Excel file
with D-CUBE tool (ZIP)
#National
Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO, 80401, USA
The authors
declare no competing financial interest.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
Articles from Environmental Science & Technology are provided here courtesy ofAmerican Chemical Society
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894