An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Electronic supplementary material is available online athttps://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.c.7403398.
Joint senior authors.
Corresponding author.
Received 2023 Sep 29; Revised 2024 Jun 21; Accepted 2024 Jun 24; Collection date 2024 Aug.
Published by the Royal Society. All rights reserved.
Body size reduction is a universal response to warming, but its ecological consequences across biological levels, from individuals to ecosystems, remain poorly understood. Most biological processes scale with body size, and warming-induced changes in body size can therefore have important ecological consequences. To understand these consequences, we propose a unifying, hierarchical framework for the ecological impacts of intraspecific body size reductions due to thermal plasticity that explicitly builds on three key pathways: morphological constraints, bioenergetic constraints and surface-to-volume ratio. Using this framework, we synthesize key consequences of warming-induced body size reductions at multiple levels of biological organization. We outline how this trait-based framework can improve our understanding, detection and generalization of the ecological impacts of warming.
Keywords:bioenergetics, body size shift, ectotherms, predictive ecology, surface-to-volume ratio, temperature-size rule
Global warming is impacting all levels of biological organization from cells to ecosystems. Although responses to warming are often species-specific, previous studies reported universal responses in ectotherm geographical range and phenology [1]. More recently, reductions in body size have been proposed as the third universal response to global warming [1]. Nevertheless, not all species are shrinking with warming [2], and there is a growing interest in understanding the factors and mechanisms explaining variation in body size shifts [2–4]. Body size reductions can be explained by shifts in species composition at the community levels or by shifts in size/age structure at the population levels [2,5,6]. Within species, these warming-induced body size reductions (BSRs) have mostly been attributed to the temperature-size rule (i.e. a widespread pattern of phenotypic plasticity whereby animals grow faster but reach a smaller adult size under warming). Previous studies have mainly focused on the proximal causes of this rule [7] and its variability among species and habitats [8–10]. However, the ecological consequences of BSRs at multiple biological levels, from individuals to ecosystems, remain poorly understood [5], and there is no framework to understand and map their connections, similarities and differences.
Ultimately, the effects of climate warming on ectotherms depend on the direct effects of temperature on biological processes as well as on the indirect effects mediated by phenotypic responses to temperature. Since Arrhenius and the development of the metabolic theory of ecology, the short-term direct effects of temperature on the physiology and ecology of ectotherm animals are better understood and these theories are often used to scale these effects from physiological rates up to entire ecosystems [11]. How temperature influences the phenotype of individuals has also received considerable attention with a strong focus on life history traits and the allocation of resources to growth and reproduction [3,4]. For instance, optimal energy allocation models predict that optimal size at maturity should be smaller under warming if the mortality rate increases with warming [12] or if the increase in the size-fecundity relationship is greater in cold than in warm environments [13]. Resource allocation strategies are also likely to depend on other factors such as nutrient availability and quality that can modulate phenotypic response to temperature ([14] among others). These studies and theories mostly focused on determining if phenotypic responses to temperature are adaptive and result from allocation strategies and trade-offs among life history traits. However, they did not investigate how these modifications of life history traits translate to higher levels of biological organization (see [4,15] for exceptions). In short, the indirect effects of temperature mediated by body size reductions are much less studied, including their importance and magnitude relative to the direct effects, and we lack a conceptual framework to understand their ecological consequences.
Here we focus on the indirect effects of temperature mediated by the temperature-size rule (i.e. BSRs driven by phenotypic plasticity). As mentioned above, shifts in species composition or population size structure can also contribute to body size reductions [6,16]. We do not include them in this review but discuss how our framework could be extended to include these additional mechanisms. The consequences of body size reductions can be far-reaching as body size determines many ecological traits and processes such as fecundity, behaviour, species interactions, stressor sensitivity, population growth rate and community dynamics [17,18]. We argue that filling this fundamental knowledge gap is critical for integrating BSRs into the climate change research agenda and ultimately facilitating generalization, detection and mitigation of climate change impacts.
We propose a trait-based approach that identifies three main pathways that determine how BSRs affect life histories, species interactions and stressor sensitivity, and link these responses to changes in population growth rates, community dynamics and ecosystem functions and services (figure 1). We first outline the general structure of the framework and then explain the different linkages using recent empirical and modelling studies. So far, only a few studies explicitly tested the ecological effects of BSRs [15,19–22]. We complement them by studies testing for consequences of small body size in general and refer to interspecific comparisons only when intraspecific comparisons are lacking.

A framework for integrating the ecological consequences of warming-induced BSR. Warming generally leads to reduced body size of ectotherms, which can have ecological consequences through three mechanistic pathways: (P1) morphological constraints imposed by smaller body sizeper se, (P2) bioenergetic constraints, as smaller body size is associated with lower energy reserves and their faster depletion, which, together with an even greater increase in mass-specific ingestion rate, leads to increased energetic efficiency (i.e. ratio of energy gain owing to ingestion and assimilation to energy loss owing to metabolism), and (P3) an increase in the surface-to-volume ratio, leading to more passive exchange of molecules with the environment. These three size-related pathways can each have specific ecological consequences on (C1) life history and dispersal, (C2) intra- and interspecific interactions, and (C3) stressor sensitivity, ultimately cascading to changes in (C4) population dynamics, (C5) (meta)community dynamics, and (C6) ecosystem functions and services. We visualize only the most obvious linkages in the framework. For example, warming-induced smaller fish will have a lower per capita excretion rate (pathway 2), which may directly affect nutrient cycling (consequence 6).
The first pathway (P1) works through the morphological constraints of smaller body size on key life history traits (e.g. lower fecundity owing to a smaller abdomen, but see [23]) and on intra- and interspecific interactions (e.g. gape limitation of predators). The second pathway (P2) operates through bioenergetics and mass scaling of vital rates, with smaller size leading to lower energy resources and higher mass-specific metabolic rates but also higher mass-specific food intake rates [24] (box 1). As a result, smaller individuals deplete their resources faster but have a higher energetic efficiency than larger ones (box 1). The third pathway (P3) is based on the surface-to-volume ratio, which is directly linked to sensitivity to stressors [28]. Smaller organisms have a higher surface-to-volume ratio, which determines not only the rates of heat and energy exchange, but also the passive uptake of molecules, including contaminants [28]. Together, these three pathways determine the ecological consequences of BSRs, and their combined effects can range from reinforcing to opposing, so this framework can reconcile the opposing effects of BSRs. For instance, the relative importance of the second (P2) and third (P3) pathways will determine whether body size increases or decreases stressor sensitivity. On a broader scale, this framework can help separate climate change impacts between different domains, as it predicts, for example, that the ecological consequences of BSRs will be stronger and different for aquatic ecosystems than for terrestrial ones (box 2). We first present how these three pathways can impact the ecology of individuals, populations and communities and how consequences at one level of organization can impact higher levels of organization (e.g. consequences for dispersal can influence meta-community dynamics). We next discuss how our framework can be extended to consider warming-induced changes in other phenotypic traits (fecundity, mortality) and behaviour (e.g. thermoregulation) and how it can be linked to established theories on resource allocation, sublethal effects and trait-mediated effects that link altered environmental conditions, in particular changes in lifetime mortality patterns, to life history responses (electronic supplementary material, text S1).
To illustrate how BSRs can affect energetic efficiency and energy reserves, we have developed a simple exploratory model based on existing models and empirical patterns [25]. Energetic efficiency EE is defined as the ratio of energy gains (ingestion rateImultiplied by assimilation rateA) to energy losses (metabolic rate,M): EE =IA/M. Since the ingestion rate typically depends on resource density, we used a type II functional response with size- and temperature-dependent parameters obtained from a recent meta-analysis [26]. As the dependence of assimilation efficiency on body size and temperature is not well characterized, we assumed that assimilation efficiency has a constant value of 0.85 corresponding to carnivorous species [18]. For metabolic rate, we modelled these dependencies using the equation from [11]. To understand how BSRs influence the dynamics of energy reserves under starvation, we first estimated the individual fat content using the equation of Liet al. [27] for cyprinid fishes, where fat reserves scale to the power of 1.21 with lean body mass (i.e. larger individuals can accumulate relatively larger reserves). We then simulated the depletion of fat reserves assuming that the individual does not feed.
The model revealed that energetic efficiency decreases with warming and increasing body mass (figure B1a). As a result, the temperature at which energetic efficiency reaches unity (with equal energy gains and losses) declines with body mass. Above that temperature, energy losses outweigh energy gains. This indicates that smaller organisms are more energetically efficient and can tolerate higher temperatures than larger ones. In contrast, larger organisms have more energy reserves (both in relative and absolute terms) and, owing to their lower mass-specific metabolic rate, deplete them at a lower rate than smaller ones (figure B1b). This allows larger organisms to cope with starvation for a longer time before their energy reserves are fully depleted, especially at low temperatures where reserves are depleted more slowly (figure B1b).

Influence of body mass on (a) energetic efficiency along a thermal gradient, and (b) the depletion of the relative fat content (the percentage of lipids relative to total body mass) of animals starving at 8°C (solid lines) and 18°C (dotted lines). The horizontal line in (a) indicates where the energetic efficiency equals one, hence where energy gains equal energy losses.
More than 80% of ectotherms follow the temperature-size rule [9] (but see [10]); they reach a smaller size at maturity in warmer environments. The ecological consequences of these temperature-induced BSRs are likely to be stronger for aquatic ecosystems than for terrestrial ones (figure B2) because (a) BSRs are more frequent and more pronounced in aquatic ectotherms than in terrestrial ectotherms, with size reductions of up to −4% per °C warming in terrestrial species and up to −8% in aquatic species [8], and (b) aquatic ecosystems are generally more size-structured than terrestrial ones [29]. Furthermore, (c) the ecological consequences in terms of increased sensitivity to stressors can differ in the two environments. For example, smaller organisms in terrestrial systems are generally more vulnerable to desiccation [30]. Instead, smaller organisms in aquatic systems are likely to suffer more from increased uptake of dissolved contaminants through the body surface [31].

Ecological consequences of warming-induced body size reductions (red arrows) are expected to differ among aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems because (a) the temperature-size rule is stronger for aquatic organisms, (b) aquatic ecosystems are more size-structured than terrestrial ones, and (c) aquatic and terrestrial systems differ in the type of stressors to which sensitivity will increase most.
BSRs predictably alter individual life histories (consequence 1,figure 1). Studies of intra- and interspecific variation in body size have found that smaller organisms can generally grow, develop and mature more quickly owing to increased energetic efficiency (pathway 2) [17,32]. Faster development may allow some, but not all, species to produce more generations per year [33]. These advantages of smaller size often come at the cost of higher predation mortality owing to morphological constraints and lower lifetime reproductive output (i.e. the total production of offspring over the lifetime of an individual; pathway 1) [34]. For example, reproductive output increases faster than linearly (hyperallometrically) with body size in 95% of marine fish species [35]. Ectotherms also often produce smaller offspring at higher temperatures [36], which suggests that a lower reproductive output owing to BSRs modulates the offspring size-number trade-off along temperature gradients [37]. BSRs may also manifest in shorter lengths-at-sex changes in sex-changing species [38], which could alter the contribution of male and female roles to individual fitness.
The consequences of BSRs for individual fitness and population dynamics will depend on the relative strengths of these effects under warming [32,39] that can, for example, diminish the reproductive advantage of a larger size [23,40]. In many natural communities, mortality rates also decrease with body size because larger individuals face fewer predators (e.g. [41]). BSRs can, therefore, make individuals of the focal species more susceptible to predation and hence lower their fitness and cause lower population growth rates unless the predators also experience BSRs of the same or larger magnitude (see below) or if the individuals also increase their reproductive output as predicted by life history theory [42]. However, BSRs could also lead to lower mortality and hence increase individual fitness and population growth rate if predators prefer individuals within a particular size range, such asChaoboruslarvae feeding onDaphnia[43], and BSR reduces prey body size below the optimum size preferred by the predator.
The effects of BSRs on dispersal ability will depend on the mode of dispersal. Across taxa, routine speed used to explore the environment declines in smaller individuals owing to morphological constraints (pathway 1) [44], which should shorten dispersal distances in smaller-bodied active dispersers and have no effect on passive dispersers [45]. Given the lower dispersal ability of smaller individuals, BSRs due to warming may therefore partially slow down range expansions of invasive ectotherms into warmer regions and warming-induced range shifts [46]. Hence, BSRs may thus interfere with another universal response to climate change, namely poleward range shifts [47].
Changes in body size and correlated life history traits can alter intraspecific interactions (consequence 2,figure 1). Body size underpins competitive hierarchies for space and mating opportunities [48], mating preferences (e.g. female preference for larger males), and cannibalistic interactions including sexual cannibalism. BSRs can disrupt these intraspecific interactions if their outcome depends on absolute or relative size differences (pathway 1), which are likely to decrease with warming [9].
Trophic interaction strength depends strongly on the predator–prey size ratio [49,50]. By changing this ratio, warming-induced BSRs can alter trophic interactions (pathway 1 leading to consequence 2,figure 1). Theoretical studies predict that BSRs in consumers can alter the strength of trophic interactions [10,19,21,50] (electronic supplementary material, text S2). In particular, increasing the predator–prey body mass ratio is expected to increase the relative rate of consumption per unit of consumer biomass, which decreases trophic interaction strength [51] and stabilizes food chains [19]. In aquatic systems, BSRs are particularly pronounced at higher trophic levels [9]. Forsteret al.[9] reported that larger species shrink more than smaller ones with warming in aquatic ecosystems. As higher trophic levels show larger body sizes in aquatic systems, we can expect stronger body size reduction for predators than for prey and thus a reduction of the predator–prey body mass ratio (box 2), which should decrease the stability and persistence of trophic systems [19] (electronic supplementary material, text S2). For instance, fish shrink more than their invertebrate prey which should decrease their top-down impact relative to the potential bottom-up effects of having smaller prey. In addition, a decrease in the predator–prey body mass ratio can be associated with lower Hill exponents of the predator functional response (i.e. representing a shift from a type III to a type II functional response) and thus decreased stability owing to higher predation at low prey densities [52,53]. BSRs can also alter trophic and competitive interactions via consumer bioenergetics (pathway 2,figure 1). Smaller predators are more energetically efficient than larger ones (box 1), potentially increasing their competitive advantage over large individuals [54].
The relative influence of morphological and bioenergetic constraint pathways on intra- and interspecific interactions depends on how body size changes affect size-selective predation versus the energetic efficiency of the predator [55]. On the one hand, warming reduces the net energy gain of predators more than that of prey, reducing relative predator biomass and reducing predation pressure on prey [56]. On the other hand, warming can increase top-down control when size differences between predator and prey are large as the predation rate increases with size differences or when prey cannot outgrow the predation window because of their smaller adult size [55,57]. In more extreme cases, shifts in predator–prey body mass ratios can lead to food web rewiring (i.e. the reorganization of food webs by addition or removal of feeding links) owing to morphological constraints such as gape limitation of predators [58] (electronic supplementary material, text S2). Although there is no formal empirical test of this phenomenon, Raffardet al. [59] reported that the abundance of benthic invertebrates and zooplankton systematically increased with the variance of minnow (Phoxinus phoxinus) body mass, suggesting that variations in intraspecific size structure could have substantial implications for prey communities in natural systems. This may contribute to explaining why warming can influence food web structure as reported in previous studies [60].
BSRs influence sensitivity to stressors (consequence 3 infigure 1) but the underlying pathways and emerging patterns differ among stressors. Smaller individuals may be more sensitive to stressors because their energy reserves are lower and more rapidly depleted owing to their higher mass-specific metabolism (box 1, pathway 2). This bioenergetic pathway could explain the negative correlation between starvation tolerance and body size (box 1). As many stressors increase metabolic rate and deplete energy reserves [61], this mechanism may also contribute to smaller individuals being more sensitive to other stressors. However, the latter pattern can be reversed when animals continue to feed during exposure to a stressor, as smaller individuals are more energetically efficient (box 1).
Smaller organisms exchange molecules with the environment more rapidly owing to their larger surface-to-volume ratio ([62], pathway 3). This mechanism contributes to the common pattern that smaller terrestrial ectotherms have a lower desiccation tolerance than larger ones (e.g. [30]). This may also lead to a higher uptake of toxicants, explaining why a warming-induced BSR can increase sensitivity to pesticides as has been documented explicitly in damselfly larvae [31]. A similar pattern has been found based on (not warming-related) intraspecific variation in body size in aquatic larvae of midges [28], and in the water fleaDaphnia magna[63] and the amphipodGammarus pulex[64]. This pattern has also been revealed across species for several types of toxicants, with smaller species that have larger surface-to-volume ratios showing higher uptake rates and resulting higher sensitivity to metals [65], pesticides [66] and nanoparticles [67]. This may involve both higher uptake via the water through the integument and the gills, and via ingestion through the gut wall. In addition, smaller animals may show higher mass-specific ingestion rates [24]. While the higher surface-to-volume ratios may also cause higher elimination rates in smaller than in larger individuals (but see [64]), the increased uptake rates seem to dominate and cause higher sensitivity to toxicants in smaller animals as shown both empirically and by using toxicokinetics–toxicodynamics models [63]. In addition, smaller individuals may be more sensitive to toxicants that have more toxic metabolites because of a higher biotransformation rate owing to their higher mass-specific metabolic rates (pathway 2) [64].
The relative importance of pathways 2 (bioenergetics) and 3 (surface-to-volume ratio) may determine the size-dependent pattern of sensitivity to hypoxia, during which animals rely on anaerobic energy production. Smaller animals run out of energy stores and reach lethal concentrations of anaerobic end-products much faster than larger animals [68]. Smaller fish are indeed more susceptible to hypoxia in cold, viscous water, probably because efficient gill perfusion (i.e. blood flow in the gills under arterial pressure) to ensure oxygen uptake is then more energetically costly [69]. Smaller fish, however, are less susceptible to hypoxia in warm water, probably because they have a higher surface-to-volume ratio and thus a higher oxygen supply [69].
Since oxygen limitation is thought to underlie heat tolerance [62], the balance between pathways 2 and 3 is also responsible for the relationship between body size and tolerance to heat stress, and its dependence on the duration of heat exposure [70]. A higher surface-to-volume ratio, and thus a higher oxygen uptake, could explain why smaller species have a higher short-term heat tolerance than larger species, while large species can sustain mild thermal stress for longer periods owing to lower mass-specific metabolism [70]. Applying this interspecific pattern to intraspecific warming-induced BSRs recorded in a ground beetle over a period of 100 years indeed indicated that the smaller beetles should possess increased tolerance to short-term thermal stress but decreased tolerance to long-term thermal stress [71]. The time dependence of heat tolerance could also explain some of the inconsistent evidence at the intraspecific level that smaller organisms often have a higher heat tolerance [72], although the opposite pattern has also been reported (e.g. [73]).
BSRs can affect population dynamics (consequence 5,figure 1) through their effects on life history. Eukaryote populations composed of smaller individuals can be more resilient to demographic and environmental perturbations. For example, smaller males with lower absolute resource requirements may invest more time in mate search or more energy in reproduction [74], which could buffer against mate-finding Allee effects (i.e. reduced population growth at low densities owing to difficulties in finding mates) and collapses of small populations. BSR may also have an impact on size-structured population dynamics through its effects on intraspecific competition [75]. In particular, accelerated juvenile growth rates and adult body size reduction lead to a smaller size difference between juveniles and adults. This size convergence can lead to an overlap in the diets of juveniles and adults, thereby intensifying intraspecific competition. Consequently, this increased competition could potentially prolong maturation periods and reduce population biomass [76].
BSRs can also affect population dynamics by modulating the strength of trophic and competitive interactions that depend on the relative body sizes of interacting individuals [49] (consequences 2 and then 4). For example, the impacts of BSRs on trophic interaction strengths and food chain persistence in a tri-trophic food chain strongly depended on the relative magnitude of BSRs across trophic levels, with weaker interactions and higher population persistence observed when predator body size shrank more than prey size with warming [19]. Furthermore, the competitive advantage of smaller predators (consequence 2) allows their populations to survive at resource densities where larger predators cannot cover their maintenance costs and starve [75,77]. This mechanism may also apply to more complex interactions. For example, a stage-structured intraguild predation model has revealed that warming can increase the competitive advantage of the intraguild prey against juvenile intraguild predators, which can lead to the extinction of the intraguild predator population [78]. Based on these studies [77,79], we can assume that BSRs promote the competitive advantage of smaller predators in exploitative competition and of the intraguild prey in intraguild predation, possibly leading to the exclusion of larger competing species.
Finally, BSRs may affect populations exposed to a stressor by altering stressor sensitivity and the resulting effects on life histories and species interactions. While there is no direct evidence to support this as a consequence of warming, it has been shown, for example, that BSRs caused by predation that removed the largest individuals from experimental Daphnia populations resulted in a greater negative impact of a toxicant on population dynamics (and even extinction in some cases) [80].
The impacts of BSRs can extend to the community level (consequence 5,figure 1). For example, BSRs may alter the structure and dynamics of food webs by modifying the strengths of trophic links; these links often depend on predator–prey body mass ratios and are described by allometries (from consequence 2 to 5,figure 1; electronic supplementary material, text S2). BSRs can also affect the distribution of body sizes at the community level (i.e. the community size spectrum) [81] if large species shrink more than smaller ones (as in aquatic systems [9]; but see [6]), resulting in a steeper size spectrum. However, this has not been confirmed in a rare study at the intraspecific level [10]. Changing the slope of the community size spectrum is likely to affect the distribution of interaction strengths within the community (from pathways 1–2 to consequences 1–2 and then 5), but the consequences of changing size spectra for community dynamics and stability remain, to our knowledge, unstudied. Another unexplored area is whether BSRs can affect the connectivity and dynamics of metacommunities through their influence on dispersal and population dynamics (from pathway 1 to consequences 1 and then 5).
These community-level changes can affect ecosystem functions and services (consequence 6). BSRs can influence key ecosystem functions such as primary productivity and nutrient cycling by modulating community dynamics (from consequence 5 to 6). Excretion rates scale with body mass to the power of 0.84 [82], so we can expect lower per capita excretion rates and associated nutrient cycling owing to BSRs (from pathway 2 to consequence 6). In dung beetles, warming reduced body size and as a result dung removal rates and thus nutrient cycling [83]. A study of aquatic detritivores has demonstrated that BSRs negatively affect decomposition rates of leaf litter, a key aspect of nutrient cycling in freshwater bodies, because the much lower per capita ingestion rates of leaf litter by smaller individuals override the increased population biomass resulting from the higher energetic efficiency of smaller individuals (from pathway 2 to consequence 6) [22]. Warming can also undermine ecosystem services such as pollination by reducing pollinator size, as shown for bumblebees [84] and pest control by predators by reducing their size [85]. BSRs may also directly affect ecosystem services to humans by reducing food provisioning, as documented for fish stocks [86].
In the previous sections, we highlighted how BSRs can have consequences on multiple levels of organization through three main pathways (figure 1). Nevertheless, these pathways are likely to operate simultaneously under natural conditions, and thereby reinforce or oppose each other. While we explicitly indicated this for pathways 2 and 3 shaping stressor sensitivity, other scenarios exist. For instance, both morphological constraints and bioenergetic constraints can decrease fecundity as gonad size may limit the number of eggs (or offspring) and energy limitations can decrease fecundity [13]. In general, it may not be always feasible to disentangle the relative contribution of the different pathways to the observed consequences unless we can monitor changes in energy allocation relative to changes in body size. In addition, the effects of BSRs on one level of organization can cascade to higher levels of organizations (as infigure 1) and these higher levels may have feedback effects on lower levels of organizations (not represented infigure 1). For instance, if changes in predator diets release predation pressure on prey, then the prey traits can evolve [13]. This can be studied in the context of life history theories where reduced mortality by predation leads to the evolution of delayed maturity at a larger size [43] which is opposite to BSRs. We thus call for further studies to explore these feedbacks in order to better understand the impact of temperature and BSRs on different levels of organization and time scales.
Very few studies directly tested the ecological consequences of warming-induced BSRs, i.e. allowed body sizes to shrink under warming and then quantified the impact on ecological endpoints (but see [15]). There are several reasons for this. The two main challenges are the difficulties associated with (i) producing organisms that only differ in body size and not in other traits, and then (ii) disentangling the effects of the warming-induced smaller sizes from the direct effects of warming on ecological consequences. Such two-step experiments where smaller animals are generated under warming, followed by quantifying ecological consequences are not only challenging but also time-consuming.
As a result, almost all of the expected ecological consequences of BSRs based on empirical studies come from indirect evidence of examining existing (not warming-related) size variations within or among species. This approach, which helped discover the potential role of BSRs in ecological dynamics, comes with important limitations. First, conclusions based on interspecific comparisons may not be valid since patterns found across species do not necessarily apply within species [87]. For instance, reproduction may scale hyperallometrically within most fish species, whereas it scales hypoallometrically among fish species [87]. Second, the limited direct empirical evidence for the ecological consequences of BSRs comes from laboratory studies, and we need more evidence from natural populations where the BSRs may be less pronounced [10].
Another challenge is that body size shifts can simultaneously occur at the level of individuals (changes in size-at-age, as considered here), populations (changes in size structure) and whole communities (changes in species composition) [2,16]. Disentangling the contributions of these different types of size shifts, and determining their relative importance and possible interactive effects on ecological processes remain to be studied. For example, a recent study of Australian reef fish communities found larger piscivores but smaller fish at lower trophic levels in warmer sites [6], implying a larger predator–prey body mass ratio and hence more stable communities (electronic supplementary material, text S2) at warmer sites. At the same time, the proportion of piscivorous fish declined strongly with warming, leading to much smaller piscivore populations and hence implying more unstable communities at higher temperatures.
So far, both theoretical and empirical studies have only used endpoints to infer the ecological consequences of warming-induced BSRs. That is, they compare scenarios with and without BSR at different temperatures (e.g. [19]) but do not consider the transitions between the two states in time. These transitions may happen not only through gradual changes, reflecting gradual warming in time, but also involve ecological surprises. First, gradual changes in ecological conditions may trigger abrupt ecological regime shifts owing to exceeded ecological stability thresholds [88] or owing to alternative stable states that can arise in food webs with size-dependent interactions [89]. For example, the size range of intermediate consumers vulnerable to predation that can be modified by BSR in the top predator determines the propensity of tri-trophic food chains and multi-channel food webs to emergent Allee effects and sudden collapses in the top predator or intermediate consumer populations [90] electronic supplementary material, text S2). Second, the transition between the current and future states may involve nonlinear or rapid changes in temperatures, whose short- and long-term effects may interfere with the ecological consequences of BSRs identified above.
As a result of these challenges, almost all studies examining the ecological consequences of BSRs on populations, communities and ecosystems are theoretical, and only loosely linked to empirical observations [19,21,50]. While we recognize their complexity, we call for more experimental andin situstudies to test the predictions of these models. These challenges generate important open questions and are at the same time acting as barriers to addressing other important open questions to advance this research field (box 3).
Questions directly linked to the framework (figure 1)
Are short-term BSRs representative of long-term BSRs? Acclimation and evolution over multiple generations may modulate the effects of temperature on growth and development rates. This suggests that BSRs may change over generations and thus influence the three mechanistic pathways (morphological constraints, bioenergetic constraints and surface-area-to-volume ratio), which, in turn, should modulate their ecological consequences.
What are the consequences of BSRs for individual fitness (consequence 1 infigure 1)? Are populations with more pronounced BSRs more or less resilient to warming and other anthropogenic stressors (consequence 3)?
What are the consequences of BSRs for subsidies from aquatic to terrestrial systems (consequence 6)? We can predict a lower contribution of semi-aquatic insects and amphibians to terrestrial systems because they shrink more with warming than terrestrial taxa, potentially resulting in a reduced energy flow from aquatic to terrestrial ecosystems.
Questions integrating the framework in a bigger context
What is the relative contribution of direct temperature effects and indirect effects mediated by BSRs to ecological consequences of warming (e.g. pesticide sensitivity)? Under what conditions are these effects additive, reinforcing or opposing?
To what extent do BSRs affect transitions of ecological communities from their current state to a future state shaped by climate warming?
How do body size shifts at individual, population and community levels interact to shape the community size spectra and ecosystem processes? Body size shifts can occur at the individual level (changes in size-at-age, as studied here), at the population level (changes in size structure) and the community level (changes in species composition). We do not know the relative importance of these shifts and their possible interactive effects on ecological processes.
What is the relationship between BSRs and the other two universal responses to climate change (shifts in geographical range and phenology)? BSRs may impact shifts in geographic ranges by influencing dispersal rate and heat tolerance and shifts in phenology by shortening generation times.
The effects of climate warming on the physiology and ecology of organisms depend on both the direct effects of temperature and its indirect effects mediated by body size reductions. It is thus crucial to determine the relative importance of the direct and indirect effects and identify the conditions under which these effects are additive, reinforcing or opposing. We propose to apply the scaling approach used in metabolic ecology [11] to systematically explore the relative importance of the direct effects of temperature and BSRs on biological rates (pathway 2).
Metabolic ecology posits that, for non-stressful temperatures, most biological ratesBof ectotherms scale with body massmand temperatureTasB≈mbe−Ea/kT, wherebis the allometric exponent,Eathe activation energy andkthe Boltzmann constant [32]. Using this relationship, the fold change in a biological rate for a temperature difference of 10°C equals toQ10=(B2/B1)10/(T2−T1)=(m2/m1)b(eEa(T2−T1)/kT1T2)10/(T2−T1), withB2andB1the biological rate values at temperaturesT1andT2, andm1andm2are the body masses at temperaturesT1andT2, respectively. In this example, biological rates are only dependent on the body mass of the focal species (m) and thusQ10calculations are not sensitive to changes in the body mass of other interacting species. The allometric exponentband the activation energyEacan widely differ during ontogeny, across populations or across species [91,92]. To begin, we assume an average activation energyEaof 0.69 eV and an allometric coefficientbof 0.75 as proposed by the metabolic theory of ecology [11]. With an increase in temperature from 20 to 30°C, this yieldsQ10= 2.46 without BSR (i.e. whenm1=m2). When body size reduces with temperature, thisQ10value is modulated by a factor (m2/m1)b, which yields much lower values ofQ10= 2.08 and 1.68 for the mean BSRs of −2 and −4% per °C reported for terrestrial and aquatic multicellular organisms, respectively [9]. In other words, BSRs can be expected to reduceQ10values on average by 15 and 32% in terrestrial and aquatic environments, respectively, which can strongly influence the responses of ecological processes to warming [93]. As allometric exponents can vary widely at the intraspecific level (ranging between 0.16 and 1.6 for animals) and can evolve in response to selection [91,92], we next explored how deviations from the MTE allometric exponent value influences how BSR influencesQ10. AsQ10values are modulated by a factor (m2/m1)band assuming thatm2<m1, then ifbis above 0.75 (i.e. the three-quarters MTE prediction), the BSR will further reduceQ10values and vice versa forbvalues below 0.75. This suggests that BSRs should be more adaptive for allometric exponents abovebas it contributes to reduce the metabolic costs experienced under high temperatures. We may thus expect shifts in allometric exponents towards larger values under warming as reported by Lindmarket al.[76].
Overall, within the range of empirical allometric exponents (i.e. 0.16–1.6), we found that BSRs will mostly reduce the direct effects of temperature on biological rates, especially in aquatic systems. This implies that considering only the direct effects of temperature may overestimate the ecological consequences of warming. In line with this prediction, Sentiset al.[19] reported that BSRs can substantially dampen the negative direct effects of temperature on species persistence in a food chain model by increasing predator persistence by up to 20%. The underlying mechanism was that smaller organisms are more efficient under warming than larger ones (as inbox 1) and need fewer resources, which in turn increases their persistence at high temperatures. Along the same line, Bernhardtet al.[20] demonstrated that the direct effect of warming is to reduce the carrying capacity of unicellular phytoplankton but BSRs lead to the opposite effect and thus dampen the direct negative effect of temperature. Finally, Réveillonet al.[22] showed that BSRs weakened the direct effects of warming on resource and consumer persistence. These few studies follow the generalQ10expectation detailed above and suggest that BSRs will generally buffer the direct effects of warming.
However, for some ecological consequences related to stressor exposure, the direct versus size-mediated effects of warming operate through different processes that may reinforce each other. For example, many pesticides become more toxic under warming, which is typically explained by the direct effects of higher temperatures on physiological processes such as increased metabolic rates [94]. Yet, BSRs may generate a fully different mechanism contributing to this phenomenon by increasing the surface-to-volume ratio [31]. In this case, considering only the direct effects of temperature (as in metabolic ecology) would underestimate this ecological consequence of warming.
Drawing on theoretical models and emerging empirical evidence, our framework identifies and synthesizes the manifold and interrelated ecological consequences of BSRs, the third universal response to warming [1]. Because body size is a pivotal trait in ecology, it is important to recognize these consequences. These may be more important than the direct ecological impacts of warmingper se, and expand the types of possible impacts. Thus, this trait-based framework can add new dimensions and realism to assessments of the ecological impacts of warming on Earth’s biota and improve on other recent developments in trait-based predictive ecology [95]. The current paucity of studies of ecological consequences of warming-induced BSRs can be leveraged by theoretical models and experimental evidence of BSR consequences in other contexts, such as trait-mediated responses to predation risk (see electronic supplementary material, text S1, for more details). Our framework also generates new questions and research directions (seebox 3) that need to be explored to improve our understanding and predictive ability of climate change impacts. To achieve this goal, a key issue would be to assess the relative influence of the three identified pathways (morphological and bioenergetic constraints, and surface-to-volume ratio) on ecological processes to better predict the ecological consequences of BSRs and determine whether they would amplify or attenuate the direct effects of warming on biological rates and processes.
We thank the editor and three anonymous reviewers for constructive comments that helped improve our manuscript.
Arnaud Sentis, Email: arnaud.sentis@inrae.fr.
Simon Bazin, Email: bazin.simon@laposte.net.
David S. Boukal, Email: boukal@entu.cas.cz.
Robby Stoks, Email: robby.stoks@kuleuven.be.
This work did not require ethical approval from a human subject or animal welfare committee.
This article has no additional data.
Supplementary material is available online [96].
We have not used AI-assisted technologies in creating this article.
A.S.: conceptualization, funding acquisition, writing—original draft, writing—review and editing; S.B.: conceptualization, writing—original draft, writing—review and editing; D.S.B.: conceptualization, writing—original draft, writing—review and editing; R.S.: conceptualization, writing—original draft, writing—review and editing.
All authors gave final approval for publication and agreed to be held accountable for the work performed therein.
We declare we have no competing interests.
A.S. and S.B. were supported by the ANR project EcoTeBo (ANR-19-CE02-0001) from the French National Research Agency (ANR), D.S.B. by project 21-29169S from the Grant Agency of the Czech Republic (GA ČR) and R.S. by KU Leuven C1 project C16/23/003 and project G.0144.23N from the Flemish Fund for Scientific Research (FWO).
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
This article has no additional data.
Supplementary material is available online [96].
Articles from Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences are provided here courtesy ofThe Royal Society
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894