An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Corresponding Author:Kari C. Nadeau, MD, PhD, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Building 1, 665 Huntington Ave, Boston MA 02115;knadeau@hsph.harvard.edu.
Issue date 2024 Jul.
Increased fossil fuel usage has increased CO2 concentrations leading to global warming and climate change with increased frequency and intensity of extreme weather events such as thunderstorms, wildfires, droughts, heat waves, and others. These changes increase the risk of adverse health effects for all human beings. However, these experiences do not impact everyone equally. Underserved communities, including people of color, the elderly, people living with chronic conditions, and socioeconomically disadvantaged groups have greater vulnerability to the impacts of climate change. These vulnerabilities are a result of multiple factors such as disparities in healthcare, lower educational status, systemic racism, and many others. These social inequities are exacerbated by extreme weather events, which act as threat multipliers increasing disparities in health outcomes. It is clear that without human action, these global temperatures will continue to increase to unbearable levels creating an existential crisis. There is now global consensus that climate change is caused by anthropogenic activity and that actions to mitigate and adapt to climate change are urgently needed. The 2015 Paris Accord was the first truly global commitment that set goals to limit further warming. It also aimed to implement equity in action, founded on the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities. Meeting these goals require individual, community, organizational, national, and global cooperation. Health care professionals, often in the frontline with firsthand knowledge of the health impacts of climate change, can play a key role in advocating for just and equitable climate change adaptation and mitigation.
Keywords:climate change, heat wave, thunderstorms, wildfires, global warming, flooding, climate justice, pollen, human health, planetary health, One health, biodiversity
Fossil fuels when burned, emit greenhouse gases, such as carbon dioxide (CO2), methane, and nitrous oxides (NOx), which trap heat and increase global temperatures.1,2These increases have altered weather patterns around the world such as the frequency and severity of floods, droughts, wildfires, and heat waves. In 1850, at the start of the industrial revolution, global carbon emissions were about 200 million tonnes.3Since then, with increases in human activity and population, it has grown exponentially to 6 (1950) and 37 billion tonnes (2021).3Concomitantly, global temperatures have also increased and in 2022 they were 0.89°C above the average temperatures observed between 1951–1980.4Although an increase of 0.89°C may appear to be small, this has had destabilizing effects on the Earth’s climate system. Further, the rate of warming is accelerating, which is an additional cause for concern. Wildfires emit heat, CO2and other greenhouse gases, particulate matter, and other pollutants creating a feedback loop and exacerbating climate change.5Deforestation is also accelerating climate change. Trees absorb CO2and act as carbon sinks and their destruction has decreased earth’s ability to maintain the carbon cycle.6Oceans also act as carbon sinks and absorb CO2from the atmosphere. Since the beginning of the industrial revolution the pH of the oceans has decreased by 0.1 pH units, which is approximately a 30% increase in acidity. Increased ocean acidity lowers the ocean’s capacity to further absorb CO2.7
Extreme weather events directly impact human health and well-being. Climate change also indirectly affects other determinants of human health, such as decreased food security and access to clean water, increased human migration, geographical spread of infectious vectors, and loss of biodiversity.8The first Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report was published in 1990 which warned of the potential harms of the increasing concentration of greenhouse gases caused by human activity to planetary and human health. However, it was only in 2015 that the first global commitment to fight the climate crisis, the Paris Accord, was signed. It was signed by 196 nations, who all agreed to work towards limiting temperature increases by the end of the century to well below 2°C above preindustrial levels while pursuing efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels. This landmark accord, for the first time, brought nations to undertake ambitious efforts to combat climate change and chart a new course in the global effort for climate action.9
While the risks of climate change to health were recognized at the Paris Accord, the funding allocated to safeguard health in the face of climate change has been negligent. In 2018, only 0.5% of multilateral climate funds dispersed for climate change adaptation had been allocated to health projects.10The impact of the climate crisis on the human body has been overlooked at international climate change summits including the Conference of the Parties (COP) until now. The 2023 COP28 in collaboration with WHO and other main partners will organize the first ever Health Day to discuss investing in resilient health systems that can ensure adaptation to the growing burdens of disease and impacts of extreme weather.11
In this review, we discuss how climate change directly affects health risks and indirectly affects determinants of health such as clean water, nutritious foods, and access to health care. Further, climate change disproportionately impacts low-income communities and communities of color around the world, the people and places least responsible for the problem bringing to the forefront ethical issues about climate justice. We discuss some of these challenges and the international and national policies that aim to mitigate climate change.
As climate change affects all humans, all individuals, communities, institutions, and countries need to get involved. Health care professionals, often in the frontline with firsthand knowledge of the health impacts of climate change, can act as key messengers and advocate towards climate change mitigation and adaptation policies that protect the health of their patients. The American Medical Association adopted a Global Climate Change and Human Health policy that supports educating the medical community on the potential adverse public health effects of global climate change and encourages health care professionals to assist in educating patients and the public on environmentally sustainable practices, and to serve as role models for promoting environmental sustainability.12
Globally, large discrepancies in socioeconomic status, education level, and access to healthcare exist. Climate change has primarily been driven by wealthier countries, who have been the biggest emitters of greenhouse gases. Additionally, individuals in higher socioeconomic groups have a larger carbon footprint. However, the brunt of the effects of climate change are most felt by poorer nations and those individuals in underserved communities with the least means to adapt to these changes.
A number of socioeconomic factors have been shown to affect health. These social determinants of health include neighborhood and built environment, education and income, social policies and community infrastructure, nutrition and health, race and ethnicity, and access to healthcare (Figure 1). In the US, policies and practices have disproportionately affected low-income communities and communities of color leaving them at greater risk of exposure to harmful pollutants from industrial and vehicular emissions, flooding from homes built in low-lying areas, and harm from degrading infrastructure (Figure 2). The historical policy of redlining has led to many inequalities. This discriminatory practice led to withholding of credit or insurance from potential customers who resided in neighborhoods classified as “hazardous” to investment resulting in homes in close proximity to hazardous waste sites, urban heat islands, or major highways and the segregation of people of color from White communities.13–15In these underserved and low socioeconomic communities, climate change has become a threat multiplier, exacerbating preexisting inequalities and disproportionally affecting health outcomes.16–19

Social determinants of health

Climate change disproportionately affects vulnerable populations, particularly underserved communities due to greater exposure to hazards as well as decreased ability to adapt to these changes. Due to decreased access to health care, they are also at greater risk of poor health outcomes.
These inequalities and injustices have led to a rallying cry for climate justice which demands that actions to cut emissions also addresses human rights and social inequalities. Climate justice poses a number of ethical questions such as, (1) Should wealthier and developed countries bear the brunt of the responsibility to mitigate climate change as they were the main perpetrators? (2) What is the responsibility of the current generation to protect Earth’s climate and environment for future generations?, and (3) Should nations and individuals today forgo possible benefits to protect future generations?
There have been efforts to formally incorporate climate change ethics into policy. For instance, The 2015 Paris Agreement aimed to implement equity in action, founded on the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities.20In 2017, UNESCO adopted a Declaration of Ethical Principles in relation to Climate Change based on six ethical principles: prevention of harm, precautionary approach, equity and justice, sustainable development, solidarity, and scientific knowledge and integrity in decision-making.21However, the extent to which each party is obligated to act, especially when facing real economic and social costs, remains difficult to answer. Climate change ethics continues to evolve as rising temperatures and extreme weather events continue to deepen inequity and create new forms of injustice.22
Rising global temperatures brought about by climate change has resulted in increased frequency and intensity of heatwaves. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) defines heat waves as a period of two or more consecutive days when the daily minimum apparent temperature (the actual temperature adjusted for humidity) in a particular city exceeds the 85th percentile of historical July and August temperatures (1981–2010) for that city. Heat wave incidences in the United States have been steadily increasing from an average of two heat waves per year in the 1960s to six per year in the 2010s and 2020s.23Extreme heat has a direct impact on human health. Such impacts include heat illnesses such as heat exhaustion, heat stroke, and medical complications of heat, including stroke and heart attack.24
People who live in cities are more at risk of the effects of heat due to the heat island effect. It is a phenomenon where urban areas experience higher temperatures due to the ability of buildings, roads, and other infrastructure to absorb and re-emit heat. The lack of green spaces in these areas also contributes to higher temperatures.25Daytime temperatures in urban areas are about 1–7°F higher than temperatures in outlying areas and nighttime temperatures are about 2–5°F higher.26A review of studies found that in the United States, people of color and community members with low incomes are more likely than other groups to live in heat islands within historically redlined neighborhoods.27A study in California found that neighborhoods with more subsidized housing were more vulnerable to extreme heat than other kinds of neighborhoods.28On average, low-income blocks in the US have 15.2% less tree cover and are 1.5°C hotter than high-income blocks; these disparities were greatest in low-income urban blocks in the Northeast, where in some urbanized areas have 30% less tree cover and are 4.0°C hotter.29
Further, low-income households often live in older homes that trap heat. These homes suffer from high heat that can result from varying factors in the home such as poor insulation or having single-paned windows.30Many of these homes lack air conditioners or other cooling appliances that help mitigate heat. These buildings are also often more expensive to cool contributing to the high costs of utility bills, presenting a financial burden for these communities.27,30Nationally, low-income households generally spend a larger portion of their income on home energy costs than other households.31All of these factors contribute to the inability of these communities to stay comfortable, cool, and safe during extreme heat events.
Another vulnerable group at increased risk of heat-related illnesses are outdoor workers, who are often low-income workers. A study found that occupational heat-related mortality is 35 times higher among agricultural workers compared to workers from other industries. In the US, agricultural workers are often low-income vulnerable migrants who face language and cultural barriers.32It is estimated that approximately 75% of farmworkers in the United States are Latino migrants. Data reported from 2005 to 2014 indicate that 20% of heat-related deaths among non-US citizens occurred on a farm, and almost 95% of these deaths took place in Texas, Arizona, and California.33Currently, there are no federal heat protection standards in the US to protect this vulnerable populations. However, the American Conference of Governmental and Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) has better clarified requirements for evaluating heat stress in workers.34
Exposure to extreme temperatures can result in morbidity or death. Extreme heat is associated with increased emergency room visits and hospital admittance, adverse pregnancy and birth outcomes, mental health issue, or death. It can exacerbate preexisting health conditions such as respiratory and cardiovascular diseases.24For example, according to the United States EPA, heat-related cardiovascular disease deaths account for about one-fourth of all heat-related deaths. Mortality rates for heat-related cardiovascular disease deaths were highest among people 65 and older and non-Hispanic Blacks.35Exposure to increased heat was shown to lead to decreased dexterity in Latino farmworkers, elevating the likelihood of physical injuries.36
As global temperatures increase there is increased evaporation and, subsequently, more overall precipitation. Therefore, a warming climate is expected to increase precipitation in many areas.37Tropical cyclones get their energy from the oceans and rising ocean temperatures have led to increased intensity of cyclones. A tropical cyclone with winds equal to or greater than 74 miles per hour is classified as a hurricane or typhoon, depending upon where the storm originates in the world.38Cyclone intensity has risen noticeably39and eight of the ten most active years since 1950 have occurred since the mid-1990s.40The intense winds and rains associated with them along with the storm surge that ensues when they hit land can cause severe flooding, property damage, and soil erosion. Injuries and drowning are increased after a hurricane and many individuals are displaced from their homes. Hurricane Katrina was responsible for around 1,200 deaths, 1.5 million displacements, and an estimated $170 billion USD in damages.41In the aftermath of hurricanes, damage to infrastructure can result in decreased access to health care, nutritious foods, clean water, and safe dwellings and increased exposure to pollutants, mold, and water borne pathogens.
The burden of the devastating effects of hurricanes are disproportionately felt by socioeconomically disadvantaged populations. A study found that the Black adult mortality rate from hurricane Katrina in Orleans Parish was 1.7 to 4 times higher than that of whites.42Economically disadvantaged groups, peoples of color, people with limited English proficiency, and certain immigrant populations are more likely to live in counties within flood zones or high risk flood areas.19,43,44Displacement and evacuations during hurricanes disproportionately affect underserved communities. For example, Black residents, as well as socioeconomically disadvantaged residents, were found to be less likely to return home after hurricane Katrina due to unoccupiable homes caused by flooding.45Both displacement and evacuation present many challenges to vulnerable populations such as interruption of or inadequate access to healthcare. This is especially true for peoples of color, older adults, and those with a pre-existing or chronic conditions. In immigrant communities, this sudden displacement makes it difficult to access disaster recovery resources due to language and socioeconomic barriers.46For example, a year after Hurricane Katrina, 40% of working-aged Vietnamese-Americans still found it difficult to obtain medications, resulting in the exacerbation of certain illnesses, such as asthma.46,47
People of color and economically disadvantaged populations are more likely to live in older homes or homes with poor infrastructure in high-risk flood areas.48Heavy rains and extensive flooding create ideal conditions for bioaerosols, such as mold, to grow in homes having flood damage had increased levels of mold growth.2,41,49The increased exposures to potential allergens caused by living in damp indoor areas can result in underserved populations disproportionately experiencing an exacerbation of symptoms associated with chronic respiratory diseases or upper and lower respiratory infections.17,43,50
Water contaminated with pathogens is another major health concern with flooding. In urban area, impervious surfaces as found in heat islands tend to be more abundant in vulnerable communities and these surfaces put a strain on sewer systems and if the region’s sewage and drainage systems are overwhelmed, it can lead to increased exposure to waterborne pathogens.51Waterborne pathogens can cause a variety of illnesses, with gastrointestinal illnesses and diarrhea being the most common.43342For example, ingestion of or having direct contact with floodwater increases these risks as flood water may contain sewage that houseE. coliand/orSalmonella.43,52Exposure to toxins is another major concern. Despite similar flooding across toxic sites during Hurricane Harvey, areas with lower socioeconomic status were more likely to have a toxic release during the storm, indicating socioeconomic disparities.53
Wildfires have been increasing in intensity and frequency because of longer warm seasons, increasing periods of droughts, and drier soil and vegetation.19,54,55Wildfires by releasing large amounts of particulate matter, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH), and black carbon into the atmosphere, further exacerbate climate change and increase air pollution.2A study found that wildfire vulnerability is spread unequally across race and ethnicity and those living in census tracts that were primarily Black, Hispanic or Native American had a 50% greater vulnerability to wildfire.56Individuals from these communities are often homeless, live in substandard housing that are not properly sealed and therefore allow smoke to penetrate indoors, or more likely to work outdoors. Additionally, people of color and other vulnerable communities more likely live in areas with high air pollution and, as a result, have chronically inflamed airways, which makes them very sensitive to irritants like wildfire smoke.57Wildfire smoke is directly linked to poor air quality which results in adverse health effects. The release of fine particulate matter less than 2.5 μm in diameter (PM2.5) is a major concern of wildfires. PM2.5is associated with exacerbating respiratory and cardiovascular diseases.2,58Various studies have found that wildfire smoke greatly impacts people of color, children, and the elderly. For example, in a study involving Medicare enrollees, people of color, especially persons who are Black, had a higher risk for respiratory hospitalization than people who are White.59The study also found that a greater percentage of Blacks were exposed to more than one smoke wave (incidences of high-pollution from wildfire smoke) than those who are White.59Another study during the 2020 California wildfire season found that PM2.5 concentrations were positively correlated with poverty and housing inequities.60
Children of certain racial and ethnic groups and low-income communities are also disproportionately affected by air pollution, wildfires, and climate change.2This is because children are still developing, typically spend more time outdoors, and breath more air relative to their body weight than adults.2Wildfire smoke exposure during childhood is associated with increased likelihood of mental illness in adulthood, a decrease in academic performance, and exacerbation of asthma, pneumonia, and bronchitis.2,55A study examining the effects of wildfire smoke on standardized test scores between 3rdand 8thgrade students across 11,700 United States school districts found that the negative effects of wildfire smoke on learning are stronger across both racial and ethnic and socioeconomically disadvantaged communities.61Pregnant women, children, and the elderly are more susceptible to the detrimental effects of wildfire smoke exposure.43Additionally, pregnant women are also at risk to the effects of wildfire smoke as exposure has been linked to adverse birth effects such as preterm birth and lower birth weight.55
In addition to extreme weather events such as wildfires, flooding, and heat waves, other climate changes such as ocean acidification, drought, loss of biodiversity and species extinction, and sea level rise affect planetary and human health. These climate events decrease availability of nutritious foods, clean water, safe housing, biodiverse and green spaces, all of which affect health. Limited resources can cause conflict and human migration, driving further inequities. As indicated earlier, tree cover is lower in low-income areas; results of a meta-analysis support a correlation between green space exposure and lower depression and anxiety.62A warmer climate also leads to geographical spread of many infectious vectors. For example, the Lone Star tick was originally found predominantly in the Southeastern United States, but it appears to spreading north and west due to climate change.63When the tick bites a human, it can transmit alpha-gal, a sugar found in non-primate mammalian meat, and sensitize these individuals. These individuals then have an allergic reaction on consuming red meat.64Another way climate change is having an effect on allergies is through increased pollen season length and concentrations due to higher CO2concentrations and increased temperatures. Again, as individuals in low-income areas are exposed to higher levels of air pollution due to industrial and vehicular emissions, they have chronically inflamed airways, which makes them more sensitive to pollen exposure and are at greater risk of exacerbation of allergic rhinitis.65–67Allergic asthma are also sometimes increased during thunderstorms, which are increasing in intensity and frequency with climate change. Under certain conditions, thunderstorms break up pollen into smaller allergic particles, which penetrate deeper into the lungs increasing risk of asthma and allergic rhinitis. This phenomena is called thunderstorm asthma.68
There is increased recognition that a healthy planet is a prerequisite for human health. Anthropogenic disruption to our planet’s natural systems comes back to affect all living things on earth. One Health is an approach which clearly recognizes the link between human and animal health and the threats that diseases pose to food supplies and economies. Its aim is to provide an integrated, unifying approach to balance and optimize the health of people, animals, and the environment.69Recognizing the need to protect nature and biodiversity, the 2022 United Nations Biodiversity Conference concluded with concrete measures to halt and reverse nature loss, including putting 30% of the planet and 30% of degraded ecosystems under protection by 2030. It also contains proposals to increase finance to developing countries.70
In the US, steps are being taken to correct historical wrongs and work towards climate and environmental justice. A major step has been the creation of a White House Office of Environmental Justice,43which requires every federal agency to address the disproportionate impact of pollution and climate change on minority communities. President Biden’s historic Bipartisan Infrastructure Law aims to advance equity in our country, which will support climate justice by improving air quality and tackling climate change. He also signed an executive order, Justice40, which mandates that at least 40% of the benefits of certain federal investments must flow directly to disadvantaged communities. These benefits will cover climate change, clean energy and energy efficiency, clean transportation, affordable and sustainable housing, remediation and reduction of legacy pollution, critical clean water and wastewater infrastructure, and training and workforce development related to the six other Justice40 investment areas.71,72
These policies are a step in the right direction. However, in addition to policy-level action, individual action is also imperative. Health care professionals often see the firsthand effects of climate change on patient health. They can individually and collectively advance equitable climate and health policies in their communities, health systems, states, and nations. They can educate their patients on how they can alter their behavior to adapt to and mitigate climate change, be role models by reducing their own carbon footprint, and work towards reducing the carbon footprint of the health sector. As health advocates, they can collectively voice their concerns to bring about sustainable policies and actions to mitigate climate change.73
Extreme weather events caused by climate change impacts everyone but not everyone experiences these impacts equally. Underserved communities, including people of color, the elderly, people living with chronic conditions, and socioeconomically disadvantaged groups have greater vulnerability to the impacts of climate change. These vulnerabilities are a result of multiple factors such as disparities in healthcare, lower educational status, systemic racism, and many others. Extreme weather events are threat multipliers which exacerbate existing social inequities that affect health outcomes. There is a need for further research on the short- and long-term effects of climate change on health. There is also a critical need for evidence-based culturally appropriate, community-driven, and effective individual and policy-level mitigation and adaptation solutions to reduce the impacts of climate change on marginalized communities.
Increased fossil fuel usage has increased CO2concentrations leading to global warming and climate change with increased frequency and intensity of extreme weather events such as thunderstorms, wildfires, droughts, heat waves, and others.
Extreme weather events directly increase health risks and indirectly affect determinants of health such as clean water, nutritious foods, and access to health care.
While extreme weather events caused by climate change impact everyone, not everyone experiences these impacts equally. Underserved communities, including people of color, the elderly, people living with chronic conditions, and socioeconomically disadvantaged groups have greater vulnerability to the impacts of climate change. Climate change is a threat multiplier which exacerbate existing social inequities that affect health outcomes.
These inequalities and injustices have led to a rallying cry for climate justice - that actions to cut emissions should also address human rights and social inequalities.
Although international committees such as the 2015 Paris Accord have set in motion international goals to reduce climate change, meeting these goals in an equitable and just manner continues to be an ongoing challenge.
Health care professionals, often in the frontline with firsthand knowledge of the health impacts of climate change, can play a key role in advocating for just and equitable climate change adaptation and mitigation policies.
Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health, NHLBI grant P01 HL152953, and NIEHS R01 ES032253
Dr.Nadeau reports grants from National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI), National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), and Food Allergy Research & Education (FARE); Stock options from IgGenix, Seed Health, ClostraBio, Cour, Alladapt; Advisor at Cour Pharma; Consultant for Excellergy, Red tree ventures, Before Brands, Alladapt, Cour, Latitude, Regeneron, and IgGenix; Co-founder of Before Brands, Alladapt, Latitude, and IgGenix; National Scientific Committee member at Immune Tolerance Network (ITN), and National Institutes of Health (NIH) clinical research centers; patents include, “Mixed allergen com-position and methods for using the same,” “Granulocyte-based methods for detecting and monitoring immune system disorders,” and “Methods and Assays for Detecting and Quantifying Pure Subpopulations of White Blood Cells in Immune System Disorders”. All other authors declare no conflict of interest.
Publisher's Disclaimer:This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
Clinical Trial Registration
Not applicable
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894