An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Correspondence: Merve Çolak (merveyetimcolak@gmail.com)
Corresponding author.
Revised 2024 Dec 20; Received 2024 Aug 12; Accepted 2025 Jan 8; Issue date 2025 May-Jun.
This is an open access article under the terms of thehttp://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.
Climate change is the most important problem that threatens the health of individuals, public health, and health systems on a global scale. The International Council of Nurses emphasizes that nurses should strive to reduce the effects of climate change and help individuals and systems adapt. In addition, it is stated that climate change should be integrated into nursing education curricula and nursing students, who are future healthcare providers, should be prepared to reduce the effects of climate change and promote a healthier environment.
The aim of this study is to examine the effect of the Climate Change and Health course on global warming knowledge and attitude, environmental literacy, and eco‐anxiety levels in nursing students.
In this study, a pretest–posttest comparative quasi‐experimental design type was used. The research was conducted with 117 students taking the “Climate Change and Health” course added to the curriculum at the Nursing Department of a private university in Istanbul between February 2023 and June 2023. Data were collected before and after the intervention using the Descriptive Characteristics Form, Global Warming Knowledge Questionnaire, Global Warming Attitude Scale, Environmental Literacy Scale for Adults, and Eco‐Anxiety Scale.
After taking the Climate Change and Health course, nursing students' global warming knowledge and attitude total scores increased, and a statistically significant increase was detected in the eco anxiety total and behavioral symptoms subscale mean scores. There was no statistically significant change in the Environmental Literacy Scale total and subscale mean scores.
It can be stated that the Climate Change and Health course positively improved nursing students' knowledge and attitudes toward global warming and increased their sensitivity about climate change. Nurses, who constitute the most important part of the healthcare workforce worldwide, have an important role in creating a healthy and safe environment and in combating the effects of global warming and climate change. For this reason, in order to train knowledgeable and equipped health professionals on this subject, it is recommended that courses on the effects of climate change, adaptation, and coping with it be added to the nursing curriculum and integrated into all subjects every year to ensure continuity.
Keywords:climate change, environment, global warming, health, nursing education
Climate change poses a significant global threat to social and environmental determinants of health, such as the degradation of food systems, the spread of climate‐sensitive diseases, and the increase in the frequency and intensity of extreme weather events (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [IPCC],2023). In the Lancet 2023 Countdown report, climate change is stated as the most important problem threatening the well‐being of individuals, public health, and health systems on a global scale (Romanello et al.2023). The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that climate change will cause approximately 250,000 additional deaths per year from malaria, diarrhea, malnutrition, and heat stress between 2030 and 2050 (WHO2023).
Climate change causes an increase in deaths and diseases due to extreme weather events such as heat waves, storms, and floods, an increase in the frequency and intensity of food‐, water‐, and vector‐borne infectious diseases, an exacerbation of chronic diseases, and an increase in mental health problems. Therefore, it negatively affects the health of individuals physically, mentally, and socially (CDC2022; WHO2023).
In a statement published by the International Council of Nurses (ICN) in 2018, it emphasizes that nurses should work to reduce the effects of climate change and ensure the adaptation of individuals and systems due to their roles in protecting and maintaining health and promoting social justice (ICN2018). Additionally, one of the Sustainable Development goals (Target 13.3: Improve education, awareness‐raising, and human and institutional capacity on climate change mitigation, adaptation, impact reduction, and early warning) of the United Nations (2015) is climate action. It is emphasized that the fight against climate change must be carried out strongly all over the world and that nurses have important responsibilities (Álvarez‐Nieto et al.2022a; Dossey et al.2019). Butterfield et al. (2021) emphasize that nurses, representing more than half of healthcare professionals, have been determined as the most reliable professional group and have an important role in the fight against climate change because they work directly with vulnerable groups (Butterfield et al.2021). Not only are nurses critical to all aspects of health promotion and patient care, they are also trusted ambassadors of health information. Nurses are also leaders in removing hazardous waste and implementing actions that reduce the carbon footprint. Beyond nurses' role in clinical care for patients and communities, they serve as primary health professionals throughout all phases of disaster response (Leffers and Butterfield2018; Richardson et al.2017).
It is stated that due to the increasingly negative effects of climate change on people's health, nurses can serve as an expert resource for patients, individuals in society, and policymakers (Leffers et al.2017). However, nurses need to be equipped and have high awareness in this regard (Harris et al.2022). When the studies on this subject in the literature are examined, it is seen that the knowledge and sensitivity of nurses regarding climate change are not fully sufficient and there are still deficiencies (Albrecht et al.2023; Fertelli2023; Kalogirou et al.2020). Therefore, nurses' knowledge, skills and sensitivity need to be developed and strengthened (Harris et al.2022). In this regard, it is emphasized in the literature that increasing the climate‐related competencies of nurses today and in the future should be developed starting from the education process and adding independent courses instead of the subjects included in an existing course (ICN2018; Harris et al.2022; Mitchell2021). In this context, nursing students, who are the health care providers of the future, need to be knowledgeable and prepared for health education about global warming, climate change and its effects on health, mitigating climate change, adaptation, and resilience, and promoting a healthy environment (Álvarez‐Nieto et al.2022a; Leffers et al.2017; Nicholas and Breakey2017).
However, studies have shown that nursing students' knowledge and awareness levels about global warming/climate change are insufficient and it is recommended that courses on climate change should be added to the nursing education curriculum (Álvarez‐Nieto et al.2022a; Biçer and Vaizoğlu2015; Cugini et al.2024; Incesu and Yas Altıner2024; Yang et al.2018). Amerson et al. (2022) emphasize that there are gaps in educational curricula on issues related to climate change and sustainability. In a study in which climate‐related educational activities were embedded in a community health course, they found that it increased awareness, knowledge, and intention to act on personal and professional issues related to climate in nursing students (Tremblay and Hawkins2023). Researchers of another study carried out with medical students, found that the climate change and health course enhanced students' environmental knowledge (Müller et al.2023). As reported in the research conducted at a medical school in Germany, the “Climate change and health” course added as an elective course had a positive impact on students' knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors regarding climate change (Lemke et al.2023). In a recent examination performed at another medical school in Germany, students evaluated the elective course on planetary health (Climate, environment, and health) positively and showed a high level of interest in climate protection and local sustainability projects (Schwienhorst‐Stich et al.2024). As indicated by research aimed to provide an overview of the existing literature examining climate change in nursing curricula, it is stated that although the link between climate change and health is recognized, this information is not systematically integrated into nursing education. In addition, it is indicated that there is a gap in the literature to improve and optimize the integration of climate change into the nursing curriculum and that more studies are needed in this regard (Tiitta et al.2024).
In line with the above information, “Climate Change and Health” course was added to the curriculum program in the nursing department in the 2022–2023 academic year. In Turkey, topics and courses related to climate change are not sufficiently included in nursing education programs. There is no other course directly related to climate change added to nursing education programs in Turkey. This study, in which the course was included in the nursing curriculum and its effect was examined, is the first study conducted in the field of nursing in Turkey. When the studies conducted in Turkey on this subject were examined, it was seen that the studies were descriptive and it was recommended to add Climate Change and Health courses to the curriculum (Biçer and Vaizoğlu2015; İncesu and Yas Altıner2024; Tahkol and Öztürk Haney2024). In addition, studies examining the effectiveness of climate change and health courses on nursing students are limited in the literature. Therefore, the aim of this study is to examine the effect of Climate Change and Health course on global warming knowledge and attitudes, environmental literacy, and eco‐anxiety levels of nursing students.
In this study, a quasi‐experimental design type with pretest–posttest comparison was used. The “TREND checklist” for quasi‐experimental studies was used to report it. We included description of the intervention, description of the comparison condition, full reporting of outcomes, and information related to the design of the study as recommended by TREND (Des Jarlais et al.2004).
Global Warming Knowledge Questionnaire total score is higher than before the training.
Global Warming Attitude Scale total score is higher than before the education.
Environmental Literacy Scale total score and subgroup scores are higher than before the education.
Eco Anxiety Scale total and subgroup mean scores are higher than before the training.
This study was conducted with the students of the undergraduate nursing program of the Faculty of Health Sciences of a private university in Istanbul in the spring semester of the 2022–2023 academic year. The inclusion criteria of the study are to be enrolled in the Climate Change and Health course, volunteering to participate in the study, and to attend at least 70% of the classes. The population of this study consisted of 150 second‐year nursing students taking the Climate Change and Health course. The study was completed with a total of 117 students who agreed to participate in the study. The power of this study was calculated with the G*Power program post hoc power analysis, and it was determined that it reached 99% power with an effect size of 0.52, a margin of error of 0.05, and a sample size of 117. Due to the catastrophic earthquake disaster centered in Kahramanmaraş on February 6, 2023, it was decided by the Higher Education Institution to conduct the courses online. Accordingly, the courses were conducted online.
In the first week of the Climate Change and Health course, the purpose of the research was explained to students and then they were asked to fill in the “Informed Consent Form” presenting that they are voluntary to participate in the study. Following their written consents, data‐collecting process of the study was initiated by the researchers. Global Warming Information Questionnaire, Global Warming Attitude Scale, Environmental Literacy Scale for Adults, and Eco‐Anxiety Scale were utilized before (pretest) and after (posttest) that the Climate Change and Health course, whereas the Descriptive Characteristics Form was used only before the course. The data collection tools were organized as Google forms and students were allowed to fill them out over the internet. Details of the data collection stages are presented in Figure1.

Research flow diagram. [Colour figure can be viewed atwileyonlinelibrary.com]
In this study, several measures were taken to prevent missing data. First, all data collection was conducted through Google Forms and participants were required to fill in the mandatory fields before submitting the forms. This minimized the risk of missing responses. Furthermore, the research team monitored the data collection process and reminded the participants to complete the forms on time. Technical support was provided for students who experienced technical problems during the online data collection to ensure full participation.
In order to obtain the sociodemographic characteristics of the participants, this form, which was created by the researchers in line with the relevant literatures, consists of a total of nine questions (Aydın2017; Ergin et al.2021).
The Global Warming Knowledge Questionnaire, which was used to determine the knowledge levels of university students about global warming, was developed by Eroğlu and Aydoğdu in 2016. The Cronbach's alpha reliability coefficient of the questionnaire is 0.85. The questionnaire is 5‐point Likert type and consists of 26 items. The negative statement in the questionnaire is reverse scored (Item 5). An increase in the total score indicates an increase in the level of knowledge about global warming (Eroğlu and Aydoğdu2016).
The Global Warming Attitude Scale developed by Bozdoğan (2014) consists of 26 items. The Cronbach Alpha reliability coefficient of the scale was found to be 0.94. The scale is a 5‐point Likert scale. As the scale score increases, positive attitudes toward preventing global warming also increase (Bozdoğan2014).
Environmental literacy is an educational approach that increases individuals' knowledge, understanding, and awareness of their environment, contributing to an effective role in solving environmental problems, encouraging behaviors consistent with the principles of sustainability, and developing critical thinking skills on environmental issues (Fang et al.2023). The Environmental Literacy Scale developed by Atabek‐Yiğit et al. (2014) is 5‐point Likert type and consists of 20 items. The highest and lowest scores that can be obtained from the scale are 100 and 20, respectively. It consists of three sub‐dimensions: “Environmental consciousness”, “Environmental anxiety”, and “Environmental awareness”. The Cronbach α coefficient of the scale is 0.881 for the total score. Two items in the scale were reverse‐coded. A high environmental literacy scale score indicates that the individual has a high level of environmental literacy (Atabek‐Yiğit et al.2014).
Eco‐anxiety refers to anxiety specifically related to climate change, including global warming, rising sea levels, increased natural disasters, and extreme weather events (Clayton2020). Eco‐Anxiety Scale was developed by Hogg et al. (2021) to measure individuals' psychological responses to ecological problems (Hogg et al.2021). Uzun et al. (2022) conducted a Turkish validity and reliability study. The scale consists of 13 items and has a 4‐point Likert type. It has four sub‐dimensions which are Emotional symptoms, Behavioral symptoms, Rumination, and Anxiety about personal impact. Cronbach's alpha value of the scale was found to be 0.91. An increase in the score obtained from the scale indicates an increase in the level of eco‐anxiety (Uzun et al.2022).
In 2022, the Climate Change and Health course was included in the curriculum as an elective course for 2 h a week. The content of the course includes climate change and its causes, the consequences of climate change, the political dimension of climate change, the effects of climate change on physical, mental, and social health, the contribution of hospitals to climate change and solution proposals (Green Hospitals, Responsibilities of health workers) and strategies to deal with climate change (Individual, Managerial, Education). The objectives of the course are presented in Figure1. The duration of the course was 15 weeks. In addition to explaining the above topics, climate‐related disasters and their effects on health were discussed.
In order to evaluate student learning, homework and two exams were utilized. First of all, students were asked to conduct individual and environmental investigations on the effects of climate change and were given homework to calculate their own carbon footprint. In online education, rooms were created on Zoom and the topics given in large and small groups were discussed with students. Moreover, students were evaluated twice: midterm and final exams. The course was conducted by the researcher. The weekly content of the Climate Change and Health course is presented in Table1.
Weekly content of climate change and health course.
Ethics committee permission was obtained from Üsküdar University Non‐Interventional Research Ethics Committee (61351342/OCAK2023‐55) and institutional permission was obtained from the university. The research was conducted in accordance with the Principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. Permissions were obtained from the researchers who developed and adapted the scales to Turkish. Verbal and written voluntary consent were obtained from the students and data were collected from those who were willing to participate in the study.
SPSS (“Statistical Package for Social Sciences version 24.0” software licensed to Uskudar University (“IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA”)) statistical analysis program was used for data analysis. After the normality distribution of the data was examined by Kolmogorov–Smirnov test, Paired Samplettest was used for pretest–posttest comparison. Cohen'sdvalues were calculated to assess the effect size of these differences. To examine the predictive power of variables on Eco‐Anxiety levels, a multiple linear regression analysis was also performed. Data were tested atp< 0.05 significance level. The reliability coefficients were evaluated with Cronbach's Alpha.
It was determined that 74.4% of the nursing students participating in the study were female, 74.4% of the students lived with their families, 88.9% of the students' family income was equal to their expenses, and 88.9% of the students decided to study nursing intentionally as presented in Table2. The mean age of the participants was 21.33 ± 2.18 years.
Some characteristics of students.
The comparison of the results of the Global Warming Knowledge Questionnaire, Global Warming Attitude Scale, Environmental Literacy Scale, and Eco‐Anxiety Scale used to measure the effectiveness of the Climate Change and Health course before and after the course is presented in Table3. The mean Global Warming Knowledge Questionnaire score of the students was 103.92 ± 10.83 before the course and 110.14 ± 12.73 after the course, with a large effect size (Cohen'sd= 0.659), indicating a substantial improvement in knowledge levels. The mean score on the Global Warming Attitude Scale increased from 137.30 ± 16.76 before the course to 141.37 ± 18.83 after the course, with a small effect size (Cohen'sd= 0.255), suggesting a modest improvement in students' attitudes toward global warming. In both scales, the difference between before and after the course was found to be statistically significant (p< 0.01).
Comparison of students' global warming knowledge levels, attitudes, environmental literacy, and eco anxiety levels according to their pre‐ and post‐course mean scores.
Note: t: paired samplettest.
When the total mean scores of the Environmental Literacy Scale, which is used to measure the awareness of the damages to the environment, were examined, it was determined as 79.15 ± 11.34 before the course and 79.09 ± 14.77 after the course, and the difference was not statistically significant. Similarly, no significant difference was found between the mean scores before and after the course in the sub‐dimensions of Environmental Consciousness Level, Environmental Anxiety Level, and Environmental Awareness Level (p> 0.05).
The mean total score of the Eco‐Anxiety Scale, which was used to determine the level of concern about possible disasters due to climate change, was found to be 12.00 ± 5.19 before the course and 13.59 ± 6.32 after the course, with a small effect size (Cohen'sd= 0.263), indicating a modest increase in eco‐anxiety levels. This increase was statistically significant (p= 0.005). In addition, the mean score of the Behavioral Symptoms subscale increased from 2.30 ± 1.90 to 2.95 ± 1.96, with a small effect size (Cohen'sd= 0.290), showing a slight but significant rise in behavioral symptoms related to eco‐anxiety (p< 0.01). No significant difference was found between the mean scores before and after the training in the sub‐dimensions of Emotional Symptoms, Anxiety about Personal Impact, and Rumination (p> 0.05).
The multiple linear regression analysis model to predict Eco‐Anxiety Scale scores is presented in Table4. The effects of the three independent variables used in the model, Global Warming Attitude Scale, Global Warming Knowledge Questionnaire, and Environmental Anxiety Level, on eco‐anxiety were examined. The regression model was statistically significant and explained 10.8% of the variance (F= 5.684,p= 0.001,R= .362, Adj.R2= 0.108). According to the regression coefficients, Global Warming Attitude Scale has a significant positive effect on eco‐anxiety (β= 0.476), and Environmental Anxiety Level has a significant negative effect on eco‐anxiety (β= −0.217).
Regression analysis results for variables predicting eco‐anxiety scale scores.
Note: R= 0.362, Adj.R2= 0.108,F= 5.684,p= 0.001.
The impact of the Climate Change and Health course added to the program to sensitize nurses during their student years was evaluated in this study.
Results of this study show that the Climate Change and Health course positively improved nursing students' knowledge and attitudes about global warming and slightly increased their level of concern about possible ecological disasters. In a study similar to our study, it was found that climate education given to nursing students increased awareness, knowledge, and intention to act on personal and professional issues related to climate (Tremblay and Hawkins2023). In a study examining the effectiveness of the Climate Change and Human Health course offered to health professionals, they stated that the course was effective in improving knowledge, self‐efficacy, and communication skills on climate change. They also emphasized the importance of educating future health professionals about the health effects of global warming (Katzman et al.2022). In another study, researchers reported that a program provided to nursing students significantly increased their attitudes and awareness toward climate change and sustainability (Álvarez‐Nieto et al.2022b). In this context, it can be claimed that the Climate Change and Health course is effective in increasing nursing students' knowledge and attitudes about global warming and climate change.
In the current study, it was determined that nursing students did not show a significant difference in the level of environmental literacy and environmental awareness. This course covers climate change and its causes, the consequences of climate change, the political dimension of climate change, the effects of climate change on physical, mental, and social health, the contribution of hospitals to climate change, and solution proposals and strategies to deal with climate change. In the content of the course, topics related to the general environment are limited. Therefore, it is necessary to show the relation between climate change and the environment in the content of the course. In the present study, environmental literacy of the students was determined to be at a high level and no significant increase was observed after the training. In a study conducted with medical students, it was determined that the climate change and health course did not significantly change the environmental awareness levels of the students (Müller et al.2023). In both studies, it is believed that students already have a high level of environmental literacy awareness.
Another issue evaluated in this study was eco‐anxiety. It was identified that the climate‐related anxiety levels of nursing students who took the Climate Change and Health course increased. As it is well‐known, a degree of anxiety motivates the individual and increases his or her sensitivity to the issue. In the literature, it is stated that eco‐anxiety is a healthy response to climate change and a response that can be transformed into action in protecting the environment (Benoit et al.2022). Eco‐anxiety is defined as an emotion that sensitizes us to environmental crises such as climate change and helps us deal with these challenges. It is stated that this emotion leads us to seek solutions at both individual and community levels. Moreover, given that the negative effects of climate change may affect the poor more, some level of eco‐anxiety has the potential to increase planetary welfare (Kurth and Pihkala2022).
In addition, after the Climate Change and Health course, there was a slight but significant increase in behavioral symptoms associated with eco‐anxiety (difficulty in sleeping, difficulty in enjoying social situations with family and friends, difficulty in working and/or studying). In another study, similar to the findings of this study, participants' eco‐anxiety was reported to have negative effects on their mental health, adversely affecting their daily routine behaviors (including food consumption, sleep), social functioning, ability to work and/or study, concentration, and thinking capacity (Hogg et al.2021). Hickman (2020) suggests that individuals may experience eco‐anxiety as more severe and complex due to existing mental health problems. For example, it is argued that an individual with obsessive–compulsive disorder might compulsively check climate‐related publications. This behavior can either stem from the mental problem itself or be a consequence of eco‐anxiety. In addition, since young people will be more affected by environmental crises, it is recommended to examine whether they experience more emotional and behavioral symptoms (Burke et al.2018).
In this study, the increase in global warming attitudes was identified as an important factor in the increased eco‐anxiety levels of nursing students. In other studies, conducted with nursing students and nurses, a similar relationship between global climate change awareness and eco‐anxiety levels was also reported (Fertelli2023; İlaslan and Şahin Orak2024; Çelik Eren and Kabataş Yıldız2024; Tümer et al.2024). In line with these studies, it can be said that in our study, taking the climate change and health course increased the students' awareness levels on this issue and increased their eco‐anxiety levels. In our study, it was found that the level of environmental anxiety had a negative effect on eco‐anxiety. Similar to our study findings, a study emphasized that addressing environmental concerns constructively supports individuals' psychological well‐being and reduces eco‐anxiety levels (Verplanken et al.2020). These findings suggest that individuals with high levels of environmental anxiety may reduce their level of eco‐anxiety by addressing their environmental concerns more as individual responsibility and sense of duty.
One of the major limitations of this study is the lack of a control group. Therefore, the researchers could not determine whether the nursing students' Global Warming Knowledge and Attitudes, Environmental Literacy, and Eco‐Anxiety Level scores would improve during the posttest if they did not attend the Climate change and health course.
The test effect is another limitation of this study in which the pretest measurement may have influenced the post‐test scores. The convenience sampling is subject to bias as students self‐selected themselves voluntarily and their characteristics may not reflect the characteristics of students who did not volunteer. Finally, this study includes the limitations of the online course due to the earthquake disaster in Turkey.
In this study, it was found that the Climate Change and Health course was effective in increasing nursing students' knowledge and attitudes toward global warming and eco‐anxiety levels. In order for the impact of the Climate Change and Health course to be sustainable, it can be stated that it would be beneficial to present this subject in other courses after the students take this course, to encourage students to do projects and to carry out activities within the department. On the other hand, it was found that the course was not effective in increasing students' environmental literacy levels. It is recommended that climate change and environmental awareness should be emphasized more in the lectures. Due to the earthquake disaster in Turkey, the course was conducted online with the decision to switch to distance education. It would be appropriate to investigate the effectiveness of the Climate Change and Health course after face‐to‐face education. Although there was no change in the environmental literacy level of the students as a result of the course, it is recommended that the Climate Change and Health course be added to the curriculum of other nursing programs and other departments of universities and that research be conducted on this subject.
In addition, it is recommended to organize workshops on this topic with other disciplines (engineering, environmental scientists, policymakers) and to conduct interventional studies on the new curricula developed. Furthermore, it would be beneficial to organize workshops and training for nurses working in the clinic within the scope of lifelong learning to increase their general awareness on the subject.
Last but not least, students who will be the future nurses should be empowered with the mindset to develop policies and discourses based on critical and analytical thinking to improve environmental health and mitigate the effects of global warming and climate change on human health.
The role of nurses, who constitute the most important part of the health workforce worldwide in creating a healthy and safe environment, in coping with the effects of global warming and climate change is known. Nurse educators should prepare students, who will constitute the future nursing workforce, on global warming, climate change and its effects on health, the contribution of hospitals to climate change, climate change mitigation, adaptation, and resilience. Nurses must be competent practitioners, advocates, and change agents to secure the health of society in the face of climate change. Therefore, it is recommended that courses on the effects of climate change, adaptation, and coping should be added to undergraduate nursing curriculum programs and more research should be conducted on this subject in order to raise knowledgeable and equipped health professionals.
Merve Çolak: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Resources, Writing—Original Draft, Writing—Review & Editing, Project administration.Rıdvan Dogan: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing—Original Draft.Selma Dogan: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing—Review & Editing, Project administration, Supervision
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
Fundings: The authors received no specific funding for this work.
Research data are not shared.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
Research data are not shared.
Articles from Public Health Nursing (Boston, Mass.) are provided here courtesy ofWiley
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894