An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Joint Senior Author
Corresponding Author:Dr Mark Miller, BHF Centre for Cardiovascular Science, University of Edinburgh, Queen’s Medical Research Institute, 49 Little France Crescent Edinburgh, UK EH16 4TJ,mark.miller@ed.ac.uk
Environmental stresses are increasingly being recognized as significant risk factors for adverse health outcomes. In particular, various forms of pollution and climate change are playing an increasing role in promoting non-communicable diseases, especially cardiovascular disease. Given recent trends, global warming and air pollution are now associated with substantial cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. As a vicious cycle, global warming increases the occurrence, size and severity of wildfires, which are significant sources of airborne particulate matter. Exposure to wildfire smoke is associated with cardiovascular disease, with these effects being underpinned by mechanisms that include oxidative stress, inflammation, impaired cardiac function and pro-atherosclerotic effects in the circulation. In the first part of our two-part series on pollution and cardiovascular disease, we provide an overview of the impact of global warming and air pollution, and because of recent events and emerging trends we pay specific attention to air pollution caused by wildfires.
Keywords:Noise pollution, water pollution, soil pollution, light pollution, cardiovascular disease
Various forms of pollution and climate change are causal for cardiovascular disease. As a vicious cycle, global warming increases the occurrence of wildfires, which are significant sources of airborne particulate matter. Exposure to wildfire smoke is associated with cardiovascular disease, with these effects being underpinned by mechanisms that include oxidative stress, inflammation, impaired cardiac function and pro-atherosclerotic effects in the circulation. In the first part of our two-part series we provide an overview of the impact of global warming and air pollution on cardiovascular disease, with specific attention paid to air pollution caused by wildfires.
Planetary health is no longer just an environmental issue – it is in the heights of social and political agendas, and awareness of the pressing need for action is high in the world’s social conscience. However, while the environmental crisis is imminent, the impetus for change appears sporadic. It is held back by other major adverse issues impacting the global arena, such as stretched national economics, armed conflicts, and pandemics. Yet, urgent action is required as climate change strides forward and pollution infiltrates the air we breathe, the water we drink, the food we eat, and the places we live in.
In 2022, the Lancet Commission published its progress report on pollution and health.1It makes for sober reading. The report notes that, since 2015, there have been reductions in deaths from household air and water pollution, but increases in deaths from outdoor air pollution and toxic chemical pollution. Overall, there was little tangible progress against pollution: pollution remains responsible for 8.8 million premature deaths annually, which equates to 1 in 6 deaths worldwide. This leads to an average global reduction of life expectancy by 2.9 years, substantially more than the reduction in life expectancy due to other factors such as chronic tobacco smoking (2.2 years) or HIV/AIDS (0.7 years).
Thus, the impact of pollution on health remains much greater than that of war, terrorism, malaria, HIV, tuberculosis, drugs, alcohol, and the number of deaths caused by pollution are similar to those caused by tobacco smoking. In the most severely affected countries, pollution-related disease is responsible for more than one death in four.2Using 2015 data from the Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors Study, is has been estimated that, in total, pollution was responsible for 268 million disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) – 254 million years lost and 14 million lived with disability – figures which continue to increase.3The European Commission estimates a cost of €1 trillion per year from premature death and disease caused by environmental pollution (including air and noise pollution), which far exceeds the costs caused by alcohol consumption and smoking.4These figures are likely to be conservative estimates of the burden posed by pollution.
Environmental stressors like climate change and pollution predominantly affect health through exacerbation of non-communicable disease. Cardiovascular disease is the biggest contributor to the burden of non-communicable disease, claiming the lives of 18.6 million people each year.5Accordingly, the exacerbation and causation of cardiovascular diseases are significant contributors to the health burden imposed by environmental stress. The precise impact of the direct and indirect effects of global warming and climate change are difficult to determine. However, insights are offered by air pollution as an exemplar. Outdoor and indoor air pollution, combined, are associated with over 7 million premature deaths per year, of which over 50% are attributable to cardiovascular causes, principally ischemic heart disease and stroke.6–8This amounts to more than 20% of all cardiovascular deaths being due to air pollution.9Welfare losses from pollution have been estimated to be 6% of world gross domestic product (GDP), over 80% of which are attributed to air pollution.1Yet, the magnitude of the cardiovascular effects of air pollution remains underappreciated, and other forms of pollution need to be better described and understood.
This 2-part review provides an overview of the evidence linking cardiovascular disease and different forms of pollution and heat as a direct consequence of global warming. Part 1 of this review covers global warming, air pollution, and wildfire smoke(Central Illustration). In the part-2 review article we cover water, soil, noise and light pollution. Importantly, both epidemiological and mechanistic evidence link all these pollution forms to increased cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. The Lancet Commission progress report concludes that “global action on all major modern pollutants is needed”.1In reviewing these topics, we hope to highlight the significance of environmental stresses to the global burden of disease and to mobilize the cardiovascular community to advocate for interventions to reduce pollution emissions and slow the progress of global warming.

Each exacerbates the actions of the other by combining to cause cardiovascular death, acute and chronic coronary artery disease, heart failure, stroke, venous thrombosis, pulmonary embolism and arrhythmia.
The global mean temperature is increasing by 0.2 degrees Celsius/year,10which has caused the years after the year 2000 to be the 20 hottest in recorded history. These years have also been plagued by an unprecedented frequency, intensity, and duration of extreme temperature events, including heat waves and the coldest temperatures ever measured in the USA. Non-optimal temperatures are associated with excess mortality and morbidity from various causes.11Around 5 million deaths globally are associated with non-optimal temperatures per year (9.43% of global deaths).11Extreme cold is associated with cardiovascular disease death, most significantly with heart failure. Hot temperatures show steeper slopes and high-risk ratios that increase with higher temperatures over several days. Thus, excess cardiovascular disease deaths from sustained cold periods are generally more extensive than those for brief escalating heat periods.
A recent meta-analysis revealed that every 1-degree Celsius increase above reference temperature correlates to a 2.1% increase in cardiovascular disease-related mortality and a 0.5% increase in cardiovascular morbidity.12During heat waves, the risk of heat-related cardiovascular mortality may also increase by more than 10%.13Heat waves and high temperatures are also responsible for the global loss of 11.7 million DALYs, which reflect adverse impacts on not only disease onset and death rate, but also quality of life. The future outlook is also not optimistic: the World Health Organization (WHO) predicts around 250,000 annual deaths between 2030 and 2050 because of heat exposure, leading to a significant increase in cardiovascular mortality14and also an exacerbation of existing health conditions.15Another concern is the interaction between temperature and air pollution: heat is often accompanied by stagnant weather, which promotes the photochemical formation of air pollutants and hinders their dilution and dissipation. Conversely, temperature inversions can also lead to stagnant weather generating episodes of cold temperature and air pollution, which also precipitate cardiovascular stress.
In response to heat, superficial vessels vasodilate to redistribute blood flow toward the dermis and skin. The skin then produces sweat to cool our bodies, limiting the increase in core temperature.16This redistribution, however, causes a decreased cardiac filling pressure and a compensatory increase in heart rate and heart contractility, which is further driven by sympathetic nerve activation and a rise in cardiac oxygen demand.16Sweat production may also lead to dehydration, decreased blood volume, increased cardiovascular strain, and acute kidney injury if fluid and sweat loss is not adequately replenished. Extreme heat stress may also exhaust the thermoregulatory capacity of our body, resulting in overheating that may proceed to heat stroke.16Therefore, heat action plans are essential to reduce the vulnerability of susceptible groups, such as children and the elderly.
Meta-analyses have demonstrated that cardiovascular illness is the primary cause of death during heat waves.12Half a billion people are estimated to have cardiovascular disease,17so any densely populated area with a temperature extreme will be at risk for increased cardiovascular mortality. Alahmad et al. demonstrated associations between extreme temperatures and cardiovascular mortality in a large multinational sample,18which included evidence associating exposure to extreme temperatures with a greater risk of mortality from multiple cardiovascular conditions.18Heart failure had the highest burden of excess deaths caused by heat and cold periods compared to other cardiovascular disease mortality.
Pathophysiologically, heat causes volume depletion followed by compensatory sympathetic activation leading to a heart rate increase and inotropy(Central Illustration). These compensatory mechanisms are blocked by typical cardiovascular disease pharmacotherapies, particularly in heart failure patients with beta-receptor blockers. In addition, the effects of heat may be exaggerated by the concomitant use of diuretics or vasodilator therapies such as angiotensin-receptor-neprilysin-inhibitors, exacerbating volume depletion and blood pressure reduction.19Rising temperature also causes an increase in metabolic state and oxygen consumption. Volume depletion, in turn, causes hemoconcentration, increased blood viscosity and activation of the blood coagulation cascade, thus increasing the risk of thrombosis and myocardial ischemia.19
Cold exposure causes activation of sympathetic tone that causes constriction of skin vessels and skeletal muscle vessels that conserves but may also generate heat. The consequence is an increase in blood pressure and, thus, an increase in afterload and cardiac oxygen demand – both of which may worsen heart failure. Like heat, cold periods will cause a state of hypercoagulability due to increased viscosity, hemoconcentration, and clotting abnormalities.
Patients at the highest risk during a heatwave need practical advice on coping with extreme heat, which may include evidence-based cooling therapies, effective air conditioning, and other measures.20Various programs track extreme heat events with resources for individuals on how to prepare for and cope with extreme heat episodes (for example the United States Centre for Disease Control and Prevention’s Climate and Health Programme21); these should continue to be developed and expanded in their coverage, and be promoted to improve public awareness. Great emphasis must be placed on educating the public concerning home monitoring of body weight, blood pressure, and symptoms of presyncope. Heat action plans need to be well-communicated and specialized training for climate cardiologists is needed. Mitigation strategies can be implemented at the landscape, urban, and building level to significantly extend society’s capacity to withstand extreme weather.20Heart-healthy city planning is mandatory to avoid urban heat islands causing severe health effects.22Urban heat islands occur when cities replace the natural land cover and trees (which shade from heat) with dense concentrations of pavement, buildings, and other surfaces that absorb and retain heat.22This increases energy costs, air pollution levels, and heat-related illness and mortality. In a recent study conducted across 93 European cities, it was reported that approximately 2644 premature deaths could be prevented by increasing city tree coverage to 30%,23highlighting the importance of increasing urban vegetative cover. Heat-related deaths could be further avoided through improvements to building insulation and implementing more reflective/less absorbent roofing materials.22As the population is subjected to hotter summers and colder winters, implementing heart-healthy changes to city design will be crucial for combating the health effects of climate change.
Over the last three decades, a substantial literature has been generated on the health effects of air pollution. Yet, the scale of this public health issue needs to be better appreciated. The relevant mortality figures put this into perspective, with current estimates suggesting that air pollution causes 7–9 million premature deaths globally every year.6,7In particular, the use of fossil fuels makes a significant contribution to the avoidable mortality attributed to air pollution by saving 5.1 million lives per year.24Low-to-middle-income countries bear the brunt of this public health crisis due to their high and generally increasing levels of air pollution, pre-existing poorer average health across their population compared to more affluent countries, and lack of access to appropriate medical care. While in high-income countries the levels of most air pollutants are lower (than in low-to-middle income countries) and decreasing,6there is still no room for complacency in any nation. There is no safe level of air pollution, with effects being observed below even the most stringent air quality guideline limit of <5g/m3, which was just introduced by the WHO.25,26
Another factor underlying the major impact of air pollution across the globe is that it affects everyone across their life course - old, young or in the womb, healthy or sick. Mortality is most significant in young children (<6 years; especially in developing countries such as Africa) and the elderly (seeFigure 1),7although other vulnerable groups include those with an existing cardiorespiratory condition, those who are obese or have metabolic syndrome, and potentially those with genetic deficiencies in antioxidant systems.27Another reason for the high levels of morbidity is that the effects of air pollution are not confined to the pulmonary or cardiovascular systems, with effects being observed in most organs of the body.28–30

Taken from52.
The cardiovascular effects of air pollution are especially relevant, accounting for approximately half of the mortality attributed to air pollution. Indeed, a fifth of all cardiovascular deaths is caused by air pollution.9Air pollution also contributes substantially to morbidity and has been linked to most cardiovascular conditions,31with the last decade spawning a series of meta-analyses confirming associations between air pollutants and most major cardiovascular diseases (Tables 1and2). Epidemiological associations tend to be strongest for airborne particles over gases. However, close correlations among differing pollutants (e.g., particles and nitrogen dioxide (NO2) from combustion sources) make separating their differing health risks challenging. Nonetheless, long-term exposure to all major air pollutants is associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality (Tables 1and2). Primary air pollutants and their sources are shown inFigure 2.
Selected meta-analyses of short-term exposure (<1 month) to air pollutants and cardiovascular mortality and morbidity129–134
Selected meta-analyses of long-term exposure (>1 month) to air pollutants and cardiovascular mortality and morbidity133,135–139

Examples of various sources of major air pollutants. CO = carbon monoxide, HNO3= nitric acid, H2SO4= sulfuric acid, NH3= ammonia, NO2= nitrogen dioxide, O3= ozone, PM = particulate matter, SIA = secondary inorganic aerosol, SO2= sulfur dioxide, temp = increasing temperature, VOCs = volatile organic carbon species.
Most air pollution research focuses on ambient (outdoor) particulate matter (PM), especially in urban settings with a greater number of pollution monitors, more pollution sources and higher pollution levels, and also greater population density. Environmental PM is categorized according to particle size: PM10(particles with a diameter of 10 μm or less), fine particles or PM2.5(diameter of 2.5 μm or less), and ultrafine particles (diameter of less than 100 nm, also termed “nanoparticles”). PM10and PM2.5are measured worldwide, whereas ultrafine particles are not routinely measured outside of research studies. While PM2.5monitors are fewer in number than PM10monitors, the health effects are more consistent for this fraction of PM; therefore, most health studies now focus on PM2.5. Indeed, the large global burden estimates for air pollution principally derive from PM2.5. The 2010 American Heart Association updated statement on PM2.532remains a seminal review. The authors conclude that there is “persuasive evidence that present-day levels of air pollutants contribute to cardiovascular morbidity and mortality”; a conclusion that has only been bolstered by the subsequent decade of research. As well as the broad categories of cardiovascular disease (Tables 1and2), associations are also observed for specific cardiovascular conditions, such as dilated cardiomyopathy,33angina pectoris,34vascular dementia,35gestational hypertension and diabetes,36rupture of aortic aneurysms,37peripheral artery disease,38venous thromboembolism,39pulmonary embolism40and congenital heart disease.41Exposure to PM is also associated with the development of atherosclerosis.42,43
Mechanistically, a wide range of pathways have been implicated, including inflammation, oxidative stress, activation of sensory afferents, changes to the autonomic nervous system, particle translocation to the circulation, endothelial cell dysfunction, increased arterial stiffness, increased blood pressure, cardiac arrhythmia, susceptibility to myocardial ischemia, pro-coagulability and impaired fibrinolysis.31Studies with pharmacological inhibitors support a role for certain of these pathways, especially oxidative stress.44,45Emerging mechanisms include the release of foxhead box (FOX)-transcription factors into the circulation,46alterations in gut microbiome leading to inflammation,47changes to stem cell populations48and circulating microRNAs.49
Particle size and composition are the major determinants of the biological activity of PM. The smaller fractions of PM may exert greater effects due to their large reactive surface area and ability to penetrate deep into the alveoli of the lungs.50Furthermore, nanoparticles can transmigrate into the blood and accumulate in areas of vascular disease51,52and recent studies have found evidence of exogenous nanosized particles in the heart53and fetoplacental vasculature.54,55Combustion is a major source of ultrafine particles. The combination of nano-size and complex composition of combustion-derived ultrafine particles makes them especially concerning for cardiovascular health (see below). Coarse PM encompasses particle sizes between PM10and PM2.5and comes from many sources, including road dust, construction, pollen, agriculture, and mining. Evidence of the contribution of coarse PM to the cardiovascular effects of air pollution is mixed32and, with the advent of greater monitoring of PM2.5, attention on coarse PM has waned somewhat over the last decade. However, interest is growing again due to recognizing the potential health effects of specific sources of coarse PM. These include sources such as desert dust and non-exhaust emissions from traffic. For the former, while desert silica was one of the more inert forms of PM, it is becoming clear that these particles can adsorb and carry anthropogenic air pollutants, with recent studies demonstrating associations with cardiovascular mortality.56Consequently, the WHO recently included desert dust in their good practice recommendations for air pollutants.25However, the cardiovascular effects of desert dust remain largely unexplored.57
Non-exhaust emissions from traffic include brake, tire and road wear, and resuspended road dust. These non-exhaust emissions will be increasingly important in the age of electric vehicles due to the diminishing proportion of PM from the exhaust and the heavier weight of electric cars leading to more significant non-exhaust emissions. Importantly, approximately 60% of PM2.5from traffic originates from these sources.58Indeed, there is a wide range of PM from non-exhaust emissions, and while representing a significant source of coarse PM, both brake and tire wear also produce particles in the ultrafine range. Brake PM is metal-rich (e.g. Fe, Cu, Zn) and redox-active. Tire-wear PM is rich in polyaromatic hydrocarbons, which have carcinogenicity and likely contribute to detrimental actions of urban PM. Furthermore, non-exhaust emission PM has been shown to have the capacity to induce cellular toxicity and lung inflammation in preclinical models. However, whether they do so at environmentally relevant levels remains unclear,59and rodent studies have provided inconsistent results for non-exhaust emissions on the cardiovascular system. However, more research is needed, especially with long-term exposure.58
PM has a varied profile depending on its source, and can be composed of principally sodium chloride (e.g., marine environments), high levels of secondary inorganic aerosol from farming (ammonium nitrate and sulfate), high mineral levels (e.g., near construction) or complex carbon-based particulates, e.g., from combustion. As well as differing sources, meteorological conditions and atmospheric reactions with other pollutants are also important, and consequently, PM composition can vary substantially both in terms of geographic region and with time. There is a broad scientific consensus that different constituents of PM2.5have different toxicity. However, the complexity of chemical species in the air pollution mixture has hampered attempts to identify the most harmful sources. The US Environmental Protection Agency recently concluded that “many PM2.5components and sources are associated with both sub-clinical and clinical endpoints” but that “the evidence does not indicate that any one source of component is consistently more strongly related to health effects than PM2.5mass”.27The UK Committee on the Medical Effects of Air Pollution (COMEAP) reached similar conclusions, with only sea-salt being identified as a likely low toxicity constituent.60
While epidemiological evidence is inconsistent, toxicological evidence points to combustion-derived PM being especially harmful due to the vast array of chemical species on their surface, including organic carbon species (e.g. polyaromatic hydrocarbons, nitro-polyaromatic hydrocarbons, alkanes, alkenes, alkyl-benzenes, quinones) and redox-active transition metals.61–63In particular, there is strong evidence that traffic-derived PM is an important contributor to the health effects of PM2.5.31,62,64Studies demonstrating an inverse association between health parameters and distance of residence from a significant road support a role for traffic-derived PM in cardiorespiratory effects.65However, factors such as noise will likely also play a role (see part 2 article). Human-controlled exposure studies have also shown that ultrafine particles in diesel exhaust are detrimental, with many adverse effects on cardiovascular function.66Animal studies have similarly shown the high capacity of diesel exhaust particles to impair vascular function,67,68accelerate the development of atherosclerosis,69,70promote thrombosis71–73and sensitize the heart to infarction from myocardial ischemia.74,75
Nitrogen dioxide gas, NO2, is produced from combustion primarily involving vehicles, industry, domestic heating and cooking. Stationary monitoring networks monitor NO2levels and report exceedances in guideline levels in many cities, especially where monitors are close to major roads. NO2is an oxidizing agent, promoting lung inflammation, causing bronchoconstriction, sensitizing the lung to allergens and infections, and exacerbating symptoms in asthmatics. It reacts in the respiratory tract, and only a tiny proportion of inhaled NO2penetrates into the blood (measured as nitrate and nitrite) to interact directly with systemic organs.
Nonetheless, NO2can exert effects elsewhere in the body by indirect mechanisms (e.g. through inflammatory processes), and exposure to NO2is associated with cardiovascular morbidity and mortality (Tables 1and2). In a cohort of 28 million individuals across Europe, levels of NO2below current guidelines were shown to be associated with cardiovascular mortality and acute admissions for coronary heart disease.76Like PM, exposure to NO2is associated with the development of coronary atherosclerosis.43Due to the close association with other pollutants (e.g., particulates from combustion), the extent to which these effects are solely due to NO2is difficult to determine. Nonetheless, two pollutant models indicate NO2has effects independent of PM2.5.77
The primary source of sulfur dioxide, SO2, is energy generation and other industries. Levels of sulfur dioxide have been falling with the removal of sulfur from fuels, lower reliance on coal (in some countries), and improvements in the release of emissions from industry. Nonetheless, in many nations, particularly in low- to middle-income countries, industrial emissions of sulfur dioxide are still concerning, especially where these industries are in close proximity to areas with a high population density.
Sulfur dioxide is an acidic gas and can exacerbate asthma, bronchitis and other lung conditions. Cardiovascular associations with sulfur dioxide have been observed, especially in low to middle-income countries.78–80Systemic inflammation may be a mechanism by which by short-term exposure to sulfur dioxide may exacerbate cardiovascular disease.81Both nitrogen dioxide and sulfur dioxide are precursor pollutants for particulate matter, which will contribute to the effects of these pollutants on health.82
Ozone gas (O3) is formed from reactions between other pollutants. It undergoes secondary reactions in the air, notably with nitrogen oxides or sunlight. Ozone impacts health through oxidative reactions, leading to oxidative stress and inflammation. Ozone is also associated with various cardiovascular conditions (Tables 1and2). In urban China, ozone is a major factor in the links between ambient air pollution and cardiovascular disease.83Meta-analyses have found associations between short-term exposure to ozone and altered heart rate variability,84and even low levels of ozone have been associated with attenuated heart-rate variability in school classrooms.85Ozone also appears to exacerbate the risk of cardiovascular hospital admissions linked to heatwaves.86While in certain studies an inverse association between ozone and cardiovascular disease was reported, this may potentially be explained by atmospheric reactions of ozone and nitrogen oxides, whereby higher ozone may reflect lower nitrogen dioxide levels.76
Carbon monoxide, CO, is a highly toxic gaseous pollutant produced by the incomplete combustion of hydrocarbons. Automotive exhaust is a major environmental source. Other sources include improperly adjusted gas heaters, old appliances, wall ovens, stoves, tobacco smoking, and charcoal grilles. Carbon monoxide exerts toxicity by binding strongly to hemoglobin to block oxygen transport. The heart and brain are especially vulnerable. Carbon monoxide is acutely toxic at high doses, and inhalation exposure can be rapidly fatal. Initial recognition of the relationship between chronic carbon monoxide exposure and cardiovascular disease came from studies of cigarette smokers. Although lung cancer incidence does not return to baseline for many years after smoking cessation, acute cardiac events fall within 24 hours, potentially due to the acute reduction in carbon monoxide exposure.87Short-term variations in ambient carbon monoxide levels are associated with hospital admissions for ischemic heart disease, myocardial infarction, and heart failure.88,89
Ammonia principally arises from agriculture via livestock manure and use of fertilizers. At high levels (usually in confined spaces in occupational settings), ammonia directly irritates the eyes and lungs. Ammonia neutralizes nitric and sulfuric acid in the atmosphere to form secondary particulate matter composed of ammonium nitrate and ammonium sulfate. In European cities, 40–60% of PM2.5mass can comprise secondary inorganic aerosols deriving from ammonia gas. Ammonium aerosols have a relatively long lifetime (a few days) and can travel large distances, crossing countries and borders. Although agricultural-derived pollutants are known to be particularly problematic with respect to exacerbating respiratory diseases, PM2.5in rural communities in the USA has been linked to death from ischemic heart disease. However, the extent to which this PM in rural communities was derived from ammonia was not determined.90
Volatile organic compounds represent a diverse group of chemicals containing organic forms of carbon. They arise from many sources, including industry, agriculture and transport, e.g., as vapors from petrol and solvents. Given the high proportion of time that individuals spend indoors, there is a growing interest in indoor air pollutants, which contain PM, nitrogen dioxide, ozone, and volatile organic compounds. Indoor sources of volatile organic compounds include domestic burning, body care products, cleaning products, smoking, candle burning, flame retardant coatings, and air fresheners. Although they react with other air pollutants to produce ozone, some volatile organic compounds directly affect cells. The potential for this varied set of chemicals to affect the cardiovascular system is beyond the scope of this review. However, various volatile organic compounds have been linked to arterial stiffness91and endothelial dysfunction.92
Along with the encroachment of the urban interface into wildland, global warming is a significant driver for wildfires, increasing their incidence, as well as the size and severity. Recent years have seen the outbreak of particularly major fires in Greece, Australia, Brazil and the USA (Figure 3). In the USA, there are more than 70,000 wildfires per year, and the acreage burned has tripled over the last 30 years.93It was estimated that between 2008 to 2012, over 10 million individuals were exposed to high levels of air pollution from wildfires for more than 10 days.94Wildfire smoke can travel a thousand kilometers or more. The recent (June 2023) fires in Canada resulted in significant smoke episodes across large distances, culminating the dramatic images in major cities such as New York.

aAnnual wildfire-burned area (in millions of acres) from 1983 to 2021. The two lines represent two different reporting systems though the Forest Service stopped collecting statistics (orange line) in 1997 and is not planning to update them, those statistics are shown here for comparison. Source: United States Environmental Protection Authority140,bNatural events in 2020 drastically changed global levels of air pollutants. The aerosol optical depth (AOD), detecting aerosols including smoke-derived particulate matter, across Australia was increased in January 2020 compared to January 2019 due to extensive bushfires. Image credit: NASA EarthObservations team based on data provided by the MODIS Atmosphere Science Team, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. Image previously published in141,cAssociations between wild fire exposure and cardiovascular mortality and morbidity. Reproduced from105
Wildfires are major sources of air pollution, generating various gaseous, semi-volatile liquids and particulate pollutants, most notably high levels of PM2.5. In 2005 it was estimated that wildfires contributed ~18% of the total PM2.5emissions in the USA,95and since 2002 there has been a 77% increase in exposure to wildfire smoke.96Wildfire events have been known to increase ambient PM2.5levels to more than 300–500 μg/m3,97a value equal to, or above, that of the most polluted megacities (by comparison, city center PM2.5in many large European and US cities is in the region of 25 μg/m3). The relative toxicity of PM from wildfires will vary considerably in relation to amount and type of biomass that is on fire and the burning characteristics, e.g. flamingversussmoldering.98There are suggestions that even short-term exposure to wildfire smoke may be more toxic than other PM forms (e.g. urban) due to the small particle size, the high levels of oxidative constituents and co-exposure to heat,97although other factors such as the proximity to the source, atmospheric conditions, extent of aging in the air, co-pollutants generated and the presence of PM from non-biomass material (e.g. burning buildings and vehicles) will influence toxicity.
Globally, wildfire smoke has been estimated to be responsible for 339,000 to 675,000 premature deaths per year.99,100The recent wildfire episodes in Canada have been linked to increases in hospital admissions for respiratory conditions in the USA, demonstrating that wildfire smoke can impact health hundreds of miles away.101,102While there are certain inconsistencies between studies, wildfire smoke is accepted as being associated with cardiovascular morbidity and mortality.99,103Meta-analyses have found increases in relative risk of cardiovascular mortality in the range of 1.9–3.30% per 10 μg/m3increase in PM2.5104,105(Figure 3c), which has parallels to PM2.5from urban exposures. Exposure to wildfire smoke is associated with hospital admissions for acute coronary events and stroke.106A meta-analysis found a 5.5% increase in the risk of ischemic heart disease on smoky days compared to non-smoky days.105Exposure has also been linked to cardiac dysrhythmia, chest pain, cardiac arrest and exacerbation of heart failure.93,99Several studies have demonstrated that wildfire smoke is associated with increased blood pressure,93,99,106including in pregnant women. Studies in firefighters of wildfires have found increases in arterial stiffness, blood markers of inflammation and vascular adhesion molecules.107The cardiovascular effects of wildfires are modified by stress and pre-existing disease (e.g., pulmonary conditions, anxiety disorders) and heat,106and the effects of heat and wildfire smoke may be additive.108In considering these effects, it must be noted that the burden of wildfire smoke on health may be underestimated if only focusing on short lag periods.109
Additional studies are also informative in the context of wildfires. Controlled exposure to woodsmoke has been shown to increase blood pressure, impair microvascular function, increase arterial stiffness, reduce heart rate variability, alter blood adhesion molecules and promote blood coagulability.110–113Systemic inflammation and oxidative stress are likely mechanisms, which are common to ambient PM from other sources.99Long-term exposure to indoor biomass burning is associated with the development of carotid atherosclerosis,114and a similar pro-atherosclerotic mechanism would likely be observed after long-term exposure to wildfire smoke.
Preclinical studies underscore the pathological effects of wildfires. Inflammation is observed in the cardiovascular system after wood smoke exposure in vivo115and in vitro in endothelial cells.116Furthermore, studies with cellular and animal models show that wildfire PM has numerous adverse effects, including increased generation of free radicals, altered mitochondrial membrane potentials, depleted antioxidant levels and causing oxidative DNA modification.99,103,117,118Rodent studies have demonstrated that peat smoke can cause a marked loss of cardiac function and ischemic cardiac cell death,119reduced blood flow of the pulmonary circulation120and altered plasma lipid levels.121The composition of woodsmoke and flaming conditions affects the toxicity of exposure,99although more studies are required to identify which constituents of the smoke drive specific biological effects.
There are opportunities to take pre-emptive action to protect public health from wildfires in communities where they are common.106These include identifying risk (e.g., through wildfire forecasts and focusing on susceptible individuals) and interventions to protect cardiovascular health in advance of, or during, wildfire outbreaks. The latter includes public and patient awareness of the health effects of wildfires, tailoring patients’ medications during wildfire alerts, maintaining clean air indoors through isolating rooms or filtering air, or using clean air shelters. Facemasks, particularly N95 respirators that can be face-fitted, have shown benefits in preventing subclinical cardiovascular outcomes in heavily polluted urban environments,122and may offer similar benefits in wildfire outbreaks.
Air pollution is often considered to be an inevitable aspect of climate change, although there are clear distinctions between these environmental stresses and they do not always track in parallel. A prime example of differences between these two aspects was the push toward the use of diesel vehicles in the early 21stcentury, which offered promise in terms of lesser production of greenhouse gases and CO2. However, this overlooked the high levels of the air pollutants in diesel exhaust such as NO2and particulate matter (especially ultrafine particles), which are major drivers of the adverse health effects of air pollution.31Nonetheless, global warming and air pollution are aligned in several respects. Many sources of greenhouse gases and air pollution are similar, e.g. combustion of fossil fuels or biomass burning. Black carbon, a PM component, has a higher global warming potential than carbon dioxide, accounting for ~8% of the net warming effect of human activity,123(although the situation is more complicated for PM2.5, as a whole, as other constituents of PM can reflect sunlight and have a cooling effect, and factors such as co-pollutants, ground deposition, altitude and other atmospheric conditions need to be considered). The greenhouse gas methane, atmospheric warming, and atmospheric reactions between volatile organic carbon species and nitrogen oxides all increase ground-level ozone, another air pollutant with detrimental actions on health. Many interventions to reduce air pollution will also have benefits for climate change. These center around the reduced use of fossil fuels but could also include a change in dietary demands leading to altered land use and reductions in agricultural emissions such as secondary inorganic particulates derived from ammonia.
Global warming is increasing the prevalence of wildfires, which can cause significant air pollution episodes and the destruction of large swathes of land, homes and livelihoods. Wildfires are predicted to increase in frequency, size, intensity and duration.124While there is a degree of uncertainty about the precise health effects of wildfire smoke, there are clear parallels with exposure to ambient (urban) PM; these include similarity of cardiovascular outcomes, effect size and mechanisms of action. In addition, the individuals that are especially susceptible and/or vulnerable are common to both wildfires and ambient (urban) PM exposure – including the elderly, those with pre-existing cardiorespiratory disease, pregnant women, and likely also those from disadvantaged socioeconomic and sociodemographic groups.99,103While, by nature, the occurrence of wildfires is largely sporadic, the likelihood of an outbreak has degrees of predictability and pre-emptive measures can be taken. These include awareness of the health risks, advice on behavior during outbreaks (e.g. curtailing exercise outdoors), clean spaces (isolated rooms, air purifiers, air filters in vehicles) or personal protection such as high-efficiency respirators (e.g. N95 respirator facemasks).106,125However, most interventions have limitations, which could be compounded in low socioeconomic settings (e.g. cost and availability of air purifiers, ‘leakiness’ of housing to external air pollution).97While PM will be a prominent driver of the cardiovascular effects of wildfire smoke, there is also a likely role of gases and volatile chemicals,126which will influence the effectiveness, or not, of facemasks and air purifiers. The greatest intervention for wildfires is prevention. Improving land-management to recuperate forest health and reduce accumulation of biomass will help prevent wildfires, but ultimately agency is needed to limit the course of global warming.97
While global warming and air pollution are aligned in many respects, perhaps the single most critical fact linking them is that both are major public health emergencies. Urgent action is needed, not just to mitigate their actions, but to curtail them from the outset. Indeed, both global warming and air pollution may ultimately prove to be the greatest global crises hitherto faced by humankind. Reducing either stressor will likely have benefits on the other; however, a concerted effort on both is critical to ensuring future human and planetary health.
- Global warming and air pollution are associated with high cardiovascular morbidity and mortality.
- Global warming is also increasing the occurrence of wildfires, which further drives air pollution.
- Wildfire smoke promotes cardiovascular disease through mechanisms that include oxidative stress, inflammation, impaired cardiac function and pro-atherosclerotic effects.
- These issues underscore the urgent need to reduce air pollution and to address global warming.
The 2022 Lancet Commission report on pollution and health highlights the profound impact of environmental factors, notably pollution, on global health. Pollution is responsible for 9 million deaths annually, equating to 1 in 6 deaths worldwide, and leads to a global reduction in life expectancy by 2.9 years. This toll is comparable to the impact of smoking and exceeds the combined effects of war, terrorism, malaria, HIV, tuberculosis, drugs, and alcohol. Cardiovascular disease, exacerbated by pollution, contributes to this burden. The report emphasizes that climate change and pollution, often seen as environmental issues, are now critical public health concerns.
Global warming has direct and indirect effects on cardiovascular health, with both hot and cold temperatures contributing to an increased risk of cardiovascular diseases and deaths. Air pollution, including particulate matter from various sources and gaseous pollutants like nitrogen dioxide, ozone, carbon monoxide, and sulfur dioxide, is strongly linked to cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. Additionally, wildfires, driven by climate change, have become a major source of air pollution, adversely affecting cardiovascular health. These fires, and their contribution to the increasing burden of air pollution, have wide-reaching effects, including those far from the actual fire sites.
Urgent, global action is needed to address the pollution crisis. This includes individual lifestyle changes, systemic shifts towards cleaner energy, and environmental policies.127The alignment of global warming and air pollution underscores the interconnectedness of these issues, with interventions in one area likely benefiting the other. Practical advice on the health effects of environmental risks like air pollution, which health practitioners can pass onto their patients, has been developed.128Because the medical community is well respected, cardiologists and other physicians have a role in educating different sectors on environmental risk factors and advocating for change to protect public health. Comprehensive strategies to mitigate pollution and climate change are paramount to protect the environment and safeguard human health globally.
Mark Miller and David Newby are supported by the British Heart Foundation (CH/09/002, RG/F/22/110093, RE/18/5/34216). Thomas Münzel is PI for the Centre Cardiovascular Research, Partner Site Rhine-Main, and is supported by a grant from the Boehringer Ingelheim Foundation entitled “Novel and neglected cardiovascular risk factors” and by the Foundation Heart of Mainz. Manish Arora is funded by NIH grants (R35ES030435, P30ES023515, U2CES030859). Jason Kovacic acknowledges research support from the NIH (R01HL148167), New South Wales health grant RG194194, the Bourne Foundation, Snow Medical and Agilent.
carbon monoxide
The Committee on the Medical Effects of Air Pollution
disability-adjusted life year
nitrogen dioxide
ozone
particulate matter
particulate matter with a diameter of less than 10 micrometers
particulate matter with a diameter of less than 2.5 micrometers
sulfur dioxide
World Health Organization
Disclosures
MA is a founder of Linus Biotechnology Inc., a Mount Sinai start-up that develops biomarkers for precision medicine applications. There are no other potential conflicts of interest to declare
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894