An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Author for correspondence:Benedicte Bachelot,Email:benedicte.bachelot@okstate.edu
Corresponding author.
Received 2025 May 20; Accepted 2025 Aug 12; Issue date 2025 Dec.
This is an open access article under the terms of thehttp://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.
Microbial nitrogen (N) fixation accounts forc. 97% of natural N inputs to terrestrial ecosystems. These microbes can be free‐living in the soil and leaf litter (asymbiotic) or in symbiosis with plants. Warming is expected to increase N‐fixation rates because warmer temperatures favor the growth and activity of N‐fixing microbes.
We investigated the effects of warming on asymbiotic components of N fixation at a field warming experiment in Puerto Rico. We analyzed the function and composition of bacterial communities from surface soil and leaf litter samples.
Warming significantly increased asymbiotic N‐fixation rates in soil by 55% (to 0.002 kg ha−1yr−1) and by 525% in leaf litter (to 14.518 kg ha−1yr−1). This increase in N fixation was associated with changes in the N‐fixing bacterial community composition and soil nutrients.
Our findings suggest that warming increases the natural N inputs from the atmosphere into this tropical forest due to changes in microbial function and composition, especially in the leaf litter. Given the importance of leaf litter in nutrient cycling, future research should investigate other aspects of N cycles in the leaf litter under warming conditions.
Keywords:climate warming, global change, hurricane, microbial ecology, microbiome, nitrogen fixation, tropical ecology, tropical forest
Unlike other major plant nutrients, N is naturally brought into most ecosystems through lightning and the biological fixation of atmospheric N gas by microbes, a process known as N fixation. Given that N limits plant growth in many ecosystems (LeBauer & Treseder,2008), biological N fixation is a critical process to study (Reedet al.,2011). N‐fixing microbes are divided into two groups: asymbiotic (free‐living) and symbiotic. Symbiotic microbes form relationships with specific plants and are housed in nodules in the roots and/or stems of these plants. These N‐fixing plants (N fixers) are relatively abundant in neotropical forests and can provide a large potential source of N fixation (Battermanet al.,2013; Tayloret al.,2017; Tammeet al.,2021). However, these symbioses are facultative and this, combined with the difficulty of adequately sampling for symbiotic nitrogen fixation (SNF), means it is possible that very little SNF occurs in mature tropical forests and that reported rates are highly uncertain (Mengeet al.,2015; Winbourneet al.,2018).
By contrast, asymbiotic nitrogen (N) fixation is easier to sample across space and time. This process is carried out by microbes that are hetero‐ or autotrophic bacteria, as well as some archaea, inhabiting water, soil, and leaf litter (Dynarski & Houlton,2018). Estimates from multiple tropical forest studies suggest that a substantial amount of N is fixed by asymbiotic microbes (e.g. Reedet al.,2007; Wurzburgeret al.,2012; Matsonet al.,2015): an estimated 7‐10 kg N ha−1yr−1in the unmanaged tropical and subtropial moist forests of Latin America (e.g. Reiset al.,2020; Moreiraet al.,2021). It is, therefore, important to understand how global changes might alter asymbiotic N fixation in tropical forests.
Biological N fixation is in part regulated by climate. At large scales, climate is considered a major driver of microbial community function and composition (Castroet al.,2010; De Vries & Griffiths,2018; Jansson & Hofmockel,2020). Warming is especially important, as it can increase microbial processing, enzyme activity, turnover, and growth efficiency (Castroet al.,2010; Pajares & Bohannan,2016; Woodet al.,2019; Bytnerowiczet al.,2022). Warming conditions have long been thought to favor N fixation in cold environments because it is a microbial process catalyzed by the enzyme nitrogenase that, like many other enzymes, has reduced activity at very low temperatures (Houltonet al.,2008). Asymbiotic microbial N‐fixation rates have been found to increase in response to warming across many biomes, but the majority of the work has been conducted in cold ecosystems (Baiet al.,2013; Liuet al.,2016; Zhenget al.,2020). However, extreme or chronic warming can inhibit asymbiotic N fixation, at least in high‐latitude ecosystems (Rousket al.,2018; Zhenget al.,2019), possibly by inducing water limitation of N‐fixing microbes (Zhenget al.,2020). In a warmed environment, the nitrogenase optimum temperature might be near 25°C, suggesting that warming might negatively impact N fixation in tropical forests (Deutschet al.,2024). Thus, the long‐term effects of warming on asymbiotic N fixation in lowland, humid tropical forests remain uncertain, highlighting the need for more experimental warming studies in these ecosystems (Contostaet al.,2015; Pajares & Bohannan,2016; Zhenget al.,2020; Deutschet al.,2024).
In addition to influencing the functioning of microbes and their enzymatically driven processes, warming may influence the composition of microbial communities. Warming can shift the soil microbial community to microbes adapted to higher temperatures and faster growth rates (Castroet al.,2010; Zhaoet al.,2020) and can affect community composition via metabolic carbon (C) or the soil nutrient pool (Maet al.,2018). Experimental warming studies, which have largely been confined to temperate and higher latitude ecosystems, have found that warming increased the richness of asymbiotic N‐fixing microbial communities in temperate grassland (Pentonet al.,2015) and enhanced N‐fixing microbial abundance and diversity in tundra ecosystem soils (Fenget al.,2019). Whether this is the case in tropical forests remains an open question (Reedet al.,2010; Mirzaet al.,2014; Pajares & Bohannan,2016) and is a focus of the work described here.
In this work, we present a comprehensive study of the effects of warming on N fixation in a tropical forest by utilizing tropical field warming. We examined the effect of warming on asymbiotic microbes by combining N‐fixation assays with DNA sequencing of soil and litter samples from the Tropical Responses to Altered Climate Experiment (TRACE), anin situwhole‐ecosystem warming experiment in Puerto Rico. We hypothesized that warming would increase N‐fixing microbial community diversity and N‐fixation rates.
This work took place within the Luquillo Experimental Forest in northeastern Puerto Rico (18°18′N, 65°50′W). Located at 100 m elevation, the site has a mean annual temperature of 24°C with relatively low seasonal variation, and a mean annual rainfall of 3500 mm (Alonso‐Rodríguezet al.,2022). The site contains clay‐rich, acidic soils (described as Ultisol) with > 80% of root biomass concentrated in the top 20‐cm soil layer (Yaffar & Norby,2020). In the study area, the dominant canopy tree species areSyzygium jambos(L.),Ocotea leucoxylon(Sw.), andCasearia arborea(Rich.) Urb., and the dominant understory tree species is the palmPrestoea montana(R. Graham) Nichols.
The TRACE experiment, which began in 2015, utilizes infrared (IR) heat to warm three 12 m2plots within the forest to 4°C above ambient temperatures, which can be compared with three control ambient plots (Fig.1; Kimballet al.,2018). Warming treatment started in September 2016 and continued until hurricanes Irma and Maria hit the island in September 2017, causing heavy damage to the experimental infrastructure. Warming was halted for a year before restarting in September 2018. Before the hurricanes, surface soils (0–10 cm) in warming plots were warmed 3.6°C above ambient soils (Kimballet al.,2018). After the hurricanes, the IR heaters were initially 2.5 m above the ground and moved to their max height of 4 m above the ground in July 2020. As understory vegetation height and foliage density increased, the warming effect in surface soils was reduced toc. +1°C (Tunisonet al.,2024). At the time of the study (summer 2023), surface soils of the warming plots were 2°C warmer than the surface soils of the ambient plots (Woodet al.,2024). Therefore, at the time of the study, soil has experienced a legacy of 7 yr of warming treatment starting at 4°C and slowly decreasing to 1°C and a legacy of hurricane disturbances. These experimental conditions enable the study of the effects of warming and hurricane disturbances on various ecosystem processes in this tropical forest (Reedet al.,2020; Tunisonet al.,2024).

Experimental setup of the Tropical Responses to Altered Climate Experiment (TRACE) plots in the Luquillo Experimental Forest of Puerto Rico. The TRACE experiment utilizes infrared heaters to warm three 12 m2plots within the forests. These warming plots are compared with three control plots experiencing ambient temperatures. (a) Diagram depicting top view of a TRACE plot used for experimental warming. Each TRACE plot is divided into four equal quadrants (represented by dashed lines). The circles at the center of each quadrant represent the approximate location of sites where soil and leaf litter samples were collected for nitrogen (N)‐fixation measurements and microbial sampling. Created in BioRender. Shahid, S. (2025)https://BioRender.com/t12j536. (b) View from underneath one of the TRACE plots in the Luquillo Experimental Forest.
In July 2023, one leaf litter sample and one soil sample were collected from each of the four quadrants in each of the six plots (Fig.1a). Using sterilized nitrile gloves,c. 4 g of leaf litter and 13 g of soil were collected from the surface at the center of each quadrant with a sterilized spoon. Samples were not collected to a specific depth; rather, we collected the same mass of surface soil and the same mass of leaf litter, ensuring the collection of the entire leaf litter layer (there was no difference in leaf litter thickness visible between ambient and warming plots). Four additional leaf litter and four additional soil samples were collectedc. 2 m in a random direction away from two of the warming plots and away from two of the control plots (for baseline ethylene concentration measurements used to correct N‐fixation rates as described below). Each sample was immediately inserted into a 55‐ml clear acrylic tube and returned to the on‐site laboratory at Sabana Field Station, where an acetylene reduction assay was used to estimate asymbiotic N‐fixation rates (see theN‐fixation ratesection; Hardyet al.,1968; Reedet al.,2010). Following this, samples were subsampled, and a portion was dried to calculate moisture content; these subsamples were then ground to calculate N, C, and phosphorus (P) content (see theC, N, and P contentsection). The remaining samples were stored in individual bags in a −80°C freezer before being shipped on dry ice overnight to Oklahoma State University for characterization of the microbial community composition (see theMicrobial community compositionsection).
The fixation rates of 24 leaf litter and 24 soil samples were analyzed using an acetylene reduction assay (Hardyet al.,1968; Reedet al.,2010). Each 55‐ml tube was sealed with a lid fitted with a septum, injected with 3.0 ml acetylene (creatingc. 10% headspace concentration), and vented to the atmosphere. The additional samples collected away from four of the plots, eight in total, were not injected with acetylene so measurements of ethylene produced in the absence of acetylene could be determined. Eight blank samples were created by injecting acetylene into tubes without samples inside so measurements of acetylene reduced to ethylene in the absence of samples could be determined. After about an 18‐h incubation in the laboratory atc. 26°C (exact incubation time measurements described later), headspaces of all 64 samples (48 plot samples, 8 control samples, and 8 blank samples) were subsampled and injected into Exetainer tubes. These Exetainer headspace gas samples were transported to the USGS Southwest Biological Science Center (SBSC) in Moab, Utah, and analyzed for ethylene concentration on a gas chromatograph (Shimadzu GC‐14A equipped with a Flame Ionization Detector; Shimadzu Corp., Kyoto, Japan).
The baseline ethylene concentrations of the additional soil and leaf litter samples and blank samples were averaged, respectively. To account for ethylene production by soil (or leaf litter) alone, as well as for ethylene production in the absence of a sample, the average baseline ethylene concentration of the additional soil (or leaf litter) samples and blank samples was subtracted from the baseline ethylene concentration of plot soil (or leaf litter) samples to obtain the adjusted ethylene concentration for each sample.
Soil samples were compacted at the bottom of each tube, and headspace volume was calculated via the measured height of empty space in each tube: from the soil surface to the bottom of the lid. Leaf litter samples were packed loosely and a headspace volume of 25 ml was assumed. Dry weights for each sample were calculated by dividing the total wet weight of each sample by its water content expressed in % plus 1 (see C, N, and P content for method). Exact incubation times for each sample were calculated by measuring time at acetylene injection and time at headspace sampling. The adjusted baseline ethylene concentrations were converted to parts per million (ppm) of ethylene using the calibration curve calculated from standard samples. Nanomoles of ethylene produced per gram of sample per hour were then calculated using the adjusted ethylene concentration (ppm), headspace volume (ml), dry weight (g), and incubation time (h) of each sample.
Each mole of ethylene produced is equivalent to 1 mole of acetylene reduced. Acetylene reduction rates were then converted to N‐fixation rates by dividing moles of ethylene produced by three following stoichiometric balance (Hardyet al.,1968). By using three across the samples as commonly found in soil and litter samples, we are assuming that despite changes in the microbial community, the stoichiometric balance remains unchanged (Soperet al.,2021a). Finally, we converted these rates to more commonly reported units to allow comparison across studies. Biological N fixation is often given in kg of N ha−1yr−1using the molar mass of N2(28 g mol−1) and making assumptions of homogeneity across spatial and temporal scales (Soperet al.,2021b). In particular, we used the area of the sample (for both soil and leaf litter samples) in the incubation tube to calculate rates over 1 ha.
After the acetylene reduction treatment, a 2 ± 0.5 g subsample was taken from each soil sample, and a 1 ± 0.25 g subsample was taken from each leaf litter sample. The remaining sample material was frozen in a −80°C freezer. Subsamples were dried at 60°C for 48 h and were used to calculate % water content. These subsamples were then pooled by type and plot and ground using a SPEX SamplePrep 8000D dual mixer/mill (SPEX SamplePrep LLC, Metuchen, NJ, USA). All ground samples were sent to the USGS SBSC, and total C and N content was determined using an Elementar Vario Micro Cube (Elementar Americas Inc., Ronkonkoma, NY, USA). The ground samples were then sent to the BYU Environmental Analytical Lab, where they were subjected to nitric acid digestion in a Mars 6 Microwave (EPA method 3051A; CEM Corp., Matthews, NC, USA), and total P content was determined using a Thermo Scientific iCAP 7400 ICP‐OES Analyzer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). This strong acid digestion method was found to perform well on a range of soil types (Churchet al.,2017), although it might underestimate total P due to recalcitrant minerals.
Soil and leaf litter samples stored in the −80°C freezer were thawed in 4°C and homogenized. Genomic DNA was extracted from each of the samples in triplicate using a Qiagen DNeasy Power Soil Pro Kit (Qiagen). Additionally, along with both the soil and leaf litter extractions, the DNA extraction kit was run on blank controls containing no sample. Extractions were pooled for each sample and stored at −80°C until downstream processing.
DNA extractions were used to characterize the full bacterial community using the 16S rRNA gene and the N‐fixing bacterial community using thenifHgene. Amplification and sequencing were carried out at the University of Minnesota Genomics Center (UMGC). Specifically, 16S rRNA gene sequences were amplified by PCR using the 16S primer set 515F‐806R (Caporasoet al.,2011), which amplifies the variable V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene. ThenifHgene, which encodes the reductase subunit of nitrogenase, the enzyme that catalyzes the reaction that fixes N, has been widely used as a genetic marker to study the diversity and abundance of N‐fixing microbes in gene sequencing studies (Pajares & Bohannan,2016).NifHgene sequences were amplified in two separate PCR steps to minimize the formation of undesirable primer dimers. First, thenifHgene was amplified using thenifHprimer set Ueda19F‐R6 (Sigma‐Aldrich), a broadly inclusive pair (Angelet al.,2018). This was followed by PCR amplification using Nextera‐adapted primers suited for Illumina sequencing using the UMGC standard PCR conditions.
The 16S andnifHgene amplicons underwent v.3 Illumina MiSeq 2 × 300 bp paired‐end sequencing. Soil and leaf litter sequence data were processed separately using the MothurMiSeq standard operating procedure (Schlosset al.,2009; Kozichet al.,2013). Briefly, paired‐end reads were assembled for each amplicon and filtered to the expected amplicon length (291 base pairs (bp) for 16S and 394 bp fornifH). The trimmed 16S sequences were aligned to the reference sequence file Silva 132 database. The trimmednifHsequences were aligned to thenifHsequence database described by Gaby & Buckley (2014). For both 16S rRNA andnifHgenes, chimeras were removed using chimera.vsearch (Mothur), and the sequences were grouped into operational taxonomic units (OTUs) at 97% sequence similarity. OTUs with only one observation in a dataset were removed using remove.rare (Mothur). For 16S, taxonomy was classified in Mothurusing v.19 of the Ribosomal Database Project (RDP) training set, publicly released in July 2023. FornifH, representative sequences from each OTU obtained using get.oturep (Mothur) were taxonomically classified by Basic Local Alignment Search Tool analysis against the NCBI GenBank database.
In June 2015, all seedlings of at least 10 cm height present in the six plots were tagged, identified to species, and measured for height from ground level and stem diameter at ground level. After a year of drought (2015), the census was repeated annually starting June 2016 until 2023 (with the exception of 2020). Using the census data from 2023, we calculated species richness and Shannon diversity index within quadrants to see how plant communities in general influenced the shift in microbial community composition. We also measured crowding within quadrants due to N‐fixing seedlings as the proportion of neighbors that are N fixers (number of N‐fixing seedlings in quadrant/total number of seedlings in quadrant) and used these variables to also explain the shift in microbial community composition as these plants might have distinct effects on microbial communities (e.g. Zhouet al.,2017).
Community composition analyses were conducted in the R programming environment using thegjamandveganpackages (Clarket al.,2017; Oksanenet al.,2022). Each of the four bacterial communities was analyzed separately: soil overall bacterial community (soil 16S), soil N‐fixing bacterial community (soilnifH), leaf litter overall bacterial community (litter 16S), and leaf litter N‐fixing bacterial community (litternifH). Before analyses, all OTUs appearing in the soil or leaf litter blank controls were removed from the soil and leaf litter OTU composition, respectively. Homogeneity in dispersion of sequence relative abundances in OTUs from the warming and ambient groups was confirmed usingbetadisperwith the Bray–Curtis distance metric (Anderson & Walsh,2013). Distance‐based redundancy analyses (dbRDA) were applied to the OTU composition data usingcapscale, again with sequence relative abundances and the Bray–Curtis distance metric. The abiotic (treatment, moisture, C : N, and P content) and biotic (proportion of N‐fixing seedlings, Shannon Index, and species richness in the given quadrant) independent variables in the dbRDA model were z‐transformed. Plot was used as a condition to account for the structure of the dataset. Permutation tests with 999 permutations determined which of these independent variables had significant effects on overall (16S) and N‐fixing (nifH) bacterial composition.
Generalized joint attribute modeling (GJAM), with plot as a random effect to account for the structure in the dataset, was used to analyze how the treatment, C : N, and P content affected the bacterial communities. Briefly, GJAM uses a multivariate normal distribution that accounts for the co‐dependence among organisms (Clarket al.,2017). The response variable,Yi, which is the bacterial composition matrix, is modeled using a latent variablewion the continuous scale:wi~MVNβ′Xi∑, whereβis the species‐by‐predictor matrix of coefficients and∑the organism covariance matrix. A set of partition points and label vectors are then used to assign eachwitoYi(Clarket al.,2017). The GJAM analyses were conducted using Gibbs sampler (a Markov chain Monte Carlo technique; Geman & Geman,1984) with 2000 iterations and a burn‐in period of 200. Using this approach, we identified OTUs associated with a significantly decreasing or increasing relative abundance in the warming treatment (OTUs with 95% credible intervals (CI) not overlapping with 0). We jointly analyzed N‐fixation rate of the samples and N‐fixing bacterial community to investigate how N fixation was directly affected by the predictor variables (β) and indirectly via changes in bacterial composition that influences N fixation through the covariance matrix (∑).
Mixed linear regressions showed that edaphic conditions differed between warming and ambient plots and across sample type (Supporting Information TableS1; Fig.S1). Soil moisture was marginally lower in the warming than in the ambient plots (degree of freedom = 22,t= −1.84,Pvalue = 0.08). Soil C : N ratio did not significantly differ across experimental conditions. Finally, P content was marginally and significantly lower in the warming than in ambient plots both in soil and leaf litter samples (degree of freedom = 1.68,t= −4.31,Pvalue = 0.06 in soil, and degree of freedom = 1.88,t= −6.84,Pvalue = 0.02 in leaf litter).
The 16S amplicon library for soil samples recovered 25 094 OTUs from 1883 812 rRNA sequences after quality trimming, removal of rare OTUs, and removal of OTUs that appeared in blank controls (TableS1). Each soil 16S sample yielded an average of 78 492 quality sequences. There were 673 unique bacterial genera identified, which were assigned to 27 bacterial phyla. The phyla Planctomycetota and Pseudomonadota dominated both sample types, with an average relative abundance of 25.73% and 18.13% of the full datasets, respectively. The 16S amplicon library for leaf litter samples recovered 34 857 OTUs from 3416 750 quality rRNA reads, and each leaf litter sample yielded an average of 142 364 quality sequences. There were 773 unique bacterial genera identified, which were assigned to 28 bacterial phyla. The phyla Pseudomonadota and Actinomycetota dominated both sample types, with an average relative abundance of 38.74% and 16.47% of the full datasets, respectively.
ThenifHamplicon library for soil samples recovered 4495 OTUs from 47 158 quality sequences (this total excludes two ambient plot samples with too few quality reads that were excluded from all analyses), and each soil sample yielded an average of 2143 quality sequences. Among OTUs that were classified (99.16%), there were 208 unique genera identified, which were assigned to 16 bacterial phyla. The phyla Pseudomonadota and Thermodesulfobacteriota dominated both sample types, with an average relative abundance of 71.87% and 10.55%, respectively, in ambient plot samples, and 66.86% and 15.62%, respectively, in warming plot samples. ThenifHamplicon library for leaf litter samples recovered 8811 OTUs from 167 914 quality sequences, and each leaf litter sample yielded an average of 6996 quality sequences. The 98.68% of OTUs were assigned to classified, cultured bacteria using Blast. Two hundred and twenty‐three unique genera were identified, assigned to 17 bacterial phyla. Again, the phyla Pseudomonadota and Thermodesulfobacteriota dominated both sample types, with an average relative abundance of 71.89% and 12.81%, respectively.
Warming significantly altered both the overall and N‐fixing bacterial community composition in soil and leaf litter (Figs2a,b,3a,b; TableS2). GJAM of the full overall bacterial community identified 16 OTUs in the soil and 44 OTUs in the leaf litter that were significantly associated with the ambient plots (Fig.2c–f). By contrast, there were 71 OTUs in the soil and 12 OTUs in the leaf litter that were significantly associated with the warming plots (Fig.2c–f). These OTUs were distributed across several genera and classes. Notably, OTUs in the class Spartobacteria and in the genusPseudonocardiafrom the class Actinobacteria were significantly more abundant in warming plots in soil and leaf litter samples, respectively. These OTUs also showed contrasting responses to edaphic factors (C : N and P; Fig.4a,b). In the soil, OTUs associated with the warming plots tended to be negatively associated with soil C : N and positively associated with P content, while the opposite was true for OTUs associated with the ambient plots (Fig.4a). In the leaf litter, OTUs associated with ambient or warming plots responded similarly with litter C : N and P (Fig.4b); OTUs associated with warming plots were positively associated with litter C : N and P, and OTUs associated with ambient plots were negatively associated with litter C : N and P.

Differences in overall bacterial community composition elucidated by 16S rRNA gene sequencing of soil and leaf litter samples. Nonmetric multidimensional scaling plots depicting samples and significantly altered operational taxonomic units (OTUs) (Sig. OTUs) show that bacterial communities are distinct between ambient and warming treatments (a, b). Forest plots of significantly altered OTUs, listed by genus and colored by class, show how different genera respond to ambient vs warming conditions in soil (c) and leaf litter (e). When in a genus, several OTUs were significantly altered by warming; we plotted each posterior distribution in the same genus location on thex‐axis. Raw abundance plots show the composition of the bacterial community at the class level between ambient and warming plots in soil (d) and leaf litter (f). The points on thex‐axis represent the median of the standardized regression coefficients associated with warming treatment, derived from the posterior distribution of generalized joint attribute modeling (GJAM) model parameters. Segments expand to the 95% credible intervals (CI). OTUs with 95% CI beneath 0 (dashed vertical line) are significantly more abundant under ambient conditions, and OTUs with 95% CI above 0 are more abundant under warming conditions. The eight most highly altered OTUs in ambient and warming are highlighted. The asterisks indicate class where individual OTUs responded positively and negatively to the warming condition.

Differences in the nitrogen (N)‐fixing bacterial community composition determined bynifHgene sequencing of soil and leaf litter samples. Nonmetric multidimensional scaling plots show that bacterial communities are distinct between ambient and warming treatments (a, b). Forest plots of significantly altered operational taxonomic units (OTUs), listed by genus and colored by class, show how different genera respond to ambient vs warming conditions in soil (c) and leaf litter (e). When in a genus, several OTUs were significantly altered by warming; we plotted each posterior distribution in the same genus location on thex‐axis. Raw abundance plots of the N‐fixing bacterial community composition at the class level in ambient and warming plots in the soil (d) and in the leaf litter (f). The points on thex‐axis represent the median of the standardized regression coefficients associated with warming treatment, derived from the posterior distribution of generalized joint attribute modeling (GJAM) model parameters. Segments expand to the 95% credible intervals (95% CI). OTUs with 95% CI beneath 0 (dashed vertical line) are significantly more abundant under ambient conditions, and OTUs with 95% CI above 0 are more abundant under warming conditions. The eight most highly altered OTUs in ambient and warming are highlighted. The asterisks indicate class where individual OTUs responded positively and negatively to the warming condition.

Individual and global responses to warming conditions as well as contribution of the bacterial community to nitrogen (N) fixation. The heatmaps (a–d) represent the median of the standardized regression coefficients of the full generalized joint attribute modeling (GJAM) models (warming treatment, C : N, and phosphorus (P)) for the operational taxonomic units (OTUs) that were the most affected by these variables for the overall soil and litter bacterial community (a, b) and the soil and leaf litter N‐fixing bacterial community (c, d). The N‐fixing bacterial community was modeled jointly with N‐fixation rates, and therefore, fixation is included in the response variables influenced by the model in the heatmaps (c, d). Finally, the direct (gray) and indirect (purple) effects of warming, C : N, and P content on N‐fixation rates in (e) soil and (f) leaf litter samples from the GJAM models. Bars reach the median effect and segments expand to the 95% CI. C, carbon.
Similarly, GJAM modeling identified many OTUs of N‐fixing bacteria that were significantly associated with warming or ambient plots in the soil and leaf litter (Figs3c–f,4c,d; significance occurs when the 95% CIs of the posterior distributions do not overlap with 0). Forty‐seven OTUs in the soil and twenty OTUs in the leaf litter were significantly associated with the ambient plots, and 27 OTUs in the soil and 73 OTUs in the leaf litter were significantly associated with the warming plots. Notably, OTUs in the generaPelobacterandPseudanabaenawere significantly more abundant in warming plots in soil and leaf litter samples, respectively. Several OTUs in the genusBradyrhizobiumwere significantly more abundant in warming, but several were also more abundant in ambient. As with the overall bacterial community, OTUs associated with ambient or warming plots showed contrasting responses to soil C : N and P (Fig.4c,d). In the soil, OTUs of N‐fixing bacteria associated with the warming plots were positively associated with soil P and negatively associated with soil C : N, and the opposite was found for ambient plot OTUs of N‐fixing bacteria (Fig.4c). Finally, as with the overall bacterial community in the leaf litter, OTUs of N‐fixing bacteria in the leaf litter associated with the warming plots also responded positively to litter C : N and P (Fig.4d).
In soil, N‐fixation rates increased from 0.007 to 0.01 nmol N2g−1h−1(or from 0.001 to 0.002 kg ha−1yr−1), or 55%, in the warming plots. GJAM showed that the direct effect of warming on N fixation was significant as assessed by the nonoverlapping of the CIs with 0, but the indirect effect, which is the effect of warming on N fixation mediated by changes in N‐fixing bacterial composition, was not (Fig.4e). Thus, the overall effect of warming was not considered significant in the soil. In leaf litter, N‐fixation rates increased from 0.04 to 87.6 nmol N2g−1h−1(or from 0.007 to 14.518 kg ha−1yr−1), or 525%, in the warming plots. Both direct and indirect effects, and thus the overall effect, were significant (Fig.4f). Specifically, the N‐fixation rate was significantly increased by warming, and this effect was both due to the direct effect of warming on the N‐fixation rate and the indirect effect of warming mediated by changes in the N‐fixing bacterial community composition.
Warming increased asymbiotic N‐fixation rates by 55% in the soil and 525% in the leaf litter, and these increases were partially mediated by changes in the N‐fixing bacterial community under warming, as shown by our generalized joint attribute model. Our estimates of N‐fixation fall within the range of free‐living N fixation found in tropical forests (0.1–60 kg N ha−1h−1in Reedet al.,2011), and our lowest value in the soil of the control plots is similar to the ones recently found in French Guiana (0.007 nmol N2g−1h−1= 0.001 kg ha−1yr−1; Van Langenhoveet al.,2021). Our highest estimate of N‐fixation rates in the leaf litter in the warming plots (87.6 nmol N2g−1h−1= 2452.8 ng N g−1h−1= 14.518 kg ha−1yr−1) is twice the rates found in P hot spots in Costa Rica (< 1200 ng N g−1h−1in Reedet al.,2010). Both the overall and N‐fixing bacterial communities were significantly altered by warming, even after accounting for other factors known to influence the asymbiotic bacterial community, such as moisture, soil C : N, and P. Warming explains up to 9% of the variance in bacterial community composition. Together, our results suggest that warming may increase N flux from the atmosphere to the ecosystem.
As hypothesized, warming increased N‐fixation activity: This increase is likely due to the effect of warmer temperatures on both the microbial community metabolites and bacterial community composition. The direct effect of warming on N fixation was significantly positive in both the soil and leaf litter, and the effect of warming mediated by its effect on the N‐fixing bacterial community was also significantly positive in the leaf litter. It is important to note that we accounted for inherent differences in water content across our samples when calculating N fixation and when investigating shifts in microbial community composition. Since little effect of moisture was detected, differences in soil and leaf litter results might arise from the impacts of warming on the plant communities (changes in plant communities directly lead to changes in leaf litter). For example, changes in plot communities as previously found at this site (Bachelotet al.,2020; Alonso‐Rodríguezet al.,2022) could lead to leaf litter with different chemistry or different amounts of leaf litter which could explain the observed differences not only in N‐fixation rates but also in total phosphorus (P). Additionally, soil and leaf litter often display different rates of N fixation, with leaf litter showing higher mass‐based rates of N fixation (Reedet al.,2013; Van Langenhoveet al.,2020) than soil. Therefore, leaf litter may have a high capacity for N fixation, allowing warming to increase fixation in leaf litter to a greater extent than in soil. This is consistent with the important role played by the litter layer in tropical humid forests in nutrient cycling (Woodet al.,2009; Sayeret al.,2024). The direct positive effect of warming on fixation observed in both environments may be due to increased enzyme activity (e.g., via increased enzyme abundance) and metabolism of N‐fixing bacteria (Houltonet al.,2008; Reedet al.,2011; Woodet al.,2019), as the indirect effect accounts for the changing N‐fixing bacterial community structure.
This indirect effect of warming is consistent with findings that temperature is a predominant parameter governing the N‐fixing community (Zhaoet al.,2020), and the N‐fixing community structure is a strong predictor of N‐fixation activity (Berthronget al.,2014).NifHgene composition does not always correlate with fixation rates since bacteria containingnifHgenes are not necessarily always fixing N (Fenget al.,2019), but in our study, warming‐induced shifts in N‐fixing community composition (e.g. warming explained 9% of N‐fixing bacterial community composition in the leaf litter) did correlate with an increase in fixation. This is consistent with a previous study that found that variation in the N‐fixing community structure accounted for differences in N‐fixation rates across a climate gradient that included tropical regions (Wuet al.,2021). Finally, while the activity and composition of N‐fixing microbes in tropical soils have been found to be regulated by moisture, C : N, and the availability of P (Pajares & Bohannan,2016), our study shows that, even accounting for these parameters, warming generally had a strong effect on the activity and composition of N‐fixing microbes in leaf litter.
The effects of warming on N‐fixation rates were in part explained by changes in bacterial composition. We found thatin situexperimental warming led to significant changes in both the overall and N‐fixing bacterial community composition, as demonstrated by specific genera significantly associated with either the ambient or warming treatment. The taxa most highly associated with ambient plots in the soil include the nitrifying genusNitrospira(Lückeret al.,2010) and the methanotrophic, N‐fixing genusMethylocystis(Steinet al.,2011), which is also capable of nitrification. Additionally, Spartobacteria andPelobacterwere highly associated with warmed soils. Spartobacteria is an abundant, yet lesser studied class of bacteria that, based on genome analysis, can likely degrade various complex carbohydrates but likely has no role in any aspects of the N cycle (Herlemannet al.,2013; Cernavaet al.,2017).Pelobacteris a lesser studied N‐fixing genus that is capable of producing sulfide (Liet al.,2021). The taxa most associated with ambient plots in the leaf litter include the order Myxococcales, which has predicted roles in C and potassium cycling (Daiet al.,2024), and the symbiotic N‐fixing genusAllorhizobium(Egamberdievaet al.,2015). Taxa highly associated with warming in the leaf litter includePseudonocardiaandBradyrhizobium. The genusPseudonocardiais associated with certain plant and ant species and has been found to be capable of asymbiotic N fixation (Chenet al.,2019).Bradyrhizobiumis a symbiotic N‐fixing genus that is also capable of asymbiotic fixation and denitrification (Zhanget al.,2023). Some species ofBradyrhizobiumare known to be able to nodulate with tropical legumes, such as Inga species (Allen & Allen,1939).Bradyrhizobiummay be warm‐adapted (Zhaoet al.,2020), but someBradyrhizobiumOTUs were also associated with ambient plots, possibly because OTUs represent different bacterial strains. Therefore, an increase inBradyrhizobiumrelative abundance could be due to increased growth of N‐fixing seedlings and/or a preference of these bacteria for warm temperatures.
The possibility of different strains of the same genus being affected differently by warming can be demonstrated by the example of Paenibacillus, which, in soil, has several OTUs associated with ambient plots and several associated with warming plots (Fig.3c). The genusPaenibacillusis well studied due to its ability to enhance plant growth by N fixation and P solubilization (Ryuet al.,2003). Further examination of specific OTUs in our study revealed thatPaenibacillusstrains associated with ambient plots were different from thePaenibacillusstrains associated with warming plots. Warming may affect bacteria differentially even at the species level, emphasizing the need to further investigatein situeffects of warming on the bacterial community.
Understanding the consequences of increased N fixation under warming conditions requires us to investigate the whole‐ecosystem level, including changes in plant demographics and microbial dynamics (Fig.5). Our experimental design enables us to study the whole understory level response to warming as we are not only warming the soil (as in Nottinghamet al.,2023) but rather the whole understory, leading to changes in plant demographics and physiology (Bachelotet al.,2020; Alonso‐Rodríguezet al.,2022; Hernandes Villaniet al.,2025). For example, prior studies at the site highlighted changes in plant demographics (Bachelotet al.,2020) and composition (Alonso‐Rodríguezet al.,2022) consistent with a shift toward a conservative growth strategy in the warming plots. Conservative strategies take precedence when limited resources or stressful conditions prioritize minimized resource loss, leading to slow but sturdy and safe growth, as in diameter growth (Reich,2014; Fagundeset al.,2022). It is possible that N plant demands exceed microbial N production due to increased plant growth rates and/or due to increased N losses, leading to a conservative N utilization in plants (Lieet al.,2021). Warming and anthropogenic N deposition have been associated with increased denitrification consistently across studies (Baiet al.,2013; Elryset al.,2023; Cuiet al.,2024) and increased nitrous oxide emissions (Aryalet al.,2022). It is therefore possible that the increase in N fixation is counterbalanced by increasing N losses through the system due to an overall accelerated N cycle (Cuiet al.,2024). Yet, many of these syntheses and meta‐analyses emphasized the lack of data from tropical forest warming experiments. Therefore, the net effect of warming on the N cycle remains unclear in tropical forests without further studies integrating the asymbiotic and symbiotic N fixation in addition to mineralization, nitrification, and denitrification, as well as N assimilation by plants and even N leaching.

Conceptual summary of the impacts of warming on the soil and leaf litter microbiome at the Tropical Responses to Altered Climate Experiment (TRACE) site. Warming‐induced increase in nitrogen (N) fixation, especially in the leaf litter, in part correlated with change in the N‐fixing bacteria community (bacteria in purple, gray bacteria do not fix N). Based on prior studies at the site, warming may also drive a shift from an acquisitive growth strategy to a conservative one (Bachelot etal.,2020; Alonso‐Rodríguezet al.,2022), which suggests a decrease in plant N demand and could lead to an increase in N losses. Additionally, warming is hypothesized to be associated with an increase in nitrous oxide emissions (Aryalet al.,2022). Here, dashed arrows indicate hypothesized effects while solid arrows represent the results of this study. Arrow thickness represents the strength of the correlation. Created in BioRender. Bachelot, B. (2025)https://BioRender.com/smi82fq.
To conclude, our study provides insight into the effects ofin situwarming on the asymbiotic N‐fixing bacterial community and asymbiotic N‐fixation rates, thus providing insights into how warming impacts N fixation in a tropical forest. Our combined results suggest that warming will increase N flux from the atmosphere into the ecosystem. Climate models predict that extremely high temperatures will occur more frequently in tropical regions than in other climatic regions (Anderson,2012; Moraet al.,2013), so scientists should predict how warming‐induced alterations in N fixation in these regions will change ecosystem functions and contributions to global nutrient cycles in the future. Given that N fixation is only one aspect of the N cycle, future studies should investigate how warming influences the entire N cycle in tropical forests (Lieet al.,2021).
None declared.
PMB and BB designed this current study with inputs from TEW and SCR. TEW, SCR and MAC designed and conducted the warming experiment. TEW, IFG‐P, SCR and BB oversaw the entire field season associated with this study. PB and SCR collected the data for N‐fixation assays. PB analyzed all the data and wrote the first draft of the study. SS supported sequencing and data analysis. PB, SS and BB generated figures for data visualization and edited the manuscript. BB and SS revised the manuscript, incorporating reviewers' comments. All authors provided regular feedback on the manuscript and data analyses.
The New Phytologist Foundation remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in maps and in any institutional affiliations.
Fig. S1Distribution of the edaphic variables measured in the soil (top row) and in the leaf litter across warming treatment.
Table S1Description of the edaphic variables measured in each plot.
Table S2The number of OTUs removed from each dataset because they appeared in the blank samples, the number of OTUs remaining for analysis, and theP‐values of independent variables, determined by the distance‐based redundancy analysis.
Please note: Wiley is not responsible for the content or functionality of any Supporting Information supplied by the authors. Any queries (other than missing material) should be directed to theNew PhytologistCentral Office.
This study was funded by the US National Science Foundation (DEB‐2120085 and DEB‐1754713) and the Department of Energy (DE‐SC0012000, DE‐SC‐0011806, 89243018S‐SC‐000014, 89243018S‐SC‐000017, DE‐SC‐0018942, DE‐SC0022095, and 89243021S‐SC‐000076). We thank TRACE technicians Deyaneira Ortiz Iglesias, Laura Rubio Lebrón, Alberto Pastor Ibáñez, and William Mejía‐García, as well as TRACE intern Katherine Pagán, for support in collecting, compiling, and organizing tree census data and processing samples collected from TRACE plots. Additional TRACE interns and volunteers also supported tree census work. We also thank USGS Southwest Biological Science Center biologists Cara Lauria, Shaina Lohman, and Kita Daly for support in collecting and processing soil and leaf litter samples from TRACE plots. We thank USGS biogeochemist Robin Reibold for support in determining sample nutrient contents and processing acetylene reduction assay samples. We thank Dr Chelsea Murphy (Mathematical Sciences Department, Oklahoma State University) for support in using the Mothurprogram. Finally, we thank Dr Tim Daniell (University of Sheffield) for constructive comments on the draft. Any use of trade, firm, or product names is for descriptive purposes only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Government.
All data and scripts associated with this study are available upon request. Sequencing data have been deposited on NCBI: PRJNA1193036. Additional datasets and scripts for the analyses have been deposited to Zenodo, doi:10.5281/zenodo.14366667.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
Fig. S1Distribution of the edaphic variables measured in the soil (top row) and in the leaf litter across warming treatment.
Table S1Description of the edaphic variables measured in each plot.
Table S2The number of OTUs removed from each dataset because they appeared in the blank samples, the number of OTUs remaining for analysis, and theP‐values of independent variables, determined by the distance‐based redundancy analysis.
Please note: Wiley is not responsible for the content or functionality of any Supporting Information supplied by the authors. Any queries (other than missing material) should be directed to theNew PhytologistCentral Office.
All data and scripts associated with this study are available upon request. Sequencing data have been deposited on NCBI: PRJNA1193036. Additional datasets and scripts for the analyses have been deposited to Zenodo, doi:10.5281/zenodo.14366667.
Articles from The New Phytologist are provided here courtesy ofWiley
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894