An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Responsible Editor: Roula Inglesi-Lotz
Corresponding author.
Received 2021 Jul 28; Accepted 2021 Oct 5; Issue date 2022.
This article is made available via the PMC Open Access Subset for unrestricted research re-use and secondary analysis in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for the duration of the World Health Organization (WHO) declaration of COVID-19 as a global pandemic.
Global warming and climate change have become one of the most embarrassing and explosive problems/challenges all over the world, especially in third-world countries. It is due to a rapid increase in industrialization and urbanization process that has given the boost to the volume of greenhouse gases (GHGs) emissions. In this regard, carbon dioxide (CO2) is considered a significant driver of GHGs and is the major contributing factor for global warming. Considering the goal of mitigating environmental pollution, this research has applied multiple methods such as neural network time series nonlinear autoregressive, Gaussian Process Regression, and Holt’s methods for forecasting CO2emission. It attempts to forecast the CO2emission of Bahrain. These methods are evaluated for performance. The neural network model has the root mean square errors (RMSE) of merely 0.206, while the Gaussian Process Regression Rational Quadratic (GPR-RQ) Model has RMSE of 1.0171, and Holt’s method has RMSE of 1.4096. Therefore, it can be concluded that the neural network time series nonlinear autoregressive model has performed better for forecasting the CO2emission in the case of Bahrain.
Keywords:Neural network, Time series forecasting, Gaussian Process Regression, Holt’s method, CO2emission
Climate change and global warming are one of the hot discussions around the global community due to the threat it poses to sustainable development (Destek and Sarkodie,2019; Khalid et al.,2021). However, from the steam period, in the course of the electrical period, to the current well information times, human lifestyle and production have spectacularly changed. The economies based on conventional small-scale peasant (e.g., agricultural) have been steadily reinstated by industrial economies, which have enhanced the production efficiency and boost real income (GDP) growth. In one fell swoop, the labor demand has increased in urban-centered regions with hasty GDP growth, and most of the rural inhabitants have moved to urban regions (Yang and Usman2021). It is obvious that the substantiation that real GDP growth determines urbanization. Considering this view, the GDP growth and urbanization process have become very significant factors of modernization level that ultimately increase the overall level of environmental pollution (Liang and Yang2019; Usman and Hammar2021; Ahmad et al.2021). Moreover, urbanization and industrialization processes have given economic growth to the world but also have caused climate change resulting in global warming. One of the major contributing factors to global warming is carbon dioxide (CO2) emission along with other greenhouse gases. Even though CO2is a minor component of the atmosphere, but it is very significant. There are several gases when they collect in the atmosphere; they prevent the solar radiation to reflect the earth’s surface and sunlight absorption. As this radiation traps in the atmosphere because of these pollutant gases, it causes an increase in the temperature of the planet. This phenomenon is known as the greenhouse effect. The gases causing the greenhouse effect include CO2, methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), and water vapor. Carbon dioxide is a significant greenhouse (heat-trapping) gas. There are many other side effects of GHGs emissions such as air pollution, global warming, rising temperature, and atmospheric variations (Yang et al.2021a; Usman et al.2021a). The poor air quality poses the high health risks to the citizens. There are direct consequences such as health and environmental worsening associated with these effects. Measuring CO2emissions is an important factor in guiding climate mitigation policies.
Carbon dioxide (CO2) is a significant of greenhouse gas and is the major contributing factor to global warming. Due to human activities, CO2concentration in the atmosphere has increased by 47% over the past 170 years (NASA2020), though this level would have reached over a period of 20,000 years naturally (NASA2020). The primary source of CO2emission is human activities such as combusting fossil fuels (non-renewable energy sources) and deforestation (Usman and Makhdum2021). Besides, there are several other natural factors as well including volcanic eruptions and respirations. As per the Doha amendment of the Kyoto protocol in 2012, the target for maximum CO2emission per capita for Bahrain was set to 20.96 metric tons for 2020. Almost 40% of the emitted CO2globally comes from the burning of fossil fuels to generate electricity (Qader2009; Usman and Jahanger2021). The rapid increase in industrialization and urbanization is usually the driving factor for economic development (Intisar et al.2020). However, the shift to industrialization causes excessive consumption of natural resources. It also increases the energy demand that is often produced by the combustion of fossil fuels and ultimately promotes atmospheric contamination. Energy consumption has been directly associated with CO2emission by various researchers (Yang et al.2020; Jahanger et al.2021a; Usman et al.2021b). Excessive exploitation of natural resources and combustion of fossil fuels and non-renewable energy cause severe threats to the environment such as water shortage, deforestation, and climate change (Dagar et al.2021).
Forecasting models consider the historical data and trends to produce an estimation of the entity being forecasted. Despite the fact that the future human behavior and actions impact a lot how accurate the estimations will be such as if the future climate changes will depend on the commitments on the governmental policies related to climate and their impact on other policies such as in manufacturing, energy consumptions, and production, etc. There are a number of factors that may influence climate variations and environmental pollution. The global average increase in temperature level depends on the overall emission of the GHGs emissions. Therefore, overall human behavior and actions are responsible for the climate change and emission of the GHGs. Non-renewable energy and related fossil fuel combustion are some of the primary factors that release CO2into the atmosphere. Several research studies have investigated the relationship between CO2emission and energy consumption and several other indicators such as fossil fuels, oil usage, coal consumption, transportation, economic growth, financial development, health expenditures, trade openness, energy use, and electricity consumption (Yang and Usman2021; Zhang et al.2021; Khalid et al.2021; Usman et al2021c; Jahanger et al.2021a,b).
As per the report of British petroleum energy statistics (BP2020), carbon emissions increased by 0.5% from primary energy use in 2018, which is lesser than the average growth of the previous 10 years carbon emission from energy use that is 1.1% per year. However, due to a large number of extreme weather days in 2019, carbon emission raised an average escalation of carbon emission of 2018 and 2019 that becomes higher than its 10-year average (BP2020). The countries that produce the highest amount of CO2are China (28%), the USA (15%), India (7%), Russia (5%), and Japan (3%) (UCSUSA2020; Usman et al.2020a). At the first sight, it can observe that CO2emission is highly correlated to the economies or gross domestic product (GDP) of the countries (Yang et al.2021a). The rich/high-income countries produce elevated amounts of CO2emissions, while poor/low-income countries produce stumpy amounts of CO2emissions. However, this is not the case; several developed countries have managed to reduce CO2emissions such as the UK, Spain, Norway, Japan, France, Poland, Australia, Italy, Denmark, and South Korea. At present, Bahrain stands at 6th position in CO2emission per capita globally and 3rd in the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries (Knoema2020). The following Fig.1and Fig.2illustrate CO2emission per capita of GCC countries.

Trend comparison of CO2emissions per capita of GCC countries

Periodic comparison CO2emissions per capita of GCC countries
Accurate measurement of CO2emission has become a demanding task due to several reasons. Reliable measurements are a prerequisite in more accurate analysis and forecasting of CO2emissions. However, CO2emission significantly caused by the transportation sector is considered one of the most challenging tasks inaccurate measurements of CO2emission due to involvement of multiple traffic parameters. Therefore, most of the models and methods of CO2emission measurement from various sectors provide approximate values with 100% accuracy that is not difficult to achieve. The amount of carbon dioxide emission was measured at 35.4 million tons for Bahrain in 2019, while it was 32.9 million tons in 2018. There has been an increase of 7.68% which is much higher than that of the average annual growth of CO2emission globally. As per the Doha amendment of the Kyoto protocol (United Nations1997), the baseline year for the countries was set to 1990, and the target for maximum CO2emission per capita for Bahrain was set 20.96 metric tons for 2020. The current amount of CO2emission per capita is 21.64 metric tons as of 2019. The step-wise trend comparison of CO2emission per capita for all GCC countries is reported in Table1.
Periodic CO2emission per capita of GCC countries
This study considers the CO2emissions data from 1933 to 2019. The data has been collected from multiple sources such as from the Statistical Review of World Energy report (BP2020) and from the organization by the name “Our World in Data” (World Bank2020). Figure3illustrates the CO2emission data of Bahrain from 1933 to 2019. It is found that the CO2emission significantly follows the upward trending in the last of twentieth and twenty-first centuries. The series also shows that there is the leveling off at around 1950, and then the series shows another sharp upward trend at around 1970. Several researchers have examined the relationships between CO2emission and renewable energy (Jahanger et al.2021b; Yang et al.2021b; Usman et al.2020b). It has been observed that renewable energy negatively impacts CO2emissions and other environmental hazards. As based on these observations, it is possible to forecast the CO2emission using statistical and other forecasting methods. However, it is a question of interest whether the overall trend of CO2emission is natural or due to some human-made interventions.

CO2emission of Bahrain (1933 to 2019)
However, the observations illustrate that on average, there has been a decrease in CO2emission in Bahrain during the last two decades. Nevertheless, as stated earlier that there has been an increase of 7.68% in 2019 as compared to 2018, therefore, it is highly unlikely to meet its current target. However, the environmental effect of the corona virus (COVID-19) pandemic might play a crucial role here, and the overall CO2may fall globally, not only in Bahrain, and this economy might meet its target. An estimation of the CO2emission of Bahrain will play a vital role in planning various economic and industrial developments for the next decade. Nonetheless, carbon capture and storage might be a key strategy to mitigate CO2emissions. However, it has several risks associated with it including the probability of leakage; measurement of economic, ecological, and social impacts; and environmental perturbation power evaluation. This study employs multiple forecasting methods to predict the CO2emission in Bahrain for the next decade.
This research study is organized into five sections. Section 2 provides a brief literature review of CO2emission forecasting using different methods. Section 3 illustrates the forecasting methods that are applied in this research. Section 4 demonstrates and analyzes the results obtain, and Sect. 5 concludes the research analyses and provides a few policy directions.
CO2emission analysis, planning, and put into practice a variety of approaches for diminishing the emission level have been an important contemplation for each of the participating countries after the Kyoto treaty (United Nations1997; Usman et al.2020c). The cost of the energy-efficient policies that decreases the CO2emission is usually higher than the strategies that do not consider carbon emission (Bye et al.2018). Carbon dioxide has become a significant contributor to GHGs and plays an important role in increasing global warming and climate change. Therefore, carbon estimation becomes more significant. Researchers around the world attempt to understand and analyze the factors responsible for CO2emission and strives to predict a massive amount of emission (Yang and Usman2021; Jahanger et al.2021b). Several methodologies have been employed by various researchers (Silva2013) to predict CO2emission and energy utilization. These methodologies include the usage of artificial neural network (ANN), support vector machine (SVM), autoregressive moving average (ARIMA) models, decision trees, Bayesian networks, and other statistical supervised machine learning algorithms. The neural network-based approach is one of the most commonly used approaches for forecasting time series like CO2emission. Moreover, the grey model method, computer-based simulations, linear regression, multiple linear regression, logistic functions, adaptive neuro-fuzzy intelligent system, autoregressive integrated moving average, and Holt’s methods are a few approaches which are used very often by various scholars in the forecasting of CO2emissions. In addition, there are several other approaches that are used to consider various factors while applying the forecasting method. These approaches employ complex mathematical and sophisticated statistical techniques for forecasting. However, this research employs the Gaussian Process Regression Rational Quadratic Model, Holt’s method, and nonlinear autoregressive neural network.
Gaussian process (GP)-based forecasting, especially time series analysis, has been used for a very long time (Wiener1964; Kolmogoroff1941). The GP predictions have been commonly employed in geo-statistics (Journel and Huijbregts1978; Matheron1973). The application of the Gaussian process in the prediction process can be seen in various areas of research such as in meteorology (Daley1991), in spatial prediction (Whittle1963), and in spatial statistics (Ripley1981; Cressie1993). Besides, researchers realized that the Gaussian process can be applied in the general regression context (Zhao et al.2020). Early usage of the GP in computer experiments (Sacks et al.1989) discussed the optimization of parameters in the covariance function and choices of the input vector that provide the most information. Furthermore, Williams and Rasmussen (1996) discussed the applications of GP in machine learning and illustrated the optimization methods for the parameters in covariance function. In this regard, other researchers have used the Gaussian Process Regression for forecasting in a variety of fields such as rock fragmentation in surface mines, wind speed forecasting, dam displacement forecasting, stream flow forecasting, short-term photovoltaic power probability forecasting, and CO2emissions forecasting. Considering this view, Gaussian Process Regression Rational Quadratic Model algorithm is one of the methodologies that will be used in this research to predict/forecasting the CO2emission in the case of Bahrain.
The origin of exponential smoothing can be traced back to World War II. Following this regime, Robert Brown developed a tracking model to track fire control information (Gass and Harris2000). This model was extended, and a general exponential smoothing method was developed (Brown1959,1963). Charles Holt developed a forecasting method similar to exponential smoothing in 1957, though it was published recently (Holt2004a,b). Winters applied Holt’s method to get empirical evidence, and the results gained popularity as Holt-Winters forecasting method (Winters1960). All variations of this method, to overcome the seasonality effect, have been developed by extending the Winters’ method (Winters1960). There are several other non-seasonal variations of this method that have additive trend (Holt1957), multiplicative trend (Pegels1969), damped additive trend (Gardner and McKenzie1985), and damped multiplicative trend (Taylor2003). The exponential smoothing method along with its several extensions has been utilized in the different domains including CO2emission for estimating the future trends and prediction. Several researchers have used double the exponential smoothing in developing a model for forecasting including in the field of environmental pollution and ozone formation, etc. A research study conducted by Choi et al. (2014) has used a double exponential smoothing model for estimating the trend in CO2emission for the US transportation sector. Another research study that provides an estimation of CO2emission of Bahrain uses several methods including the Holt-Winters method and neural time series forecasting (Tudor2016).
Neural network-based prediction models have gained a lot of popularity in the last couple of decades. There was an explosion of techniques used in artificial intelligence in 1980. Then, in the next decade, the use of ANN was widely used in time series forecasting. In recent years, the use of neural networks has increased multifold due to a high increase in computational power. The neural network has been a reliable technique for prediction and forecasting in multiple domains. For instance, multiple perceptron, due to their approximation property, was quickly adopted in time series forecasting besides being introduced as a technique to solve the classification problems. There are several other techniques available for time series forecasting and analysis; however, most of these methodologies assume a linear relationship among the variables, and others are based on nonlinearity. Linearity-based methods do not perform well in the cases where the relationship among the variables is nonlinear. The neural network-based model prediction models can perform well even if the relationship is nonlinear. Nonlinear autoregressive neural network for time series forecasting can overcome the nonlinearity and has the potential to forecast with minimum prediction error (Benmouiza and Cheknane2016; Hill et al.1996). The use of neural networks can be found in various domains such as machine translation (Shahnawaz and Mishra2013; Bye et al.2018), natural language processing (Khan et al.2018), sentiment analysis (Astya2017), and image processing (Bashir et al.2017). Neural network forecasting models have been implemented to predict in several fields including CO2emission forecasting and air pollution estimation (Gallo et al.2014), for forecasting the intensity of emission by some of the top CO2emitters (Acheampong and Boateng2019) and CO2emission estimation (Zhao and Mao2012; Sun and Huang2020), for predicting humidity and room temperature (Mustafaraj et al.2011), and for predicting energy consumption (Ruiz et al.2016; Usman and Hammar2021).
Time series analysis and forecasting are significant challenges for researchers. Finding a forecasting method that can predict with minimum prediction error has been a major challenge. There are several complex mathematical and sophisticated statistical forecasting techniques available. This research paper implements Gaussian Process Regression Rational Quadratic (GPR-RQ) Model, neural network time series nonlinear autoregressive (NNTS-NA), and Holt’s method. This section illustrates the functioning of these methods in brief.
In the Gaussian process (GPs), a subset of variables from any collection of random variables forms a joint Gaussian distribution (Williams and Rasmussen2006). The GPs have the potential to be applied for Bayesian supervised learning. In supervised machine learning, regression is a technique that concerns the prediction of the future values of the continuous quantities. Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) models are nonparametric probabilistic models based on the kernel with a multivariate distribution with a finite collection of random variables (Williams and Rasmussen2006; MacKay1998). The GPR has more ability to perform well on small datasets and eradicating the problem of micronumerasticity. Over the past decade, the use of GPs has gain popularity in the machine learning community. There are several types of the kernel that can be used with GPR such as rational quadratic covariance, squared exponential covariance, Matern class covariance, and marginal likelihood gradient. Based on experiments conducted, this study has found that rational quadratic performs relatively better than the other kernels for the prediction of CO2emission. The algorithm for Gaussian Process Regression Rational Quadratic Model is outlined as follows:
Assume that noiseεfollows an identical independent (iid) Gaussian distribution having a variance ofσn2and zero mean such asε∼N(0,σn2).
Step 3: Use the rational quadratic kernel.
CO2emission is frequently subject to rapid transients and high variance; therefore, time series forecasting models have to overcome the nonlinearity of the change in the carbon emission level. According to a research study (Lapedes and Farber1987), time series can be modeled using the following nonlinear autoregressive model as presented in Eq.6as follows:
In prediction, past values are used to predict future values. Nonlinear autoregressive time series neural network is implemented using a multilayer feed-forward network with feedback connection (Lapedes and Farber1987; López et al.2012). Figure4illustrates the topology of the nonlinear autoregressive neural network.

Nonlinear autoregressive neural network structure
The model can be expressed in the Eq.7as follows:
where the functionhis unknown and the training aims to approximate the functionhby adjusting the weights and bias. The termε(t)denotes the error term assuming that it is a random independent variables’ sequence having zero mean and finite/constant variance. The network uses feedback delays to learn from the past time series values. The parameterdrepresents the delay and can be tuned for the desired accuracy by the trial and error method.
There are several training algorithms that can be used for training the neural network such as Levenberg–Marquardt, Bayesian regularization, and scaled conjugate gradient. Levenberg–Marquardt is the most commonly used algorithm. Scaled conjugate gradient algorithm uses gradient calculations that make it more memory efficient unlike the Jacobian calculations used by Levenberg–Marquardt and Bayesian regularization training algorithms. However, Bayesian regularization often attains better solutions for noisy and small problems. The neural network used in this study is an open-loop network. Prediction using open-loop networks are often more efficient than the closed-loop network. The open-loop network allows the network to be fed with correct feedback inputs despite training the network to produce the correct feedback outputs.
Holt’s forecasting method uses an exponentially moving weighted average, using which flattens the random fluctuations. It puts a lessening weight on the older data. Because of these Holt’s method properties, it can perform well with a minimum amount of data (Holt2004a,b). The new average value or moving average is estimated by calculating the weighted average of the current value of the series and the average value of the last period. Holt’s method’s capability of forecasting with minimum data combined with its flexibility makes it a good candidate for predicting CO2emissions. As the amount of CO2emissions data is limited and containing many fluctuations can be observed by simply plotting the data used for this research. If there may have trends of different kinds. There are three types of trends which are linear, exponential, and damped. A linear trend means an absolute equal value decrease or increases from one stage of time to a different. An exponential trend illustrates that a relatively equal value decrease or increases from one period to a different. A damped trend is a combination of the behavior of exponential trend and linear trend.
The following three equations outline the method. The first equation is the forecasting equation, the second equation is the level equation (for value smoothing), and the third equation is for the trend. The forecasting model uses the trend and level equations to address trends and fluctuations. The equations are defined in Eq.8as follows:
whereltis the series level at timet; h is the forecast step, andbtpresents trend. However,ltwill be calculated through Eq.9as
whereαis the smoothing parameter andbtwill be estimated through Eq.10as follows:
whereβis the trend smoothing parameter such as 0 <β<1.
Forecasting using the linear method exhibits a constant decreasing or increasing trend. Empirical evidence suggests that using it results in over-forecasting (Gardner and McKenzie1985). The following set of equations illustrates Holt’s method using damped trend is calculated through Eq.11as follows:
whereltis the series level at timet; h is the forecast step,btis the trend, and 0 <φ< 1. Bothltandbtparameter can be measured through Eqs.12and13, respectively, as
whereαis the smoothing parameter andβis the trend smoothing parameter such as 0 <β<1.
This research study has used the CO2emission data collected from Global Change Data Lab’s project “Our World in Data” (World Bank (2020). This project has consolidated data for CO2emission from the Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center (CDIAC) and the Global Carbon Project. The data obtained is open source and includes the CO2emission data from 1933 to 2018 for Bahrain. The data for 2019 was taken from the BP report (BP2020). The amount of CO2emission is presented in million metric tons. This research study applies multiple methods and endeavors to forecast the CO2emission of Bahrain. It also provides the comparison among the forecasted amount by different approaches. The implementation of the discussed methods has been done using a variety of open-source Python libraries. The GPR model was implemented using the rational quadratic kernel function with fivefold cross-validation. The neural network created for predicting has 11 hidden layers, and the number of delays was kept at 2. The network was trained with 3 different algorithms that are Bayesian regularization, Levenberg–Marquardt, and scaled conjugate gradient. By using the trial and error approach with the mentioned algorithms and network configurations, the best accuracy was obtained using the Bayesian algorithm. This experiment implemented multiple approaches of Holt’s method such as exponential smoothing trend, Holt’s linear trend, and adaptive damped trend. “Estimated” method has been used for initializing with the value of 0.11 with 0.9 smoothing level and 0.1 smoothing trends.
The following Fig.5illustrates the responses predicted by the Gaussian Process Regression Rational Quadratic (GPR-RQ) Model. As mentioned in the previous section, this research has employed the rational quadratic kernel for training the Gaussian Process Regression model. The horizontal axis represents the year, and the vertical axis represents the amount of CO2emission.

GPR-RQ model response plot
The above figure represents the plot for the actual amount of CO2emission and the predicted amount. The diagonal line in Fig.6represents a perfect prediction in which predicted values are the same as the actual values. As observed from Fig.6, almost all the points lie on or nearby the accurate prediction. Training using the GPR-RQ model achieved a root mean square error of 1.0171.

GPR-RQ model predicted vs. actual response plot
Figure7training and responses of the trained neural network model. After the trial and error method for initial weight initialization, the best accuracy was obtained using the Bayesian algorithm among the three tested algorithms. The root means squared error obtained using the neural network method was 0.206.

Prediction by neural network time series nonlinear autoregressive using Bayesian regularization
The following Fig.8represents the training and responses of the forecasting model using exponential smoothing trend, Holt’s linear trend, and adaptive damped trend. The model was trained to observe the effects of different trends on forecasting accuracy. Experiments were performed with several different values for smoothing parameters and trend smoothing parameters. It was observed that among the three trends, exponential smoothing trend, Holt’s linear trend, and adaptive damped trend, Holt’s linear trend has outperformed the other two. The best accuracy was obtained usingα=0.9andβ=0.1for Holt’s linear trends. The root means squared error obtained using Holt’s method was 1.4096.

Prediction using Holt’s method
The following Table2illustrates the performance comparison for the CO2emission prediction models. This research compares the performances of the applied forecasting methods by evaluating their accuracy with regard to root mean square errors (RMSE). RMSE is always a positive value. As the predicted values are small (maximum around 35), therefore, a small root mean square error (RMSE) amounts to a large quantity. Smaller values of RMSE will lead to higher accuracy. As summarized, the accuracy of neural network time series nonlinear autoregressive is much higher than the Gaussian Process Regression model and Holt’s methods. The neural network model has an RMSE of merely 0.206, while the GPR-RQ model has an RMSE of 1.0171, and Holt’s method has an RMSE of 1.4096. Therefore, it can be concluded that neural network time series nonlinear autoregressive has performed better for forecasting the CO2emission of Bahrain. The following Table3illustrates the CO2emission data forecast until 2025. The forecasted values have been predicted using neural network time series nonlinear autoregressive model. Among all the tested methods for predicting CO2emission, the neural network model has illustrated better performance. The lower the RMSE value, the more accurate the results are. The root mean square error for CO2emission prediction has been achieved smallest amount among the tested methods. The achieved RMSE value is almost 5 times smaller than the other methods. Therefore, the neural network time series nonlinear autoregressive model for predicting the CO2emission in the case of Bahrain has explored the best performance among the methods tested.
Performance comparison for forecasting model
CO2emission data forecast till 2025 for Bahrain
Among all the greenhouse gasses, carbon dioxide (CO2) is the major contributor to global warming. CO2is also known as a heat-trapping gas. It traps the solar radiation in the earth’s atmosphere that might have bounced off if the atmosphere was not polluted with CO2and other greenhouse gases. CO2is the primary factor for global warming, and it must be curbed or reduced. An international treaty was signed known as the Kyoto protocol that extends the climate change framework by the United Nations to put a restrain on global warming. In 2012, as per the Doha amendment, the baseline year and the target for CO2were set for several countries including Bahrain. However, as per the CO2emission data of 2019, Bahrain is lagging behind its target. Bahrain should consider CO2emission as one of the key factors while developing policies related to energy consumption, production, and CO2emissions. Carbon capture and storage can be considered one of the strategies for CO2emission mitigation. However, it comes with several associated risks such as leakage probability; measurement of economic, ecological, and social impacts; and environmental perturbation strength assessment. This research attempts to find an appropriate forecasting model for CO2emission. Three methods were implemented and evaluated. The neural network model has achieved an RMSE of 0.206, while the GPR-RQ model has an RMSE of 1.0171, and Holt’s method has an RMSE of 1.4096. Therefore, it can be concluded that the neural network time series nonlinear autoregressive model has performed better for forecasting the CO2emission of Bahrain.
The findings of this study observed a solid interrelationship between the series. Following the above mentioned findings, the government and policymakers of Bahrain should take initiative to promote the power sector and initiate new strategies to diminish environmental pollution. These healthy and robust plans and policies should enhance the consumption and production of alternative, cleaner, and renewable energy sources, such as wind, hydropower, solar, and biomass energy sources, rather than spot lightning on intensive, non-renewable power combustion, production, and consumption from harmful fossil fuels. In addition, the policymakers of Bahrain, as well as government authority, can use this research to establish the power sector status and reduces the chances of several other ecological challenges and prospects. Most prominently, this research can be applied to offer verification that an important improvement and reorganization to energy are mandatory to heighten the level of real economic growth and also get better its environmental sustainability over the point in time. Researchers are working in the direction of investing the impact of different sectors and their proportion in overall CO2emission of Bahrain and predicting the sector-wise contribution.
Artificial neural network
Autoregressive moving average
British petroleum
Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center
Chlorofluorocarbons
Methane
Carbon dioxide
Gulf Cooperation Council
Gaussian Process Regression
Gaussian Process Regression Rational Quadratic
The forecast step
Multilayer neural network
Nitrous oxide
Root mean square errors
Support vector machine
Smoothing parameter
Smoothing trend parameter like 0 < β < 1
Trend
ltIs the series level at time t
MRQ: methodology and software. SK: formal analysis, data collection, and writing-original draft preparation. MK: writing-review and editing, project administration. MU: conceptualization, introduction, supervision, formal analysis, writing-original draft preparation, revised the draft, and finalizes proof. MH: literature and writing-original draft preparation. All authors have read and approved the manuscript.
The datasets used and/or analyzed during the current study are variability from the corresponding author on reasonable request.
Not applicable.
Not applicable.
The authors declare no competing interests.
Publisher's note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Mohammed Redha Qader, Email: mredi@uob.edu.bh.
Shahnawaz Khan, Email: shahnawaz.rs.cse@itbhu.ac.in.
Mustafa Kamal, Email: m.kamal@seu.edu.sa.
Muhammad Usman, Email: usman399jb@gmail.com.
Mohammad Haseeb, Email: haseeb.ecb@gmail.com.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
The datasets used and/or analyzed during the current study are variability from the corresponding author on reasonable request.
Articles from Environmental Science and Pollution Research International are provided here courtesy ofNature Publishing Group
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894