An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Correspondence, Albert Cruz‐Gispert, Institut de Ciència i Tecnologia Ambientals (ICTA), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain.  Email:albert.cruz.gispert@gmail.com
Corresponding author.
Revised 2024 Nov 12; Received 2024 Aug 16; Accepted 2024 Dec 20; Issue date 2026 Feb.
This is an open access article under the terms of thehttp://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited and is not used for commercial purposes.
Climate change impacts on biodiversity have been primarily studied through ecological research methods, largely ignoring other knowledge systems. Indigenous and local knowledge systems include rich observations of changes in biodiversity that can inform climate change adaptation planning and environmental stewardship. We reviewed literature documenting local observations of climate change impacts on biodiversity reported by Indigenous peoples and local communities. We examined whether reported impacts varied across taxa, geographic regions, and people's main livelihood activities and assessed whether local reports followed geographic and taxonomic patterns found in the natural sciences literature. We also compared taxa reportedly affected by climate change by Indigenous peoples and local communities and by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List. Our analyses included 2452 observations of climate change impacts on 1715 taxa from 203 documents describing 291 case studies. Changes in taxon abundance, phenotype, phenology, and distribution were widely reported, and most climate change impacts were reported for plants, fishes, and mammals. Reported impacts differed by geographic region and by livelihood, and most species reported as affected by climate change by Indigenous peoples and local communities were not considered threatened by climate change by the IUCN. Our results showed that Indigenous and local knowledge systems can contribute to a more complete understanding of climate change impacts on biodiversity.
Keywords:biodiversity, ecology, environmental change, Indigenous and local knowledge, IUCN, literature review, biodiversidad, cambio ambiental, conocimiento local e indígena, ecología, revisión bibliográfica, UICN
Pueblos indígenas y reportes comunitarios locales del impacto del cambio climático sobre la biodiversidad
Los efectos del cambio climático sobre la biodiversidad se han estudiado principalmente con métodos de investigación ecológica, lo que ignora en gran medida otros sistemas de conocimiento. Los sistemas de conocimiento indígenas y locales incluyen observaciones valiosas de los cambios en la biodiversidad que pueden servir de base para la planificación de la adaptación al cambio climático y la gestión ambiental. Revisamos la bibliografía que documenta las observaciones locales de los efectos del cambio climático en la biodiversidad comunicadas por los pueblos indígenas y las comunidades locales. Analizamos si los impactos notificados variaban en función de los taxones, las regiones geográficas y las principales actividades de subsistencia de las personas. También evaluamos si los informes locales seguían los patrones geográficos y taxonómicos encontrados en la bibliografía de las ciencias naturales y comparamos los taxones supuestamente afectados por el cambio climático según los pueblos indígenas y las comunidades locales y según la Lista Roja de la Unión Internacional para la Conservación de la Naturaleza. Nuestros análisis incluyeron 2,452 observaciones de impactos del cambio climático sobre 1,715 taxones procedentes de 203 documentos que describían 291 estudios de casos. Se reportaron numerosos cambios en la abundancia, el fenotipo, la fenología y la distribución de los taxones, y la mayoría de los impactos del cambio climático se registraron en plantas, peces y mamíferos. Los impactos reportados diferían según la región geográfica y los medios de subsistencia, y la mayoría de las especies declaradas como afectadas por el cambio climático por los pueblos indígenas y las comunidades locales no estaban consideradas amenazadas por el cambio climático por la UICN. Nuestros resultados mostraron que los sistemas de conocimiento indígenas y locales pueden contribuir a una comprensión más completa de los impactos del cambio climático sobre la biodiversidad.
Climate change is one of the primary drivers of global changes in nature (IPBES,2019). The alteration of processes affecting biodiversity, such as fire and hydrological regimes, drives changes in ecosystem productivity, stability, invasibility, and nutrient dynamics, and different drivers of change interact in complex and compounding ways (Folke et al.,2004; Tilman et al.,2014). In the near future, climate change is expected to have an increasing role in biodiversity loss through its direct impacts on species and its synergic interactions with other drivers of change (Arneth et al.,2020; Maxwell et al.,2016; Segan et al.,2016). As climate change progresses, the distribution, functioning, and interrelations of organisms, and thus ecosystems, will increasingly be altered. These changes will interact with nonclimate‐related threats to biodiversity, such as habitat degradation, invasive non‐native species, pollution, and resource extraction (Pörtner et al.,2021).
The literature exploring climate change impacts on biodiversity has largely focused on modeling shifts in species’ distribution, population numbers, and extinction probabilities under future climate scenarios (Bellard et al.,2012; de los Ríos et al.,2018; Pacifici et al.,2015). Recent reports project significant impacts on biodiversity even at moderate climate change scenarios of 1–2°C increase in global mean temperatures (Nunez et al.,2019). Most models indicate worst‐case scenarios that lead to the sixth mass extinction in the history of the planet (Ceballos et al.,2015). Yet, the accuracy of these models is undermined by the inherent biases in their input data. Climate change scenarios are based on meteorological data collected unevenly throughout the world (Reyes‐García et al.,2019a). These data are especially scarce in biodiversity hotspots (Di Marco et al.,2017). Future climate scenarios project the appearance of climatic regions with no current analogue characteristics, complicating the prediction of species composition under such uncertain conditions (Williams & Jackson,2007). Moreover, models show significant spatial and taxonomic biases regarding climate change impacts on biodiversity and rarely account for complex synergies among species, their response capacities, cascading effects, and cross‐scale interactions (Bellard et al.,2012; de los Ríos et al.,2018; Pacifici et al.,2015; Rocha et al.,2018). In sum, predictive models have helped identify global patterns and the magnitude of climate change impacts on biodiversity but struggle to represent the highly place‐specific and nuanced nature of these impacts (Costello,2019).
Although climate change impacts on biodiversity negatively affect all human societies, they particularly affect Indigenous peoples and local communities, whose livelihoods are directly dependent on ecosystem functioning (Adger et al.,2013; IPBES,2019). Worldwide, such impacts add to the already numerous threats that Indigenous peoples and local communities face regarding their livelihoods, cultural identity, and knowledge systems (Aswani et al.,2018; Reyes‐García et al.,2024a). It is increasingly recognized that Indigenous peoples and local communities can contribute substantially to the thorough understanding of environmental change (Brondízio et al.,2021), including changes generated through the synergic interactions between different drivers of change (Junqueira et al.,2021). Indigenous and local knowledge (ILK) systems offer deep, time‐tested insights, passed down through generations that have historically experienced and adapted to climate variability and environmental changes (Makondo & Thomas,2018; Whitaker et al.,2023). Thus, ILK systems can inform current needs for climate change adaptation (Petzold et al.,2020; Schlingmann et al.,2021), ecological restoration (Reyes‐García et al.,2019b), and environmental stewardship in general (Brondízio et al.,2021).
Several studies focusing on ILK systems have documented local observations of climate change and its impacts (Reyes‐García et al.,2016,2019a; Savo et al.,2016). These observations are predominantly related to atmospheric and physical changes in the environment, but they also describe a broad range of impacts on biodiversity (Schunko et al.,2022). Due to the historical and intimate relationship with their environment, Indigenous peoples and local communities can detect, for example, subtle changes in abundance and distribution of wild species, phenological alterations in plants and animals, the appearance of invasive species, changes in growth patterns, and impacts on the taste of wild edible fruits (Alamgir et al.,2014; Anderson et al.,2018; Chaudhary & Bawa,2011; Huntington et al.,2017). Moreover, given the holistic nature of ILK systems, Indigenous peoples and local communities detect cascading effects from changes in the atmospheric system on different components of biodiversity (Reyes‐García et al.,2024b) and linkages between climate change impacts on different elements of their socioecological system that would be difficult to establish through conventional scientific methods (Hatfield et al.,2018). For instance, Indigenous communities in the Gwanda district of Zimbabwe reported links between changes in temperature and rainfall patterns, plant phenology, and insect abundance as early indicators of disease outbreaks (Macherera et al.,2017). Likewise, Uttarakhand's communities in Western Himalaya reported phenological mismatches between plants and pollinators due to changes in rainfall and snowfall periods that led to decreased species populations (Negi et al.,2017).
Such detailed and integrated understandings of ecosystem processes are undoubtedly important to understand the dynamics of climate change at a local level and its direct and indirect impacts on socioecological systems and biodiversity (García‐del‐Amo et al.,2020). Despite the richness of ILK systems, they remain underutilized in global climate change research and policy (Ford et al.,2016) and in research and policy on climate change impacts on biodiversity (García‐del‐Amo et al.,2020; Reyes‐García et al.,2022). This is so, despite the growing evidence that Indigenous peoples and local communities’ stewardship is key to meeting international biodiversity obligations (Goolmeer et al.,2022).
We examined Indigenous peoples and local communities’ reports of climate change impacts on biodiversity and evaluated correspondence and complementarity between such reports and scientific knowledge. First, we reviewed the academic literature documenting local observations of climate change impacts on biodiversity reported by Indigenous peoples and local communities. Then, we analyzed the geographic, categorical, and taxonomic trends of local observations and determined how the reported impacts of climate change were distributed across taxa. Finally, we compared these results with the list of taxa affected by climate change compiled by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) and, based on this comparison, we considered how our findings can fill gaps in understanding of climate change impacts on biodiversity.
This research was conducted as part of the Local Indicators of Climate Change Impacts (LICCI) Project, which aims to weave insights from ILK systems into climate research and policy (Reyes‐García et al.,2019a). The LICCI project relies on the collection of primary data by members of the LICCI Consortium with a standardized and openly available protocol (Reyes‐García et al.,2024c,2023a) and on the analysis of secondary data documenting local reports of climate change impacts (Schlingmann et al.,2021; Schunko et al.,2022; Zant et al.,2023). The Ethics Committee of the Autonomous University of Barcelona approved our research (CEEAH 4781). We are committed to enhancing the transferability, integration, and scalability of ILK in climate research. None of us have an Indigenous background, and we are all trained in science. We recognize that our training in Western epistemic traditions shapes our understandings of nature and drivers of biodiversity change and acknowledge that the Indigenous peoples and local communities, whose knowledge is reported in this work, may interpret, conceptualize, and prioritize these constructs in distinct ways. The interpretation we offer is inherently representative of our own views.
We conducted a literature review to collect local observations of climate change impacts reported by Indigenous peoples and local communities. Following Reyes García et al. (2019a), we used Web of Science and Scopus search engines and a search string encompassing key terms related to three main topics: “local knowledge” or “indigenous knowledge” or “traditional ecological knowledge” AND “perceptions” or “observations” or “indicators” AND “environmental change” or “global change” or “climate change.” The search was restricted to title, abstract, and keywords of peer‐reviewed journal articles, book chapters, and conference reports in English published up to December 2020. We acknowledge three important limitations in the process of creating the database. First, the database was created to assess local reports of climate change impacts broadly, so the search string did not include specific biodiversity‐related terms. Our search may therefore have overlooked documents that focus on specific elements of biodiversity without necessarily addressing the wider context of climate change. Second, many climate researchers might not consider ILK in their work or might not have the adequate partnerships to include such perspectives. This results in an underrepresentation of ILK in the literature on climate change impacts. Third, our search terms were general and did not cover region‐specific terminology. For example, we did not include the termbiocultural knowledge, a term frequently used in research in Australia (e.g., Ens et al.,2015; Pert et al.,2015), potentially underrepresenting that region. These three limitations result in an incomplete database, likely rendering our results conservative.
Our search resulted in 558 documents, which we reviewed to identify those that included first‐hand observations of climate change impacts reported by Indigenous peoples and local communities. We excluded reviews, meta‐analyses, and documents that identified climate change impacts through sources other than Indigenous or local knowledge. After the screening process, 296 documents were selected for detailed analyses.
For each document, we collected bibliographic information and information on the main livelihood activity of the ethnic group reporting changes. Based on descriptions in the documents reviewed, livelihood activities were classified as agriculture, fishing, hunting and gathering, animal husbandry, and other nature‐dependent livelihoods, which included, for example, forestry, ranging, silviculture, and other direct (e.g., mining, traditional medicine) and indirect (e.g., wage labor, tourism) natural‐resource‐dependent activities. When documents reported results from several case studies, information was collected at the case study level.
The country and geographic coordinates of each case study were recorded and associated with a geographic macroregion, Arctic, North and Central America, South America, Europe, Asia, Africa, or Oceania. In the documents, we searched for local reports of climate change impacts and noted verbatim all statements related to the topic. We then classified these reports in general categories referred to as LICCI (Reyes‐García et al.,2023a). These categories group observations referring to the same phenomena (e.g., “early ripening of wild fruits” and “Pandanustrees produce fruits at unexpected times of the year” were grouped under the indicator “changes in wild plant or fungi species fruiting time”) (Reyes‐García et al.,2023a). All LICCIs were classified in a hierarchical categorization pertaining to atmospheric, physical, or life systems, the latter including biological and human subsystems.
We focused on reports of climate change impacts that were observed in undomesticated species and general reports related to wild biodiversity and ecosystems. Reports related to intensively human‐managed species, such as crops, livestock, and aquaculture products, were not considered. From the initial pool of 296 documents selected for detailed analysis, 203 met the criteria described above. The documents described 291 case studies.
Local reports of climate change impacts on biodiversity were structured according to the typology of changes described previously and grouped across 10 broad categories: changes in taxon abundance, phenology, distribution, composition, mortality, phenotype, habitat, invasive species, pests and diseases, and reproduction. Changes in phenology accounted for changes in plant's flowering, fruiting, and leaf shedding times and for changes in animal behavior and migrations and mating timing. Changes in phenotype included changes in the size or taste of animals, plants, and fungi species and changes in productivity and growth rates and malformations. Changes in habitat included changes in land cover, habitat integrity or fragmentation, and more general changes in biodiversity and ecosystem productivity.
For each report, we identified the taxa reported as affected. If different taxa were associated with a change, we noted one observation for each taxon, so every observation accounted for a single climate change impact associated with a single taxon. We then identified the scientific name of the taxa at the most precise taxonomic level described in the study. For example, “arrival of African honey bees” (Jacobi et al.,2015) could be identified at the species level (Apis mellifera), whereas “reduction of pollinating bees” (Sobral et al.,2017) could refer to several taxonomic families and therefore was identified only at the order level (Hymenoptera). Finally, we used the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF) (www.gbif.org) data portal to verify and standardize scientific names. This process resulted in 2452 observations of climate change impacts on 1715 reported taxa. Because several impacts on single taxa were reported in many case studies, the number of observations of climate change impacts exceeded the number of taxa reports.
Observations were grouped into 10 categories according to the taxa reported as affected: plants, fishes, mammals, invertebrates, birds, reptiles and amphibians, other taxa (including fungi, algae, lichens, bacteria, chromista, and orthornavirae species), ecosystem, unspecified flora, and unspecified fauna. The category ecosystem accounted for generic changes affecting land cover, landscape, and biodiversity. Unspecified flora and fauna included changes described in generic groups, such as vegetation and pastures or animals and game, respectively.
We used descriptive statistics to examine the geographic distribution of case studies, reports, and taxa. We calculated the percentage of case studies located inside and outside biodiversity hotspots areas (Hoffman et al.,2016; Myers et al.,2000) and the frequency of reports of specific climate change impacts and taxonomic categories.
We then calculated the taxonomic precision of taxa reported (i.e., percentage of taxa described at the kingdom, phylum, class, order, family, genus, and species level). We considered the taxa mentioned in each case study, regardless of whether it was associated with one or multiple climate change impacts.
We also compared the taxa most frequently reported to be affected by climate change according to Indigenous peoples and local communities with taxa reported as affected by climate change by the IUCN (2022), which does not recognize cultural values in their listing process (Reyes‐García et al.,2023b). To do so, we first calculated which taxonomic classes were most frequently associated with climate change impacts for species on the IUCN's Red List by ranking the classes according to the number of species classified as threatened by climate change and severe weather. We then ranked the taxonomic classes reported by Indigenous peoples and local communities according to the number of taxa reports that could be identified at the class level and compared the rank order of the taxonomic classes between the two databases.
Finally, we assessed whether the taxa reported by Indigenous peoples and local communities at the species level was evaluated by IUCN, and if was, we determined the threat status associated with each species and whether it was considered threatened by climate change by IUCN. All statistical analyses and graphical representations were carried out with R 4.1.2 (Team,2020). Data supporting the results are available online (Cruz‐Gispert et al.,2024).
The 291 case studies reporting climate change impacts on biodiversity derived from ILK systems were in Asia (28%), Africa (23%), and the Arctic (22%), and to a lesser extent in South America (11%), Oceania (6%), Europe (6%), and North and Central America (4%) (Figures1&2a). Out of the 291 case studies, 123 (42%) were in biodiversity hotspots. A total of 2452 local observations were described, which comprised 1715 taxa reports. Each case study reported on average 8.4 (standard deviation [SD] 10.5) observations of climate change impacts on biodiversity (range 1–71) and identified 5.9 (7.2) taxa (range 1–52) as affected.

Global distribution of taxa reported to be affected by climate change by Indigenous peoples and local communities (points, case studies [n= 291]; gray, case studies describing impacts on taxa not identified to species level [n= 120]; orange, case studies with descriptions of impacts of climate change on species [n= 171] evaluated by IUCN; green, case studies with descriptions of impacts of climate change on species not evaluated by IUCN; colored dot size, proportional to number of species reported to be affected by climate change; shading, biodiversity hotspots [Hoffman et al.,2016; Myers et al.,2000]).

Frequency of case studies, local observations, and taxa reported as affected by climate change by (a) geographic macroregion and (b) main livelihood of Indigenous peoples and local communities (AG, agriculture; AH, animal husbandry; FI, fishing; HG, hunting and gathering; OTH, other nature‐dependent livelihoods).
Communities dependent on agriculture as main livelihood activity were the most represented (42% of case studies), followed by fishing communities (23%), hunter‐gatherers (17%), and to a lesser degree communities relying on animal husbandry (13%) and other nature‐dependent activities (5%) (Figure2b). The distribution of main livelihoods was uneven across macroregions. Thus, 75% of case studies with hunter‐gatherer communities were in the Arctic, whereas case studies involving agricultural communities were mostly distributed across Asia (40%), Africa (33%), and South America (15%). A one‐quarter of case studies with fishing communities were in the Arctic (28%) and one‐quarter were in Africa (25%). Finally, one‐half of case studies involving communities dependent on animal husbandry were based in Asia (47%).
From the 2452 local observations of climate change impacts on biodiversity, about one‐third (33%) related to changes in abundance, followed by changes in phenotype (12%), distribution (12%), phenology (11%), species composition (11%), changes in invasive species (6%), pest and diseases (6%), habitat (5%), mortality (4%), and reproduction (0.5%) (Figure3a).

Number of (a) local observations of climate change impacts reported by Indigenous peoples and local communities by impact category (n= 2452) and (b) affected taxa by taxonomic category (n= 1715) and (c) relative percentage of climate change impact categories per taxonomic category (n= 2452).
These observations comprised 1715 taxa reports, from which fishes (25% of reported taxa), plants (20%), and mammals (13%) were the most frequently reported, followed by invertebrates (11%) and birds (7%) (Figure3b). About 20% of taxa reports referred to impacts on generic taxonomic categories (i.e., unspecified flora, ecosystem, and unspecified fauna; 13%, 5%, and 2% of reported taxa, respectively). Because some taxa were reported in different case studies, taxa reports included 829 unique taxa; 515 unique taxa were described at the species level.
Climate change impacts varied across taxonomic groups. For example, changes in phenotype were mostly observed in plants (21% of observations within this taxonomic category) and unspecified flora (31%), whereas changes in phenology were predominantly observed in plants (23%) and mammals (20%) (Figure3c). Changes in abundance were reported across all taxonomic categories and were particularly frequent in fishes (51%). For invertebrates (39%) and other taxa (62%), most changes related to pests and diseases.
The distribution of taxa reports varied between macroregions and main livelihood activities (Figure4). Fishes, for example, accounted for most taxa reports in Europe (85% of taxa reports within this macroregion) and represented the major share of taxa reported by fishing communities (70% of taxa reports within this livelihood). Mammals accounted for one‐third (33%) of taxa reports described in the Arctic and 35% of taxa reports by hunter‐gathering communities. Plants represented 33% of reports in Asia and 27% in Africa and were frequently reported by agricultural and animal husbandry communities (28% and 45%, respectively).

Distribution of local observations of climate change impacts reported by Indigenous peoples and local communities across climate change impact categories by (a) macroregion and (b) main livelihood activity and distribution of taxa reported as affected by climate change by (c) macroregion and (d) main livelihood activity (AG, agriculture; AH, animal husbandry; FI, fishing; HG, hunting and gathering; OTH, other nature‐dependent livelihoods).
The taxonomic precision of observations varied among documents and typology of changes. Although some documents reported climate change impacts on specific species, others reported broad changes at the community or ecosystem level or described a combination of both. Thus, out of the 1715 taxa reported, 94% could be classified at the kingdom level, 77% at phylum, 77% at class, 66% at order, 62% at family, 56% at genus, and 50% at species level. Six percent of taxa could not be classified at the kingdom level, either because the taxon could belong to different kingdoms and had no further specification in the study (e.g., algae could refer to either Chromista or Plantae species) or because it was too generic (e.g., habitat, land cover).
Almost two‐thirds (59%) of reported taxa referred to kingdom Animalia and one‐third to Plantae (33%), whereas Fungi, Chromista, and Bacteria kingdoms accounted for 2%, 0.4%, and 0.4% of taxa reported, respectively (Table1). Seventeen different classes were reported within the kingdom Animalia. Actinopterygii (24% of taxa reported), Mammalia (13%), Insecta (7%), and Aves (7%) were the most representative. For Plantae Magnoliopsida (14%), Liliopsida (4%), and Pinopsida (1%) were the classes most frequently reported. The species most frequently mentioned across different documents were mammals reported by communities in the Arctic, including reindeer or caribou (Rangifer tarandus) (14 case studies, 12 documents) and polar bear (Ursus maritimus) (10 case studies, nine documents).
Distribution of taxa affected by climate change as reported by Indigenous peoples and local communities.
Number of reports describing climate change impacts on taxa classified within each class, regardless of whether it was associated with one or multiple impacts of climate change.
The ranking of classes most frequently reported to be affected by climate change in our database showed similarities with the class ranking on IUCN's Red List. Magnoliopsida, Actinopterygii, Insecta, Aves, and Mammalia were prominent in both rankings (Table2). Anthozoa, Amphibia, and Gastropoda classes ranked higher in IUCN's ranking than in the ranking from Indigenous peoples and local communities, and Indigenous peoples and local communities reported impacts on numerous classes that were not classified as threatened by climate change in IUCN's database, such as Clitellata.
Ranking of taxonomic classes reported as affected by climate change by International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) and taxa reports by Indigenous peoples and local communities, from most affected by climate change (top) to least affected (bottom).
Number of Indigenous peoples and local community reports describing climate change impacts on taxa by class, regardless of whether the report was associated with one or multiple impacts.
No data in documents reviewed.
No data on IUCN Red List.
Among the 515 species reported by Indigenous peoples and local communities, 210 species (41%) had not been evaluated by IUCN, and seven species (1.4%) were classified as data deficient (Figure5a). For the 298 species mentioned by Indigenous peoples and local communities and assessed and classified under an IUCN threat category, 249 species (84%) were categorized as least concern, 12 (4%) as near threatened, 28 (9%) as vulnerable, six (2%) as endangered, and three (1%) as critically endangered. Out of the 298 species assessed by IUCN, 254 (85%) were not considered by IUCN to be threatened by climate change (Figure5b).

Number of species reported by Indigenous peoples and local communities as affected by climate change (a) across International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) threat categories (IUCN,2022) (n= 515) and (b) that are threatened (orange) or not threatened (green) by climate change according to the IUCN by threat status (CR, critically endangered; DD, data deficient; EN, endangered; LC, least concern; NE, not evaluated; NT, near threatened; VU, vulnerable).
Our review showed that, worldwide, Indigenous peoples and local communities observe many climate change impacts on biodiversity. Their observations have been documented in geographic regions where scientific data on the topic are scarce, although reports from key biodiversity regions remain undocumented. Our results indicated that changes most frequently reported referred to species abundance, phenotype, distribution, phenology, and composition and that fishes, plants, and mammals were more often reported to be affected. Indigenous peoples and local communities described climate‐driven changes in species that had not been evaluated by large scientific efforts, such as those of the IUCN.
We acknowledge the limitations of categorizing and analyzing global patterns of observations that have a strong local context and are qualitative and interpretative in nature (Reyes‐García et al.,2019a). Our effort synthesized impacts reported by Indigenous peoples and local communities that were documented in the scientific literature, which does not necessarily capture the full extent of impacts reported by Indigenous peoples and local communities or the complexities and nuances of ILK on climate change impacts on biodiversity.
Indigenous peoples and local communities reported a myriad of climate change impacts on biodiversity. Most of the case studies we considered were from the Arctic, Asia, and Africa, more specifically the Beaufort Sea, the Himalayan range, the Guinea Gulf, and East African mountain ranges. Although potentially geographically biased, the concentration of case studies in these regions was consistent with other literature reviews of climate change impacts perceived by Indigenous peoples and local communities (Reyes‐García et al.,2019a; Savo et al.,2016) and showed a tendency for researchers to conduct studies in areas where greater climate change impacts are expected (Nakashima et al.,2018). Forty‐two percent of case studies were in biodiversity hotspots, such as the Tropical Andes, the Mediterranean Basin, Southwest Australia, and the Himalayan and East African mountain ranges. Case studies documented local observations of impacts in regions where scientific data were abundant, such as Europe and North America, but also in less data‐rich areas, such as tropical regions in Africa, and Asia, where high levels of biodiversity and greater numbers of threatened species were found (de los Ríos et al.,2018; di Marco et al.,2017). Local observations of climate change impacts were still underdocumented in the Caribbean Islands, Mesoamerica, Amazon basin, central and Southeast Asia, northern Africa, and eastern Australia, areas that were especially vulnerable to climate change and should be a priority for monitoring changes in biodiversity (Pacifici et al.,2015).
Changes in the abundance of fishes, mammals, and plants were, by far, the impacts most frequently described in the literature we reviewed, possibly due to the direct dependence of Indigenous peoples and local communities on the availability of these resources for their livelihoods (Schunko et al.,2022). Changes in phenology and distribution were also commonly reported. For example, climate change impacts on plant's phenology, such as changes in flowering, fruiting, and leave shedding times, were frequently reported in mountainous regions (Chaudhary & Bawa,2011; Negi et al.,2017). Changes in wild species distribution were reported across all macroregions; plants, mammals, birds, and invertebrates shifted to higher altitudes or colder latitudes (Huntington et al.,2017; Lamsal et al.,2017), and fishes moved away from coastal areas or shifted latitudes (Azzurro et al.,2019; Geetha et al.,2015). Overall, such trends were consistent with trends described in the literature, where abundance, phenology, and species distribution were frequently attributed to climate change (Bellard et al.,2012).
Indigenous peoples and local communities described mostly impacts on fishes, plants, and mammals, although they also reported changes in invertebrates, birds, fungi, reptiles, and amphibians. Both the geographic location of case studies and the main livelihoods of communities reporting observations influenced which taxonomic categories were more frequently reported. Impacts on mammals, for example, were mostly described by hunter‐gatherer communities in the Arctic, whereas changes in plants were mostly reported by communities dependent on agricultural and animal husbandry activities in Asia and Africa. Differentiated perceptions associated with livelihoods have also been described at the local level (García‐del‐Amo et al.,2022). These trends might be explained by the fact that communities tend to report more impacts on culturally important species (Rosales & Chapman,2015) and on taxa directly linked to their subsistence activities (Dinero,2013), compared to other species.
The distribution of observations across taxonomic categories might also relate to an uneven effort and interest of the scientific community. Studies focusing on Indigenous peoples’ and local communities’ reports of climate change impacts usually have been conducted in areas where climate change is expected to be more visible or have greater impacts. Similarly, the studies might have focused on taxa, which, according to scientists’ expectations, were more vulnerable to climate change (e.g., plants shifting their range to higher altitudes in the Himalayan range, or mammals affected by changing sea‐ice conditions in the Arctic), or simply were of interest to scientists. Climate change impacts on orcas (Orcinus orca), polar bears, or reindeers, for example, were repeatedly mentioned across studies in the Arctic, possibly due to the significance of these species as flagship or umbrella species, their large size, their threatened status, and their charismatic nature (Donaldson et al.,2017). If that is the case, scientific literature might be underreporting the importance of other taxa affected by climate change, even if this information is observed by Indigenous peoples and local communities, as it has been shown in other studies comparing the focus of scientific research and local concerns (Reyes‐García et al.,2023b). Such potential bias might also inflate the number of similarities found between taxonomic trends in reports from Indigenous peoples and local communities and those from natural science methods (di Marco et al.,2017; Troudet et al.,2017).
In recent years, ILK has become regarded as a key asset for managing biodiversity, particularly when a species’ range is mostly located in the territory of Indigenous peoples or local communities or when a species is of particular significance to a community (Cross et al.,2017; Reyes‐García et al.,2023b). Yet, the incorporation of ILK in global assessments of nature is poor, and sources of knowledge, such as the IUCN Red list of Threatened Species, still do not include cultural values, possibly due to the difficulties in overcoming issues of contrasting interests between local people and scientists, including lack of trust between people with different knowledge systems (Tomasini,2018). We found that a large share (41%) of the species reported by Indigenous peoples and local communities as affected by climate change have not been evaluated by IUCN, which has potential implications for political and funding decisions on biodiversity conservation. These species include plants, fishes, invertebrates, and microorganisms, mostly located in Asia, Africa, and South America. Therefore, our results suggest that local reports can contribute to understanding of climate change impacts on well‐documented species (Laforest et al.,2018) and to understanding of species that have not yet received scientists’ attention (Troudet et al.,2017). Such a contribution could be crucial to overcoming the current spatial and taxonomic biases found in natural science literature because it could shift the focus to species that are locally relevant (Reyes‐García et al.,2023b).
The contrast between the global perspective of IUCN's assessments and the place‐specific nature of local reports might explain why 48% of species reported by Indigenous peoples and local communities as affected by climate change were classified as least concern and why only about 10% of 515 species were described as threatened by climate change in the IUCN Red list. Local reports do not necessarily match with reports of threats to the species’ global survival; rather, they describe local impacts that might have varying effects on different ecosystems or species’ communities. Still, Indigenous peoples’ and local communities’ reports include observations of impacts that are difficult to detect through conventional ecological research methods (Hatfield et al.,2018). Their reports of climate change impacts also reflect deep, time‐tested knowledge, gathered and passed down through generations (Makondo & Thomas,2018). Based on this long‐term interaction with the surrounding ecosystem, Indigenous peoples and local communities can detect changes on species’ abundance and distribution (Castillo et al.,2020) that would need long‐term datasets, which are scarce in ecological research (Chambers et al.,2017). These long‐term perspectives also enable Indigenous peoples and local communities to detect phenotypic changes in the organisms themselves. Examples documented in the literature reviewed here included changes in the productivity, size, or taste of wild fruits (an increased water content in box myrtle [Myrica esculenta] fruits [Alamgir et al.,2014]) and changes in the size of animals (e.g., decrease in octopus [Octopusspp.] size [Moshy & Bryceson,2016]) or their morphology (e.g., bearded seals [Erignathus barbatus] have thinner blubber [Huntington et al.,2017]). Such changes in species’ responses to climate change are still poorly understood but can play an important role on the species’ potential adaptation to a changing environment (Bellard et al.,2012).
Local reports of climate change impacts on biodiversity drawing from ILK systems bring detailed, interlinked, and nuanced information (including cascading effects on interspecific interactions, trophic webs, and ecological networks [Lennert & Richard,2017; Raemaekers & Sowman,2015]) and documentation of changes at scales that are understudied in ecological research (Bascompte,2009). Different ILK systems’ ontologies and understandings of time also offer other perspectives in the time frame in which climate change impacts are considered (Hatfield et al.,2018), which can promote biodiversity management strategies that go beyond the retention of current ecological conditions (Petheram et al.,2015).
Indigenous peoples’ and local communities’ perspectives are also important to understand the place‐specific effects of climate change on biodiversity and surrounding socioecological systems. Although climate change might be the direct driver of some changes (e.g., phenological changes), it is intertwined with other drivers of change, such as direct exploitation of resources or changes in land and sea use, that affect abundance, distribution, or composition of species (Díaz et al.,2019; Maxwell et al.,2016). Indigenous peoples and local communities can identify such interrelated drivers of change (Junqueira et al.,2021); their perspectives and knowledge should be central to addressing the feedbacks between climate‐driven changes on biodiversity, ecosystem functioning, human well‐being, governance challenges, and the dynamics of climate change itself (Arneth et al.,2020; Pecl et al.,2017).
Finally, although predictive models and global assessments of climate change impacts on biodiversity are crucial to understanding the potential magnitude of environmental change and its generic trends, Indigenous peoples’ and local communities’ observations bring detailed knowledge of place‐based and current impacts. Scientists and conservation practitioners need to access this updated information if they are to develop active management strategies that adapt to rapidly changing conditions (Pecl et al.,2017). Including ILK holders in all stages of biodiversity management, from assessment of socioecological systems to implementation of conservation actions and subsequent review of effectiveness and efficiency, has the potential to promote strategies that are less focused on predictive models and more grounded in the local characteristics of past and present interrelations in the socioecological system (Petheram et al.,2015).
Our work constitutes the first effort to structure and explore Indigenous peoples and local communities reports of climate change impacts on biodiversity. We found that Indigenous peoples and local communities report a vast range of place‐specific impacts of climate change on diverse taxa, with changes in abundance, phenotype, phenology, and distribution being the most frequently reported. The categories of impacts and taxa reported differed by geographic region and by livelihood. We also found that an important share of the species reported by Indigenous peoples and local communities have not yet been evaluated by IUCN, and in IUCN's database climate change is not considered a threat for most species reported as affected by Indigenous peoples and local communities. Indigenous peoples’ and local communities’ perspectives have long‐term background information and updated information of climate change impacts on biodiversity that are difficult to collect with conventional ecological research methods. Moreover, local observations draw attention to subtle impacts of climate change that are rarely documented by ecological research methods, such as changes in phenotype of wild flora and fauna and impacts on the ecological interrelations of different organisms.
Our compilation of local observations reveals great value in the inclusion of Indigenous peoples and local communities on assessments of climate change impacts on biodiversity. Further research should include a conscious focus on relations among elements of the socioecological systems detected through ILK holistic views to gain a more comprehensive understanding of climate change impacts across ecological scales. Resources should be directed toward further exploring the relation between reports of climate change impacts on biodiversity and livelihoods to understand how reported impacts relate to Indigenous peoples’ and local communities’ practical and cultural uses of biodiversity and how the impacts of climate change on biodiversity interact with other drivers of biodiversity loss at a local scale.
All the authors contributed to the conceptualization, methodology, and data analyses. Albert Cruz‐Gispert and David García‐del‐Amo collected data. Santiago Álvarez‐Fernández performed statistical analyses and visualizations. Albert Cruz‐Gispert wrote the first draft of the manuscript, and all the authors contributed substantially to revisions and edits.
This project received funding from the European Research Council under an ERC Consolidator Grant (FP7‐771056‐LICCI) and contributes to the “María de Maeztu Unit of Excellence” (CEX2019‐000940‐M). We especially thank members of the LICCI Consortium for numerous and vivid discussions of the topic.
Cruz‐Gispert, A.
, 
García‐del‐Amo, D.
, 
Junqueira, A. B.
, 
Schunko, C.
, 
Álvarez‐Fernández, S.
, & 
Reyes‐García, V.
 (2026). Indigenous peoples and local community reports of climate change impacts on biodiversity. Conservation Biology, 40, e.70033. 10.1111/cobi.70033
Article Impact Statement: Indigenous and local knowledge offer crucial insights into climate change impacts on biodiversity, complementing ecological data.
Articles from Conservation Biology are provided here courtesy ofWiley
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894