An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Address all correspondence to Dr. Craig Stephen; e-mail:craigstephen.pes@gmail.com
Corresponding author.
Health impacts of climate change are now inevitable. The objective of this study was to see if animal health climate change adaptation was a subject of scholarly inquiry, advice, or discussion and if there was an evidence base from which to make adaptation recommendations. A scoping review of English-language literature over the past 10 years was undertaken and the top findings related to animal health adaptation and climate change were inventoried on Google. Documents found in the search focussed predominantly on hypothesizing what hazards might occur with climate change, describing their spread or proposing possible impacts. Scant evidence was found of scholarship related to sustainable animal health climate change adaptation planning or action. Investment and attention to adaptation planning and research are needed to increase confidence in climate change recommendations in the face of continuing uncertainty about the breadth of effects on animal health and the best actions to take in preparing and responding to them.
Les impacts sur la santé des changements climatiques sont maintenant inévitables. L’objectif de la présente étude était de voir si l’adaptation de la santé animale aux changements climatiques était un sujet d’enquête savante, un avis ou une discussion et s’il y avait une base factuelle à partir de laquelle faire des recommandations d’adaptation. Une recension de la littérature de langue anglaise des 10 dernières années fut entreprise et les principales trouvailles reliées à l’adaptation de la santé animale et des changements climatiques furent inventoriées sur Google. Les documents retrouvés dans la recension focussaient principalement en émettant des hypothèses sur quels risques peuvent survenir avec les changements climatiques, décrivant leur propagation ou proposant des impacts possibles. Peu d’évidences furent trouvées liées à la planification ou l’action relativement à l’adaptation durable aux changements climatiques en matière de santé animale. Des investissements et une attention à la planification de l’adaptation et de la recherche sont requis pour augmenter la confiance dans les recommandations liées aux changements climatiques compte tenu de l’incertitude persistante à propos de l’étendue des effets sur la santé animale et les meilleures actions à prendre pour s’y préparer et y répondre.
(Traduit par DrSerge Messier)
Climate change transcends species and geographical boundaries. The frequencies of nations, cities, and states declaring climate change emergencies is accelerating. How we respond or adapt to climate change will have profound implications for humans, biodiversity, economies, and ecosystems today as well as in the future. Decision-makers are confronted with the challenge of allocating resources to protect human, animal, and ecosystem health in the face of scientific and social debate on the anticipated effects of climate change and the best ways to respond. Climate change will amplify existing health problems, alter global food production and consumption patterns, diminish the availability and quality of ecological services, and create unanticipated threats (1). International organizations such as the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPPC), the World Health Organization (WHO), the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), and the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) have all reminded us that the health impacts of climate change are now inevitable and will become some of the greatest challenges to societies. Health stewardship in the face of climate change means promoting a continuum of care that will prevent anticipated impacts, resist unanticipated impacts, and ensure recovery without persistent and irreversible harm. A previous commentary opined that, despite being arguably the most important challenges of the 21st century, veterinary engagement and leadership on climate change response and adaptation have been hard to find (2). The goal of this paper was to further test that declaration by characterizing the conversation on animal health and climate change adaptation seen in peer-reviewed literature and online.
The 2018 special report of the IPCC emphasized the necessity of limiting global warming to 1.5°C to reduce risk to health, biodiversity, fisheries, food security, water supply, and ecosystems (3). The world was not on target to meet that goal in 2020 nor did it seem there was consensus on the path to do so. In this study, we were interested to see if the animal health sector was investigating or evaluating strategies, technologies, policies, or other tools to help animals sustainably adapt to what seems now to be the inevitable health impacts of climate change. Climate change adaptation involves reducing risk and predisposition to be adversely affected by climate change by building capacity to cope with climate impacts and mobilizing that capacity by implementing decisions and actions (4). Climate change adaptation requires adjustments in natural and human systems in response to actual or expected effects of climate change, in order to moderate harm or exploit beneficial opportunities (5). Our focus on adaptation does not reflect a lack of interest in or importance of climate change mitigation. Taking tangible steps to reduce further climate change by managing activities and policies that lead to global warming must still be a priority. However, the climate will be slow to respond to any new initiatives and the trajectory back to climate conditions to which species, ecosystems, and societies have evolved will take untold years, even if we could eliminate all drivers of adverse climate change today. It has been estimated that anthropogenic climate change will be irreversible on centennial to millennial timescales even after a complete cessation of CO2emissions (6). Adaptation action will, therefore, be a pressing issue for several generations of animal health professionals.
Stephen et al (2) scanned websites of selected veterinary associations and government agencies in the global north and international animal health organizations such as the OIE and FAO as part of their commentary on the social relevance of veterinary medicine in climate change action. Acknowledgment of climate change as a priority issue was not widespread, but there was a suggestion of a growing conversation about the need for the animal health sector to be engaged in climate change research and action. When these authors inserted “animal health climate change adaptation” in an Internet search bar, they found few “hits” in relation to the magnitude of risk that climate change is posing to natural ecosystems, food production systems, and societies. Stephen et al (2) asserted that climate change is part of the animal health dialogue but with little tangible evidence that the dialogue is focussing on what actions animal health professionals can undertake now to better prepare wild and owned animals from future climate change harm.
The objective of this study was to see if animal health adaptation was a subject of scholarly inquiry, advice, or discussion and if there was an evidence base from which to make climate action recommendations. More specifically, we were interested if the conversation recognized some core concepts of sustainable adaptation action including the recognition that:
there are multiple concurrent stressors and acknowledgment that adaptation against one harm can affect adaptation for another;
differing values and interests will affect adaptation outcomes;
local knowledge is needed for effective adaptation action;
adaptation actions should not add to climate change, limit the ability to respond or negatively impact other parts of society, the economy, or the natural environment; and
adaptation actions should be effective, efficient, equitable, and evidence-based (7,8).
A scoping literature review was undertaken using PubMed and Google Scholar as search engines. PubMed was selected because it indexes about 110 veterinary and laboratory animal journals and we wanted to focus our search on journals likely to be used and read by animal health professionals. Google Scholar was added to increase the likelihood of finding other peer-reviewed scholarly publications, such as research theses. PubMed has been assessed as the optimal tool for searching biomedical electronic research while Google Scholar is well-suited to retrieving more obscure online information (9). Only English-language papers from the past 10 y were included in order to characterize the most recent conversation. The words animal, cat, feline, dog, wildlife, livestock, and aquaculture were searched in combinations with the words climate change, health, and adaptation. Duplicates were identified by viewing titles, authors, and dates of publication. All papers were initially screened by looking at the title and abstract to ensure there was some relevance to animal health and climate change. If the paper’s relevance was still uncertain, a key word search of the paper using the term “climate change” was done to establish the context in which animal health was associated with climate change. Papers were placed into broad thematic categories based on the subjects and context of the discussion of climate change and animal health. The relevance screening was done by both authors and the initial thematic categorization done by 1 reviewer (CS). This thematic categorization was assessed by the second author (JW) who reviewed the title and abstract of each paper in each category. Where disagreements were found, the 2 reviewers came to a consensus on the appropriate categorization of a paper. Based on this initial screening, CS nominated initial themes within each category that could be used to further describe the focus of papers within each category. Both reviewers used the initial list of themes as a starting point to assess each paper and were able to add new themes as they emerged when papers were read. The categories discovered by both reviewers were discussed to find a common set of descriptors for papers within each broader theme. Papers were not reviewed for methodological quality or rigor of their conclusions as the purpose of the study was to explore if sustainable adaptation was a subject of interest or discussion in the extracted literature.
Our inclusion criterion was any paper that included discussion of a determinant of animal health or animal disease or an animal health outcome with respect to climate change. Determinants of health are specific categories of factors that cumulatively impact the capacity of an individual or population to be healthy. They include an individual’s biological endowment as well as social and environmental factors that provide the capacity and resources to remain healthy. Determinants of health are well-studied in humans and have been adapted for animals in Wittrock et al, 2009 (10). Exclusion criteria are listed inTable 1.
Exclusion criteria used in a 2019 scoping review of peer-reviewed, English-language literature on animal health and climate change found in PubMed and Google Scholar.
Our second method involved examining the contents of the first 10 pages of hits emerging from the Google search in November 2019 for the term “sustainable climate change adaptation for animal health.” What people are searching for from Google can provide insight into what the public are concerned about or interested in (11). We first determined if animal health outcomes or determinants were the subject of the webpage. If they were, we assessed if they dealt with or discussed methods for adaptation and if those methods met the criteria for sustainable adaptation action described in the introduction [in brief they recognize that: i) there are multiple, concurrent, interacting stressors; ii) differing values and interests will affect adaptation outcomes; iii) local knowledge is needed for effective adaptation action; iv) actions should not add to climate change, limit the ability to respond or negatively impact other parts of society, or the natural environment; and v) adaptation actions should be effective, efficient, equitable and evidence-based]. Google search “hits” that included papers encountered in the literature review were not assessed a second time.
The initial PubMed search yielded 1341 papers and Google Scholar yielded an additional 342 documents. After relevance screening was done to ensure documents involved some aspect of animal health and climate change, 446 documents were left to be reviewed. These 446 documents fell into 6 themes (Table 2).
General themes of 446 documents included in a scoping review of animal health and climate change using PubMed and Google Scholar and the number (percent) of documents that occurred in each theme. This included peer-reviewed and non-peer-reviewed documents such as summaries of conferences or meetings and research theses.
Only 388 of the 446 documents extracted were from peer-reviewed journals. The remaining documents were either research theses, edited but not reviewed documents, compilations of meetings or workshops abstracts, or technical reports from international organizations. Only 8% of the documents (n= 36) directly discussed animal health adaptations to climate change: of these 36 papers, 15 (3% of the total papers extracted) described innate evolved characteristics, including genetic attributes, that could help some species, strains or breeds adapt to or cope with climate change; 9 papers (2%) dealt with ecosystem or natural resource management to help animals adapt to the impacts of climate change; 6 papers (1%) were concerned with animal husbandry to help animals cope. The remaining papers in this theme either provided generic statements on the need for adaptation or focussed on the harms to which animals or animal health service providers should be prepared to respond. There was insufficient information in the extracted papers to identify best practices for adaptation or to assess if a proposed action(s) was effective due to the small number of papers for each recommendation. Papers in this theme either proposed or hypothesized actions or tried them on a pilot scale or limited basis rather than systematically evaluating their effectiveness. Papers in this section tended to look at 1 harm or 1 species rather than multiple species or harms. There was little discussion of how action in one setting could affect adaptation in another or on the need for equitable adaptation actions.
Papers that focussed on adaptation of the agriculture or aquaculture industry predominantly discussed how the sector could adapt as opposed to a focus on how to adapt food production for animals’ benefits apart from some recognition that changing disease situations could harm animals. The proposed, non-economic-based recommendations paid attention to animals’ determinants of health, such as housing conditions, environmental quality, and feed availability. Only 7 papers emphasized animal health. Sixteen papers (4% of the total extracted papers) in this theme were reviews that gave little detail on specific adaptation actions. The 36 papers interested in how animal management could mitigate climate change dealt exclusively with reducing greenhouse gas emissions either through animal husbandry or with reduced meat consumption by humans. The former focussed more on describing the harms from agriculture-related greenhouse gas emissions than proposing actions to effectively, equitably and sustainably reduce those emissions. As with papers on how agriculture and aquaculture could adapt to climate change, papers examining ecosystem or natural resource management actions rarely mentioned specific actions to protect animal health. Although adaptation was a search term, most papers mentioned the need for adaptation but then either discussed harms that might occur or provided a high-level overview of adaptation issues.
General science journals provided 16% of the 388 peer-reviewed papers based on our search criteria. Journals concerned primarily with hazards (such as vectors, parasites, pathogens, or pollutants), journals concerned with biology, and journals concerned with ecology or the environment each provided approximately 14% of the peer-reviewed papers. Other health journals (including public health and environmental health) provided 13%; general animal health journals provided 9%; and journals concerned with food production (such as animal science and aquaculture journals) provided 7% of the extracted peer-reviewed papers. Only 4% of the papers found on animal health and climate change were from journals dedicated to climate change science. The remaining 9% were from miscellaneous journals categories.
Papers and other documents concerned with possible threats could be placed into 7 categories: infectious diseases (n= 63), vector-borne diseases (n= 60), parasites (n= 32), ecological changes (n= 31), heat stress or thermal tolerance (n= 17), pollutants or toxins (n= 12), and others (n= 85). As some papers dealt with more than one issue, the number provided in the last sentence exceeds the total number of papers in this theme. Twenty-four percent (n= 68) of the documents in this theme were reviews or perspectives papers. Topics included in the category of “other” were: impacts on productivity or reproduction, food quality effects, access to biotic determinants of health (e.g., habitat, pasture), ocean acidification and implications for food production.
Our Google search using the phrase “sustainable climate change adaptation for animal health” yielded 97 hits; 2 were explicitly concerned with adaptation efforts for animal health and 15 mentioned animal health or management of animal health determinants as a part of broader climate change adaptation efforts. Nine were found in our aforementioned literature search. All the 17 sites with some relevance to animal health acknowledged that animals face multiple concurrent climate change stressors or threats but only 1 mentioned all the elements of sustainable adaptation action described in our methods. The need for better or more evidence was a common refrain but with sparse details. Animals were either discussed as a risk factor, as a strategy for human community climate resilience, as part of agriculture adaptation, or in the context of sustaining ecosystems in the face of climate change but usually from an anthropocentric perspective. None emphasized the need to develop adaptation plans for the sake of the animals themselves apart from one concerned with ecosystem management for wildlife conservation. The remaining 80 online documents either had the search key words on the page in ways unrelated to sustainable adaptation for animal health or spoke of animal health in passing as something to consider or spoke of animal-based risk factors for human outcomes.
Our project found scant evidence of scholarship or activities related to sustainable climate change adaptation action for animal health. Few papers or websites were explicitly concerned with adaptation action. Many of those that were concerned discussed adaptation in very general terms rather than evaluating the effectiveness, efficiency, equity, or evidence upon which to base action recommendations. Documents that met our inclusion criteria generally did not explore differing values and interests or examine the implications of actions on other harms or other sectors of society. Some of the papers we excluded did describe varying social values linked to animal production or aquaculture but didn’t incorporate those findings into animal health adaptation planning. Adaptation for the sake of animal health was more commonly a concern for wildlife. Companion animal papers were more focussed on harm detection and response. Livestock and aquaculture papers dealt more with adaptation actions to ensure sustainable farming activities in the face of climate change. Engineered and technological adaptation are common adaptive responses in other sectors, including human health, but there is growing experience of the value for ecosystem-based, institutional, and social measures (4). Our findings indicate that there is an important gap in scholarly inquiry into an adequate scope of actions needed to sustainably help animals adapt to and maintain health in the face of climate change.
There was a high level of awareness of the importance of climate change within the papers we reviewed, which was to be expected given our search criteria. The literature we found predominantly hypothesized what hazards might occur, described the spread of putative climate sensitive hazards, or proposed or documented disease impacts from unusual or extreme weather conditions that could be expected with climate change. Most papers were found in journals without explicit foci on animal health such as general science journals, natural resource or environment journals, or journals targeting the agriculture or aquaculture sectors. The veterinary journals were almost exclusively concerned with describing possible harms or the effects of climate change on hypothesized climate change sensitive hazards. Papers dealing with possible threats looked primarily at infectious, parasitic, and vector-borne diseases with little attention to non-infectious diseases, non-carbon pollution, or natural toxins. This occurred despite our purposeful exclusion of the term disease or disease-associated words in our search terms. Papers dealing with changes to determinants of health were largely found in agriculture, aquaculture, ecology, and environment journals. The experience in human health to date shows that non-infectious diseases, such as heat stress and impacts of respiratory and cardiovascular disease are having significant social impacts (12), giving rise to a recommendation for animal health researchers to expand their areas of interest when investigating animal health harms from climate change. Attention on climate change continues to rapidly grow but, at government, international, and scientific levels, attention seems more focussed on speculating the course of known climate-sensitive infectious and parasitic diseases rather than on building adaptable wild and domestic animal populations able to cope with a wide suite of known and unknow harms that will come from climate change.
A collaborative report prepared by the Auditors General of all Canadian provinces, territories, and the federal government concluded in 2018 that leadership, guidance, and tools to integrate climate change issues into government operations were lacking (13). We feel that the combination of the arguments presented in Stephen et al (2), with our review of 446 scientific documents and an overview of the conversation on Google allows us to propose that climate change adaptation leadership and innovation is similarly missing in the animal health world. This suggests a critical void that will make animal populations, and the humans and communities that depend on them, highly vulnerable to the effects of climate change. We acknowledge that the parameters of our search precluded an international assessment of research and limited the scope of papers we reviewed to those covered by 2 literature databases. However, our process of comparing concurrently collected qualitative findings allows us to triangulate our and Stephen et al (2) findings to propose there is a critical gap in scholarship on sustainable climate change adaptation action for animal health. Triangulation in research allows investigators to explore if examining a phenomenon in different ways supports or contradicts a finding or conclusion (14).
Climate change vulnerability is determined by a population’s exposure to the impacts of climate change and its adaptive capacity (15). Building adaptive capacity is, therefore, critical to any population’s health in the face of climate change. Animal health adaptation planning will need extraordinary investment and attention to adaptation research to increase confidence in adaptation recommendations in the face of continuing uncertainty about the breadth of impacts and the best actions to prepare for and respond to them. CVJ
Use of this article is limited to a single copy for personal study. Anyone interested in obtaining reprints should contact the CVMA office (hbroughton@cvma-acmv.org) for additional copies or permission to use this material elsewhere.
Articles from The Canadian Veterinary Journal are provided here courtesy ofCanadian Veterinary Medical Association
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894