An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
e-mail:philip.munday@jcu.edu.au
A contribution to the special feature ‘Ocean acidification’.
Received 2017 Jul 12; Accepted 2017 Jul 18; Issue date 2017 Sep.
Published by the Royal Society. All rights reserved.
Ocean acidification, caused by the uptake of additional carbon dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere, will have far-reaching impacts on marine ecosystems (Gattuso & Hansson 2011Ocean acidification. Oxford University Press). The predicted changes in ocean chemistry will affect whole biological communities and will occur within the context of global warming and other anthropogenic stressors; yet much of the biological research conducted to date has tested the short-term responses of single species to ocean acidification conditions alone. While an important starting point, these studies may have limited predictive power because they do not account for possible interactive effects of multiple climate change drivers or for ecological interactions with other species. Furthermore, few studies have considered variation in responses among populations or the evolutionary potential within populations. Therefore, our knowledge about the potential for marine organisms to adapt to ocean acidification is extremely limited. In 2015, two of the pioneers in the field, Ulf Riebesell and Jean-Pierre Gattuso, noted that to move forward as a field of study, future research needed to address critical knowledge gaps in three major areas: (i) multiple environmental drivers, (ii) ecological interactions and (iii) acclimation and adaptation (Riebesell and Gattuso 2015Nat. Clim. Change5, 12–14 (doi:10.1038/nclimate2456)). In May 2016, more than 350 researchers, students and stakeholders met at the 4th International Symposium on the Ocean in a High-CO2World in Hobart, Tasmania, to discuss the latest advances in understanding ocean acidification and its biological consequences. Many of the papers presented at the symposium reflected this shift in focus from short-term, single species and single stressor experiments towards multi-stressor and multispecies experiments that address knowledge gaps about the ecological impacts of ocean acidification on marine communities. The nine papers in this Special Feature are from authors who attended the symposium and address cutting-edge questions and emerging topics in ocean acidification research, across the taxonomic spectrum from plankton to top predators. They cover the three streams of research identified as crucial to understanding the biological impacts of ocean acidification: (i) the relationship with other environmental drivers, (ii) the effects on ecological process and species interactions, and (iii) the role that individual variation, phenotypic plasticity and adaptation will have in shaping the impacts of ocean acidification and warming on marine ecosystems.
Keywords:ocean acidification, ecology, conservation
Ocean acidification is occurring simultaneously with warming. Four of the nine papers [1–4] in this Special Feature specifically consider the role of multiple drivers in assessing the future impacts of ocean acidification. In their opinion piece, Kroekeret al.[1] set the scene by explaining how the effects of ocean acidification may be enhanced, reduced or even reversed by other environmental drivers, and how these effects on individual organisms may be further modified by interactions among species. Ernet al.[2] then specifically examine the potential effects of two climate change drivers, hypoxia and ocean acidification, on the upper thermal limits of coral reef fishes, in this case finding that neither of these two drivers appears to alter the critical thermal limits of the damselfishChromis atripectoralis.
The changes in seawater chemistry associated with ocean acidification affect the performance of individuals, but it is ultimately the interactions with other individuals of the same or different species that determine the population and community effects of environmental changes. Kroekeret al.[1] outline the need for a much deeper understanding of multi-level interactions within and between levels of biological organization and the importance of recognizing and understanding the outcomes of nonlinear responses. They promote the use of long-term and manipulative field experiments at the community level, pointing to the success of long experiments in grasslands to understand the complex impacts of climate change. They suggest that natural CO2seeps might offer similar opportunities for conducting manipulative experiments by crossing ocean acidification conditions with other stressors.
Two papers then consider the effects of ocean acidification on predators and predator–prey interactions. First, Rosaet al.[3] consider the effects of ocean acidification on sharks, the top predators of the ocean, and quantify the magnitude and direction of response that have been observed in the few studies conducted to date. Next, Watsonet al.[4] show that future elevated CO2levels in the ocean alter predatory behaviour and dramatically reduce the rate of prey capture in a predatory marine snail. In combination with changes in the behaviour of their prey caused by elevated CO2, this study indicates that higher CO2levels in the ocean could alter the outcome of predator–prey interactions in marine invertebrates, with possible consequences for the trophic dynamics of marine ecosystems. Together, these papers suggest that marine ecosystems could be altered by changes in the top-down effects on predators as well as the more commonly considered bottom-up effects of acidification on energy flow through the ecosystem.
The final set of papers in this Special Feature explore individual and population variation in sensitivity to ocean acidification and the scope for acclimation and adaptation. First, Elliset al.[5] outline the potential role of gender in biological responses to ocean acidification and call for increased attention to gender in studying the effect of ocean acidification on fitness related traits such as growth, reproduction and survival. Next, Hattichet al.[6] explore inter- and intra-specific variation in phenotypic responses to ocean acidification in three species of plankton. Plankton studies often rely on single clone incubations; however, Hattichet al.report divergent among-clone responses to ocean acidification in three plankton species, demonstrating the importance of testing many genotypes to avoid over- or under-estimating the potential effects of ocean acidification on the species reaction norm.
Phenotypic plasticity is predicted to play a major role in adaptive responses to ocean acidification because it can buffer populations against rapid environmental change, allowing genetic adaptation to catch up over the longer term [7]. However, the capacity for phenotypic buffering could differ among populations, depending on the history of environmental variation they experience. In a multi-population study, Gaitan-Espitiaet al.[8] find support for the climate variation hypothesis by showing that there is greater buffering of phenotypic responses to ocean acidification in populations that experience greater natural variation in pH andpCO2. However, phenotypic plasticity may not always be adaptive. In a novel multi-stressor experiment, Parkeret al.[9] show that parental exposure to ocean acidification is maladaptive to larval oysters when they experience both warming and ocean acidification. This provides a counter-point to some other recent studies that have generally found beneficial parental effects on offspring when adults are exposed to ocean acidification [10,11]. Clearly, the capacity for acclimation will differ among populations and it will be important for future studies to test for acclimation to ocean acidification in the context of warming, and possibly other anthropogenic stressors.
Populations can also differ in their adaptive potential because of differences in standing genetic variation that have been shaped by differences in the history of selection. In an opinion piece on evolutionary responses to ocean acidification, Gaitan-Espitiaet al.[12] predict that populations in strong upwelling zones will exhibit a high tolerance to ocean acidification but reduced capacity for future adaptation owing to genetic constraints. By contrast, populations in seasonally variable locations should exhibit greater genetic variation and weaker genetic constraints among traits. This highlights that the evolutionary response to ocean acidification will vary among populations because of spatial variation in the selection gradient and the genetic covariance among traits. Their analysis provides a basis for future empirical studies using geographical gradients to test adaptive potential to ocean acidification.
Together these studies illustrate the need for a greater focus on the capacity for marine organisms to mount adaptive responses to ocean acidification through phenotypic plasticity and genetic adaptation, but they also show that there are spatial variation and constraints to adaptive potential, especially for populations experiencing the simultaneous stressors of global warming and ocean acidification. These will be vital and exciting topics for future research.
As well as thanking the authors for their excellent contributions, I would like to thank the handling editor, Mark Briffa, who did all the hard work of managing the review process, and the publishing editors at Biology Letters, Surayya Johar and Raminder Shergill, who facilitated the process from start to finish.
This article has no additional data.
I have no competing interests.
I am supported by an Australian Research Council Future Fellowship.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
This article has no additional data.
Articles from Biology Letters are provided here courtesy ofThe Royal Society
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894