An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Wilson can be reached atwils2211@umn.edu, with copy toCJONEditor@ons.org.
Corresponding author.
Received 2025 Apr 1; Accepted 2025 Jul 2; Collection date 2025 Dec.
Single-user license only. ONS reserves all rights. For permission to post online, reprint, adapt, or reuse, please emailpubpermissions@ons.org.
Direct and indirect consequences of climate change pose significant challenges to people with cancer and the healthcare systems that support them. Healthcare providers are increasingly observing the ramifications of climate change across the cancer care continuum. Climate-related health challenges faced by people with cancer are expected to intensify without substantial intervention.
This study aimed to assess the awareness, concerns, motivations, and behaviors of oncology nurses regarding climate change and its impact on health.
This cross-sectional, exploratory study used convenience sampling and an open-access, anonymous online survey. Data were captured through the Climate and Health Tool.
Among the 135 participants, most were aware that climate change is caused by human activity, but fewer were aware of the healthcare sector’s contribution. Most were concerned about the effects of climate change on health and were motivated to respond but need additional knowledge and skills to act.
Keywords:climate change, cancer, nurses, climate education
CLIMATE CHANGE REFERS TO THE LONG-TERM SHIFTSin temperatures and weather patterns that are occurring as a result of global warming (United Nations, n.d.). Global warming, primarily a result of human activity, is contributing to planetary changes—significantly affecting human health in direct and indirect ways—and to greater inequalities in health outcomes (American Nurses Association [ANA], 2023).
Extreme weather events, air pollution, extreme heat, environmental degradation, impacts on food and water supply and quality, increasing allergens, and changes in vector ecology are linked to poorer health outcomes (seeFigure 1). Children, older adults, and people experiencing poverty, marginalization, and social exclusion will disproportionately experience negative health effects and have fewer resources to adapt to the changing climate (Ahdoot et al., 2024;Levy & Patz, 2015;Ragavan et al., 2020;United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 2016). The impact of climate change aggravates existing inequalities and may affect the capacity of people to cope and adapt (United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 2016).

IMPACT OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON HUMAN HEALTH
Note. Image courtesy of Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (https://www.cdc.gov/climate-health/media/pdfs/2024/05/Regional-Impacts-Climate-Change-H.pdf).
Direct and indirect consequences of climate change pose significant challenges to people with cancer and the healthcare systems that support them. Healthcare providers are increasingly observing the ramifications of climate change across the entire cancer care continuum, from heightened exposure to known carcinogens to delays in access to cancer screening, treatments, and post-treatment monitoring (Ginex et al., 2023;Hiatt & Beyeler, 2020). As global temperatures continue to rise, the climate-related health challenges faced by people with cancer are expected to intensify without substantial intervention (Herring & Lindsey, 2022).
Although there is a paucity of evidence in the oncology nursing literature on the impact that oncology nursing has on climate change and cancer, oncology nurses are one of the most well-positioned members of the interprofessional workforce to address the impacts of climate change on cancer care (Walton et al., 2025). Oncology nurses are in a unique position to promote sustainable practices in health care, such as reducing waste, enhancing energy efficiency, and educating patients and colleagues about the links between environmental factors and cancer risk (Dickman et al., 2022). In addition, oncology nurses educate patients about disaster preparedness and postdisaster care. They also assist in disaster planning and response to minimize disruptions in care and adverse outcomes (ANA, 2023;Wilson et al., 2024). In addition, oncology nurses can support hospital, state, and federal policies aimed at mitigating climate change, ultimately contributing to a healthier environment for people with cancer and the broader population (seeFigure 2).

EXAMPLES OF WAYS ONCOLOGY NURSES CAN ADDRESS CLIMATE CHANGE
Although there are no data about awareness, motivations, behaviors, and beliefs related to climate change among oncology nurses, these data exist for nurses, nursing students, and oncology professionals broadly (Elia et al., 2024;Schenk et al., 2019,2021). As a specialized field, oncology nursing has distinct experiences and perspectives compared to the broader nursing workforce (Oncology Nursing Society [ONS], 2020;Rieger & Yarbro, 2003). Understanding these unique factors can highlight strengths and identify gaps in practice, allowing the oncology nursing community to better address their needs in the face of climate change. Therefore, this study aimed to assess the awareness, concern, motivations, and behaviors of oncology nurses regarding climate change and its impact on health.
This cross-sectional, exploratory study used convenience sampling and an open-access, anonymous online survey platform powered by Qualtrics. RNs and advanced practice RNs aged 18 years or older; of any gender, ethnic background, or health status; and currently working or with previous experience working in cancer care in any professional setting were eligible to participate. These data were captured through a validated and reliable online survey tool, the Climate and Health Tool (CHANT) (Schenk et al., 2019,2021).
Prior to initiating recruitment, CHANT survey developers provided the authors with a specific CHANT survey episode code (Schenk et al., 2019). Oncology nurses in attendance at the 49th Annual ONS Congress®presentation “The Impact of Climate Change on Patient Care” participated using a digital flyer containing a QR code linked to the online survey. In addition, the authors distributed an online survey link and/or the survey QR code through social media platforms relevant to oncology nursing (e.g., ONS chapter social media platforms), conference presentations, professional networks, and/or email distribution lists within professional nursing societies. The authors anticipated that most participants were likely to be members of ONS; however, the survey was open to the international oncology nursing community. The online survey directed visitors to a cover letter approved by institutional review boards from the University of Minnesota, Duke University Health System, and University of Kentucky. The survey asked visitors to indicate their willingness to participate in the study. The online survey, using the study-specific testing episode code, was open from April 25 to June 2, 2024.
Investigators at Washington State University developed the 12-question CHANT to assess healthcare professionals’ awareness, motivation, concern, and self-reported behaviors at home and work, respectively, regarding climate change and health (Schenk et al., 2021).Schenk et al. (2019,2021)describe the development of CHANT elsewhere. The survey takes about 10–12 minutes to complete and consists of five psychometrically tested domains: awareness, concern, motivation, home behavior, and work behavior (Schenk et al., 2019). For each question, participants respond using a five-point Likert-type scale. The survey assesses awareness of climate change impacts on health by measuring five items; level of concern related to climate change by measuring five items; motivation to address issues related to climate change and health by measuring three items; home behavior of performing climate-friendly behaviors at home by measuring five items; and work behavior of performing different climate-friendly behaviors at work by measuring four items. Authors calculated each of the five scale scores as the mean of the items within, yielding potential ranges of 0–4 for each domain.
In addition, participants indicated reasons they are motivated to address climate change using a preselected list of options including “not motivated” and a free-text option to provide other reasons. Participants also indicated reasons they do not address climate change to the extent they would like using a preselected list of options including “I do address climate change to the extent I would like,” “I do not want or intend to address climate change,” and a free-text option for other reasons. In addition, participants reported the frequency of climate-related weather events in their area, the frequency with which they are seeing health conditions that are worsened by climate change in “patients/clients,” “self, family, or people I know,” and “people I read or hear about but do not know personally,” and the frequency with which they communicate about climate change and health with different groups or individuals using a five-point Likert-type scale (0 = never, 1 = rarely, 2 = occasionally, 3 = frequently, 4 = very frequently). In addition, participants rated their optimism that “humans will adequately prepare for the impacts of climate change” and “humans will prevent further climate change” using a five-point Likert-type scale (0 = not at all, 1 = slightly, 2 = somewhat, 3 = very, 4 = extremely). The authors also assessed self-report data on sociodemographic and personal characteristics including profession, professional role, education, years in practice, professional setting, gender, race, ethnicity, age, and country and state or province of residence.
The authors used descriptive statistics including means and SDs or frequency distributions to summarize variables. Pearson’s correlation coefficient determined bivariate associations among the CHANT scale scores. The authors conducted all data analysis using SAS, version 9.0, with an alpha level of 0.05 for significance. This study was determined exempt from continuing review by institutional review boards of the University of Minnesota, Duke University Health System, and University of Kentucky.
A total of 135 nurses from 31 U.S. states/territories and Canada completed the survey. The average age was 45 years (SD = 12.8), nearly all were female (n = 130, 97%), and the majority identified their race as White/Caucasian (n = 113, 85%) (seeTable 1). The majority of participants were RNs (n = 113, 84%; n = 22, 16% advanced practice RNs), had BSN/Bachelor of Arts in Nursing degrees (n = 79, 59%), and worked in direct/clinical care (n = 94, 70%), and the average number of years working as a healthcare professional was 19 years (SD = 12.3).
SAMPLE CHARACTERISTICS (N = 135)
Participants could choose more than 1 response.
Note. Some participants did not answer every question.
Based on a potential range of 0–4, oncology nurses reported moderate familiarity with the evidence-based statements (X̄ = 2.68, SD = 0.92) (seeTable 2). Participants were most aware that the warming that causes climate change is due, in large part, to human behaviors that add greenhouse gases (GHGs) to the atmosphere (n = 98, 80% moderately/extremely familiar) and that the planet has warmed significantly (n = 88, 73% moderately/extremely familiar), and least aware that healthcare delivery is responsible for about 8.5% of total GHG emission in the United States (n = 40, 32% moderately/extremely familiar).
MEANS AND SDs OF CLIMATE AND HEALTH TOOL SCALE SCORES AND FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTIONS FOR INDIVIDUAL ITEMS (N = 135)
Percentage moderately/extremely familiar
Percentage moderately/extremely concerned
Percentage true/very true
Percentage often/always
Note. Climate and Health Tool scale scores yield a potential range of 0–4, with 0 indicating less awareness, concern, motivation, and engagement in climate-friendly behaviors, and 4 indicating more.
Note. Some participants did not answer every question.
On average, participants reported relatively high levels of concern with the five statements as they related to climate change (X̄ = 3.3, SD = 0.77), with highest concern reported for overall impacts on future generations (n = 109, 89% moderately/extremely concerned) and changes to the planet (n = 108, 88% moderately/extremely concerned).
Participants reported high levels of motivation to address climate change (X̄ = 3.22, SD = 0.82). Specifically, the majority indicated they want to change practices to reduce GHG contributions (n = 106, 86% true/very true), prepare for health impacts of climate change at their workplace (n = 102, 83% true/very true), and teach others how climate change affects health (n = 96, 79% true/very true).
Participants reported more frequent behaviors to address climate concern at home (X̄ = 2.3, SD = 0.7), compared to at work (X̄ = 1.65, SD = 0.8). The most frequent behavior reported both at home and work was to conserve energy (n = 101, 83% at home; n = 60, 51% at work), followed by reducing waste (n = 65, 54% at home; n = 40, 34% at work) and using less gasoline at home (n = 64, 53%) and commuting to work (n = 25, 22%).
All scale scores of CHANT were positively correlated with one another. Motivation (r = 0.66, p < 0.001) and awareness (r = 0.58, p < 0.001) were strongly correlated with the concern scale (seeTable 3). Work and home behaviors were also strongly correlated (r = 0.52, p < 0.001). All other scales had significant correlation coefficients ranging from 0.2 to 0.42.
CORRELATIONS AMONG SCALES OF THE CLIMATE AND HEALTH TOOL (N = 135)
For reasons they were motivated to address climate change, the majority responded with clean air and water (82%), health impacts (80%), the future (77%), and their families (65%). The main reasons they indicated they do not address climate change were not knowing what to do (41%), feeling overwhelmed (36%), it being too complex (34%), and not knowing enough about climate change (25%).
When asked about exposure to climate-related weather events, the highest percentage of frequently/very frequently encountered events was extreme heat (45%), followed by heavy precipitation (34%) and drought (24%). Less than one in five reported frequent or very frequent exposure to wildfires (19%), flooding (16%), or hurricanes and storm surges (9%). Participants were asked about the frequency of seeing health conditions that are worsened by climate change among various groups. Among all groups (patients/clients; self, family, or people they know; people they read or hear about but do not know personally), the most frequent conditions nurses said they have seen worsened were respiratory problems (n = 74, 58%; n = 52, 39%; and n = 74, 58%, respectively) and mental health issues (n = 74, 58%; n = 48, 37%; and n = 83, 65%, respectively) (seeTable 4). They reported less frequency of seeing worsening extreme heat illness, vector-borne disease, and physical trauma related to storms. For nearly all conditions, nurses reported higher frequencies among those they read or heard about but do not know personally, compared to patients/clients or self, family, and people they know.
FREQUENCY OF SEEING HEALTH CONDITIONS THAT ARE WORSENED BY CLIMATE CHANGE AMONG VARIOUS GROUPS (N = 135)
Percentage frequently/very frequently
Note. Some participants did not answer every question.
Less than 1 in 10 nurses said they were very/extremely optimistic that humans will adequately prepare for the impacts of climate change (9%), and even fewer were very/extremely optimistic that humans will prevent further climate change (6%). When asked how often they communicate with various groups about climate change, nearly three-fourths said never or yearly with professional groups (72%), less than half never or yearly with personal groups (41%), and most never or yearly with elected officials or community leaders (86%).
In this study, the authors sought to assess the awareness, concern, motivations, and behaviors of oncology nurses related to climate change and health. In the sample of 135 oncology nurses, the majority reported being moderately aware of global warming, its causes, and its disproportionate impact on certain populations. To a slightly lesser extent, the sample reported being familiar with the impacts of the changing climate on human health, and even fewer were aware of the amount of GHG emissions attributed to the U.S. healthcare sector. One reason for the lack of reported familiarity in the sample may be because education about the health impacts of climate change has historically not been included in the training of healthcare providers, and faculty members now being charged with incorporating climate change into health curricula often lack the knowledge themselves (Moutinho, 2024). Innovative solutions to integrating climate and health and sustainability practices into nursing curricula and in healthcare settings are needed. To that end, in 2023, ANA released a position statement,Nurses’ Role in Addressing Global Climate Change, Climate Justice, and Health. In the statement, ANA calls on healthcare institutions and schools of nursing to support decarbonization of the healthcare sector and integrate climate and sustainability content into nursing curricula at all levels, and for professional nursing organizations to educate members about climate impacts on health and support policies that reduce GHG emission and build climate-resilient healthcare systems. In response, in 2025, ONS published a white paper,The Impact of Climate Change Across the Cancer Control Continuum: Key Considerations for Oncology Nurses, to enlighten members on the role of oncology nurses in climate change education, research, clinical practice, and advocacy across the cancer control continuum (Walton et al., 2025). For example, because of the changing climate, the United States is experiencing an increased incidence of wildfires, resulting in increased exposure of the public to cancer-causing particulate matter, airborne allergens, and worsening ground-level ozone (Nolte et al., 2018). In addition, exposure to wildfire smoke within the first year of recovery from lung cancer surgery has demonstrated worse overall survival (Zhang et al., 2023). The authors presented, in part, information such as this at the 49th Annual ONS Congress. To improve oncology nurses’ understanding across all domains of CHANT, educational opportunities, such as those supported by ONS and called upon by ANA, provide tailored learning opportunities for oncology nurses on the health implications of climate change.
Oncology nurses in this study are very concerned and highly motivated to act. The authors found both awareness and motivation to be strongly, positively correlated with concern among the sample, with higher scale scores of awareness and motivation associated with higher scale scores of concern. These results suggest that the more concerned a participant was about climate change, the more aware they were of evidence-based statements, and the more motivated they were to change practices to reduce GHG emissions. In the sample, participants reported an overwhelming motivation to change their practice to reduce GHG emissions; a desire to teach their patients, clients, and community members about climate change impacts on health; and wanting to prepare for the impact of climate change in their workplace. In addition, work and home behaviors related to climate action were strongly correlated, suggesting that those who do more to reduce GHG emissions at home do more to reduce GHG emissions at work and vice versa. Although it is not solely the responsibility of oncology nurses to address health care’s impacts on climate change, empowering oncology nurses with the knowledge and skills to act can provide agency to those who are motivated and concerned about the future. Despite the majority of participants reporting that they frequently encounter patients with respiratory and mental health issues worsened by climate change, participants cited lack of knowledge, feeling overwhelmed, complexity, and uncertainty about what actions to take as the main reasons for not addressing climate change. All of these barriers could be countered with education and training on evidence-based strategies for mitigating and responding to climate change, such as the presentation that was provided at the 49th Annual ONS Congress and in the white paper (Walton et al., 2025). As extreme weather events become more frequent, oncology nurses can take action now to prepare cancer centers and patients for disasters to ensure uninterrupted access to lifesaving treatments, medications, and supportive care.
Although the study was focused specifically on oncology nurses, data from a similar study reported that 98.6% of participants (cancer care physicians and other healthcare providers) were familiar or somewhat familiar with the fact that the healthcare sector is a major contributor to GHG emissions (Elia et al., 2024). They also assessed preferred educational modalities and found them to be webinars, e-learning, journal articles, conferences, and podcasts (Elia et al., 2024). Although the current study did not inquire about preferred educational modalities, this information is helpful to nurse educators and nursing faculty who want to provide more education and training to healthcare students and providers.
A majority of participants reported that they never or rarely talk to the leadership within their organization about supporting policies, products, and/or processes that create fewer GHG emissions. Participants also subjectively reported that they are not confident their organizations would prioritize this issue. This provides an opportunity to (a) bring awareness of this issue to cancer care leaders/administrators where needed and (b) provide training and development to direct care staff in talking with organizational leaders about supporting policies, products, and/or processes that decrease GHG emissions.
It should also be noted that although participants reported that they are not confident their organization would prioritize this issue, there are data that point otherwise. For example,Abel et al. (2024)reported 943 hospitals signed the White House Health Sector Climate Pledge, a voluntary commitment by private-sector healthcare organizations to climate resilience and emissions reduction. In addition, the Race to Zero campaign, which calls on businesses, investors, cities, and others to reduce GHG emissions, led by the United Nations Climate High-Level Champions, stated “over 70 healthcare institutions representing the interest of more than 14,000 hospitals and health centers in 26 countries have partnered with Health Care Without Harm” to decrease GHG emissions to net zero by 2030 (Health Care Without Harm, n.d.-b, para. 3). In addition, the Health Care Climate Council (Health Care Without Harm, n.d.-a) includes 18 health systems in the United States representing 547 hospitals and health centers in 45 states, and Practice Greenhealth (https://practicegreenhealth.org) provides environmental solutions to more than 1,700 hospitals and health systems in the United States and Canada. Although participants may have valid perceptions of the potential resistance of their organizations to engage in this work, there is a clear and growing coalition of healthcare organizations that are committed to taking action. Oncology nurses can explore whether their organization is part of any or all of these initiatives when bringing in new, evidence-based strategies and feel empowered to be a part of all sustainability efforts within their organization.
Last, the evidence from this study and the paucity of evidence in the oncology nursing literature call to action the need for more published research in this space. Support for oncology nurse scientists to lead studies evaluating the impact of climate change on cancer as well as interventions to address this growing concern advances the sustainability of cancer care into the future. ONS research priorities note a need to “describe the impact of the environment on cancer care outcomes” (Rosenzweig et al., 2024, p. 508). Research funders from public and private institutions can prioritize oncology nursing research on the effects of climate change on cancer and interventions to address these effects.
There are several limitations of this study—most notably, the small sample size and convenience sampling. There are an estimated 100,000 oncology nurses in the United States alone (Lyon, 2022), making the sample of 135 respondents unlikely to represent the motivations, concern, awareness, or behaviors of all oncology nurses. In addition, the participants in this study are likely engaged and/or interested in environmental health impacts on cancer because the authors launched this study at a professional conference presentation focused on this issue. Although the authors attempted to widely distribute the tool to a diverse, representative group of oncology nurses, it is likely that most participants attended the professional conference presentation. In addition, cross-sectional surveys with self-reported data have inherent variability, imprecision, and bias as a result of the responder (e.g., recall bias, social desirability bias) (Brenner & DeLamater, 2016). This is particularly true for surveys assessing pro-environmental behavior (Koller et al., 2023). This is likely reflective in the current study’s results as well. Regardless, the current study was the first to report on awareness, motivations, behaviors, and beliefs about climate change among oncology nurses specifically and adds to the growing body of literature on climate and health.
Addressing the healthcare sector’s contribution to GHG emissions requires intentional action from nurses in all roles. Education is foundational; incorporating content on the environmental impact of health care into nursing curricula, annual competencies, e-learning modules, and continuing education offerings, including professional conference presentations, can equip nurses with the knowledge to recognize and address sustainability challenges in practice. Beyond education, nurses need structured opportunities to collaborate on actionable solutions. Participation in work groups—both within institutions and through affiliations with organizations like Health Care Without Harm and Practice Greenhealth—can promote the exchange of best practices and foster collective problem-solving. Finally, motivation to act can be cultivated across the nursing continuum, from frontline staff to executive leadership and community partners. Engaging nurses in committees and work groups focused on sustainability encourages ownership of change efforts and facilitates open dialogue with healthcare leaders. Supporting nurses in these ways may empower them to contribute meaningfully to reducing health care’s environmental impact, ultimately advancing planetary and patient health.
In conclusion, asANA (2023)has pointed out, innovation in nursing education, research, practice, and advocacy is needed to address climate change and its impact on health. Educational initiatives about the health impacts of climate change and the role of the healthcare sector’s contribution to GHG emissions can leverage nurses’ shared concern about climate change and their strong motivation to act. Through research and collaborative work groups, nurses at all levels can create innovative solutions that improve health outcomes for patients with cancer and reduce uncertainty about how to take action. These efforts can empower oncology nurses to advocate for changes that support a healthy planet within healthcare systems and across local, state, and national levels.
IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE
■ Seek and offer educational opportunities to learn about and discuss health care’s impact on climate change.
■ Join and actively participate in sustainability-focused work groups and professional organizations to identify and implement evidence-based solutions addressing the impact of climate change on people with cancer.
■ Engage oncology nurses at all levels in institutional sustainability initiatives to boost motivation and drive impactful, organizationwide change.
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY
EARN 1 CONTACT HOUR

ONS members can earn free nursing continuing professional development (NCPD) for reading this article and completing an evaluation online. To do so, visitwww.ons.org/publications-research/cjon/ncpdto link to this article and then access its evaluation link after logging in. ONS is accredited as a provider of nursing continuing professional development by the American Nurses Credentialing Center’s Commission on Accreditation.
Certified nurses can claim no more than 1 total ILNA point for this program. Up to 1 ILNA point may be applied to Professional Practice/Performance. Seewww.oncc.orgfor complete details on certification.
QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION
USE THIS ARTICLE FOR JOURNAL CLUB

Journal club programs can help to increase your ability to evaluate the literature and translate those research findings to clinical practice, education, administration, and research. Use the following questions to start the discussion at your next journal club meeting.
■ What did this article teach you about the evidence on oncology nurses’ involvement in planetary health and its potential impact on patients with cancer?
■ In what ways does your organization focus on planetary health? In what ways can you focus on planetary health?
■ What next steps can you take to incorporate this evidence into practice or research?
Visithttps://bit.ly/3JPMTkRfor details on creating and participating in a journal club. Photocopying of this article for discussion purposes is permitted.
The authors gratefully acknowledge Elizabeth Schenk, PhD, MHI, RN, FAAN, and colleagues from Washington State University for their support and resources used to complete this research study, and the oncology nurses who took the time to respond to the survey and contribute to the growing evidence base.
The authors take full responsibility for this content. This work was supported by a grant (P30 ES026529) from UK-CARES. Its contents are solely the responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences. Wilson serves on the Oncology Nursing Society Board of Directors. The article has been reviewed by independent peer reviewers to ensure that it is objective and free from bias.
Articles from Clinical Journal of Oncology Nursing are provided here courtesy ofOncology Nursing Society
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894