An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Corresponding author:aline.remus@agr.ca
Received 2024 Feb 14; Accepted 2024 Aug 7; Collection date 2024.
This article contains public sector information licensed under the Open Government Licence v3.0 (https://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3/).
Nitrogen and phosphorus excretion are major sources of environmental contamination in growing–finishing pig operations. Nutrient excretion can be reduced by feeding pigs daily-tailored diets to their estimated nutrient requirements using individual precision feeding (IPF) techniques. This study modeled and evaluated the environmental impact of moving from conventional group 3-phase feeding (CGF) to IPF systems in Quebec, Canada, using life-cycle assessment with SimaPro software. The cradle-to-farm model included inputs and outputs of each subphase: raw materials/feedstuffs production, feed mill processing, transport, animal rearing, and manure management. The model was identical for both treatments in all aspects except for the production of feeds and barn and manure emissions in the growing–finishing phases. All feed ingredients originated from Quebec, simulating agricultural practices using real management data from an average farm in Quebec. Based on observed pig growth data, the CGF and IPF systems were compared in the growing–finishing phase. IPF diets were modeled as the blend of 2 feeds (i.e., A and B), while CGF diets were stablished according to the industry. The evaluated impact categories were global warming potential (GWP), eutrophication potential (EP), and acidification potential (AP). The functional unit was 1 t of feed at the feed mill gate and 1 t of finished pig live weight at the farm gate. A Monte Carlo analysis determined the uncertainty of the growth performance results. Feeding programs were compared using analysis of variance. Corn was associated with elevated GWP and AP impacts, leading to higher impacts for diets with higher corn content. Feed B, which contained 83% corn, resulted in impacts of 645 kg of CO2-eq., 8.53 kg SO2-eq., and 4.89 kg PO4-eq. Diets with higher EP impact had a higher percentage of soybean meal. Feed A contained 25% of this ingredient and had an impact of 608 kg CO2-eq., 6.98 kg SO2-eq., and 5.57 kg PO4-eq. CGF diets had environmental impacts between those of feeds A and B. Compared to CGF, applying IPF programs during the growing–finishing phase decreased GWP by 7.6%, AP by 16.2% and EP by 13.0%. IPF significantly reduced the environmental impact in all categories through the more efficient use of nutritional resources by pigs. IPF could help to improve the sustainability of growing–finishing pig operations in Quebec and likely other regions using corn and soybean-based diets.
Keywords:acidification, climate change, environmental impact, eutrophication, individual precision feeding, life-cycle assessment
This study emphasizes the environmental gain of improving nutrient efficiency in growing–finishing pig operations in Quebec by using individual precision feeding programs. Improving nutrient-use efficiency allows for a reduction of nitrogen and phosphorus intake and excretions, which reduces emissions related to climate change, acidification, and eutrophication in pig production chains.

Activities related to raising farm animals can have a significant environmental impact on areas such as air quality, climate, land and soil, water, and biodiversity (de Vries and de Boer, 2010;Leip et al., 2015;Vergé et al., 2016) while competing with other sectors for resources. For that reason, one of the main current challenges of the livestock industry is to remain economically viable while reducing greenhouse gas emissions and other environmental impacts.
Feed production and the excess of excreted nutrients, particularly nitrogen (N) and phosphorous (P) are the main contributors to the environmental impact of the swine industry (González-García et al., 2015;Andretta et al., 2018). Therefore, feed origin and production methods, and the dietary nutrient utilization efficiency must be taken into account to reduce the environmental impact of pig production (Basset-Mens and van der Werf, 2005;Monteiro et al., 2016;Benavides et al., 2020). This is particularly important for acidification potential (AP), and eutrophication potential (EP), which are some of the most affected environmental metrics by nutrient efficiency, whereas the choice of feed ingredients and their origin greatly affects global warming potential (GWP) and other environmental metrics such as land-use ratio. Environmentally sustainable livestock production systems should adopt production techniques that minimize global warming gas emissions and other negative impacts on natural ecosystems. Additionally, the use of nonrenewable resources such as water, land, and minerals (i.e., P) should also be minimized (Dourmad and Jondreville, 2007).
Beyond the judicious choice of feed ingredients, the environmental footprint of pig production systems can be mitigated by improving the utilization efficiency of dietary nutrients, which can be achieved by adjusting the daily supply of nutrients to meet the requirements of individual animals (Pomar et al., 2009;Hauschild et al., 2010). This is because the nutrient requirements of animals not only change during the growth period but also vary greatly among individuals (Pomar et al., 2003). Precision feeding was developed to maximize nutrient utilization efficiency and minimize nutrient excretion without compromising growth performance. Such feeding techniques provide the proper amount of feed with the suitable composition at the right time, to either a small groups of animals (Parsons et al., 2007;Pomar et al., 2014;Moss et al., 2021) or to individual animals (Hauschild et al., 2012;Pomar et al., 2015). Precision feeding techniques contrast with conventional feeding techniques, where the same feeds are supplied to large groups of animals during long periods. Furthermore, nutritionists include safety margins when formulating conventional feeds to account for the variability between animals, feed ingredient composition, and other unknown factors (e.g., health status) (Patience, 1996;Roush et al., 2007), thus significantly increasing nutrient supply and decreasing nutrient utilization efficiency. Therefore, precision feeding techniques can significantly enhance farm profitability, nutrient utilization efficiency, and farm sustainability while also reducing production costs by up to 10% (Andretta et al., 2014,2016;Remus et al., 2021).
As nutrient excretion contributes to the environmental impact of pig production systems (Andretta et al., 2018;Hendriks et al., 2019;Ogino et al., 2021), improving nutrient utilization efficiency without modifying the feed ingredients may decrease the environmental impact in terms of GWP, AP, and EP. Therefore, the objectives of this study were to characterize the environmental impact of the overall pig production systems in Quebec (Canada) in terms of GWP, AP, and EP using modeling and life-cycle analysis and to evaluate the potential reduction of these impacts by using individual precision feeding (IPF) techniques.
The environmental impacts of 2 pig production scenarios were evaluated using the life-cycle assessment (LCA) approach described byGuinee (2002). The LCA was performed in 4 interrelated steps: 1) the definition of objectives and scope, 2) the life-cycle inventory, 3) the life-cycle impact assessment, and 4) the interpretation of the results. The province of Quebec, Canada, was chosen for this study because of the region’s high pork production. Quebec has particularities such as its harsh winter climate, and its capability to produce both corn and soybean feed ingredients that differentiate it from other main pork producing regions where previous LCA have been done. The studied environmental impacts were GWP (CO2-eq.), EP (PO4-eq.), and AP (SO2-eq.). These environmental impacts were estimated using theCML (2013)baseline method.
A cradle-to-farm gate LCA was conducted to compare the environmental impacts of pork production systems using the available feed ingredients and feeding pigs in either conventional group 3-phase feeding (CGF) or IPF feeding systems. The production of the main locally grown feed ingredients (corn, wheat, and soybean meal) and the production of the free amino acids (AA) were also modeled and studied. Minor ingredients such as limestone, dicalcium phosphate, salt, and vitamin–mineral premixes were produced outside the region, and processes such as feed drying and processing, transport, animal husbandry, and manure storage and land application for these ingredients were considered in the LCA (Figure 1). The LCA model used in this study separated the animal production process into 3 stages: breeding, nursery, and growing–finishing.

Production model used in the LCA. The system boundary to be considered in the current study goes from the cradle to the farm gate, considering a complete cycle of pig production (piglets and slaughter animals). The figure displays the initial diagrammatic representation of the main processes and products that will be considered in the analysis. Initially, 3 main interfaces will be evaluated 1) feed ingredients, 2) feed processing industry, and 3) rearing animals. Figure created with BioRender.com.
The SimaPro software (v 8.0.3.14, PRE Consultants, Amersfoort, The Netherlands) was used for the simulations. The software includes extensive datasets from several regions of the world, including the US, Canada (including Quebec), and allows for customization to reflect specific scenarios, therefore, local data was used when available for accurate representation of the Quebec context. To generate LCA estimates, SimaPro includes data on emissions and resource extractions for each production process or step, considering each substance’s potential contribution to various environmental issues (PRé Sustainability Database & Support Team, 2022).
Pigs and sows in the breeding and nursery phases were assumed to be equally fed and raised in the 2 simulated production scenarios, and only growing–finishing pigs were subjected to the treatments (CGF or IPF). The environmental impacts of the use of pharmaceutical drugs and capital assets (machinery, equipment, and buildings) were not considered in the model, while the allocation of the environmental impact when a process had more than one product as an outcome (e.g., soybean meal and oil production) was proportional to the economic value of the products. The allocation factors used for this simulation can be found inSupplementary Material S1. Slaughtering procedures were also excluded from this study, given that an earlier study found no carcass composition or meat quality effect due to the use of IPF or CGF (Andretta et al., 2014). Finally, the LCA functional unit for crop production was 1 t at the feed mill gate and 1 t of finished pigs (120 kg of BW) at the farm gate.
The transportation of feed ingredients and processed feeds from the production site to the feed mill and from the feed mill to the farm was assumed to occur by truck, as was the transportation of animals between production units. The Google Maps software (Google Inc., Mountain View, CA) was used to estimate road distances, and the information from the Agri-footprint 5.0 (Agri-footprint, 2019) database was used to simulate the transport. A 20-km distance was considered between the nursery and growing–finishing farms, and a 60-km distance was considered between the feed mill and the 3 production units (farrowing, nursery, and growing–finishing). Finally, a distance of 150 km was assumed between the fields and the feed mill.
Soybean, corn, and wheat were assumed to be produced in the Montérégie and Centre-du-Québec regions, which are the main production areas for these ingredients in Quebec. Fertilizer, herbicide, and pesticide use data were collected from the experimental farm in Sherbrooke, Quebec, and were used to simulate agricultural practices. The chosen farm implements sound agricultural practices, employing animal manure as fertilizer and adopting integrated weed management to minimize chemical fertilizer and herbicide use. The choice of the farm was heavily influenced by data availability and reliable records. This farm serves as a scenario aiming to mitigate the environmental impact of crop production. Using this known standard scenario helps to decrease noise when modeling the effects of the 2 feeding practices on their environmental impacts. However, the total value for emissions is only applicable for the scenario in question, whereas the dimension of change (e.g., percentage change of CO2emissions) should be replicable in different scenarios. Moreover, agricultural yields were simulated using an average of the production in Quebec during the last 5 years (Statistics Canada, 2022a). The information inputted for the crop is provided inTable 1. The Ecoinvent v3.0 database was used to simulate the impact of chemical fertilizers, pesticides, and herbicides. Meanwhile, pig slurry was used as an organic fertilizer in all crops. However, the gas emissions associated with pig slurry production were allocated to pig production. The environmental impact caused by a change in land use, such as deforestation to produce more arable land, was estimated based on the data provided by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food of Québec (MAPAQ) and published byStatistics Canada (2024)using the methodology described byda Silva et al. (2010).
Agricultural yield and agricultural inputs to arable crop production in Quebec, based on information from a reference farm
The environmental impact of industrial AA production was adapted fromMosnier et al. (2011), distinguishing the AA produced by chemical synthesis, such asdl-methionine, from those produced by fermentation, such asl-lysine andl-threonine. The environmental impacts of other minor feed ingredients such as limestone were also obtained from the Ecoinvent database, and the environmental impact of the vitamin–mineral complex was assumed to be equal to that of limestone (Andretta et al., 2018). In the case of processed feed ingredients such as soybean meal, the Ecoinvent data of processing in the U.S. was adapted to represent the Quebec situation. The electricity origin was changed to hydropower, to match Quebec’s main energy origin (Canada Energy Regulator, 2021). Distances were changed to 150 km between storage and processing plants to adjust to the scenario where all the crops were grown and processed in the same province, and the main means of transportation was by truck.
This case study was developed for a complete farrow-to-finish production system in a confinement operation (buildings with slatted floors). A typical farm was used to gather farm inputs such as water and energy for all animal production units.
Common Quebec feed ingredients were used to formulate all the complete feeds (Table 4). Soybean meal was considered the main source of protein, and corn was the main source of energy, with a small inclusion of wheat as a complementary source of energy. The nutritional composition of industrial byproducts such as wheat middlings, corn DDG, and corn gluten meal was taken from the build-in database in the EvaPig software (v 1.3.1.4; INRA, Saint-Gilles, France), and the Ecoinvent database was used to input the environmental impact of these ingredients.
Ingredients and calculated nutrient composition of the complete feeds used in the group 3-phase feeding program (CGF) (feed I, feed II, and feed III) and the individual precision feeding program (IPF) (A and B).
1Standard ileal digestible.
Animal performance data for the farrowing units was estimated using the average Canadian production from 2017 to 2021 obtained fromStatistics Canada (2022b), and a mortality rate of 15% was assumed between farrowing and weaning, resulting in a total of 25 weaned piglets/sow/yr. Lactation and gestation complete feeds were obtained from the literature (Miller et al., 2017), assuming the daily feed intake was 2.5 kg/d for gestating sows and 5.5 kg/d for lactating animals. N retention rates of 30% and 60% were assumed for the gestating and lactating sows, respectively (NRC, 2012;Miller et al., 2017). Finally, for the weaning phase, performance data and complete feeds from a study conducted in Sherbrooke, QC, (Remus et al., 2020Unpublished data) were used to simulate this growth phase. The feed intake, N excretion, and growth performance values used for the simulation can be observed inTable 2.
Productive values used in the simulation for the farrowing and nursery phases, equal for both feeding treatments
1One cycle is considered a full gestation plus 21 d lactation period in the case of the sows and in the case of the piglets is considered the nursery phase (6 to 20 kg BW).
2Body weight.
3Considered mortality between farrowing and finishing (1 to 120 kg BW).
4Calculated assuming DFI of 2.5 kg/d and 5.5 kg/d for gestating and lactating sows, respectively.
5Calculated assuming N retention rates of 30% and 60% were for the gestating and lactating sows, respectively, and P retention of 40%.
6Remus et al., unpublished data.
7Data from an average farm in Quebec.
To model the growing–finishing phase, reference data from 130 high-performance growing–finishing pigs (Andretta et al., 2014,2016) were used to compare the feeding programs in terms of growth performance and nutrient excretion (Table 3), both studies were performed in Quebec in high-performance genotype pigs. In the conventional CGF systems, pigs were assumed to be fed to optimize the growth of large groups of animals, and feeds are provided in 28-d phases. In the IPF system, growing–finishing pigs were assumed to receive a daily blend of 2 feeds, a nutrient-dense, and a low nutrient density feed, providing each individual the estimated amount of nutrients required for that day. This simulation assumed no difference in growth performance due to the feeding system based on experimental results (Andretta et al., 2014,2016). The IPF feeding system increases nutrient efficiency by feeding the pigs with tailored individual diets closely matching their daily amino acid requirements. Moreover, the CGP system was designed to meet the requirements of the 80th percentile based on the known (real-time) studied population growth performance, thus allowing most of the pigs to reach maximum growth. Thus, IPF techniques in growing–finishing pig operations can significantly reduce protein and P intake (25%) and excretion (40%) without changes in growth performance (Andretta et al., 2014,2016). Therefore, these reductions in protein and P intake and excretion were applied to the simulation.
Productive values and standard deviation used for the simulation of the growing–finishing phase (Andretta et al. (2016)where the different feeding techniques were applied, group 3-phase feeding (CGF) and individual precision feeding (IPF)
1Crude protein.
2Average daily gain.
3Feed conversion ratio.
The pigs’ nutritional requirements were estimated as proposed byHauschild et al. (2012)using individual daily data collected on the reference populations. Thus, the complete feeds (Table 4) for each of the 3 feeding phases of the CGF pig group (feeds I, II, and III) were formulated to satisfy the requirements of the 82nd percentile pig (Hauschild et al., 2010), which is equivalent to the average pig plus 15%, of the population on the first day of each phase (Brossard et al., 2009;Remus et al., 2020).
In the IPF pig group, feed A and feed B were blended daily for each pig to match its individual Lys/NE requirements, and each feed was independently formulated as a complete feed. Feed A had high nutrient density levels and was formulated to satisfy the requirements of one of the most demanding pigs at the beginning of the growing period, whereas feed B had a low nutrient density level and was formulated to satisfy the requirements of the least demanding pigs at the end of the growing period. These formulation and feeding approaches were also used to feed the reference populations in this study (Andretta et al., 2016).
Manure management includes manure storage, field application, and emissions from the field in the scope of the simulation (Figure 1). The N- and P-related emissions, such as NH3, considered the manure composition associated with the different N and P excretion rates of each feeding practice and production category (Andretta et al., 2016). Enteric fermentation from both growing–finishing pigs and breeding animals was calculated using crude fiber intake as a driver (Jørgensen, 2007), while manure CH4production was estimated following the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change methodology (IPCC, 2006), with tier 1 approach. With this approach, an emission factor is chosen depending on the development level and climate of the country or region and the animal species produced. Direct and indirect N2O emissions were also calculated using IPCC methodology for manure storage, application, and emissions from soils with manure application, including volatilization and leaching using tier 2 approach. Finally, emissions of NH3from the buildings, storage of manure and manure application, NOX, and N2were calculated using the European Environmental Agency air pollutant emission inventory guidebook (EEA, 2019). Emissions due to leaching for manure storage were not considered, and all N and P considered in feces or urine were assumed to be applied to land as fertilizer once the losses had been accounted for. All the emission factors used for this simulation can be found inSupplementary Table S1.2.
A Monte Carlo approach was used to quantify the uncertainties associated with the studied environmental impacts in the 2 studied feeding systems. The consumption of each complete feed (A and B) and N and P excretion were assumed to be normally distributed as observed in previous data (Andretta et al., 2014,2016). The average and STD values for total feed intake for the IPF group were 92.6 ± 21.9 kg for feed A and 113.2 ± 68.7 kg for feed B. The excretion values for the IPF group were 1.87 ± 0.77 kg for N and 580.0 ± 161.3 g for P during the complete growth period. In the CGF group, the average values for total feed intake were 60.1 ± 23.1 kg for feed 1, 70.2 ± 25.2 kg for feed 2, and 75.49 ± 29.82 kg for feed 3. The excretion values for the CGF group were 2.66 ± 1.40 kg for N and 650 ± 313.92 g for P.
The simulation was run 1,000 times, and in each run, a value of each input was randomly selected from the specified distribution for each variable. The generated data on the studied environmental impacts (GWP, AP, and EP) were analyzed as a complete randomized design using the lmerTest package (Kuznetsova et al., 2017), considering the individual pig as the experimental unit and feeding program as a fixed effect. The assumption of normal distribution of the error was checked graphically. A P ≤ 0.05 was considered a significant difference. Differences between individual treatments were analyzed using the F-test, and the uncertainty in the estimate of the means of the data was expressed as the maximum standard error.
The feed production phase, with a functional unit of 1 t at the farm gate, was associated with 612 kg of CO2-eq., 7.78 kg of PO4-eq., and 5 kg of SO2-eq. for corn; 578 kg of CO2-eq., 10.4 kg of PO4-eq., and 4.52 kg of SO2-eq. for wheat; and 384 kg of CO2-eq., 1.3 kg of PO4-eq., and 9.82 kg of SO2-eq. for soybeans (Figure 2). Based on the inclusion of each of these ingredients, the environmental impact of the complete feeds (1 t of feed at feed factory) was assessed (Table 5). Feeds with higher cereal content had a higher impact on GWP and EP. Each kg of corn inclusion in the diets represented 1% of CO2-eq. (3.97 kg) and PO4-eq. (0.04 kg) emissions for every 1000 kg of feed produced. While feeds with high soybean meal content had higher EP, for each kg of soybean meal inclusion the diet represented 0.2% SO2-eq. (0.01 kg) emissions every 1000 kg of produced feed.

Climate change, acidification, and eutrophication impact of corn, wheat, and soybean meal produced in the Montérégie area of Québec.
Potential environmental impact of 1 t, at mill gate, of the different feeds used for growing–finishing pigs. Feeds I, II, and III used in the group 3-phase feeding program (CGF), and feeds A and B used in the individual precision feeding program (IPF)
The contribution of growing–finishing pigs to each impact category varies among treatments and impact categories (Figure 3). The emissions due to the nursery unit represent around 20% of the impact in all impact categories studied. The overall GWP contributions of the complete cycle were approximately 60% related to feed production, 20% related to the piglet-producing units, and the remaining 20% due to the growing–finishing pig process and management of these pigs’ manure. In AP, 50% and 40% of the impact is related to the growing–finishing farm for CGF and IPF, respectively, mainly due to on-farm emissions and manure management emissions. Feed accounted for 30% and 40% of AP contributions within CGF and IPF, respectively, and the farrowing and weaning units accounted for the remaining 20% in both treatments. Regarding EP, the majority of the impact in the CGF scenario arises from growing–finishing farm and manure management emissions, accounting for more than 50% of the total impact in this category. In contrast, in the IPF scenario, this impact is substantially lower, with growing–finishing unit and manure management emissions accounting for 20% of the total EP impact. Additionally, the contribution of feed to the EP is 30% in CGF and substantially higher at 60% in IPF. In both cases, the piglet-producing units accounted for 20% of the overall impact.

Contribution of the different processes and inputs to the potential environmental impact of growing–finishing pigs (1 t of BW at the farm gate) in Québec. Growing–finishing includes the emissions of growing–finishing animals and the energy consumed on the farms. Nursery refers to the emissions of breeding and nursery farms and the emissions related to the feed consumed in those farms (equal in the 2 scenarios). Feed refers to the emissions related to crop cultivation and feed production for the feeds consumed at growing–finishing farms—A and B for individual precision feeding (IPF), and I, II, and III for the group 3-phase feeding (CGF).
When the 2 feeding systems were compared, IPF reduced (P < 0.01) the environmental impact in GWP by 7.6%, AP by 16.2%, and EP by 13% compared to GPF (Table 6). These changes are due to the changes in nutrient excretion observed between feeding treatments. IPF reduces N and P excretion by 30% and 10%, respectively, when compared to GPF.
Potential environmental impact of 1 t of pig body weight at the farm gate, according to 3-phase feeding (CGF) or individual precision feeding (IPF) during the growing–finishing phases
1Standard error.
The objective of the study was to compare the environmental impact of 2 feeding systems, IPF and CGF, in Quebec, Canada. Even though other LCA studied a Canadian scenario based on Ontario data (Mackenzie et al., 2015,2016a,2016b), none of them considered the use of IPF as a tool to mitigate the environmental impact of pig production. These advantages were previously validated in Brazil (Monteiro et al., 2016;Andretta et al., 2018) and France (Garcia-Launay et al., 2014). However, these studies do not reflect North-American scenarios in places such as Quebec. The main differences are linked to the ingredient origin, soil and storage emissions during winter, and crop yield, among others. These factors are explored in detail in this study.
It is also important to mention that this study is a comparison between 2 attributional LCAs, which describe the scenario for the 2 feeding systems. This practice is common among other authors (Leip et al., 2015;Pelletier, 2017;Pexas et al., 2020) when the study aims to compare 2 or more options from the same production perspective. If the study was done with a consequential LCA mindset, the aim would be to simulate how the change in feeding systems affects not only emissions related to pork production but also the overall environmental impact of the livestock sector (van Zanten et al., 2018), modifying the results. In this case, it would analyze how the change from a CGF system to an IPF system in growing–finishing pigs would modify the inputs used in pig production, mainly feed. Therefore, this modeling would show how an increase in corn and a decrease in soybean consumption by the pork industry would change the agricultural industries of the region due to a decrease or increase in the availability of the feed ingredients, and the environmental impact of the changes.
In Canada, feed can account for more than 65% of the GWP (Mackenzie et al., 2015). Assessing grain production is an important element in the evaluation of the environmental impact of pig production. Corn and wheat had greater GWP and AP impact than soybean due to the higher amount of N fertilization required to produce these crops. As soybean can fix N into the soil (Weber, 1966), only a small amount of N fertilizers are required for this crop, whereas organic or chemical fertilizers are required to produce cereals. The application of N fertilizers, either organic or chemical if ammonium-based, has associated N volatilization (Sommer et al., 2004;IPCC, 2006), emitting compounds such as NH3or N2O that contribute to GWP and AP.
Soybean presented the highest EP impact of all the studied crops, mainly due to its capacity to fix N into the soil, contributing to an increase in the amount of the nutrient present in the system. Soybean also had lower GWP and AP impacts than the other crops. These findings are consistent with another Canadian study (Mackenzie et al., 2015). However, they differ from European (Garcia-Launay et al., 2014;González-García et al., 2015;de Quelen et al., 2021) and Brazilian (Monteiro et al., 2016;Andretta et al., 2018) scenario results when looking at the GWP impact category. The differences between the scenarios are mainly explained by the local origin of the soybean. The soybean used in the Canadian scenarios had shorter transportation and a smaller land-use change impact than the other scenarios presented. The European scenarios report long soybean transportation and greater land-use change due to the soybean being produced mostly in South America. Transatlantic transportation greatly increases the GWP of soybean production (McAuliffe et al., 2017). In addition, the impacts of land-use changes are still accounted for in some regions of South America (Sy et al., 2015), increasing the GWP impacts (Alvarenga et al., 2012), despite the real impact associated with soybean cultivation being highly heterogeneous across large countries like Brazil (Garofalo et al., 2022). As deforestation in the Montérégie region of Quebec occurred longer than 50 years agoStatistics Canada (2024), this impact was not accounted for in the analysis for the present study.
Another point of variation among results is the agricultural practices modeled in each study, which have been in constant evolution throughout the last century (Parton et al., 2015). Lately, the focus is not only on maximizing yields but also on maintaining soil structure, minimizing soil losses, and managing natural resources in a more sustainable way. To achieve this, techniques such as adjusting the fertilization timing and ratio to better suit the crop’s needs (Abalos et al., 2016), reduced tillage, or crop rotations are applied (Kelly et al., 1996;Holland, 2004). Therefore, the agricultural techniques applied to crop production and the choice of feed ingredients should be the main areas of focus for the Canadian sector to reduce the environmental impact of animal production, especially for GWP.
When the environmental impact of the different feed formulas for growing–finishing pigs was analyzed, the results reflected the findings for the individual crops. The formulas with greater cereal content (B and III) had the greatest contribution in GWP and AP, whereas the formulas with greater soybean meal content (A and I) had the greatest contribution in EP.
Finding alternative protein sources to soybeans is not a pressing issue from an environmental perspective in the Quebec context. Moreover, finding alternative energy sources to corn and wheat is necessary due to the high CO2equivalent emissions resulting from their production. These observations vary between production areas (van Zanten et al., 2015;Mackenzie et al., 2016a). In Ontario, a neighboring province to Québec, the inclusion of wheat shorts showed promising results, reducing GWP by 10% while also reducing nonrenewable energy use and nonrenewable resource use without changes in AP or EP (Mackenzie et al., 2016a). The same study found no environmental benefits in GWP by including corn DDGS or meat meal in the growing–finishing diets, due to higher N excretion rates in both cases and also higher GWP values for DDGS than for corn. Integrating the results fromMackenzie et al. (2016a)with those found in this study shows that, to minimize the environmental impact of pig production in Quebec, it is important to find alternative feed ingredients that reduce corn inclusion while maintaining feeding practices that result in a low N excretion such as low-protein diets and IPF.
Several studies (Strid Eriksson et al., 2005;Garcia-Launay et al., 2014;Monteiro et al., 2016) have reported the potential environmental benefits of reducing crude protein content in pigs’ feeds. Reducing the use of soybean products by adding free-grade AA in feed formulas is a way to achieve this goal (Strid Eriksson et al., 2005;Cherubini et al., 2015). Another effective technique is to use IPF to reduce protein intake (Andretta et al., 2014,2016;Remus et al., 2019). This is made possible by adjusting the diet to each animal’s nutritional requirements every day (Pomar et al., 2009). This practice improves nutrient utilization efficiency by reducing nutrient excesses and consequently decreasing nutrient excretion and is an effective alternative for reducing the environmental impact linked to crude protein content in pigs’ diets (Monteiro et al., 2016;Andretta et al., 2018).
Multi-objective or eco-friendly formulation has also been suggested as a solution to reduce the environmental impact without compromising animal growth performance (de Quelen et al., 2021;Méda et al., 2021). In this case, the feeds are formulated to optimize both feed costs and environmental impacts. The use of this formulation method showed a reduction of 13% in GWP, < 10% in AP, and 13% in EP in a 2-phase production system (Méda et al., 2021). In their study,de Quelen et al. (2021)found reductions of 10% in GWP and around 6% in AP and EP per kg of BW when comparing multi-objective formulation methods to the conventional least-cost formulated diet. The same study also compared locally grown ingredients, which minimize transport, and showed a reduction of 12% in GWP when compared to the conventional least-cost-formulated methods. However, this formulation method did not reduce AP or EP. In this aspect, it is important to note that the benefits of using multi-objective or eco-friendly formulation methods can be added on top of the benefits of formulating low-protein diets or using IPF techniques.
When examining the overall picture and considering the effects of different feeding techniques on animal performance, the environmental impact of the CGF treatment aligns with the impacts found in Ontario (Mackenzie et al., 2015) for GWP and AP, with a variation of less than 5% when expressed in the same functional unit (kg of carcass). However, in terms of EP, the results of this study are higher than those presented byMackenzie et al. (2015)because this study includes N excretion and N-related emissions from all production stages, including the maternity and nursery units.
As previously mentioned, feed production is the most important production process for GWP, representing up to 58% of the overall GWP impact. This in close agreement with the 65% importance of feed in GWP impact found byMackenzie et al. (2015). The relatively small differences between the literatureMackenzie et al. (2015)and the results of the present study are due to the crop simulation method. In the present study, the inputs to the crop system were modeled from a farm that uses good agricultural practices such as using organic fertilizer and integrated agricultural techniques to control weeds. These resulted in lower fertilizer and agricultural practice impacts than some of the datasets for Canada (Ecoinvent, 2013), while still being representative of the agricultural practices in the region.
In the case of AP, the production stage with the highest contribution to this impact category is raising the animals, which represents 70% and 60% for CGF and IPF, respectively; these values include the growing–finishing, farrowing, and nursery phases. Out of the 3 animal production stages, growing–finishing pig production and the emissions related to manure application in the field are the main sources of AP impact, which is in agreement with other studies (Garcia-Launay et al., 2014;Reckmann et al., 2016). These results reaffirm the need to focus on the environmental impact of growing–finishing pigs to improve the sector’s emissions.
When EP is analyzed, the results of the present GPF treatment agree with the literature, which shows the importance of manure application emissions to this impact category. Nevertheless, the results for IPF contrast with GPF by reducing N excretion by 30%. IPF also reduces ammonia and other N-related emissions, which are the main contributors to the EP impact category. Reducing the overall EP impact by reducing the impact of the main contributors, increases the relative importance of feed. This trend can also be seen with other N-reduction techniques such as the formulation of low-protein diets and the addition of crystalline AA to feed formulas (Garcia-Launay et al., 2014;Berton et al., 2018;Cappelaere et al., 2022). In fact, IPF as studied in this project is already applying the use of low-protein diets with the inclusion of crystalline AA, showing an additive capacity to its benefits.
The reduction observed when comparing IPF to GPF in all 3 studied environmental categories (7%, 16%, and 13% for GWP, AP, and EP, respectively) is due to the more efficient use of the nutrients from catering to the variability of protein requirements between animals and also over time. The IPF-feed animals receive a smaller nutrient concentration but have the same growth performance as CGF-feed pigs (Andretta et al., 2014), reducing nutrient excretion and therefore the emissions related to those nutrients.
Finally, one of the factors that affected the results is the data used for the simulation. This study was carried out using mostly observed data, especially when describing animal growth performance, whereas (Monteiro et al., 2016,2017) used modeled data to describe growth performance. With the observed data used in this study (Andretta et al., 2014,2016), there were no changes in growth performance between feeding treatments, while the studies that modeled data assumed a better growth performance for the precision-feed pigs. These results explain some of the differences between studies; different performances between CGF and IPF treatments increased the environmental benefits of IPF when compared to CGF.
This study estimated the environmental impact of the use of IPF to provide individually daily-tailored feeds for growing–finishing pigs with the conventional practice in the industry of 3-phase feeding programs and showed that IPF for growing–finishing pigs can be a tool to reduce the environmental impact of pig production. The use of IPF reduced GWP, AP, and EP by 7%, 16%, and 13%, respectively, when compared to CGF. Additionally, this study’s findings highlight the need for more research into alternative feed ingredients, agricultural practices, and feeding practices to keep reducing the environmental impact of pig production and moving towards a more sustainable production system.
Thanks to those who confidentially shared the information needed for this study and to Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada and the Canadian Swine Cluster 3, Advancing the Canadian Swine Sector Through Environmental Footprint Analyses (project #17114) for the financial support.
amino acid
acidification potential
conventional group 3-phase feeding
eutrophication potential
global warming potential
individual precision feeding
life-cycle assessment
Berta Llorens, 
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Sherbrooke Research and Development Centre, Sherbrooke, QC J1M 1Z3, Canada.
Candido Pomar, 
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Sherbrooke Research and Development Centre, Sherbrooke, QC J1M 1Z3, Canada.
Bernard Goyette, 
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Sherbrooke Research and Development Centre, Sherbrooke, QC J1M 1Z3, Canada.
Rajinikanth Rajagopal, 
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Sherbrooke Research and Development Centre, Sherbrooke, QC J1M 1Z3, Canada.
Ines Andretta, 
Departamento de Zootecnia, Faculdade de Agronomia, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, 91540-000, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
Maria Angeles Latorre, 
Departamento de Producción Animal y Ciencia de los Alimentos, Facultad de Veterinaria, Universidad de Zaragoza, 50013 Zaragoza, Spain.
Aline Remus, 
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Sherbrooke Research and Development Centre, Sherbrooke, QC J1M 1Z3, Canada.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
Articles from Journal of Animal Science are provided here courtesy ofOxford University Press
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894