An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email:semoffitt@ucdavis.edu.
Edited by David Jablonski, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, and approved March 2, 2015 (received for review September 4, 2014)
Author contributions: S.E.M. and T.M.H. designed research; S.E.M. and T.M.H. performed research; S.E.M., T.M.H., P.D.R., and J.P.K. analyzed data; and S.E.M., T.M.H., P.D.R., and J.P.K. wrote the paper.
Issue date 2015 Apr 14.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
This investigation presents the first record to our knowledge of the disturbance and recovery of seafloor ecosystem biodiversity in response to abrupt climate change. Ocean sediments have been extensively studied using geochemical and microfaunal (e.g., Foraminifera) analyses; however, these traditional approaches produce limited interpretations of ecological and community-scale responses. We demonstrate here that ocean sediments harbor metazoan fossil material that can be used to reconstruct the response of seafloor biodiversity to global-scale climate events. We show that the last deglaciation, the most recent episode of climate warming, was accompanied by abrupt reorganizations of continental margin seafloor ecosystems through expansions and contractions of the subsurface low-oxygen zones. This archive reveals that global climate change disturbs seafloor ecosystems on continental margins and commits them to millennia of ecological recovery.
Keywords:seafloor ecosystems, abrupt climate change, deglaciation, oxygen minimum zone, metazoans
Anthropogenic climate change is predicted to decrease oceanic oxygen (O2) concentrations, with potentially significant effects on marine ecosystems. Geologically recent episodes of abrupt climatic warming provide opportunities to assess the effects of changing oxygenation on marine communities. Thus far, this knowledge has been largely restricted to investigations using Foraminifera, with little being known about ecosystem-scale responses to abrupt, climate-forced deoxygenation. We here present high-resolution records based on the first comprehensive quantitative analysis, to our knowledge, of changes in marine metazoans (Mollusca, Echinodermata, Arthropoda, and Annelida; >5,400 fossils and trace fossils) in response to the global warming associated with the last glacial to interglacial episode. The molluscan archive is dominated by extremophile taxa, including those containing endosymbiotic sulfur-oxidizing bacteria (Lucinoma aequizonatum) and those that graze on filamentous sulfur-oxidizing benthic bacterial mats (Alia permodesta). This record, from 16,100 to 3,400 y ago, demonstrates that seafloor invertebrate communities are subject to major turnover in response to relatively minor inferred changes in oxygenation (>1.5 to <0.5 mL⋅L−1[O2]) associated with abrupt (<100 y) warming of the eastern Pacific. The biotic turnover and recovery events within the record expand known rates of marine biological recovery by an order of magnitude, from <100 to >1,000 y, and illustrate the crucial role of climate and oceanographic change in driving long-term successional changes in ocean ecosystems.
Oceanic deoxygenation is a predictable, fundamental, and long-lasting property of anthropogenic climate change (1). The global ocean inventory of oxygen is predicted to decline between 1% and 7% by the year 2100, and modeling predictions reveal extensive oceanic deoxygenation, on thousand-year timescales, under “business-as-usual” carbon emission scenarios (2). Modern oceanographic time series already document rapid loss of [O2] in interior ocean waters over the last 4 decades (3,4), although this trend is complicated in regions where [O2] demand is decreased through the slackening of trade winds (5). As oxygen levels in the ocean decrease and the already extensive oxygen minimum zones (OMZs) expand, the volumetric habitat for aerobic respiration is reduced, presumably resulting in a fundamental reorganization of marine communities. Past events of climate warming and OMZ expansion, including the recent deglaciation from 18 to 11 ka, provide a case study for understanding the effects on marine ecosystems of abrupt temperature and oxygenation changes.
Paleoceanographic records clearly demonstrate that OMZ strength changed in response to geologically recent episodes of abrupt climate change, including glacial terminations (6,7) as well as those associated with shorter-term millennial-scale climatic oscillations (8). In general, warm climate episodes are associated with geographically and vertically expanded OMZs, and cold episodes are associated with contracted OMZs. Climate records from Santa Barbara Basin (SBB), a relatively shallow (600 m) anoxic basin in the eastern boundary current of the northeast Pacific Ocean, exhibit close synchrony to the Greenland Ice Sheet Project 2 (GISP2) Greenland ice core climate records (8,9). Vertical expansion and intensification of the California Current OMZ are recorded during the last deglacial episode, as well as an episode of expanded subsurface oxygenation (OMZ contraction) during the temporary cooling of the Younger Dryas episode (6,8,9).
Paleoecological reconstructions from ocean sedimentary sequences have primarily relied on records of benthic Foraminifera (6,10,11) and less so on ostracods (12). Previous studies have not documented changes in a broad spectrum of marine biodiversity, in contrast to those long carried out on the terrestrial realms (e.g., refs.13and14). We present a record of >5,350 microfossils and macrofossils and 51 trace fossils from SBB sediment core MV0811-15JC (418 m water depth; sedimentation rates of 42.2–100.0 cm⋅ky−1; 16.1–3.4 ka), which reveals community-scale responses of continental margin ecosystems to OMZ oscillations. This newly recognized archive exhibits dramatic upper-ocean reorganization of benthic faunal communities in response to abrupt changes in ocean circulation and climate.
The diversity of continental margin benthic faunas is, in part, controlled by the distribution and consumption of oxygen (15). Hypoxia thresholds vary greatly across marine benthic organisms (16), resulting in successional patterns along OMZ gradients. Vertical zonation patterns in diversity, trophic structures, and physiological strategies are driven by the transition from well-oxygenated shallower waters to the hypoxic center of the OMZ (0.5–0.1 mL⋅L−1). Hypoxic zones are marked by low density, low diversity, and high community dominance in both invertebrate and foraminiferan communities (15,17).
Foraminifera are well adapted to the extreme chemical environments found on certain continental margins and exhibit associations with specific oxygenation regimes (18). High foraminiferal diversity is generally associated with oxygenated sediments (15,17). Peak densities of benthic Foraminifera (>1,000 individuals/cm3), however, occur when hypoxic oxygen concentrations range between 0.5 and 0.1 mL⋅L−1, in response to rich detrital food resources and a scarcity of invertebrate competitors and predators (19). Overall, changes in foraminiferal density, diversity, and relative abundances of hypoxic marker species are sensitive recorders of changes in OMZ strength (20).
Invertebrate communities abruptly decline as dissolved oxygen concentrations fall below a hypoxic threshold (0.5–0.4 mL⋅L−1) (15). Echinoderms (Spatangoida, Ophiuroidea), arthropods (Ostracoda), and molluscs (Bivalvia, Gastropoda, Scaphopoda) are members of continental margin benthic communities and, in addition to benthic foraminifera, contribute to the fossil assemblages preserved in MV0811-15JC. Ostracod populations are found in seafloor environments with >0.4 mL⋅L−1O2(21). Molluscs exhibit a wide range of sensitivity to hypoxia, with gastropods associated with a lower lethal oxygen threshold compared with bivalves (17). Gastropods thrive and create high-density bands in the hypoxic center of modern OMZs (15,22). Respiration thresholds are unknown for scaphopods; they are, however, motile predators of Foraminifera and detritivores, and their respiration requirements may be analogous to other molluscan predators. Echinoderms exhibit variable hypoxia thresholds: Spatangoid urchins (heart urchins) are ubiquitous community members of soft sediment continental margins across OMZ gradients (23), whereas ophiuroids (brittle stars) live above and below the hypoxic center of the OMZ (between 1.4 and 4.3 mL⋅L−1O2) (24) to form distinct, high-density depth zones (22). Spatangoid urchins exhibit a threshold of hypoxia sensitivity when bottom water oxygenation conditions are <0.1 mL⋅L−1O2(25). In such extreme hypoxia, along with the cessation of bioturbation (8,26), and with sufficiently high surface carbon export (27), the preservation of sedimentary laminations can occur. Not all laminations originally formed may be preserved in paleoceanographic records, as laminations can be subject to removal or deterioration when followed by postdepositional intervals of oxygenation, invertebrate settlement, and bioturbation.
Core MV0811-15JC is a short (922 cm) deglacial archive with an independent age model constructed using radiocarbon dates and oxygen isotopic tie-points to ODP Site 893A (9,20). Core MV0811-15JC exhibits a “two-step” record of planktonic foraminiferal oxygen isotopic shifts during the last deglaciation with a relatively indistinct, highly variable cooling episode representing the Younger Dryas; similar characteristics to this episode are exhibited at nearby ODP 893A (9,28) (Fig. 1andFig. S1). Sedimentation rates for core MV0811-15JC range from 100.0 cm⋅ky−1during the deglaciation to 42.2 cm⋅ky−1during the Holocene (Fig. S1). Core MV0811-15JC is bioturbated and exhibits lower sedimentation rates than in the very high resolution (140 cm⋅ky−1) and intermittently laminated ODP Site 893A recovered from near the center of SBB. At Termination 1A (14.7 ka), core MV0811-15C was at ∼300 m water depth, with sea level ∼110 m below that of the present day (29). At this shallow water depth, the foraminiferal biotic archive of core MV0811-15JC recorded vertical changes in the upper boundary of the regional California Current OMZ (20).

Core MV0811-15JC’s (SBB; 418 m water depth; 9.2 m core length; 34.37°N, 120.13°W) oxygen isotopic, foraminiferal, and metazoan deglacial record of the latest Quaternary. Timescale (ka) is in thousands of years before present, and major climatic events include the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM), the Bølling and Allerød (B/A), the Younger Dryas (YD), and the Holocene. (A) GISP2 ice core δ18O values (46). (B) Planktonic ForaminiferaGlobigerina bulloidesδ18O values for core MV0811-15JC, which reflects both deglacial temperature changes in Eastern Pacific surface waters and changes in global ice volume. (C) Benthic foraminiferal density (individuals/cm3). (D) Relative frequency (%) of benthic Foraminifera with faunal oxygen-tolerance categories including oxic–mildly hypoxic (>1.5 mL⋅L−1O2;N. labradorica, Quinqueloculinaspp.,Pyrgospp.), intermediate hypoxia (1.5–0.5 mL⋅L−1O2;Epistominellaspp., Bolivinaspp.,Uvigerinaspp.), and severe hypoxia (<0.5 mL⋅L−1O2;N. stella, B. tumida)(19). (E) Log mollusc density (individuals/cm3). (F) Ophiuroids (brittle star) presence (presence = 1, absence = 0, 5-cm moving average). (G) Ostracod valve density (circles, valves/cm3) and 5-cm moving average. Data from ref.20.
Core MV0811-15JC is a nonlaminated sediment sequence, and the presence of bioturbating spatangoid urchin test and spine material is continuous throughout the core (Table S1). Estimates for bioturbation depth disturbance in deep-sea sediments are commonly assumed to be ∼10 cm, although shallower (2–5 cm) (30,31) and deeper (20 cm) depths are reported (32). Very high sediment volumes are displaced as a result of spatangoid movement (33), and these physical changes produce complex biogeochemical interactions in sediments associated with changes in primary productivity and nutrient flux (34). This sedimentary, microfossil, and spatangoid evidence indicates this is a bioturbated deglacial archive, which is a critical factor in interpreting rates of change in this record. For the purposes of this investigation, interpreting the “abrupt” nature of community change is especially relevant in the context of sediment bioturbation, which can vertically smear an event horizon across 5–20 cm of sediment. Transitions in metazoan community diversity and abundance are prominent features of this record; biological transitions recorded across <20 cm of preserved sediment may therefore have taken place even more abruptly than suggested by rates of sediment accumulation, over very short intervals of time, rather than being paced on decadal or centennial timescales.
Seafloor invertebrate communities underwent major oscillations during the last ∼16,000 y along the continental margin of the Eastern Pacific (Figs. 1and2andFigs. S2andS3). The high degree of sensitivity of seafloor ecosystem structure to climate change is revealed by changes in benthic communities both within and between each climatic interval of the last deglacial (Fig. 1). We document changes in the abundance of seafloor metazoans, including ostracods, ophiuriods, and molluscs (Fig. 1), as well as metrics of community diversity (Shannon’s Index of diversity,H′) and functional guilds in both Mollusca and Foraminifera (Fig. 2). Ostracod valves were observed in 32.1% of sediment intervals, and ophiuroid vertebral ossicles were observed in 20% of sediment intervals (Table S1).

Foraminiferal oxygenation-tolerance category frequency, mollusc trophic guild frequency, mollusc class density, and mollusc diversity. (A) Relative frequency changes in benthic Foraminifera with faunal oxygen-tolerance categories (19) including oxic–mildly hypoxic (>1.5 mL⋅L−1O2;N. labradorica, Quinqueloculinaspp.,Pyrgospp.), intermediate hypoxia (1.5–0.5 mL⋅L−1O2;Epistominellaspp., Bolivinaspp.,Uvigerinaspp.), and severe hypoxia (<0.5 mL⋅L−1O2;N. stella, B. tumida). (B) Relative frequency changes (5-cm moving average) in mollusc trophic guilds (including chemosynthetically associated, deposit, suspension, deposit/suspension, carnivore/detritivore, carnivore/deposit, detritivore, and unknown (Table S2). (C) Log bivalve density (valves/cm3). (D) Gastropod density (shells/cm3). (E) Scaphopod density (tusks/cm3). (F) Shannon’s Index of mollusc diversity (H′, 5-cm moving average).
The molluscan record is dominated by chemosynthetically associated assemblages, including elements that harbor endosymbiotic sulfur-oxidizing bacteria within their tissues (Lucinoma aequizonatum, unidentified Lucinidae, Manzanellidae) and those that graze on filamentous sulfur-oxidizing benthic bacterial mats (Alia permodesta;Fig. 2andTable S1). These forms are metazoan extremophiles and are characteristic of the most sulfide-rich, methane-rich, and oxygen-poor environments of modern continental margins (35–37). Many of these extremophiles are opportunistic, weedy species and appear in high-density (∼900 individuals/m2) zonations on modern continental margins (22,38–40). Deposit feeding, suspension feeding, and detritivorous and carnivorous trophic guilds are also present within the molluscan assemblage. The presence of additional trophic guilds, particularly the motile guilds associated with carnivory and detritivory, indicate seafloor ecosystems marked by both the absence of free sulfide and elevated (O2> 0.5 mL⋅L−1) oxygen concentrations (41).
During the glacial episode, before Termination 1A, metazoan communities were diverse and dense; the bioturbated seafloor was colonized by ostracods, ophiuroids, molluscs, and oxic–mildly hypoxic foraminiferal assemblages (>1.5 mL⋅L−1O2;Figs. 1and2). The molluscan community was dominated by taxa associated with or harboring chemosynthetic bacteria (L. aequizonatum, unidentified Lucinidae, Manzanellidae,A. permodesta). Carnivorous and detritivorous mollusc trophic guilds were also present as secondary elements. The most pronounced high molluscan density event at 15.3 ka was found to contain 40 individual shells of the bivalveL. aequizonatumin 1-cm-thick intervals in addition to scaphopodsGadila aberransandCadulus tolmiei, and bivalves from Cardiidae (Trachycardiinae andClinocardium nuttalli).
Termination 1A (14.7 ka) is marked by dramatic and rapid changes in metazoan and foraminiferal assemblages, including an abrupt decline in the density and diversity of metazoan faunas. These major changes in the ecosystem, involving density and presence/absence shifts in molluscan classes, ostracods, and ophiuroids, are limited to just 12 cm of sediment (Fig. S4). Higher trophic level processes (involving worms, crustaceans, and predatory gastropods;Fig. S3) also exhibit high sensitivity to the environmental changes associated with climate transitions. Within 130 y (12 cm of sediment), the invertebrate community collapsed and was replaced by low-density communities primarily composed of foraminifera associated with intermediate (1.5–0.5 mL⋅L−1O2) and severe (<0.5 mL⋅L−1O2) hypoxia.
There was not a total loss of the metazoans at Termination 1A, as rare individuals of molluscs, ophiuroids, and ostracods persisted into the Bølling warm episode. Nevertheless, the change at Termination IA represents an ecosystem-scale shift from the dense metazoan communities of the last glacial episode to an assemblage dominated by foraminiferal extremophiles (Nonionella stella,Bolivina tumida) during the Bølling (Fig. 2). This comprehensive loss of invertebrate biodiversity at the onset of the warm Bølling episode (14.7 ka) is a product of regional hydrographic change associated with the vertical expansion of the OMZ and compression of the oxygenated upper ocean. The faunal changes of the Bølling are particularly revealing of how extreme this hydrographic interval was: It was so intense, even metazoan extremophiles did not settle or colonize the continental margin. The major faunal change at the onset of the Bølling warming is confined to <20 cm sediment. Therefore, because of the presence of bioturbation, our assessment of decadal–centennial timescales for this biotic turnover is likely conservative; instead, it could have been nearly instantaneous.
Chemosynthetically associated mollusc (particularly gastropod) densities increased during the Allerød, beginning at 13.5 ka (Fig. 2). The biotic changes indicate seafloor ecosystem recovery after the major disturbance of the Bølling began during the Allerød and was initiated by the colonization of the seafloor by filamentous sulfur-oxidizing benthic bacterial mats and bacterial mat grazers (A. permodesta).During the late Allerød-Younger Dryas from 13.5 to 12.5 ka, the metazoan biotic community gradually recovered taxonomic diversity and density (Fig. S4). A full recovery of seafloor biodiversity to pre-Termination 1A levels occurred from 12.5 to 11.7 ka, wherein deposit feeding, suspension feeding, and carnivorous molluscan trophic guilds became dominant (Fig. 2); ostracods recovered to high densities (Fig. 1); and ophiuroid vertebral ossicles were continuously present (Fig. 1). Trace fossils on Younger Dryas molluscs indicate predation pressure from annelids, crustaceans, and predatory gastropods (Fig. S3). The Younger Dryas climatic interval, beginning at 12.9 ka, is clearly marked by major compositional changes in the benthic foraminiferal community, the abrupt colonization ofUvigerinaspp., and oxic–mildly hypoxic taxa (Quinqueloculinaspp.,Nonionella labradorica).
The slow, step-like recovery of seafloor ecosystems from the late Allerød into the Younger Dryas is recorded through 107 cm of sediment representing ∼1,070 y of depositional history (Fig. S4). We attribute this relatively slow recovery in colonization to biotic changeovers that occur during ecosystem transitions from severely hypoxic, sulfide-rich, chemosynthetic trophic webs to those webs dominated by carnivorous and detritivorous functional guilds. The gradual nature of this recovery is not considered to be an artifact of sediment bioturbation, because bioturbation is limited to <20 cm of sediment. The recovery of seafloor diversity in response to the oxygenation reversal in the Younger Dryas is an order of magnitude longer than known rates of recovery for seafloor biodiversity after disturbance (42). This evidence expands previous expectations for rates of biological recovery by an order of magnitude, from <100 y to >1,000 y, and reveals long-term consequences of climate-driven successional changes in ocean ecosystems.
Termination 1B (∼11.7 ka) is marked by another abrupt and acute ecological disturbance wherein all metazoans disappeared from the sediment record within 18 cm of sediment, equivalent to ∼170 y (Figs. 1and2andFig. S4). Termination 1B is an extremely abrupt event in the biotic record of core MV0811-15JC; the disappearance of metazoan taxa occurred in <20 cm, and therefore the event may have been relatively instantaneous but subsequently smeared as a result of bioturbation. Unlike Termination 1A, metazoans did not recover from the disturbance of Termination 1B and remained absent in the record for >4,000 y. Foraminiferal communities surged at Termination 1B to high densities and dominance byBolivinaspp. Metazoan absence, extremely high foraminiferal densities, and dominance ofBolivinaspp. are indicative of intermediate hypoxia at the ocean floor (1.5–0.5 mL⋅L−1O2) throughout the Holocene (20).
A novel mid-Holocene seafloor community developed between 7.5 and 5.0 ka that is not analogous to earlier communities and is indicative of a sulfide-rich chemosynthetic ecosystem. Invertebrate diversity and abundance are lower in this ephemeral ecosystem: Gastropods [specifically the sulfidic and hypoxic bacterial grazerA. permodesta(38)] are the only molluscan group to appear (Fig. 2), ophiuroid fossils are absent, ostracod occurrences are rare (Fig. 1), and there is a high frequency of annelid predation (Fig. S3). Evidence for elevated annelid predation pressure (Fig. S3) is consistent with an environment similar to the core of the modern OMZ (15,17). Simultaneously, foraminifera are extremely abundant and dominated by OMZ-associated fauna (20). Interestingly, the mid-Holocene community is most similar to the successional colonization and recovery of the late Allerød. We interpret the mid-Holocene metazoan and foraminiferan assemblage to be consistent with a hypoxic, sulfidic seafloor environment. Suborbital, millennial environmental oscillations, for example, those reflected by sea surface temperature and solar variability records resolved from the eastern Subtropical Pacific (43), could create mid-Holocene variability in intermediate water oxygenation. Such climate and oceanographic variability may have altered mid-Holocene OMZ structure and changed vertical ecosystem zonation on the continental margin. This anomalous community abruptly disappeared at 5 ka, and all younger sediments lack metazoans.
Shallow seafloor ecosystems (∼300 m water depth) in the temperate northeast Pacific Ocean were dramatically altered during the climatic and oceanographic changes of glacial Termination 1A (duration 130 y) and 1B (duration 170 y) (Figs. 1and2andFig. S4). During this time, ocean and climate changes led to abrupt reorganization of the vertical zonation of ecosystems on the continental margin through the expansion of the OMZ (20,44,45). Long-term (>1,000 y) ecosystem recovery is demonstrated in the Younger Dryas oxygenation reversal, wherein differences in trophic structures and physiological adaptations, from chemosynthetic extremophiles to motile carnivores and deposit feeders, determine the successional process and its timing. The dominance of chemosynthetically associated mollusc assemblages is striking; even deglacial intervals considered to be more oxygenated can still contain extremophile metazoan communities, and thus, by comparison, the depauperate intervals (Bølling and Holocene) were truly extreme, inhospitable biochemical regimes. The biodiversity record presented here reveals that benthic ecosystems can be rapidly influenced and disturbed by abrupt global climate change and related reorganization of ocean circulation.
Past changes in OMZ intensity (45) and the resulting effects on seafloor benthic biodiversity provide an interpretive precedent to understand the capacity for substantial and long-term ecosystem disturbance to accompany future oceanic oxygen loss (1,2). Previous deoxygenation events dwarf modern scales of ecological disturbance (42) and illustrate the nonanalog nature of environmental disturbance in the recent geologic past. Our results suggest that deoxygenation resulting from future anthropogenic climate change may significantly restructure the distribution of marine life on continental margins and that this disturbance can commit upper ocean ecosystems to millennia of ecological recovery.
MV0811-15JC was collected aboard theR/V Melvillein 2008 and is the shallowest deglacial sediment record (418 m water depth; 3.4–16.1 ka) reconstructed from both SBB and the broader northeastern Pacific Ocean continental margin. At the time of collection, the core was sampled at 10-cm intervals (92 samples, 2.5 cm3) for benthic foraminifera, invertebrate assemblages, and isotopic analyses. The core was resampled for invertebrate analysis in 2010 at 1-cm intervals (922 samples, 5 cm3). MV0811-15JC’s planktonic and benthic δ18O records and benthic foraminiferal communities are previously published (19), and the age model is based on two radiocarbon dates and three planktonic tie-points to ODP Site 893A (9), with sedimentation rates ranging from 42.2 to 100.0 cm⋅ky−1. Sediment was processed via disaggregation in DI water, washing (150-μm sieve), and oven drying (50 °C). Benthic invertebrates included molluscs, echinoderms, and ostracods (Table S1). Molluscs were identified to the lowest taxonomic resolutions possible with the fossil evidence (Table S2). Ostracod diversity was not determined. Density (Mollusca, Ostrocoda; individuals/cm3) and presence/absence (Echinodermata) were calculated. Mollusc diversity was assessed using a running 5-cm value of Shannon’s Index of Diversity (H′). Trophic guild frequency (%) of the mollusc community was calculated, and the assemblage was partitioned into the following categories: chemosynthetically associated, deposit, suspension, deposit/suspension, carnivore/detritivore, carnivore/deposit, and detritivore (Table S2). Trace fossils of mollusc predation were identified to trophic guild (gastropod, crustacean, or annelid), and the frequency of predation events was calculated at a 10-cm resolution (Fig. S3). Benthic foraminiferal density (individuals/cm3), Shannon’s Index of Diversity (H′), and relative frequency (%) of oxygen-sensitive taxa groups (19) were used to reconstruct seafloor oxygenation changes.
We thank H. Spero, R. Mooi, T. Cronin, K. Thompson, D. Winter, J. Hosfelt, C. Replogle, and L. Jacobs for sample preparation, analytical assistance, discussions, and comments that improved the manuscript. We also thank two anonymous reviewers for their insightful critique. Support was provided by the National Science Foundation (OCE-0825322 to T.M.H. and J.P.K.; and OCE 1255194 to T.M.H.); the UC Multicampus Research Programs and Initiatives (T.M.H.); University of California, Davis, Responding to Rapid Environmental Change Integrative Graduate Education and Traineeship (S.E.M.); Mia Tegner Historical Ecology Grant (to S.E.M.); the Environmental Protection Agency Science to Achieve Results Fellowship (to S.E.M.); and Switzer Environmental Fellowship (to S.E.M.). This is a contribution of the Bodega Marine Laboratory.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
This article contains supporting information online atwww.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1417130112/-/DCSupplemental.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
Articles from Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America are provided here courtesy ofNational Academy of Sciences
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894