An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
e-mail:nobradovich@gmail.com
Electronic supplementary material is available online athttps://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.c.4647755.
Received 2019 Jan 30; Accepted 2019 Aug 21; Issue date 2019 Sep.
Published by the Royal Society. All rights reserved.
Human behaviours alter—and are altered by—climate. Might the impacts of warming on human behaviours amplify anthropogenic contributions to climate change? Here, we show that warmer temperatures substantially increase transportation use in the USA. To do so, we combine meteorological data with data on vehicle miles travelled (VMT) and public transit trips (PTT) between 2002 and 2018. Moving from freezing temperatures up to 30°C increases VMT by over 10% and amplifies use of public transit by nearly 15%. Temperatures beyond 30°C exert little influence on either outcome. We then examine climate model projections to highlight the possible transportation impacts of future climatic changes. We project that warming over the coming century may add over one trillion cumulative VMT and six billion PTT in the USA alone, presenting the risk of a novel feedback loop in the human–environmental system.
Keywords:climate change, human mobility, Earth system feedbacks
Human activities are changing the global climate [1] at historically rapid rates [2]. And these climatic changes, in turn, are shaping the human system [3]. From psychological health [4] and expectations [5] to physiological well-being [6,7], from exercise [8] to mood [9], from daily productivity [10] to economy-wide growth [11] and from public safety [12,13] to civil discord [14,15], warming stands to substantially alter human outcomes. Though potential feedback loops exist [16–19], scholars predominantly investigate these two topics—human contributions to climate change and the social impacts of a changing climate—in isolation [20]. How the impacts of climate change on human systems might, in turn, alter the future trajectories of anthropogenic climate change remains largely unexplored.
By contrast, scientists have uncovered potential self-reinforcing loops between the climate system and biophysical Earth systems [21], including those provided by melting permafrost, changes in surface albedo, persistent loss of forest cover and alterations in precipitation regimes, among numerous other feedbacks [22–25]. Though these factors add substantial complexity when incorporated into climate models, they stand to markedly improve projections of future climatic outcomes [26]. Given that humans are the primary contributors to present climatic changes [1], omission of potential temperature–human behaviour feedback from these models might bias projections of future climate even more than omission of biophysical feedback [19,27,28].
Of potential temperature–behaviour feedback loops, human transportation behaviours are of particular import due to the large contribution of transportation to global greenhouse gas emissions [29–31]. If climatic factors alter transportation usage, changes in climate may produce positive or negative feedback via the transportation sector. Recent studies provide rationale to hypothesize that climate change could alter transportation demand. For example, individuals increase their recreational physical activity in warmer temperatures [8,32], and existing evidence suggests that weather might shape transportation behaviours [33,34]. If climatic changes were to translate into an increased demand for travel, perhaps to see friends or to participate in recreational activities, warmer temperatures might increase demand for transport [35,36]. However, the literature on the impacts of climate change and transportation has focused predominantly on the potential for extreme climatic impacts to periodically disrupt transportation systems [37,38] without analysis of possible feedback loops.
These facts combine to suggest that warming has the potential to induce changes in transportation behaviours that, in turn, alter the accumulation of greenhouse gases in Earth’s atmosphere, producing a vicious circle in the Earth system. To examine this hypothesis, we measure the effect of temperature on US transportation patterns across 43 trillion vehicle miles travelled (VMT) and 158 billion individual trips on public transit (PTT) between 2002 and 2018 (figure 1). Using these data and methods drawn from climate econometrics [39], we examine four primary questions.

Vehicle miles travelled (VMT) and public transit trips (PTT). This figure depicts the US states covered by our sources of VMT and passenger PTT as well as the national monthly variation in each series. Panel (a) plots the cross-sectional state variation of the over 40 trillion VMT in our data. Panel (b) plots the state variation of the over 150 billion PTT in our data. For PTT, we map metropolitan areas into the states where the centroid of the metropolitan boundary area falls. The US road network is depicted in (a,b). Panel (c) displays the seasonality of VMT and illustrates a slight increase in VMT between 2003 and 2018. Panel (d) depicts that PTT display less seasonality in their temporal variation than do VMT. (Online version in colour.)
First, does ambient temperature alter the use of vehicular transportation, the largest emitter in the transport sector [40]? Second, does temperature also affect use of public transit? Third, do the effects of temperature on transportation vary by demographic or climatic context? Finally, how might anthropogenic climate change alter US transportation usage in the future?
To investigate the impact of temperature on vehicular transportation, we employ monthly, state-level data on the log of VMT from the US Federal Highway Administration and combine these data with gridded monthly maximum temperature data from the PRISM climate group (see §2.1). Our data contain over 40 trillion VMT. We identify the causal effect of average maximum monthly temperatures using techniques from climate econometrics [39]. Our approach deconvolves the maximum temperature and VMT series into anomalies from normal for each state, month and year. We graphically depict this process for our VMT data infigure 2e,f. Once deconvolved, the remaining variation in temperature is as good as randomly assigned to the remaining variation in VMT; to bias our estimation, a confounding series would need to systematically covary with both temperature anomalies and VMT anomalies but not itself be caused by temperature anomalies [3,39]. We then employ these deconvolved series to examine the marginal effect of an anomalous one degree increase in temperature on anomalous changes in VMT, across each portion of the underlying temperature distribution. We depict the intuition behind our identification infigure 2c. To smoothly combine the analyses infigure 2c, we employ a cubic spline approach (see §2.2). Of note, we omit non-climatic control variables, such as socioeconomic covariates, from our estimation procedures because of their potential to generate bias in our parameters of interest—a phenomenon known as a ‘bad controls’ or a ‘post-treatment controls’ [14,39,41].

Warmer temperatures increase VMT and PTT. Panel (a) displays the marginal effects estimated from our splined regression model from equation (2.1) of monthly maximum temperatures on the log of VMT. Warmer temperatures, up to approximately 30°C, amplify VMT. Panel (b) depicts the estimated splined regression for the relationship between monthly maximum temperatures and the log of PTT. Warmer temperatures, again up to approximately 30°C, amplify PTT. Error regions in panels (a,b) consist of 1000 splined regressions, cluster bootstrapped on state or city from each sample, respectively. Panels (c,d) depict the deconvolved identifying variation in temperature and our deconvolved outcome measures that underlie the estimated results in panels (a,b). We separate the deconvolved data into five-degree windows by level of normal state-month (panel (c)) and city-month (panel (d)) maximum temperatures. Anomalous increases in monthly maximum temperatures increase both VMT and PTT over most of the distribution of normal maximum temperatures. At the hotter end of the distribution, these relationships attenuate in magnitude. Lines in panels (c,d) represent linear fits within each temperature window. Panels (e,f) plot both the state demeaned and fully deconvolved VMT and temperature series, respectively, from our VMT data for a randomly sampled state. Panels (g,h) replicate panels (e,f) for a randomly sampled city from our PTT data. (Online version in colour.)
Figure 2adisplays the results of our VMT analysis (importantly, all models control for number of monthly days with measurable precipitation, monthly average diurnal temperature range, percentage cloud cover, relative humidity and wind speed; see §2.1). Warmer temperatures cause VMT to increase predominantly linearly up to approximately 29°C (the 88th percentile of monthly temperature) and to decline slightly past this point. This effect is large in magnitude. Moving from freezing temperatures to 29°C produces an approximately 11% increase in VMT. Added warming from 30°C to 40°C produces a change in VMT of approximately −2%, a smaller effect that is also estimated with higher statistical uncertainty. Thus, warmer temperatures amplify VMT across nearly the full temperature distribution.
Does temperature only impact vehicular transport, or does it more broadly impact transportation demand? To examine this question, we employ data on the monthly number of PTT for US metropolitan areas from the Federal Transit Administration, again linking these data to our meteorological variables of interest (see §2.1). These trips provide a measure of public transit ridership demand—for both rail and bus—across the entire USA. Our data contain over 150 billion PTT. We analyse our PTT data using similar methods to those for our VMT data (see §2.2).Figure 2g,hdepicts an example deconvolution of these data, andfigure 2ddepicts the analyses of anomalies across levels of the temperature distribution.
Figure 2bdisplays the results of our PTT analysis. Warmer temperatures increase PTT linearly up to approximately 31°C (the 90th percentile of monthly maximum temperatures) and cause PTT to decline minimally past this point. Like for VMT, the effect of temperature on PTT is large. Moving from freezing temperatures to 31°C produces an approximately 14% increase in PTT. Added warming from 31°C to 40°C produces a change in PTT of approximately −1%, an effect that is estimated with higher statistical uncertainty. The effects of temperature on PTT generally resemble the effects of temperature on VMT. Thus, warmer temperatures amplify demand for both vehicular transportation and public transit across the majority of the temperature distribution.
Do the estimated effects of temperature on transportation demand vary by the characteristics of localities? For example, do more urban or more rural places respond more acutely to warmer temperatures? Or do places with cooler average climates respond differently to warmer temperatures than do locales with warmer climates? To investigate questions of heterogeneous effects, we split our sample along the relevant variables and estimate our splined regression model for each subsample.
Performing these analyses, we find that the effect of temperature on VMT is nearly identical for VMT in urban areas as compared to VMT in rural areas (electronic supplementary material, figure S1a), observe little difference in functional form between states with warmer climates and states with cooler climates (electronic supplementary material, figure S1b), and note high similarity between those states with high rates ofper capitaVMT when compared with those states with lowerper capitaVMT (electronic supplementary material, figure S1c). We observe little evidence of heterogeneous effects of temperature on vehicular transport. However, we observe more substantial evidence of heterogeneity in the effect of temperature on public transit demand. For example, the effects of temperature on rail-based transit are notably larger than on non-rail based transit (electronic supplementary material, figure S1d). Added study is necessary to identify the precise mechanisms underlying this result. Further, we observe some evidence of potential adaptation with respect to climate for our PTT series; warmer cities observe more marked decreases in PTT due to cold temperatures than do cooler cities (electronic supplementary material, figure S1e). We do not observe any substantial heterogeneity in effect, however, across cities with higher numbers of PTTper capitaas compared to those with lower numbers of PTTper capita(electronic supplementary material, figure S1f). Importantly, across each of our heterogeneous effects analyses we observe that warmer temperatures increase the demand for transportation—both vehicular and via public transit—across the bulk of the temperature distribution.
Thus, warmer temperatures increased US transportation usage over recent years. Might added anthropogenic warming amplify future US demand for transportation? To examine this question, we employ downscaled, monthly resolution climate model data from NASA Earth Exchange (see §2.1). We then extract these data to the administrative units from our analyses and employ the empirically estimated response functions between temperature and VMT and PTT, respectively. Using these data and our estimates, we examine the potential cumulative increases in VMT and PTT for each future month out to 2100, as well as the by-season and by-location heterogeneity in these projections (see §2.3). For each analysis, we examine projections across three emissions scenarios, RCP2.6, RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 (figure 3d). Importantly, our projections do not incorporate the potential for dynamic feedback between transportation emissions and warming nor do they incorporate projections of increased transport demand due to non-climatic factors. Our projections may thus represent a conservative lower bound.

Climate change may amplify future VMT. Panel (a) plots the by-state log of projected cumulative added VMT by 2050 and 2099 across emissions scenarios. Panel (b) displays the time series of projected cumulative added VMT due to future warming over the entire USA. Under RCP8.5, future US warming may produce over one trillion cumulative added VMT by 2100. Panel (c) plots historical maximum monthly temperatures from our sample and the peak of the relationship between maximum temperatures and log (VMT). Approximately 88% of historical temperatures fall below this peak. Panel (d) plots monthly temperature anomaly projections relative to the 2006–2020 baseline for each state from 2020 to 2100. Panels (e,f) plot sum total added VMT during each month of the year for 2040–2050 and 2090–2100. (Online version in colour.)
Our resulting projections indicate that—under higher rates of emissions (RCP8.5)—future anthropogenic warming could produce a cumulative addition of approximately 1.1 trillion VMT in the USA alone by 2100 (figure 3b). This represents 35% of the VMT in the most recent year in the VMT data.Figure 3adepicts that states with higher present amounts of VMT observe the largest absolute increases in the future. Further, because the peak of our historical function for VMT is towards the upper end of the historical temperature distribution (figure 3c), the majority of the months of future years are associated with increases in VMT out to both 2040–2050 (figure 3e) and 2090–2100 (figure 3f).Figure 4depicts the spatial and temporal heterogeneity of our VMT projections for RCP8.5 in per cent relative to baseline VMT (see §2.3 and electronic supplementary material, figures S3 and S4 for these projections across RCP2.6 and RCP4.5). We project future cooler months of the year to observe the largest increases in VMT, while we project warmer months to observe smaller in magnitude decreases in VMT.

Effects of warming on VMT vary by state across future months. This figure depicts the projected impacts of future warming on mean percentage change in VMT for the years between 2040 and 2050 and between 2090 and 2100 for the RCP8.5 scenario. Cooler months of the year observe the largest increase in VMT over these periods, while summer months observe decreases. (Online version in colour.)
Similarly, we project that future warming will also increase demand for public transit. Our projection indicates a cumulative increase of nearly six billion added PTT in 2100 under RCP8.5, with those states having high current rates of public transit seeing the largest increases (see electronic supplementary material, figure S5). This figure represents over 60% of the PTT that occurred in the most recent year in the historical data. Further, our projections indicate a net increase in public transit demand across nearly all months of the year over the coming century. We depict our projections broken out by states and future months across emissions scenarios in electronic supplementary material, figures S6–S8.
Climatic conditions alter myriad human behaviours, and recent data indicate that transportation behaviours are no exception. We find a robust causal relationship between temperature and the use of transportation in the USA. Warmer temperatures, up to approximately 30°C, amplify both VMT and PTT along with the transport emissions these activities produce. These results are present in a variety of contexts and persist across numerous robustness checks. Our projections employing climate model output suggest that warming over this century may amplify use of transportation in the USA, especially during cooler seasons and in regions with already high levels of transportation usage. Importantly, this temperature–behaviour dynamic poses the risk of a novel feedback loop in the human–environmental system. These conclusions, however, are subject to a number of considerations.
First, transportation is currently the leading sector for US greenhouse gas emissions [30] and its relative contributions are likely to continue to grow [42]. Unless and until transport is decarbonized [43–45]—a process that poses notable challenges [31]—any cumulative increases in VMT and PTT will translate directly into amplifications of cumulative anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions. Because of the uncertainties associated with future transportation energy sources and resultant emissions, coupled with the difficulties of dynamically incorporating these feedbacks into the climate system, here we refrain from quantitative projection of likely emissions due to added future VMT and PTT. Future studies should seek to quantify the emission risk such a dynamic feedback loop might pose.
Second, our point estimates of future VMT and PTT due to feedback are relatively small in magnitude. Each future cumulative projection represents less than 1 year of current VMT (35%) and PTT (60%), respectively. These projections are likely conservative, however. For one, our empirical estimates of the relationship between temperature and transportation demand are likely downwards biased due to a combination of measurement error [46] and amplification of noise due to the deconvolution process we employ in our analyses [47]. In order to identify the causal relationship between temperature and transport, our procedure necessarily omits from its estimation any potential climate-driven seasonal effects of transportation [39]. Further, in our projections we pin VMT and PTT demand to its baseline average over the 5 year, 2013–2017 period. Transportation usage is likely to increase due to both population pressures and economic growth over the coming decades [42], amplifying any climate change-related impacts. Moreover, our projections omit dynamic feedback-driven increases in transport due the anthropogenic forcing from instantaneous increases in emissions due to added transport usage. The feedback is, in reality, exponential in nature, though we model it in a linear manner here.
Third—even though we demonstrate increases in baseline mobility across the two primary modes of human transport in the USA—we are unable to definitively identify all variables mediating our results [39]. We hypothesize that the added transportation demand is due to an increased baseline demand for mobility (as evidenced by similar increases in physical activity rates [8]). However, precisely why demand for mobility increases in response to warmer temperatures—as has now been observed in numerous locations around the world—is an important question needing further investigation. Perhaps it is that individuals are spending less of their time resting or sleeping [6,7,48], and therefore have more time to spend in activities requiring mobility. Or perhaps mobility behaviours are undertaken as a means of offsetting some of the mental health consequences of hotter temperatures [4,49]. Ultimately, future studies are needed to disentangle the root causes of this relationship.
Fourth, the effects we observe in our data may not hold in other countries or into the distant future. Extending this analysis to other countries where transportation demand is more rapidly growing—such as China and India—will be useful for examining the extent to which our findings here represent risk of a global feedback loop. Further, transportation in the future may look markedly different from its current form [50] a fact that adds to the uncertainty of our projections. Consideration of the effects we identify here in the context of shared socioeconomic pathways may be useful [51]. Additionally, humans may adapt to warmer climates in ways that mitigate or amplify future effects [52,53]. We observe no empirical evidence of historical adaptation in our VMT series but cannot rule out the potential for future adaptation.
Fifth, while transportation represents the largest emissions sector in the USA, it is only one of myriad potential areas where we may observe climate–behaviour feedback loops. While feedback loops in the transportation sector may be of relatively low magnitude when taken alone, they must be considered within the full scope of potential climate–behaviour feedback loops. For example, the effect of warming on net carbon emissions from the heating and cooling sectors [54–56] as well as any mitigation or adaptation actions intentionally taken in response to observed climatic changes [19] represent other areas of important potential feedback worth additional study. Further quantification of the scope, magnitude and uncertainties of these potential climate–behaviour feedback mechanisms—with attempts to incorporate them into projections of future warming—is critical [19].
Climate scholars investigate human contributions to climate change and climate change’s role in shaping human systems separately. Yet these dynamics are intricately intertwined. Climate alters human emitting behaviours that contribute heavily to climate change. Current climate models incorporate anthropogenic inputs in a non-dynamic, linearly additive manner. The feedback we document here is dynamic and exponential in nature. By omitting these dynamics, models may be markedly underestimating anthropogenic forcing of the climate system, in turn producing lower-bound estimates of the future magnitude of the climate crisis.
We gather our VMT data from the US Federal Highway Administration, Office of Highway Policy Information’s Traffic Volume Trends product. These monthly data are derived from approximately 4000 continuous traffic counting stations across the USA. Our unit of analysis for these data is the state-by-calendar month. We collect our PTT data from the US Federal Transit Administration’s National Transit Database. These data are collected monthly from hundreds of metropolitan transit agencies around the country, and our unit of analysis is city (metropolitan area)-by-calendar month. Our data represent the standard data used by the US FHA and FTA in assessing traffic and public transit trends.
We employ gridded (at approx. 4 km) temperature and precipitation from the PRISM Climate Group [57] and average cloudcover, relative humidity and wind speed from the National Centers for Environmental Prediction Reanalysis II project [58]. Global circulation model projections employ NASA Earth Exchange’s DCP-30 monthly maximum temperature ensemble average projections from 2006 to 2099 [59] across 21 of the CMIP5 models [60] run on the RCP2.6, RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 emissions scenarios [61]. We average our climatic data to the state (for VMT) and metropolitan area (for PTT) boundaries of our sample. All shapefiles are drawn from the US Census Bureau’s TIGER products.
Our relationships of interest are the marginal effects of monthly maximum temperatures on the logged values of VMT and PTT, respectively. We model this for VMT as
In this cross-sectional, time-series model,iindexes states,mmonths of the year andycalendar years. Our dependent variableYimyis continuous and represents the natural log of VMT in stateiin monthmwithin calendar yeary. TMAXimyrepresents the monthly average of daily maximum temperatures. For PTT,iindexes cities andYimyrepresents the natural log of PTT; indexes are otherwise consistent across outcomes.
To allow flexible estimation of the marginal effects of temperature on our outcome measures, we employ a cubic spline approach, represented byf(), with splines set at the quartiles of the distribution of experienced maximum temperatures [39]. Further, we control for number of monthly days with measurable precipitation and monthly average diurnal temperature range, percentage cloud cover, relative humidity and wind speed, represented viaZηas failure to do so may bias our primary estimates [39].
To ensure that time-invariant, state-specific (city-specific) factors or seasonal, state-specific (city-specific) factors do not bias our estimates of the effect of temperature on transportation outcomes, we includeαim—representing non-parametric state-by-month (city-by-month) fixed effects—in equation (2.1) [39]. Further, there may be state-specific (city-specific) time trends influencing our transportation outcomes that could spuriously correlate with meteorological conditions. To control for these potential state (city)-specific trending confounds, we includeμiyin equation (2.1), representing state-by-year (city-by-year) fixed effects.
After deconvolving our data around unit-by-month and unit-by-year fixed effects, the remaining variation in our meteorological variables is treated as good as randomly assigned to the remaining variation in our outcome measures [3,39]. The marginal effects off(TMAXimy) from this estimation can thus be interpreted as the causal effects of particular maximum temperatures on our transportation outcome measures [3,39].
We account for serial correlation inεimyby conducting 1000 cluster bootstrapped splined regressions clustered on state for VMT and on city for PTT [39]. Further, we omit non-climatic control variables from equation (2.1) because they may generate post-treatment bias in our parameters of interest [14,39]. To estimate our models, we use thefelm() function from thelfepackage in R [62].
To deconvolve our temperature and VMT/PTT outcome measures to plot them as anomalies infigure 2c–h, we employ the same set of fixed effects as in equation (2.1) and use thedemeanlist() function from thelfepackage in R [39,62].
Our results are robust to varying the specification of maximum temperatures in our model (see electronic supplementary material, figure S2) across both the VMT and PTT models. In each of these robustness checks, we substitute a separate way of parametrizing the estimation of the temperature functional form. We adjust for serial correlation inϵimyin these robustness checks by employing heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered on state for VMT and on city for PTT [39]. In our first robustness check (electronic supplementary material, figure S2a,e), we employ the full distribution of daily maximum temperatures over the period by pulling in counts of the number of monthly days within each 5°C daily temperature bin [63]. We omit the 30–35°C maximum temperature bin and interpret our estimates as the change relative to this baseline. Coefficient estimates in this model represent the effect on our logged outcome measures of having one additional day out of the month falling in the specified maximum temperature bin. In our second check (electronic supplementary material, figure S2b,f), we employ separate indicator variables for each 5°C monthly average maximum temperature bin and again interpret these estimates relative to the 30–35°C omitted bin [8]. Coefficient estimates in this model represent the effect of being in one monthly maximum temperature bin on our logged outcome measures, relative to the omitted category of temperatures. Finally, we parametrically model monthly maximum temperature with a quadratic fit in electronic supplementary material, figure S2c,g. We plot the marginal effects of these quadratic terms in electronic supplementary material, figure S2d,h. They are highly significant across the cooler portions of the distribution of temperature, losing significance at the hottest portion of the distribution. Importantly, across each of these additional ways of specifying our functional form for maximum temperatures, the functional form recovered closely mirrors that recovered from our spline regression in the main text.
We produce monthly spatial averages for each US state for each month between 2006 and 2100 employing NASA’s NEX DCP-30 ensemble average projection data across each of RCP2.6, RCP4.5 and RCP8.5. This gives us a state-by-month climate projection for every month out to 2100 across these three emissions scenarios.
To calculate our projections of added VMT depicted in figures3and4, we first fit the predicted marginal effects estimated from the splined fit in equation (2.1),f^(), for each future month across each emissions scenario:
whereiagain indexes states,mindexes months,yindexes years andrindexes the three emissions scenarios. With these log-scale fitted values, we then calculate our projected percentage change in VMT due to climate change for each future state-month-scenario. To do so, we employ the months of years 2006–2020 as our TMAX baseline and calculate:
Here, exponentiating our natural log-scale coefficients translates them into percentage terms. The difference of the two terms provides the projected percentage change inΔY^imyr. We plot the mean of this projected percentage change by-state over the periods 2040–2050 and 2090–2100 infigure 4. Then, to calculate the change in absolute number of VMT, we multiply these percentage changes by the average state-month number of VMT over 2013–2017, the most recent complete 5-year period in our data:
This procedure gives us a projected change in number of VMT across each state, future calendar month, and emissions scenario for years 2020–2100.
To calculate the by-month additions to VMT across the full USA from future warming that we present infigure 3d,e, we employ the output from equation (2.2) and sum this output across each state across each 10-year future period (2040–2050 and 2090–2100) for each month and each emissions scenario:
To calculate the cumulative US time series of added VMT due to future warming presented infigure 3a, we calculate the cumulative sum of our projections across states and across months for each future year and each emissions scenario:
Finally, to calculate the cumulative sum of added VMT due to future warming across states in a given future year, presented infigure 3a, we modify equation (2.3) to include a by-state index and select the specific years of 2050 and 2099:
To estimate the possible impact of future climatic changes on PTT, we employ our empirically estimated function of the relationship between historical temperatures and historical PTT and couple this estimate with our NEX climate model projection data. Projections are conducted at the metropolitan area level and aggregated up to states for geographical visualization. We otherwise follow the projection procedure outlined above for VMT for the PTT projections.
We thank Daniel Alpert for his excellent research assistance and Patrick Baylis for sharing code. We also thank Patrick Baylis, Valentina Bosetti, Emilio Ferrara, James H. Fowler, Flavio Lehner, Kristina Lerman, Robyn Migliorini, Nicholas Millar, Frances Moore, David G. Victor and seminar participants at USC’s Information Sciences Institute for their helpful comments.
Replication data and materials are stored in Harvard’s Dataverse athttps://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/2LIINY.
N.O. constructed and analysed the data, produced figures and tables, drafted the manuscript, and conceived of the research question. All authors refined the concept and edited the manuscript.
We declare we have no competing interests.
Support for this work was provided by the MIT Media Lab.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
Replication data and materials are stored in Harvard’s Dataverse athttps://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/2LIINY.
Articles from Journal of the Royal Society Interface are provided here courtesy ofThe Royal Society
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894