An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Email:magan@ust.hk.
Received 2025 May 19; Accepted 2025 Aug 15; Revised 2025 Aug 14; Collection date 2025 Sep 9.
This article is licensed under CC-BY 4.0
Coastal hypoxia,
driven by human-induced nutrient enrichment
and
global warming, significantly threatens marine ecosystems. While cutting
land-derived nutrient sources has been proposed as the key solution,
its effectiveness may be undermined by climate change, and costs may
rise after addressing the easier targets. Evaluating various nutrient
measures under future climate scenarios is critical but challenging
due to inadequate projections for coastal processes. In this global
context, we combine field measurements with a coast-resolved physical-biogeochemical
model to assess the effectiveness of land-based and alternative mitigation
strategies under near-term (2016–2045) and long-term (2071–2100)
climate change scenarios in a representative estuary-shelf system.
Our findings evidence that stringent land-based nutrient reduction
is necessary but insufficient to halt deoxygenation under climate
change. This insufficiency is mainly due to enhanced water-column
stratification, driven by climate warming and its associated increase
in river discharge, which restricts oxygen replenishment more than
the reductions in biogeochemical oxygen consumption achieved through
nutrient management. We demonstrate that oyster aquaculture can serve
as an effective complementary strategy to remove nutrients and combat
oxygen depletion. This incentivizing approach aligns with the global
trend of increasing nonfed aquaculture, offering a promising supplementary
solution to the challenges of managing coastal nutrients and mitigating
hypoxia globally.
Keywords:coastal hazard, eutrophication, nutrient management, climate projection, water column stratification, ecosystem modeling


Coastal oceans are rapidly
losing oxygen (Figure). This deoxygenation disrupts global biogeochemical
cycles, adversely affects marine life, and undermines essential ecosystem
services for humans.,The primary driver of this widespread
phenomenon is the massive increase in anthropogenic nutrient discharge
into coastal waters, which stimulates organic matter production and
accelerates bottom-water oxygen consumption. As a result, the global
expansion of coastal eutrophication and hypoxia (dissolved oxygen
<2 mg/L) is perceived to correlate closely with the pace of socioeconomic
development worldwide.,For example, coastal hypoxia was
sparsely reported in North America and northern Europe before the
1970s but became prevalent in the 1990s. Since the 2000s, coastal
hypoxia has also plagued developing countries in South and East Asia,
following the surge in synthetic fertilizer use, and is likely expanding
to Africa and South America.,Nevertheless, these
emerging hypoxic zones are not as well-monitored as those in developed
nations, contributing to the underreporting of hypoxic sites in developing
regions despite their high nutrient loads (FigureA).

Global distribution of nitrogen delivery and
coastal hypoxic sites,
along with hypoxic conditions in select coastal zones. (A) Global
distribution of nitrogen delivery to surface waters in 2020, modeled
under the Shared Socio-economic Pathways (SSP) scenario SSP1, alongside locations of coastal hypoxic zones:
476 sites in red (from Diaz and Rosenberg) and 117 sites in blue (synthesized from literature by this study).
(B– E, and G) Temporal evolution and trends of hypoxic extent
in (B) Baltic Sea, (C) Northern Gulf
of Mexico, (D) Chesapeake Bay, (E) the Upper Gulf of Thailand, and (G) Pearl River Estuary (PRE). In panels (E) and (G),
the annual bottom oxygen minimum is shown for time-series monitoring
sites in the Upper Gulf of Thailand (100.59°E and 13.52°N)
and PRE (blue dot in panel F), respectively. Solid lines represent
the linear fit of observations, with asterisks (*) indicating correlation
coefficients significant atp< 0.05. Vertical
dashed arrows mark the year when large-scale nutrient management plans
or agreements were launched in the respective watershed. (F) Frequency
of hypoxia estimated from 13 summer surveys conducted from 2014 to
2021, covering the PRE and adjacent shelf.
Reducing land-based nutrient inputs has long been
viewed as essential
for alleviating eutrophication-driven hypoxia (see nutrient reduction
schemes inFigureB,C,D,G). However, historical data indicate that coastal hypoxic
systems rarely respond linearly to nutrient reductions. This nonlinear response is partially due to physical
controls on hypoxia,,governed by complex interactions
among oceanic processes such as river plumes, tides, and wind-driven
coastal currents, and climate stressors like warming and changes in
precipitation and prevailing winds. These
processes regulate oxygen ventilation by altering water column stratification
and mixing while also affecting biogeochemical oxygen production and
consumption by distributing nutrients and organic matter and modifying
environmental conditions for phytoplankton growth and trophic interactions.
Additionally, on longer time scales, climate change complicates the
physical and biogeochemical response of coastal waters to nutrient
inputs, as warming can decrease oxygen solubility, intensify water
column stratification, alter circulation, and enhance oxygen consumption
through microbial respiration. These changes
may undermine the effectiveness of nutrient reduction strategies in
combating coastal hypoxia.
More
stringent nutrient reduction strategies are thus essential
for addressing the challenges posed by a warming future; however,
their implementation encounters several socioeconomic and technical
obstacles. First, developing regions often struggle to balance socioeconomic
development with the need for environmental pollution control, which
hampers strict regulatory enforcement. Second, in developed regions
that have already made progress in reducing nutrient inputs, easier
measures, such as cutting point-source emissions, have largely been
exhausted. This leaves the more challenging and costly task of reducing
diffuse emissions to further mitigate nutrient pollution. Finally,
conventional land-based nutrient control measures cannot remove nutrients
already discharged into aquatic systems or those released from sediments.
Given these challenges,in situmitigation measures
are increasingly advocated to complement land-based source control
approaches. Examples include nonfed aquaculture
such as kelp, seaweed, and shellfish,,along with oyster reef
restoration, and artificial oxygenation. Among them, cultivating filter-feeding shellfish
has been shown to reduce eutrophication and control phytoplankton
blooms in various coastal systems. Additionally,
the growing human demand for seafood protein creates strong incentives
for shellfish cultivation, making it
a promising win-win for both the economy and ecosystems. However,
the effectiveness of large-scale shellfish aquaculture compared to
land-based source control for mitigating hypoxia under future climate
conditions is rarely quantified as global climate models cannot adequately
capture the regional-scale estuarine processes critical for simulating
coastal hypoxia and shellfish aquaculture.
To address the knowledge
gap, we employ a high-resolution, coupled
physical-biogeochemical model to translate global climate and circulation
patterns to the estuarine and coastal scale (Figure S1). Using this model, we examine the future evolution of a
eutrophic estuary-shelf system up to the year 2100 and quantify the
effectiveness of nutrient input reduction and oyster farming in alleviating
hypoxia under climate change conditions. Instead of focusing on well-studied
hypoxic systems in developed countries (e.g., Baltic Sea, Northern
Gulf of Mexico, and Chesapeake Bay), we investigate an emerging seasonal
hypoxic system: the Pearl River Estuary and its adjacent shelf off
Southern China (referred to as PRE;FigureF). The PRE, nourished by China’s
second-largest river, the Pearl River, is surrounded by one of the
world’s fastest-growing urban areas and supports a prominent
oyster aquaculture industry. This makes it a representative coastal
system that faces the dual pressures of human disturbance and climate
change. Unraveling the future trends of hypoxia in the PRE under different
management scenarios can provide valuable insights into various underrepresented
coastal systems in developing nations. Additionally, assessing the
role of oyster farming in mitigating hypoxia can also reveal the potential
of shellfish aquaculture as a sustainable solution to meet food demands
while supporting ecosystem restoration.
We assembled and analyzed
long-term monitoring data and multiyear field survey data to assess
the biophysical conditions of our study region, create model forcing
files, and validate model simulations. The primary data sets include:
1) freshwater discharge of the Pearl River from 1986 to 2021, provided
by the Ministry of Water Resources of China (http://xxfb.hydroinfo.gov.cn/); 2) nitrate and phosphate concentrations near the major river outlet,
HuMen, from 1991 to 2014, compiled from the literature (Figure S2); 3) concentrations of inorganic nitrogen
and phosphorus monitored biweekly near the HuMen outlet from 2014
to 2023; 4) monthly concentrations of total nitrogen and phosphorus
near the HuMen outlet from 2015 to 2023, collected by the Department
of Ecology and Environment of Guangdong Province (https://gdee.gd.gov.cn/); and
5) 13 summer cruise surveys (June to September) from 2014 to 2021,
covering the entire PRE and the adjacent shelf,(Figure S3). These summer surveys include
key ecosystem variables, such as temperature, salinity, chlorophyll,
nitrate, ammonium, phosphate, and dissolved oxygen concentrations.
The three-dimensional (3D) physical-biogeochemical
model is based on the Regional Ocean Modeling System (ROMS), a free-surface, hydrostatic, primitive-equation
ocean model. Configured to encompass the Pearl River Estuary and its
adjacent shelf in the northern South China Sea (Figure S1A), the model adopts
an adaptive horizontal resolution that gradually decreases from approximately
0.1 km in the estuary and inner shelf to about 1 km at the southern
open boundary over the shelf. Additionally, it features 30 terrain-following
vertical layers using the S-coordinate system, with refined resolution
(<0.2 m) near the surface and bottom. The model utilizes the Mellor-Yamada
level 2.5 closure scheme for vertical turbulent mixing, an upwind-biased
third-order scheme for horizontal momentum advection, and a third-order
accurate, nonoscillatory scheme for tracer advection (HSIMT).
The biogeochemical component (seeFigure S1B) is adapted from the expanded N-based
model of Fennel et al., which includes
the cycling of nitrogen, phosphorus, and oxygen. The model consists
of 11 state variables: nitrate, ammonium, phosphate, oxygen, chlorophyll,
phytoplankton, zooplankton, small detritus, large detritus, and river-delivered
terrestrial particulate and dissolved organic matter (POMterrand DOMterr). Key processes parametrized in the model
include: 1) phytoplankton growth dependent on temperature, light,
and nutrient, with ammonium inhibiting nitrate uptake and colimitation
effect of nitrogen and phosphorus; 2)
phytoplankton acclimation to changing light intensity by calculating
a variable ratio between phytoplankton biomass and chlorophyll; 3)
zooplankton grazing based on Holling’s type III (S-shaped)
functional response; 4) linear rates for phytoplankton mortality,
zooplankton basal metabolism, and remineralization of detritus and
terrestrial organic matter; 5) a second-order zooplankton mortality;
6) aggregation of phytoplankton and small detritus to form large detritus;
7) sinking of phytoplankton, detritus, and POMterr; 8)
light-dependent nitrification; and 9) oxygen production or consumption
linked to the aforementioned processes. A mass-conserving and computationally
efficient sediment component is implemented following Fennel et al. and Yu et al. It
assumes that all oceanic sinking organic matter and a fraction of
the POMterrreaching the sediment–water interface
are instantly remineralized, returning a flux of dissolved constituents
to the bottom water. This sediment treatment is similarly applied
to organic nitrogen and phosphorus, with a fraction of the deposited
organic nitrogen lost to nitrogen gas (N2) through denitrification.
The biogeochemical model has been expanded to include the filter-feeding
activities of oysters (Figure S1B). The key processes parametrized in the model
related to oysters include: 1) oyster filtration of particulate organic
matter (including phytoplankton, zooplankton, small and large detritus,
and POMterr) based on ambient water salinity, temperature,
and oxygen concentration; 2) basal metabolism dependent on temperature,
and active respiration associated with food acquisition and assimilation;
3) excretion to ammonium and phosphate; 4) biodeposition from the
uningested and/or unassimilated portions of filtered food (i.e., pseudofeces
and feces) and oyster mortality; 5) vertical sinking of oyster-derived
detritus; 6) remineralization of oyster detritus in both the water
column and sediment; and 7) oxygen consumption associated with oyster
basal metabolism and remineralization of oyster detritus. The complete
set of equations, parameter values, and validation details can be
found in Yu and Gan.
The high-resolution
coupled estuary-shelf model is one-way nested
within the China Sea Multiscale Ocean Modeling System (CMOMS) (Figure S1C). CMOMS
is also based on ROMS and is coupled to the same biogeochemical component
as described above. The model domain covers the China Seas (including
the South China Sea, East China Sea, Bohai Sea, and Yellow Sea) and
the adjacent northwest Pacific Ocean. It has a horizontal resolution
of approximately 7 to 10 km and includes 30 terrain-following vertical
layers. Details on the CMOMS model setup and validation can be found
in Gan et al. To provide open boundary
conditions for the estuary-shelf model, we conducted a CMOMS model
projection from 2015 to 2100, utilizing atmospheric fluxes downscaled
from the CMIP6 global climate models under the high-emission SSP5-8.5
scenario (see the detailed CMIP6 forcing information inSection).
For
the estuary-shelf model, river discharge rates from 2015 to
2021 were based on historical discharge data, while those from 2022
to 2100 were computed from a Soil and Water Assessment Tool (SWAT)
model covering the Pearl River Basin under
the climate forcing of the SSP5-8.5 scenario. River nutrient concentrations
are less predictable because they are profoundly affected by environmental
policies. Therefore, instead of projecting river nutrient concentrations
from watershed models, we based our projections on historical data
and hypothesized nutrient management scenarios detailed inSection.
We generated 86-year
(2015 to 2100) monthly atmospheric forcing, oceanic boundary variables,
and river discharge from the Sixth Phase of the Coupled Model Intercomparison
Project (CMIP6) climate model projections under both the moderate-emission
SSP2-4.5 scenario and the highest-emission SSP5-8.5 scenario. The climate models were selected from the list
used in the Atlas of the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report (AR6). Model data were obtained from the CMIP6 database
(https://esgf-node.llnl.gov/projects/cmip6/). Atmospheric forcingsincluding air temperature, air pressure,
relative humidity, zonal and meridional wind speed at the surface,
rainfall rate, solar shortwave radiation, and cloud fractionwere
interpolated onto the CMOMS model grid and then averaged across all
available models to create an ensemble mean (Table S1). Similar data processing steps were applied to oceanic
velocity, temperature, and salinity to establish boundary forcing
for the CMOMS model. In contrast to other atmospheric forcings, the
zonal mean atmospheric pCO2projection was derived from
long-term greenhouse gas projections from the reduced-complexity climate-carbon-cycle
model MAGICC7.0 (data available athttps://greenhousegases.science.unimelb.edu.au) and then interpolated onto the CMOMS model grid. The ensemble mean
river discharge was used for the large-scale CMOMS model only, while
the high-resolution estuary-shelf model was forced with river discharge
estimates from the previously mentioned SWAT model.
In this
study, we present results solely from the SSP5-8.5 experiments. Comparisons
of the atmospheric forcing between the two SSP scenarios indicate
only a slight increase in domain-averaged air temperature under SSP5-8.5,
with minimal difference in wind speed over the China Seas (Figure S4). This allows us to confidently focus
our analysis on the SSP5-8.5 scenario.
The nested ocean
modeling system builds upon our previously validated framework,,with additional performance metrics presented inFigure S5. The model effectively captures characteristic summer
conditions (Figure S5), including the convergence
of the southwestward nutrient-rich buoyant jet and the northeastward
wind-driven shelf current in the coastal zone. It also reliably represents
the stratification that facilitates phytoplankton production (with
a surface chlorophyll correlation of 0.38), organic matter accumulation,
and hypoxia development (with a bottom oxygen correlation of 0.62).
Quantitative analysis of cruise data demonstrates the model’s
ability to reproduce key variables with low bias, and the root mean
squared error (RMSE) values fall within the range of observational
variability. Statistically significant correlations (p< 0.05) are found across all variables, ranging from 0.38 to
0.93, with the highest correlations observed for surface nitrate (0.93)
and phosphate (0.89). While highly variable estuarine dynamics inherently
limit model’s accuracy for patchily distributed variables like
chlorophyll, these metrics collectively affirm the model’s
utility for analyzing hypoxia mechanisms and making future projections.
To project near-term (2016–2045) and long-term (2071–2100)
oxygen dynamics, we employed a computationally efficient “time
slice” approach with our validated modeling system. This method
simulates discrete seasonal intervals (May to September annually)
rather than continuous multidecadal runs, effectively capturing critical
summer dynamics when hypoxia typically develops. Each yearly simulation
begins in May, initialized from physically consistent states derived
from the continuously running CMOMS model, which provides initial
and boundary conditions to ensure interannual continuity. This strategy
reduces computational demands, preserves interannual variability during
the biologically active season, and avoids cumulative numerical round-off
errors associated with continuous multidecadal simulations. The method’s
reliability has been confirmed by validating model simulations from
2016 to 2024 against the aforementioned cruise observations (Figure S5).
Projections for river nutrient
concentrations were based on historical
data from 1986 to 2024. Nitrate and phosphate concentrations significantly
increased (p< 0.05) from 1986 to 2015, followed
by a decline after the State Council of China issued the Action Plan
for Water Pollution Prevention and Control in 2015, hereafter referred to as the Nutrient Reduction Scheme
2015 (seeFigure S2B). Inspired by these
trends, we explored two nutrient management scenarios: the “DecreasingN”
scenario assumes robust management that facilitates a persistent decline
in river nutrient concentrations until 2100, following the observed
decline rate from 2016 to 2023 after the implementation of the Nutrient
Reduction Scheme 2015; the “ConstantN” scenario maintains
the river nutrient concentrations at 2015 levels until 2100, reflecting
a more moderate management approach that curbs the observed increasing
trend from 1986 to 2015.
Specifically, in the DecreasingN scenario,
we projected river organic
and dissolved inorganic nitrogen concentrations to follow the historical
declining trend observed from 2016 to 2023 under stringent nutrient
reduction strategies. River organic phosphorus concentrations were
assumed to follow the same trend as that of organic nitrogen, maintaining
a constant stoichiometric ratio in river organic matter. Meanwhile,
phosphate concentrations were set to decline in line with the observed
trend from 2016 to 2023, leveling off at 1 mmol/m3from
2024 onward, which is approximately the targeted water quality level
in mainland China. In the ConstantN scenario, the river nutrient concentrations
were maintained at the elevated levels observed in 2015 until 2100.
Climatological seasonal cycles of river nutrient concentrations were
derived from the biweekly monitoring data collected from 2014 to 2023,
and these seasonal patterns were applied to the corresponding nutrient
species for all future years.
To evaluate the effectiveness
of oyster aquaculture in mitigating
hypoxia under climate change, we conducted an “Oyster case”
scenario based on the DecreasingN framework. This simulation incorporated
a 100 km2oyster cultivation area in the upper water column
of the western coastal zone at a typical commercial-scale density
of 100 oysters/m2. This configuration was selected based
on systematic sensitivity experiments by Yu and Gan, which identified 100 km2as the optimal scale
that balances hypoxia mitigation efficiency with ecological carrying
capacity in the studied region. The chosen area represents a feasible
expansion, equivalent to approximately one-third of Guangdong Province’s
current oyster farming area (301 km2in 2022, according
to the China Fishery Statistical Yearbook) and a small fraction of China’s total 2349 km2cultivation area. The density of 100 oysters/m2reflects
actual regional aquaculture practices, falling within the documented
commercial range of 100–350 oysters/m2observed
in the adjacent bay. For our summer-focused
simulations, we maintained a fixed oyster biomass of 1 g of dry weight
(representing medium-sized oysters) and did not consider the harvest
of oysters. While debate exists about whether shellfish biodeposition
counteracts the benefits of nutrient removal, Yu and Gan showed that this effect
is negligible in the coastal zone off PRE. This is attributed to strong
wind-driven currents in the area and the significantly reduced deposition
flux to the sediment via shellfish filtration, a reduction that substantially
lowers sediment oxygen consumption (the dominant oxygen sink in bottom
waters of this region).
As anticipated, the model
projects an increase in water-column stratification in the PRE, indicated
by a significant (p< 0.05) rise in buoyancy frequency
(N2) (FigureA). This increasing stratification is primarily driven by future
warming and enhanced freshwater discharge (Figure S2A). Ecosystem responses to these substantial changes in physical
conditions are markedly shaped by nutrient management strategies.

Future
projections for different nutrient management scenarios
and the impacts of oyster farming. (A–C) Future trends of regionally
averaged (A) stratification strength and (B) surface phytoplankton
concentration, and (C) regionwide hypoxic volume under various nutrient
management scenarios. Each dot represents the summer mean (June to
September) for the corresponding year. The inset bar graphs display
the 30-year averages for each variable across different scenarios,
with the periods 2016 to 2045 shown in lighter color and 2071 to 2100
in darker color. Error bars represent the 25th and 75th percentiles
of the data range for each 30-year period. (D) The 60-year average
(from 2016 to 2045 and 2071 to 2100) of oyster-assimilated particulate
organic nitrogen (PON), nitrogen removed by oysters, and the percentage
decrease in bottom oxygen consumption and hypoxic volume induced by
oyster farming were relative to the DecreasingN case. Error bars indicate
the 25th and 75th percentiles of the data range over the 60 years.
Relative changes are calculated exclusively for the western hypoxic
center, where oyster farms are located.
In the DecreasingN case, which reflects an ambitious
yet realistic
nutrient reduction strategy based on 2016–2023 policy achievements
(Section), the
steady decline in river nutrient load (Figure S2C) leads to reduced coastal nutrient levels (Figure S6A,B) and decreased phytoplankton biomass
(FigureB). This results
in a 17% decline in bottom water oxygen consumption (Figure S7). However, climate change undermines these gains
under SSP5-8.5, as a weakened physical oxygen supply (22% decrease
in vertical diffusion;Figure S7) due to
increased stratification and decreased solubility outweighs biogeochemical
improvements. Consequently, hypoxic volume off the PRE persists, increasing
by 6% during 2071–2100 compared to 2016–2045 (FigureC), remaining widespread
in coastal zones and expanding downstream (Figure S8A,B). While further land-based reductions could theoretically
improve oxygen conditions, these marginal gains would require increasingly
expensive controls on both point and nonpoint sources, such as advanced
wastewater treatment and agricultural runoff mitigation.
Nevertheless,
the value of nutrient reduction is clearly demonstrated
when compared to the ConstantN case. In this scenario, rising freshwater
discharge drives a steady increase in nutrient influx (Figure S2), significantly (p< 0.05) fueling phytoplankton biomass growth (FigureB) and leading to a 17% rise
in bottom water oxygen consumption (Figure S7). Consequently, the ConstantN case predicts a dramatic 195% expansion
of hypoxic volume from the earlier 30-year period (2016–2045)
to the latter period (2071–2100), far exceeding the 6% increase
under DecreasingN. This indicates that higher anthropogenic nutrient
input will greatly amplify the effects of climate change on coastal
hypoxia. Additionally, hypoxic volume in ConstantN has increased by
147% and 586%, respectively, during the two 30-year periods compared
to the DecreasingN case (FiguresC andS8C,D). This dramatic
expansion illustrates that while the DecreasingN scenario cannot fully
counteract climate impacts, it remains essential for preventing more
catastrophic oxygen depletion.
Building on the
DecreasingN scenario, we find that adding oyster
aquaculture (100 km2farming area at 100 oysters/m2) to the western coastal zone (the Oyster case) markedly enhances
hypoxia mitigation. The model projects that these oysters assimilate
particulate organic nitrogen (PON) at a mean daily rate of (2.2 ±
0.6) × 106mol/d through filter-feeding. After accounting
for nitrogen released via oyster mortality and metabolism, the net
nitrogen removal is (0.64 ± 0.57) × 106mol/d
(FigureD). This corresponds
to an annual oyster-induced N removal rate of 32.9 ± 29.4 g/m2/yr, which falls within the observed range of 12 to 152 g/m2/yr reported by Rose et al. and
15.0 to 61.2 g/m2/yr in Barrett et al. By reducing PON in the western coastal zone (FigureA,B), oyster farming decreases
bottom water oxygen consumption by 10% and shrinks hypoxic volume
by 34% compared to the DecreasingN scenario (FiguresD andS8E,F).
These promising results demonstrate that oyster aquaculture can effectively
complement land-based efforts to alleviate coastal hypoxia.

Oyster farming-induced
changes, oyster farming sites in China,
and major global producers of mollusks and algae. (A) A three-dimensional
view of model estimates averaged over 60 years (from 2016 to 2045
and 2071 to 2100), illustrating vertically integrated particulate
organic nitrogen concentrations at the top and bottom-water dissolved
oxygen concentrations superimposed on the topography below. (B) Similar
to A but displaying the oyster farming-induced changes in particulate
organic nitrogen at the top. The 100 km2oyster farming
area is delineated by the red rectangle. (C) Major oyster farming
sites in China, represented by red dots, along with oyster farming
areas from 2013 to 2022 shown as blue bars. (D) Mollusks and algae production by country or region. Only the top 15 producers of mollusks and the
top 11 producers of algae are included. Countries or regions that
are the largest producers of both mollusks and algae are colored darker
pink.
Despite numerous efforts to
reduce nutrient inputs, signs of ecosystem recovery remain rare.,,Climate change further complicates
mitigation by impairing oxygen replenishmenta trend evident
in the PRE, where increased stratification offsets oxygenation gains
from nutrient reductions. This highlights the urgency of adopting
complementary strategies, such as nonfed aquaculture (e.g., seaweed
and shellfish), to combat deoxygenation.,Such a need extends beyond well-known coastal hypoxic zones in developed
regions (e.g., the northern Gulf of Mexico, Baltic Sea, and Chesapeake Bay) to many underrepresented systems in developing
countries experiencing rapidly rising nutrient loads.
Our assessment
demonstrates the effectiveness of shellfish aquaculture as a complementary
strategy to land-based nutrient reduction for addressing coastal hypoxia
under future climate change, based on high-resolution projections.
Several modeling considerations merit discussion. While our model
captures regional-scale biogeochemical interactions, the fixed oyster
biomass assumption for summer simulations does not account for growth-dependent
filtration variability or seasonal size dynamics. Physiological rates,
including filtration efficiency, naturally increase as the oysters
mature. Future model enhancements could incorporate individual-based
approaches,,particularly for local-scale
management where growth dynamics are more influential. For regional-scale,
long-term hypoxia projections such as ours, the model strikes a necessary
balance between resolution and computational feasibility. The calculated
net N removal rates (32.9 ± 29.4 g/m2/yr) align with
empirical observations (12–152 g/m2/yr), validating
the model for ecosystem-scale analysis. When scaled to China’s
oyster farming area (2349 km2in 2022), these conservative estimates suggest substantial ecosystem
benefits, with a net N removal of ∼7.7 × 104t/yr, equivalent to 2.5% of the annual riverine N input from China’s
eight major rivers (3.1 × 106t/yr). At a nitrogen price of 32.3 USD/kg-N (based on European
and North American markets), this removal
translates to ∼2.5 billion USD annually.
These projections,
while simplified at the organism level, demonstrate
meaningful improvements in water quality from shellfish aquaculture.
Actual values may vary with site-specific conditions, but the fundamental
benefit pattern remains robust. The economic and ecological potential
is poised to grow further, given the rapid expansion of oyster farming
(FigureC) and additional
unquantified benefits such as food production, habitat provision, shoreline
erosion protection, and carbon sequestration. These cobenefits warrant further quantitative
assessment, establishing shellfish aquaculture as a sustainable development
tool that aligns economic and ecological goals in coastal zones.
There is ample potential and incentive for expanding nonfed aquaculture
worldwide.,,However, global production of mollusks (e.g., oysters, clams, mussels,
and scallops) and algae remains concentrated in a few countries: China
produces 83% of mollusks and 59% of algae, with the remainder primarily
from South Korea, Chile, Japan, and Vietnam for mollusks and Indonesia,
South Korea, the Philippines, and North Korea for algae (FigureD). Many developing
countries, such as Indonesia, Bangladesh, Uruguay, and Guinea, have
substantial capacity for shellfish aquaculture but currently lack
large-scale production. Furthermore,
while coastal waters in 132 countries are estimated to have suitable
nutrient levels and temperatures for seaweed aquaculture, only 37
are currently engaged in this practice.
The global disparity between the vast potential for nonfed
aquaculture
and its current concentration in limited regions stems partly from
insufficient quantitative assessments of its interactions with coastal
ecosystems and dual economic-ecological benefits. While previous studies
have mapped the potential of marine aquaculture and highlighted promising
opportunities,,process-based evaluations of
large-scale aquaculture incorporating dynamic coastal processes remain
limited. Our coast-resolved PRE framework provides a transferable
approach to quantify the benefits of shellfish aquaculture (e.g.,
nutrient removal and hypoxia mitigation) in diverse coastal systems.
Future implementations could extend this approach to include size-dependent
physiology of nonfed species beyond oysters (e.g., mussels, clams),
carbonate system dynamics for assessing acidification resilience,
and sediment biogeochemistry for evaluating benthic-pelagic coupling.
These advancements would enable more robust quantification of climate
change interactions (e.g., warming and acidification impacts on shellfish
growth) and whole-ecosystem effects.
Most importantly, integrating these biogeochemical models with socioeconomic
frameworks would reveal the full ecosystem service value of nonfed
aquaculture, providing policymakers with actionable insights to balance
seafood security with marine ecosystem protection against escalating
deoxygenation threats.
In summary, we provide a quantitative
analysis of the long-term
evolution of coastal hypoxia (2016 to 2100) under various nutrient
management scenarios, integrating field measurements with a coast-resolved
physical-biogeochemical modeling system in an emerging coastal hypoxic
zone. Our findings indicate that future climate change can diminish
the efficacy of nutrient source control in remediating coastal hypoxia.
By demonstrating the effectiveness of oyster aquaculture in combating
eutrophication-driven hypoxia, we advocate for incorporating nonfed
aquaculture as a complementary strategy alongside conventional land-based
measures. This approach aligns well with the global trend of expanding
nonfed aquaculture and is particularly beneficial for developing countries
seeking sustainable economic growth and ecosystem development.
This study was supported by the Area of Excellence
(AoE/P-601/23-N) and the General Research Fund (GRF 16307423) of the
Hong Kong Research Grants Council, and the Center for Ocean Research
in Hong Kong and Macau (CORE). CORE is a joint research center between
Laoshan Laboratory and The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
We are also grateful for the support of the National Supercomputing
Centers of Guangzhou and Tianjin.
The CMOMS model
data are available athttps://odmp.ust.hk/cmoms/. The CMIP6 data are available athttps://aims2.llnl.gov/search. Data used to create figures in the main text and the Supporting
Information are available athttps://github.com/yuliuqian/Hypoxia-mitigation-efficacy.git. The model used in this study is a community model, ROMS, with codes
available athttps://www.myroms.org/. The codes modified for this study are available upon request to
the corresponding author J.G.
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.est.5c06682.
Model domain and schematic
framework, river forcing,
field survey data, future projections of temperature and wind speed,
model-data comparisons, future projections of nutrients and hypoxic
area, oxygen budget analysis, future projections of hypoxia frequency
and oxygen changes, and climate model variables selection (PDF)
The authors
declare no competing financial interest.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
The CMOMS model
data are available athttps://odmp.ust.hk/cmoms/. The CMIP6 data are available athttps://aims2.llnl.gov/search. Data used to create figures in the main text and the Supporting
Information are available athttps://github.com/yuliuqian/Hypoxia-mitigation-efficacy.git. The model used in this study is a community model, ROMS, with codes
available athttps://www.myroms.org/. The codes modified for this study are available upon request to
the corresponding author J.G.
Articles from Environmental Science & Technology are provided here courtesy ofAmerican Chemical Society
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894