An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
e-mail:peter.molnar@utoronto.ca
Electronic supplementary material is available online athttp://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.c.4587938.
Received 2019 May 18; Accepted 2019 Jul 18; Issue date 2019 Aug 14.
Published by the Royal Society. All rights reserved.
Population growth metrics such asR0are usually asymmetric functions of temperature, with cold-skewed curves arising when the positive effects of a temperature increase outweigh the negative effects, and warm-skewed curves arising in the opposite case. Classically, cold-skewed curves are interpreted as more beneficial to a species under climate warming, because cold-skewness implies increased population growth over a larger proportion of the species's fundamental thermal niche than warm-skewness. However, inference based on the shape of the fitness curve alone, and without considering the synergistic effects of net reproduction, density and dispersal, may yield an incomplete understanding of climate change impacts. We formulate a moving-habitat integrodifference equation model to evaluate how fitness curve skewness affects species’ range size and abundance during climate warming. In contrast to classic interpretations, we find that climate warming adversely affects populations with cold-skewed fitness curves, positively affects populations with warm-skewed curves and has relatively little or mixed effects on populations with symmetric curves. Our results highlight the synergistic effects of fitness curve skewness, spatially heterogeneous densities and dispersal in climate change impact analyses, and that the common approach of mapping changes only inR0may be misleading.
Keywords:climate change, integrodifference, metabolic theory, range shifts, thermal tolerance, niche
Numerous species are undergoing range shifts in response to climate change, typically polewards in latitude or upwards in altitude [1–3]. Underlying these shifts are complex spatial dynamics that may include: regional extirpations in areas where conditions are becoming unsuitable; persistence, but with altered population dynamics in regions where conditions have changed but remain suitable; and dispersal, followed by potential establishment and growth, into regions where conditions have become newly suitable [4,5]. Depending on the respective strengths of these processes, the net effect may be a range shift that corresponds to either an increase or decrease in range size and/or abundance. Examples of such changes exist from almost all major taxa [1–3], including for some pathogens and pests, as well as for some species that provide ecosystem services [6–9].
One key element for determining the impacts of a warmer climate on a species's range and abundance is the temperature sensitivity of its population growth, which in turn is a consequence of the temperature sensitivities of the underlying life-history components [10]. Mortality, for example, tends to increase exponentially with temperature within a species’s thermal tolerance range, while fecundity in contrast exhibits a hump-shaped relationship—increasing first to an optimal temperature before decreasing again to zero at high temperatures (see [10] and references therein). In many insects and vertebrate ectotherms [10–12], these patterns combine to yield a unimodal temperature–population growth relation that increases gradually to an optimum before dropping steeply to zero near the warmest temperatures of the species's tolerance range. We refer to this relation as cold-skewed because the distribution's heavy tail corresponds to cold temperatures (figure 1b). By contrast, environmentally transmitted nematode parasites can exhibit a warm-skewed population growth curve, because the mortality of free-living stages is directly affected by temperature, but reproduction—when occurring within an endotherm definitive host—is temperature-independent [13] (figures1cand2b; see also [14]). Intermediate cases also exist (e.g. more symmetric population growth curves in bacteria [15];figure 1d), and skewness may further vary between [16] and within taxa [17]. In general, fitness curves are expected to be cold-skewed when the positive effects of a temperature increase (e.g. increased reproduction) outweigh the negative effects (e.g. increased mortality), and are expected to be warm-skewed in the opposite case [18,19].

Summary statistics quantifying the impacts of climate warming. (a) The hypothetical south-to-north temperature gradient before (solid line) and after (dashed line) climate warming. (b–d)R0(T) at corresponding spatial locations for (b) cold-skewed, (c) warm-skewed and (d) symmetricR0(T). Orange bars indicate increased fitness after warming, with darker orange indicating regions satisfyingR0(T) < 1 before warming. Blue indicates decreased fitness after warming, with darker blue indicating regions satisfyingR0(T) > 1 before warming. The percentage of the colour bar that is orange (cold-skewed: 57%; warmed-skewed: 44%; symmetric: 50%) is the percentage of the habitat with an increased population growth rate due to climate warming (excluding the regions that are unsuitable both before and after climate warming). (e) Our summary metrics: the ‘fundamental thermal niche’ is defined as all locations whereR0(T) > 1; ‘range size’ is the length of the spatial domain where the population density is above a numerical cut-off value of 0.001; ‘abundance’ is the numerical integral of the population density across the landscape; ‘lag’ (light green) is the distance between the location of the range front and the front of the fundamental niche; ‘extinction debt’ (the total area of the pink region) is an abundance calculated as the present density integrated across all regions where the population is eventually expected to become extirpated due toR0(T) < 1; and ‘colonization credit’ (the total area of the green region) is an abundance calculated as the difference between the present density and the carrying capacity integrated across all regions where the population could persist due toR0(T) > 1. (Online version in colour.)

R0(T) curves with different directions of skew arise when fecundity or mortality are more strongly temperature-dependent. (a–c) Sharpe–Schoolfield equations (equations (2.5)–(2.7)) describe the temperature dependence of fecundity (ρ(T), orange) and survival (σ(T), blue), yielding (d–f) the temperature-dependentR0(T) as the product of these two quantities (equation (2.4)), which is then normalized so that the sum ofR0(T) across the landscape is a constant for niches of all skewness, and (g–i) the spatial dependence ofR0by combiningR0(T) with a spatial temperature gradient (here, linearly decreasing from 30°C atx= −60 in the south to −15°C atx= 60 in the north) and withR0(T) ≥ 1 shown in dark grey andR0(T) < 1 shown in light grey shading. (a,d,g) Fecundity only depends on temperature withEρL=3eV,EρH=6eV, andμ(T)= μ0= −ln(0.2); (b,e,h) survival only depends on temperature withEμL=6eV,EμH=3eVandρ(T)=ρ0= 50; (c,f,i) both fecundity and survival are temperature-dependent withEρL=EρH=EμL=EμH=5Eρ=5Eμ. Note that the left and middle columns describe extreme scenarios that generateR0(T)-curves that bound other, more realistic, combinations of temperature dependencies in fecundity and mortality. (Online version in colour.)
The shape of a species's temperature-dependent population growth curve has been highlighted as a key determinant of where a species is likely to persist in a warming climate. For example, researchers often estimate a species’s fitness curve (the net reproductive number,R0, as a function of temperature) and then evaluate whether population growth would increase or decrease in different locations under future climates [11,20–22], sometimes also comparing the total land area where increases are likely against the total area where decreases are likely as a measure of the anticipated overall net climate change impact [21]. The logical consequence of this perspective is that species with a cold-skewed population growth curve should have an advantage over species with a warm-skewed curve in a warming climate, because a cold-skewed curve maximizes the area over which population growth will increase in response to warming [7,18] (figure 1b–d). This interpretation does not, however, explicitly consider the ability of a species to disperse into and colonize new habitats, nor does it account for spatially heterogeneous densities along a species's range. Here, we show that the explicit consideration of dispersal and population dynamic processes suggests the opposite interpretation, that is, that a warm-skewed population growth curve is more beneficial to a species under climate warming than a cold-skewed curve.
To explore how fitness curve skewness may affect a species’s range size and abundance during climate change-induced range shifts, we formulate a ‘moving-habitat’ integrodifference equation (IDE) model [23]. The IDE framework simultaneously considers both dispersal and net reproduction, and produces ‘travelling wave’ solutions [24] that describe how a species's distribution moves across the landscape via reproduction, dispersal, colonization and mortality. ‘Moving-habitat’ IDE models consider a fundamental niche that shifts due to climate warming, and analyses show that the speed of climate change, the size of a species's niche, as well as its population growth rate and dispersal ability interact to determine if a species will keep pace with its moving niche [23,25,26]. Moving-habitat IDE models describe the dynamics of both the shifting niche and the shifting species distribution, and are a suitable framework for understanding when populations will lag behind their fundamental niches as a result of climate warming. Populations that do not disperse will remain in place and ultimately go extinct as their niches shift polewards with climate warming. Moving-habitat IDE models [23,25,26], and closely related partial differential equation models [27,28], have to date only considered vastly simplified representations of population growth, typically assuming a constant, spatially uniform growth rate within the niche, and spatially uniform declines elsewhere (but see [29]).
Our model (i) accounts for temperature dependencies in reproduction and survival using relationships suggested by the metabolic theory of ecology (MTE) [18,30] to formulate temperature-dependent population growth curves of varying degrees of skewness (figure 2), (ii) numerically solves the IDE to subject populations to climate change-induced habitat shifts, and (iii) evaluates how skewness affects range sizes, abundances and the lags between the invasion front and the niche boundaries during climate change (seefigure 1efor definitions). Generally, we find that warming adversely affects populations with cold-skewed fitness curves, positively affects populations with warm-skewed fitness curves, has relatively little or mixed effects on populations with symmetric fitness curves, and that these results are largely robust against different choices of population growth and dispersal mechanisms.
IDE models combine reproduction, mortality and dispersal to describe the spatio-temporal dynamics of a population, treating space and time as continuous and discrete variables, respectively. The population density,nt+1(x), at locationxin yeart+1 is given by
wheref(nt(y),T(y,t)) describes the density- and temperature-dependent population growth at locationyin yeart, and the dispersal kernelk(x−y) describes the probability of an offspring dispersing from locationyto locationx. We assume that no parents survive after reproduction (i.e. non-overlapping generations). Accordingly, following reproduction, survival and dispersal, the integral totals the number of offspring arriving at locationxfrom all possible origins (yinΩ) to give the new population density,nt+1(x).For simplicity, we modelΩas a one-dimensional domain [−L, L], corresponding to either a latitudinal temperature gradient from the equator to a pole, or to an elevation gradient from low to high. For convenience, but without loss of generality, we discuss our model for a latitudinal temperature gradient in the Northern Hemisphere, hereafter referring tox=−Las the ‘south’ andx=Las the ‘north’, and assuming a linear temperature decrease fromy= −L toy=L(figure 1a).
In the main text, we focus our discussion on the Beverton–Holt model for population growth, the Laplace dispersal kernel and deterministic annual temperature increases (figures3and4). However, for generality we also evaluate the robustness of our conclusions to other combinations of population growth and dispersal, including compensatory and non-compensatory density dependence, and fat-tailed, exponentially bounded and asymmetric dispersal kernels (electronic supplementary material, §§5–7). Moreover, we also consider annual stochastic temperature variations around the deterministically increasing mean (electronic supplementary material, §8).

Range change dynamics of species with cold-skewed, warm-skewed and symmetricR0(T) curves. (a–c) Att= 0, climate warming of + 0.1°C yr−1begins causing theR0(T) curve to shift northwards (shaded grey, with regions whereR0(T) > 1 shown darker). Blue curves show the population density responding to this niche shift. Extinction debt (the abundance of the population persisting in regions whereR0(T) < 1) is the total area of the shaded pink region and colonization credit (the abundance of the population temporarily below carrying capacity despiteR0(T) > 1) is the total area of the shaded green region. Panels (d–f) show the population density at 10-year increments during climate warming. (g–l) Populations with cold-skewed and symmetricR0(T) have colonization credits that exceed extinction debt (g,i) and thus reduced range size and abundance under climate warming (j,l); the opposite is true for populations with a warm-skewedR0(T) (h,k). Parameter values are described in the main text and the electronic supplementary material, §1.2, with the activation energiesEρandEμfixed asEρ= 0.65 eV andEμ=0 eV (cold-skewedR0(T)),Eρ= 0 eV andEμ= 0.65 eV (warm-skewedR0(T)) andEρ=Eμ= 0.65 eV (symmetricR0(T)), respectively. To allow visual comparison between a population'sR0(T) and its density, (a–c) showR0(T) multiplied by 0.3. Similarly, (j–l) show the lag values multiplied by 50.

Climate warming adversely affects populations with a cold-skewedR0(T) (left column), benefits populations with a warmed-skewedR0(T) (middle column), and has relatively little effect on populations with a symmetricR0(T) (right column). (a–c) Different degrees ofR0(T) skewness are explored for each of the cold-skewed, warm-skewed and symmetric scenarios by varyingEρand/orEμfrom 0.2 to 1.1 eV by steps of 0.15 eV (dark to light blue; all other parameters are given in the main text and the electronic supplementary material, §1.2). (d–l) Changes in range size, abundance and lag before (t< 0), during (t= 0 tot= 100) and after (t> 100) warming. The vertical axes in (d–i) are percentage changes relative to the initial range and abundance and in (j–l) are the absolute difference between future lags (t> 0) and the lag att= 0 (cf. electronic supplementary material §§1 and 2 for details).
The Laplace kernel for dispersal is given by
and assumes that the probability of dispersal from locationytoxdepends only on the distance |x − y| with a mean dispersal distanceD(see [31] for a mechanistic derivation). Specifically, equation (2.2) assumes that dispersal is not affected by the temperature or density where an individual is born,y, where it settles,x, or the habitat it travels through to get fromytox.
The Beverton–Holt model describes annual net reproduction, can be viewed as the discrete-time analogue to the continuous-time logistic equation, and is given by
whereKrepresents the carrying capacity andR0(T) is the temperature-dependent net reproductive number at low densities, which we refer to as the ‘fitness curve’. BothR0andKcould be impacted by environmental conditions in multiple ways, but we focus only on temperature dependencies in the former to allow disentangling the influence of fitness curve shape on the range change dynamics without confounding these analyses with changes in carrying capacity. We assume a fixed generation time of 1 year (implying that temperature does not affect the number of generations per year) and describe the temperature dependence of population growth via the underlying temperature dependencies of fecundity and mortality
whereρis fecundity at low population density,σis the probability of an individual surviving to reproduce at low population density, andT(y,t) is temperature at locationyat timet. For notational simplicity, we writeT(y, t)=Thenceforth.
We describe the temperature sensitivities of both fecundity,ρ(T), and survival,σ(T), using relationships suggested by the MTE [18,30]. Fecundity is typically cold-skewed, increasing exponentially with temperature within a species's fundamental thermal niche, and dropping steeply to zero near the upper and lower temperature boundaries of that range (figure 2a). Assuming the temperature dependency of fecundity is largely driven by the sensitivity of underlying metabolic processes, we use the Sharpe–Schoolfield model [18] to representρ(T) and write
whereρ0is the fecundity at a reference temperatureT0(units: Kelvin, K),κ=8.62 × 10−5eV K−1is Boltzmann's constant (units: electronvolt per Kelvin, eV K−1),Eρis the average activation energy (units: eV) of the rate-limiting enzyme driving reproduction (determining the temperature sensitivity of fecundity at intermediate temperatures of the organism's niche), andEρLandEρHare the inactivation energies (units: eV) determining how abruptly fecundity drops to zero at the thermal tolerance boundaries,TρLandTρH.
Survival is typically also a unimodal function of temperature but, unlike fecundity, is usually warm-skewed, peaking near the lower boundary of the organism's fundamental niche and declining exponentially as temperatures increase (figure 2b). As with fecundity, we use an MTE-based formulation [18], representing the temperature-dependent mortality rate by
and the proportion of individuals that survive to reproduce by
As with fecundity, the parametersEμ,EμLandEμHdetermine the temperature sensitivity of mortality within and outside the lower and upper temperature thresholds,TμLandTμH, andT0is a reference temperature at which mortality equalsμ0.
We assumed a linear temperature gradient ranging from 30°C to −15°C across the landscape (Ω= [−L,L]). To evaluate how the shape of the temperature-dependent fitness curveR0(T) (equation (2.4)) influences the range change dynamics, we establish cold-skewed, warm-skewed and symmetricR0(T) curves by assuming temperature sensitivities in fecundity only, mortality only, or both (figure 2; cf. also [18]). We present simulations for these three extreme cases (figure 4) and note that they generate a wide variety ofR0(T) shapes that bound other, more common combinations of the relative strengths of the temperature dependencies of fecundity and mortality (i.e.Eρ≠Eμbut both positive). We set the inactivation energies (EρL,EρH,EμLandEμH) such that they further accentuate the direction of any skew inR0(T) while ensuring that the fundamental niche is contained within the spatial domain. The magnitude of the skew is further manipulated in each of these cases by considering a biologically plausible range of activation energies [32] (0.2 ≤Eρ, Eμ≤ 1.1 eV). We standardized each fitness curve so that the total reproductive potential of an organism across the entire landscape is always a constant. This calibration ensures that the shape ofR0(T) is the main source of variation in all comparisons, and that qualitative differences in climate change impacts can be attributed to differences in the fitness curve shape (electronic supplementary material, §2). We used numerical simulations to explore the range change dynamics given by equations (2.1)–(2.7). Population density was allowed to equilibrate before the onset of warming (att= 0), after which we increased the temperature at all locations byw= 0.1°C yr−1until an increase of 10°C was achieved. We tracked the population's range size and abundance, as well as the lag between the northern boundary of the population range and of its thermal niche (seefigure 1efor definitions). Range size and abundance changes are reported as percentage changes relative to the range and abundance at the onset of warming (t= 0), whereas lag is reported as the difference between future lags and the lag att= 0 to facilitate comparisons between fitness curves with different shapes. The MATLAB code is provided on Figshare [33] (doi:10.6084/m9.figshare.6955370) and further details of the simulation parametrization, assumptions and implementation are described in the electronic supplementary material, §§1 and 2.
Solving equations (2.1)–(2.7) with simulated climate warming reveals that the species's distribution lags behind its shifting fundamental niche (see also [5]). We observe regions of ‘colonization credit’ [4], where suitable habitat (R0(T) ≥ 1) has yet to be fully colonized, and of ‘extinction debt’ [4,34], where individuals continue to persist temporarily in unsuitable habitat (R0(T) < 1;figure 3a–c; seefigure 1efor our definitions of colonization credit and extinction debt).
During climate warming, population density retains its general shape, but the skew ofR0(T) affects the length of habitat where the population is at carrying capacity (figure 3a–f). Populations with a warm-skewedR0(T) have small lags (figures3kand4k) and small colonization credits (figure 3h), which means that most of the fundamental niche has been fully colonized, and suggests increased range sizes (figures3kand4e) and increased abundances (figures3kand4h) under climate warming. The opposite holds for cold-skewedR0(T), where a larger lag (figures3jand4j) results in large colonization credits (figure 3g), meaning that a large region of the fundamental niche has yet to be fully colonized, and leads to decreased range sizes (figures3jand4d) and abundances (figures3jand4g).
These differences in the range change dynamics of warm-skewed, symmetric and cold-skewedR0(T) can be understood by considering the population's potential for range expansions at the leading range edge. Populations with warm-skewedR0(T) are sensitive to beneficial temperature increases in the north, where the slope of theR0(T) curve is steep. In addition, warm-skewed populations have higher densities at the leading edge of their fundamental niche (figure 3b) due to smaller lags (figure 4k), and thus a large potential for colonizing newly available northern habitats via dispersal, resulting in an increased range size and abundance during warming (figure 4e,h). For populations with a cold-skewedR0(T), these same mechanisms act in the opposite direction, implying decreased range sizes and abundance. Extinctions at the trailing edge of the population density also determine the net impact of climate warming, with extinction debts largest for populations with warm-skewedR0(T), further explaining why these populations show increased range size and abundance in response to climate warming (figures3g–i; electronic supplementary material, §§4 and 5.1). Populations with a symmetricR0(T) are mostly unaffected by climate warming, but show slight decreases in both range size and abundance (figure 4f,i). These slight decreases occur where the population lags behind its fundamental niche, resulting in a negative net effect of colonization versus extinction, despite the symmetry ofR0(T).
The influence ofR0(T)'s skewness on a population's response to climate warming is largely insensitive to aspects of the fitness curve shape other than skewness, mean dispersal distance, the choice of population growth function, the choice for dispersal kernel and annual stochastic fluctuations in temperature (electronic supplementary material, §§3–8; summarized intable 1); however, for large values ofR0(T), Ricker growth may give rise to oscillatory or chaotic travelling waves that do not occur with Beverton–Holt growth [26], and these oscillations can be dampened by climate warming due to the temperature dependence ofR0(T) (electronic supplementary material, §6).
The skewness ofR0(T) has a strong influence on a population's response to climate warming. These effects are largely insensitive to choice of population growth function, dispersal kernel, mean dispersal distance and climate stochasticity. In response to 100 years of warming, range size and abundance generally decrease (−) with a cold-skewedR0(T), increase (+) with a warm-skewedR0(T) and remain relatively unchanged (0) with a symmetricR0(T).
The shape of temperature-dependent population growth measures such asR0(T) contains critical information on a species's sensitivity to climate change. The common approach of only considering how population growth metrics would change in different locations under climate change (e.g.R0(T)- orr(T)-based impact maps for insects [11], wildlife pathogens [22] and human pathogens [20,21], wherer(T) is the net reproductive rate at low densities), however, can yield an incomplete and potentially misleading picture. In contrast to the suggestion by Molnáret al.[18] that cold-skewed populations experience increased population growth over the majority of their habitat (orange bars infigure 1b) and warm-skewed populations experience increased growth over only a small portion of their habitat (orange bars infigure 1c), when embeddingR0(T) within a framework that considers dispersal, density dependence and a shifting fundamental niche, we find that generally climate warming adversely affects the range size, abundance and lag of populations with a cold-skewedR0(T), positively affects populations with a warm-skewedR0(T), and has relatively little or mixed effects on populations with a symmetricR0(T) (figure 4andtable 1). For cold- and warm-skewedR0(T), the degree of the skew further magnifies these effects (figure 4). While previous interpretations of the effect of fitness curve skewness on species’ responses to climate warming have considered solely the shape ofR0(T), we suggest that it is not only the skewness ofR0(T), but also the synergistic effects of dispersal and spatially varying population densities that underly our findings that a warm-skewedR0(T) results in range size and abundance increases, and small lags between the moving cold tolerance limit of the fundamental niche and the population's leading edge, whereas a cold-skewedR0(T) results in range contractions, decreased abundances and large lags.
Our model is deliberately simple to facilitate a sound understanding of the synergistic effects of fitness curve skewness, density and dispersal as a previously unrecognized mechanism for why some species may benefit from warming while others experience range contractions and population declines. These synergistic mechanisms should be viewed as complementary to previously recognized influences, such as the role of interspecific interactions [35] in confining species to only part of their fundamental niche. The muskox lungwormUmingmakstrongyls pallikuukensis, for example, has a warm-skewedR0(T) [13] and has been closely tracking the northern boundary of its shifting fundamental niche during a warming-induced range expansion [6], as would be expected (figures3and4). No changes were reported in the southern boundary of the lungworm's distribution [6], which is consistent with our results that warm-skewedR0(T) have large extinction debts (figure 3h), and may further be explained by the behavioural thermoregulation of the worms' intermediate slug host and the shelter it provides from lethal high-temperature extremes through behavioural thermoregulation [13]. Also in agreement with our results are the range contractions observed in tree species in the eastern USA [36] and southern Africa [37], where limited dispersal has resulted in large dispersal lags at the poleward limits, perhaps further exacerbated by apparently cold-skewed fitness curves (cf. fig. 3 in Tallutoet al. [4]). Lepidopterans [8,9] and Odonata [38], by contrast, have largely expanded their ranges polewards in response to warming—often while maintaining stable or more slowly moving equatorward boundaries—despite generally cold-skewed fitness curves (see Deutschet al. [11], their dataset S1). It has, however, been suggested that these range change patterns could be a result of temperature limiting species’ distribution at the poleward boundary, and factors other than temperature (e.g. competition) currently limiting distribution at the equatorward boundary [8,9,38]. In other words, these species may not be fully occupying the warmest end of their fundamental thermal niche, and would temporarily be shielded from the worst consequences of warming despite having a cold-skewed fitness curve.
The dynamics of climate warming-induced range changes are complex, and our analyses are not meant to imply that skewness will uniquely determine whether warming benefits or harms a species. Dedicated meta-analyses are needed to disentangle the various factors affecting range changes (i.e. sensitivities to other abiotic variables [39], biotic interactions [40] and landscape features [41,42]), but are currently limited by (i) unknown fitness curve shapes for most species, (ii) the difficulty of inferring fitness curve shape from local densities when carrying capacity is temperature-independent as assumed here (cf.figure 3a–f, showing ‘rectangular travelling waves with soft edges' regardless of fitness curve skew), and (iii) a paucity of studies [43] documenting distribution and abundance changes over a species’s entire range and on long enough time scales to capture the dynamics suggested here. Nevertheless, given the robustness of our results to different forms of density dependence and dispersal (table 1), we expect that imbalances in the temperature sensitivities of different life-history traits, and the resultant fitness curve skewness, may explain some of the observed variation in distribution and abundance change responses to climate warming.
Our models can easily be extended in multiple ways by relaxing simplifying assumptions or adding additional population regulating mechanisms. The list of potential factors influencing range change dynamics is long, and includes potential temperature dependencies in other life-history and population dynamics parameters (e.g. increased temperature could imply: decreased development times due to faster metabolism [30]; shortened dispersal distances due to decreased larval development times [30], such as in marine plankton [44]; and decreased carrying capacity, since faster metabolism accelerates the depletion of a fixed resource supply [12]), local adaptation (e.g. different temperature sensitivities of individuals at the leading and trailing edge [17,45]), limiting abiotic factors other than temperature [39] (e.g. moisture), age structure [26] (e.g. for species where dispersal only occurs in certain life stages such as trees or many insects), Allee effects limiting range shift speeds at the leading edge [24,46], as well as landscape heterogeneities [41,42] and species interactions [27,35,40]. Each of these might dampen or amplify the patterns suggested by our analyses.
We used temperature-dependent relationships for fecundity and survival, but did not explore the effects of temperature dependence on generation time. This assumption most closely corresponds to organisms with a fixed, 1-year generation, for example, driven by obligatory diapause to overwinter a cold season (e.g. Lepidoptera in temperate forests). However, even in these cases, in response to warmer temperatures, generation times may decrease to allow for multiple generations within a year. Such changes would not affectR0(T) (becauseR0(T) measures population growth per generation) [10,47], but would shift the relationship between temperature and the geometric growth rate,λ(T), towards more cold-skewed, probably with the corresponding consequences for abundance and range changes that were outlined in our Results section. Our combined MTE–IDE framework allows easy incorporation of such additional factors, but would need to be extended to consider multiple generations per year (i.e. [48]).
The MTE describes temperature effects from the individual to the ecosystem level [30], and has provided many insights describing how a warmer climate may alter population and community dynamics [18,32,42,49], but analyses have generally not explicitly considered dispersal. Likewise, there exists a rich literature that uses IDE models to explore how various intrinsic and extrinsic mechanisms affect range change dynamics [24,26,31,41,42,46], but few studies have explicitly explored the role of temperature in these dynamics. Combining these two bodies of theory has enormous potential for unravelling the complexities of temperature-dependent spatial population dynamics.
All computer code is available athttps://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.6955370.v4[33].
All authors designed the study, interpreted the results and wrote the manuscript. A.H. and C.A.C. wrote the computer code.
We declare we have no competing interests.
This research was catalysed by a Banff International Research Station workshop (13w5095) and further facilitated by an Atlantic Association for Research in the Mathematical Sciences Collaborative Research Grant. A.H. (RGPIN 2014-05413) and P.K.M. (RGPIN 2016-06301) were supported by National Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada Discovery grants, and P.K.M. was further supported by the Canada Foundation for Innovation John R. Evans Leader Funds and MRIS Ontario Research Funds. C.A.C. was supported by the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BB/P004202/1). Part of this work was carried out while C.A.C. was a funded visiting scholar at the Fields Institute for Research in Mathematical Sciences.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
All computer code is available athttps://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.6955370.v4[33].
Articles from Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences are provided here courtesy ofThe Royal Society
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894