An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email:dwhitt@ucar.edu.
Edited by Edward A. Boyle, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, and approved May 18, 2020 (received for review January 15, 2020)
Author contributions: D.B.W. and M.F.J. designed research, performed research, contributed new reagents/analytic tools, analyzed data, and wrote the paper.
Issue date 2020 Jul 7.
Published under thePNAS license.
Global warming drives cascading changes across physical, chemical, and biological marine systems. However, the coupled dynamics of these systems are difficult to disentangle. Here, we present a simple theoretical model of how these systems respond to global warming in the Subarctic Atlantic Ocean, which experiences particularly dramatic changes in 21st-century warming scenarios. The results reveal how global warming impacts this system by showing that remote changes in the Atlantic basin-scale circulation are a more important driver of biogeochemical change in the Subarctic than local reductions in vertical mixing.
Keywords:ocean circulation, biogeochemistry, global warming
Earth system models (ESMs) project that global warming suppresses biological productivity in the Subarctic Atlantic Ocean as increasing ocean surface buoyancy suppresses two physical drivers of nutrient supply: vertical mixing and meridional circulation. However, the quantitative sensitivity of productivity to surface buoyancy is uncertain and the relative importance of the physical drivers is unknown. Here, we present a simple predictive theory of how mixing, circulation, and productivity respond to increasing surface buoyancy in 21st-century global warming scenarios. With parameters constrained by observations, the theory suggests that the reduced northward nutrient transport, owing to a slower ocean circulation, explains the majority of the reduced productivity in a warmer climate. The theory also informs present-day biases in a set of ESM simulations as well as the physical underpinnings of their 21st-century projections. Hence, this theoretical understanding can facilitate the development of improved 21st-century projections of marine biogeochemistry and ecosystems.
The Subarctic Atlantic Ocean hosts a highly productive marine ecosystem (1,2) which contributes to a major regional sink of anthropogenicCO2(3) and sustains valuable fisheries along its margins (4). However, Earth system models (ESMs) project that biological productivity will decline rapidly in the Subarctic Atlantic Ocean relative to other oceans as greenhouse gases increase (5,6). Consistent with these projections, observations suggest that Subarctic Atlantic Ocean productivity has declined during the industrial era (7), but future declines may be far more dramatic (5,6).
Studies have attributed these rapid regional declines in Subarctic Atlantic Ocean productivity to particularly substantial reductions in the depth of surface mixing layers and a slower Atlantic meridional overturning circulation (AMOC), which led to a vertical decoupling of the surface productivity from the essential nutrients at depth (5,6,8). Based on evidence that nutrient transport in the AMOC is important for North Atlantic Ocean productivity (6,9,10), some studies recently suggested that the slowing meridional nutrient transport in the North Atlantic Ocean nutrient stream (11–15) (which occurs in conjunction with a slower AMOC) is a stronger physical driver of North Atlantic Ocean productivity declines in 21st-century projections than shoaling surface mixing layers (16,17). However, the mechanisms that lead to productivity decline in ESMs can be hard to disentangle (5,6,16–20), and the relative importance of the physical drivers for the projected 21st-century productivity declines in the Subarctic Atlantic Ocean is not well understood.
Here, we use a two-box theoretical model of the physical and biogeochemical dynamics in the Subarctic Atlantic Ocean to predict and understand the physical drivers of biogeochemical change under increasing ocean surface buoyancy, which results from ocean surface warming and freshening as atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations increase (5,19). We also use the box model to interpret sophisticated ESM simulations of marine physical and biogeochemical dynamics in the Subarctic Atlantic Ocean, including the present-day dynamics and 21st-century warming scenarios.
We start by considering the upper layer of our model, which represents the surface mixed layer of the Subarctic Atlantic Ocean, with parameters optimized to reflect present-day conditions (Materials and Methods). The annual cycle is the dominant timescale of biogeochemical variability here (21,22) and therefore an important target for constraining biogeochemical models and improving process understanding. For example, consider the horizontally averaged dynamics of surface nitrateNO3−. Although a significant fraction of net primary productivity reflects recycling, nitrate consumption primarily reflects new productivity associated with physical resupply of nutrients that are lost via export of organic material from the surface layer (23). Every winter, after the sun retreats toward the Southern Hemisphere, the Subarctic Atlantic Ocean cools and turbulence mixes water vertically over depths of hundreds of meters (Fig. 1A). As a result, the nitrate concentration is relatively high at the surface and fairly well mixed vertically over the top several hundred meters (Fig. 1AandD). As the sunlight increases, the surface mixed-layer depthDsshoals, and the marine ecosystem consumes the nitrate in the surface mixed layer (Figs. 1CandDand2B) at a rate
whereNsis the nitrate concentration in the surface mixed layer and PROD is the rate of consumption of nitrate by the ecosystem, i.e., new productivity. As the nitrate is drawn down to relatively low concentrations during summer, new productivity slows (Figs. 1CandDand2B). But, as the sunlight reduces again, and the mixed-layer depthDsdeepens during the fall, waters of the seasonal thermocline, which have relatively high nitrate concentrationsNd, are entrained into the surface layer. Thus, the surface nitrate concentration increases (Fig. 1CandD) at a rate
where the entrainment velocitywen≈∂Ds/∂t.

The box model is optimized to represent observed nitrateNO3−concentrations and vertical mixing over the entire Subarctic Atlantic Ocean, from70○W to10○E and from45○N to75○N. (A) A map of the late-winter-maximum surfaceNO3−concentrations from the 2013 World Ocean Atlas (24) and the corresponding March mixed-layer depth (black contours) based on all in situ Argo profiles from 2000 to 2017 (25). (B) A hydrographic section ofNO3−obtained in August 2013 (26). (CandD) The seasonal cycle ofNO3−in the World Ocean Atlas (24), which is represented by colored shading inD. The mean (black) and 10 to 90% range (gray shading) of the observed mixed-layer depths are plotted inD. Modeled values (red dashes) of surfaceNO3−(C) and mixed-layer depth (D) are plotted for comparison. A few isopycnals are marked by white contours inAandB. The dominant terms in the present-day nitrogen budget in the Subarctic seasonal thermocline are indicated inB(12,14).

Future climate scenarios forced by slower overturning and/or shallower winter mixing demonstrate that overturning is the primary driver of lower new productivity. (AandB) The annual new production in each year (A) and the seasonal cycles of new productivity at the beginning and end of the scenarios (B). In all three scenarios, surface buoyancy increases at a rate of4.3×10−5m⋅s−2⋅y−1, which is equivalent to a warming of about 0.05 °C/y or a freshening of about 0.005 practical salinity units per year. Note the differenty-axis ranges.
To understand changes in productivity on longer timescales, we also need to consider the model’s lower layer, which represents the seasonal thermocline that lies between the summer and the winter mixed-layer depth. This layer holds the essential reservoir of nitrate that is tapped each winter to resupply the surface layer and sustain relatively high rates of new productivity compared to that in subtropical oceans (2,22) (Fig. 1CandD). As a result of the relatively large nitrate reservoir, the seasonal cycle of the nitrate concentrationNdin the seasonal thermocline is far smaller in amplitude thanNsat the surface (Fig. 1D). Yet, over an annual cycle, there is a net loss of nitrate via entrainment into the surface layer during fall that is not balanced by the subduction of nitrate from the surface layer into the seasonal thermocline during spring. A near-equilibrium state is sustained by a physical transport of nitrate and remineralization of the production that is exported from the surface layer above into nitrate in the seasonal thermocline.
On interannual and longer timescales, new productivity is constrained by the integrated nitrate budget from the surface to the bottom of the seasonal thermocline (12). A fraction of the new production is exported below the maximum winter mixed-layer depth,Dw, and thereby lost from the seasonal thermocline. In an equilibrium state, this export to depths belowDwhas to be replenished by physical transport processes. Integrated over the upper Subarctic Atlantic Ocean, the physical resupply of nitrate is dominated by advection via the AMOC, which leads us to an approximate mean budget equation for the upper Subarctic Atlantic Ocean:
Here,δis thee-folding depth scale over which production is remineralized ande−Dw/δis approximately the fraction of new production that is exported belowDwand lost from the seasonal thermocline, which we henceforth call the x ratio;ΔN=Nsub−Ndis the nitrate deficit between the subpolar seasonal thermoclineNdand subtropical thermoclineNsub(Fig. 1B),Ψmaxis the maximum value of the AMOC streamfunction at the subtropical/subpolar boundary (45○N), andA≈11×106km2is the area of the Subarctic Atlantic Ocean (from45○to75○N).
By fitting the time-dependent two-box model to the present-day seasonal cycle via optimization, we obtain a model solution that captures the nitrate dynamics of both the surface and seasonal thermocline, as described above (Figs. 1and2).SI Appendix, Figs. S1–S3show several additional diagnostics of the optimal solution, including the contributions of each process to the seasonal cycle, i.e.,Eqs.1and2, and the approximately cyclo-stationary equilibrium, i.e.,Eq.3.
ESMs project that new productivity in the Subarctic Atlantic Ocean will decline over the 21st century in global warming scenarios. The two physical drivers that explain this decline are captured by the box model and highlighted byEq.3: 1) A shoaling of the winter mixed-layer depthDwleads to an increase in the x ratio such that a larger fraction of the new production is lost from the seasonal thermocline. 2) A slowing of the AMOC volume transportΨmaxleads to a reduction in the resupply of nitrate from the subtropics. For example, in an ensemble of simulations of the Community Earth System Model (CESM) (27) the mean winter mixed-layer depthDwand the meridional volume transportΨmaxare reduced by about 45 and 54%, respectively, from 2020 to 2100 in a high-emissions scenario (Fig. 3), and qualitatively similar reductions are found in several other ESMs (17). Similar changes inDwandΨmaxare also predicted by the box model (Fig. 3), which uses a simple first-principles analytic expression (28,29) to characterize how increasing surface buoyancy drives physically coupled declines inDwandΨmaxin 21st-century global warming scenarios (Materials and Methods).

Model results show the relationship between a shallower winter mixed layerDw, a slower ocean meridional circulationΨmax, and reduced new productivity PROD in a warming climate. The background gradient represents the annual new production in equilibrium box model solutions, the three thin black lines are the transient box model solutions inFig. 2, and the white dotted line is the average over the Subarctic Atlantic Ocean of an ensemble of CESM simulations of the high-emissions representative concentration pathway (RCP8.5) scenario from 2020 to 2100. Circles are marked every 5 y in the transient simulations, with the fill colors again denoting the annual new production. Note that the fill colors are barely distinguishable from the background shading, indicating that 1) the transient simulations are well approximated by the model’s equilibrium solution and 2) the ESM results are well approximated by the predictions of the two-box model.
To separate and quantify the effects of decliningDwandΨmaxon new productivity, we ran the optimized box model through an increasing-buoyancy scenario, which is a simple analog of the high-emissions scenario simulated in the CESM, with different combinations of physical responses: decliningDwwith fixedΨmax, decliningΨmaxwith fixedDw, and decliningΨmaxandDw(Fig. 2). The results show that decliningDwandΨmaxboth contribute to reduced productivity, with the slowing meridional transport being the increasingly dominant driver of the declining productivity as the surface buoyancy increases. By the end of the 80-y-long integration, the new production is reduced by 0.11 mol N⋅m−2⋅y−1if only the mixed-layer shoaling is applied versus 0.26 mol N⋅m−2⋅y−1if only the AMOC slowing is applied. If both drivers are applied, the new production is reduced by 0.37 mol N⋅m−2⋅y−1. Even though the model dynamics are inherently nonlinear, we therefore empirically find that the effects of AMOC slowing and mixed-layer shoaling approximately add up linearly. In addition, both physical drivers induce qualitatively similar changes in the seasonal cycle of productivity by reducing the peak and shortening the duration of high springtime productivity. The slowing AMOC has a relatively stronger effect than the shoaling mixed layer on both the peak and duration, and the effects of the two drivers on seasonal productivity are approximately additive. Hence, the effects of slowing AMOC and shoaling mixed layers on productivity can be separated with little ambiguity in the box model.
To quantify the potential impact of a wide range of different changes inΨmaxandDwon new productivity,Fig. 3shows equilibrium results from the box model as a function of bothΨmaxandDw. Most notably, we find that both the transient box model and the CESM ensemble mean closely follow the equilibrium box-model prediction over the parameter space considered. This is becauseEq.3holds quite well throughout the transient scenarios (SI Appendix, Fig. S4D).
To test the robustness of our results, we have quantified the sensitivity of the equilibrium new productivity response to global warming to the most poorly constrained box model parameters. Within observational constraints, the net decline in the annual new production at higher surface buoyancy is relatively robust to the box model parameters (SI Appendix, Fig. S5). The x ratioe−Dw/δand nitrate deficitΔNare the most important features of the present-day solutions that control how the physical drivers impact productivity under increasing buoyancy. In particular, if the present-day x ratio and nitrate deficit are reduced, then the shallowing winter mixed layerDwand hence increasing x ratio have a somewhat greater impact while the slowing meridional circulationΨmaxand hence declining advective nitrate transportΨmaxNsubhave a smaller impact, but the net decline in productivity is fairly similar. Nevertheless, declining meridional nitrate transport is the dominant driver of equilibrium productivity declines at the end of the 80-y increasing-buoyancy scenario shown inFigs. 2and3for all parameter combinations that we considered.
The compensation between sensitivity in the x ratio and nutrient advection may partially explain why ESMs robustly project that new productivity in the Subarctic Atlantic Ocean declines as buoyancy increases, despite substantial differences in the underlying physical and biogeochemical model dynamics (5,17–19). For example, as shown inSI Appendix, Figs. S1 and S4, the CESM has a higher nitrate concentration in the seasonal thermocline and a smaller nitrate deficit than is consistent with observations. In addition, the x ratio in the CESM, as inferred frome−Dw/δ≈0.33, is lower than for our box model tuned to observations, wheree−Dw/δ≈0.53, because the remineralization depth scale is about half as long in the CESM (δ≈250m) compared to the box model (δ=500m). In fact, the box model suggests that the higher present-day nitrate concentration in the seasonal thermocline in the CESM is associated with the smaller present-day nitrate deficit, which approximately compensates for the lower x ratio inEq.3. As a result, the annual new production is similar in the box model and the CESM and both have a similar sensitivity to changes in the meridional transportΨmax. However, other ESMs may differ somewhat from observations and the CESM with regard to the nutrient deficit, the x ratio, and other variables that influence Subarctic Atlantic Ocean productivity declines in 21st-century scenarios (for nutrients, mixed layers, and overturning, see ref.17). Future analysis of other ESMs could quantify the relevant variables identified by the two-box model to better understand how the drivers of Subarctic Atlantic Ocean productivity decline differ across models.
The physics and biogeochemistry of the Subarctic Atlantic Ocean are projected to undergo rapid change in the coming decades if atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations continue to increase at current or faster rates. Here, we present a simple predictive theory of the physical and biogeochemical response of the Subarctic Atlantic Ocean to increasing surface buoyancy. The emerging hypotheses are as follows: 1) The simple box model andEq.3capture the most essential dynamics of the productivity response to global warming; numerous other physical, chemical, and ecological changes (5,18,19), many of which occur in the CESM, are secondary effects. And, 2) the slower nutrient stream suppresses Subarctic Atlantic Ocean productivity in global warming; the shoaling winter mixed layer and the vertical decoupling of surface productivity from the local deep nutrient reservoir are an important but secondary effect. These results not only provide fundamental insight into the dynamics of the coupled physical/biogeochemical marine systems, but also provide insights into the underlying dynamics of an ensemble of ESM simulations. Such fundamental theoretical understanding of the expected and simulated physical and biogeochemical changes can underpin the development of more accurate and precise projections of the next 10 to 100 y.
The model (30) simulates the average nitrate concentrationNO3−in two layers, both of which are above the late-winter maximum surface mixed-layer depthDw, in the Subarctic Atlantic Ocean. The region has meridional extentL≈2,750km, zonal extentW≈4,000km, and areaA=LW≈11millionkm2(roughly70○W to10○E and45○to75○N). The coupled governing equations for the evolution of the nitrate concentrations as a function of time in each layer are as follows:
The nitrate concentrationNsin the surface layer with time-varying thicknessDsis drawn down by the ecosystem, which is implicit (as in ref.31). That is,
whereμmrepresents the maximum nitrate consumption rate andkNis the half-saturation concentration for nitrate uptake. The light limitation function is integrated overDs, following ref.21;kIis the half-saturation irradiance,1/kzis thee-folding depth, and the annual cycle of photosynthetically available radiation at the sea surfaceI0is defined using standard functions (32) and closely follows satellite observations (30,33).
Only a fractiona(Ds)of the new production PROD is lost from the surface layer, since a fraction of the new production remineralizes back toNswithin the surface layer. The remineralization of exported production back to nitrate at depth is usually represented via power laws or exponential functions (34). For simplicity, a single exponential function is used to represent the vertical structure of export, such that
whereδis thee-folding depth scale over which production is remineralized.
A fraction of the production that is exported from the surface layer is remineralized in the seasonal thermocline, which has nitrate concentrationNdand varying thicknessDd≈Dw−Ds. The fraction of new production that remineralizes in the seasonal thermocline is given by
The fraction of new production that is exported to depths belowDwand thereby lost from the seasonal thermocline is given bya−b≈e−Dw/δ(SI Appendix, Fig. S6), which we call the x ratio, and may range from about 10 to 60% in the Subarctic Atlantic Ocean (35).
The entrainment velocity
is a function of the rate of change of the mixed-layer depth∂Ds/∂tand the vertical velocity at the mixed-layer basew(Ds)(36,37), which is written in terms of the lateral velocityvassociated with the incoming AMOC from the south using continuity. As the mixed-layer depthDsgets shallower during spring, the water formerly in the mixed layer is subducted into the seasonal thermocline. This has no impact on the nitrate concentration in the surface layer (hence the Heaviside functionH(wen)inEq.4), but subduction does modify the nitrate concentration in the seasonal thermocline during spring as indicated inEq.5.
Rather than include a prognostic model for the annual cycle of the surface mixed-layer depthDs, we specify the annual cycle ofDsusing an analytic function with parameters controlling the minimumDband maximumDw.
We tune the summertime minimum mixed-layer depthDs=Dbto provide the best fit to the observed summer (August) nitrate profile (averaged horizontally over the Subarctic Atlantic Ocean) from the World Ocean Atlas 2013 (24). Specifically, we fit the observed nitrate profile over the upper 200 m, using a step function:
Since the true horizontally averaged mixed-layer concentration is best approximated by the averaged surface value, we prescribe thatNs=Nobs(z=0)=1.3mmol/m3, but we optimizeDbandNdto minimize(N(z)−Nobs(z))2averaged over the top 200 m. The best fit is obtained forNd=11.3mmol/m3andDb=40m; the latter is hence used in all our experiments. The maximum late-winter mixed-layer depthDwis determined via an optimization procedure described below, and the result is an annual cycle inDsthat is very similar to the observed spatially averaged mixed-layer depth as shown inFig. 1D(the observations are based on all Argo profiles from the years 2000 to 2017 and published in ref.25).
A northward mean velocityvand horizontal eddy/gyre mixing with diffusivityκhrestore upper-ocean nitrate in the Subarctic Atlantic Ocean toward the high nitrate concentrationNsubon the same isopycnals in the permanent thermocline at lower latitudes (Fig. 1B) (11,12,15–17). In the present climate, the advective timescaleL/v=ADw/Ψmax∼6y, whereΨmax≈18sverdrups (Sv) is an estimate of the northward volume transport in the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation based on observational constraints (38). This estimate of the overturning seems fairly well constrained (within±2Sv) for the present day and is therefore not considered a tunable parameter. The horizontal diffusive timescale is less well constrained by observations but is thought to be at least an order of magnitude longer thanL/Ψmax. Here, we assumeκh=2,500m2/s, which gives a diffusive timescaleL2/κh∼100y.
The overturning velocity scale is physically coupled to the mixed-layer depth and the surface buoyancy following ref.28. In particular, we define the depth scale of the upper limb of the AMOC or, equivalently, the maximum depth of wintertime convection by matching the minimum surface buoyancy in the Subarctic Atlantic Ocean to the buoyancy profile in the basin’s lower latitudes (SI Appendix, Fig. S7). Assuming an exponential low-latitude buoyancy profilebLL=bS⁡exp(z/h)yields an AMOC depth scale
wherebNis the surface buoyancy in the northern deep water formation region. Then,Dw=RwinterDMOC, whereRwinteris a scaling factor that is determined via optimization to reduce the spatially variable maximum winter mixed-layer depth to a single representative valueDw.
The overturning streamfunction can be estimated using
for−DMOC<z<0, with the boundary conditionsΨ(0)=Ψ(−DMOC)=0. The solution toEq.12with boundary conditions applied is
whereα≡bN/bS, andDMOCis given byEq.11.
We are here interested in the total overturning transport, that is, the maximum ofΨ(z). Unfortunately, analytically solving for the maximum ofEq.13is not straightforward, but, as shown inSI Appendix, Fig. S8, the maximum value of the overturning streamfunction is very well approximated as
UsingbS=0.0205m/s2,bN=0.0005m/s2,h=500m,f0=10−4s−1, which we hold fixed in present-day scenarios, the maximum magnitude of the AMOC streamfunctionΨmax=17.9Sv compares well with observational estimates (38).
Vertical mixing in the thermocline restores the nitrate in the seasonal thermoclineNdtoward the abyssal concentrationNaby≈18mmol/m3and mixes nitrate between the model layers. This mixing is represented via a diffusive process withκz=2×10−5m2/s based on observations (39). The flushing timescales areDb2/κz∼3y for transport from the seasonal thermocline to the summertime mixed layer andDw2/κz∼160y for transport from the deep ocean to the seasonal thermocline.
Additional sources and sinks of nitrate to the seasonal thermocline and surface mixed layer of the Subarctic Atlantic Ocean, which include meridional advection and remineralization of oceanic organic nitrogen, microbial nitrogen fixation and denitrification, nitrogen deposition from the atmosphere or sea ice, and riverine/sedimentary input in shallow water, are thought to be much smaller than the advective nitrate transport to the seasonal thermocline via the AMOC. Therefore, these sources/sinks will not impact the results presented here and are omitted from the box model for simplicity but included (with the exception of coastal riverine/sedimentary inputs) in the CESM, which is described in more detail below.
Global warming scenarios are implemented in the box model by increasing the surface buoyanciesbSandbN, which impactDw=RwinterDMOCviaEq.11andΨmaxviaEq.14. For simplicity, bothbSandbNare increased at the same rate, although the results are primarily sensitive to changes inbN. These simple relations are expected to adequately describe the transient response ofDwandΨmaxto increasing surface buoyancy on timescales from order 10 to 100 y, i.e., over several decades. On shorter timescales, AMOC variability becomes meridionally incoherent and is significantly influenced by processes that are not incorporated in this simple model (38). Similarly, the mixed-layer depth variability will not necessarily be coherent with the circulation on short timescales. Conversely, on longer timescales of centuries to millennia, the deep ocean will adjust to changes in buoyancy, thus invalidating the assumptions made in the physical model (29,40). In addition,Nsubtends to decline with warming (6,17), which is not considered in our box-model warming scenarios but is accounted for in the CESM. A sensitivity study suggests this effect has a smaller impact on 21st-century productivity than either decliningDworΨmax(SI Appendix, Fig. S9), but the effect may be more significant on longer timescales, e.g., due to teleconnections to the Southern Ocean (6,10).
Despite the simplicity of the box model, it has several parameters that are not very well constrained by direct observational estimates. These include the upstream nitrate concentration in the subtropical thermocline,Nsub(12 to 22 mmol/m3); the maximum nitrate consumption rate,μm(0.1 to 1.5 mmol/m3/d); the half-saturation constant for nitrate uptake,kN(0.5 to 8 mmol/m3); the ratio of the winter mixed-layer depth to the AMOC depth scale,Rwinter=Dw/DMOC(0.05 to 0.5); and thee-folding depth scale over which remineralization occurs,δ(50 to 750 m). Hence, we identify the optimal model parameters indirectly by obtaining a five-dimensional hypercube of125model solutions with a range of 12 values for each parameter given in parentheses above. For each of the125parameter combinations, a 115-y simulation is run from initial conditions withNs=Nd=10mmol/m3under present-day boundary conditions. The last annual cycle, when the solution is effectively cyclo-stationary, is used for model evaluation.
We identify reasonable values for the parameters by comparing these solutions with observational constraints and minimizing a cost function that is a sum of squared errors. The set of parameters that minimizes this cost function and is used to produce the results inFigs. 1–3is given inSI Appendix, Table S1.
The first set of constraints is derived from observation-based estimates of nitrate and new production. The surface nitrate concentration in the Subarctic Atlantic Ocean reaches a minimum of 1.3 mmol/m3in August and a maximum of 9.7 mmol/m3in February (24). And the best fit to the nitrate concentration in the seasonal thermocline is obtained for a value ofNd=11.3mmol/m3(see above). Thus, we define the following three cost functions:C1=[(minmonth(Ns)−1.3)/2]2,C2=[(maxmonth(Ns)−9.7)/2]2, andC3=[(mean(Nd)−11.3)/2]2. We normalize each difference by dividing by our estimates of the uncertainty, which we define based on our judgment of the uncertainties associated with structural differences between the model formulation and the real system which are at least as large as the various sampling and measurement uncertainties. Observational estimates of new production range fairly widely, but it is unlikely that the true regional and annual average is outside the range 0.1 to 1.4 mol N⋅m−2⋅y−1and it is most likely toward the middle of this range (2,22,41,42). Based on these references we define a cost functionC4=[(mean(PROD)−0.7)/0.7]2.
We find that the parameters are not uniquely defined by the constraintsC1toC4. The 1,000 solutions with the smallest summed cost do not cluster around a single point in the five-dimensional parameter space, but rather define a multidimensional subspace of plausible parameter sets (SI Appendix, Fig. S6). Specifically, the good solutions fall on a diagonal throughμm-kNparameter space covering essentially all values that we consider for each ofμmandkN. In addition, for given values ofkNandμm, there are good solutions along a diagonal inDw/δ-Nsubparameter space. In addition, changes inδcan also be compensated by changes inDw, independent of the other parameters.
As a result, we find that three additional constraints are required, one onkNorμm, one onNsuborδ/Dw, and one onδorDw, if we want to determine a unique set of most likely model parameters. Fortunately, laboratory experiments and observations do provide guidance about the most appropriate values ofkN,δ, andNsub. Observations that the Subarctic Atlantic Ocean is dominated by larger phytoplankton (43,44) suggest an additional term for our cost function asC5=[(kN−3)/3]2. Second, observations suggest that the incoming nitrate fluxNsubΨmaxis between 300 and 400 kmol/s (11,12,16), so we impose the constraintNsub=(300–400)kmols−1/18 Sv=17 to 22 mmol/m3, which suggestsC6=[(Nsub−19.5)/2.5]2. Finally, observations that the attenuation of sinking particulate organic material has a depth scale toward the middle of the 100- to 1,000-m range (34) suggestC7=[(δ−500)/300]2. With these three additional constraints,C5toC7, we find that the solutions with smallest summed cost cluster narrowly in all parameters. The best solution (out of125) has a summed cost∑i=17Ci=0.19and the parameters are listed inSI Appendix, Table S1. This “best” present-day solution is obtained by running a 200-y simulation to equilibrium; diagnostics are inFigs. 1and2andSI Appendix.
We also find that the equilibrium annual new production at higher surface buoyancy is not very sensitive to the specific parameter targetsC5toC7. To demonstrate this, we simulate the late-time cyclo-stationary response to an instantaneous increase in surface buoyancy for several different parts ofkN-μm,Nsub-Dw/δ, andδ-Dwparameter space (SI Appendix, Fig. S5); the relationships between each parameter pair are constrained byC1toC4(SI Appendix, Fig. S6). The overall response to increasing surface buoyancy is very similar for a fairly wide range of these parameters, and the slowing meridional nitrate transport is generally more important than the shoaling mixed layer and the resulting decoupling of the surface mixed layer from the local deep nitrate reservoir.
Box-model results are compared with a large ensemble of simulations of the high-emissions RCP8.5 scenario with the CESM, a sophisticated ESM. The members of this ensemble differ only due to the introduction of small random noise in the year 1920, and the model and experimental protocol are described in detail in ref.27.
All results are averaged over 32 members with valid biogeochemistry and over the area from70○W to10○E and45○N to75○N. New productivity PROD is approximated by vertically summing the net biogeochemical nitrate tendency over the top 50 m, where this tendency is negative. Below 50 m, the nitrate tendency is positive due to remineralization, and the vertical profile of this tendency has ane-folding depth scale similar to the particulate organic nitrogen fluxδCESM≈250m (SI Appendix, Fig. S4C). The AMOC streamfunctionΨand nitrate flux function are calculated by averaging the monthly output in potential density space, as described in ref.16and shown in figure 6 in ref.16. The winter mixed-layer depthDwis calculated using the same definition as for the observations (25).
All data and model software are cited in the references and described inSI Appendixand Zenodo:http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3757340.
This material is based upon work supported by the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), which is a major facility sponsored by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Cooperative Agreement 1852977. Travel funding from NCAR, via the Climate and Global Dynamics Laboratory, made this collaboration possible. D.B.W. was supported by the NSF, via Contract OCE-1658541, as well as by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration via Contract NA18OAR4310408. M.F.J. acknowledges support from the NSF via Award OCE-1846821.
The authors declare no competing interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Data deposition: All data and model software are cited in the references and described inSI Appendixand Zenodo:http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3757340.
This article contains supporting information online athttps://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.2000851117/-/DCSupplemental.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
All data and model software are cited in the references and described inSI Appendixand Zenodo:http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3757340.
Articles from Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America are provided here courtesy ofNational Academy of Sciences
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894