An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Correspondence and requests for reprints should be addressed to Alexander
S. Rabin, M.D., Veterans Affairs Ann Arbor Health Care System, 2215 Fuller Road,
Ann Arbor, MI 48105-2303. E-mail:alexander.rabin@va.gov.
Corresponding author.
Received 2022 Feb 14; Accepted 2022 Feb 25; Collection date 2022 Jul 1.
The medical community has called for “urgent action to
keep average global temperature increases below 1.5°C, halt the destruction of
nature, and protect health” (1). Yet
there remains an uneasy recognition that healthcare delivery, which accounts for
8–9% of total U.S. greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (2), is itself a formidable contributor to global warming.
Addressing the causes of climate change while maintaining quality standards represents
one of the key challenges for health care in the 21st century. Although a great deal of
attention has been drawn to the massive carbon footprint of U.S. healthcare energy use
(3), the contribution of inhaler propellants
to climate change has largely been overlooked. In this Viewpoint, we explore
opportunities to transform the inhaler market to address an important source of GHG
emissions.

The metered-dose inhaler (MDI) is the most prescribed aerosolized medication delivery
mechanism in the United States (4), and it
relies on a hydrofluoroalkane (HFA) propellant to eject medication into the lungs (5). HFA propellants are GHGs with high global
warming potential. The two most common MDI propellants, HFA-134a and HFA-227ea, have
1,430 times and 3,220 times greater global warming potential than carbon dioxide
(CO2), respectively (6). The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency estimates that in 2020 alone, the discharge and leakage
of HFAs from MDIs were responsible for generating 2.5 million metric tons of
CO2equivalents, roughly equal to the emissions of 550,000 passenger
vehicles driven for one year (4). In contrast,
alternative delivery mechanisms that do not rely on propellants, such as dry-powder
inhalers (DPIs) and soft-mist inhalers, have carbon footprints that are approximately 20
times smaller than that of equivalent MDIs (7).
Transitioning away from these HFA propellants is a necessary step toward decarbonizing
the U.S. healthcare system.
The therapeutic aerosol industry has previously undergone a major transformation to
address the needs of patients and the environment. The Montreal Protocol on Substances
That Deplete the Ozone Layer of 1987, an agreement to eliminate chlorofluorocarbons
(CFCs), has been called one of the most successful interventions of the environmental
movement. Damage to the stratospheric ozone layer and the formation of an “ozone
hole” led to a global effort to curtail emissions of CFCs, gases that were used
widely in refrigerants and aerosols. Adoption of the Montreal Protocol resulted in a
steady decline in the production and use of these gases. The mitigation of ozone
depletion and the resultant protection from ultraviolet B radiation exposure have had a
dramatic effect on human health, with an estimated 2.3 million skin cancer deaths
averted in the United States alone (8).
Under the Montreal Protocol, exemptions were issued for essential medical CFC uses until
technological and economically feasible alternatives were available. The pharmaceutical
industry responded to this call for CFC-free inhalers with the development in the 1990s
of new non–ozone-depleting propellants as well as new propellant-free devices
such as the DPI (9,10). As a result of these market changes, the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration announced the removal of an “essential use” designation for
CFCs in albuterol inhalers effective December 31, 2008 (11). Although the new generation of HFA propellants had no
ozone-depleting effect, they remained potent GHGs, an environmental hazard that was not
overtly considered in the approval process.
Improvements in aerosol delivery technology and the harsh reality of the climate crisis
have changed how HFA inhalers should be viewed. In the U.S. market, alternatives to the
current generation of HFA inhalers exist for most classes of drugs, including
short-acting bronchodilators, long-acting bronchodilators, and inhaled corticosteroids.
Non-HFA inhalers frequently have equivalent patient tolerance and efficacy (12) but significantly less global warming
potential than MDIs. There are few recommendations to guide prescribers on the type of
inhaler delivery mechanism; instead, providers use the tools that are available to them.
For example, U.S. clinicians routinely prescribe a combination
budesonide–formoterol MDI as part of the current Global Initiative for Asthma
guidelines for single maintenance and reliever therapy, whereas the studies informing
these recommendations were performed with DPI formulations (13,14). Thus the choice
of inhaler is often guided by nonmedical factors such as formulary availability or
patient and physician familiarity (7,15).
Outside the United States, healthcare systems committed to decarbonization have
recognized the disproportionate environmental impact of propellant-based MDIs on carbon
emissions. The United Kingdom’s National Health Service estimates that MDIs
account for approximately 3% of its carbon footprint (16). In response, the National Health Service has established a
working group to develop strategies to transition away from the use of MDIs. The United
Kingdom’s National Institute for Health and Care Excellence has also incorporated
inhaler-related carbon footprints into a clinical decision tool that encourages
environmentally conscious prescribing and responsible inhaler disposal (17).
In the United States, where health care constitutes 25% of global health sector
emissions (3), a shift away from HFA inhalers
would result in a meaningful reduction in GHG emissions and would represent a major
symbolic victory. As outlined, this transition could be made without compromising the
quality of respiratory care. But it will not be easy. Compared with Sweden, where MDIs
constitute only 13% of the inhaler market, 88% of inhalers in the United
States are of the MDI class (4). Changing
clinical practice will require significant activation energy to overcome barriers that
lie ahead. Patients who are unfamiliar with alternative inhaler types will need to be
newly educated on the proper techniques needed to use these devices. Circumstances may
also arise in which an alternative inhaler is truly inferior (e.g., patients who cannot
generate sufficient inspiratory flow rates required for DPI use) or inappropriate (e.g.,
patients with milk-protein sensitivity who cannot tolerate lactose-containing DPIs).
Research efforts will need to be focused on identifying these unexpected consequences.
The barrier that may be most idiosyncratic to the U.S. transition effort is that
prescription drug pricing renders many non-HFA inhalers unaffordable to patients.
However, advocacy for affordable drug pricing and decarbonization efforts do not have to
be at odds. Rather, they should instead inform each other, ensuring that effective drugs
with low global warming potential are priced competitively against HFA inhalers.
To this end, we suggest that the medical community take the following steps to lessen the
climate impact of inhaled medications (Table
1). Professional and patient organizations should play a leading role to lobby
regulatory agencies and pharmaceutical companies to offer a wider array of affordable
non-HFA inhaler alternatives. Hospital and insurance formularies must also account for
the environmental risks of inhaler propellants and give parity to non-HFA options. When
formulary choices with low global warming potential exist, electronic medical record
decision support tools should guide prescribers toward these alternatives. In addition,
advocacy for rigorous emissions standards and incorporation of inhaler global warming
potential into future iterations of respiratory disease management guidelines, such as
those of the Global Initiative for Asthma, should be considered. Medical professionals
would benefit from an educational campaign, akin to the American Board of Internal
Medicine’s Choosing Wisely initiative, to encourage environmentally conscious
prescribing. And patients should have access to educational materials that outline the
relative global warming potential of each inhaler, as well as guidance on safe inhaler
disposal to reduce propellant leakage when HFA-based inhalers cannot be avoided (18). Finally, where uncertainties exist regarding
the comparative effectiveness of HFA and non-HFA alternatives, clinical research should
be conducted to guide a safe and equitable transition to inhalers with low global
warming potential.
Strategies to reduce the climate impact of hydrofluoroalkane inhalers
Definition of abbreviation:
HFA = hydrofluoroalkane.
When surveyed, most pulmonary physicians view climate change as a public health crisis
and want to enact changes to mitigate the problem (19). The disproportionate effects of climate change on the health of
socially vulnerable groups underscore the importance of minimizing the climate impact of
the care we provide (20). Ironically, the very
medications we use to treat respiratory diseases such as asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, which are worsened by climate change, are also causing climate
change. Transitioning away from propellant-based MDI inhalers could have a substantive
impact on the crisis by sparking doctor–patient conversations about climate
change (21) and inspiring a new generation of
practitioners to engage in environmental advocacy.
The authors thank Drs. Kent E. Pinkerton and Drew A. Harris for their editorial
advice.
Author disclosuresare available with
the text of this article atwww.atsjournals.org.
Articles from Annals of the American Thoracic Society are provided here courtesy ofAmerican Thoracic Society
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894