An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Correspondence:Fabrizzio Protti‐Sánchez (fabrizzio.protti-sanchez@uibk.ac.at), 
Michael Bahn (michael.bahn@uibk.ac.at)
Corresponding author.
Revised 2025 Jul 3; Received 2025 Feb 28; Accepted 2025 Jul 4; Issue date 2025 Aug.
This is an open access article under the terms of thehttp://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.
Northern ecosystems are warming rapidly, but the effects on soil carbon (C) dynamics are not fully understood. In particular, it is unclear whether warming effects on soil respiration (SR) –the primary source of atmospheric CO2from terrestrial ecosystems– persist throughout the year or vary seasonally. While both summer and cold‐season processes shape annual soil C fluxes, the long cold season, which dominates high‐latitude regions, has received far less attention. Using a natural geothermal gradient in a subarctic grassland (+0°C to +10°C above ambient soil temperature), we assessed the effects of more than a decade of continuous soil warming on SR. We obtained high‐resolution year‐round soil CO2fluxes and separated geothermal from biological sources of CO2following a stable isotope approach. Our findings revealed seasonally variable responses: warming significantly increased SR during the cold season (October–May) but, surprisingly, had no effect during summer (July–September). The lack of a summer warming response likely resulted from warming‐induced soil C depletion and microbial and root adaptations. Overall, prolonged warming altered seasonal C flux dynamics by enhancing the cold‐season contribution to total annual SR. This shift led to a 5.8% rise in annual SR per degree Celsius of warming. Furthermore, the apparent temperature sensitivity of SR (Q10) and the seasonal amplitude of SR declined exponentially with warming intensity, with effects stabilizing beyond +3°C of warming, indicating apparent long‐term thermal acclimation of SR seasonality. Altogether, our findings highlight the importance of considering the seasonality of SR for accurate predictions of soil C dynamics in northern ecosystems under long‐term warming.
Keywords:Northern grasslands, seasonality, soil CO2efflux, soil warming, temperature sensitivity, thermal acclimation
Warming has been suggested to critically affect soil carbon dynamics in northern ecosystems, but there are large uncertainties regarding the seasonality of warming effects on soil respiration, the main terrestrial source of atmospheric CO2. In our study, conducted in a subarctic grassland in Iceland, we found that decadal soil warming increased total annual soil respiration by enhancing cold‐season fluxes, while having no pronounced effect on summer fluxes. Thus, cold‐season fluxes will become the main driver of annual soil respiration in subarctic grasslands under a warmer climate.

The Earth's climate system is warming (IPCC2021). By the end of this century, the average global surface temperature is projected to increase to 1.5°C–4.8°C above pre‐industrial levels (IPCC2021). This warming trend has significant implications for the global carbon (C) cycle in that it can shift the balance between the uptake and release of C by terrestrial ecosystems (Heimann and Reichstein2008). Soil respiration (SR) is the largest source of carbon dioxide (CO2) from terrestrial ecosystems and includes both the microbial mineralization of soil organic matter (SOM) and rhizosphere respiration (Bond‐Lamberty et al.2024; Kuzyakov2006). Warming has been suggested to increase SR (Rustad et al.2001; Lu et al.2013; Carey et al.2016), potentially leading to positive feedback to atmospheric CO2concentrations and, thus, climate change (Arora et al.2020; Heimann and Reichstein2008). However, our current understanding of warming effects on soil C dynamics largely derives from short‐term warming experiments (Song et al.2019; Wang, Liu, Piao, et al.2014; Yan et al.2021). While longer‐term studies have also found increases in SR rates with warming (Chen et al.2022; Peng et al.2020; Reth et al.2009; Schindlbacher et al.2012; Yan et al.2022), transient effects or even declining SR rates over time have also been reported (Lei et al.2021; Melillo et al.2017; Wang et al.2019), for example, due to thermal acclimation (Bradford et al.2016; Chen et al.2024; Walker et al.2018). Given the considerable uncertainties concerning the longer‐term impacts of warming on soil C dynamics, further research is clearly needed.
SR exhibits strong diel and seasonal variation driven by both direct and indirect factors. Fluctuations in temperature and soil moisture exert immediate biophysical controls on soil microbial and root respiration rates (Davidson et al.1998), whereas variations in light intensity and photoperiod influence SR more indirectly by modulating C inputs through changes in vegetation productivity (Bahn et al.2008; Bond‐Lamberty et al.2024; Grogan and Chapin III1999; Wright et al.2013). In temperate, boreal, and (sub‐) arctic ecosystems, SR peaks in the warmer summer months when temperatures, as well as plant productivity, are higher and fresh C assimilates fuel respiration in the rhizosphere (Bahn et al.2009,2008; Epron et al.2001; Meeran et al.2023; Schindlbacher et al.2009). In the colder months, low temperatures and short photoperiods limit aboveground productivity and belowground C input, reducing root growth and autotrophic SR rates (Alvarez‐Uria and Körner2007; DeForest et al.2006; Makita et al.2018). During winter, roots are considered dormant, with the heterotrophic mineralization of SOM being the dominant component of SR (Hicks Pries et al.2015; Tucker et al.2014; Yi et al.2020). Seasonal variation in SR is also linked to changes in soil substrate availability and shifts in the soil microbial community structure between seasons (Hicks Pries et al.2019; Poppeliers et al.2022), which may affect the temperature sensitivity of SR throughout the year (Contosta et al.2013; Janssens and Pilegaard2003; Makita et al.2018). Although the seasonality of SR is well acknowledged, comprehensive studies covering all seasons are still limited, particularly with respect to the seasonality of warming responses of SR. Short‐term warming experiments performed in temperate forests suggest that warming effects are more pronounced in the shoulder seasons (i.e., spring and autumn) and winter (Contosta et al.2011,2013; Hicks Pries et al.2019; Noh et al.2017; Wang et al.2010). However, it remains largely unknown whether seasonally distinct warming responses persist over longer‐term warming conditions.
Northern terrestrial ecosystems (> 60° N), such as the Arctic and Subarctic, store large amounts of C in the soil (Scharlemann et al.2014; Tamocai et al.2009), and their SR fluxes during the long cold season are considered to contribute substantially to the annual C balance (Larsen, Grogan et al.2007; Larsen, Ibrom et al.2007; Natali et al.2019). Given that northern regions are projected to warm more and faster than the global average (IPCC2021; Rantanen et al.2022), it is urgent to understand the implications of warming on soil C dynamics in these ecosystems (Crowther et al.2016; Lei et al.2021; Natali et al.2019; Van Gestel et al.2018; Walker et al.2018,2020). This understanding is critical, given the larger apparent temperature sensitivity of SR in northern ecosystems (Davidson et al.2006; Natali et al.2019). In addition, most studies in these ecosystems have investigated the impacts of warming on SR during the warm season, especially during the peak growing season (Maes et al.2024; Meeran et al.2023), while the responses during the colder season (including winter, spring and fall) remain largely unexplored.
This study examined how prolonged warming (> 12 years) affects SR throughout the year and whether it shifts the seasonal contributions within the total annual flux. We hypothesized that the effects of warming on SR vary across seasons, with a stronger positive warming effect taking place in the cold season due to the greater limitation of soil temperature on plant and microbial processes. Consequently, we expected that warming would increase the cold‐season contribution of total annual SR.
The study was conducted along natural soil warming gradients in a subarctic grassland located at the Hengill geothermal area (64°00′01″ N, 21°11′09″ W; 83–168 m a.s.l) in Reykir, Iceland, and is part of the ForHot research site (Sigurdsson et al.2016). The long‐term (2003–2015) mean annual air temperature of the site is 5.2°C, and the mean annual precipitation is 1457 mm (Icelandic Meteorological Office;www.vedur.is). The grassland is unmanaged over a Silandic Andosol with a silt loam texture (Arnalds2004; Sigurdsson et al.2016), and it is primarily dominated byAgrostis capillaris,Ranunculus acris, andEquisetum pratense(Sigurdsson et al.2016). Previous studies at the same site found no changes in plant community structure along the warming gradient, with dominant species remaining stable along the warming gradient (Leblans et al.2017). The growing season in unheated soils begins in late May and ends in late September (Leblans et al.2017). Additional site characteristics and soil properties are described in detail in Sigurdsson et al. (2016), as well as the suitability of the ForHot site as a climate change experiment.
The entire soil profile at the study site has been warmed since May 2008, after a large earthquake established a new geothermal system within this previously unheated area (Sigurdsson et al.2016). Horizontal soil temperature gradients occur through heat conduction from fissures in the bedrock, which are warmed by heated water vapor transport through these channels originating from the hot groundwater. Soil temperatures in these horizontal geothermal gradients are higher near the faults and decrease perpendicular to them (Fang et al.2023; O'Gorman et al.2014; Sigurdsson et al.2016). Although the area is prone to degassing volcanic CO2(Maljanen et al.2020), there is no evidence of soil contamination from geothermal by‐products (Sigurdsson et al.2016).
Following a gradient design (Kreyling et al.2018), eight experimental locations along the geothermal soil warming gradient were selected in August 2020. As demonstrated by Kreyling et al. (2018), unreplicated sampling at a maximum number of sampling locations maximizes the prediction success of the underlying response function. In this study, the experimental locations spanned a continuous soil warming range from +0°C to +10°C above ambient soil temperature (Table1), encompassing the full range of warming scenarios projected for northern ecosystems by 2100 (IPCC2021; Soong et al.2020). These locations were unevenly spaced along the gradient, with distances ranging from 3.5 to 32 m (FigureS1). This relatively short spatial separation minimizes environmental heterogeneity (e.g., in soil and vegetation) while allowing comparison of different warming intensities, a key advantage of using geothermal systems as natural soil warming experiments (O'Gorman et al.2014; Sigurdsson et al.2016).
Soil temperature (mean ± standard deviation) across a geothermal gradient in a subarctic grassland, including the mean annual soil temperature for 2021 (ST21), as well as the seasonal mean soil temperatures for summer 2021 (STSS21; June–September) and the cold season 2021 (STCS21; January–May and October–December).
Soil warming was defined as the difference between the 2021 mean annual soil temperature at each location and that of the coldest plot (designated as +0°C warming). In July 2021, microclimate loggers (TMS‐4, Tomst, Czech Republic) were installed in each plot to record soil temperature and volumetric soil water content (SWC; TableS1) at a depth of 6 cm, along with soil surface and air temperature at heights of 0 and 12 cm, respectively, every 15 min. The soil temperature predating July 2021, lost due to logger failure, was estimated using linear regressions (FigureS2) to account for missing data. This involved cross‐referencing each plot with nearby paired plots, where soil temperature had been consistently measured at the same depth since July 2020 (SMT100, Truebner, Germany).
Soil CO2efflux (SCE), defined as the total soil CO2emission stemming from soil respiration (SR) and the degassing of geogenic CO2from the underlying volcanic system, was monitored using an automated soil flux system connected to a multiplexer (Li‐8100A and Li‐8150; Licor, USA) from mid‐August 2020 until the end of March 2022. Automated dark soil chambers (Li‐8100‐104; Licor, USA; V = 4076.1 cm3) were installed at the eight locations across the geothermal gradient (Table1) and connected to the multiplexer. Each chamber was placed on a polyvinyl chloride (PVC) collar (Ø 21 cm) inserted 2–4 cm into the soil. To exclude aboveground plant respiration, all the vegetation within the collars was clipped at ground level. Clipping was conducted on a weekly to biweekly basis during the growing season and at least once a month during the cold season. SCE in each location was measured at intervals ranging from every 2 to 6 h, capturing the diurnal variability in soil temperature and SCE.
During the SCE measurements, the chamber closure time was 120 s. The fluxes were calculated over a measurement window of 90 s (discarding the first 30 s after closure) using simple linear regression (hereafter LR model) or a non‐linear model described by Hutchinson and Mosier (1981) (hereafter HM model). Because linear fits often underestimate effluxes in non‐steady chambers (Anthony et al.1995; Hüppi et al.2018; Hutchinson and Rochette2003; Livingston et al.2005,2006), as the ones used in this study, we a priori favored the HM model. For each measurement, we computed the corrected Akaike Information Criterion (AICc) and the root mean square error (RMSE) for both fits. We chose the LR model only if it outperformed HM on both metrics (lower AICc and lower RMSE).
To prevent implausible flux estimates sometimes produced by the HM model during short chamber closure or when LR‐flux is low (Johannesson et al.2024; Hüppi et al.2018; Parkin et al.2012), any HM‐derived flux was overridden if: (a) the ratio of HM flux to LR flux (“g‐factor”) exceeded 4 (Hüppi et al.2018; Rheault et al.2024), or (b) the fitted curvature parameter kappa (Κ) in HM model exceeded the maximum value (Κmax) as defined by Hüppi et al. (2018). Across all measurements, the HM model was retained in 78% of the cases. To ensure data quality, any flux (LM or HM derived) with an RMSE exceeding the instrument's precision for CO2(RMSE > 1) was considered noisy (Rheault et al.2024) and discarded. After this quality control procedure, 8% of the SCEs were flagged and removed.
Additional gaps in the time series, ranging from 36% to 47% across chambers at a daily resolution, were due to technical and power supply issues (between mid‐December 2020 and March 2021), together with manual interruption of the system to prevent chamber damage during periods of considerable snow cover (i.e., in April 2021, a few days in October–December 2021, and between January and March 2022).
As geogenic degassing of CO2from the hydrothermal system could confound the assessment of warming effects on SR, we separated the biogenic and geogenic SCE sources based on their distinct δ13C isotopic compositions (Maljanen et al.2020). For this, we measured in situ the isotopic composition of the soil CO2efflux (δ13CSCE) in various campaigns over the growing seasons of 2020 and 2021 (July–September) and conducted additional campaigns in May and October 2021 to cover fluxes of lower magnitude. This was performed by coupling a CO2isotope laser analyser (G2201‐i, Picarro Inc., USA) with the automated soil flux system in a closed‐loop configuration (LI‐COR Biosciences2016) using a low‐leak diaphragm pump (A0702 CSM package, Picarro Inc., USA). The isotope laser was calibrated daily using two reference gases (386 and 965 ppm CO2, respectively; δ13C = −32.5‰), which also helped monitor potential instrument drifts. However, due to high instrument stability and minor drifts, calibration frequency was periodically reduced from mid‐July 2021 onward. During the isotopic flux campaigns, the chamber closure period was increased to 5–10 min, and δ13C data were averaged over a 30‐s window to reduce the variation associated with the raw δ13C signal.
The isotopic composition of soil CO2efflux (δ13CSCE) was assumed to result from two sources: biogenic CO2, derived from microbial and root respiration (i.e., SR), and geogenic CO2, from volcanic degassing. The δ13CSCEwas calculated as the intercept of a Keeling plot, which regresses the δ13C of the accumulated CO2in the chamber against the reciprocal CO2concentration over time (Keeling1958). The Keeling plot intercepts were computed using ordinary least squares (OLS) regression following Zobitz et al. (2006). δ13CSCEestimates were accepted when the Keeling plot intercept was significant (p< 0.05), ther2of the linear fit exceeded 0.95, the CO2spanned > 20 ppm, and the intercept's standard error was < 1‰ (Pataki et al.2003; Zobitz et al.2006).
A two‐pool isotope mixing model (Phillips and Gregg2001) partitioned SCE into SR and geogenic CO2efflux using end‐member δ13C values of −4.7‰ for geogenic CO2(Maljanen et al.2020; Meeran et al.2023) and −30.5‰ for biogenic CO2. The latter was determined based on the average δ13C in shoots adjacent to each flux measurement area (FigureS3c, methods detailed in Section2.4), which also corresponded to the mean δ13CSCEin ambient locations (Figure1a). Fluxes with a δ13CSCEbelow the biogenic end‐member value were considered to have zero geogenic contribution. Although biogenic CO2could also originate from older and presumably more13C‐enriched SOM under warming, we found no significant variation in δ13CSOMacross the warming gradient (FigureS3b, methods detailed in Section2.4). Nevertheless, to evaluate the sensitivity of our results to the biogenic end‐member assumption, we re‐ran the two‐pool mixing model using the mean δ13CSOMvalue (−27.0‰) instead of the mean δ13Cshoot(−30.5‰). This analysis yielded nearly identical geogenic degassing estimates along the gradient, particularly because the bulk SOM signature was relatively constant and only modestly enriched relative to shoots. Overall, the mean geogenic CO2efflux ranged from 0.22 μmol m−2s−1in the coldest location to 5.56 μmol m−2s−1in the warmest, with notable variability within each plot (Figure1b).

Boxplots of (a) the isotopic composition of soil CO2efflux (δ13CSCE) and (b) the geogenic soil CO2efflux across a soil warming gradient. The central line within each boxplot indicates the mean, and the scatter shows single measurements. The horizontal dashed lines in (a) represent the biogenic and geogenic CO2end‐member values (−30.5‰ and −4.8‰, respectively).
SR was estimated by subtracting the geogenic CO2efflux from the total SCE measured in each location at a given time. To dampen the variable geogenic CO2outgassing in each location, the corrected SR was regressed against the measured SCE (FigureS4). The model parameters were then used to compute the SR rates, without the geogenic efflux, over the entire monitoring period.
To characterize the biogenic end‐member of SCE and assess the warming effect on soil C content (SOC), soil and shoot samples were collected in each experimental location in June 2022 after removing the automated soil chambers. Soil samples were obtained by extracting three cores (Ø 1 cm) at a depth of 5 cm inside the SCE measurement area, pooled into a composite sample, and sieved (2 mm). Similarly, shoot samples were collected around the SCE measurement area by placing three rings (Ø 2 cm) in the ground, cutting the vegetation inside, and pooling into a composite sample. Subsequently, soil and shoot samples were oven‐dried until constant weight at 65°C for at least 48 h and transported to the Department of Ecology at the University of Innsbruck. There, the samples were ground into a fine powder and weighed into tin capsules for bulk C and isotope analyses (FigureS3) by dry combustion in a Combustion Module Cavity Ring‐Down Spectroscopy (CM‐CRDS) system (G2131‐i, Picarro Inc., USA, and Costech Analytical, USA). Calibration against certified international standards (IAEA‐CO‐8: Calcite with δ13C = −5.764‰ and IAEA‐600: Caffeine with δ13C = −27.771‰, International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, Austria; Coplen et al.2006), as well as an internal standard (Glycine with δ13C = −24.25‰, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), was regularly performed throughout the measurements.
The autotrophic component of soil respiration (RA) was estimated following the ‘deep‐collar’ approach (Bond‐Lamberty et al.2011; Hanson et al.2000; Heinemeyer et al.2011; Subke et al.2006; Suseela and Dukes2013; Wang, Liu, Chung, et al.2014). In 2018, PVC collars (Ø 10 cm) were installed in six permanent plots at the ForHot research site (Sigurdsson et al.2016) across a warming gradient of up to +6°C above ambient soil temperature. In each plot, two paired collars were installed: one inserted 2 cm into the soil (shallow collar) and the other > 13 cm deep (deep collar), beyond the rooting zone (0–10 cm; Verbrigghe, Leblans, et al.2022) to sever roots and exclude lateral roots. Aboveground biomass inside deep collars was clipped monthly during the first growing season to eliminate photosynthetic C supply to the residual roots.
Manual measurements of SCE were performed over five campaigns during the summer growing season of 2021 in days with no precipitation, using a portable infrared gas analyser (SRC‐1, EGM‐4; PP‐Systems, UK) in the deep and shallow collars with a chamber deployment time of 120 s. To eliminate aboveground plant respiration, all shoots within the shallow collars were clipped at ground level at least 24 h prior to measurements. No shoot regrowth was observed after three years of installation of the deep collars, suggesting effective root exclusion.
RAwas calculated as the difference in fluxes between paired shallow and deep collars. Estimating RAusing the deep collar approach does not require isotopic‐based partitioning of the geogenic CO2component, as fluxes from paired shallow and deep collars are equally affected by geogenic degassing. Therefore, by subtracting their fluxes, the geogenic component effectively cancels out, providing a reliable estimate of RA.
To account for uneven sampling intervals (ranging from 2 to 6 h) throughout the monitoring period, we aggregated the data to a daily resolution. Daily mean SR was calculated only for days with at least three flux measurements spanning a minimum of 12 h between the first and last observation. This approach ensured that fluxes were well distributed throughout the day, capturing the diurnal range of soil respiration and soil temperature. To interpolate missing daily SR values (whether due to quality checks or system malfunctions) and to construct complete annual SR budgets, we used empirical temperature‐response models. Specifically, three empirical models were used to describe the temperature response of daily SR for each chamber (Table2).
Models describing the temperature response of soil respiration.
SR, soil respiration in μmol m−2s−1; T, soil temperature in °C for vH and γ models, and in Kelvin (K) for LT model; and R10, Q10, E', T0, β1, β2, and β3are model parameters to be estimated from measurements. As the non‐linear least square regression failed to converge for the LT model with three parameters, the T0parameter was fixed at 227.13 K, following the value reported in the original paper and used in several subsequent studies (e.g., Graham et al.2012; Khomik et al.2009; Koskinen et al.2014; Zhao et al.2020).
Non‐linear least squares regressions (NLS) were used to fit and parameterize the models using the R package ‘minpack.lm’ (Elzhov et al.2023). To evaluate the predictive performance and generalizability of each model, we applied a five‐fold cross‐validation procedure for each chamber. In each fold, the dataset was randomly split into five equal subsets using the ‘caret’ R package (Kuhn2008); four were used for model training, and the remaining one served as the validation set. Model parameters were fitted on the training subset and used to predict SR in the held‐out fold. Prediction accuracy was quantified using the root mean square error (RMSE), averaged across all five folds. Model parsimony was assessed using the corrected Akaike Information Criterion (AICc), which includes a penalty for model complexity and is preferred over AIC when the sample size is small relative to the number of parameters (Burnham and Anderson2002). This was particularly relevant in our case, as the empirical models varied in complexity, ranging from two to three parameters (Table2). For each chamber, the model with the lowest RMSE (indicating best fit) and lowest AICc (greater parsimony) was selected. The parameters of the best‐fit model were then used to interpolate missing SR values and estimate the complete daily SR for the year 2021, which had the most complete dataset.
The temperature sensitivity of SR (Q10) at each warming level was derived from the van't Hoff model (Table2) using the full range of soil temperature observed at each chamber. Since the Q10estimated from the annual fluxes captures the response of other variables that covary with temperature across seasons, such as soil water availability, light, plant activity, litter inputs, and microbial biomass (Janssens and Pilegaard2003; Subke and Bahn2010), it represents the apparent temperature sensitivity of SR and also reflects its seasonality. Because the soil temperature range varied across warming levels, we performed a sensitivity analysis using a restricted but common range (3°C–15°C) shared by all warming sites. The Q10estimates based on the shared 3°C–15°C interval were nearly identical to those derived from the full soil temperature range observed at each site (FigureS5).
To further characterise SR seasonality in 2021, two additional metrics were calculated for each warming level: the coefficient of temporal variation (CV) (Rubio and Detto2017) and the seasonal amplitude. CV was estimated as the ratio of the annual SR standard deviation to the mean annual SR, providing a unitless measure of how strongly SR fluctuated throughout the year. The seasonal amplitude was computed as the magnitude of change in SR observed between May (before the onset of the growing season) and August (when SR peaked).
Furthermore, to assess how soil warming affects SR both seasonally and annually, the modelled daily SR fluxes were integrated for each month and for the whole year (2021) to estimate the total amount of C respired across each warming level, using the ‘auc’ function of the ‘flux’ R‐package (Jurasinski et al.2022). The summer and cold seasons were defined based on year‐round air temperature data, following the approach of Lei et al. (2024). For instance, monthly air temperatures in 2021 were fitted with a fifth‐degree polynomial spline function to capture air temperature trends throughout the year. Calculating the first derivative allowed estimation of the temperature change range at each point throughout the year, revealing the sharpest increase in air temperature between May and June and the most pronounced cooling period between September and October. Consequently, June through September was classified as summer, while October through May was categorised as the cold season.
The warming effects on daily SCE and SR were assessed using Generalised Linear Mixed‐effects Models (GLMMs) with the ‘glmmTMB’ R‐package (Brooks et al.2017). Warming, treated as a continuous variable, and season, categorized into summer and cold seasons, were included as fixed factors, along with their interaction to test for season‐specific warming responses. Date of measurements and chamber ID were included as random intercepts to account for repeated measurements. The models were fitted with a Tweedie distribution using a log‐link function to accommodate the positively skewed nature of the data and the presence of near‐zero fluxes. Similarly, to assess whether and how warming altered soil moisture, the available volumetric soil water content (from July 2021 to April 2022) was modeled using a beta‐regression mixed model in ‘glmmTMB’ with warming as a fixed factor and the date and chamber ID as random intercepts. Model assumptions and fits were assessed using residual diagnostics from the ‘DHARMa’ R‐package (Hartig2024).
The response of Q10, seasonal amplitude, and CV of SR across the soil warming gradient was assessed using a non‐linear regression model describing an exponential function asy=a·expb·x+c, whereyis the response variable,xis the warming level, anda,b, andcare model parameters. These model parameters were estimated using the self‐starting function ‘SSexp3P’ from the ‘ggtrendline’ R‐Package (Mei et al.2022). Additionally, warming effects on soil and plant C content and δ13C, as well as on the cumulative monthly and annual SR, were assessed using permutation‐based linear regression (‘lmPerm’ R‐Package; Wheeler and Torchiano2025), which is better suited for a comparatively small number of experimental units (e.g.,n= 8). Finally, the contribution of the total cold‐season flux to the annual SR was evaluated with an exponential regression function as described before.
Normality in the residuals of all models was assessed visually, and statistical significance was determined atp< 0.05. Data processing and statistical analyses were performed in R 4.5.0 (R Core Team2025). Figures were made using the ‘ggplot2’ (Wickham2016), ‘ggpubr’(Kassambara2023), and ‘patchwork’ (Pedersen2024) R‐packages.
SCE and SR mirrored the annual fluctuations in soil temperature (Figure2), with the highest fluxes occurring during the summer, particularly at the peak of the growing season in July and August, while lower fluxes were observed during the cold season. Notably, both warming and season had a significant main effect on SCE (warming: z‐value = 7.87,p< 0.001; season: z‐value = 31.65,p< 0.001) and on SR (warming: z‐value = 6.79,p< 0.001; season: z‐value = 30.53,p< 0.001). However, the warming response was significantly attenuated in summer, as shown by a negative warming × season interaction (SCE: z‐value = −33.11,p< 0.001; SR: z‐value = −24.64,p< 0.001).

Daily mean soil temperature (a), soil CO2efflux (b), and soil respiration (c) across a geothermal gradient in a subarctic grassland. Colors depict the annual mean soil warming in each plot for 2021. The grey‐shaded areas indicate the summer season (June–September), while the non‐shaded areas indicate the cold season (October–May). The horizontal dashed line in (a) marks 0°C in soil temperature.
Soil warming exerted no detectable effect on SWC (z‐value = −0.71;p≥ 0.05). During the summer of 2021, a pronounced dry spell from 5 to 20 August led to a decline of SWC to approximately 0.16–0.30 m3m−3across chambers (FigureS6a). However, this decrease occurred in all chambers, independently of soil warming intensity (p≥ 0.05), and SWC had no impact on SR across the sites even at the peak of the dry spell (FigureS6b;p≥ 0.05).
Prolonged warming led to a significant linear decline of soil C of 0.17% ± 0.07% C °C−1, corresponding to a 3.7% decrease in SOC content per degree Celsius of warming (p< 0.05; FigureS3a).
The three empirical models describing the temperature response of SR effectively predicted soil fluxes across the entire soil warming gradient (Figure3; TableS2). All models captured non‐linear temperature responses with varying levels of accuracy depending on the warming treatment. Overall, the Gamma (γ) model exhibited the best fit and overall performance at most warming sites (n= 4), as indicated by lower RMSE and AICc values. For the remaining sites, the van't Hoff (vH) model outperformed others at +1.8°C and +5.9°C, while the Lloyd & Taylor (LT) model showed a better fit at +0.2°C and +9.8°C. Accordingly, the γ model was selected to model daily SR at four sites, while the vH and LT models were applied at their respective optimal warming locations. These selected models reproduced precisely the temporal patterns of SR at each experimental location (FigureS7).

Temperature response curves of soil respiration at varying levels of soil warming in a subarctic grassland. Colors depict the fitted models: Gamma (γ) in orange, Lloyd & Taylor (LT) in purple, and van't Hoff (vH) in green. The cross‐validated root‐mean‐square deviation (RMSE) and corrected Akaike Information Criterion (AICc) values for each model are displayed within each panel. Note the different scales on they‐axis. Estimated parameters and performance metrics for each model are provided in TableS2.
The annual Q10value, derived from the van't Hoff equation, indicated that the apparent temperature sensitivity of SR decreased exponentially with increasing warming intensity (Figure4a). Specifically, there was a sharp decline in Q10at lower levels of warming (i.e., < 1.8°C above ambient soil temperature), after which the Q10stabilized, forming a plateau at higher warming levels. This declining Q10trend remained consistent when recalculated using the shared 3°C–15°C soil temperature range across all warming sites.

Warming effects on (a) the apparent temperature sensitivity (Q10), (b) the seasonal amplitude, and (c) the coefficient of temporal variation (CV) of soil respiration. The blue line indicates the best‐fit non‐linear regression model, and the shaded area around the line depicts the model‐predicted 95% confidence interval.
Additionally, under ambient soil temperature conditions, there was a large seasonal difference in SR fluxes, with higher summer fluxes than in the colder season. In contrast, SR in the warmed locations showed reduced seasonal variation, with minor differences between the summer and the cold season. Specifically, we observed an exponential decay in the seasonal amplitude and the coefficient of temporal variation (CV) with increasing soil warming intensity (Figure4b,c). These patterns strongly correlated with the Q10response to warming (Q10vs. seasonal amplitude:r= 0.98; Q10vs. CV: r = 0.91).
The warming effects on the amount of soil‐respired C per month (in g C m−2month−1) varied seasonally (Figure5a). During the cold season (January–May and October–December), the cumulative monthly SR significantly increased with warming intensity (p< 0.05). In contrast, during the summer months, between June and September, warming did not substantially affect the cumulative monthly SR (p≥ 0.05), and even a slight negative trend was observed at the peak of the growing season (July and August) (Figure5a). Complementary manual RAmeasurements in summer showed no significant changes along the warming gradient (p≥ 0.05; FigureS8).

Monthly (a) and annual (b) changes in soil‐respired C per degree Celsius of soil warming (slope). Error bars represent the standard error of the slope for each period along the warming gradient. The horizontal dashed line indicates a slope of 0, representing no change. Significance levels are indicated by colour: Black bars indicate significant slopes (p< 0.05), while grey bars indicate non‐significant slopes (p≥ 0.05). Note the differingy‐axis scales between panels.
On an annual basis (in 2021), cumulative SR ranged from 948.18 ± 184.74 g C m−2year−1under ambient conditions to 1073.86 ± 352.85 g C m−2year−1in warmed soils (FigureS9). Prolonged warming increased annual SR by 47.81.2 ± 20.42 g C m−2°C−1year−1(Figure5b;p< 0.05), representing a 5.8% rise in annual SR per degree Celsius of warming.
The seasonal contributions to total annual SR showed contrasting responses to warming intensity (p< 0.01). Warming significantly reduced the proportion of SR within annual SR during summer (June–September), while it increased during the cold season (January–May and October–December). Under ambient conditions, approximately 70% of the total annual SR occurred during summer. In warmed soils, however, the cold season became the dominant period for SR, contributing 58%–70% of the total annual emissions (Figure6).

Effects of soil warming on the contribution of cold‐season fluxes to annual soil respiration in 2021. The blue line indicates the best‐fit non‐linear regression model, and the shaded area around the line depicts the model‐predicted 95% confidence interval.
Our study, to our knowledge, is the first to document the annual and seasonal responses of soil respiration (SR) to prolonged warming in a subarctic grassland, an ecosystem highly vulnerable to climate warming. Our findings reveal that prolonged warming led to an increase in the annual SR, with significant seasonal variations in the warming effects. Notably, prolonged warming increased SR during the colder months, while it primarily had no impact in summer. We also found that even a slight increase in soil temperature (of less than 2°C) can substantially alter the seasonal dynamics of SR and that cold‐season fluxes will play a more prominent role in the C balance of subarctic ecosystems over time under warmer conditions.
Our study revealed that soil warming did not significantly impact summer SR, though a slight negative trend was observed (Figure5a). The depletion of soil organic carbon (SOC) stocks with prolonged warming is a frequently suggested mechanism explaining the thermal acclimation of SR to warming (Domeignoz‐Horta et al.2023; Melillo et al.2017; Walker et al.2018). In this subarctic grassland, SOC stocks declined within the first 5 years of warming but stabilized thereafter (Verbrigghe, Leblans, et al.2022). Previous studies at the same site suggest that the stabilization of the warming‐induced SOC loss was related to a reduction in microbial biomass, which in turn prevented further SOC reduction (Verbrigghe, Leblans, et al.2022; Walker et al.2018,2020). However, respiration per unit of microbial biomass increased with warming intensity (Marañón‐Jiménez et al.2018; Walker et al.2018). Söllinger et al. (2022,2024) further showed that soil microorganisms in this grassland adapt to warming‐induced substrate depletion by downregulating their protein biosynthesis machinery (e.g., ribosome contents). This physiological adaptation may help sustain increased microbial activity in warmed soils by reallocating energy and matter from ribosome synthesis toward processes such as substrate uptake and turnover (Söllinger et al.2024). Consequently, the stable SR rates observed in summer across all warming levels (Figure5a) are consistent with a smaller but more active microbial pool under prolonged warmer conditions.
Additionally, prolonged warming led to proportional losses of soil C and N at our site (Marañón‐Jiménez et al.2019,2025; Walker et al.2020), and soil microbes were found to be C‐limited (Meeran et al.2023; Verbrigghe, Meeran, et al.2022). C limitation could constrain microbial activity, while reduced N availability may intensify plant‐microbial competition for N (Bardgett et al.2008; Sistla et al.2014), especially during the growing season, when warming has been shown to increase aboveground N uptake (Marañón‐Jiménez et al.2025). Thus, the limited availability of soil C and N likely constrained soil microbial respiration, contributing to the observed lack of SR response to warming during the summer.
Furthermore, our results clearly indicate that autotrophic soil respiration (RA), which includes respiration from roots and the associated microbial community in the rhizosphere, was not altered by warming (FigureS8), which is in line with a recent meta‐analysis of warming experiments in grasslands (Chen et al.2024). At our site, decadal soil warming has been shown to decrease fine root biomass and production (Bhattarai et al.2023; Fang et al.2023), as well as the root‐soluble sugar pool (Bhattarai et al.2024). Similarly, the biomass of root‐associated microorganisms, such as arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi, also declined with warming (Verbrigghe, Meeran, et al.2022). Despite these reductions in belowground autotrophic pools, other studies at the same site have found higher aboveground plant biomass (Avila et al.,in prep; Marañón‐Jiménez et al.2025) and greater NDVI in the early growing season in the warmer plots (Meeran et al.2023; Mortier et al.2024), indicating increasing gross primary production (GPP) under warming. Thus, we suggest that the smaller belowground autotrophic pool in warmed soils should be metabolically more active to maintain similar RArates to those in ambient soils, fueled by enhanced GPP under warming.
Notably, our results for the summer season contrast with previous research conducted at the same grassland site, which reported a positive SR response during summer under decadal warming during a short campaign in July 2018 (Meeran et al.2023). This discrepancy may be due to the earlier study assuming a constant geogenic efflux, which likely led to an overestimation of SR in warmed soils with a higher geogenic contribution. By contrast, our study demonstrates that the magnitude of geogenic CO2outgassing varies temporally within each experimental location (Figure1), which needs to be accounted for when partitioning the biogenic and geogenic sources of CO2in geothermally active areas (FigureS4) used as natural soil warming experiments. Furthermore, interannual variability in summer precipitation and evapotranspiration and thus soil moisture could have potentially caused different warming responses across the studies. However, a comparison of the Standardised Precipitation Evapotranspiration Index (SPEI; Vicente‐Serrano et al.2010) for the study area (Hveragerði) across years suggests no major differences across the study periods, nor any indication of drought in 2021 (FigureS10). At this northern grassland, frequent and abundant precipitation typically maintains comparatively high soil moisture levels, even in warmed plots (Leblans et al.2017; Meeran et al.2023; O'Gorman et al.2014; Sigurdsson et al.2016). In our study, even during a dry spell in August 2021, we observed no significant differences in soil moisture or any significant moisture‐related reduction of SR across the warming gradient (FigureS6). We therefore conclude that the observed warming responses of SR during the summer season are not driven by any significant moisture limitation. Altogether, the observed apparent thermal acclimation of SR under long‐term warming during summer in subarctic grassland likely resulted from two offsetting responses of the soil autotrophic and heterotrophic pools to warming: a decrease in belowground biomass and an increase in specific activity.
During the colder and darker months in 2021 (January–May and October–December), corresponding to the long cold season in subarctic ecosystems, warming positively affected SR (Figure5a), to an extent that cold‐season SR dominated the warming effect on annual SR (Figure6). As vegetation becomes inactive and roots enter dormancy (Hicks Pries et al.2015; Tucker et al.2014; Yi et al.2020), soil microbial activity primarily drives SR during this period. In cold environments, soil microbial activity is strongly limited by energy availability, especially in winter (Azizi‐Rad et al.2022). In our study, SR under ambient conditions was substantially lower than under warming conditions because low soil temperatures restricted microbial respiration (Figure3). Moreover, in ambient soils, short periods of sub‐zero soil temperatures were observed (Figure2a), during which SR approached near‐zero levels. These freezing periods limited soil microbial activity due to low soil temperatures and likely restricted water availability through freezing, further inhibiting SR (Mikan et al.2002). In contrast, the positive linear increase in SR with warming intensity during the cold months (Figure5a) suggests that warming alleviates these constraints, enabling soil microbes to sustain their activity and metabolism in the cold season.
Considering that SOC pools were reduced in warmed plots (Verbrigghe, Leblans, et al.2022), enhanced cold‐season SR under warming was likely fueled by increased availability of plant litter from warming‐induced increases in productivity (Avila et al., in prep; Marañón‐Jiménez et al.2025; Meeran et al.2023; Mortier et al.2024). A recent study in a long‐term warmed temperate forest showed that plant litter from the previous growing season was increasingly decomposed during autumn and winter, elevating microbial respiration and partially compensating for prior SOC depletion that had constrained summer microbial activity (Domeignoz‐Horta et al.2023). Increases in litter decomposition during winter have also been observed in tundra and subalpine meadows in response to deeper snow cover, which provides thermal insulation and thereby increases temperature relative to soil without snow cover (Baptist et al.2010; Blok et al.2016; Saccone et al.2013). Therefore, we hypothesize that increased inputs of litter may fuel cold‐season SR when temperature limitation on SR is alleviated. We speculate that this additional fresh C undergoes faster turnover during the cold season, which may contribute to the new steady state of SOC stocks under prolonged warming (Verbrigghe, Leblans, et al.2022). Further research is needed to explore the cross‐seasonal coupling between SR and plant‐derived C inputs and their implications for C cycling in northern ecosystems.
Prolonged warming strongly influenced the seasonality of SR, as evidenced by a marked reduction in the coefficient of temporal variation (CV) and seasonal amplitude (Figure4). Notably, the most pronounced changes in SR dynamics occurred within the first 1°C–3°C of warming, which indicates a potential threshold for SR seasonality at low to medium warming intensities. Beyond 3°C of warming, the ecosystem appeared to stabilize in a new steady state, likely because the warming‐induced SOC depletion had stopped (Verbrigghe, Leblans, et al.2022), contributing to the observed thermal acclimation of SR seasonality at higher warming levels. These findings offer novel insights into the non‐linear responses of SR seasonality to future warming scenarios. Even a slight increase in soil temperature (> 1.8°C above ambient soil temperature) can profoundly affect the temporal dynamics of SR in northern ecosystems. Such a response has important implications for predicting ecosystem C balance in a warmer world, where slight temperature changes could trigger significant shifts in seasonal C fluxes and potentially exacerbate feedback to the climate system.
The apparent temperature sensitivity of SR (Q10), which also reflected the seasonal variability in SR relative to seasonal fluctuations in soil temperature, showed the same non‐linear pattern along the warming gradient (Figure4) described above. Ambient SR was highly sensitive to temperature increase, as indicated by high Q10values—also characteristic of high‐latitude ecosystems (Crowther et al.2016; Davidson and Janssens2006). Under prolonged warming conditions, characterized by less soil C availability, the lower Q10values registered in this study indicate that the decomposition of the remaining and more stable SOC pool requires less activation energy (Craine et al.2013; Davidson and Janssens2006; Hartley and Ineson2008; Rocci et al.2021). Overall, this response suggests that thermal acclimation of SR occurs over time in this subarctic grassland and that warming‐induced C depletion may drive the reduced seasonality of SR under prolonged warming.
Despite the apparent thermal acclimation of SR in the studied subarctic grassland, prolonged warming resulted in a 5.8% increase in total annual SR per degree Celsius of warming (Figure5band FigureS9). This increase was driven by an enhanced contribution of cold‐season SR, which outweighed the lack of warming effects on SR during summer (Figure5aand Figure6). These findings further highlight the critical role of cold‐season emissions in shaping the annual SR response in northern ecosystems under warmer climate scenarios (See et al.2024; Natali et al.2019). If the enhanced total annual SR is not offset by greater plant C uptake in the long term, these ecosystems may transition to a net C source (Maes et al.2024; See et al.2024). Given the profound implications of these shifts for the Earth's climate system, future research should focus on elucidating the seasonal and annual patterns of plant C uptake and ecosystem respiration under prolonged warming to improve predictions of C cycling dynamics in a warmer climate.
We conclude that prolonged warming in a subarctic grassland increases total annual SR by enhancing cold‐season emissions, while having no significant effects on SR during summer. Furthermore, our study suggests that the effects of prolonged warming on SR seasonality stabilize when warming levels exceed 3°C, indicating apparent long‐term thermal acclimation of SR. Future climate models and C balance predictions of northern ecosystems should reproduce the seasonal shifts and non‐linear responses of SR dynamics along various warming scenarios to more accurately project the impact of prolonged warming on the global C cycle.
Fabrizzio Protti‐Sánchez:conceptualization, data curation, formal analysis, investigation, methodology, project administration, software, visualization, writing – original draft, writing – review and editing.Linsey M. Avila:data curation, formal analysis, investigation, methodology, software, writing – review and editing.Kathiravan Meeran:investigation, methodology, writing – review and editing.Johannes Ingrisch:data curation, investigation, software.Páll Sigurðsson:investigation, writing – review and editing.Klaus S. Larsen:funding acquisition, methodology, project administration, software, writing – review and editing.Bjarni D. Sigurdsson:funding acquisition, investigation, methodology, project administration, resources, writing – review and editing.Ivan Janssens:conceptualization, funding acquisition, methodology, project administration, supervision, writing – review and editing.Michael Bahn:conceptualization, funding acquisition, methodology, project administration, resources, supervision, writing – original draft, writing – review and editing.
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Data S1:gcb70388‐sup‐0001‐Supinfo.pdf.
This research was financially supported by the FutureArctic project, a European Union's Horizon 2020 framework program for research and innovation under the Marie Skłodowska‐Curie Actions (Grant No. 813114). F.P.S. was additionally supported by a PhD completion grant from the University of Innsbruck. N/A
Protti‐Sánchez, F.
, Avila L. M., Meeran K., et al. 2025. “Soil Respiration Responses to Prolonged Warming Vary Seasonally in a Subarctic Grassland.” Global Change Biology
31, no. 8: e70388. 10.1111/gcb.70388.
Funding:This work was supported by H2020 Marie Skłodowska‐Curie Actions, Grant No. ITN‐813114.
Fabrizzio Protti‐Sánchez, Email: fabrizzio.protti-sanchez@uibk.ac.at.
Michael Bahn, Email: michael.bahn@uibk.ac.at.
The data and code that support the findings of this study are openly available in Zenodo repository athttps://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14849372.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
Data S1:gcb70388‐sup‐0001‐Supinfo.pdf.
The data and code that support the findings of this study are openly available in Zenodo repository athttps://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14849372.
Articles from Global Change Biology are provided here courtesy ofWiley
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894