An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Issue date 2023 Aug.
This review discusses climate change-related impacts on asthma and allergic-immunologic disease, relevant U.S. public health efforts, and healthcare professional resources.
Climate change can impact people with asthma and allergic-immunologic disease through various pathways, including increased exposure to asthma triggers (e.g., aeroallergens, ground-level ozone). Climate change-related disasters (e.g., wildfires, floods) disrupting healthcare access can complicate management of any allergic-immunologic disease. Climate change disproportionately affects some communities, which can exacerbate disparities in climate-sensitive diseases like asthma. Public health efforts include implementing a national strategic framework to help communities track, prevent, and respond to climate change-related health threats. Healthcare professionals can use resources or tools to help patients with asthma and allergic-immunologic disease prevent climate change-related health impacts.
Climate change can affect people with asthma and allergic-immunologic disease and exacerbate health disparities. Resources and tools are available to help prevent climate change-related health impacts at the community and individual level.
Climate change is one of the biggest public health threats of our time [1]. It has increased people’s risk of experiencing temperature extremes, natural disasters, and climate-sensitive diseases (e.g., asthma, allergic rhinitis), each of which can result in far-reaching effects on short- and long-term health [2]. While climate change can affect everyone’s health, various factors can influence individuals’ risk for climate-related health effects [1–4]. People who have fewer resources to adapt to climate-related threats are more likely to experience adverse health outcomes; these individuals include children, older or socially isolated adults, people of some racial and ethnic groups, individuals experiencing poverty, and people with disabilities or underlying health conditions [1,2,4,5].
This review highlights some impacts of climate change on asthma and allergic-immunologic disease, including examples of how these health impacts can disproportionately affect certain populations. Also, we discuss some U.S. public health efforts to reduce the health effects of climate change across the country. We conclude by describing selected climate-related resources that healthcare professionals can use to help patients with asthma or allergic-immunologic disease.
Climate change can affect people with asthma through various pathways, including through increased exposure to asthma triggers [3] (Fig. 1). Each person with asthma has their unique asthma trigger(s) that can cause them to experience increased asthma symptoms, which might be severe enough to require emergency medical treatment for an asthma exacerbation [6–8]. Climate change-associated increases in ambient temperature can increase individuals’ exposure to asthma triggers in several ways [3]. For example, levels of ground-level ozone and smog are projected to increase in some locations, because ground-level ozone is created by chemical reactions that occur in the presence of heat and sunlight [2,3,9–11]; these reactions occur between pollutants (oxides of nitrogen [NOx] and volatile organic compounds) emitted by vehicle tailpipes, power plants, chemical plants, and other sources [2,3,9–11]. Results from a 2015 meta-analysis indicate that ozone is associated with increased risk of asthma-related emergency department (ED) visits and hospitalizations [12]. This finding is supported by results of more recent studies from various U.S. regions [13–15]. Also, heat waves are projected to become longer and more intense because of climate change [2]. Several studies have found relationships between increased ambient temperatures and asthma-related ED visits or hospitalizations [16,17]. Besides the potential effect of heat as an asthma trigger, extreme heat can also adversely affect certain inhaled asthma medications; for instance, temperatures above 120° F can cause pressurized inhaler canisters to burst [3].

Examples of how climate change can increase exposure to asthma triggers
Warmer seasonal air temperatures, more frost-free days, alterations in rainfall patterns, and other effects of climate change can affect the onset and duration of “allergy season” for people with allergic asthma sensitized to seasonal aeroallergens (pollens and outdoor mold) [2,3,18,19]. These changes also can affect how much pollen plants create and disperse which can, in turn, influence the intensity of seasonal allergy symptoms [2,18,19]. Several recent meta-analyses have reported positive associations between outdoor pollen exposure and asthma-related symptoms, ED visits, or hospitalizations [20–22]. For people with asthma symptoms triggered by exposure to outdoor aeroallergens, climate change-related shifts in “allergy season” timing and intensity can adversely impact their asthma control [2,3].
Climate change might increase levels of particulate matter in some locations [2,3]. Particulate matter is the mixture of solid particles and liquid droplets found in the air, including visible dust and soot, as well as smaller particulate matter ≤2.5 μm in aerodynamic diameters (PM2.5) [2,11,23]. Exposure to PM2.5can trigger respiratory symptoms in people with asthma [2,3,11,24]. Meta-analyses published in 2016 reported positive associations between PM2.5concentrations and asthma-related ED visits and hospitalizations [25,26]. These relationships have also been supported by more recent studies [13,27].
Several types of climate change-related disasters are projected to increase in frequency, which can increase exposure to certain asthma triggers [2,3]. For instance, shifts in global temperatures affect how heat and moisture move around the planet, which can result in drier conditions in some parts of the world [2,18]. Changes to the frequency, duration, and geographic distribution of droughts can increase the risk of wildfires [2,3,18]. Epidemiologic studies conducted following numerous wildfires have reported positive associations between wildfires and asthma-related ED visits or hospitalizations [28–31]. While anyone’s health can be affected by wildfire smoke, people with asthma are at increased risk of experiencing respiratory symptoms triggered by wildfire smoke [2,3].
Some climate change-related disasters are caused by extreme rainfall [2,3,18]. Increases in extreme rainfall and total rainfall have contributed to increases in severe flooding events in certain U.S. regions [2,3,18]. Moreover, the frequency of heavy rainfall events is projected to increase in all U.S. regions [2,3]. In addition to immediate health hazards associated with flooding, water intrusion into buildings can lead to indoor mold growth, thereby increasing exposure to mold among people in affected buildings [3,18]. For people with asthma symptoms triggered by inhaling mold, exposure to increased levels of indoor mold can adversely impact their asthma control [3,32,33].
Wildfires, floods, and other climate change-related disasters can affect mental health [2,34]. At this time, limited research has focused on relationships between mental health conditions and asthma symptoms after wildfires or floods [35,36]. Nevertheless, numerous studies have found these disasters can substantially impact symptoms of mental health (including posttraumatic stress disorder or depression symptoms) among individuals with or without previously diagnosed mental health conditions [2,37–39]. Furthermore, extensive evidence has demonstrated that mental health symptoms can affect asthma control [7,8,34,36].
Besides increasing human exposure to asthma triggers like mold and wildfire smoke, climate change-related disasters also can affect the medical management of asthma by disrupting usual access to asthma medications, medical care, and, in the event of a power outage, use of nebulizers that rely on electricity [3,34,40]. Moreover, disaster-related loss of electricity can affect the ability to follow recommended storage and handling instructions of some biologic agents for the treatment of severe asthma [41,42]. For example, omalizumab, benralizumab, and reslizumab are stored under refrigerated conditions [42–44]. Dupilumab and tezepelumab are typically stored refrigerated but, if necessary, can be used while kept at room temperature (up to 77°F) for certain periods of time [45,46]. Dupilumab may be kept at room temperature for a maximum of 14 days; tezepelumab may be kept at room temperature for a maximum of 30 days [45,46]. Prescribing information indicates that after these respective time intervals at room temperature, these two medications must be discarded [45,46].
Climate change can affect the health of people with allergic-immunologic diseases other than asthma. The aforementioned climate change-related effects on outdoor aeroallergens and flooding-associated indoor mold growth can increase symptoms among people with allergic rhinitis or allergic conjunctivitis who are sensitized to these aeroallergens and then exposed to higher levels of pollens or mold [2,3,19,47]. For example, multiple studies have found that certain pollen seasons in some regions are starting earlier, lasting longer, or becoming more intense with increasing temperatures associated with climate change [2,19,48,49]. Also, exposure to elevated levels of mold can affect people with hypersensitivity pneumonitis caused by mold inhalation [33,50]. Conversely, exposure to indoor dust mite allergens can be lowered in homes with air conditioning, a climate-related adaptation measure, because air conditioning use lowers indoor relative humidity and thereby can reduce dust mite proliferation [51]. Data from several decades indicate the percentage of U.S. homes with air conditioning has steadily increased [51].
Management of any allergic-immunologic condition can be complicated by climate change-related disasters that disrupt usual access to medications or healthcare professionals, including emergency medical care needed to treat anaphylactic food allergy reactions [3,52–55]. Also, for individuals and families affected by food allergy, disasters can impede usual access to allergen-safe foods [52,53]. Furthermore, disaster-associated power outages can affect refrigeration of biologic agents indicated for treating certain allergic-immunologic conditions (e.g., omalizumab for chronic idiopathic urticaria, dupilumab for moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis or chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyposis, ecallantide for hereditary angioedema, and some immune globulin products for treatment of primary humoral immunodeficiency) [43,45,56–58]. Storage of omalizumab and dupilumab are described in the previous section on asthma. Ecallantide should be kept refrigerated; vials of ecallantide removed from refrigeration should be stored below 85°F and used within 14 days or returned to refrigeration until use [56]. Two immune globulin products recommended to be stored under refrigerated conditions are Asceniv™and Bivigam®[57,58].
Disparities in asthma and exposure to various asthma triggers have been well-documented. According to U.S. data from 2018–2020, asthma prevalence disproportionately affects certain groups, including children and adults who are non-Hispanic (NH) Black, American Indian/Alaska Native, or of Puerto Rican ethnicity [59–61]. Also, asthma is disproportionately more common among people with lower household incomes than among people with higher household incomes [59,62]. For example, asthma prevalence in 2020 was 11.0% (standard error, 0.75) among people with household incomes less than 100% of the federal poverty level but 6.7% (standard error, 0.28) among people with household incomes equal to or higher than 450% of the federal poverty level [59]. National mortality data indicate asthma deaths are also unequally distributed; the likelihood of dying from asthma in the United States is more than two times higher among NH Black Americans compared to NH White Americans [59–61]. Regarding disparities in exposure to asthma triggers, data at the national, state, and local level have shown that NH Black individuals, Hispanic individuals, and people with lower incomes are substantially more likely to reside in areas with higher levels of ozone or PM2.5[18,63–69].
Disparities have also been identified for allergic-immunologic diseases beyond asthma [60,62,70,71]. For instance, 2021 data from the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) 2021 found that food allergy was more prevalent in NH Black children compared to NH White and Hispanic children [70]. Also, this survey reported the prevalence of atopic dermatitis was highest among NH Black children [70]. In addition to prevalence, other studies have identified racial or ethnic disparities in the severity of these allergic-immunologic diseases [60,62]. For example, one analysis found NH Black and Hispanic children had higher odds of food allergy-related anaphylaxis and ED visits than NH White children [60,72]. Other data indicate atopic dermatitis is more severe among NH Black adults and children compared to other racial groups [60]. For adults, data from the 2021 NHIS indicate that food allergy was more prevalent in NH Black adults than NH White, NH Asian, and Hispanic adults [60,71]. For chronic rhinosinusitis, several studies involving adult patients have reported higher disease severity or morbidity among NH Black individuals, Hispanic individuals, and individuals receiving Medicaid insurance [73–77].
In addition to these documented disparities, climate change is a health equity issue [1]. Individuals with greater risk of exposure or fewer resources (e.g., children, individuals experiencing poverty, people with disabilities) to adapt to climate-related threats are more likely to experience negative effects on their physical and mental health [1,5,78]. For instance, extreme heat can disproportionately affect people with fewer resources to secure housing, including housing with air conditioners [3,79,80]. In another example, climate change-related urban flooding can impact low-lying areas with poor infrastructure, which disproportionately affects people with lower incomes and people of color [81,82].
Contributors to disparate risk for climate-related health effects (such as economic and social factors, or the availability of individual and community resources to adapt to climate-related threats) could potentially add to existing disparities in climate-sensitive diseases including asthma. For instance, a 2022 report from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency found that among all racial/ethnic groups studied, NH Black children are the most likely to live in Census tracts with the highest projected increases in pediatric asthma-related ED visits attributable to climate-driven changes in PM2.5levels [63,81]. This report also found disparities by income level [63,81,83]. Specifically, children with from households with incomes less than two times the federal poverty level are more likely to live in areas with the highest projected increases in asthma-related ED visits attributable to PM2.5[63,81,83].
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC’s) Climate and Health Program began in 2009 and has supported state, tribal, local, and territorial public health agencies as they prepare for and respond to the health impacts of a changing climate [3,84]. This program’s activities include conductingepidemiologic studiesto build the scientific evidence base, providing technical assistance and funding to public health agencies, and creating tools and guidance to support communities to prepare for and respond to the health impacts of climate change [3,84]. In 2022, CDC and the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) developed and released a national CDC/ATSDR Agency-wide Climate and Health Strategic Framework [1]. This framework outlines more than 50 actions that CDC/ATSDR aspires to implement within the next five years [1]. These actions focus on addressing environmental justice and health equity, leveraging interdisciplinary partnerships, using innovative data practices and research to inform policy and decision-making, and building a climate-ready workforce [1].
Through these activities, CDC/ATSDR commits to embracing cross-cutting solutions, technological advances, and new partnerships to address the health impacts of climate change in the United States and abroad [1]. Furthermore, CDC/ATSDR will continue to include a health equity approach in its climate and health work to address health disparities and injustices [1]. This far-reaching, collaborative approach to address the health risks of climate change can help communities track, prevent, and respond to the public health threats of climate change, including impacts on asthma and allergic-immunologic diseases [1].
Everyone, including healthcare professionals, can participate in efforts to prepare for and reduce health effects associated with climate change, including impacts on asthma and other allergic-immunologic diseases [3]. Multiple clinically-oriented resources exist to help healthcare professionals learn more about this topic [3,23,85–88]. These materials include educational resources that can be shared with and used by patients, such ashttps://www.AirNow.govor the AirNow app [89,90], which both can help people with asthma and others learn when outdoor air pollution levels might be harmful in their area. When outdoor air pollution levels may be harmful in their area, these patients can try spending more time indoors (where outdoor air pollution levels are usually lower) or choose easier outdoor activities like walking instead of running [3,89,91]. For children with asthma, the American Academy of Pediatrics has endorsed publicly available activity books designed to help children learn about emergency preparedness for wildfires and flooding [92–96]. These activity books include information about asthma and are available in English and Spanish [92–96].
Certainly, discussions with patients about guidelines-based medical management, education on disease self-management, and reducing exposure to disease triggers (which vary among individuals) continue to remain key to helping individuals achieve and maintain control of their asthma or other allergic-immunologic disease [6,8,24]. Conversations about climate change and health can be integrated into clinical care and examples of climate-related conversation strategies with patients and families are available in multiple publications [97–100]. These references include communication strategies tailored to patients with asthma or other allergic-immunologic disease [97–100].
For healthcare professionals involved in educating medical education, resources are available to inform teaching opportunities with medical students, residents, and fellows. For instance, asthma-related examples of how to provide climate change-related education for physicians-in-training can be found online or in the literature [54,87,88]. These resources include slide decks and problem-based learning cases that address both asthma and climate change [87].
Climate change is one of the biggest public health threats of our time, and its impacts on human health and wellbeing are far-reaching and worsening [1]. Climate change can impact asthma and other allergic-immunologic disease through various pathways. Climate change is a health equity issue; climate change-related health impacts can disproportionately affect certain populations, which could potentially add to existing disparities in climate-sensitive diseases such as asthma. U.S. public health efforts to reduce the health impacts of climate change include the development of the 2022 CDC/ATSDR Agency-wide Climate and Health Strategic Framework [1], which focuses on addressing health equity and can help communities track, prevent, and respond to the public health threats of climate change. For clinical care and medical training, numerous resources are available to help healthcare professionals provide education about preventing climate change-related health impacts. A collaborative, cross-sector approach can help individuals and communities be more prepared to prevent and respond to health effects associated with climate change, including impacts on asthma and other allergic-immunologic disease [1].
The authors thank Jim Walters (CDC) for his contributions to this article.
The findings and conclusions in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official position of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Conflicts of interest:None.
Human and Animal Rights:This article does not contain any studies with human or animal subjects performed by any of the authors.
Papers of particular interest, published recently, have been highlighted as:
* Of importance
** Of major importance
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894