An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Collection date 2025 Jan.
Single-user license only. ONS reserves all rights. For permission to post online, reprint, adapt, or reuse, please emailpubpermissions@ons.org.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY:Nurses in all specialties have been called upon to take action to address global climate change, climate justice, and health. TheAmerican Nurses Association (2023)has specifically tasked nursing professional organizations to (a) educate members on climate change–related illnesses and negative impacts on treatment, (b) collaborate with grassroots organizations for environmental justice efforts, (c) support policies that promote climate mitigation and adaptation, (d) maintain familiarity with climate justice frameworks, and (e) collectively amplify the voice of nursing to strengthen its impact on climate policy. The purpose of this white paper is to enlighten members of the Oncology Nursing Society and oncology nurses at large on the increasing impact of climate change across the cancer control continuum and the pivotal role of the oncology nurse in education, research, clinical practice, and advocacy. Climate change refers to long-term shifts in temperature and weather patterns that are occurring because of global warming (United Nations, n.d.). Climate change is an often-overlooked social determinant of (or contributor to) health that exacerbates poor health, increases healthcare costs, disproportionately affects some communities, and has a synergistic effect with other social determinants of health (Ragavan et al., 2020). Climate change affects all aspects of the cancer control continuum and impacts some populations disproportionately. Events such as wildfires and floods, exacerbated by climate change, can heighten individuals’ exposure to cancer-causing substances, thereby increasing their susceptibility to the disease; reducing such exposure can reduce risks for cancer and positively impact the environment. Air pollution, extended droughts, heat waves, ultraviolet radiation, extreme weather events, and food supply disruptions also impact cancer etiology. Extreme weather events disrupt preventive care, cancer detection, and screening efforts, and create workforce shortages that can lead to suboptimal care. Disruptions in the supply chain and scheduled healthcare visits impact patient care continuity. Additionally, climate-related extreme weather events have an impact on overall survival and disrupt end-of-life care, underscoring the pervasive impact of climate change on cancer care across the continuum. Oncology nurses are strategically positioned to contribute to multifaceted solutions, including obtaining and offering education to fellow healthcare providers, students, patients, community members, and policymakers. Oncology nurse scientists are equipped to spearhead the generation of pertinent new knowledge, and nurses in clinical care can play a crucial role in assisting their healthcare system to become carbon net neutral. Oncology nurses must answer the call to actively engage in climate and health advocacy efforts within their own healthcare systems and in the communities where they live, work, and play. Several resources for education and action are shared.
Keywords:climate change, white paper, health climate justice, oncology nurse
Nurses are the most trusted professionals, as they are committed to promoting and advocating for the health, welfare, and safety of all people (American Nurses Association [ANA], 2023). In 2023, the ANA position statement “Nurses’ Role in Addressing Global Climate Change, Climate Justice, and Health” called upon nurses in all settings and specialties to take action to address global climate change, climate justice, and health. TheANA (2023)specifically asked nursing professional organizations (e.g., International Council of Nurses, World Health Organization, Alliance of Nurses for Healthy Environments, American Academy of Nursing) to (a) educate members on how climate change contributes to illness and can negatively impact treatment, (b) collaborate with grassroots organizations for environmental justice efforts, (c) support policies that promote climate mitigation and adaptation, (d) be familiar with climate justice frameworks, and (e) collectively amplify the voice of nursing to strengthen its impact on climate policy. The Oncology Nursing Society (ONS) is the professional home to oncology nurses worldwide and is committed to promoting excellence in oncology nursing and transformative cancer care. Given the ANA’s call to action, the purpose of this white paper is to educate ONS members and oncology nurses at large on the growing impact of climate change across the cancer control continuum and the role of the oncology nurse in education, research, clinical practice, and advocacy.
It has been estimated that climate change interventions in industrialized countries could prevent 30%–40% of premature deaths from preventable health conditions such as cancer (Vineis et al., 2021). Experts acknowledge that climate change impacts all aspects of the cancer control continuum, from etiology to survivorship and end-of-life care (Hiatt & Beyeler, 2020). Exposure to environmental pollutants, which is a major risk factor for the development of new cancers, is rising as the frequency and severity of climate-related extreme weather events increase (Kingsley, 2019;Santos et al., 2021). Extreme weather events also disrupt cancer control screening efforts and cancer center care delivery, resulting in increased cancer morbidity and mortality. For instance, Hurricanes Harvey and Maria in 2017 caused increased carcinogen exposure as well as disruption to transportation systems and power grids; both are factors associated with an increase in cancer mortality (Nogueira et al., 2019,2023). Population research on social determinants of health (SDOHs) has demonstrated the disproportional impact of climate change on the health of individuals living in marginalized communities with fewer environmental protections, worse access to health care, frail or absent healthcare infrastructures, poorer economies, and fewer healthy food options.
Oncology nurses can answer the ANA’s call to action by educating patients on environmental health and the effects of climate change, serving as environmental stewards and advocates in their practice settings and communities, participating in disaster preparedness and response efforts, and promoting health policies (Dickman et al., 2022;LeClair & Potter, 2022). Although climate change is not historically emphasized in the academic preparation of nurses, it is imperative that oncology nurses recognize how the changing climate affects cancer prevalence and outcomes and exacerbates ongoing healthcare challenges (e.g., inappropriate staffing, patient safety, infectious disease response, mental health, availability of supplies and medications) (Langan & Krieger, 2018).
Climate change refers to long-term shifts in temperature and weather patterns that are occurring due to global warming (United Nations, n.d.). TheANA (2023)position statement explains that global warming, primarily caused by human activity, is contributing to a broad range of planetary changes (e.g., rising sea levels, extreme temperatures) that significantly impact human health directly (e.g., wildfires, severe storms, vector-borne diseases), indirectly (e.g., water and food scarcity, climate-related migration, access to health care), and inequitably. Climate change is an often overlooked SDOH that exacerbates poor health, increases healthcare costs, disproportionately affects communities, and has a synergistic effect with other SDOHs (Ragavan et al., 2020). More extreme weather events can combine with air pollution, extreme heat, or environmental degradation to undermine food and water supplies and quality, increase allergens, and change vector ecology, thereby leading to poorer health outcomes (seeFigure 1). Although climate change impacts everyone, the resulting negative health effects are disproportionately experienced by those with fewer resources to adapt to the changing climate, including children, older people, and people experiencing poverty, marginalization, or social exclusion (American Academy of Pediatrics Council on Environmental Health, 2015;Levy & Patz, 2015;Ragavan et al., 2020;United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 2016).

Impact of Climate Change on Human Health
Note. Image courtesy of Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (https://www.cdc.gov/climate-health/media/pdfs/2024/05/Regional-Impacts-Climate-Change-H.pdf).
For individuals with a diagnosis of cancer, the impact of climate change may worsen existing inequalities and present unique challenges both to the individual and to the healthcare system responsible for providing their care. Increasingly, cancer care providers are witnessing the impact of climate change on all aspects of the cancer control continuum, ranging from increased exposures to known carcinogens to delayed access to cancer screenings, treatments, and post-treatment surveillance testing (Ginex et al., 2023;Hiatt & Beyeler, 2020). As global warming continues to worsen, short of effective interventions (Herring & Lindsey, 2022), the climate-related health impact among the oncology patient population will likely worsen as well.
Certain substances, including those used in building materials (e.g., asbestos for heat insulation, chromated copper arsenic to prevent lumber from rotting), are known carcinogens. Climate change events such as wildfires and floods can expose members of the affected population to these harmful substances, thereby increasing their risk for developing cancer. In South Florida, for example, soil redistribution caused by hurricanes has increased the risk for exposure to heavy metals and other known carcinogens, with a disproportionate impact on communities of color and lower-income communities (Nogueira et al., 2023;Union of Concerned Scientists, 2020). Reducing the use of carcinogenic substances not only reduces risks for cancer but also positively impacts the environment. As climate change worsens, strategies have been developed in response to the changing environment that can also mitigate exposure to carcinogens, contribute to cancer prevention, promote healthy behaviors, and improve planetary health.
Air pollution, a major effect of climate change, was established as a carcinogen by theInternational Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) in 2013. As noted previously, the increased incidence of wildfires due to climate change has increased exposure to airborne allergens as well as worsened ground-level ozone and particulate matter (Nolte et al., 2018). The clearest connection between climate change and cancer is the one that exists between air pollution and lung cancer. Lung cancer is the second most common cancer in the United States and the leading cause of cancer-related mortality (American Cancer Society, 2024). Although tobacco use is the most common cause of lung cancer, air pollution is responsible for 43% of lung cancer deaths worldwide (Landrigan et al., 2018), and 15% of deaths globally are attributable to particulate air pollution, a threefold increase over the past three decades (Matthews-Trigg et al., 2019). Additionally, the public’s exposure to radon is expected to increase over time due to the melting of the permafrost and the increased amount of time spent sheltering indoors due to extreme heat and poor outdoor air quality (Glover & Blouin, 2022;Zhang et al., 2024).
Extended droughts and heat waves related to climate change have increased the risk and extent of forest fires, which place large amounts of particulate air pollution into the atmosphere. Wildfire smoke contains several carcinogens, namely formaldehyde and benzene (Winstead, 2023). Once again, some groups are disproportionately affected by these exposures, including firefighters, children, older people, pregnant people, outdoor workers, people with lower socioeconomic status, and those with preexisting cardiac or respiratory disease (Korsiak et al., 2022;U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2024).
It is known that asbestos, erionite, wood dust, arsenic, beryllium, cadmium, and chromium are associated with cancers of the lung, skin (arsenic), and nasal cavities (wood dust) (Siemiatycki et al., 2004). When a building catches fire or floods as a result of an extreme weather event brought about by climate change, these harmful substances can burn or leach into the water system, causing exposure beyond that attributable to their initial use in construction or manufacturing; therefore, eliminating, replacing, or reducing these known carcinogens in buildings is a double pathway toward reducing exposure.
In the healthcare industry, petrochemicals are used for fuel and to make single-use plastics that are used in pharmaceutical and medical supplies. Petrochemicals are chemical products (e.g., benzene, propylene, ethylene) derived from the refining of petroleum or natural gas, and some are known carcinogens. TheIARC (2018)has found sufficient evidence that exposure to the petrochemical benzene is a cause of acute myeloid leukemia and may contribute to the development of acute lymphocytic leukemia, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, multiple myeloma, and non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Further, it is well understood that the refining process and the burning of fossil fuels (e.g., coal, natural gas, petroleum) for energy (e.g., transportation, electricity, heat) contribute to air pollution, thus increasing cancer risk and greenhouse gas emissions (Onyije et al., 2021). Eliminating, replacing, or reducing the fossil fuels and petrochemicals used in health care, households, and common daily activities will reduce exposure, and thus cancer incidence. In addition, reducing the use of fossil fuels in health care will result in the health benefits of less pollution and slow global warming by reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
Ultraviolet (UV) radiation from the sun both affects and is affected by global climate change. As ozone in the stratosphere decreases, more harmful UVB radiation reaches the Earth’s surface. Although UV radiation enables vitamin D synthesis, which is needed for bone health and disease prevention in humans, it also contributes to sunburn (Smithsonian Environmental Research Center, n.d.). UV radiation is defined as acomplete carcinogenbecause it is both a mutagen and a nonspecific damaging agent, and it has properties of both a tumor initiator and a tumor promoter (D’Orazio et al., 2013). UV is molecularly and epidemiologically linked to the three most common skin cancers: basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and malignant melanoma (D’Orazio et al., 2013).
Primary cancer prevention refers to actions taken to prevent cancer from developing, including avoiding exposure to known carcinogens (e.g., tobacco abstinence), partaking in physical activity, consuming a healthy diet, using sun protection, and receiving vaccines known to prevent cancer. Evidence shows that the changing climate is impacting primary cancer prevention efforts in multiple ways as people across the globe experience extremes in temperature and weather, poor air quality, scarcity of quality food and water, higher UV radiation exposure, and obstacles to accessing health care (Hiatt & Beyeler, 2020). For example, people whose diets are rich in fruits and vegetables have a lower risk of cancers of the mouth, pharynx, larynx, esophagus, stomach, and lung, and some evidence suggests that maintaining a diet rich in plant foods also lowers the risk for cancers of the colon, pancreas, and prostate (National Cancer Institute, 2024). Although it is difficult to estimate the effects of climate change on nutrition-related cancers, one modeling study has predicted more than half a million climate-related deaths worldwide because of changes in the food supply by 2050 (Hiatt & Beyeler, 2020). Climate change–related droughts and floods also affect the food supply, reducing access to fresh fruits and vegetables and the quality of vegetation available to livestock. In addition to extreme events, climate change–related higher ground-level ozone, decline in pollinators, and sea level rise all affect food production and yields. Higher concentrations of carbon dioxide in the air reduce the nutritional content of grains, including protein and micronutrients. Rising ocean temperatures and acidification reduce the productivity of fisheries, potentially reducing the consumption of fish, which are rich in omega-3 fatty acids and known to be protective against some cancers (Hiatt & Beyeler, 2020).
The changing climate is impacting physical activity. Mild temperatures often facilitate outdoor physical activity; however, poor air quality and extreme temperatures lead people to seek shelter from air pollution and heat, potentiating physical inactivity. For example,Bernard et al. (2021)conducted a systematic review of the literature on the bidirectional associations between climate change impacts and physical activity behaviors, and found that air pollution, extreme temperatures, and natural disasters each have a consistent, negative effect on levels of physical activity.
In addition to the behavioral and lifestyle impacts of climate change on cancer prevention, the incidence of extreme weather events is affecting cancer vaccine uptake. Extreme weather events are known to disrupt supply chains and hospital infrastructure and staffing, causing delays in foundational cancer prevention immunizations (e.g., Gardasil®, Cervarix®, Recombivax HB®) (Fontham et al., 2020;National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, 2022). For example, the “super floods” experienced in Pakistan in 2022 led to delays in childhood vaccination due to the displacement of children, shifting resources at the government level, and consequent interruptions to the supply chain of medicine and the vaccination of women and children (Ali & Hamid, 2022). Moreover, officials in Pakistan reported a loss of vaccine records due to floodwaters and suspended routine vaccination drives given the difficulties of traveling and maintaining safe vaccine storage (Ali & Hamid, 2022).
Lastly, extreme weather events cause delays in primary care visits due to infrastructure damage, displacement, and other socioeconomic factors, thus undermining opportunities for health coaching and discussion of cancer prevention strategies based on individual risk (Commonwealth Fund, 2022). As with many elements of climate change, disadvantaged populations bear a disproportionate burden of the impacts of climate change on cancer prevention efforts.
Climate change is causing an increase in the frequency and severity of extreme weather events (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2021) that can have devastating effects on patients with cancer across the cancer control continuum (Ginex et al., 2023;Hiatt & Beyeler, 2020). Extreme weather events can damage healthcare infrastructure, disrupt supply chains, and cause displacement of both patients and healthcare workers (Ginex et al., 2023;Nogueira et al., 2023). Such disruptions cause delays in cancer screening and detection strategies, leading to later-stage diagnoses and subsequent higher mortality rates (Cavallo, 2021;National Cancer Institute, 2023a,2023b;Siegel et al., 2023).
The impact of extreme weather events on the cancer care workforce is well documented. Disruptions in communication channels between healthcare providers within and across organizations have led to negative outcomes in patient care (Donohue, 2007;Joseph et al., 2007). Healthcare professionals can experience damage to their homes or displacement because of extreme weather events (Carr, 2017;Lopez-Araujo & Burnett, 2017;Marris, 2017;Mireles et al., 2018), which prevents them from getting to work, thereby creating workforce shortages and limits in care capacity. It should be noted that the devastation caused by extreme natural disasters and the stress of providing care during and after them can have severe long-term psychosocial impacts on healthcare providers (Nix & Caldwell, 2018). The impact of extreme weather events could continue to exacerbate the already pressing healthcare workforce shortage. In addition to workforce disruptions, workforce training programs have been negatively impacted by extreme weather events (Man et al., 2018).Harmon and Boulmay (2011)reported a five-year delay in restoring an oncology fellowship program for physicians following Hurricane Katrina. It is reasonable to expect similar impacts on nursing programs both within academia and healthcare institutions.
Perhaps the most poignant examples of the devastating impact of extreme weather events due to climate change involve treatment for cancer. In an analysis of 10-year survival data post–Hurricane Katrina, researchers found a 15% increase in mortality among adults with breast cancer and lung cancer (Bell et al., 2020). Likewise, a retrospective study byNogueira et al. (2019)of patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer receiving radiation therapy in areas where hurricanes were declared found a reduction in overall survival because of interrupted radiation therapy treatments. In addition to such direct impacts on patients, the risk of infection in those receiving immunosuppressive therapies is amplified by the increase in vector-borne disease from flooding (Dickman et al., 2022;Hiatt & Beyeler, 2020;Nogueira et al., 2023). Displacement from a disaster also places immunocompromised people at risk, particularly when they are forced to be in close contact with large groups of people (e.g., shelters).
The provision of cancer care for survivors and those nearing the end of life is impacted by climate change–related damage to healthcare infrastructure, disruptions in supply chains, and displacement of both patients and healthcare professionals. Climate-related extreme weather events disrupt follow-up care and cancer screenings, heighten emotional distress among cancer survivors (Rodriguez-Rabassa et al., 2020), and impact overall survival.Bell et al. (2020)discovered that individuals diagnosed with invasive cancer of the breast, colon, or lung who were exposed to Hurricane Katrina within six months of diagnosis exhibited worse long-term (10-year) survival compared to matched patients unaffected by a hurricane; the disruptions to care brought about by Hurricane Katrina are thought to have contributed to this finding. Similarly,Zhang et al. (2023)reported that patients exposed to wildfire smoke during the first year of recovery post– curative-intent lung resection for non-small cell lung cancer had worse overall survival than those who were not exposed to wildfire smoke.
The provision of end-of-life care following an extreme weather event is equally concerning; patients and caregivers face numerous barriers to accessing holistic care that supports a peaceful death. In a systematic review of end-of-life care in natural disasters,Kelly et al. (2023)found that disasters caused disruptions in care, isolation, magnification of inequalities among different ethnic groups, and an extra care burden on families and caregivers. The findings outlined in this section underscore the urgent need for comprehensive strategies to address the dire impacts of climate change across the cancer control continuum.
Education is one of several action strategies that nurses can take to ameliorate the impacts of climate change on human health. Education and other strategies are depicted inFigure 2. There are a multitude of opportunities for nurses to educate themselves and other healthcare professionals about climate change and its impact on health. In 2018, the Alliance of Nurses for Healthy Environments and Health Care Without Harm launched an initiative called the Nurses Climate Challenge aimed at mobilizing nurses to educate 50,000 health professionals about the impacts of climate change. To assist with this goal, the Alliance of Nurses for Healthy Environments offers (a) a comprehensive list of free resources with which nurses can educate themselves, their colleagues, and their communities; (b) a map to connect over 2,000 nurses who have volunteered as climate champions; (c) a podcast series to share their efforts; and (d) a free textbook for nurses. Additionally, the Alliance of Nurses for Healthy Environments maintains a formal relationship with over 60 schools of nursing in the United States and Canada that have made formal commitments to teach nursing students about climate change and track that education. Free training opportunities and materials for nurses and other healthcare providers are also offered by CleanMed, Health Care Without Harm, the Global Consortium on Climate and Health Education, and Harvard University. In recognition of the importance of teaching nursing students about the health impacts of climate change, theAmerican Association of Colleges of Nursing (2021)described the need for learners to understand the impact of climate change on environmental and population health inThe Essentials: Core Competencies for Professional Nursing Education. Faculty in nursing schools across the United States are sharing resources on how to incorporate this content into existing courses and creating freestanding electives focused on climate change.

Strategies to Ameliorate the Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health
Oncology nurses are well positioned to educate patients about the adverse health effects of climate change. For example, as exposure to extreme weather events and wildfire smoke among patients with cancer is associated with worse overall survival (Bell et al., 2020;Zhang et al., 2023), nurses can proactively educate patients on strategies to minimize exposure (e.g., staying indoors, masking) when the outdoor air quality is poor. Oncology nurses can also integrate environmental assessments into clinical encounters to ensure identification of carcinogen exposures (Flucke & Sullivan-Moore, 2023). On a broader level, they can take part in developing policies and protocols that address emergency response and ensure continuity of care in the event of extreme weather. Within health systems, disaster preparedness, mitigation, and response are critical components of effective adaptation to the changing climate. Oncology nurses have valuable insights and competencies that can add to the sustainability and quality of disaster preparation and response efforts (Wilson et al., 2024).
On the infrastructure level, oncology nurses can become involved in quality improvement efforts to reduce waste, change product types, or adjust clinical operations without compromising high-quality clinical care and its outcomes. Nurses can advocate for their facilities to become carbon net neutral, promote procurement of supplies from vendors who supply zero emissions products, advocate for fewer meat-based meals in healthcare facilities, undertake efforts such as rooftop gardens, and work to reduce energy use (Health Care Without Harm, 2019). Nurses can encourage their healthcare system to sign the White House/Department of Health and Human Services’ Health Sector Climate Pledge to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 50% by 2030 and achieve net zero by 2050 (Fauteux & Simon, 2024).
Oncology nurse scientists can develop research agendas that align with the climate change and health priorities of the National Institute of Nursing Research and otherNational Institutes of Health (2023)agencies, and of ONS, such as examining the intersection of cancer care and climate change, and related impacts of mitigation efforts. As recent climate change research has illustrated the disproportionately negative impacts on health in marginalized communities, new models for cancer care delivery, including prevention of cancer from climate-related carcinogens, should be prioritized in current research funding opportunities.
Oncology nurses are highly respected advocates for environmental justice who believe that all people deserve a safe and clean environment, devoid of carcinogens, as well as equitable access to health care in their community. Oncology nurses can be active not only in ONS but also in other professional nursing organizations that form coalitions around issues related to climate change. Membership alone makes a difference in the number of advocates that professional organizations represent on behalf of change efforts. Oncology nurses have been active in national and international advocacy efforts such as the Climate Strike in Washington, DC, and the COP28 United Nations Climate Change Conference. They inform policy by engaging in committees that protect and regulate health care and the environment and serve as leaders on state and local interprofessional committees focused on climate change and sustainability (Fauteux & Simon, 2024).
Climate change often places communities that are under-resourced or experiencing ongoing systemic discrimination, exclusion, and under- or disinvestment at higher risk for negative health effects (Crimmins et al., 2023). Addressing and mitigating the impacts of climate change will require intentional engagement with and elevation of these most-at-risk communities to effectively improve and further prevent disparities in health outcomes. Oncology nurses are well positioned to advocate with and on behalf of these communities. An equity-minded approach to addressing the myriad issues surrounding climate change and cancer will result in better outcomes for all.
Oncology nurses have been called upon to address numerous serious issues pertaining to global climate change, climate justice, and health. ONS has been charged with informing its members about climate change–related negative impacts on cancer etiology and treatment. Oncology nurses are well positioned to engage in ongoing education and share that education with students, healthcare providers, and communities; conduct research in this area; make practical changes within healthcare facilities toward carbon net neutrality; and advocate for systems-based policy solutions that promote equity and environmental justice.
The authors gratefully acknowledge Nancy Houlihan, MA, RN, OCN®, and Donnalee Frega, PhD, RN, for their contributions to editing the manuscript.
Articles from Oncology Nursing Forum are provided here courtesy ofOncology Nursing Society
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894