An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email:kjfeeley@gmail.com.
Edited by Janet Franklin, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, and approved July 15, 2015 (received for review April 2, 2015)
Author contributions: A.D. designed research; A.D. and P.R.S. performed research; A.D. and K.J.F. analyzed data; and A.D. and K.J.F. wrote the paper.
Issue date 2015 Aug 25.
Understanding how species respond to climate change is crucial to the development of effective conservation strategies. We found directional and systematic changes in the composition of both adult and juvenile tree species in tropical north Andean forests at rates consistent with concurrent temperature increases, supporting the hypothesis of upward species migrations resulting from global warming. Our results indicate that compositional shifts occur primarily via range retractions. This suggests elevated risk for species extinctions and local biodiversity loss with ongoing warming. Other environmental filters, such as species-soil adaptations, as well as anthropogenic disturbances (e.g., habitat loss and hunting) may limit future species migrations and decrease the ability of forest communities and their constituent species to respond to climate change.
Keywords:climate change, conservation biogeography, dispersal modes, species migrations, thermal niches
Climate change is expected to cause shifts in the composition of tropical montane forests towards increased relative abundances of species whose ranges were previously centered at lower, hotter elevations. To investigate this process of “thermophilization,” we analyzed patterns of compositional change over the last decade using recensus data from a network of 16 adult and juvenile tree plots in the tropical forests of northern Andes Mountains and adjacent lowlands in northwestern Colombia. Analyses show evidence that tree species composition is strongly linked to temperature and that composition is changing directionally through time, potentially in response to climate change and increasing temperatures. Mean rates of thermophilization [thermal migration rate (TMR), °C⋅y−1] across all censuses were 0.011 °C⋅y−1(95% confidence interval = 0.002–0.022 °C⋅y−1) for adult trees and 0.027 °C⋅y−1(95% confidence interval = 0.009–0.050 °C⋅y−1) for juvenile trees. The fact that thermophilization is occurring in both the adult and juvenile trees and at rates consistent with concurrent warming supports the hypothesis that the observed compositional changes are part of a long-term process, such as global warming, and are not a response to any single episodic event. The observed changes in composition were driven primarily by patterns of tree mortality, indicating that the changes in composition are mostly via range retractions, rather than range shifts or expansions. These results all indicate that tropical forests are being strongly affected by climate change and suggest that many species will be at elevated risk for extinction as warming continues.
Global warming is causing poleward and upward changes in the distributions of many species (1–4). Studies from tropical forests are extremely sparse (1,5), but the available evidence suggests that many tropical plant species are “migrating” upward (6–8). Accordingly, the composition of tropical montane forests is changing toward increased relative abundances of species whose ranges were previously centered at lower, hotter elevations (6,8). However, this process of “thermophilization” (9) is generally occurring at velocities slower than concurrent regional temperature increases (6,8). Furthermore, in at least one tropical site (Volcan Barva, Costa Rica), the observed shifts in tree species composition were mostly a result of increased mortality of species with ranges centered at higher, cooler elevations (8), indicating that species migrations and associated compositional shifts are occurring mostly via range retractions (1). If generalizable, these findings indicate that many tropical tree species have at best a poor capacity to persist under rapidly rising temperatures, suggesting a high risk for species loss in these systems (10).
One factor that determines the velocity at which plant species can move through space, and hence migrate, is seed dispersal (11–13). Although most tree species in wet tropical forests are animal-dispersed (14,15), differences in the relative abundances of species with different dispersal modes could greatly affect the responses of forest communities to climate change. Furthermore, other nonclimatic factors, such as soil and other edaphic factors, can pose significant barriers to species migrations by limiting the movement of species between different habitat types (16–18). For example, the specialization of species on specific soil types or conditions (19,20) can potentially halt migrations by preventing species from moving into areas with suitable temperatures but unsuitable edaphic conditions (18,21). Likewise, forest disturbances (anthropogenic or natural) will affect the ability of species to respond to climate change (22,23). Disturbances can hinder species movements by creating unsuitable conditions and/or by creating dispersal barriers (24). Conversely, disturbances may facilitate range shifts by resetting succession and minimizing priority effects that would otherwise skew competitive interactions, and thereby prevent some species from moving into climatically suitable habitats. Finally, by changing forest structure and cover, disturbances can alter microclimate (25) and influence species and community responses to climate change (9).
To date, all studies of tree species migrations from the tropics have looked exclusively at large adult trees (i.e., individuals with diameter at breast height [DBH] ≥ 10 cm). The resultant models of species migrations and community responses to climate change are therefore potentially confounded by the fingerprint of past climatic events or episodic disturbances. The inclusion of smaller size classes (i.e., shrubs and juvenile trees) could potentially help to determine whether observed migrations are responses to episodic or ongoing environmental changes, and hence allow for better predictions of how these forests will fare in the future (26,27).
In this study, we investigated the response of tropical montane forests to anthropogenic climate change in the northern Andes and surrounding lowlands of northwest Colombia (SI Appendix, Fig. S1). This area is poorly represented in ecological studies, and the forest communities have not previously been assessed for climate change responses. To look at forest responses to climate change, we analyzed the patterns of compositional change that have occurred over the last decade in a network of 16 1-ha permanent adult tree census plots with nested subsample plots for censusing the smaller shrubs and juveniles (SI Appendix, Table S1). We assessed the rates of compositional change of both the adult (large individuals) and juvenile (small individuals) tree communities through time. We also tested whether the observed rates of compositional change are related to species’ dispersal modes, plot soil fertility and nutrient concentrations, or forest structural and demographic parameters. Understanding how these factors relate to, and potentially influence, the responses of juvenile and adult tropical tree communities to climate change will enhance our ability to predict and possibly mitigate the effects of future climate change on tropical species, as well as on the valuable services these threatened communities provide for millions of people.
Through all surveys, a total of 31,902 individual woody plants belonging to 1,820 species (including morpho-species) were identified and measured. Large individuals (DBH ≥ 10 cm; hereafter referred to as adults) represented 38.8% of individuals and included 1,050 species. Small individuals (1 cm ≤ DBH < 10 cm; hereafter referred to as juveniles) represented 61.2% of individuals and included 1,325 species (SI Appendix, Table S2).
We estimated the thermal optimum for all represented species (juveniles and adults) based on the locations from which they had been previously collected in online herbarium databases (SI Appendix, Table S3). We then calculated the community temperature score (CTS; °C) of each plot during each census as the average of the constituent species’ thermal optima weighted by the species’ relative basal areas in that census (8,27). The CTS was calculated for each plot separately using just the large individuals (CTSadult) and again using just the small individuals (CTSjuv). Both CTSadultand CTSjuvwere strongly negatively correlated with plot mean annual temperatures (adults:R= 0.95 andP< 0.0001; juveniles:R= 0.92 andP< 0.0001) and elevations (adults: R = −0.95 andP< 0.0001; juveniles:R= −0.92 andP< 0.0001;Fig. 1). CTS was an average of 0.15 °C lower for adults than juveniles in the same plot (Fig. 1andSI Appendix, Table S1).

Mean CTSs of the 16 study plots versus (A) plot elevation (mm) and (B) plot mean annual temperature (°C). Points at the same elevation or temperature represent the estimated CTS values for adults (diamonds; DBH > 10 cm) and juveniles (triangles; DBH < 10 cm) from the same plot. Lines indicate linear regressions between plot elevation or temperature and CTS estimates for adults (dashed) and juveniles (solid).
We next estimated the overall thermal migration rate (TMR; °C⋅y−1) of each plot as the annualized net change in CTS calculated over all possible census intervals. TMRs are indicative of changes in the relative abundance of lower-elevation species versus higher-elevation species (i.e., a positive TMR indicates community-wide thermophilization and is consistent with upward species migrations). For adult trees, TMRs were positive in 17 of the 20 plot census intervals (binomial probability = 0.002;Fig. 2), and the overall mean TMRadult(first to last census) was 0.011 °C⋅y−1[95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.002–0.022 °C⋅y−1]. Assuming an adiabatic lapse rate of 5.5 °C⋅km−1, this corresponds to a mean upward migration of 2.0 m⋅y−1(95% CI = 0.4–4.0 m⋅y−1). The three plots that had overall negative TMRadultwere all located higher than 1,700 m of elevation (Fig. 2). For juveniles, the TMRs were also positive in 17 of the 20 plot census intervals (Fig. 2), and the overall mean TMRjuvwas 0.027 °C⋅y−1(95% CI = 0.009–0.050 °C⋅y−1), which corresponds to a mean upward migration of 4.9 m⋅y−1(95% CI = 1.6–9.1 m⋅y−1). Three plots had negative TMRjuv(first to last census).No plots had both a negative TMRjuvand a negative TMRadult(SI Appendix, Fig. S2).

The estimated community temperature (°C) and elevation (m) score anomalies of plots in the northern Andes of Colombia. (A) Large individuals (adults). (B) Small individuals (juveniles). Anomalies in temperature were calculated as the net difference between a plot’s CTS in the respective census and the plot’s initial CTS. Anomalies in elevation were assessed by assuming an adiabatic lapse rate of 5.5 °C⋅km−1. Positive values represent an increase in basal area of taxa with distributions centered at lower, hotter elevations. Plot numbers correspond to the increasing ordinal position from lowlands to highlands along the elevational range covered by the plots (SI Appendix, Table S1). Red dashed lines with filled symbols indicate CTS anomalies of lowland plots (<1,100 m asl), and blue solid lines with open symbols indicate CTS anomalies of highland plots (>1,700 m asl).
The independent contributions of mortality, recruitment, and growth to each plot’s TMRadultand TMRjuvwere estimated following the protocol of reference8. With very few exceptions, changes in CTS were driven primarily by patterns of tree mortality (Fig. 3). In other words, thermophilization of the communities was mostly a result of increasing mortality of higher-elevation, cold-adapted species relative to the mortality of lower-elevation, thermophilic species, rather than being a result of any changes in tree growth or recruitment (8).

Thermal and elevational migration rates (°C⋅y−1and m⋅y−1, respectively) of plots and TMR resulting from just basal area growth (TMRgrow), just tree basal area recruitment (TMRrec), and just tree basal area mortality (TMRmort). (A) Large individuals (adults). (B) Small individuals (juveniles). For both stem size classes, the solid black line corresponds with the overall change in plot temperature and elevation (i.e., the annualized change between the initial and final plot censuses). In both panels, plots are ordered by increasing TMRadult. Plot numbers correspond to the ordinal elevation of plots from lowlands to highlands (SI Appendix, Table S1).
We assessed the relationship between each plot’s TMRadultand TMRjuvwith plot-level measures of dispersal modes, edaphic factors, and forest structural-demographic features (SI Appendix, Table S2). Principal components analysis (PCA) was used to reduce the dimensionality of each independent dataset (i.e., dispersal mode, edaphic factors, or structure-demography). We then calculated the regression between TMR and the PCA axes for each dataset and used Akaike information criterion to select the most parsimonious models. Finally, variance partitioning was used to determine the extent to which each of the PCA-transformed variables and their interactions explained differences in TMRadultand TMRjuv. For both adults and juveniles, a stepwise selection procedure was applied to all selected axes from the different datasets to get the overall most parsimonious model to explain TMRs.
For adult trees, the most parsimonious model describing the relationships between TMRadultand the different datasets retained the three dispersal mode PCA axes, two of the soil PCA axes, and one of the structure-demography PCA axes (SI Appendix, Table S4 and Fig. S3). On the basis of the adjustedR-square, all independent significant variables together accounted for 47% of the explained variation in TMRadult, most of which is attributable to the dispersal modes and the interaction of dispersal modes with soils (SI Appendix, Fig. S4A). The overall most parsimonious model for adults retained the three dispersal mode PCA axes (SI Appendix, Fig. S3A).
For juveniles, none of the PCA axes describing dispersal mode were significantly related to TMRjuv. The two most parsimonious models for the remaining datasets retained two of the three soil PCA axes and one of the structure-demography PCA axes (Table 1andSI Appendix, Fig. S3). Together, the two datasets explained 53% of total variation in TMRjuv. According to variance partitioning, the joint effects of the soil and structure-demography variables accounted for 64% of the total explained variation, roughly 26% of which could be attributed to only soils and the remaining 10% to only structure-demography variables (SI Appendix, Fig. S4B). The overall most parsimonious model for juveniles retained the soil PCA1 axes and the structure-demography PCA1 axis (SI Appendix, Fig. S5).
Regression models relating TMRs to dispersal modes, soil characteristics, and structural-demographic properties of north Andean study plots
The general model evaluated wasTMR = b0+b1PCA1+b2PCA2+b3PCA3. Principal component analysis was independently performed for each set of explanatory variables. The underlined and italicized models are the most parsimonious for each category of stems. Significance of both parameters and models are represented by ***P< 0.001; **P< 0.01; *P< 0.05;xP< 0.1;ns, nonsignificant. The significance of the parameters was evaluated by thet-statistic. The significance of the model was evaluated by theF-statistic. AIC, Akaike information criterion; bi, parameters;PCAiplot coordinates associated to each one of the PCA axis.
In northern Andean forests, the composition of trees is strongly and predictably related to elevation and temperature, such that more thermophilic species tend to occur at higher relative abundances in hotter, lower-elevation plots (Fig. 1). We find strong evidence, however, that the composition of these plots is changing directionally through time, potentially in response to climate change and increasing temperatures. One indication of these directional changes in composition is that the CTS of smaller trees tends to be slightly elevated relative to the CTS of larger trees. In other words, within the plots there tends to be elevated relative abundances of thermophilic species when looking at the smaller, and presumably younger, individuals than when looking at the older trees. This pattern is consistent with increasing relative abundances of thermophilic species through time. The directional changes in species composition are also evidenced in the temporal changes in CTS observed for both the adult and juvenile tree communities: In nearly all plots, CTS is increasing through time (i.e., positive TMR) as a result of increased relative abundances of lower-elevation species (Fig. 3).
These results are consistent with the results of previous studies from the southern Peruvian Andes (6) and from Volcan Barva in Costa Rica (8). Taken together, the three studies all suggest that widespread upward species migrations may be occurring throughout many neotropical montane forests. The estimated rate of compositional change for the Northern Andes is ∼2.0 m⋅y−1(95% CI = 0.4–4.0 m⋅y−1) for adult trees. This is not significantly different from the migration rates previously estimated for the tree communities in Peru (2.0 ± 0.9 m⋅y−1) (6) or in Costa Rica (1.2 ± 0.9 m⋅y−1) (8).
This is the first study to our knowledge to look at changes in the composition of juvenile tropical tree communities. The average rate of thermophilization for juveniles (4.9 m⋅y−1; 95% CI = 1.6–9.1 m⋅y−1) did not differ significantly from that of adults, but the overall trend suggests that juveniles trees are likely migrating faster than the larger adult trees. The fact that juvenile and adult communities are both experiencing thermophilization indicates that the observed compositional changes are not a result of any isolated climatic event or episode but, rather, that the changes in composition reflect responses to long-term ongoing climatic perturbations, such as global warming.
The observed TMRs of both the adult and juvenile trees are in accord with observed rates of warming in the study region. Since the 1960s, mean annual temperatures in the province of Antioquia, Colombia, have increased at a rate of 0.015 ± 0.002 °C⋅y−1(berkeleyearth.org). The rate of warming throughout the neotropics is accelerating, and temperatures are expected to increase by 2–4 °C by the end of this century (28). To keep pace with this future warming, TMRs will need to likewise increase significantly.
Even if TMRs are able to keep pace with warming, there is strong reason to be concerned for these forests and their constituent species: In the vast majority of plots, the observed changes in composition were driven mostly by patterns of differential mortality (Fig. 3). In contrast, there was very little contribution of tree recruitment or growth to the observed compositional changes. The overriding contribution of mortality suggests the observed changes in species composition are driven by range retractions, rather than range “marches” or range expansions (1). Range retractions do not bode well for species and suggest a high risk for biotic attrition and biodiversity loss in these systems (29). During the study period, there has been no significant change in species richness of juvenile trees in the plots (pairedt-test,P= 0.09). However, the species richness of adult trees has decreased in 15 of the 16 plots (binomial probability = 0.0003) by an average of four species (pairedt-test,P< 0.0005;SI Appendix, Fig. S6).
The plot-level factors related to TMRs differed between adult and juvenile tree communities. Changes in the composition of large trees, but not small trees, were significantly associated with the relative representation of different seed dispersal modes in the community. For the adult trees, rates of compositional change and thermophilization were decreased in plots with greater relative abundances of species with dispersal modes limited to shorter-distance dispersal events (i.e., ballistic dispersal, gravity dispersal, hydrochory, and myrmecochory), even when these dispersal modes were quite rare overall. This finding makes intuitive sense, as we expect species with short-distance dispersal modes to be slower migraters (12,13), and thus their occurrence may act to stabilize species composition through time. In line with the above result, the plots that had greater relative abundances of wind- or animal-dispersed species exhibited faster TMRs. Habitat loss, hunting, and other anthropogenic disturbances may eventually limit the efficacy of animal dispersal by removing some important dispersers from the system or creating barriers to their movements (30,31). This, in turn, will slow or prevent species migrations, and may limit the ability of forest communities to respond to climate change (24).
Soil fertility and nutrient concentrations were significantly associated with the TMRs of both adult and juvenile tree communities. One possible explanation for this pattern is that certain soils are relatively inhospitable to some species, and may reduce the ability of species to track suitable climates (32). The relationship between TMR and the soil variables differed between adult and juvenile communities. For adults, TMRs were slowest in plots with soils having low P concentrations (R= −0.59;P< 0.05). Because P is one of the most important factors limiting tree growth in tropical forests (20,33), many species may be prevented from migrating into areas with low-P soils, even when climatic conditions are conducive to establishment and growth (18). This, in turn, could allow species in these areas to persist longer, even as the climate becomes unsuitable, as there will be less competitive pressure from incoming “better-suited” species. For juveniles, TMR was positively associated with concentrations of Ca in the soil (R= 0.61;P< 0.05). Several studies have previously identified Ca as being a key element determining tree species distributions (20,34). Faster TMRjuvin high-Ca soils may indicate that species can more easily migrate into and persist in these relatively fertile soils.
TMRs were only weakly associated with forest structural and demographic variables. For the adult tree communities, the relationship between TMR and structural-demographic features was primarily driven by changes in plot 2 (SI Appendix, Fig. S3E). Plot 2 had the fastest of all TMRs and was the only site in which growth was an important demographic process determining the TMR of adult trees (Fig. 3). The particular behaviors of this plot may be associated with past disturbances in the forest understory (e.g., some cattle grazing is known to have occurred in this plot) that may have facilitated the establishment of species previously centered at hotter ranges (i.e., with higher optimum temperatures). As this example suggests, disturbances may facilitate range shifts by resetting succession and minimizing priority effects that would otherwise skew competitive interactions and prevent some species from moving into climatically suitable habitats (23). Excluding Plot 2, the observed relationship between TMRadultand structural-demographic variables is no longer significant (SI Appendix, Fig. S3E), weakening any generalization about direct effects of local demography in determining forest responses to climate change.
For the juvenile tree communities, both mortality of individuals and an increase in the overall biomass change were important factors in determining TMRs (SI Appendix, Table S4 and Fig. S5). Although the observed trend in juvenile trees could be the result of self-thinning after forest disturbances, in this particular case the results suggest that many of the species centered at cooler elevations (i.e., with lower optimum temperatures) are experiencing range retractions as a result of high mortality at lower elevations. This pattern remained consistent even when only the juvenile trees of canopy-reaching species were analyzed (SI Appendix, Fig. S7). For understory species with more limited dispersal, disturbances can hinder species movement by creating unsuitable conditions and/or by creating dispersal barriers (24). Furthermore, by changing forest structure and cover, disturbances can alter microclimate and influence species’ responses to climate change (10,25).
It is important to keep in mind that climate change involves many variables other than just mean annual temperature. For example, changes in the timing or amount of precipitation can potentially drive species migrations (35). For the tree species occurring in the study plots, there is a significant positive correlation between their optimal mean annual temperature and their optimal annual precipitation (R= 0.54;P< 0.0001;SI Appendix, Fig. S8), and accordingly, there are also positive correlations (adults:R= 0.85 andP< 0.0001; juveniles:R= 0.71 andP< 0.005;SI Appendix, Fig. S9) between the plots’ CTS and their community precipitation scores (CPS; optimal annual precipitation estimates and CPS were calculated following the same methods as used for temperatures). However, CPS is not correlated with actual precipitation (SI Appendix, Fig. S10), suggesting community composition in these forests is determined much more strongly by temperature than by water availability. One potentially important outcome of these relationships is that as tree species migrate upslope because of warming, CPSs are also increasing (SI Appendix, Fig. S11). In other words, the thermophilization of the north Andean tree communities may have the adverse effect of making these forests more moisture-demanding and susceptible to future drought. This does not bode well for the persistence of these systems, as most climate models predict decreasing precipitation, especially over dry season periods, in this region over the coming decades (36–38).
In conclusion, our findings show that the tree communities of the northern Andes are changing directionally through time to include relatively more thermophilic species. These results add to the small, but growing, body of evidence showing upward species migrations and thermophilization of tree communities throughout the neotropics (5). In the northern Andes, the directional changes in community composition are occurring in both the adult and juvenile trees. This strongly supports the hypothesis that the observed changes in composition are part of a long-term process, such as global warming, and are not a response to any single episodic event (39). The changes in the juvenile tree community also indicate that these forests will continue to undergo compositional shifts long into the future. Although the observed TMRs are consistent with concurrent rates of warming, it is unlikely that these communities will continue to keep pace in the future. High rates of deforestation and animal extirpation in the study area will likely decrease forest connectivity and diminish the ability of many plant species to reach newly suitable areas in the future. Reduced connectivity coupled with accelerating climate change (including both increases in temperatures and reductions in water availability) will result in faster range retractions and may increase the likelihood of local and global extinctions (40).
The study area is located in the northwest region of Colombia between 5°50′ and 8°61′ North and 74°61′and 77°33′ West (SI Appendix, Fig. S1). Elevation in the region ranges from 0 m asl to 4,000 m asl. The study was conducted using data collected from 16 permanent 1-ha forest inventory plots that were each censused at least twice each between 2006 and 2014 (SI Appendix, Table S1 andMethods).
Using the protocol used by references6and8, we estimated the thermal distributions of all tree species occurring in the 16 plots, based on the herbarium specimens collected in the tropical Andean countries of Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia. For all species occurring in the study plots, all available herbarium data records from these countries were downloaded through the Global Biodiversity Information Facility data portal (www.gbif.org/; accessed February 2014). Records that were missing collection coordinates, records tagged by the Global Biodiversity Information Facility as having possible coordinate issues, and records that had obvious georeferencing errors (i.e., coordinates occurring over the ocean or in other countries) were discarded. Duplicate records were discarded. The mean annual temperatures (hereafter “temperatures”) at the collection locations of all specimens were estimated by extracting the temperature values from the WorldClim extrapolated climate map at a spatial resolution of 30 arc s (41).
For each of the tree species recorded in the 16 plots that were represented by ≥10 herbarium collection records, we estimated the thermal optimum as the mean temperature (°C) of the herbarium collection locations (6,8). For species with <10 available records, the thermal optimum was estimated as the average collection temperature calculated from all available records of congeneric individuals collected from the tropical Andean region. Analyses were conducted using different sample size criteria, but results did not differ appreciably.
For each plot census, we calculated the CTS (°C) as proposed by reference8. CTS is the average of thermal optimum of all species occurring in the plot weighted by their relative basal area. The TMR (°C) was calculated as the net change in CTS values for each plot over all possible consecutive censuses. Confidence limits of the annualized overall TMRs were calculated by nonparametric bootstrapping with 1,000 draws (α = 0.05).
The overall annual TMR (°C⋅y−1) of each plot was calculated as the annualized change in the CTS values for each plot over the entire census period (i.e., CTS of the first vs. CTS of the last census). We also calculated the TMR for each plot due solely to tree basal area growth (TMRgrow), tree basal area recruitment (TMRrec), and tree basal area mortality (TMRmort). The TMRgrowof a plot is the difference in the plot’s CTS, as calculated using the initial versus final basal areas of just the trees surviving through the census period. The TMRrecof a plot is the difference in its CTS as calculated using the final basal areas of all stems recorded at the end of the census interval versus its CTS as calculated using the final basal areas of just the stems that survived through the census interval. Finally, a plot’s TMRmortis the difference in its CTS as calculated using the initial basal areas of all stems recorded in the first census versus its CTS as calculated using the initial basal areas of just the stems that survived through the census interval. All analyses were separately performed for only large individuals (DBH ≥ 10 cm; referred to as adults) and for only small individuals (1 cm ≤ DBH < 10 cm; referred to as juveniles). The juvenile class included both juvenile trees as well as shrubs and treelets.
The optimum precipitations of all species, and the CPS and precipitation migration rates of all plots, were also calculated using analogous methods as those described earlier, but using total annual precipitation (mm) values from the WorldClim maps (41).
We assessed the extent to which dispersal capability (dispersal modes), plant-habitat specialization (soil or edaphic characteristics), and forest disturbance (assessed by plot structural-demographic features) explain the observed changes in CTS (TMRs) of all plots (SI Appendix, Fig. S3). PCA was used to reduce the dimensionality of each independent dataset (SI Appendix, Table S4). In all cases, all variables were standardized to mean = 0 and SD = 1 before the analysis. The Kaiser-Guttmann criterion (42), which only selects the axes whose eigenvalues are larger than the mean, was applied. Then, TMR (°C⋅y−1) of adults (TMRadult) and juveniles (TMRjuv) was regressed against each independent dataset of independent PCA axes (dispersal, soils, or structure-demography). We applied the stepwise procedure based on the Akaike information criterion to select the most parsimonious model for each dataset of PCA axes. Finally, all selected axes of each independent dataset were submitted all together to a variation partitioning analysis based on the adjustedR-squared (42). Variation portioning aims to disentangle the extent at which each one of the independent hypotheses represented by the respective selected PCA axes, and their interactions, explain the compositional changes in CTS of all plots. All analyses were done with the R 3.1.2 software (43). The variance partitioning was performed with thevarpartfunction available in the library VEGAN (44).
The second census of the plots was founded by Fundación Natura, as part of the Mitigación Voluntaria de Emisiones de Gases de Efecto Invernadero initiative in Colombia, cofunded by the Global Environment Facility through the Banco Interamericano de Desarrollo, and the projectConsolidación de un sistema de monitoreo de bosques y carbono como soporte a la política ambiental y de manejo en Colombia, which is carried out by the Instituto de Meteorología, Hidrología y Estudios Ambientales. A.D. was funded by a Visiting Researcher Fulbright grant (2014-2015) hosted by Florida International University and the Fairchild Tropical Botanical Garden. K.J.F. is supported by the US National Science Foundation (DEB-1257655 and DEB-1350125). This is contribution 303 from the Tropical Biology Program of Florida International University.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
This article contains supporting information online atwww.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1506570112/-/DCSupplemental.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
Articles from Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America are provided here courtesy ofNational Academy of Sciences
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894