An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Correspondence: Collin Kramer (kramer.543@osu.edu)
Corresponding author.
Revised 2024 Nov 12; Received 2024 Aug 23; Accepted 2024 Nov 18; Collection date 2025 Jan.
This is an open access article under the terms of thehttp://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited and is not used for commercial purposes.
Climate change and its effects continue to threaten the stability of environments worldwide, impacting nearly every species. Although framing is an established technique in climate communication science, little has been done in communicating the climate change effects from an animal welfare perspective.
The primary objective of this article is to present the synthesis of evidence in existing literature on the effects of communicating climate change as an animal welfare issue.
A systematic approach was taken based on the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta‐Analyses) scoping review guidelines and utilizing a hybridized ProPheT‐PICOS Model with modifications. Using search strings, scholarly databases within the Web of Science platform were systematically searched for English‐language climate change literature that included animal welfare concepts. Articles were imported into Covidence and inclusion and exclusion criteria were then used to select articles for further analysis.
Of an initial 4080 studies, only two papers were identified that used animal welfare framing to discuss climate change based on the inclusion/exclusion criteria.
Further research should attempt to understand and approach framing climate change concerning current understanding by geographic location and culture to close research gaps and mitigate bias in the context of climate change and its effects on animal welfare.
Keywords:animal welfare, climate change, communication, framing
This article uses a systematic approach to identify and present the synthesis of existing literature communicating the effects of climate change from an animal welfare perspective. After search strings were applied and scholarly databases searched, only two papers were identified utilizing animal welfare framing concerning the effects of climate change. Further research should attempt to understand culture and beliefs by geographic location to mitigate bias in the context of discussing climate change and its effects on animal welfare.

Climate change refers to any significant change in the magnitude of temperature and weather patterns occurring for extended periods of time, usually decades or longer (United Nations, (n.d.); U.S. Environmental Protection Agency2016). The Earth has undergone many periods of climate fluctuations over its history, with most occurring slowly and naturally, taking hundreds to thousands of years (National Geographic Society2024). Today, however, the climate is changing rapidly due to anthropogenic pressures such as fossil fuel usage, agricultural intensification and deforestation contributing to worldwide biodiversity loss (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency2016). These rapid changes, having significant impacts on global biodiversity, affect nearly every animal on the planet. The Intergovernmental Science‐Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) reported that one million plant and animal species are at risk of extinction within the coming decades (Martin2019). Animals, both under human care (i.e., in agricultural settings, pets/companion animals, zoo/aquaria animals) and those that are not (i.e., terrestrial and aquatic wildlife) are at high risk from the effects of climate change (Joseph et al.2023).
Humans depend on animals for food, medicine, research, clothing, companionship and more, making the mitigation of climate change effects on animals important for the sustainability of civilization. People form bonds with various species of animals, known as the human‐animal bond (HAB), which can provide both physical and psychological health benefits (Wensley2008). With humans’ dependency on animals in everyday life—either directly or indirectly—and as climate change continues to threaten animal health and welfare globally, there is a need for greater urgency and understanding in the importance of climate change mitigation and adaptation. Focusing on climate change's effects on animal welfare, which could help elicit the strong connection of the HAB, may provide an efficient and effective communication framework to achieve education and mitigation goals.
Though the effects of climate change on animal welfare are well‐documented globally (Stephens2022, 72–75; Joseph et al.2023; Mukeka et al.2022), using animal welfare framing in climate change communication strategies is less common. Framing in communication refers to the selection of certain details of an issue and emphasizing them to structure the issue in a specific way (Schafer and O'Neill2017, 1‐2; Badullovich, Grant, and Colvin2020, 1–2). Communicating climate change is a well‐established field of social science, and framing techniques are commonly used in climate change communication studies (Schafer and O'Neill2017, 12). Climate change communication styles and frameworks vary depending on audience, political ideology, geography and context (Newig2011). There is no ‘one’ or ‘correct’ way to approach climate change from a communication standpoint that elicits the desired response amongst all members of the target audience. Therefore, framing is used in communication to assist in the understanding of certain details of a concept over others (Badullovich, Grant, and Colvin2020).
Some studies using animal welfare framing when communicating about climate change tend to focus on meat consumption, environmental impact and the welfare of animals in the production industries (Laestadius et al.2016; Paiva et al.2022; Perino and Schwickert2023). These studies show concern for animal welfare but do not discuss the effects of climate change on animal welfare. Further, climate change as a concept is complex and not fully understood (Newig2011, making it difficult to effectively communicate the importance of mitigating its effects. Animal welfare is also difficult to conceptualize and may have different meanings for different people (Hewson2003). This could help explain the apparent insufficiency of communication on climate change from scientists and further confounded by a lack of communication skills or institutional support (Entradas et al.2019); however, many scientists fail to communicate the issue of climate change in a culturally relevant manner (Matera2020). Animal welfare framing has been shown to influence attitudes and actions. A report conducted by the European Union found that 94% of Europeans believe in the importance of protecting farm animal welfare, 59% are prepared to pay more for products sourced from animal welfare–friendly production systems, and 87% believe information campaigns on animal welfare can positively influence attitudes of younger generations towards animals (European Commission, Directorate General for Health and Food Safety and TNS Political & Social2015, 4, 17).
Additionally, education on heat stroke—a known detriment to the welfare of dogs, especially brachycephalic breeds—concerning climate change has likely increased owner's awareness of risk factors and mitigation strategies that only help to improve the welfare of their companion animals (Tripovich et al.2023). Given the increasing interest in animal welfare worldwide (Eadie2012, vii), utilizing animal welfare framing may be an impactful method of communicating the effects of climate change.
Veterinarians in the United States take lifelong oaths to relieve animal suffering, protect animal welfare and conserve animal resources (Veterinarian's Oathn.d.). Yet the animal health community has been less involved in the promotion of climate change adaptation actions, despite recent studies showing that veterinary students and veterinarians believe climate change is currently occurring (Kramer et al.2020; Pollard et al.2021), as well as the action call for the veterinary profession to help establish sustainable planetary boundaries in the face of climate change and a growing population (Alders et al.2021). The veterinary profession is trusted by the public (Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons2019), and must address climate change through a One Welfare lens that aligns the physical and social environment, animal welfare and human wellbeing as an interconnected triad (Pinillos et al.2016; Stephens2022, 13). While the veterinary profession's voice has been infrequently heard in the discussion of climate change, conservation, and animal welfare, veterinarians must reframe climate change as an issue confronted daily in the occupation to ensure the profession retains social relevance (Stephen et al.2019). As frames previously utilized in climate change communication do not have the same effect on all people (Wiest et al.2015), veterinarians can use their professional strengths and influence change for the greater good by communicating the animal welfare impacts of climate change. Therefore, exploring literature from the research question in this paper on how animal welfare framing can impact people's perceptions on climate change could have notable relevance for actionable change towards sustainable practices.
Through a narrative review using a modified scoping review approach, this article gathers and synthesizes evidence from a broad range of literature to explore how animal welfare framing impacts people's perceptions of climate change. This collection of evidence follows the outline of Badullovich, Grant, and Colvin (2020) and highlights voids in knowledge and gives guidance for future climate change framing research.
A narrative literature review to further investigate the outcomes and effects of communicating climate change as an animal welfare issue was conducted across scholarly disciplines using a modified scoping review methodology. Scoping literature reviews can act as precursors to systematic reviews as they can be used to search multiple bodies of literature or clarify concepts to confirm the relevancy of inclusion criteria and research questions (Munn et al.2018). This review followed the typical scoping review literature methodology which included (i) specifying review objectives, (ii) defining a search strategy and (iii) establishing inclusion and exclusion criteria to select relevant articles (Briner and Denyer2012). Only English‐language articles were included in this review. Because climate change is aglobalphenomenon resulting from the culmination of decades oflocalactions, the timeframe was left open to encompass all articles ever written about climate change. Climate change was first conceptualized by the ancient Greeks, but experimentation was conducted in the late 1800s proving its potentiality and the first writing about the phenomenon in the 1950s helped lead to the present‐day understanding of the issue (Pester2021). Thus, an open timeline given the history of climate change is appropriate for this review.
The study followed PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta‐Analyses) scoping review guidelines (Tricco et al.2018) with modifications for limited researchers and time. It was guided by the following research question:
‘How does animal welfare framing impact people's perceptions on climate change?’
The study utilized the following hybridized ProPheT‐PICOS Model (Booth et al.2016, 87) shown in Table1. In the ProPheT Model, animal welfare was the problem (Pro), climate change and/or global warming was the phenomenon of interest (Phe) and the open timeline for our search represented the time (T) in this model. In the PICOS Model, animal welfare was the problem (P), animal welfare framing methods were the intervention (I), there was no comparison (C), impacts on perceptions and/or opinions was the outcome (O) and global was the scope (S) in this model. This hybridized model was used to overlap various aspects of each framework to better assist the literature search for the research question. For example, the PICOS Model identifies interventions and outcomes, both imperative aspects to this study's research question, which the ProPheT Model did not possess. Similarly, the ProPheT contains phenomenon of interest and time elements that the PICOS Model contains. The authors felt his hybridized model was appropriate given the uniqueness of the research question.
Hybrid ProPheT‐PICOS Model used to outline study objectives.
Biosis Citation Index, CABI Abstracts and Global Health, Core Collection, Medline and ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Citation Index databases were searched within the Web of Science platform. Grey literature such as reports, books or unpublished literature was omitted from this search.
The keyword search included the following search strings, translated as needed for each database: (‘animal*’ OR ‘livestock’ OR ‘wildlife’ OR ‘amphibian*’ OR ‘bird*’ OR ‘poultry’ OR ‘gallus’ OR ‘fish’ OR ‘mammal*’ OR ‘reptile*’ OR ‘cattle’ OR ‘bovine’ OR ‘bos’ OR ‘goat*’ OR ‘caprine’ OR ‘capra’ OR ‘sheep’ OR ‘ovine’ OR ‘ovis’ OR ‘swine’ OR ‘porcine’ OR ‘sus’ OR ‘horse*’ OR ‘equine’ OR ‘equus’ OR ‘camelid*’ OR ‘waterfowl’ OR ‘fowl’ OR ‘insect*’ OR ‘pollinator*’ OR ‘honeybee*’ OR ‘dog’ OR ‘dogs’ OR ‘canis’ OR ‘cat’ OR ‘cats’ OR ‘felis’ OR ‘oyster*’ OR ‘mollusc*’ OR ‘mollusk*’) AND (frame* OR framing OR communicat*) AND (‘climate change’ OR ‘global warming’) AND (perception* OR opinion* OR attitude* OR sentiment* OR understand* OR feeling*).
These search strings involving animals were chosen to encompass as many groups of animals as possible hoping to elicit the numerous effects climate change can have across a wide variety of species. The terms ‘climate change’ or ‘global warming’ were included in the search strategy as they are often used interchangeably in society (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency2016) that might be represented as such in the literature. It is also worth noting that the phrase ‘animal welfare’ was not included in this search string. The phrase was initially included; however, it was found that articles that resulted decreased significantly in number to only a handful, in comparison to the thousands of results that were found when the term was not included in the search string. Therefore, to be as inclusive as possible for this research question, the term ‘animal welfare’ was not included in the search string.
The exclusion and inclusion criteria to consider articles comprised of the following:
Inclusion Criteria
Must discuss attitudes/perceptions/opinions/beliefs of people towards animals
Must have a focus on climate change and/or global warming directly within the study
A focus/emphasis is on animal welfare
Must include framework used for communication about climate change and/or animal welfare
Must evaluate impact of animal welfare framing on an outcome related to climate change
Exclusion Criteria
Does not discuss attitudes/perceptions/opinions/beliefs of people towards animals
Does not explicitly discuss climate change/global warming as a focus of the paper
Does not explicitly mention/discuss animal welfare or welfare‐related issues
Focus on animals as commodity, not the welfare of animals
Full text not in English
Does not describe a communication framework in the text
All search results were imported into Covidence that is a cloud‐based tool that allows the review of titles and abstracts for large‐scale literature reviews (Covidence ‐ Better Systematic Review Managementn.d.). A total of 1795 duplicate articles were removed automatically through it. See Figure1for a PRISMA flowchart showing the screening process.

PRISMA flow diagram mapping the stages of the review process.
The articles were screened at the level of title/abstract and full‐text review by the same individual. The same individual who screened the papers also extracted qualitative data, recording the title, abstract, date of publication, region in which the study was conducted, citation, DOI, summary notes regarding paper details and objectives, and ultimately, whether the paper was accepted or rejected based on inclusion/exclusion criteria and why. All recorded data were logged in an Excel file.
The focus of the papers needed to be on how the perceptions or beliefs of climate change were influenced by animal welfare. The framing focus could either emphasize animal welfare or climate change/global warming, but the paper had to discuss a connection between the two concepts. Any context of framing was accepted given this concept is not thought to be practised or well‐described in the literature. The scholarly results went through one pass of full‐text screening by one individual.
After the removal of duplicates, the number of articles remaining was 4080. Due to lack of time and personnel, a sample of 25% (1024) of the imported articles were screened at the title and abstract level, resulting in the exclusion of 1010 articles. Full‐text screening of the remaining 14 papers was performed. Two papers were included while 12 were excluded. Though the 12 excluded articles contained themes of both animal welfare and climate change, none clearly communicated animal welfare as a climate change issue and therefore, were not accepted.
The included studies were conducted in different countries, which were Australia and Chile, and were published in theJournal of Rural Studies(Elsevier) andAnimals(MDPI), respectively. Both studies were observational. Observational studies observe individuals or measure outcomes without attempting to affect an outcome. The 14 articles originally included for the full‐text screening were multi‐national studies all written within the last 10 years, with the final two included articles published in 2021 and 2023.
In the two articles included, animal welfare framing was utilized in the context of increasing exposure to extreme weather events caused by climate change and the impacts those effects had on the animals. Both articles discussed the welfare of animals when exposed to extreme weather events, farmer perceptions of animal welfare and that the farmers clearly perceived climate change as an animal welfare issue. Of the 12 articles not included following the full‐text review, the majority (7/12) focussed on meat consumption and its relation to environmental impact. Regarding the five remaining excluded articles not centred on meat consumption, one focussed on taxation for meat to benefit animal welfare or climate change, one on livestock production systems and their impact on animal welfare and climate, one on livestock housing systems and its impact on the environment, one on think tanks’ contribution to the discussion on animal‐based diets and their impact on the climate and one on public health, environmental health and policy in the context of climate change.
This article provides a systematic methodology via a modified scoping review approach to extract and identify journal articles that use animal welfare framing in the context of climate change communication. This systematic approach taken for this review shows that animal welfare framing in the communication of climate change is rather sparse and evident in this article.
The search string for the research question in this article was the best attempt to broadly capture as many animals and species as possible. Early iterations of the search terms attempted to include both the terms ‘animal’ and ‘animals’ and specific species, but this resulted in a low number of articles found, as studies often do not include these terms in searchable fields. Further, it was impossible to list every animal that may have been discussed in the literature in this context. It is also worth discussing why the term ‘animal welfare’ or ‘welfare’ was not used in the search criteria given the research question, which involves the relationship between animal welfare framing and climate change perceptions. When ‘animal welfare’ and ‘welfare’ were added to the search criteria as ‘animal welfare OR welfare,’ the number of articles returned drastically reduced in all databases. Biosis Citation Index, CABI Abstracts and Global Health, Medline, ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Citation Index and Web of Science Core Collection resulted in 29, 14, 8, 15 and 34 articles, respectively, when the ‘animal welfare OR welfare’ phrase was added. It is unclear why this number was so reduced, but it could be due to the concept of animal welfare being complex and variously worded and having a different meaning to different organizations and people (Animal Welfare n.d.; Hewson2003). For this paper's objectives, animal welfare is defined as the state of an animal in its attempts to cope with its environment (Broom1986).
Another reason for the reduced number of results when including the terms ‘animal welfare’ and ‘welfare’ may be due to the lack of association or understanding between people and the effects of climate change on animals as welfare issues. For example, disease is well‐known to cause poor welfare (Butterworth and Weeks2010), yet some articles discussing how climate change is likely to increase the distribution and severity of disease in the coming decades for animals (Burge et al.2014; Rocque et al.2008) do not mention the terms ‘animal welfare’ or ‘welfare’. Adding the terms ‘animal welfare’ or ‘welfare’ as required terms to the search decreased the results from 4080 to 105. The complexity, breadth and varying approaches to animal welfare research made developing a comprehensive list of animal welfare search terms prohibitive. Thus, it was decided to take as broad an approach as possible at the search stage by not including the terms ‘animal welfare’ and ‘welfare’. This decision was borne out as only some of the articles selected for full‐text screening (Buddle et al.2021; Stubbs et al.2018; Larrondo et al.2023; Paiva et al.2022; Perino and Schwickert2023; Kwasny, Dobernig, and Riefler2022) would have been found if those terms had been required.
It is worth noting that the initial set of studies retrieved by the searches included an especially large number of irrelevant articles. For example, numerous papers resulting from the final search strategy discussed plant‐related agriculture and its relationship to a changing climate, without mentioning ‘livestock’ or ‘animal*’ in any way. The authors were not able to determine why plant‐related agricultural papers were included in results given no mention of ‘crop*’ or ‘plant*’ was included in the search string.
In the accepted study based in Chile, farmers were experiencing a mega‐drought, or drought of a prolonged period, due to climate change (Larrondo et al.2023). Farmers clearly acknowledged the impacts the drought was having on their goats including lack of food and water, death of their animals and economic issues in providing resources, thus affecting the animals’ welfare. Farmers may tend to equate good animal welfare with high productivity (Bergstra, Hogeveen, and Stassen2017) that can place focus on livestock welfare in terms of economic value and commodity, detracting from the animals’ inherent value (Buddle et al.2021; Cornish et al.2016). However, this study showed a significant negative correlation between farmers who perceived their animals to have poor welfare due to the drought and the levels of depression, anxiety and stress (Larrondo et al.2023). Despite this study being survey‐based, welfare framing used in the questionnaire directly related to the mega‐drought showed a relationship in perceptions and outcomes based on the farmers' experiences. This relationship between farmer wellbeing and animal welfare is a principal component of One Welfare, which emphasizes the interconnectedness between environmental sustainability, animal welfare, and human health and wellbeing (Pinillos et al.2016; Stephens2022, 13). The connection farmers have with their animals’ welfare indicates the strength of the HAB and may prove that communicating the effects of climate change in terms of the impacts it has on animal welfare is an effective strategy to implement sustainable change for climate adaptation and mitigation.
Additionally, the included study conducted in Australia demonstrated the increased understanding farmers have for their animals’ welfare and the climate. This study, also survey‐based, showed that when using welfare framing in relation to climate change, farmers comprehend the impacts the effects of climate change have on their animals’ welfare that influenced the outcomes of their actions. While farmers linked ‘good welfare’ with productivity, they also understood the negative impacts climate change has on their livestock and believed that proactively responding to climate extremes was crucial to improving their animals’ welfare (Buddle et al.2021). A common theme throughout this article was that farmers sought to relieve stress and promote good welfare for their animals. Farmers are increasingly concerned about the welfare of their animals (Kauppinen et al.2010; van Eerdenburg et al.2021) given their mental wellbeing is directly related to their animals’ welfare (Kristensen and Enevoldsen2008; Pinillos et al.2016) and vice‐versa (Kauppinen et al.2012). The farmers in this accepted study from Australia felt an increased responsibility to care for their animals when facing the effects of climate change, clearly connecting the HAB these individuals have with their livestock (Buddle et al.2021). This further recognizes the importance of the One Welfare approach and supports that communicating climate change as an animal welfare issue may be an impactful strategy to encourage collaborative change to address the global impact climate change effects will continue to have.
Lastly, it is worth discussing the papers that were included in the full‐text review but were ultimately not accepted. Most papers focussed on meat, or animal‐based food consumption, and the impact this practice had on the environment or climate. Papers showed that consumption is rooted in cultural practice, social norms, daily habits or self‐identity (Kwasny et al.2022; Randers et al.2021). While it is well‐documented that animal‐based diets are a detriment to the climate (Almiron et al.2022; Laestadius et al.2016), many people were uncertain about reducing meat in their diets and adopting meat substitutes (Collier et al.2021) or did not understand the connection between meat consumption and environmental issues (Kwasny, Dobernig, and Riefler2022; Stubbs et al.2018). While not every paper discussed meat consumption and its impacts on climate change, a common theme that arose across many papers was that the public were genuinely concerned about animal welfare (Collier et al.2021; Paiva et al.2022; Schutz et al.2023). One study reported that the public was willing to pay an increased tax on meat to support animal welfare (Perino and Schwickert2023). If framed correctly, these results could further support the idea that animal welfare is an appropriate and effective framing strategy to confront the global impact of climate change.
While the goal of this modified scoping review was to identify literature on framing animal welfare as a climate change issue, there were limitations to this study and to be fully transparent, they are discussed in the following paragraphs. Only articles written in English were chosen which prevented papers written in other languages from being considered. To be more inclusive, future studies could include a team of multi‐lingual individuals that encompass a broad range of languages and allow for more literature databases to be searched. Framing theory itself has its own challenges and is considered a “fractured paradigm” as there lacks a universal understanding when using the terms frame, framing, or framework (Entman1993). In research, framing is not uniform in its execution and can change between different, or within similar, fields of study (Schuldt et al.2021). Articles may have discussed framing or utilized framing theory but did not specifically use these terms in their titles or abstracts, and thus were missed in the databases searched. This emphasizes the importance of using consistency when carrying out research applying framing theory.
The goal for animal welfare framing applied in this study was to connect with the growing popularity of the topic worldwide (Eadie2012, vii; Nurse2016); however, not every issue pertaining to animals may be understood to affect their welfare. For example, disease is well‐established in literature to indicate or cause a poor state of welfare for animals (Broom and Corke2002; Butterworth and Weeks2010, 189; Stephens2022, 36); however, some articles written about the effects of climate change on animals such as increased disease transmission never mention the terms ‘animal welfare’ or ‘welfare’ (Ashraf et al.2017; Burge et al.2014; Marcogliese 2008; Rocque et al.2008). As such, any articles using similar themes of climate change's effects on animals without explicitly discussing their welfare would have been missed in the database search. Though the search strategy was adapted to encompass as many species of animals as possible, the odds that some papers were inevitably missed are likely.
The scholarly results selected only went through one pass of full‐text screening by one individual that inevitably led to bias. This highlights restrictions due to staffing and timing. Future studies should employ multiple people over a longer timeframe to ensure a more robust approach can be taken to identify as many publications that fit the inclusion criteria for the research question as possible. Publication bias, or studies rejected from publication due to insignificant or inconclusive findings, could also have limited the study's findings and outcomes (Makrygianni et al.2018). All papers included were related to agriculture and therefore, public perception is critically absent. As society is currently undergoing a state of ‘hypocognition’ on environmental issues meaning ideas are severely lacking when it comes to solutions to environmental crises (Lakoff2010), research may still need to be conducted on these topics and the small sample size selected for inclusion could be explained.
The aim and methodology for this review were followed using the framework described by Arksey and O'Malley (2005) to summarize research findings and identify gaps in existing literature. However, because of framing's wide use across many disciplines (Schafer and O'Neill2017, 2‐3), it lacks coherence and does not have the same effect on all people (Wiest et al.2015). Therefore, animal welfare framing may not be understood collectively or a concern of everyone that can impact the study design. Future research may need to restructure the questions in this review differently or ask new questions that may encompass a more holistic approach. This study is a first attempt at scoping literature on animal welfare framing in the context of climate change and broad themes are described from the results of the databases searched. The included and excluded literatures of this study could be used as a beginning point for future systematic approaches, and this paper is an important first step.
The concern for animal welfare in these papers reflects a growing concern worldwide (Eadie2012, vii); therefore, communicating the animal welfare impacts of climate change may be a culturally relevant topic at this time. Frames that introduce new considerations can offset partisan predispositions (Wiest et al.2015). Thus, introducing a new framework—animal welfare—when communicating climate change's effects may have a significant impact on humans and elicit a response greater than any seen thus far to motivate adaptative action. Given the established threat to animal welfare posed by climate change and the oaths taken by veterinarians to protect animal welfare (Veterinarian's Oathn.d.), veterinarians must reframe climate change as an issue confronted daily in the occupation to ensure the profession retains social relevance (Stephen et al.2019). This modified scoping review is a first‐step approach in synthesizing evidence to support a path forward for the use of animal welfare framing in the context of communicating climate change effects with the goal to encourage sustainable behaviour and adaptive action.
Collin Kramer: conceptualization, investigation, writing–original draft, methodology, visualization, writing–review and editing.Jessica R. Page: validation, methodology, writing–review and editing, resources, project administration, supervision.Jaylene Flint: writing–review and editing, resources, project administration.Mark Flint: supervision, resources, writing–review and editing, project administration.
The authors confirm that the ethical policies of the journal, as noted on the journal's author guidelines page, have been adhered to. No ethical approval was required as this is a review article with no original research data.
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
The peer review history for this article is available athttps://publons.com/publon/10.1002/vms3.70154
Supporting Information
The One Welfare: Animal Welfare residency program is funded by the One Welfare and Sustainability Center through the College of Veterinary Medicine at the Ohio State University.
Funding: The One Welfare: Animal Welfare residency program is funded by the One Welfare and Sustainability Center through the College of Veterinary Medicine at the Ohio State University.
All data supporting the findings of this study are contained in this article or the Supporting Information files.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
Supporting Information
All data supporting the findings of this study are contained in this article or the Supporting Information files.
Articles from Veterinary Medicine and Science are provided here courtesy ofWiley
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894