An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Correspondence:Fangliang He (fhe@ualberta.ca)
Corresponding author.
Revised 2025 Dec 15; Received 2024 Nov 12; Accepted 2025 Dec 19; Issue date 2026 Feb.
This is an open access article under the terms of thehttp://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Global warming is raising both climate and weather variability. However, how this tendency may destabilise forest ecosystems is poorly understood. Using a set of global tree‐ring data, we calculated the 5‐year variance and mean of tree growth rate over 1401–2010, and modelled the variance–mean relationship. We found that the global averaged variance increased much faster than the mean in the past century (+40.0% vs. +8.5%), and closely covaried with the accelerated global warming since the 1970s (r= 0.93). The exponent of tree‐level variance–mean power law was higher in wetter habitats and less drought‐resistant species, and has increased significantly under global warming, indicating an environment‐ and trait‐dependent growth‐safety tradeoff and a decreasing resistance to a warmer climate. Our study shows that global warming may have strongly destabilised tree growth and made forest dynamics less predictable, adding to the growing concern that global warming is jeopardising the functioning of forest ecosystems.
Keywords:climate change impact, climate zones, ecological stability, forest resilience, growth‐safety tradeoff, hydraulic trait, Taylor's power law, tree radial growth, variance to mean relationship
In recent decades, considerable research has focused on the long‐term trend of tree growth rates under global warming, yet little attention has been paid to trends in high‐frequency tree growth variations—that is, year‐to‐year differences in growth rates. Our study reveals for the first time that, over the past century, the global average tree growth variation has increased by 40%, a far more pronounced shift than the 8.5% increase observed in long‐term mean tree growth rates. These findings indicate that global forest growth is becoming significantly more unstable, which may jeopardize the well‐functioning of forest ecosystems.

Global warming elevates mean temperatures and also increases climate and weather variabilities (annual deviations from long‐term averages, and shorter‐term atmospheric changes, respectively) (Rahmstorf and Coumou2011; AghaKouchak et al.2020). These changes directly affect the performance of organisms and can significantly alter the tendency and variation (temporal uncertainty) of ecological processes. Tree growth is a fundamental process driving the dynamics and functioning of global forests. Quantifying tree growth responses to global warming is therefore critical for understanding and predicting the capacity of forests in providing ecosystem services, such as carbon sequestration, biodiversity maintenance, and climate change mitigation. However, previous studies predominantly focused on the temporal trend of tree growth rate, while largely neglecting the trend of growth variation.
Tree growth critically relies on a balanced energy (temperature and light) and water (precipitation) supply (Lambers et al.2008). As global warming progresses and atmospheric CO2concentration continues to rise, it has been widely noticed that tree growth has accelerated globally, especially in higher latitudes (McMahon et al.2010; Pretzsch et al.2014; Silva et al.2016; D'Orangeville et al.2018). Recently, evidence also shows that such growth acceleration may be weakening or even reversing in some regions, mainly due to the warming‐induced droughts and heatwaves, which suppressed growth and inflicted tree mortality (Allen et al.2010; Peng et al.2011; Tijerín‐Triviño et al.2025). Associated with these changes in long‐term growth tendency, tree growth rate also fluctuates widely from year to year (Clark and Clark1994). Such growth variation could increase as global climates become more extreme and environmental disturbances intensify (e.g., through air pollution, fires, pest outbreaks, and land use changes) (Rahmstorf and Coumou2011). This potential increase of growth variation would be ecologically consequential as it indicates compromised individual tree health and carbon sequestration efficiency (Cailleret et al.2019; DeSoto et al.2020). This is because not only is less carbon assimilated during low‐growth events, but a greater proportion of the fixed carbon could be consumed in defending against the factors that caused those events—such as drought, heat, diseases, and pests—diverting carbon from wood production and storage. This individual‐level growth instability could escalate to destabilise population‐ and community‐level productivity and ultimately undermine the resilience of forest ecosystems and their functional roles (Isbell et al.2009; Lloret et al.2011; Cailleret et al.2019; DeSoto et al.2020).
Despite the ecological significance of both tree growth rate and its temporal variation, the latter has received far less attention than the former in previous studies. We don't know how growth variation changes at the global level as global warming progresses, nor do we know how it covaries with mean tree growth rate. Addressing this knowledge gap could help better understand the impacts of global warming (and other associated environmental changes) on tree growth and forest dynamics. Under recent global warming, particularly since the 1970s when warming intensified, the sensitivity of tree growth to temperature has decreased (Babst et al.2019). We thus hypothesize that the increase in mean growth rate would have slowed down (IPCC2021). Meanwhile, growth variation could exhibit an accelerating upward trend as excessive warming and droughts push trees toward their physiological limits, leading to a less stable tree growth process.
Numerous factors, both abiotic and biotic, affect tree growth and its variation. Previous studies showed that faster tree growth rates are associated with lower stress tolerance (to drought in particular) and therefore result in higher climate sensitivities (Eller et al.2018; Bauman et al.2022). The possible mechanism is that fast‐growing trees produce xylem conduits with larger diameters and thinner walls, which allow higher hydraulic conductivity but make the xylem structures more susceptible to damages caused by drought‐induced negative water pressure (Gleason et al.2016; Eller et al.2018). Such vulnerability could increase tree growth sensitivity to climate variability, thus increase variations in tree growth and ultimately weaken forest ecosystem stability (Cailleret et al.2019; DeSoto et al.2020). This positive relationship between mean tree growth rate and growth variation could also result if faster tree growth rates mean tree growth is more sensitive to favourable short‐term climatic anomalies, causing stronger growth variation. However, the opposite may also be true: faster‐growing trees may have larger reserves of non‐structural carbon and other nutrients (Carbone et al.2013), which can buffer the negative impacts of extreme climate events and reduce growth variations (Hartmann and Trumbore2016; Gessler et al.2017). In both cases, the growth rate‐variation relationship could depend on species traits, which determine tree growth responses to environmental fluctuations (Rowland et al.2021; Bauman et al.2022). Despite that the tree‐level growth‐variation relationship has the potential to provide critical insights into the tradeoff between growth rate and stability, as well as the adaptability of forests to the changing environment, no effort has so far been made to quantify this relationship and its dependency on climates and species traits. Addressing this gap can help predict the response of forests to climate change and inform management practice.
In this study, we compiled a global tree‐ring dataset spanning from 1401 to 2010 to reconstruct the global histories of tree growth rate and variation, and modelled their relationship. Specifically, we aim to: (1) examine the respective global trends of mean tree growth rate and growth variation over the past 600 years, (2) quantify the effects of climate on mean tree growth rate and growth variation, and (3) model the variance–mean power law relationship for individual tree growth, and examine the effects of environmental conditions and species traits on the power‐law relationship.
Tree‐ring data used in this study were compiled from the International Tree‐ring Data Bank (https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov). In the database, tree‐ring series are grouped into separate datasets, each containing trees from one location and one species (defined as one population). All datasets available by May 2022 were downloaded. We cleaned the datasets following the widely adopted method of Zhao et al. (2019), which included removing duplicated trees, standardising site and species names, correcting formatting errors (such as relocating erroneous stop markers to ensure data integrity and software readability), etc. We restricted our analysis to tree‐ring data falling in the period of 1401–2010 because the sample size in 1401 and 2010 is similar and is much reduced before 1401 and after 2010 (FigureS1). The cleaned data includes 208,267 series from 5361 populations (4251 unique sites) and 281 species across the world (FigureS1).
Tree‐ring widths represent annual radial growth rates of trees. It is well recognised that raw ring‐width measurements inherently decrease with tree age, which could inflate or shadow any climate‐driven long‐term growth trend (Cook et al.1990; Bowman et al.2013). This confounding effect must be controlled before further analysis. To do that, it is a common practice to fit an age‐related ‘expected growth curve’ and divide the measured ring width by the expected curve (Cook et al.1990; Babst et al.2019). This process is known as ‘detrending’ or ‘standardising’, and the calculated dimensionless value is called Ring‐Width Index (RWI). There are various methods to fit the expected growth curve, among which the spline function, regional curve, and negative exponential function are most commonly used (Cook et al.1990; Helama et al.2004). To rule out potential biases caused by different detrending methods, all three types of growth curves were used to detrend the raw data and to reconstruct historical tree growth patterns in this study. We further tested two more detrending methods: (1) to fit the curve based on the constant basal area increment assumption (Biondi and Qeadan2008) and (2) using raw growth data without detrending but controlling age effect in a mixed‐effects model. Details on these detrending sensitivity tests can be found inSupporting Information, MethodsS1. In short, all five methods led to similar results, showing a significant increase in both mean and variance of growth rate from their historical baselines (p< 0.001), in line with the main findings (see Figure1in Results). The only exception was that the mean growth rate derived from the 2/3 spline detrending showed an insignificant trend (p> 0.05), which was expected given that it is a more aggressive detrending method that removes a larger portion of long‐term growth signals. Since the negative exponential function detrending has been known to be able to retain both long‐term and short‐term climatic signals, which are necessary for our study (Helama et al.2004; Gedalof and Berg2010), we chose this detrending method here. We calculated RWI by specifying ModNegExp in thedetrend.seriesfunction provided by packagedplR(Bunn2008) of R software (https://r‐project.org). In addition to detrending, we evaluated additional factors that could influence tree‐ring data and potentially bias our results (Methods S1).

Global tree growth patterns over 1401–2010. (a) The 5‐year moving window mean of tree growth rates (RWI) as shown by the black curve. The gray zone is the ±1.96 standard error interval for the mean. (b) The associated temporal variance of tree growth rates. The dashed blue line indicates the year after which non‐stationarity was detected by the Dickey‐Fuller test. The solid horizontal lines are the stationary means of growth rates and variance, respectively, calculated over 1401–1900. The dashed horizontal lines are their 0.05 and 0.95 quantiles, respectively. These stationary means are the baselines of the growth rates and variance against which the increase in growth rate in 1925–2010 and variance in 1975–2010 are compared. Red lines are the global average temperature anomalies (with respect to 1961–1990 mean, which is 13.97°C). The inset panels show the relationships of growth mean and variance with the temperature anomalies, respectively.
We compiled two sets of climate data. The first one was the global mean annual temperature (MATg) covering the whole study period of 1401–2010 (Neukom et al.2019). The second data, compiled from datasetCRU‐TS4.04(0.5° resolution;http://climexp.knmi.nl) for individual sites, included mean annual temperature (MAT), total annual precipitation (TAP), mean annual self‐calibrating Palmer Drought Severity Index (scPDSI), mean annual water vapour pressure (VP), mean annual relative humidity (RH), and mean annual water vapour pressure deficit (VPD). HereRHandVPDwere calculated from temperature and water vapour pressure. These data spanned a shorter time period from 1901 to 2010.
We compiled leaf and wood economic spectrum traits from theTRYplant trait database (http://try‐db.org) (Kattge et al.2011) to test possible associations of those traits important to growth and stress resistance with tree growth variance–mean relationships. The availability of the trait data for our 281 species varied, with 57 species having data ofspecific leaf area(SLA), 51 species havingleaf/sapwood area ratio(LSR), 73 species havingnegative xylem pressure at 50% conductivity loss(P50), 162 species havingwood density(WD), and 37 species havingstem conduit density(SCD).
To reconstruct the historical trends of tree growth rate and growth variation, we calculated the mean and variance of individual tree's annual growth rates (the RWI values) using non‐overlapping 5‐year moving windows from 1401 to 2010 (Suvanto et al.2016; Philipsen et al.2018). The 5‐year window was selected to balance temporal resolution and high‐frequency noise suppression. We also tested other window lengths (3, 5, and 10 years) and found our main conclusions were robust to the test (FigureS2). For each 5‐year moving window, the mean and variance of growth rate (RWI) were respectively calculated for each tree and averaged into populational values. We then calculated the global mean and variance by averaging the populational values across the world for each 5‐year window (i.e., each population contributes one data point to the global averages). To determine the time when the mean and variance of tree growth rates have significantly deviated from their respective historical mean, we assessed the stationarity of the two time series using the Dickey‐Fuller test in R packagetseries(Trapletti and Hornik2023). Pearson's correlation coefficient was calculated between global mean temperature (MATg) and the global average mean and variance of tree growth rates, respectively. To reveal tree growth patterns in different climatic environments, we also averaged the mean and variance for each of the five Köppen climate zones (Tropical,Dry,Temperate,Continental,Polar; FigureS1), classified by temperature and precipitation in 1951–2000 (Kottek et al.2006). Note that in the calculations above, the upper and lower 0.01 quantiles of populational values were excluded to minimise possible bias caused by outliers.
Although the above correlation analysis assesses the overall global‐level relationship of tree growth (mean and variance, respectively) with temperature, the correlations could vary across climate zones and be affected by zone‐specific non‐climatic factors. To account for these climate zone‐related confounding effects, we modelled tree growth mean and variance on multiple climate factors using a linear mixed‐effects model by treating climate zone as a random effect. The fixed effects included temperature and water‐related climatic variables, calculated the same way the mean and variance of tree growth rates were calculated. These climatic variables included 5‐year mean:MAT,MATg,TAP,scPDSI,VP,RH, andVPDand their 5‐year variance:MATvar,MATgVar,TAPvar,scPDSIvar,VPvar,RHvar, andVPDvar. The quadratic term of bothMATgandMATwere also included, denoted asMATg2andMAT2, to capture the nonlinear relationship between growth and temperature as observed in Figure1. The linear mixed‐effects model is:
whereyiis either the mean or variance of tree growth rate in yeari(referring to the middle year of a five‐year window),xkiis thekthclimatic variable,uiis the random effect of climate zone, andεiis the model residuals. Modelling was separately conducted for two different time spans: 1401–2010 when onlyMATg,MATg2andMATgVarwere used (because other variables were not available before 1901; see the data section above), and 1901–2010 when all climatic variables (regional average anomalies, relative to 1961–1990) were used. Note that climate anomalies rather than the raw measurements were used to ensure that the model captures the temporal rather than spatial growth‐climate relationship. All climatic variables were standardised to 0–1 by (x‐xmin)/(xmax‐xmin) before modelling, to make their effect sizes comparable. Model selection was based on the AIC.
To examine the tree‐level relationship between the mean and variation of tree growth rates, we modelled tree growth data following Taylor's variance–mean power law (Taylor1961):
wherevandμare variance and mean, respectively, whileaandbare two coefficients, with exponentbbeing of particular interest as it captures the nature of the scaling relationship (Cohen and Xu2015). Specifically, the relationship between mean and variance is isometric ifb= 1, accelerating (superlinear) ifb> 1, and decelerating (sublinear) ifb< 1. Empirical data showbtypically falls between 1 and 2 (Taylor2019). In our study, the value ofbindicates the degree of tree growth variation scales with tree growth rate. We did two analyses to model the Taylor power law. The first analysis was to fit the power law to growth variance–mean data for the entire study period of 1401–2010 but in multiple consecutive 50‐year windows, in order to examine the temporal changes in the mean–variance relationship. The second analysis was to model the relationship for the period of 1901–2010 in which tree growth rates and variance had non‐stationary increase and local climate data were also available, allowing us to examine the variability in the mean–variance relationship over space and across species. The power‐law fittings of the two analyses are described below.
We divided the time range of tree‐ring data into consecutive 50‐year periods (totaling 12 periods: 1411–1460, 1461–1510, …, 1961–2010; the first 10 years of 1401–1410 were excluded so that to make the last period ending in 2010). For each 50‐year period, any tree‐ring series that did not have full overlap with that period was excluded. Populations with fewer than 3 series were also removed. Within each of the twelve 50‐year periods, we first calculated tree growth mean and variance using 5‐year moving windows (i.e., with 4‐year overlap). We used a 4‐year overlapping window to fully leverage the information the tree‐ring data carries to increase the sample size for more robust model fitting: given the 50‐year period, a non‐overlapping approach would yield only 10 data points, which is insufficient for reliable fitting of the power law model. The power‐law model was then fitted to the variance and mean data of each 50‐year period. The fitting was conducted by applying the ordinary least‐squares method to the log‐transformed model (Equation2). The exponentbvalues were first averaged within each population then averaged across all the populations to obtain a globalbvalue for each of the 12 50‐year periods. A schematic graph for the averaging process can be found in theSupporting Information(FigureS3). The upper and lower 0.01 quantiles of populational mean exponents were removed to minimise the influence of outliers.
We fitted the same power‐law model to each tree‐ring series of 1901–2010 and calculated a mean exponentbfor each population. We excluded tree‐ring series which covered shorter than 60 years over the period of 1901–2010 and populations with fewer than 3 series. Finally, a total of 155,364 tree‐ring series were modelled, which represented 4890 populations. The tree‐level exponents (b) were then averaged to obtain a mean exponent for each population. The upper and lower 0.01 quantiles of populational mean exponents were removed to minimise the influence of outliers, resulting in 4791 populational exponents. From these populationalbvalues, we obtained an averagebacross the world and for each of the five climate zones.
First, to assess the potential temporal association between exponentband global warming, we calculated Pearson's correlation coefficient between the 50‐year global averageband mean temperature.
Next, to examine the spatial variabilities inb, we first tested the climate‐zone level differences of populationalb(for the period of 1901–2010) using Tukey's multiple comparison. We then modelled populationalbusing the local climates and species traits with a linear mixed‐effects model:
wherebijis the exponent for thejthpopulation of theithspecies,xkijis thekthpredictor (climate or traits),uiis species specific random effect describing the variation inbamong populations within a species, andεijis the model residuals. Climatic variables (MAT,TAP,scPDSI,VP,RH,VPD,MATvar,TAPvar,scPDSIvar,VPvar,RHvar, andVPDvar) were mean values over 1901–2010. As the availability of the trait data varies among species, if the number of traits included in a model increases, the number of species (and populations) included in the model decreases (i.e., sample size decreases). Given this constraint, we built two models. The first model only included climatic variables, so that no species or population needs to be excluded. The second model included both climatic and trait variables. To fit this second model, we could not include all traits in one model because the availability of trait data varied across species. Instead, we used a two‐step approach. First, we fitted the model to each possible combination of traits plus all climatic variables. In the case where any of the traits in the combination was insignificant, that model was excluded. Models with fewer than 10 species were also excluded. Finally, among the models retained, the model with the lowest AIC was selected. All numerical predictors were standardised to 0–1 before modelling. Collinearity was checked and none was detected. Marginal and conditionalR2(respectively denoted asRm2andRc2) were calculated for the final models to quantify how much variation was explained by the fixed effects alone (Rm2) or by the fixed and random effects together (Rc2) (Nakagawa and Schielzeth2013). A schematic plot for the above analysis can be found in theSupporting Information(FigureS4).
The Dickey‐Fuller test showed that the global mean and variance of tree growth rates as measured by ring width index were statistically stationary from 1401 to 1925 for the mean growth rate and 1401 to 1975 for the growth variance (Figure1). They respectively increased significantly after 1925 and 1975 according to the test (p< 0.05), with the mean increasing by 8.5% and the variance increasing by 40.0% compared to their respective baseline means (Figure1). Different from the mean growth rate (Figure1a), there was a pronounced surge in the variance starting from the 1970s, with the variance increasing by 30.1% in just four decades (1971–1980 vs. 2001–2010) and still showing no sign of slowing down (Figure1b). Similar patterns of mean and variance of tree growth rates, particularly the rapid increase of variance after the 1970s, were observed in all climate zones (FigureS5).
The observed global trends in tree growth mean and variance were strongly correlated withMATgover the past six centuries (Figure1), with Pearson's correlation coefficient (r) of 0.80 betweenMATgand mean growth rate, and 0.73 betweenMATgand growth variance (1401–2010,p< 0.01). The surge in growth variance since 1975 was strongly correlated with the acceleration of global warming (r= 0.93 between variance andMATg,p< 0.01, 1975–2010). It is also worth noting that, as global warming intensified, the increase of mean growth rates levelled off, while the increase of growth variance kept accelerating (Figure1, insets).
The linear mixed‐effects model of the global growth patterns from 1401 to 2010 showed that, after controlling for differences among climate zones, both mean growth rate and growth variance maintained a significant positive relationship with temperature. Additionally, the model revealed that the second‐order term of temperature,MATg2, has a negative relationship with mean growth rate but a positive relationship with growth variance, in line with the insets in Figure1. For the period 1901–2010,PDSIwas the most important predictor of mean tree growth rates, indicated by its largest effect size, followed byMAT, whileMATwas the only and a highly significant predictor for tree growth variance (Table1).
Linear mixed‐effects models for quantifying the association of the mean and variance of tree growth rates with climatic variables. Coefficient (se) indicates the effect of a predictor and its related standard error.R2(m/c) indicates marginal and conditionalR2for each model.MATg, the global mean annual temperature;MATg2, the squaredMATg;MAT, mean annual temperature;scPDSI, mean annual self‐calibrating Palmer Drought Severity Index.
Over the past six centuries, we observed a strong temporal trend in the growth variance–mean relationship, with the global exponentbincreasing from a baseline mean of 1.25 to 1.56 in 2010 (Figure2). This increase inbwas closely correlated with temperatureMATgwithr= 0.83 over 1401–2010. For the period 1901–2010 in which tree growth rates and variance significantly increased (Figure1), our tree‐level variance–mean relationship showed a medianR2of 0.22, with 76% of trees exhibiting statistically significant relationships (p< 0.05) (FigureS6). The populational mean exponent had a global average value of 1.44 (± 0.02), with 84% of them larger than 1 (Figure3), indicating that in this period tree growth variation overwhelmingly increased faster than the mean growth rate. At the regional scale, the climate zonesTropicalandDryhad the highest and lowest meanbamong all climate zones, respectively (Figure3).

The global average exponentbof tree growth mean–variance power law increased over the past six hundred years (black curve). The gray zone represents ±1.96 standard error interval for the exponentb. The year onx‐axis is the end year of each 50‐year extent period over which the mean–variance power law was modelled. The horizontal black line is the baseline average ofb(=1.25) over the period of 1401–1900, accompanied by the two dashed lines indicating the 0.05 and 0.95 quantiles. The red curve is the global mean temperature. The correlation between the exponentband the mean temperature isr= 0.83.

Global distribution of populational growth variance–mean power‐law exponentbfor 1901–2010. The global average ofb= 1.44. The right panels are the frequency distribution ofb(with 84% of them having values > 1) and the Box plot ofbacross the five climate zones (white dots denote mean values, letters indicate the difference as tested by Tukey's multiple comparisons). The number of populations and species included in each climate zone are listed on top of each box.
The 1901–2010 populational exponentbwas significantly correlated with climates and species traits (Table2). The linear mixed‐effects model explained 11% of the global variability inbwhen only climatic predictors were included, while 17% of the variability was explained when both climatic and trait variables were included (in this case trait data were only available for 3137 populations of 73 species; Table2). The models showed that the exponent increased with air humidity (VP) and drought vulnerability (P50, of which a higher value indicates a lower resistance to drought) (Table2).
Linear mixed‐effects models between the exponent (b) of the mean–variance power‐law model and climate and trait variables. Coefficient (se) indicates the effect of a predictor and its related standard error.R2(m/c) indicates marginal and conditionalR2for each model.N.popis the number of populations (sample size) that were modelled, andN.spis the number of species (the random effect).P50(negative xylem pressure at 50% conductivity loss) is the only trait selected by the model.
Tree growth is a fundamental ecological process sustaining the global biosphere and carbon cycle (Vieira et al.2005; Lambers et al.2008; Pan et al.2013). Understanding the response of tree growth to global warming is critical for informing climate mitigation practices. Unlike the warming‐stimulated tree growth, which is well documented globally (McMahon et al.2010; Pretzsch et al.2014; Silva et al.2016; D'Orangeville et al.2018), the response of tree growth variation to warming has been little explored. Our study shows that, over the past century, the global average 5‐year tree growth variance has increased nearly four times faster than the mean, particularly after the 1970s. We further found that the increase of mean growth rate with global temperature has levelled off in recent decades while the increase of variance accelerated (insets of Figure1). However, it should be noted that the increase of mean growth rate in climate zone Polar did not level off, but instead accelerated (FigureS5). These findings suggest that, while there was a significant regional difference, global warming‐induced tree growth stimulation has in general weakened, and global tree growth has become less stable in recent decades. In addition, we found that at the individual level, tree growth variation also increased generally faster than mean growth rate, as indicated by the superlinear mean–variance relationship, with exceptions in drier regions such as the southwestern US and Central Asia (Figure3).
While our analysis revealed a strong correlation between global mean tree growth rate and mean annual temperature, we caution to interpret this finding as evidence of a globally coherent tree growth stimulation by rising temperature, but rather evidence of a generally positive growth response to various warming‐related environmental changes. For example, tree growth in the eastern USA may have directly benefited from rising precipitation in the region due to warming‐induced shifts in atmospheric patterns (Alexander et al.2021). A recent study showed that the main driver of global tree growth has shifted from temperature to water (Babst et al.2019), which is in line with our finding thatscPDSIemerged to be the most important predictor for mean tree growth rate in the last century (Table1). Additionally, most trees in our dataset are from boreal forests, where tree growth is believed to respond more positively to global warming (McMahon et al.2010; Pretzsch et al.2014; Silva et al.2016; D'Orangeville et al.2018). However, as shown in our climate‐zone level analysis (FigureS5), although the largest growth increases occurred inPolarandContinentalzones, positive tree growth trends can be found in all climate zones, includingDryzone.
The global decline in warming‐related tree growth and the continued increase of growth variance (Figure1insets) are further confirmed by the positive and negative terms ofMATg2in the climate‐growth models (Table1). These results reflect an overall unfavourable environmental shift for tree growth worldwide. The less‐dense data points at high temperatures shown in the insets of Figure1indicate that this growth pattern is a relatively recent phenomenon. They occurred probably because tree growth cannot effectively adapt to the excessive warming (Aguirre‐Gutiérrez et al.2025), which exacerbates water deficits and offsets the earlier beneficial effects of warmer climates. This finding aligns with recent observations of decreasing forest growth and rising tree mortality on the global scale (Peng et al.2011; Tijerín‐Triviño et al.2025). These unfavourable environmental changes could also make living trees more sensitive to interannual variations in climate factors, especially precipitation (Babst et al.2019; Peltier et al.2022), thus elevating the interannual variation in tree growth rate. Finally, though not tested in this study, this increased tree growth variation might also be partially explained by other global change stressors, e.g., pests and diseases, acid rain, fires and land use change (Trumbore et al.2015).
The overwhelmingly‐superlinear power‐law relationship (i.e.,b> 1) means that when trees grow faster, they also vary more in growth rate. An increase in tree growth variation is often considered as a sign of weakening stress resistance and tree vigour (Lloret et al.2011; Cailleret et al.2019), making individual trees more vulnerable to extreme climates and various disturbances, subsequently increasing tree mortality (Trumbore et al.2015; DeSoto et al.2020). This result is in line with studies showing that the warming‐induced growth acceleration can reduce the lifespan of trees (Brienen et al.2020). Compared to previous research that described this growth‐safety tradeoff with the growth‐lifespan relationship, for the first time we studied this tradeoff in living trees using the tree growth's mean–variance power law. Our findings indicate that the stimulation of tree growth by warming comes at the expense of growth stability and drought resistance. However, we would caution the inference about growth‐resistance tradeoff from the superlinear mean–variance relationship, because increased tree growth variation could also be caused by other reasons, such as increased growth sensitivity to favourable environment. Also, as drought could cause a legacy effect whereby those heavily‐impacted trees may enter a long low‐growth period (Cavin and Jump2017; DeSoto et al.2020), this could also reduce growth variance instead of increasing it.
Furthermore, our results indicate that this growth‐safety tradeoff varies significantly across species and climatic zones. As shown in Table2, the hydraulic traitP50was significantly associated with the power law's exponentb. It is well recognised that species with less negativeP50tend to grow faster but are more vulnerable to drought (Gleason et al.2016). Therefore, faster‐growing species tend to be more susceptible to hydraulic system weakening induced by rapid growth, which further increases their sensitivity to climatic variation. This ultimately leads to a faster rise in growth variance with mean growth rate, and thus a larger exponentb. It has also been observed that trees growing in more humid climates tend to adopt a growth strategy that prioritises faster growth over building more robust hydraulic traits (Cavin and Jump2017). This may explain why the effects of annual precipitation and water vapour pressure on exponentbare positive, while the effect of water vapour pressure deficit is negative. It also explains why thebis low in climatic zoneDry(Figure3). In short, trees in drier habitats might inherently be more resistant to droughts, thus less susceptible to the fast growth‐induced weakening of hydraulic systems. Finally, the observation that the global exponentbchanged from a baseline of 1.25 before global warming to 1.56 in the most recent decade suggests that under global warming, for each unit increase in growth rate, the increase in growth variation is becoming larger. In other words, an acceleration in growth comes at the cost of a greater loss of growth stability. In addition, the above findings may also suggest that the spatial and temporal variations in the mean–variance relationship of tree growth be driven by different climatic factors, with water being more important for spatial variation inb(Table2) and temperature for temporal trends inb(Figure2). However, these results should be interpreted with caution, as a positive correlation does not guarantee a causal relationship. In addition to precipitation and temperature, other abiotic and biotic factors not included in this study could also play a role.
Tree‐ring studies could be biased by various factors, such as sampling bias (e.g., toward large and more climate‐sensitive trees), detrending bias (including different detrending methods and end bias), and changing sample size or tree age over time (Bowman et al.2013; Duchesne et al.2019; Babst et al.2019). We tested the effects of these common confounding factors and the results show the observed tree growth patterns in Figure1are robust (seeSupporting Information, MethodsS1). Still, there remain some caveats to clarify. First, it is necessary to emphasise that we used the ring width index, rather than raw tree‐ring widths, to represent tree growth rates in this study. Consequently, the interpretation of growth acceleration is on a relative scale. For example, although thePolarzone exhibited a greater relative magnitude of growth acceleration than theTropicalzone (FigureS5), the absolute growth rate is typically higher in tropical forests, where trees generally grow much faster. Second, while our results indicate that global warming is closely correlated with the observed upward growth trend and increased growth variance (Figure1), we acknowledge that other global change factors may also influence these trends. For example, land use changes could very likely contribute to the increased tree growth variance by directly disturbing growth and altering competitive dynamics in forests (Cramer et al.2008). Furthermore, natural forest succession, fire, diseases, acid rain, CO2fertilisation, and nitrogen deposition could also play a role (Cook et al.1990; Trumbore et al.2015). Third, not all trees are amenable to tree‐ring study, especially those in warm and humid climates, as they don't typically form clear growth rings. As a result, the ITRDB tree‐ring data are less represented by tropical trees (Babst et al.2019). We thus suggest not extrapolating the findings of our study to species or areas beyond the ITRDB data coverage.
Our findings that tree growth variation increased much faster than mean growth rate under global warming (especially since the 1970s) suggest that global warming has increasingly destabilised global forests and jeopardised their roles in supporting global life systems. The changing variance–mean power law with climate and species traits further suggests that trees from different environments and species have different abilities to maintain their growth stability. This study for the first time quantifies the global dynamics of tree growth variation and explores the causes. To better confront global change, we argue that future research should put more emphasis on understanding the temporal uncertainties in tree growth and their drivers.
Fangliang He and Jingye Li conceived the study. Jingye Li compiled the data, conducted the analysis, and wrote the first draft of the manuscript, which was revised by Fangliang He and Jingye Li.
This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada and the Alberta Land Institute. Jingye Li also graciously acknowledges the Oversea Study Program of Guangzhou Elite Project (Grant: S.J.[2019] No. 2).
Table S1:Linear mixed‐effects model for the responses of temporal mean and variance of tree growth rates (in mm) to temperature. Coefficient (se) indicates the effect (slope) of a predictor and its related standard error.
Figure S1:Geographical distribution (upper panel) and sample size (lower panel) of the tree‐ring data set. In the upper panel, colours denote different Köppen climate zones. In the lower panel they‐axis denotes the number of populations. The black horizontal line denotes the sample size in 1401 which is 684 populations (while the number of populations in 2010 is 693).
Figure S2:Temporal trends of the global mean and variance of tree growth rates. Calculated using the same data and detrending method as in Figure1, but with a different moving window length of 3 years (a, b) and 10 years (c, d).
Figure S3:Schematic plot showing the averaging process of tree‐level exponents from Taylor's power law models (see Methods for details).
Figure S4:Schematic plot showing the analysis to investigate the spatial and temporal regulators of the mean–variance relationship in tree growth rates (see Methods for details).
Figure S5:Temporal trends of the mean (a) and variance (b) of tree growth rates in different climate zones. Coloured solid lines are localised smooth regression lines. The thick blue lines denote averages among individual climate zones. Shaded area represents ±1.96 standard error interval. The vertical dashed blue lines denote year 1925 and 1975 for tree growth mean and variance, respectively.
Figure S6:Frequency distributions of thep‐value (a) andR2(b) for the tree‐level Taylor's power law model. The red line in (b) denotes the median value.
Figure S7:Temporal trends of the global mean and variance of tree growth rates. Calculated from tree‐ring series detrended by a 300‐year spline function (see MethodsS1). The vertical dashed blue lines denote year 1925 and 1975 for mean and variance, respectively. Shaded area represents ±1.96 standard error interval. TheR2values show the correlation between the growth mean or variance and that in Figure1.
Figure S8:Temporal trends of the global mean and variance of tree growth rates. Calculated from tree‐ring series detrended by the 2/3 spline function. The vertical dashed blue lines denote year 1925 and 1975 for mean and variance, respectively. Shaded area represents ±1.96 standard error interval. TheR2values show the correlation between the growth mean or variance and that in Figure1.
Figure S9:Temporal trends of the global mean and variance of tree growth rates. Calculated from tree‐ring series detrended by the regional curve standardisation. The vertical dashed blue lines denote year 1925 and 1975 for mean and variance, respectively. Shaded area represents ±1.96 standard error interval. TheR2values show the correlation between the growth mean or variance and that in Figure1.
Figure S10:Temporal trends of the global mean and variance of tree growth rates. Calculated from tree‐ring series detrended by constant basal area increment detrending. The vertical dashed blue lines denote year 1925 and 1975 for mean and variance, respectively. Shaded area represents ±1.96 standard error interval. TheR2value shows the correlation between the growth mean or variance and that in Figure1.
Figure S11:Temporal trends of the global mean and variance of tree growth rates. Calculated from tree‐ring series fully covering 1801–2000 (no change in data coverage and sample size over this 200‐year period). The vertical dashed blue lines denote year 1925 and 1975 for mean and variance, respectively. Shaded area represents ±1.96 standard error interval. TheR2values indicate the correlation between the growth mean or variance and that in Figure1in the same period of coverage time (1801–2000).
Figure S12:Temporal trends of the global mean and variance of tree growth rates. Calculated from tree‐ring series end before 1900 (for mean) and 1970 (for variance) (see MethodsS1). Shaded area represents ±1.96 standard error interval.
Figure S13:Temporal trends of the global variance of tree growth rates. The variance was calculated for different age groups of trees separately. Each curve represents one age group. There are 10 groups in total. The red line denotes average values across all groups and each yellow point represents one 5‐year window over which growth variance was calculated. The vertical dashed blue line denotes year 1975.
Figure S14:Temporal trends of the global mean and variance of tree growth rates. Calculated from the ITRDB tree‐ring data that were originally collected for climate‐reconstruction studies (upper panels) and for other more general dendrochronological studies (lower panels). The global distributions of the two groups are displayed on the maps on the right, showing a fair global coverage. The vertical dashed blue lines denote year 1925 and 1975 for mean and variance, respectively. Shaded area represents ±1.96 standard error interval. TheR2values show the correlation of the mean growth rate and variance with those in Figure1.
Figure S15:Temporal trends of the global mean and variance of tree growth rates. Calculated from the group of trees represented by single series (upper panels) and the group of trees that may be represented by multiple series (lower panels). The vertical dashed blue lines denote year 1925 and 1975 for mean and variance, respectively. Shaded area represents ±1.96 standard error interval. TheR2values show the correlation of the mean growth rate and variance with those in Figure1.
We thank Roel Brienen, Manuel Gloor, and anonymous reviewers for constructive and insightful inputs which greatly improved this study. We also thank the numerous contributors of ITRDB and TRY who generously shared their data that made our work possible. This research was funded by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada and the Alberta Land Institute. Jingye Li also graciously acknowledges the Oversea Study Program of Guangzhou Elite Project (Grant: S.J.[2019] No. 2).
Li, J.
, and He F.. 2026. “Variation in Tree Growth Increases With Global Warming.” Ecology Letters
29, no. 2: e70326. 10.1111/ele.70326.
Editor:Xavier Morin
The data and codes that support the findings of this study are available at:https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.30882446.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
Table S1:Linear mixed‐effects model for the responses of temporal mean and variance of tree growth rates (in mm) to temperature. Coefficient (se) indicates the effect (slope) of a predictor and its related standard error.
Figure S1:Geographical distribution (upper panel) and sample size (lower panel) of the tree‐ring data set. In the upper panel, colours denote different Köppen climate zones. In the lower panel they‐axis denotes the number of populations. The black horizontal line denotes the sample size in 1401 which is 684 populations (while the number of populations in 2010 is 693).
Figure S2:Temporal trends of the global mean and variance of tree growth rates. Calculated using the same data and detrending method as in Figure1, but with a different moving window length of 3 years (a, b) and 10 years (c, d).
Figure S3:Schematic plot showing the averaging process of tree‐level exponents from Taylor's power law models (see Methods for details).
Figure S4:Schematic plot showing the analysis to investigate the spatial and temporal regulators of the mean–variance relationship in tree growth rates (see Methods for details).
Figure S5:Temporal trends of the mean (a) and variance (b) of tree growth rates in different climate zones. Coloured solid lines are localised smooth regression lines. The thick blue lines denote averages among individual climate zones. Shaded area represents ±1.96 standard error interval. The vertical dashed blue lines denote year 1925 and 1975 for tree growth mean and variance, respectively.
Figure S6:Frequency distributions of thep‐value (a) andR2(b) for the tree‐level Taylor's power law model. The red line in (b) denotes the median value.
Figure S7:Temporal trends of the global mean and variance of tree growth rates. Calculated from tree‐ring series detrended by a 300‐year spline function (see MethodsS1). The vertical dashed blue lines denote year 1925 and 1975 for mean and variance, respectively. Shaded area represents ±1.96 standard error interval. TheR2values show the correlation between the growth mean or variance and that in Figure1.
Figure S8:Temporal trends of the global mean and variance of tree growth rates. Calculated from tree‐ring series detrended by the 2/3 spline function. The vertical dashed blue lines denote year 1925 and 1975 for mean and variance, respectively. Shaded area represents ±1.96 standard error interval. TheR2values show the correlation between the growth mean or variance and that in Figure1.
Figure S9:Temporal trends of the global mean and variance of tree growth rates. Calculated from tree‐ring series detrended by the regional curve standardisation. The vertical dashed blue lines denote year 1925 and 1975 for mean and variance, respectively. Shaded area represents ±1.96 standard error interval. TheR2values show the correlation between the growth mean or variance and that in Figure1.
Figure S10:Temporal trends of the global mean and variance of tree growth rates. Calculated from tree‐ring series detrended by constant basal area increment detrending. The vertical dashed blue lines denote year 1925 and 1975 for mean and variance, respectively. Shaded area represents ±1.96 standard error interval. TheR2value shows the correlation between the growth mean or variance and that in Figure1.
Figure S11:Temporal trends of the global mean and variance of tree growth rates. Calculated from tree‐ring series fully covering 1801–2000 (no change in data coverage and sample size over this 200‐year period). The vertical dashed blue lines denote year 1925 and 1975 for mean and variance, respectively. Shaded area represents ±1.96 standard error interval. TheR2values indicate the correlation between the growth mean or variance and that in Figure1in the same period of coverage time (1801–2000).
Figure S12:Temporal trends of the global mean and variance of tree growth rates. Calculated from tree‐ring series end before 1900 (for mean) and 1970 (for variance) (see MethodsS1). Shaded area represents ±1.96 standard error interval.
Figure S13:Temporal trends of the global variance of tree growth rates. The variance was calculated for different age groups of trees separately. Each curve represents one age group. There are 10 groups in total. The red line denotes average values across all groups and each yellow point represents one 5‐year window over which growth variance was calculated. The vertical dashed blue line denotes year 1975.
Figure S14:Temporal trends of the global mean and variance of tree growth rates. Calculated from the ITRDB tree‐ring data that were originally collected for climate‐reconstruction studies (upper panels) and for other more general dendrochronological studies (lower panels). The global distributions of the two groups are displayed on the maps on the right, showing a fair global coverage. The vertical dashed blue lines denote year 1925 and 1975 for mean and variance, respectively. Shaded area represents ±1.96 standard error interval. TheR2values show the correlation of the mean growth rate and variance with those in Figure1.
Figure S15:Temporal trends of the global mean and variance of tree growth rates. Calculated from the group of trees represented by single series (upper panels) and the group of trees that may be represented by multiple series (lower panels). The vertical dashed blue lines denote year 1925 and 1975 for mean and variance, respectively. Shaded area represents ±1.96 standard error interval. TheR2values show the correlation of the mean growth rate and variance with those in Figure1.
The data and codes that support the findings of this study are available at:https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.30882446.
Articles from Ecology Letters are provided here courtesy ofWiley
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894