An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Xiao-Yi Xing and Ya-Fang Tang contributed equally to this research. The order of their names was determined by flipping a coin.
CitationXing X-Y, Tang Y-F, Xu H-F, Qin H-L, Liu Y, Zhang W-Z, Chen A-L, Zhu B-L. 2021. Warming shapesnirS- andnosZ-type denitrifier communities and stimulates N2O emission in acidic paddy soil. Appl Environ Microbiol 87:e02965-20.https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.02965-20.
Corresponding author.
Contributed equally.
Received 2020 Dec 17; Accepted 2021 Mar 13; Prepublished 2021 Apr 9; Collection date 2021 Jun.
Warming strongly stimulates soil nitrous oxide (N2O) emission, contributing to the global warming trend. Submerged paddy soils exhibit huge N2O emission potential; however, the N2O emission pathway and underlying mechanisms for warming are not clearly understood. We conducted an incubation experiment using15N to investigate the dynamics of N2O emission at controlled temperatures (5, 15, 25, and 35°C) in 125% water-filled pore space. The community structures of nitrifiers and denitrifiers were determined via high-throughput sequencing of functional genes. Our results showed that elevated temperature sharply enhanced soil N2O emission from submerged paddy soil. Denitrification was the main contributor, accounting for more than 90% of total N2O emission at all treatment temperatures. N2O flux was coordinatively regulated bynirK-,nirS-, andnosZ-containing denitrifiers but not ammonia-oxidizing archaea or ammonia-oxidizing bacteria. ThenirS-containing denitrifiers were more sensitive to temperature shifts, especially at a lower temperature range (5 to 25°C), and showed a stronger correlation with N2O flux than that ofnirK-containing denitrifiers. In contrast,nosZ-containing denitrifiers exhibited substantial variation at higher temperatures (15 to 35°C), thereby playing an important role in N2O consumption. Certain taxa ofnirS- andnosZ-containing denitrifiers regulated N2O flux, includingnirS-containing denitrifiers affiliated withRhodanobacterandCupriavidusas well asnosZ-containing denitrifiers affiliated withAzoarcusandAzospirillum. Together, these findings suggest that elevated temperature can significantly increase N2O emission from denitrification in submerged paddy soils by shifting the overall community structures and enriching some indigenous taxa ofnirS- andnosZ-containing denitrifiers.
IMPORTANCEThe interdependence between global warming and greenhouse gas N2O has always been the hot spot. However, information on factors contributing to N2O and temperature-dependent community structure changes is scarce. This study demonstrated high-temperature-induced N2O emission from submerged paddy soils, mainly via stimulating denitrification. Further, we speculate that key functional denitrifiers drive N2O emission. This study showed that denitrifiers were more sensitive to temperature rise than nitrifiers, and the temperature sensitivity differed among denitrifier communities. N2O-consuming denitrifiers (nosZ-containing denitrifiers) were more sensitive at a higher temperature range than N2O-producing denitrifiers (nirS-containing denitrifiers). This study’s findings help predict N2O fluxes under different degrees of warming and develop strategies to mitigate N2O emissions from paddy fields based on microbial community regulation.
KEYWORDS:N2O emission, submerged paddy soils, temperature sensitivity, relative contribution, key regulating taxa
Global warming may increase the global surface temperature by up to 4.8°C during the 21st century (1), which will strongly stimulate greenhouse gas emissions, creating a positive-feedback mechanism that amplifies warming. Nitrous oxide (N2O) is a potent greenhouse gas, with a global warming potential about 298 times higher than that of carbon dioxide (CO2) within a time horizon of 100 years (2). Many studies have demonstrated that global warming induced considerable N2O emission; for example, N2O emission increased by 35.2% even within 1.5°C of experimental warming (3), and up to 227% when the temperature increase was >6°C (1). Assessed asQ10(fractional change in rate with a 10°C increase in temperature), the temperature sensitivity of N2O emission was previously reported to range from 2.3 to 50 for different soil types but was found to be lower than 3.5 in most cases (4–9). Previous research regarding temperature sensitivity of N2O emission has mostly focused on upland fields (4,10,11), pastures (7,12), and forest ecosystems (8). However, few reports have concentrated on paddy soils, and these studies were mainly limited to aerobic rather than submerged paddy soils (13,14). Paddy fields represent an important land use covering more than 135 million ha globally (15), representing a crucial N2O emission source. Particularly, submerged paddy soil has been shown to present huge N2O emission potential when the nitrogen supply is sufficient (16). However, whether and how global warming influences N2O emission in submerged paddy soil have rarely been investigated.
N2O emissions from soils primarily result from two processes: nitrification and denitrification (4,9). Delineating the relative contributions of the two processes is essential for the accurate estimation of national N2O emission inventories and the development of N2O emission-mitigating strategies (17). Although some attempts to quantify emissions have been made, mainly based on correlation analysis (14,18), direct quantitative studies, such as those using stable isotope labeling to estimate the relative N2O contribution in paddy soils, are scarce (19,20). Furthermore, nitrification and denitrification are affected by temperature, and their temperature sensitivity (Q10) varies for different soils. Supposedly, denitrification is generally more sensitive at higher temperatures due to large O2consumption (4,8,21,22). Based on previous studies using different soil types, theQ10value for denitrification ranges from 1.7 to 9.3 (4,12), while that for nitrification ranges from 1.7 to 4.1 (8,23,24). Considering that submerged soil was found to be favorable to induce denitrification (16), we speculated that elevated temperature might better stimulate N2O emission via denitrification in submerged paddy soils.
Microbes mainly drive nitrification and denitrification, and numerous studies have demonstrated that temperature can shape nitrifier and denitrifier communities, thus regulating N2O emission (4,8,13). Bacterial and archaealamoA(ammonia monooxygenase),nirSandnirK(cytochromecd1and copper-containing nitrite reductase, respectively), andnosZ(nitrous oxide reductase) genes have been used extensively as molecular markers to investigate the dynamics of nitrifier and denitrifier communities (4,25,26). As nitrifiers, ammonia-oxidizing bacteria (AOB) have been speculated to exhibit a higher temperature sensitivity than ammonia-oxidizing archaea (AOA) (4,9,27). Denitrifiers are generally more sensitive to temperature than nitrifiers (4,12). Specifically,nirS-harboring microbes are more sensitive to warming and contribute more to N2O production thannirK-harboring microbes (1,4,8). In addition, the temperature sensitivity of complete denitrifiers (nosZ-harboring microbes) in different environments significantly varies (1,4,28,29). Overall, most of the past research principally focused on the abundance of nitrifiers and denitrifiers, while their community structure dynamics were rarely explored. Though Cui et al. (4) measured nitrifier and denitrifier responses, terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis could not provide comprehensive species information. Moreover, distinct microbial components exhibit different temperature preferences for growth and function (28,30), which means that changing temperature could select specific communities to drive N2O emission. Nevertheless, little research has explored the key functional nitrifiers or denitrifiers under different temperatures (4).
Over the past 30 years, air temperature has shown asymmetric warming in China, and the increased rate tended to be higher in subtropical areas than in temperate or cold-temperate regions (9). Although a recent study carried out in the temperate zone showed the temperature sensitivity of N2O emission and denitrifiers (4,8), few measurements focused on N2O emission in the subtropical zone under warming conditions (14). In the present study, we conducted an incubation experiment to investigate N2O emissions from flooded paddy soil in a subtropical zone at different temperatures and to assess the relative contributions of nitrification and denitrification. Illumina MiSeq sequencing was used to investigate the dynamics of nitrifier and denitrifier community structures. The objectives of this study were to (i) investigate N2O emission under changing temperatures and determine the main responsible pathway and (ii) explore the responses of nitrifier and denitrifier community structures to temperature change and probe the key functional microbial guilds affecting N2O emissions. We hypothesized that (i) elevated temperature would increase N2O emission, primarily via stimulating denitrification, and (ii) the nitrifier and denitrifier communities would respond differently to temperature rise and contribute to N2O emission to different extents. These results would provide a better understanding of N2O fluxes under global warming and help develop mitigation strategies for N2O emission from paddy fields.
The N2O emission rate increased exponentially with increasing temperature, showing a sharp increase from 15°C to 25°C (Fig. 1a). At 5°C and 15°C, the average N2O emission rate over the 96-h incubations was relatively low (49.78 and 110.47 μg kg−1h−1). As incubation temperature increased to 25°C, the N2O emission rate dramatically increased, reaching 1,960.26 μg kg−1h−1. Then at 35°C, it increased further, though at a slower pace, and eventually, the average N2O emission was about 2,942.52 μg kg−1h−1. Accordingly, the temperature sensitivity for the entire incubation temperature interval (5 to 35°C) (Q10-total) was 5.07. Furthermore, the temperature sensitivity for intervals of 5 to 15°C, 15 to 25°C, and 25 to 35°C (Q10-partial) were measured, and theQ10-partial for 15 to 25°C was higher than for the other temperature intervals and was 7.99 and 11.83 times higher than for 5 to 15°C and 25 to 35°C (Table 1).

Total cumulative N2O emission (a) and15N2O emission from15NH4+and15NO3−inputs (b) during the 96-h period under different incubation temperatures. Data are presented as mean values with standard errors (n= 3).
Mean values ofQ10of total N2O emission and15N2O emissions from15NO3−or15NH4+fertilizer input (n= 3)a
Q10-partial indicates the temperature sensitivity for intervals of 5 to 15°C,15 to 25°C, and 25 to 35°C, andQ10-total indicates the temperature sensitivity for the entire incubation temperature interval (5 to 35°C). The different letters indicates significant difference (P< 0.05).
The N2O emission rate from denitrification was always far higher than that from nitrification (Fig. 1b). Consequently, denitrification played a dominant role in N2O emission, and its contribution was steady and above 90% after incubation for 96 h (Fig. 2). Accordingly, soil NO3−concentrations at 96 h decreased with the increase of incubation temperature and were even lower than the detection limit at 25°C and 35°C (Fig. 3a). The N2O flux attributed to denitrification was positively associated with potential denitrification rates (PDRs) (Fig. 4), which reinforced the importance of denitrification in N2O emission. In contrast, soil NH4+concentrations at 96 h increased with elevated incubation temperature; particularly, the concentrations under 25°C and 35°C were even higher than that at 0 h (Fig. 3b), presumably because at higher temperatures, mineralization was stronger than nitrification, resulting in a net production of NH4+.

Relative contribution of denitrification (FD) to total N2O emission under different incubation temperatures. Data are presented as mean values with standard errors (n= 3). The different letters indicate significant difference (P< 0.05).

Soil NO3−concentration (a) and NH4+concentration (b) under different incubation temperatures. The concentrations under different incubation temperatures were measured at 96 h. Data are presented as mean values with standard errors (n= 3). The different letters indicate significant difference (P< 0.05). nd, NO3−concentration was below the detection limit.

Regression analysis results of N2O flux and PDR by substrate over a 96-h incubation period. **,P< 0.01.
There were no significant differences in AOA and AOB communities among the temperature treatments, except the AOB communities under 15°C separated from other groups (Fig. 5aandb), which indicated that nitrifying microbial community structures were less sensitive to temperature. Significant variation due to temperature was measured for 5 operational taxonomic units (OTUs) out of 73 and 1 out of 243 for AOAamoAand AOBamoA, respectively, accounting for 8.90% and 0.10% of their respective total abundances (Fig. 6). In contrast, denitrifier communities were strongly affected by temperature, and distinct types of denitrifiers behaved differently.nirSdenitrifiers were most sensitive to temperature, and the community structure shifted with changing temperature; more importantly, the most significant variation appeared between the interval of 15 to 25°C, similar to N2O flux (Fig. 5d). In contrast, there was no evident variation in the low-temperature range (5 to 15°C) fornirKandnosZdenitrifiers. However, their community structures strongly changed as incubation temperature increased to 25°C and continuously changed at 35°C (Fig. 5cande). Furthermore, the fact thatnirSdenitrifiers had the highest percentage of warming-sensitive OTUs, up to 43.12% of the total, followed bynosZ(32.58%) andnirK(16.76%) (Fig. 6), provided further evidence thatnirSdenitrifiers were more temperature sensitive thannirKandnosZdenitrifiers.

Principal-coordinate analysis (PCoA) representation of the overall community structure of AOA (a), AOB (b),nirK-type (c),nirS-type (d), andnosZ-type (e) denitrifiers under different incubation temperatures. Different-colored symbols represent samples under different incubation temperatures.

Relative abundances of the sensitive nitrifiers and denitrifiers under different incubation temperatures. (a) OTUs whose relative abundance increased with increasing temperature; (b) OTUs whose relative abundance decreased with increasing temperature.
The relative abundance of these key OTUs regulating N2O emission under different temperature incubations and their taxonomy are presented inFig. 7. For AOA, 8.32% of the OTUs (2 OTUs) positively related with N2O emission rate at a significant level, and they mainly belong toThaumarchaeota(Fig. 7a). In contrast, the comparable figure for AOB was merely 0.10% (1 OTU), relating toNitrosospira(Fig. 7b). For thenirKandnirSgenes, 1.51% OTUs (6 OTUs) and 25.21% OTUs (16 OTUs) were positively correlated with N2O emission rates, respectively, indicating temperature-mediated N2O production from denitrification mainly by shapingnirScommunity structures. Phylogenetic analysis showed that the OTUs fornirSwere mainly affiliated withRhodanobacter,Cupriavidus, and unclassifiedBurkholderiaceae(Fig. 7d), while those fornirKwere affiliated withBradyrhizobiumandMycobacterium(Fig. 7c). Meanwhile, fornosZ, encoding nitrous oxide reductase, 9.81% of the OTUs (60 OTUs) negatively correlated with N2O emission rate and were clustered in the vicinity ofnosZfromAzospirillumandAzoarcus(Fig. 7e).

Taxonomy information of the key AOA (a), AOB (b),nirKdenitrifiers (c),nirSdenitrifiers (d), andnosZdenitrifiers (e) under different incubation temperatures.
In light of the fact that denitrification made an overwhelming contribution to N2O emission, and denitrifiers were more sensitive to temperature variation, variance partitioning was applied to further determine the effect intension of denitrifiers to N2O emission, using the relative abundance of active communities ofnirK,nirS, andnosZas explanatory variables (Fig. 8). Interaction of all factors contributed the most to N2O emission, explaining up to 40.7% of the variance, suggesting that N2O emission was coordinatively regulated bynirK-,nirS-, andnosZ-type denitrifiers. Interaction ofnirSandnosZaccounted for 21.4% of N2O emission, significantly higher than that ofnirKandnosZ. In addition,nirSalone explained more variance (9.0%) thannirK(0.3%). These results again indicated thatnirS-harboring microbes were more responsible for N2O emission thannirK-harboring microbes. Furthermore,nosZalone accounted for 26.8% of N2O emission, suggesting the importance of thenosZcommunity in N2O reduction.

Variation partitioning of N2O emission. The edges of the triangle depict the variation explained by each factor alone. Percentages of variation explained by interactions of two or all factors are indicated on the sides and in the middle of the triangles, respectively.
Results from our incubation experiments showed that as temperature increased from 5°C to 35°C, paddy soil N2O emission rate increased exponentially (Fig. 1a), consistent with previous studies (4,5,13,31). However, the N2O net emission rate and temperature sensitivity (overallQ10) were higher than the more frequently published values for dryland, grassland, and forest (4,5,7,14). Therefore, it can be speculated that paddy soil is a considerable N2O emission source, especially under global warming conditions. The adequate nitrogen supply (720 μg of N g−1of dried soil) and suitable moisture condition (125% water-filled pore space [WFPS]) in this study boosted this increasing trend (1,11,32). Hence, the N2O emission in the fields experiencing heavy irrigation and N fertilizer application should be of particular concern. Specifically, the overallQ10of total N2O emission was about 5 in this study, while the global surface temperature could rise nearly 5°C during the 21st century (1), implying that N2O emission might increase by 150% due to this 5°C increase. It is noteworthy that the annual average temperature of the study area fluctuated from 15 to 22°C, lying within the most sensitive temperature range of the N2O increment (Q10was about 18 [Table 1]). This meant that N2O emission of the paddy soil of this region would increase by about 8 times during the 21st century, concomitantly with an expected 5°C global warming. Overall, the N2O increment would reveal regional characteristics under global warming due to the regional difference in air temperature, and N2O emissions of paddy soils in the subtropical zone would be considerable.
Furthermore, the enhanced N2O emission was mainly attributed to denitrification, accounting for more than 90% of the total emission under all conditions (Fig. 2). Denitrification is often favored in soils with higher moisture and lower oxygen contents (33), and it contributes around 85 to 90% N2O emission under saturated conditions (34). In addition, most denitrifying microorganisms are capable of aerobic respiration and denitrification; thus, they could be potentially enriched in paddy soils with regular redox fluctuation (35). It is noteworthy that the temperature sensitivity (Q10) of denitrification was higher than that of nitrification (Table 1), which was in line with previous studies (8,12). The reason might be that increasing temperature caused an increase in the anaerobic volumes and more denitrifiers than nitrifiers (8). In addition, both the temperature responses of nitrification and denitrification were bell shaped (21,25,36), and the affected increment mostly appeared at low to moderate temperatures (25,36); specifically, it was in the interval of 15 to 25°C in this study (Table 1). This indicates that global warming-induced N2O emission may be stronger in temperate regions.
As nitrification and denitrification are generally microbial processes, exploring the responses of associated microbial structure to temperature is vital to interpret the variation of N2O emission. AOA and AOB communities were less influenced by elevated temperature (Fig. 5aandbandFig. 6). The absence of temperature-dependent change inamoAgene diversity has also been reported by previous researchers (1,4,37). Some ammonium oxidizer communities, such asNitrosospirasubspecies clusters 2, 3a, and 4, are characterized by a low growth rate and possible mixotrophic lifestyle (38,39), allowing them to survive harsh conditions (38,40), for example, by resisting temperature variation (38). Nevertheless, AOA primarily regulated nitrification by increasing part of the active taxa at the higher temperature treatment (Fig. 7). AOA were hypothesized to have more robust environmental adaptability (38) and to dominate nitrification in acidic paddy soils (41) because at least some AOA communities possess a high affinity to the substrate and could tolerate acidic environments (42). For example,Thaumarchaeota, the key AOA community regulating N2O emission in this study, is widely present in acidic soils (43,44), suggesting their preference for and potential adaptation to this environment (13).
Compared with autotrophic ammonia oxidizers, denitrifiers showed higher temperature sensitivity, which might be because they are phylogenetically widespread and as therefore are active at a wide range of temperatures (12,45). For N2O-producing denitrifiers, past studies have suggested niche differentiation betweennirK- andnirS-harboring microbes (46); however, less is known about their environmental preferences. In the present study, thenirKcommunity structure was insensitive to temperature rise under colder conditions (5 to 15°C), but it showed evident variation when temperature increased from 15°C to 35°C (Fig. 5c). In contrast,nirSshowed higher temperature sensitivity over the whole temperature range (Fig. 5d). This further suggested that there was divergent temperature sensitivity betweennirKandnirSdenitrifiers. Some researchers also found thatnirSwas more sensitive in the 5 to 35°C temperature range (4,14). The paddy soil investigated in the current study is located in a region with a subtropical monsoon climate, with an average temperature of 26 to 29°C in summer and >4°C in the coldest month. Thus, we speculated that bothnirSandnirKmight drive N2O production in summer, especially under the effect of global warming, whereasnirSmight be more important in winter. In addition, Wertz et al. (10) supposed thatnirKwas more sensitive when the temperature dropped below zero, which might imply thatnirKwould be more important in frigid zones under warming conditions. Overall, the research about temperature sensitivity differentiation betweennirKandnirSis still in its infancy and has fewer achievements. Further studies are needed to elucidate the temperature differentiation pattern and the underlying mechanism.
As mentioned above, the most striking variation ofnirScommunity structure appeared in the interval of 15 to 25°C, which coincided with the response of N2O emission to temperature. In addition, there were more activenirScommunities (the average was 25.21%) thannirKcommunities (the average was 1.51%) that positively correlated with N2O emission (Fig. 7canddandFig. 8). These results showed likely feedback between elevated temperature and N2O production mediated by denitrification through a shift innirScommunity structure. Past studies have suggested thatnirSwas more responsible for N2O emission under elevated temperature based on microbial abundance (8,12,47). Our study provided further evidence in microbial composition to support this. Furthermore, according to high-throughput sequencing, thenirScommunities that positively correlated with N2O emission mainly affiliate withRhodanobacterandCupriavidus, which might be the key taxa in regulating N2O emission under rising temperatures. These members were common denitrifiers in the soil environment (48,49); however, little is known about their ecophysiology and thermal adaptation. Interestingly, in black arable soils,nirS-containingAzoarcusandDechloromonaswere found to be the main taxa regulating N2O emission under elevated temperature (4). Thus, distinct denitrifying communities seem responsible for N2O emissions from different soil types under warming conditions.
nosZdenitrifiers can reduce N2O to N2by N2O reductase (50,51). Their essential role in controlling N2O emission under elevated temperature has been demonstrated by the results of active community analysis and variation partitioning (Fig. 7and8). Phylogenetic analysis showed that 60 OTUs belonging toAzoarcusandAzospirillumwere negatively associated with N2O flux. The N2O-reducing capacity of these members in paddy soils has been extensively reported (52), and Swiatczak et al. (53) found thatAzoarcuswas sensitive to temperature. More importantly, the temperature sensitivity difference ofnosZ-possessing and N2O-producing denitrifiers is essential to predict N2O flux under future global warming. Generally,nosZdenitrifiers showed low-temperature sensitivity at lower temperature increments (5 to 15°C) whilenirSdenitrifiers were sensitive in this range, which meant that a temperature increase from 5 to 15°C could induce better adaptation innirSthannosZcommunity structure, thus causing incomplete denitrification and increasing the potential for N2O emission. Incomplete denitrification at lower temperatures (10°C) has also been reported by Liao et al. (46). However,nosZdenitrifiers manifested apparent variation at high temperature increments (15 to 35°C [Fig. 5e]), just likenirKandnirSdenitrifiers. Therefore, when the temperature was increased from 15 to 35°C,nirK-harboring,nirS-harboring, andnosZ-harboring microorganism communities were all altered and jointly played a role in N2O emission. That is, complete denitrification was more likely to occur at this temperature range (46). Past studies reported inconsistent temperature sensitivity ofnosZ-type denitrifiers (1,4,28,29). Based on the above-described results, it is suspected that temperature range might also affect the temperature sensitivity of specific N2O-producing and N2O-consuming denitrifiers.
In conclusion, the elevated temperature would significantly promote N2O emission from submerged paddy fields, and more than 90% of total N2O production originated from denitrification regardless of incubation temperature. However, we showed thatnirKandnosZdenitrifiers showed significant changes only at higher temperature ranges (15 to 35°C), whereasnirSdenitrifiers were sensitive under the entire temperature range (5 to 35°C). ThenirScommunity structure response to temperature coincided with denitrification-derived N2O production, primarily since more OTUs were positively associated with the N2O flux. Together, our results suggest that N2O emission from paddy soil in a subtropical zone may sharply increase and become a major emission source of N2O under future global warming.nirS-type but notnirK-type denitrifiers dominated N2O production, whilenosZdenitrifiers played an essential role in N2O reduction. Future studies need to identify the key microbial groups and mitigate N2O emission by shaping the community structure ofnirSandnosZdenitrifiers.
Soil samples were collected from a typically acidic paddy field located at the Taoyuan Agroecosystem Research Station (111°26′E, 28°55′N; altitude, 92.2 to 125.3 m) in Hunan Province, China, in late October 2014, as previously described by Qin et al. (54). The soil was developed from quaternary red clay, and climatic factors and major soil properties have been reported previously (54).
Soils were preconditioned in the dark with 25% WFPS at 25°C for 4 days before the incubation experiment. Preconditioned soil samples were distributed (each 200 g [dry weight]) into individual glass bottles (1,000 ml). Two15N-labeled compounds,15NH414NO3and14NH415NO3(15N, 5 atom%), were added at 720 μg N g−1of dried soil, which is equivalent to 200 kg N ha−1when added to 200 g of soil with a surface area of 72 cm2. The moisture content of the soils was adjusted to 125% WFPS. Subsequently, these bottles were uncapped and incubated at 5°C, 15°C, 25°C, and 35°C for 96 h. There were 3 replicates for each temperature.
Gas samples (30 ml) were taken from the headspace at 1, 24, 48, 72, and 96 h after incubation. Gas samples were collected using a sterile gas-tight syringe, and N2O concentrations were measured with a gas chromatograph (Agilent; 7890A), according to the method of Qin et al. (54). Atoms percent15N excess of N2O was analyzed using a MAT253 isotope ratio mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) coupled with a trace gas cryogenic preconcentration device (PreCon; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a multipurpose gas introduction device (GasBench II, with a PoraPLOT Q capillary column [0.32 mm {outer diameter} by 25 m {length}]; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The15N2O concentrations were calculated as N2O flux × atoms percent15N excess of N2O at 1, 48, and 96 h after incubation. The15N2O from15NH4NO3was defined as nitrification-derived N2O, and that from NH415NO3was defined as denitrification-derived N2O.
Q10was calculated based on the modified van’t Hoff equation, which is shown below. The van’t Hoff equation is as follows:
whereQ10=eβ×T. The modified van’t Hoff equation is as follows:
whereQ10= (RT2/RT1)[10/(T2−T1)],Ris N2O emission,Tis incubation temperature,Tbasalis measured temperature, and α and β are fitting parameters.
Based onequation 1,Q10-total was calculated to express the temperature sensitivity of potential N2O emission from the entire incubation range (5 to 35°C). Based onequation 2,Q10-partial was calculated to express the temperature sensitivity for the following temperature intervals: 5 to 15, 15 to 25, and 25 to 35°C, which would clarify the difference in temperature sensitivity in different temperature ranges.
The soil was destructively sampled at 0 h (untreated) and 96 h; approximately 180 g was stored at 4°C for measurement of ammonium (NH4+) and nitrate (NO3−) concentrations as described by Qin et al. (54), and approximately 20 g was stored at −80°C for molecular analyses. The PDRs were calculated by the differences in soil NO3−-N concentrations between 0 and 96 h, in micrograms per kilogram per day.
Microbial genomic DNA was extracted from 0.5 g of soil after the 96-h incubation, as described by Chen et al. (55). DNA quality and concentrations were measured using a NanoDrop NA-1000 spectrophotometer (Nanodrop Technologies, Wilmington, DE). The extractions were performed in triplicate; all DNA was pooled and stored at −80°C for further analyses.
The AOAamoAand AOBamoA,nirK,nirS, andnosZgenes were amplified by PCR using the primers and profiles listed inTable 2, incorporating a barcode at the 5′ end of each forward primer to separate different samples. The PCR and sequencing process was performed as described by Qin et al. (54).
Thermal profiles and primers used for PCR amplification of different functional genesa
The forward and reverse primers are indicated by the letters F and R, respectively. Y, C or T; R, A or G; K, G or T; S, C or G.
Sequence analysis was performed with QIIME. The sequences were denoised and checked for chimeras using usearch 61. After quality checking, 370,416, 327,984, 188,412, 387,315, and 432,945 sequence reads were obtained for the AOAamoAand AOBamoA,nirK,nirS, andnosZgenes, respectively. Clustering based on sequence similarity (97%) returned averages of 73, 243, 1,669, 955, and 1,132 OTUs, respectively, for the above-named genes. The NCBI nucleotide database was searched by BLAST with one representative sequence from each OTU, and the top hits were annotated with specific species information, using a similarity threshold of 70% (56).
Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed in SPSS 18.0 to test the effects of incubation temperature on N2O fluxes,Q10, NO3−concentrations, NH4+concentrations, and relative abundance of every specific OTU of nitrifiers and denitrifiers. Furthermore, the OTUs showing significant variation were named as sensitive taxa. A regression analysis was made using origin 8.0 to estimate the relationship between PDR and N2O emission. Principal-coordinate analysis (PCoA) was used to manifest the nitrifier and denitrifier profiles. Pearson correlation analysis was performed with SPSS software to assess the relationship between the relative abundance of every specific OTU and N2O emission rate. Variance partitioning technique was used to quantify the effect of the microbial communities on the variation in N2O emission.
All AOAamoAand AOBamoA,nirK,nirS, andnosZgene sequences have been deposited in the GenBank Sequence Read Archive under the accession numberPRJNA673095.
PCoA was performed using the free Majorbio I-Sanger Cloud platform. We thank Editage for providing English language editing services.
This research was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (41771335, 41271280, and 41771300), the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2016YFD0200307 and 2017YFD0301504), and the Research Foundation of Education Hunan Province of China (20B529).
We declare that we have no conflicts of interest.
Hong-Ling Qin, Email: huniu@isa.ac.cn.
Maia Kivisaar, University of Tartu.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
All AOAamoAand AOBamoA,nirK,nirS, andnosZgene sequences have been deposited in the GenBank Sequence Read Archive under the accession numberPRJNA673095.
Articles from Applied and Environmental Microbiology are provided here courtesy ofAmerican Society for Microbiology (ASM)
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894