An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Corresponding author at: Northeast Institute of Geography and Agroecology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Harbin, 150081, China.liuxb@iga.ac.cn
Corresponding author at: La Trobe University, Melbourne Campus, Bundoora, Vic 3086, Australia.j.jin@latrobe.edu.au
Jinyuan Zhang, Zhenhua Yu and Yi Gao contribute to this work equally.
Received 2025 Feb 3; Revised 2025 May 14; Accepted 2025 Jun 24; Collection date 2026 Apr.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Keywords:Climate change, Microbial community, Microbial diversity, Paddy field, Soil organic carbon, Straw amendment
Straw amendment did not replenish the mineral-associate C loss under warming.
High temperature destabilized microbial community network of paddy soil.
Warming decreased the abundances of organic C- and N-mineralization genes.
The suppression of microbial metabolisms under warming lowered the straw-C input into SOC.
Growing academic attention has been given to the crucial role of soil microorganisms in the net loss of soil organic carbon (SOC) under climate warming and the effectiveness of straw-C sequestration to replenish the SOC stock. However, the lack of empirical investigations in anaerobic paddy soils hinders accurate estimation of the global soil C-climate feedback and development of countermeasures.
This study aimed to unravel the impact of warming on the complexity of the microbial community network of the paddy soil in response to warming, and correspondent changes of microbial metabolic functions relevant to the transformation of straw-C in SOC pools.
We added13C/15N-labeled rice straw into a long-term paddy soil and incubated under three temperature treatments (25, 35 and 45 °C) for 140 days to quantify straw-C sequestration in various SOC fractions, and further deployed metagenomic sequencing and solid-state13C NMR analyses to explore relevant biochemical mechanisms.
Warming (35 °C and 45 °C vs. 25 °C) enhanced SOC decomposition, but straw amendment did not replenish the loss C in mineral-associated C, a major SOC fraction of this soil, especially at 45 °C. Compared to 25 °C, temperature increases to 35 °C and 45 °C led to decreases in microbial diversity indices by an average of 19 % and 43 %, respectively. Warming also destabilized the microbial community network with less connectivity and keystone nodes in the paddy soil. Furthermore, warming decreased the abundances of organic C- and N-mineralization genes. Those genes encode enzymes involved in the degradation of both labile and recalcitrant organic compounds, including starch, cellulose, hemicellulose, chitin, pectin and aromatics, as well as in N mineralization, such as glutamate dehydrogenase and glutamate synthase. A subsequent deficiency in the synthesis of those enzymes appeared to suppress the transformation of straw-C and N, thereby reducing their sequestration efficiency in the mineral-associated C fraction in the paddy soil.
The detrimental impact of warming on the microbial metabolic profiles lowered the role of straw amendment in sustaining SOC stability under warming. An improved understanding of the warming-induced loss of microbial community diversity and correspondent weakening metabolic functions for the turnover of exogenous C should be accounted for global mitigation practices in paddy fields under climate warming.
Climate warming raises a major concern of destabilizing soil organic carbon (SOC) and increasing the release of CO2from soil, the largest carbon (C) reservoir in the terrestrial systems [1]. Increasing evidence has demonstrated that warming decreases SOC stock with the stimulation of soil CO2efflux, and its impact varies with soil types, and locations or latitude [[1],[2],[3],[4]]. The magnitude of warming impact on SOC essentially depends on how the different SOC components or fractions are degraded, taken the example of an initial loss of soil labile C followed by the degradation of recalcitrant C compounds over time of warming in Harvard Forest [2,5]. Similarly, research on pristine alpine soils, grassland prairies, and agricultural soils has demonstrated that dissolved organic C (DOC) is sensitive to climate warming, resulting in significant reductions in DOC levels [[6],[7],[8]]. While extensive studies have examined the effects of warming on SOC decomposition in upland regions and its potential positive feedback to global climate change [6,[9],[10],[11]], paddy soils represent a distinct case. These soils are characterized by low oxygen and nitrogen (N) availability under anaerobic conditions, which may substantially modulate microbial-driven SOC decomposition rate [12]. However, unlike aerobic upland soils, the anaerobic paddy soils with the global acreage of approximately 165 million ha (https://www.statista.com/statistics), have been relatively overlooked in regard to the SOC stability under climate warming.
Returning rice straw to soil is considered as the most effective approach to maintaining SOC stock under climate warming [10,13]. Whether the mineralized SOC under warming can be replenished with the amount of fresh C input relies on the transformation of fresh C in soil and its contribution to the soil C sequestration. However, the fresh C input can also accelerate the decomposition of existing recalcitrant C through the priming effect by microorganisms [2,14]. Thus, quantifying the straw-C transformation and the mineralization of original SOC under warming is critical to assess the effectiveness of straw amendment to counteract warming-induced destabilization of SOC in paddy soils.
The warming-induced decomposition of SOC and the consequent greenhouse gas emission into the atmosphere are certainly attributed to soil-dwelling microorganisms [4,15]. Climate warming normally stimulates microbial activity, and hence the soil C loss [4,16]. The effect of warming on soil microbiological properties, such as microbial community composition, community succession, microbial growth rate, network complexity and stability, have been reported in grasslands, forests, tundra, and cropping uplands [1,[17],[18],[19],[20],[21]], but few have been done in submerged rice paddies, and on how warming interacts with rice straw amendment on the microbial community. It is particularly noteworthy that anaerobic microbial communities in paddy soils differ markedly from those in upland soils, likely contributing to distinct C cycling dynamics. To our knowledge, however, only methanogenic archaeal communities have been lately investigated in rice field soils under warming conditions [13,22].
Generally, microbial assemblages in response to warming are intrinsically temperature-sensitive or adaptive as temperature may greatly affect their microbial reproduction, metabolic activities, and extracellular enzyme production, which are closely associated with organic matter transformation [17,23]. Alphaproteobacteria and Actinobacteria, for instance, have been demonstrated to be adaptively enriched under soil warming conditions, and are involved in the decomposition of recalcitrant C, which may lower the SOC stability [24,25]. When straws are amended to replenish SOC pools under warming, the looming question here is whether the shift of microbial communities adaptive to warming impacts the straw-C transformation and its sequestration to sustain SOC stability in paddy soils.
Soil microorganisms play a central role in mediating C and N cycling. Recent studies have highlighted the ability of bacteria to metabolize low-rank coal into humified organic matters [26] and degrade organic pollutants to enhance soil quality [27], underscoring the adaptability and functional diversity of microbial communities in various soil environments. In paddy soils, anaerobic conditions significantly influence microbial functions related to SOC decomposition. Due to limited oxygen availability, microbial turnover is slower in those soils, leading to higher microbial C assimilation efficiency compared to upland soils [[28],[29],[30]]. This underscores the need for in-depth investigation into relevant metabolic functions of microorganism. As the microbially-mediated transformation of organic C is essentially coupled with N, advancing our understanding of how microbial community shift under warming mediates the straw-C transformation must anchor on both C and N metabolisms of microorganisms [31,32]. It is interesting with a great difference in C/N ratio between rice straw and soil organic matter, of which transformation under warming is highly dependent and of microbial metabolic preference on organic N mining. The warming-inducted change in the microbial N-relevant metabolisms has been indicated at transcription levels for chitin, nucleic acid and peptidoglycan-degrading enzymes in response to 8 years of 6 °C above the ambient temperature in Icelandic grasslands [31], resulting in correspondent increases of soil organic C and N. However, the information about the effect of warming on microbial functional profile and phylogenetic assemblages in relation to the C-N coupled microbial processes is still lacking.
Moreover, the microbial ecological functioning in response to warming depends on the complexity of microbial community network, which reflects the interconnectivity among microbial taxa in the microbial community through exchanges of materials, energy and information [20]. Under warming conditions, a potential threat to the microbial community is that elevated temperature may act as a selective filter against microbial taxa, leading to destabilization, or even collapse, of microbial network, thereby impairing straw-C and N transformation processes. A deeper understanding of microbial network stability is crucial for developing effective straw amendment strategies to mitigate the impacts of climate warming in paddy ecosystems. Here, by using13C/15N-labeled rice straw combined with metagenomic sequencing, we aimed to elucidate the effect of warming on straw-C transformation and associated microbial community diversity, network complexity and metabolic profile of microbial communities. We expected that the straw amendment would effectively counteract the SOC loss under warming because straw-C input may favour microbial metabolisms towards C and N transformation under warming. However, the effectiveness of the straw-C in stabilizing SOC stocks in paddy soils would be attributed to whether warming disrupts the stability of community network and deteriorates the microbial metabolic profiles on organic C and N transformation.
We collected topsoil (0–15 cm) from a paddy field in northeast China (47° 33′N, 126° 56′E) with a rice-cultivation history of more than four decades. The air-dried soil was passed through a 2-mm sieve. The plant debris and gravels were carefully removed. The soil had the basic properties of SOC 36.9 g kg−1, total N 3.4 g kg−1, NH4+13.3 mg kg−1, NO3−5.8 mg kg−1and pH 6.8 (1:5 H2O).
To accurately quantify the sequestration of straw-derived C and N in SOC fractions and CO2emissions originating from straw, we labelled rice plants using13CO2and15N-labeled urea. The13C/15N dual-labelled straws of rice were produced in 2020. In particular, rice plants were grown in 12 pots with 10 kg of soil loaded into each pot (28 cm diameter and 26 cm depth). Seventy-five mg N kg−1of15N-labeled urea (5 % of15N atom excess) was homogeneously mixed with soil. The seeds were put on damp filter papers at 25 °C for three days before being transferred to a seedbed for 20 days. We transplanted six seedlings into each pot and thinned to three plants after 10 days. The13CO2labelling was conducted 10 times over the growth period. On the13C labelling day, 12 pots were placed in four labelling chambers. Each chamber had the dimension of 120 cm of length and width, and 140 cm height. An air pump (Laisai, Zhejiang, China) was then used to remove12CO2from the chambers by circulating the air through 10 M NaOH solution for 30 min. Na213CO3with 50 % of13C atom excess was dissolved in water and placed inside each chamber, and then achieved CO2concentration of 420 ppm by adding 9 M H2SO4every 30  min for 8  h. A ventilation system was installed inside the growth chamber to evenly mix CO2. During the growth phase, the soil in the pots was constantly submerged in a depth of 3 cm of water. After plants were harvested, plant materials were oven-dried at 70 °C for 3 days, ground and sieved through a 2-mm sieve. The respective straw C and N concentrations were 422 and 11.2 mg g−1; and atom%13C and15N excess were 4.75 % and 1.95 %, respectively.
We conducted a 140-day incubation experiment that comprised three temperature treatments (25 °C, 35 °C and 45 °C), two straw amendments (0 and 20 g kg−1soil) and five replicates in a split-plot design with the temperature treatment as main plots and straw treatment nested within the main plots. As four harvests were conducted on days 3, 30, 60 and 140 of incubation, there were a total of 120 jars in the experiment.
In order to stabilize microbial activity, the soil was pre-incubation for 20 days with 50 % field capacity at 25 °C. Soil moisture was carefully maintained through daily watering by weighing, and thorough mixing. Approximately 25 g (dry soil base) of the pre-incubated soil was put into a sterilized plastic vial (3.5-cm diameter and 6.5-cm height), in which 0.5 g rice straw was also added and mixed thoroughly with soil for the straw-amended treatment. To simulate the anaerobic condition of paddy fields, the soil water content was increased to 72 % to form a wet water film on the surface of soil. Then, the plastic vial was put into a 1-L Mason jar, together with another vial containing 30 mL of NaOH (0.5 mol L−1) to trap CO2. The sealed Mason jars were placed in incubators of designated temperature conditions in the dark. In addition, two blanks (no-soil controls) were established under identical temperature conditions for each treatment. During the incubation, the soil moisture was kept at 72 % or saturated through weighing and watering to create the anaerobic condition.
Five replicate jars were randomly harvested from each treatment at each sampling date. Each sample was divided into three parts, i.e. approximately 18 g of fresh soil for NH4+, NO3–, MBC and dissolved organic C measurements; approximately 2 g stored at −80 °C for subsequent soil DNA extraction and sequencing; the remaining soil air-dried for the determination of SOC fractions and other chemical properties.
Soil respiration was measured on days 6, 12, 21, 30, 40, 50, 60, 80, 100, 120 and 140 of soil incubation with the titration method. The CO2released from soil was trapped in 0.5 M NaOH vials. The 1.0 M SrCl2was used to precipitate CO3–in the trap, followed by a titration with a 0.1 M HCl solution with phenolphthalein as indicator. The SrCO3precipitate was dried at 60 °C, and the δ13C of SrCO3was quantified using an isotope ratio mass spectrometer (Deltaplus, Finnigan MAT, USA).
Soil NH4+and NO3–were extracted with 2 M KCl and then determined with a flow injection auto-analyzer (SKALAR, San++, Netherlands). The MBC was estimated using the fumigation extraction method with a conversion factor (kEC) of 0.38 [33]. The total organic C in the non-fumigated control was DOC. The atom%13C and15N of soil were determined using an isotope ratio mass spectrometer (Deltaplus, Finnigan MAT, USA). An element analyzer (VarioEL III, Hanau, Germany) was employed to measure soil C and N concentrations.
According to Cambardella and Elliott [34], soil was fractionated into particulate organic C (>53 μm) and mineral-associated organic C (<53 μm). Briefly, 30 mL of NaI solution (1.7 g cm−3) was added to 5 g soil, and the solution was then vortexed and spined at 6500 ×gfor 30 min. In order to remove plant debris floating on the supernatant, the supernatant was filtered through a 0.45-µm membrane by a vacuum centrifuge. Subsequently, 30 mL of sodium hexametaphosphate solution (0.5 M) was added into soil and shaken for 17 h (70 r min−1) on a reciprocal shaker (MX-RL-Pro DRAGON LAB, USA). After that, the soil was sieved through a 53-µm sieve with distilled water rinsed for 3 times and then dried at 60 °C for 72 h. Then, soil samples were ground using a ball mill (Retsch MM2000; Retsch, Haan, Germany), before the measurements of total C and N, atom%13C and15N in SOC fractions.
The functional groups of SOC were analyzed by solid-state13C cross-polarization magic-angle-spinning (CPMAS) nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). Before NMR analysis, soils were pre-treated with 2 % hydrofluoric acid to concentrate C and remove paramagnetic compounds. The samples were loaded into zirconia rotors (4-mm diameter) of the Bruker AVANCE NEO 400 WB spectrometer (Bruker BioSpin AG). The test temperature, rotation rate, magic angle and magnetic field strength were 297 K, 8 kHz, 54.7° and 9.39 T, respectively. Approximately 10,000 transients were obtained to generate a spectrum with a signal-to-noise ratio of >10. From the spectra, four chemical shift ranges were distinguished, including alkyl C (0–45 ppm), alkoxy C (45–110 ppm), aromatic C (110–160 ppm), and carbonyl C (160–200 ppm). The stability and aliphatic nature of soil were estimated by alkyl C/O-alkyl C and aliphatic C (0–110 ppm)/aromatic C (110–160 ppm).
We extracted soil DNA from 0.5 g frozen soil using FastDNATMSpin Kit (MP Biomedicals, USA). The concentration and quality of soil DNA sample were determined using a Qubit 4.0 Fluorometer (Invitrogen, San Diego, CA, USA) and a NanoDrop 2000 Spectrophotometer (Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc.), respectively. The V4-V5 region of 16S rRNA gene was targeted for amplification with the primers 515F (GTGCCAGCMGCCGCGG) and 907R (CCGTCAATTCMTTTRAGTTT). The PCR amplification protocol commenced with an initial denaturation step at 95 °C for 2 min, proceeded with 35 cycles that consist of denaturation at 95 °C for 30 s, annealing at 55 °C for 30 s and extension at 72 °C for 45 s, and a final extension phase at 72 °C for 10 min. The PCR products were then purified using an AxyPrepDNA purification kit (AXYGEN, Inc.), before the paired-end sequencing on the Illumina MiSeq platform and the raw data process in the pipeline of Quantitative Insights into Microbial Ecology (QIIME2) (https://qiime.org/). Specifically, the high-quality sequences were clustered into operational taxonomic units (OTU) which were defined at a 97 % similarity threshold using Usearch software (version 7.1). Bacterial OTUs were aligned with the Greengenes-13-8 16S rRNA database (https://greengenes.lbl.gov/). Each sample was rarefied to 23,576 sequences (minimum) for downstream analyses. The initial sequences were deposited in the NCBI database with the accession number of PRJNA945338.
The DNA samples from day 140 of incubation were also used for microbial metagenomic analysis, which was performed on an Illumina HiSeq 4000 platform (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) at Majorbio Bio-pharm Technology Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Regarding sequence quality control, raw metagenomic sequences were subjected to Fastp (version 0.20.0,https://github.com/OpenGene/fastp) to eliminate the adapters. Then, the clean reads were assembled into contigs through ade novoassembly process using Megahit (version 1.1.2). Following the assembly of contigs, those exceeding 300 base pairs were selected for the identification of open reading frames (ORFs) using the MetaGene (https://metagene.cb.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp). The ORFs were then processed with CD-HIT (version 4.6.1) to generate a nonredundant gene catalog, ensuring only unique gene sequences included. The gene catalog underwent taxonomic annotation through BLAST searches against the NCBI Non-Redundant (NR) database. Additionally, the biological functions of the genes were annotated by querying the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (version 94.2) with the Diamond software (version 0.8.35). The KEGG Orthologies of marker genes that are involved in the C and N mineralization and methanogenesis processes were identified and selected in accordance with previous findings [21,[35],[36],[37],[38]]. The raw sequence data obtained from this study were uploaded onto the NCBI Sequence Read Archive with the accession number of PRJNA950955.
Non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) analyses were conducted in R with the vegan package to demonstrate the differences in the β phylogenomic and functional diversity of microbial communities among the treatments. The significance of the difference in microbial community diversity between treatments was assessed with Analysis of Similarities (ANOSIM) and Adonis tests in the vegan package in R. Network modules were graphically represented through the Gephi platform (version 0.9.2). To clarify the variation of bacterial taxa in response to different temperature treatments, the upregulated and downregulated OTUs were estimated and displayed by volcano plots under no-straw and straw amendments. Structural equation modeling (SEM) was conducted with the maximum likelihood method for estimation using AMOS software (version 20.0) from IBM Corporation’s Software Group (Somers, New York, USA).
A canonical correlation analysis (CCA) was conducted to Identify the association of the bacterial community composition with the biochemical characteristics using the program R version 4.4 for Windows. The correlations between C-decomposition gene profile and soil biochemical properties were estimated using the vegan package in R and presented in a heat map [39].
The proportions and contents of straw-derived C and N in soil were calculated using the following equations [40].
where CDFR (%) and NDSR (%) are the percentages of straw-derived C and N, respectively; CDFR and NDFR are the concentrations of C and N derived from straw, respectively;13Csampleand15Nsampleare the13C abundance and15N abundance of soil samples, respectively. The13Cnaturaland15Nnaturalrefer to the13C natural abundance of 1.08 % and15N natural abundance of 0.366 % [41], respectively. The13Cstrawand15Nstrawrefer to the13C abundance (4.75 %) and15N abundance (1.95 %) of straw applied in this study, respectively. In addition, the percentage and content of straw-derived C in soil respiration CO2were also calculated by using the equations (a) and (d), and13Csampleis the13C abundance of SrCO3.
In this study, the data were presented as the average value followed by the standard error. The difference between treatments were statistically compared using the Tukey’s honestly significant difference (HSD) test atp= 0.05 (SPSS 17.0 Inc., Chicago, USA).
In this study, warming significantly decreased mineral-associated organic C (MOC) (p< 0.01) as straw was amended into the paddy soil, but not in the no-straw control. Compared to the no-straw control, straw amendment did not affect MOC at 25 °C. Warming did not change particulate organic C (POC) of the paddy soil while decreased the N concentration in POC and MOC (p< 0.01) (Fig. 1A, B;Table S1). Increasing temperature from 25–45 °C decreased the straw-derived C in MOC by 5 % (p< 0.05), but increased it in POC. Warming did not affect the straw-derived N in POC or MOC (Fig. 1B), but increased straw-C and N retention in the soil (Fig. S1).

The concentrations of total C and straw-derived C (A) and total N and straw-derived N (B) in the particulate (POC) and mineral-associated (MOC) organic C fractions, and relative proportions (%) of different functional groups of soil organic C (C) in paddy soils amended with13C/15N-labeled straw after 140 days of incubation at 25 °C, 35 °C and 45 °C. Within a C fraction, different letters indicate significant differences among treatments atp< 0.05. Error bars represent the standard errors.
Both straw amendment and warming significantly altered the functional groups of SOC (p< 0.01) (Fig. 1C). Compared to 25 °C, warming (35 °C and 45 °C) significantly decreased the aliphatic C/aromatic C and alkyl C/O-alkyl C ratios, irrespective of straw amendment (p< 0.05). Straw amendment significantly increased but warming decreased the alkyl C proportion. The 45 °C treatment resulted in a significant increase of O-alkyl C under straw amendment.
Based on themeta-analysis, in paddy soils across Asian and European locations, warming led to the loss of the α-diversity of microbial community with significant decreases of microbial richness (Sobs, Ace and Chao) and Shannon diversity, but an increase of Simpsons index (known as D) (p< 0.05), indicating low evenness (Fig. S2). The warming influence on those diversity indices was greater at 45 °C than 35 °C. A similar trend was found in a paddy soil from midsouth China with increasing temperature from 5–25 °C (Fig. S3). The increase of temperature considerably altered the β-diversity of microbial communities in a similar pattern across geographic locations with Firmicutes being highly enriched but most phyla such as Chloroflexi, Acidobacteriota, Proteobacteria, Bacteroidota and Actinobacteriota and the affiliated genera being suppressed, especially at 45 °C (Figs. S2 and S4).
In the present study, the addition of rice straw significantly increased the microbial richness and diversity indices by an average of 8 % at 25 °C (Fig. S5) whereas increasing temperature to 35 °C and 45 °C decreased these indices by average 19 % and 43 %, respectively, leading to a significant interaction of straw and temperature (p< 0.01). Straw amendment also progressively altered the β-diversity of microbial community over time, while high temperature (45 °C) drove the community towards to a similar composition regardless straw amendment (p< 0.01) (Fig. 2). Thus, high temperature, rather than straw was the main factor determining the soil bacterial community composition. Further microbial network analysis showed that increasing temperature markedly decreased the numbers of nodes, keystones and edges, and the average degree, irrespective of straw amendment (Fig. 3A), indicating that microbial network turned to be unstable under warming conditions. Among keystone phyla, Actinobacteriota, Bacteriodota and Proteobacteria displayed lower abundances in response to warming (Fig. 3B). The volcano plots indicated that the proportion of downregulated OTUs turned to greater with increasing temperature regardless straw amendment, indicating that warming led to lower OTU abundance (Fig. 3C). Interestingly, straw amendment further decreased the proportion of downregulated OTUs under warming, resulting in significant interaction between straw and warming.

Non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) analysis of bacterial communities in response to straw amendment at 25 °C, 35 °C and 45 °C after 3 and 140 days of incubation (A) and the relative abundances of dominant phyla with relative abundances of >1 % on 140 days (B). Arrows in the panel (A) indicate the dynamics of soil microbial communities over time for each treatment.

The microbial network with topological properties (A) and relative abundances of the keystones’ phyla (B) in a paddy soil in response to straw amendment at 25 °C, 35 °C and 45 °C. Volcano plots showing the significantly upregulated and downregulated bacteria OTUs under warming (C). The percentages represent the proportions of OTUs that showed significant differences between the warming treatments.
Both warming and straw amendment significantly increased soil respiration rate within the initial 60 days of incubation (p< 0.01) (Fig. S6A and B). Increasing temperature to 35 °C and 45 °C enhanced cumulative soil respiration by an average of 37 % at the end of incubation (p< 0.001), indicating an acceleration of SOC decomposition in response to warming. When straw was amended, increasing temperature from 25 °C to 35 °C increased soil cumulative respiration by 27 % by day 140, but no difference between 25 °C and 45 °C. Moreover, the Q10for 35–45 °C was significantly lower than for 25–35 °C, and straw amendment significantly decreased Q10(Fig. S6C), indicating that straw amendment alleviated the warming stimulation on microbial activity, but this was effective only at 35 °C. As a result, warming to 35 °C increased the cumulative straw-derived CO2-C as well as soil-derived CO2-C (Fig. S7A, B). The smaller proportion of straw-derived CO2-C in the total CO2release (Fig. S7C) inferred the greater influence of warming on soil-derived CO2-C than straw-derived CO2-C. However, 45 °C suppressed those measurements. The less primed C (Fig. S7D) and MBC together with an increase in dissolved organic C (Fig. S8) under 45 °C (cf. 35 °C) further reflected the deescalating microbial attributes to SOC decomposition.
The NMDS analysis on metagenomic data showed that warming markedly changed the profiles of organic C and N mineralization genes (Fig. 4A, B) and total functional genes (Fig. 4C), irrespective of straw amendment. The straw-induced change in the profile of soil microbial functional genes was greater under 35 °C than 45 °C, indicating that high temperature became the dominant factor driving the microbial functional diversity regarding C and N mineralization. Specifically, 140 days of incubation at 45 °C, irrespective of straw amendment, resulted in a significant decrease in the abundances of organic C-decomposition genes (p< 0.01), such as genes coding decomposition of starch, cellulose, hemicellulose, chitin, pectin and aromatics, compared with 25 °C (Fig. 4A;Table S1). The temperature of 35 °C significantly decreased the abundances of genes coding cellulose and hemicellulose decomposition with the straw amendment. Similarly, warming led to a significant decrease in the abundance of methanogen genes under the straw amendment (Fig. S9). Furthermore, the abundance of N-mineralization genes, such as the genes coding glutamate dehydrogenase and glutamate synthase, exhibited a similar trend in response to warming (Fig. 4B). The number of C- and N-mineralization relevant genera were indicated in volcano plots (Fig. S10). High temperatures increased the proportion of downregulated genera containing the C and N mineralization genes, irrespective of straw amendment.

Non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) analysis on profiles of C-degradation genes (A), N-mineralization genes (B) and total metagenomic genes (C) with their respective normalized reads in response to straw amendment at 25 °C, 35 °C and 45 °C. Different letters indicate significant differences among treatments atp< 0.05. Error bars represent the standard errors (n = 3).
The community composition was positively associated with soil-derived CO2-C across the treatments in this study (Fig. 5A), indicating that warming-induced shift of microbial community composition towards SOC decomposition and was persistent even with straw amendment. Further evidence was that the microbial community diversity and network nodes were also positively associated (p< 0.05) with alkyl C, alkyl C/O-alkyl C ratio and MOC concentration (Fig. 5B). Moreover, the SEM demonstrated that warming negatively affected network complexity (p< 0.001), which detrimentally influenced the metabolic function of C-mineralization genes (Fig. 6). However, straw amendment did not pose a direct impact on microbial community network under warming conditions (p> 0.05). The C-mineralization genes fundamentally determined the SOC chemical composition as indicated with alkyl-C/O-alkyl-C ratio (Fig. 6A). Those microbial functional genes downregulated by warming also directly influenced the straw-C sequestration in the POC fraction (Fig. 6B). The negative association of straw-derived CO2with MOC-13C demonstrated the unfavourable influence of warming on straw-C sequestration in MOC.

Canonical correspondence analysis on soil microbial communities in relation to edaphic variables (A) and heat map of correlations between soil biochemical traits and C decomposition gene profile (B) in paddy soils incubated with straw at 25 °C, 35 °C and 45 °C for 140 days. Line width is proportional to the partial Mantel’s r value, and line color denotes the statistical significance based on 999 permutations (orange,p< 0.05; grey,p≥ 0.05). Pairwise comparisons of biochemical traits are also shown, with a gradient of orange and blue colors and size of square denoting Pearson’s correlation coefficients. Thepvalues were adjusted for multiple testing with the Bonferroni-Holm method. SOC, POC and MOC refer to soil organic C, particulate organic C and mineral-associated organic C, respecitvely. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Structural equation model (SEM) indicates the direct and indirect influences of warming and straw amendment on microbial community diversity and function in relation to soil organic C (SOC) chemical composition and particulate (POC) and mineral-associated (MOC) organic C fractions (A) and straw-C sequestration (B). TheR2values denote the proportions of variance explained by relationships with other variables in SEM. The values above the arrows denote the standardized path coefficients indicating a positive (positive values on blue lines) or negative effect (negative values on red lines). The width of the arrows indicates the strength of the causal relationship. Solid and dashed lines represent significant and insignificant paths, respectively (*,p< 0.05; **,p< 0.01; ***,p< 0.001). The overall model fit was satisfactory (A: Fisher’s C = 69.37;P= 0.54; df = 18; B: Fisher’s C = 43.29;P= 0.62; df = 18). (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Warming accelerated the soil C loss in the paddy soil, while the straw amendment did not compensate for the loss over time. In this study, the warming-induced increase of CO2release from soil (Figs. S6 and S7) and marginal decrease of MOC reflected a stimulation of the SOC decomposition and subsequent unstable SOC stock, which is consistent with the previous findings in numerous ecosystems in response to rising global temperature [31,42]. However, against the hypothesis, the attempt of C trade-off with straw amendment exhibited a repercussion of the irreversible decrease of MOC, a major SOC fraction in the paddy soil, under warming conditions (Fig. 1). Moreover, the significant decrease of alkyl C and carboxyl C proportions supported the degradation of recalcitrant soil C in response to warming, irrespective of straw input (Fig. 1), and this might mainly occur in MOC because alkyl C normally binds with clay particles in the MOC fraction, leading to longer residence time compared to other functional groups binding with larger soil particles [[43],[44],[45]]. The observed decrease in the alkyl C/O-alkyl C ratio under warming conditions (Fig. 1) indicates a shift from stable to more labile C forms, suggesting that SOC becomes more susceptible to microbial degradation and less likely to be sequestered over the long term [21]. This decline in the alkyl C/O-alkyl C ratio may reflect the decomposition of MOC, which constitutes the dominant fraction of SOC. Here, considering the intrinsic link between C with N cycling [46], correspondent decreases in straw-N and total N concentration in the MOC fraction in response to warming (Fig. 1) provide empirical evidence that warming slows down the transformation of straw-N and C to replenish the MOC fraction. Therefore, straw amendment does not revert the trend that warming climate drives the SOC into vulnerable or unstable status due to the accelerated mineralization of recalcitrant forms of soil organic matter (C- and N-contained compounds). Although increasing temperature increased the C concentration and straw-C in the POC fraction (Fig. 1), the organic C in this fraction is readily accessible by microorganisms and easily decomposed, which does not favour soil C sequestration in the long term.
The SOC turnover and straw-C sequestration under warming are intrinsically associated with correspondent changes in microbial phylogenetic and functional diversities [31]. In this study, warming dramatically decreased the microbial population (Fig. 4andFig. S7) and diversity, irrespective of straw amendment (Fig. 1andFig. S5). The loss of microbial community diversity would be attributed to the detrimental effect of high temperature on the microbial species sensitive to high temperature (Fig. 1), and this effect is likely to be universal as the similar response patterns have been found in paddy soils across different continents. Recent studies have also demonstrated that sensitive microbial species may consequently become extinct under warming together with coextinction cascades in other species [17,47]. With six years of climate warming in a grassland field trial in the US Great Plains, Wu et al. also demonstrated a 9.6 % decrease of bacterial community richness in soil [17], further indicating strong filtering effect of warming on existing microbial species.
Moreover, increasing temperature decreased the network complexity and stability of the microbial community, irrespective of straw amendment (Fig. 3). The simplified structure of microbial network under warming likely results in vulnerable ecological functions performed by microorganisms in paddy soils, and this trend was not reverted under straw amendment (Figs. 6 and 7). However, contradictory results have been reported in grassland and forest uplands with more diverse microbial community and complex microbial network [20,24]. The smaller increase in temperature (3.6–5 °C) in their studies in comparison to our present study led to different microbial community responses because warming at 35 °C and 45 °C may exceed the growth tolerance of some microbial taxa, especially in the soils located in the temperate regions with annual temperature of approximately 2 °C. Thus, the majority of soil microbial communities in this paddy soil are likely sensitive to warming as indicated with lowered Q10 when the temperature rose from 35–45 °C compared with that from 25–35 °C (Fig. S6).
The impact of warming on the stability of microbial network led to the reduction of the community metabolic functions as indicated by the SEM (Fig. 6) and the heat map (Fig. 5). The considerable decreases in the abundances of organic C and N-mineralization genes coding decomposition of cellulose, hemicellulose and aromatics, and glutamate dehydrogenase (Fig. 4), as well as the weakened microbial metabolic potentials under warming may suppress the transformation of new C and N, as indicated by the decrease in straw-derived C and N in the MOC fraction under warming (Fig. 1,Fig. 6). However, the suppression of those mineralization genes under warming did not account for the increased CO2release (Figs. S5, S6 and S9), inferring that catabolic reaction processes rather than anabolic reactions are the dominant metabolisms. In addition, as part of C cycling, methane emission is also enhanced under warming conditions [48], which may contribute to the soil C loss. However, the methanogen genes were not enriched under warming in this study (Fig. S9), generating an assumption of the warming-induced change in specific capability of those methanogens on methanogenesis. Theoretically, high temperature increases microbial maintenance cost with high energy demand and low microbial C-use efficiency [[49],[50],[51]]. The lowered microbial biomass C and increased DOC concentration in response to warming, especially at 45 °C in this study (Fig. S8), and similar findings in the relevantmeta-analysis across terrestrial ecosystems [51] support this view.
The enriched Firmicutes under warming in this study may be responsible for the escalating decomposition of SOC. Firmicutes are normally recovered from higher temperature (>35 °C) via upregulating heat shock proteins and enzymes that maintain cellular integrity and functions [18]. Thus, they are considered asr-selected thermal generalists [17]. Previous studies have demonstrated that Firmicutes possess divergent strategies to invest extra energy to anaerobic fermentation pathways, because they can produce ATP by supplementing respiration with fermentation [52,53]. Moreover, Firmicutes likely play an important role in anaerobic decomposition of organic polymer, especially during the initial cellulose cleavage [54]. However, under elevated temperatures, Firmicutes may shift their metabolic strategies toward catabolic processes rather than C mineralization [18,55]. The divergent response of Firmicute abundance and reduced abundance of C mineralization genes under warming likely reflected the relatively low representation of those genes within Firmicute genomes. The decline in the abundance of functional gene may result from warming-driven selection pressures that filter out microbial taxa harboring those genes [31]. Thus, the simultaneous enrichment of Firmicutes and reduction in the abundance of C-mineralization genes under warming conditions can be attributed to shifts in microbial community composition, the functional traits of dominant taxa, and altered metabolic priorities. Firmicutes probably possess the function of preferentially metabolizing xyloglucan and chitin (aminopolysaccharide polymer), supporting the decreased N concentration in the MOC fraction under warming in this study (Fig. 1). However, with the adaptability of Firmicutes to high temperatures, whether its function of mineralizing N-contained organic compounds is prevailing under warming, requires further test, specifically its metabolic activities on soil organic N mineralization in the MOC fraction with low C/N ratios than other SOC fractions or straw.
Straw amendment did not mitigate the enhanced decomposition of SOC and mineralization of organic N in the paddy soil under warming, leading to the depletion of C and N in the MOC fraction. This was attributed to the warming-induced loss of the microbial community diversity and unstable network that linked to the detrimental disturbance on microbial metabolic processes including the C and N mineralization, and thus suppressed the straw turnover to replenish C and N in the MOC fraction in paddy soils, especially under high temperatures. Under climate warming scenario, the paddy soil ecosystems become vulnerable in terms of low diverse and unstable microbial communities, and reduction of its eco-functions on organic turnover, thus leading to the limitation of straw amendment as a strategy to sustain SOC and improve soil ecological resilience to the warming world in the future. Considering the selective pressure exerted by warming on microbial community diversity, biological strategies such as application of biofertilizer or thermotolerant synthetic microbial communities (SynComs) may effectively restore microbial ecological functions related to straw-C transformation and sequestration in paddy soils.
This article does not contain any studies with human or animal subjects.
Jinyuan Zhang:Investigation, Data curation, Writing – original draft.Zhenhua Yu:Methodology, Resources, Supervision, Formal analysis.Yi Gao:Formal analysis, Validation.Yansheng Li:Resources, Formal analysis.Xiaojing Hu:Formal analysis, Software.Haidong Gu:Software, Validation.Caixian Tang:Validation, Funding acquisition, Writing – review & editing.Judong Liu:Methodology, Resources.Junjie Liu:Investigation.Shaoqing Zhang:Resources, Formal analysis.Xinqi Sima:Investigation, Data curation.Guanghua Wang:Supervision, Writing – review & editing.Pengfei Liu:Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing.Yichao Rui:Formal analysis.Ashley Franks:Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Writing – review & editing.Xiaobing Liu:Funding acquisition, Writing – review & editing, Supervision.Jian Jin:Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Writing – review & editing, Supervision.
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
This work was funded by Chinese Academy of Sciences International Partnership Project (131323KYSB20210004), the Postdoctoral Fellowship Program of CPSF (GZC20232640), the Strategic Priority Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (XDA28020201), Australian Research Council (DP210100775), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (42407605).
Supplementary data to this article can be found online athttps://doi.org/10.1016/j.jare.2025.06.075.
Xiaobing Liu, Email: liuxb@iga.ac.cn.
Jian Jin, Email: j.jin@latrobe.edu.au.
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:
Data will be made available on request.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
Data will be made available on request.
Articles from Journal of Advanced Research are provided here courtesy ofElsevier
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894