An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Electronic supplementary material is available online athttps://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.c.7441762.
Corresponding author.
Received 2024 Mar 18; Revised 2024 Jul 17; Accepted 2024 Aug 2; Collection date 2024 Sep.
Published by the Royal Society. All rights reserved.
Nutrient addition, particularly nitrogen, often increases plant aboveground biomass but causes species loss. Asymmetric competition for light is frequently assumed to explain the biomass-driven species loss. However, it remains unclear whether other factors such as water can also play a role. Increased aboveground leaf area following nitrogen addition and warming may increase transpiration and cause water limitation, leading to a decline in diversity. To test this, we conducted field measurements in a grassland community exposed to nitrogen and water addition, and warming. We found that warming and/or nitrogen addition significantly increased aboveground biomass but reduced species richness. Water addition prevented species loss in either nitrogen-enriched or warmed treatments, while it partially mitigated species loss in the treatment exposed to increases in both temperature and nitrogen. These findings thus strongly suggest that water limitation can be an important driver of species loss as biomass increases after nitrogen addition and warming when soil moisture is limiting. This result is further supported by a meta-analysis of published studies across grasslands worldwide. Our study indicates that loss of grassland species richness in the future may be greatest under a scenario of increasing temperature and nitrogen deposition, but decreasing precipitation.
Keywords:biodiversity, nitrogen deposition, primary productivity, rainfall, rising temperature, soil water content
Climate warming and nutrient enrichment, two prominent environmental changes resulting from anthropogenic activities, significantly alter diversity and functions of terrestrial plant communities [1,2]. Many field experiments have found that warming increased aboveground biomass [3–5] but reduced plant diversity [6–9]. Warming-induced decline in plant diversity may be attributed to the exclusion of certain species with relatively low thermal tolerance [10]. Alternatively, warming increases evapotranspiration and reduces soil water content, and thus may lead to loss of species with low drought tolerance [9,11,12]. Experimentally adding nutrients, such as nitrogen, often increases aboveground biomass but reduces diversity in many plant communities [13–18]. Although this result has been demonstrated in numerous experiments globally, the mechanisms driving species loss are still under debate. The biomass-driven competition hypothesis is often proposed to explain plant species loss after nutrient addition. This hypothesis postulates that increased nutrient availability would increase plant aboveground biomass and cover, and intensify interspecific light competition, thus leading to a decline in species richness [19–22]. Taller plant species with more competitive advantages may overshadow shorter ones, and this size-asymmetric competition for light would lead to the exclusion of shorter species [21,23–25].
Other important mechanisms have also been suggested to explain plant species loss after nutrient addition. The niche dimension hypothesis suggests that species coexistence requires niche partitioning through differences in resource requirements, with limiting resources acting as ‘niche axes’ [22]. Therefore, adding soil nutrients reduces niche dimensionality, which limits the number of species that can coexist [15,19,26]. The nitrogen detriment hypothesis states that increasing soil nitrogen causes stress by changing abiotic and biotic conditions, such as soil acidification [27], ammonium ion toxicity [28,29] and soil microbial communities [30]. In addition, root competition belowground for other soil resources [19,31,32] may also cause species loss. The degree to which various mechanisms drive species loss under nutrient addition may depend on the environmental context. For example, soil water limitation may occur in water-limited drylands once nutrient limitation is relaxed. Therefore, understanding the mechanism leading to species loss under nutrient addition requires further examination given that multiple factors may lead to lower diversity in plant communities.
Soil water is a crucial resource determining plant diversity in terrestrial ecosystems, especially in arid and semi-arid regions [33–35]. Field studies found that plant diversity increased with water addition but decreased with partial exclusion of ambient rainwater [36–38], probably due to lower soil water content in response to altered rainfall regimes [39,40], thereby affecting species coexistence [41]. Furthermore, nutrient addition has been shown to negatively affect soil moisture [26]. A recent study in a semi-arid grassland community showed that contrary to the light competition hypothesis, taller plant species were more likely to lose after nitrogen and CO2enrichment, probably due to reduced soil water availability [32]. Analogous to biomass-driven light competition, increased aboveground biomass after nutrient addition and warming can increase water demand due to increased leaf area and plant transpiration [42], which may lead to elevated soil water consumption [32] and thus potentially intensify water limitation and belowground competition.
Accounting for the potential role of water, we proposed the biomass-driven water limitation hypothesis as an explanation for species loss under nutrient enrichment. If water limitation causes loss of plant species under nitrogen addition and warming, adding water would mitigate this limitation, and thus species richness should not decline. If light competition causes species loss after nitrogen addition, we would expect less significant species decline in dry regions because light should not be a major limiting factor where biomass production potential is low. To test these hypotheses, we performed a multi-factorial (nitrogen, temperature and water) field experiment in a semi-arid grassland and compared aboveground biomass and species richness with and without water addition when nitrogen and temperature were increased. To assess the generality of these hypotheses, we also conducted a meta-analysis on nitrogen, temperature and water treatments across grasslands worldwide. We expected that the main driver of species loss would shift from water limitation to other mechanisms, such as light competition, as water availability increases.
Increasing water (W), temperature (T) and nitrogen (N) had significant effects on plant aboveground biomass and species richness (electronic supplementary material, table S3). Further post hoc multiple comparisons showed that all treatments individually increased aboveground biomass, with the largest positive effect observed under all three treatments combined—including a significant three-way interaction among them (WNT;figure 1a, electronic supplementary material, table S3 and table S4). Nitrogen addition and/or warming significantly reduced grass and whole community species richness (N, T, NT;figure 1b, electronic supplementary material, table S4 and figure S4) relative to ambient levels. Consistent with our hypothesis that water addition can mitigate biomass-driven species loss, nitrogen and/or temperature combined with water (WN, WT, WNT) had significantly greater species richness than the corresponding treatments without adding water (N, T, NT;figure 1b, electronic supplementary material, table S4). This result clearly demonstrates that water addition mitigated the negative effects of nitrogen addition and warming on species richness (figure 1b, electronic supplementary material, table S3). In fact, both total and forb species richness under water plus nitrogen (WN) were significantly greater than the ambient level (figure 1band electronic supplementary material, figure S4B). Water addition almost fully counteracted the negative effect of warming, as water plus temperature (WT) had similar species richness to ambient conditions. Notably, species richness under triple treatments (WNT) was significantly greater than nitrogen plus temperature (NT) but still lower than ambient, suggesting that water addition can only partially mitigate species loss caused by simultaneous increases in temperature and nitrogen (figure 1b, electronic supplementary material, table S3).

Responses of plant aboveground biomass (a) and species richness (b) to increased water, nitrogen and temperature in field measurements. Boxes show the 25th and 75th percentiles, and the black circles are the means. The horizontal dashed lines show the means under ambient conditions. Different letters indicate significant differences atp< 0.05. The full statistics are presented in electronic supplementary material, table S4.
Across all the eight treatments, species richness significantly decreased with increasing aboveground biomass (figure 2a, electronic supplementary material, table S5). Species richness was significantly greater and it decreased significantly less with increasing aboveground biomass in treatments of water addition compared with treatments that were not watered, as suggested by the slopes and intercepts of the two regression lines infigure 2a(electronic supplementary material, table S5). Soil water content was generally greater under water addition treatments than ambient, while soil water content was lower under warming and nitrogen addition (figure 2b). Species richness significantly increased with soil water content (figure 2b, electronic supplementary material, table S5), further suggesting that water availability is an important driver of species loss under warming and nitrogen addition. The structural equation model revealed that water addition increased plant species richness, while nitrogen addition or warming reduced species richness (figure 2c). Soil water was negatively linked to aboveground biomass (figure 2c), which was consistent with our expectation that larger aboveground biomass under nitrogen addition or warming would cause greater water demand and consumption. Increasing water, nitrogen and temperature increased aboveground biomass, and then reduced species richness (figure 2c), thus suggesting the existence of biomass-driven species loss. The positive effect of soil water on species richness (0.35 ± 0.06) was comparable to the negative effect (−0.39 ± 0.06) of aboveground biomass on richness (figure 2c). Thus, increased soil moisture by water addition can largely mitigate biomass-driven species loss. Nitrogen addition reduced soil pH (figure 2c). Contrary to expectation, we observed a negative, not positive, effect of soil pH on species richness.

Effects of aboveground biomass and soil moisture on species richness. Data were field measurements from a grassland community under increased water (W), temperature (T) and nitrogen (N). AMB is the ambient condition. Regressions were estimated by linear mixed-effects models, with year as the random effect. Changes in plant species richness with (a) aboveground biomass and (b) soil water content across different treatments. (a) According to the standardized major axis regression analysis, the intercept of the linear regression of richness-biomass was significantly greater while the slope was significantly lower in water addition treatments (W, WN, WT, WNT) than those without watering (AMB, N, T, NT) (see electronic supplementary material, table S5 for detailed statistics). (b) In each treatment, soil water content was measured in one replicate, therefore, we conducted an overall regression for the eight treatments (electronic supplementary material, table S5). (c,d) Structural equation model testing the direct and indirect effects of resource addition and warming on species richness. (c) Significant path coefficients and standard errors of the model describing the strength and sign of the relationships among the variables are shown adjacent to the arrows (significance: ***p< 0.001; **p< 0.01; *p< 0.05). Non-significant coefficients are not shown for simplicity. Model fit statistics: chi-square (χ2) = 7.51,pvalue (p) = 0.06, goodness of fit index (GFI) = 0.99, comparative fit index (CFI) = 0.99, root-mean-square error of approximation (RMSEA) = 0.09. (d) Standardized effects of increased temperature, and water and nitrogen addition on species richness.
We further compared plant species composition in each treatment to explore which species were likely to lose under nitrogen addition or warming (figure 3). Compared with the ambient condition, the grassPoa annuaL. and the forbIxeridium dentatum(Thunb.) Tzvel. were not observed under the nitrogen and warming treatments (N, T, NT). However, both species were observed under the ambient and water addition treatments (W, WN, WT, WNT). Additionally, other species (e.g.Plantago asiaticaL.;Saussurea japonica(Thunb.) DC.;Aster hispidusThunb;Leymus secalinus(Georgi) Tzvelev) also exhibited similar decreasing patterns under nitrogen and warming treatments, although the declines were not significant compared with ambient conditions (figure 3). These results further indicated that water addition mitigated species loss driven by water limitation under nitrogen addition and warming.

Plants species observed in each experimental treatment. The plant species are:Poa annuaL. (Poa),Ixeridium dentatum(Thunb.) Tzvel. (Id),Plantago asiaticaL. (Pla),Braya humilis(C. A. Mey.) B. L. Rob. (Bh),Saussurea japonica(Thunb.) DC. (Sj),Aster hispidusThunb. (Ah),Leymus secalinus(Georgi) Tzvelev (Ls),Stipa capillataL. (Sc),Artemisia capillarisThunb (Ac) andMedicago sativaL. (Ms). Species names with different colours represent different functional groups: blue represents grasses and orange represents forbs. The frequency is quantified as the proportion of plots where plant species were observed in four replicated plots under a treatment, then averaged over the years 2018 to 2022. Compared with the ambient, + and − signs suggest significant increase and decrease (p< 0.05), respectively. (b) Diagram showing changes in grassland community under increased nitrogen and temperature.
The findings from our field experiment were generally supported by our meta-analysis across grasslands worldwide, whereby water and nitrogen addition increased aboveground biomass, whereas warming had a non-significant negative effect (figure 4a). In the meta-analysis we found large across-study variation in the responses of aboveground biomass to warming, and our field experimental results fell within this range of variability (electronic supplementary material, figure S3). Compared with ambient conditions, species richness on average significantly declined with nitrogen addition and/or warming, but increased or did not change under water addition (W, WN) treatments (figure 4b).

Meta-analysis of responses of plant aboveground biomass (a) and species richness (b) to increased water, nitrogen and temperature. The weighted mean response ratio summarized the effect sizes of all independent studies. The error bars represent the 95% confidence intervals and indicate a significant response (filled circles) when not overlapping with zero. The numbers adjacent to each circle are the weighted mean response ratio, confidence intervals and sample sizes of each treatment. We did not include species richness data for the water plus temperature treatment, nor biomass/species data for the triple treatment in the meta-analysis because of a lack of data in the literature.
We also explored the association between species richness and soil water across grassland sites compiled in our meta-analysis (figure 5). Under ambient conditions, species richness and soil water showed a unimodal relationship, with peak richness occurring at 45% soil water content (figure 5a). Nitrogen addition and warming tended to reduce species richness across the soil water gradient (figure 5b,c). Water addition tended to increase species richness in grasslands with lower soil water availability but reduced species richness in grasslands with greater soil water content (figure 5d, electronic supplementary material, figure S5). Specifically, when soil water content was below 30%, water addition (W, WN) increased both aboveground biomass and species richness (figure 6). Compared with the significant negative effect of nitrogen addition on species richness, water addition mitigated species loss caused by nitrogen (figure 6b). Under greater soil water content, water addition increased aboveground biomass but tended to decrease (non-significant) species richness (figure 6). Furthermore, when soil water content was below 30%, water reduction decreased both aboveground biomass and species richness, thus supporting the water limitation hypothesis (electronic supplementary material, figure S7). By comparison, water reduction decreased aboveground biomass but had no significant effect on species richness under greater soil water content (electronic supplementary material, figure S7).

Meta-analysis of plant species richness responses across the soil water gradient in global grasslands. (a) All species richness data under ambient conditions. Ambient and treatment data from (b) nitrogen addition, (c) warming (temperature, T; temperature and nitrogen, TN) and (d) water addition (water W; water and nitrogen, WN). Regressions were estimated by linear mixed-effects models, with site as the random effect. We selected linear and nonlinear models based on Akaike information criterion. According to the standardized major axis regression analysis, the linear regressions differed significantly between ambient and nitrogen addition but not between ambient and water addition (see electronic supplementary material, table S6 for detailed statistics).

Responses of aboveground biomass (a) and species richness (b) to water and nitrogen addition with increasing soil water content. The weighted mean response ratios summarized the effect sizes of independent study sites in three soil water content ranges. The error bars represent the 95% confidence intervals and indicate a significant response (filled circles) when not overlapping with zero. Species richness under warming did not change significantly with soil water and the datapoints were relatively small (figure 5c), thus we did not include this treatment in the analysis.
Using a field experiment in a grassland community exposed to nitrogen and water addition, and warming along with a meta-analysis across grasslands worldwide, our study collectively revealed that water limitation critically drives species loss after nitrogen addition and warming. We found that warming and/or nitrogen addition significantly increased aboveground biomass but reduced species richness. However, water addition combined with nitrogen and/or warming, showed consistently and significantly greater species richness than the corresponding treatments without watering (figure 1b; electronic supplementary material, figure S4B), further supporting the water limitation hypothesis. The finding of water limitation provides a likely mechanism underlying the contrasting effects of water and nitrogen additions on grassland plant diversity [43], and yields new insight into grassland biodiversity conservation.
The effects of nitrogen addition and warming on species richness are mediated through both increased aboveground biomass and reduced soil water availability. However, increasing soil moisture through water addition can largely mitigate biomass-driven species loss (figure 2c). Our findings supported the biomass-driven water limitation hypothesis. Increased plant aboveground biomass under nitrogen addition increases leaf area, which consumes more soil water by transpiration [42]. Increased leaf area would also increase rainfall interception and canopy evaporation and thus decrease rainwater infiltration into soil [44]. Indeed, lower soil water content was observed following nitrogen addition (electronic supplementary material, figure S8) [26,45]. Warming also increased aboveground biomass and consequently reduced soil water content (figure 2c). Warming can also directly reduce soil water content (figure 2c) through increasing vapour pressure deficit and evaporative water loss [32,46,47]. Previous research has proposed that the average supply rate of the most limiting resource controlled plant species diversity [48]. When nitrogen and temperature increase, lower soil water availability reduced species richness.
Once soil water content was insufficient to meet the increasing demands for plant water uptake, species with weaker competitive ability for water or lower water use efficiency might be excluded in the nitrogen and warming treatments. In our field experiments, plant species characterized by relatively low root biomass and thus potentially with low water uptake ability [49], such asIxeridium dentatum(Thunb.) Tzvel. andPoa annuaL., rarely existed in plots with warming and nitrogen but no water addition (figure 3). However, when water addition was combined with nitrogen addition or warming, the two species persisted, supporting the water limitation hypothesis (figure 3). Therefore, these findings strongly suggest that water addition can mitigate species loss caused by nitrogen addition and warming.
Our field experiment using two resource addition treatments along with warming provided a unique test of the biomass-driven species loss hypothesis. Specifically, our field experiment found that when facing simultaneous increases in temperature and nitrogen, a current trend that is projected to intensify in many parts of the globe [50], water addition (36% increase in annual precipitation in our study) might only partially mitigate decline in species richness. First, among all cases, the triple treatments (WNT) resulted in the largest plant aboveground biomass, and thus greatest demand for soil water. Moreover, light limitation may play a role when aboveground biomass is the largest. Second, both warming and nitrogen addition led to a decline in species richness [7,45], and their combined negative effect may surpass the positive impact of water addition (figure 2d). This finding also indicated that the loss of species may be greatest in grasslands where temperature and nitrogen deposition will increase while precipitation decreases, a potentially widespread phenomenon because several studies have found increases in aridity at regional and global scales [51].
Compared with ambient conditions, species richness significantly increased under the water plus nitrogen treatment (figure 1b), with a non-significant increase in aboveground biomass. Therefore, the increase in species richness should not be linked to the biomass-driven competition hypothesis. Water and nitrogen addition increased soil nutrient and moisture levels, which may enhance seed germination and species richness in semi-arid ecosystems [52]. We observed that the frequencies of forb species increased under WN treatments (figure 3). Thus, water addition may have dual effects on species richness: (i) mitigating biomass-driven water limitation and (ii) increasing seed germination. Increases in both water and temperature did not change species richness significantly, likely because the increased moisture post-watering and the increased evaporation post-warming cancelled each other out.
Both field experiments and meta-analyses suggest a positive link between species richness and soil water content in relatively dry environments. In our field study, species richness and soil water content had a positive linear relationship (figure 2b), whereas in the meta-analysis, the relationship was nonlinear (figure 5a). The primary reason is that the soil water content range in the experiment was 8.5–12.5%, but in the meta-analysis ranged from 10% to 55%. The linear relationship observed in the experiment fell within the ascending phase of the nonlinear relationship found in the meta-analysis. Therefore, the results from the experiment and the meta-analysis were consistent.
In our field experiment, nitrogen addition significantly reduced species richness (figure 1b). Photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) did not differ significantly between ambient and nitrogen treatments (electronic supplementary material, figure S6). Harpoleet al. [53] suggested that light limitation can be an important contributor to diversity loss, though it is not a universal mechanism. Other mechanisms, such as water limitation found in our study, can explain the decline in species richness (electronic supplementary material, figure S8).
Compared with the ambient condition, PAR was significantly lower under the warming treatment at 0–10 cm (electronic supplementary material, figure S6). Moreover, the negative link between species richness and biomass was slightly stronger than the positive link between species richness and soil water content (figure 2c). Thus, light competition [14,54] may play a role in species loss, and different mechanisms are not mutually exclusive [53]. Our meta-analysis supported this hypothesis by demonstrating that the effects of water addition on species richness tended to decrease with increasing soil water availability across grasslands, and the effects of water addition turned from positive to negative in grasslands with greater soil water content (figures 5dand6b). Therefore, water addition had a positive effect on species richness and prevented species loss in arid grasslands, supporting the water limitation hypothesis. Conversely, in mesic grasslands, water addition showed negative effects on species richness and did not prevent species loss (figure 6), suggesting that other mechanisms, including light competition, may be the primary driver of species loss as demonstrated in field experiments [13–16,54].
In this study, nitrogen addition indirectly reduced plant species richness mainly through its positive effect on aboveground biomass (figure 2c). Nitrogen has also been found to cause species loss through a nitrogen-specific mechanism (e.g. the detriment effect) not related to biomass [19,29]. Soil acidification and ammonia toxicity were assumed to impose detrimental effects on plant seedlings [55]. We included a path in the structure equation model (SEM) where nitrogen addition affects species richness through its impact on pH. We found that soil pH had a negative, not positive, effect on species richness. This might be due to the high soil pH (8.6, alkaline) in our study site. Nitrogen addition reduced soil pH (from 8.6 to 8.5) to a slightly more neutral level, which would be beneficial for plant species. Consequently, nitrogen addition did not cause soil acidification and decline in species richness. Therefore, background soil properties also need to be considered when assessing mechanisms of species loss following nitrogen addition.
According to the niche dimension mechanism, species loss would increase with the number of resources added due to a decrease in resource-based niche partitioning [19,26]. Our study primarily investigated two soil resources, i.e. water and nitrogen. The niche dimension mechanism did not occur, as simultaneous water and nitrogen addition did not result in lower species richness than water or nitrogen alone (figures 1band4b). Plant diversity can be independent of niche dimensionality if species have appropriate trade-offs [26,56]. In future experimental studies, both water and light may be added to multiple nutrient-enriched plant communities across a moisture gradient to fully explore the mechanisms underlying species loss.
Our study used field measurements from a grassland community exposed to increased nitrogen, water and temperature and a meta-analysis of >2000 published datasets across grasslands worldwide to demonstrate that water addition mitigated species loss after nitrogen addition and warming. The finding suggests that water limitation can critically drive species loss after nitrogen addition and under warming in ecosystems where soil moisture is frequently limiting. When facing simultaneous increases in temperature and nitrogen, however, water addition might only partially buffer species loss. Nitrogen fertilization should be avoided in areas with increasing temperature but decreasing precipitation.
We conducted a field experiment in a temperate semi-arid grassland located in Gansu Provincial Dryland Agroecology Observation and Research Station, Lanzhou University, China (36°02′ N, 104°25′ E, altitude 2400 m). During the experimental period (2017–2022), the mean annual temperature was 5.9°C and mean annual precipitation was 360 mm of which about 85% occurs during the growing season (May to September). The soil is classified as Calcic Kastanozems by the Food and Agriculture Organization soil classification system or Mollisol by the United States soil taxonomy system. The grassland was managed (grazing, harvest) by a local farmer before 2003, and has been fenced without any management since April 2003. The plant community during the experimental period was dominated byArtemisia capillarisThunb,Stipa capillataL.,Medicago sativaL. andLeymus secalinus(Georgi) Tzvelev.
We implemented a full factorial design of three experimental treatments: water (W), nitrogen (N) and temperature (T). Each treatment had two levels, ambient and elevated, resulting in eight treatment combinations. In the water addition treatment, we sprayed water equivalent to 10 mm precipitation on each plot twice at the beginning and end of each month in the growing season (May to September). In total, we increased precipitation by 100 mm per year, resulting in a 36% increase in annual precipitation. For N addition, we sprayed an ammonium nitrate solution on each plot at a rate of 2 g N m−2month−1in the middle of the months from May to September (i.e. 10 g N m–2annually). Other plots without N treatments were also sprayed with the same amount of distilled water. We achieved the increased temperature treatment using open-top chambers (OTCs), which had a hexagonal design with sloping sides and were placed on the soil surface to provide year-round warming. On average, the warming treatments increased air temperature by 1.6°C [57]. The bottom area of OTCs was 1.5 m2, thus we also used the same size for all other treatments. All experimental treatments started in 2017, and data were collected from 2018 to 2022. The study area did not have a slope or any other environmental gradient, so we used a randomized complete block design. Each treatment had four replicates, resulting in a total of 32 experimental plots. Each plot was separated by a buffer zone of 1.5 m to allow space between nutrient and water additions.
We measured aboveground biomass, species richness, and soil temperature and moisture in all experimental plots. We divided plant species into forb and grass functional groups. We counted the number of species in each plot every August when biomass reached its peak, and then divided by plot area. Meanwhile, we harvested all aboveground biomass in the plots, and then oven dried at 75°C to a constant mass to obtain aboveground biomass. We measured soil water content in one replicate of each treatment using a ZL6 soil monitor (Meter Devices Inc. Pullman, Washington, WA, USA). Soil moisture was recorded each hour starting in April 2021. Aboveground biomass and species richness under different treatments were measured during 2018–2022, and we used the 4 year mean for all four replicates. In each treatment, soil water content was measured during 2021–2022, therefore, we used the 2 year mean for all four replicates.
We applied a linear mixed-effects model to examine the effects of water, temperature, nitrogen addition and their interactions on biomass and richness. Water, temperature, nitrogen addition and their interactions were the fixed effects, while plot and year were the random effects. In addition, we used the Duncan multiple comparisons test to evaluate the differences among treatments. We checked the normality of error distributions and homogeneity of variance using the Shapiro–Wilk and Levene’s tests, respectively (electronic supplementary material, table S1). We used a linear mixed-effects model in R packages ‘lme4’ and ‘lmerTest’ to test the effects of soil water content and biomass on richness, with year as a random effect. We used standardized major axis regression in R package ‘SMATR’ to assess the heterogeneity of slopes and intercepts [58]. Structural equation modelling (SEM) can simultaneously evaluate the relationships among multiple variables, helping to understand direct and indirect effects of water, temperature and nitrogen on plant biomass and diversity. In this study, SEM was conducted to investigate the direct and indirect effects of water and nitrogen additions, warming, soil water content and aboveground biomass on species richness measured in our field experiments. Path coefficients were obtained using a maximum likelihood method. We employed chi-square (χ2),p-value (p), goodness of fit index (GFI) and comparative fit index (CFI) and root-mean-square error of approximation (RMSEA) to evaluate the goodness of model fitting, wherep> 0.05,GFI> 0.90,CFI> 0.95,RMSEA≤ 0.08 suggested a reasonable fitting. We implemented the SEM in IBM SPSS Amos v. 26.0 (Amos Development Co., Greene, ME, USA).
We searched for literature published before 20 June 2023 using the Web of Science with the following search terms: (warming or increased temperature or nitrogen deposition or nitrogen addition or increased or decreased precipitation or water or rainwater) and (richness or diversity) and (biomass or aboveground net primary productivity [ANPP] or productivity) and (grassland or meadow or steppe or prairie or savanna). The search yielded 7482 published papers (from 1 January 1980 to 20 June 2023) across grasslands worldwide. We used three criteria for study inclusion. First, experiments needed to be conducted in the field and had at least one pair of measurements in both ambient and treatment groups to examine the effects of nitrogen and water additions and warming. Next, plant aboveground biomass and species richness were measured during the peak growing season. Peak aboveground biomass in grasslands is usually a surrogate for aboveground net primary production, thus we also included ‘ANPP and productivity’ in the search terms. Finally, the means, standard deviations (or standard errors) and sample sizes of the variables could be extracted from the publications. Based on the criteria above, we obtained 318 publications suitable for the meta-analysis (electronic supplementary material, figure S1). We collected data directly from the main text, supplementary materials and open datasets when possible, or digitally extracted information from the figures using GetData Graph Digitizer version 2.22 (https://getdata-graph-digitizer.updatestar.com/) when data were not directly available.
The plant aboveground biomass data included treatments of nitrogen addition (N,n= 778), water addition (W,n= 221), increased temperature (T,n= 131) and their combinations WN (n= 62), WT (n= 21) and NT (n= 9). The plant species richness data included N (n= 872), W (n= 191), T (n= 111), WN (n= 63) and NT (n= 42). Among these published studies, the N addition rate ranged from 1.2 to 64 g N m−2yr−1, temperature was increased 0.6°C–1.8°C, and water addition ranged from 29 to 133 mm. Figure S2 in electronic supplementary material shows the locations of the study sites where the plant aboveground biomass and species richness data were compiled. We also collected aboveground biomass (n= 209) and species richness (n= 146) under the water reduction treatments.
We used the natural log-transformed response ratio (ln RR) [59] as the metric to measure the effect of nitrogen and water additions, along with warming, on plant aboveground biomass and species richness in each study.
whereYt¯andYc¯are mean values of variables (i.e. aboveground biomass, species richness) in the treatment and control/ambient condition, respectively.
In meta-analysis, heterogeneity describes the differences in treatment effects among studies. A random-effects model was used to summarize the effect sizes from all individual studies when heterogeneity was detected; a fixed-effects model was used otherwise [60,61]. Realistically, fixed-effects models are discouraged because it is hard to obtain similar true effect sizes across different biological studies [62]. Random-effects models are generally preferred in ecology, therefore, we used random effects to summarize the effect sizes of aboveground biomass and species richness. We usedI2(total heterogeneity/total variability) to quantify the size of heterogeneity of different studies. The sizes of heterogeneity of aboveground biomass (I2= 96.7%) and species richness (I2= 90.2%) were large for our compiled data, further justifying the use of a random-effects model [60,61].
Following Hedgeset al. [59], the within-study error variance (vi) of lnRR was calculated:
whereNtandNcare the sample sizes of the treatment and control/ambient condition, respectively, andStandScare the standard deviation of the treatment and control/ambient condition, respectively.
To improve precision of combined estimates and the power of tests, we used the weighted mean response ratio (RR++) to summarize the effect sizes of all independent studies, assigning lower weight to studies with greater measured variance.
wherewi∗is the weight for studyi,calculated as the inverse of variance(wi∗=1vi+τ2).τ2is among-study error variance of different studies,vi+τ2is total variance of a single study andkis the number of studies. The 95% confidence intervals for each effect were generated by bootstrapping tests.
We tested for potential publication bias using funnel plots (electronic supplementary material, figure S3) and Egger’s regression [63]. The results indicated no publication bias in the species richness data we compiled from the literature. However, there was a significant publication bias (p< 0.001) in the aboveground biomass data (electronic supplementary material, table S2). To assess the impact of this bias on our meta-analysis results, we used the trim-and-fill approach in the ‘metafor’ package in R. The aboveground biomass dataset was not filled with any data, andp-value of Egger regression did not change before and after the trim-and-fill process. Therefore, although our findings suggest the aboveground biomass dataset may have publication bias, this bias does not significantly impact our results. The meta-analysis was conducted in R 4.2.0 (R Core Team, 2022).
We used meta-regression models to explore the responses of aboveground biomass and species richness to water addition across the soil water content gradient. The response ratios (ln RR) in each study were used as the response variables, and the study sites were considered as a random effect in the models.
Hailing Li, Email: lihl14@lzu.edu.cn.
Juan Chen, Email: chenjuan20@lzu.edu.cn.
Josep Peñuelas, Email: josep.penuelas@uab.cat.
Jordi Sardans, Email: j.sardans@creaf.uab.cat.
Scott L. Collins, Email: scollins@unm.edu.
Kailiang Yu, Email: kailiang@princeton.edu.
Chao Song, Email: chaosong@lzu.edu.cn.
Jian-Sheng Ye, Email: yejsh@lzu.edu.cn.
This work did not require ethical approval from a human subject or animal welfare committee.
All data are available in Dryad Digital Repository [64].
Additional information is provided in electronic supplementary material [65].
We have not used AI-assisted technologies in creating this article.
H.L.: conceptualization, data curation, formal analysis, investigation, methodology, resources, software, validation, visualization, writing—original draft, writing—review and editing; J.C.: conceptualization, data curation, formal analysis, methodology; J.P.: funding acquisition, writing—review and editing; J.S.: funding acquisition, writing—review and editing; S.L.C.: funding acquisition, writing—review and editing; K.Y.: writing—review and editing; C.S.: writing—review and editing; J.-S.Y.: conceptualization, funding acquisition, methodology, project administration, supervision, validation, visualization, writing—original draft, writing—review and editing.
All authors gave final approval for publication and agreed to be held accountable for the work performed therein.
We declare we have no competing interests.
This research was supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Grant Number: lzujbky-2022-ct01) and “111” Project (Grant Number: BP0719040). J.P. and J.S. were supported by the Spanish Ministry of Science (Grant ED2021-132627B-I00 funded by MCIN, AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and European Union NextGenerationEU/PRTR), the Catalan government (grant SGR2021-1333) and the Fundación Ramón Areces (grant CIVP20A6621). S.L.C. was supported by NSF award DEB-1856383.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
All data are available in Dryad Digital Repository [64].
Additional information is provided in electronic supplementary material [65].
Articles from Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences are provided here courtesy ofThe Royal Society
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine8600 Rockville PikeBethesda, MD 20894