Title: A Systematization of Cybersecurity Regulations, Standards and Guidelines for the Healthcare Sector
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2304.14955v1
--------------------------------------------------

A Systematization of Cybersecurity Regulations,
Standards and Guidelines for the Healthcare Sector
Maria Patrizia Carello1, Alberto Marchetti Spaccamela1, Leonardo Querzoni1,
and Marco Angelini1
Sapienza University of Rome
{carello, alberto, querzoni, angelini}@diag.uniroma1.it
Abstract
The growing adoption of IT solutions in the healthcare sector is leading to a steady in-
crease in the number of cybersecurity incidents. As a result, organizations worldwide have
introduced regulations, standards, and best practices to address cybersecurity and data
protection issues in this sector. However, the application of this large corpus of documents
presents operational diﬃculties, and operators continue to lag behind in resilience to cyber
attacks. This paper contributes a systematization of the signiﬁcant cybersecurity docu-
ments relevant to the healthcare sector. We collected the 49 most signiﬁcant documents
and used the NIST cybersecurity framework to categorize key information and support the
implementation of cybersecurity measures.
1
Introduction
Worldwide, the digital transformation of health services is seen as an important and inﬂuential
process, increasing the integration of technology in healthcare organizations, ranging from the
use of computers and electronic health records to home monitoring of patients, electronic med-
ical devices, and decision support systems [71].
Digital transformation aﬀects many aspects of healthcare systems and allows for the improve-
ment of service quality. For example, it is known that the adoption of telemedicine decreases
hospital mortality rates without a signiﬁcant increase in cost [19, 32].
However, the extensive integration of technologies into existing organizations has caused cy-
bersecurity incidents to become an increasing challenge.
Therefore, preventing, mitigating,
responding to, managing emergencies, and recovering from cyber-attacks are critical responsi-
bilities in the health domain nowadays.
To answer the above needs, several regulations, standards, and best practices on healthcare
security have been proposed worldwide to help and guide health organizations in improving
their cybersecurity preparedness. However, the correct application of regulations, standards,
and best practices poses several issues. Firstly, these guidelines have been designed by diﬀerent
actors for various purposes, and their fragmented nature makes integration and application
challenging (issue1). Furthermore, they often provide a high-level overview of security mea-
sures in a discursive manner without specifying the technical security policies that need to be
implemented (issue2). Moreover, there is signiﬁcant overlap among documents published by
diﬀerent sources, and diﬀerent terminology is used to refer to the same concepts (issue3). Fi-
nally, the extensive use of legal jargon and cross-references to other regulations makes it diﬃcult
to parse and extract security-focused elements (issue4).
This paper proposes a systematization of the corpus of documents mentioned above to over-
come these issues. We extract succinct and informative excerpts related to security and data
protection from non-technical sources, and then provide a consistent view of the stated security
measures by analyzing the degree of overlap and ﬁlling the gaps in coverage of security-related
arXiv:2304.14955v1  [cs.CR]  28 Apr 2023
Systematization of Cybersecurity doc. for the Health Sector
Carello, Marchetti, Querzoni and Angelini
aspects.
To accomplish this, we began by analyzing a corpus of 68 documents to identify
relevant ones. From these, we extracted excerpts of interest and mapped them to the NIST Cy-
bersecurity Framework [65]. Based on each mapped excerpt, we deﬁned a set of cybersecurity
controls that can be eﬀectively used to build cybersecurity plans.
We also present the methodology used to conduct our study and exemplify its application in
the healthcare sector, discussing ﬁndings that highlight possible areas for improvement.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides background information on cybersecu-
rity regulations, standards, and best practices issued worldwide in the healthcare sector and
illustrates related proposals; Section 3 introduces our novel methodology for systematizing such
corpus of documents, and describes its results; Section 4 discusses important ﬁndings identiﬁed
through this systematization; Section 5 concludes the paper.
2
Background and Related Work
The corpus of documents that govern cybersecurity and data protection for healthcare organi-
zations can be grouped into three categories: Regulations, Standards, and Best Practices. Each
category is brieﬂy described in the following.
Regulations are issued by an executive authority or regulatory agency and have the force of
law. They can be national or international (for the national ones, in this paper we refer to
the Italian regulations). One of the ﬁrst security regulations for the healthcare sector is the
U.S. Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) [38], 1996. The main goal of
HIPAA was to protect Personally Identiﬁable Information (PII) and to preserve privacy while
allowing individuals to access their medical records. HIPAA was updated in 2003 and 2013,
adding requirements for managing Electronic Protected Health Information and implementing
penalties for privacy violations. The EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [68],
2018, regulates the processing and circulation of personal data; GDPR recognizes health data
as special data that requires greater protection and speciﬁc security measures. The European
Union issued the Regulation on Medical Devices (MDR), 2017, that presents cybersecurity re-
quirements of medical devices [69].
Standards are documents set up by authority or general consent as a model or example to
be compliant with. In the last few years, several Standards have been released to promote the
development of security requirements for the healthcare sector, for example, the ISO 27799
Health informatics [47], 2016, provides an implementation guide for the controls described in
ISO/IEC 27002 and supplements them where necessary. More recently, the ISO/TR 21332 -
Health informatics
[55], 2021, provides an overview of the security and privacy of Electronic
Health Records (EHR) in a cloud computing service and the IEC 80001-1 [42], 2021, speciﬁes
security requirements for connecting medical devices.
Best Practices are guidelines to be used in a particular business or industry (such as health-
care) to meet cybersecurity objectives and to be compliant with regulations. For example, the
NIST Security Rule -SP 800-66 [64], 2008, summarizes HIPAA security standards to support
healthcare organizations to be compliant with HIPAA regulations. In Europe, ENISA pub-
lished several documents; we mention the Procurement guidelines for cybersecurity in hospitals,
2020, [26] and the European Commission’s (EC) Medical Devices Coordination Group (MDCG)
published in 2020 a guide on how to fulﬁll all the essential cybersecurity requirements issued
by the MDR and IVDR (In Vitro Diagnostic Medical Devices Regulation) regulations [61].
2
Systematization of Cybersecurity doc. for the Health Sector
Carello, Marchetti, Querzoni and Angelini
Related work. In the last ten years there has been a signiﬁcant increase in the pace of pub-
lication about cybersecurity and healthcare [18]. The interest is motivated by the key role of
Cybersecurity in the healthcare sector: any disruption in health services can be a disaster for
patients’ health, not only for organizations. In the following, we focus on studies that aim to
provide a systematization for the large number of cybersecurity documents in the healthcare
domain.
Jalali et al. [58] conducted a broad work on scientiﬁc literature: they surveyed 472 scientiﬁc
contributions extracted from Pubmed and Web of Science at the intersection of cybersecurity
and healthcare. Their ﬁndings show that most contributions focus on technological aspects,
while 32% focus on managerial and policy-making topics. Diﬀerently from our work, they do
not consider regulations, standards, and best practices, making their work complementary to
our approach. Mohammed [62] discusses the compliance issues and challenges for healthcare
organizations in the U.S., focusing on HITECH and HIPAA. The author lists among major chal-
lenges the vagueness and ambiguity of many of the prescriptions of those documents, similar to
what we identiﬁed before.
Furthermore, it has been observed how cybersecurity standards and regulations are still un-
certain, overlapping, and do not entirely address healthcare-speciﬁc concerns; as a consequence
complying with cybersecurity rules is a challenging activity that involves time and expense for
healthcare organizations, hindering their ability to develop adequate cybersecurity programs
[23, 14, 20, 60, 21]. In [59] and [73] regulations and standards for medical device software are
considered focusing on the device manufacturer as the intended target; our goal is to inform
the management (i.e., CISOs and DPOs) inside healthcare organizations.
As a consequence of the aforementioned considerations, it is necessary to support healthcare
organizations in navigating and making sense of these documents to support the extraction and
modeling of cybersecurity measures.
3
Methodology
This section outlines a novel four-step methodology for the systematization of cybersecurity
regulations, standards, and best practices that have been published over time for the healthcare
sector. In the ﬁrst step, we thoroughly searched public repositories to ﬁnd documents of interest.
In the second step, the documents are analyzed to identify excerpts that refer to technical
security and governance measures. In the third step, cybersecurity excerpts are mapped on the
Subcategories of the NIST Framework [65], and in the last step, a control deﬁnition procedure
is carried out for each subcategory.
All the results and additional materials are available at this link:
https://github.com/carelloSapienza/Systematization-healthcare.
Figure 1: Methodology Steps
3
Systematization of Cybersecurity doc. for the Health Sector
Carello, Marchetti, Querzoni and Angelini
3.1
Documents Collection
We explored the information available on the main oﬃcial sources of European, International,
and National regulators (e.g., ENISA, NIST, Salute.gov) using main searched keywords such as
cybersecurity, privacy, electronic health record (EHR), medical device, telemedicine, cloud for
healthcare.
A second round of research was conducted using the main indexing platforms (e.g., Elsevier
Scopus, Google scholar, IEEE Xplore), and the primary searched keywords were: cybersecurity
in healthcare, healthcare cybersecurity legislation, telemedicine security and privacy, cyberse-
curity of medical devices; security framework for healthcare.
We performed a forward and
backward analysis for each document or paper collected. Afterward, to reﬁne the research, we
constrained each collected document to two key requirements: (i) the regulation must be in
eﬀect, (ii) the document must address data security, privacy issues, or cybersecurity measures
for healthcare organizations or public administrations. Therefore, we did not include works
that address only manufacturers of medical devices, external service providers, or government
agencies.
Examples of documents excluded, as not deemed of interest, are ISO/TR 17522:2015 Health
informatics — Provisions for health applications on mobile/smart devices [45], focused only
on interoperability, and ISO 14971:2019 Medical devices — Application of risk management to
medical devices [50] that is speciﬁcally addressed to manufacturers of medical devices.
Results. This step allowed us to gather 68 potential documents of interest ﬁrst, then narrowed
to 49 documents by considering the key requirements. The ﬁnal corpus, therefore, is composed
of 11 regulations, 21 best practices, and 17 standards gathered by European (9), international
(19), and national (21) sources.
3.2
Documents Analysis
In this step, each of the 49 documents previously collected is accurately analyzed to identify
key excerpts of text that refer to technical security and governance measures. A key excerpt of
text is a sentence in a document that refers to areas of cybersecurity or data protection, such
as information security policies, data privacy, incident management, etc. The identiﬁcation
has been performed manually by at least two members of our team with expertise in security
governance, cybersecurity, and data protection. Once identiﬁed, the excerpt is extracted from
its original document and collected in a table as output for the next step. Another group of
information security specialists has regularly examined the collected excerpts to verify their
relevance.
This step mitigates issue 4 helping to organize the texts and to extract only the relevant
contents (security and data protection).
Results. Figure 2 shows an example of key excerpts identiﬁcation on the document Security
and Resilience in eHealth Infrastructures and Services [24].
To identify relevant key excerpts from non-relevant ones, consider the ﬁrst sentence: “An eHealth
incident reporting mechanism, potentially part of a clinical incident reporting and alerting sys-
tem, may improve patient safety”. This excerpt does not give any technical information and
therefore is not a key excerpt. Conversely, the sentence highlighted in green asserting that
“Computer Emergency Response Team should be created” and “could potentially collaborate with
the national CERT” has been considered a relevant excerpt since it provides clear cybersecurity
indications.
4
Systematization of Cybersecurity doc. for the Health Sector
Carello, Marchetti, Querzoni and Angelini
Figure 2: Example of Key Excerpts Extraction from [24]
Figure 3: Documents Analysis: excerpts distribution
Based on the analysis of the 49 documents collected, we extracted approximately 2,800
excerpts distributed as depicted in Figure 3.
3.3
Documents Mapping
The excerpts identiﬁed in the previous step are listed in a table in their original form. To
systematize them, we choose the NIST Cybersecurity Framework v1.1 that provides a
common ground and standard terminology for cybersecurity functionalities. However, since
several key excerpts refer to data security and privacy, it was necessary to extend it. We lever-
aged the Italian Cybersecurity Framework [15, 16], retro-compatible with the NIST framework,
that includes categories and subcategories dedicated to data protection. Each excerpt has been
accurately assessed for its semantic content and linked to one or more subcategories of the
framework.
For each excerpt, the Function it belongs to is ﬁrst determined, followed by the assumed Cat-
egory and then the appropriate Subcategory. An example of mapping is shown in Table 1.
This step mitigates issue 3 by identifying, quantifying, and resolving overlap.
5
Systematization of Cybersecurity doc. for the Health Sector
Carello, Marchetti, Querzoni and Angelini
DETECT
4,99%
PROTECT
54,75%
RESPOND
6,24%
RECOVER
1,40%
IDENTIFY
32,62%
Figure 4: Mapping (Functions)
IDENTIFY 32,62
%
ID.AM
8,42%
ID.BE
0,94%
ID.GV
7,02%
ID.RA
6,41%
ID.RM
1,72%
ID.SC
3,90%
DP-ID.DM 4,21%
PROTECT 54,75
%
PR.AC
14,20%
PR.AT
4,05%
PR.DS
11,54%
PR.IP
16,38%
PR.MA
1,56%
PR.PT
7,02%
DETECT 4,99%
DE.AE
0,46%
DE.CM
2,81%
DE.DP
1,72%
RESPOND 6,24%
RS.RP
1,24%
RS.CO
2,49%
RS.AN
0,63%
RS.MI
0,47%
RS.IM
1,41%
RECOVER 1,40%
RC.RP
1,10%
RC.IM
0,15%
RC.CO
0,15%
Figure 5: Mapping (Categories)
Results. The 2,800 excerpts have been mapped mostly in the Protection and Identify functions.
Very few excerpts address Respond, Detect, and Recover functions, as visible in Figures 4.
3.4
Controls Deﬁnition
In this step, the excerpts previously mapped are reﬁned and modeled as cybersecurity controls.
It is necessary to reﬁne the excerpts to be syntactically uniform because they were retrieved
from documents of various types, origins, and writing styles. For example, Best Practices have
a purely technical nature and are made by sentences more direct and concise. In contrast,
Regulations have a syntax typical of the legal world and are therefore made by sentences more
discursive.
To deﬁne the controls and get a consistent and similar structure, three key constraints were
enforced during their deﬁnition:
1. Self-contained: the control contains every element that is essential for its semantic
completeness;
2. Homogeneous: the control faithfully complies with the semantics of the excerpt;
3. Veriﬁable: an application of the control must be veriﬁable through a well-deﬁned quan-
titative or qualitative approach.
A unique identiﬁer then enumerates each control to retain its traceability. By analyzing each
excerpt in Table 1 and applying the constraints, one or more controls have been deﬁned. For
example, a thorough semantic analysis of the excerpt E2 led to the deﬁnition of three controls:
ID.GV-2-01 and ID.GV-2-02 directly derived from the original text while ID.AM- 6 has been
added as an implicit requirement deriving from the former controls.
This step mitigates issues 1 and 2 by uniforming the contents and supporting the imple-
mentation of technical security measures.
Results. At the end of this step, the approximately 2800 sentences extracted from the previous
phase led to the deﬁnition of approximately 3,320 controls.
The control deﬁnition’s 15% increase over the sentences extracted conﬁrms the heterogeneity
and fragmentation of the excerpt’s content. The distribution of controls is uniform among the
framework’s categories (see Table 1).
6
Systematization of Cybersecurity doc. for the Health Sector
Carello, Marchetti, Querzoni and Angelini
Table 1: Excerpts ext. & Controls Deﬁnition Document [24] Recommendation 4
Excerpt Detail
Subcategory
Control Deﬁnition
E1: Member States should develop
incident response mechanisms to ef-
ﬁciently bring together the health-
care organizations with the national
cyber security competent centers.
PR.IP-9
PR.IP-9-01:
Healthcare
organi-
zations develop incident response
mechanisms to bring together with
the national cybersecurity compe-
tent centers
E2: An eHealth-focused Computer
Emergency Response Team should
be created, which could potentially
collaborate with the national CERT
on incident handling. Feedback di-
rectly to the eHealth service users
(e.g., clinicians) is extremely im-
portant for their continued engage-
ment.
ID.GV-2;
ID.AM- 6
ID.GV-2-01:
A Computer Emer-
gency Response Team (CERT) has
been created focused on eHealth.
ID.GV-2-02:
The CERT collabo-
rates with the national CERT on
incident handling.
ID.AM-6-01: Roles and responsibil-
ities are deﬁned within the Com-
puter Emergency Response Team
E3:
In terms of eHealth incident
handling and hazard control, fur-
ther steps need to be taken: Sys-
tems for reporting and analyzing in-
cidents both locally and nationally.
RS.AN-5
RS.AN-5-01:
Systems for report-
ing and analyzing incidents both lo-
cally and nationally have been im-
plemented
4
Findings
Cybersecurity Controls Coverage. The ﬁrst ﬁnding, depicted in Fig 3, is the large gap
among the number of relevant excerpts extracted from Regulations and Standards compared
to Best Practices.
The gap is mostly due to the nature of the documents themselves: Regulations have the lowest
percentage of extracted excerpts (10,7%) because they are mostly discursive and do not address
technological or procedural security measures, only stating general goals; Best Practices, on the
other hand, have the highest percentage of excerpts (69,60%), since they are intended to serve
as guidance for deploying cybersecurity measures, and therefore feature more technical and
in-depth cybersecurity controls (Finding 1).
While Healthcare organizations experienced signiﬁcant security incidents in recent years, with
the majority of them caused by either phishing or ransomware attacks [14], there is still a
lack of focus on how to address such threats. This is evidenced by the very low percentages
of controls mapped on Detect (4,99%), Respond (6,24%), and Recovery (1,40%) functions, as
shown in Figure 5. As a result, the documents focus mainly on the identiﬁcation of cybersecurity
perimeter and assets protection, with Protect (54,75%) and Identify (32,62%) being the most
covered functions, rather than the detection and management of cybersecurity incidents during
and after their deployment (Finding 2).
Cybersecurity Topics Coverage. The previous ﬁndings, were derived using the NIST Cy-
bersecurity Framework. As it is a mostly operative framework, it gave us an idea of the less
covered actions. To provide additional insights focused on evaluating the coverage of key cy-
bersecurity and data protection areas, we used a second taxonomy suggested by the Report A
Proposal for a European Cybersecurity Taxonomy
[63], issued by the European Commission.
We selected the most pertinent topics for the healthcare sector (eight) and used a three-stage
approach to evaluate the coverage level for each topic. Firstly, the team assigned each subcate-
7
Systematization of Cybersecurity doc. for the Health Sector
Carello, Marchetti, Querzoni and Angelini
gory of the NIST Framework to one of the taxonomy’s security topics. Secondly, we counted the
number of controls that fell into a speciﬁc subcategory for each document based on the mapping
performed in the Control Deﬁnition Step. Thirdly, we developed three levels of coverage based
on the number of occurrences: Low if there were 1 to 3 controls that address the topic, Medium
(4 to 6 controls), and High (more than 6 controls). Thresholds were derived from a statistical
analysis of the distribution of extracted controls per document per subcategory. Figure 6 shows
the topics addressed and the level of coverage for each document gathered, ranging from dark
green for high coverage to white for no coverage. Using this approach, we provide an overview
of documents coverage of cybersecurity topics and derive several ﬁndings.
Figure 6: Mapping Taxonomy
8
Systematization of Cybersecurity doc. for the Health Sector
Carello, Marchetti, Querzoni and Angelini
T1: Security Management and Governance (Figure 6 column A) is the most addressed
topic (around 85%) demonstrating the high regard by the documents collected. Moreover, the
security measures are addressed by many publications issued by diﬀerent sources, implying that
the topic’s contents are heavily overlapping (Finding 3). In addition, many documents go deeper
in their analysis (deep green color), and as a result, it could prove challenging to homogenize the
security measures extracted. Unlike T1, T8: Assurance, Audit, Certif. (Figure 6 column B) is
the least addressed topic, with some scattered contributions from standards and best practices,
even if focused. Surprisingly, regulations do not provide cybersecurity controls in this area.
Similar considerations can be made for topics T6: Incident Handling & Digital Forens. and
T7: Education & Training. T6 presents a shallower coverage than T7, raising the possibility
that the resulting security measures could be incomplete (Finding 4).
Analyzing Figure 6 from a document-based perspective, the coverage area is determined by the
document typology: Regulations and Standards are more focused on speciﬁc topics, leaving
others completely or partially uncovered, while Best Practices are broad and cross-topics. For
instance, the standard ISO 17090 [48] (row C) focuses on a single topic (T2), analyzing it in
depth and providing speciﬁc security measures. On the other hand, the National Best Practice
for Electronic Health Record [37] (row D) covers a wider range of topics, where most of them
are only given a shallow level of analysis, implying that the contents are overly generic (Finding
5). An interesting analysis is to compare international and national coverage mappings (see
Figure 7). Even among the National corpus of documents, the most popular topics are T1,
T2: Data Security & Privacy, and T3: Identity Management. It indicates that the national
context tends to mirror the trend of international publications on these topics. On the contrary,
the remaining topics result less covered, both in terms of the number of controls and depth of
analysis.
Critical topics are T7 and T8, with the ﬁrst addressed in less than 20% of the
documents and the second addressed by only one best practice (Finding 6). Notice that there
is a lack of standards in the list of national documents since all standards gathered during the
collection step are issued by international entities.
Figure 7: National Mapping Taxonomy
Temporal trends. The temporal analysis by date of publication conﬁrms that cybersecurity
is emerging as a top priority in the healthcare sector, with a steady increase in the pace of
cybersecurity regulations, standards, and best practices publication since 2008.
As shown in Figure 8 there is a peak of publications in 2017 which may be related to the 2016
9
Systematization of Cybersecurity doc. for the Health Sector
Carello, Marchetti, Querzoni and Angelini
0
2
4
6
8
10
NUMBER OF DOCUMENTS 
PUBLICATION YEAR
Best Practice
Regulation
Standard
Figure 8: Analysis by document type
0
2
4
6
8
10
NUMBER OF DOCUMENTS
PUBLICATION YEAR
NATIONAL
INTERNATIONAL
Figure 9: National vs International
Hollywood Presbyterian ransomware attack (the ﬁrst highly publicized cyberattack incident
against a hospital) [17] and a second peak in 2021, when, among others, regulations on medical
devices, along with related guidelines and standards, have been published (Finding 7).
Furthermore, Figure 9 illustrates that national publications tend to follow a similar trend,
indicating that national authorities are attempting to keep up and align national regulations
with international ones (Finding 8).
Actors. A healthcare system is an organization of people, institutions, and resources that
delivers services for the population. We modeled, referring to literature, the healthcare sector
as composed of ﬁve main providers, sorted by descending size:
• Hospital: an institution that provides diagnoses of disease, medical and surgical treat-
ments, and nursing care for sick or injured people;
• Private Structure (e.g., Care Homes, Diagnostic Centers, etc. ): structure that performs
several health services but cannot perform hospitalizations;
• Local Sanitary Unit: the integrated primary health care public service covering a well-
deﬁned population;
• Clinical laboratory: healthcare facility providing a wide range of laboratory procedures
for diagnosis and treatment;
• Medical practitioner: a self-employed or publicly employed health professional who works
independently.
For each provider, we deﬁned the delivered services classiﬁed as primary (compulsory to
provide) mapped in green, secondary (optional to provide) indicated in yellow, and services not
provided indicated in red (see Figure 10).
Afterward, for each primary service, we analyze which cybersecurity controls, deﬁned in the
Controls Deﬁnitions Step, could be ﬁtting for securing the service.
As a result, for each provider, we obtain the number of cybersecurity controls that should be
coped with to improve the providers’ cybersecurity posture distributed by functions and origi-
nating sources type (see Figure 10).
Due to the fewer services oﬀered, Medical Practitioners need to cope with less than 60% controls
compared to a hospital organization. Overall, Identify and Protect remain the most addressed
functions, and there is a uniform distribution of controls derived from Regulations, Standards,
and Best Practices (Finding 9). We notice that the number of controls to cope remains high,
disregarding the target actor. More eﬀort should be put in place to streamline their implemen-
tation, considering their priority and the security of secondary services.
10
Systematization of Cybersecurity doc. for the Health Sector
Carello, Marchetti, Querzoni and Angelini
Figure 10: Healthcare Providers and Services
5
Conclusions
This paper systematized healthcare sector cybersecurity and data protection regulations, stan-
dards, and best practices, analyzing 49 documents and categorizing them using the NIST Frame-
work. This resulted in 3200 security controls and nine ﬁndings, including that best practices
present more technical controls than Regulations. We found an uneven distribution of controls
for cybersecurity and data protection topics, particularly in the areas of Detect, Respond, and
Recover. Future plans include updating the systematization with new documents, like NIS2,
and utilizing the controls for cyber-posture assessments.
References
[1] Circolare n. 61 del ministero della sanità del 19 dicembre 1986 n. 900 - conservazione dei dati
sanitari (1986)
[2] Disciplina del ﬂusso informativo sui dimessi dagli istituti di ricovero pubblici e privati (2000)
[3] Testo unico sulla documentazione amministrativa (tuda) (2000)
[4] D.Lgs. 7 marzo 2005, n. 82 (c.d. «Codice dell’Amministrazione Digitale ») (2005)
[5] D.p.c.m. 29 settembre 2015 n 178 - regolamento in materia di fse (2015)
[6] Decreto 4 agosto 2017: Modalità tecniche e servizi telematici resi disponibili dall’infrastruttura
nazionale per l’interoperabilità del fse (2017)
[7] AGENAS: Indicazioni metodologiche sicurezza (2022)
[8] AGID: Linee guida per la conﬁgurazione per adeguare la sicurezza del sw di base
[9] AGID: Linee guida per la modellazione delle minacce
[10] AGID: Linee guida per il disaster recovery delle pubbliche amministrazioni (2013)
[11] AGID: Linee guida per lo sviluppo di codice sicuro (2013)
[12] AGID: Linee guida sul punto di accesso telematico ai servizi della pubblica amministrazione (2021)
[13] AGID: Linee guida sulla formazione, gestione e conservazione dei documenti informatici (2021)
[14] Akinsanya, O.O., Papadaki, M., Sun, L.: ”current cybersecurity maturity models: How eﬀective
in healthcare cloud ?”. In: CERC. pp. 211–222 (2019)
11
Systematization of Cybersecurity doc. for the Health Sector
Carello, Marchetti, Querzoni and Angelini
[15] Angelini, M., Ciccotelli, C., Franchina, L., Marchetti-Spaccamela, A., Querzoni, L.: Italian na-
tional framework for cybersecurity and data protection. In: Privacy Technologies and Policy: 8th
APF, Lisbon, Portugal, Springer (2020)
[16] Angelini, M., Lenti, S., Santucci, G.: Crumbs: a cyber security framework browser. In: IEEE
Symp. on Visualization for Cyber Security (VizSec). pp. 1–8. IEEE (2017)
[17] Argaw, S.T., Bempong, N.E., Eshaya-Chauvin, B., Flahault, A.: The state of research on cyber-
attacks against hospitals and available best practice recommendations: a scoping review. BMC
medical informatics and decision making 19(1), 1–11 (2019)
[18] Argaw, S.T., Troncoso-Pastoriza, J.R., Lacey, D., Florin, M.V., Calcavecchia, F., Anderson, D.,
Burleson, W., Vogel, J.M., O’Leary, C., Eshaya-Chauvin, B., et al.: ”cybersecurity of hospitals:
discussing the challenges and working towards mitigating the risks”. BMC medical informatics and
decision making 20(1), 1–10 (2020)
[19] Armaignac, D.L., Saxena, A., Rubens, M., Valle, C., Williams, L.M., Veledar, E., Gidel, L.:
Impact of telemedicine on mortality, length of stay, and cost among patients in progressive care
units: Experience from a large healthcare system. Critical Care Medicine 46, 728 – 735 (2018)
[20] Biasin, E., Kamenjašević, E.: Cybersecurity of medical devices: new challenges arising from the
ai act and nis 2 directive proposals. International Cybersecurity Law Review 3(1), 163–180 (2022)
[21] Burke, W., Oseni, T., Jolfaei, A., Gondal, I.: Cybersecurity indexes for ehealth. In: Proc. of the
Australasian computer science week multiconference. pp. 1–8 (2019)
[22] CEN: 16850 - societal and citizen security - guidance for managing security in healthcare facilities
(2015)
[23] Coventry, L., Branley, D.: Cybersecurity in healthcare: A narrative review of trends, threats and
ways forward. Maturitas 113, 48–52 (2018)
[24] ENISA: Security and resilience in ehealth infrastructures and services (2015)
[25] ENISA: Healthcare certiﬁcation (wp2018) (2018)
[26] ENISA: Procurement guidelines for cybersecurity in hospitals (2019)
[27] ENISA: Cloud security for healthcare services (2021)
[28] ENISA: Nis investments (2021)
[29] ENISA: Psirt expertise and capabilities development - health and energy (2021)
[30] ETSI: Ts 101 533-1 v1.2.1 - technical speciﬁcation, electronic signatures and infrastructures; in-
formation preservation systems security (2011)
[31] GPDP: Linee guida in materia di dossier sanitario 4 giugno 2015 – n164 - notiﬁche data breach
(2015)
[32] Haleem, A., Javaid, M., Singh, R.P., Suman, R.: ”telemedicine for healthcare: Capabilities, fea-
tures, barriers, and applications”. Sensors international 2, 100117 (2021)
[33] Health, M.: Dpcm 3 dicembre 2013 - regole tecniche in materia di sistema di conservazione (2013)
[34] Health, M.: Decreto 7 dicembre 2016, n. 261 - guida alla corretta compilazione e tenuta del registro
operatorio (2016)
[35] Health, M.: Linee guida telemedicina (2018)
[36] Health, M.: Circolare del 8 luglio 2021 - vigilanza sui dispositivi medici - indicazioni per la
segnalazione di incidenti occorsi dopo l’immissione in commercio (2021)
[37] Health, M.: Fascicolo sanitario elettronico - linee guida (2022)
[38] HHS: Administrative simpliﬁcation (2013)
[39] HHS: Healthcare industry cybersecurity task force (2019)
[40] HITRUST: Health information trust alliance common security framework
[41] IEC: 62304 - medical device software — software life cycle processes (2006)
[42] IEC: 80001-1 2021 application of risk management for it-networks incorporating medical devices
(2021)
12
Systematization of Cybersecurity doc. for the Health Sector
Carello, Marchetti, Querzoni and Angelini
[43] ISO: 11636 health informatics — dynamic on-demand virtual private network for health informa-
tion infrastructure (2009)
[44] ISO: Health informatics — guidelines on data protection to facilitate trans-border ﬂows of personal
health data. (2013)
[45] ISO: 17522health informatics - provisions for health applications on mobile/smart devices (2015)
[46] ISO: 27017 - information technology — security techniques — code of practice for information
security controls based on iso/iec 27002 for cloud services (2015)
[47] ISO: 27799 health informatics-information security management in health using iso/iec 27002
(2016)
[48] ISO: 17090:2017 health informatics — public key infrastructure (2017)
[49] ISO: 18638:2017 - health informatics — guidance on health information privacy education in
healthcare organizations (2017)
[50] ISO: 14971 medical devices (md); application of risk management to md (2019)
[51] ISO: 12967 health inform. service architecture-p.1: Enterprise viewpoint (2020)
[52] ISO: 12967 health inform. service architecture-p.2: Information viewpoint (2020)
[53] ISO: 20000-information technology-service management-system requirements (2020)
[54] ISO: 22696-health informatics-guidance on the identiﬁcation and authentication of connectable
personal healthcare devices (2020)
[55] ISO: 21332 - health informatics — cloud computing considerations for the security and privacy of
health information systems. (2021)
[56] ISO: 21547:2010 health informatics — security requirements for archiving of electronic health
records. (2021)
[57] ISS: Buone pratiche per la sicurezza informatica nei servizi sanitari (2019)
[58] Jalali, M.S., Razak, S., Gordon, W., Perakslis, E., Madnick, S.: Health care and cybersecurity:
Bibliometric analysis of the literature. J Med Internet Res (2019)
[59] Lechner, N.H.: An overview of cybersecurity regulations and standards for medical device software.
In: Central European Conference on Information and Intelligent Systems. pp. 237–249. Faculty of
Organization and Informatics Varazdin (2017)
[60] Martin, G., Martin, P., Hankin, C., Darzi, A., Kinross, J.: ”cybersecurity and healthcare: how
safe are we?”. Bmj 358 (2017)
[61] MDCG: Guidance on cybersecurity for medical devices (2022)
[62] Mohammed, D.: Us healthcare industry: Cybersecurity regulatory and compliance issues. Journal
of Research in Business, Economics and Management 9(5), 1771–1776 (2017)
[63] Nai-Fovino, I., Neisse, R., Hernández-Ramos, J., Polemi, N., Ruzzante, G., Figwer, M., Lazari,
A.: A proposal for a european cybersecurity taxonomy. Publications Oﬃce of the European Union
(2019)
[64] NIST: Nist security rule (sp 800-66 rev. 1)-an introductory resource guide for implementing the
hipaa security rule (2008)
[65] NIST: Cybersecurity framework v1.1 (2018)
[66] of organizations, C., istitutions: Proposta di codice di condotta per la protezione dei dati personali
in sanità (2019)
[67] OWASP: Secure medical device deployment (2017)
[68] PARLIAMENT, E.: General data protection regulation (2016)
[69] Parliament, E.: Regolamento (ue) 2017-745 sui dispositivi medici - mdr (2017)
[70] PARLIAMENT, E.: Directive of the european parliament and of the council on measures for a
high common level of cybersecurity across the union, repealing directive 2016/1148 (2022)
[71] Ricciardi, W., Pita Barros, P., Bourek, A., Brouwer, W., Kelsey, T., Lehtonen, L.: How to govern
the digital transformation of health services. European J. of Public Health 29(Suppl._3), 7–12
13
Systematization of Cybersecurity doc. for the Health Sector
Carello, Marchetti, Querzoni and Angelini
(2019)
[72] Rule, H.A.E.I.F.: Hitech act - health information technology for economic and clinical health act
(2009)
[73] Thomasian, N.M., Adashi, E.Y.: Cybersecurity in the internet of medical things. Health Policy
and Technology 10(3), 100549 (2021)
14
