Title: Cybersecurity Competence for Organisations in Inner Scandinavia
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.09673v1
--------------------------------------------------

Cybersecurity Competence for Organisations in
Inner Scandinavia
Simone Fischer-H¨ubner1[0000−0002−6938−4466], Leonardo A.
Martucci1[0000−0002−9980−3473], Lejla Islami2[0000−0002−5717−8649], Ala Sarah
Alaqra1[0000−0002−6509−3792] and Farzaneh Karegar1[0000−0003−2823−3837]
1 Karlstad University, Karlstad, Sweden
{simone.fischer-huebner, leonardo.martucci, as.alaqra,
farzaneh.karegar}@kau.se
2 Danmarks Tekniske Universitet, Lyngby, Denmark
lejis@dtu.dk
Abstract. A rapidly growing number of cybersecurity threats and in-
cidents demands that Swedish organisations increase their efforts to im-
prove their cybersecurity capacities. This paper presents results from
interviews and a prior survey with key representatives from enterprises
and public sector organisations in the Swedish region of V¨armland in In-
ner Scandinavia, examining their cybersecurity readiness and needs for
education and competence development. We discuss the generalizability
of our findings and the extent to which they may be specific to Swe-
den and V¨armland, and we conclude by proposing efforts to strengthen
cybersecurity competences in Inner Scandinavia.
Keywords: Cybersecurity Readiness · Education · Training.
1
Introduction
Cybersecurity attacks and incidents with a drastic impact on organisations are
steadily increasing worldwide. In Inner Scandinavia, especially in the Swedish re-
gion of V¨armland, recent incidents included distributed denial of service attacks
against the supermarket chain Coop in December 2023, and the IT cloud-hosted
services provided by the Finnish company Tietoevry, which serves public institu-
tions, in January 2024.1,2 While Sweden ranks fourth globally in digitalisation,
it lags in cybersecurity readiness, placing 16th in the National Cybersecurity
Index.3 This gap between digitalisation and cybersecurity readiness levels makes
Sweden especially vulnerable to attacks and calls to improve readiness and com-
petence. Sweden’s new NATO membership further increases the need to invest in
defence and strengthen cybersecurity capacity, knowledge, and skills, as outlined
in Sweden’s new Cybersecurity Strategy for 2025–2029. Advanced competence
is also required to understand and prepare for new cybersecurity rules and regu-
lations, including the Network and Information Security Directive 2 (NIS2), the
Cyber Resilience Act (CRA), the Digital Operational Resilience Act (DORA),
arXiv:2510.09673v1  [cs.CR]  8 Oct 2025
2
Fischer-H¨ubner et al.
and the Artificial Intelligence Act. The high number (“tsunami”) of such regu-
lations challenges European organisations in meeting compliance requirements
for risk analyses and implementing adequate security measures.
On the other hand, the V¨armland region in Inner Scandinavia is strategi-
cally considered a “safe” region in Sweden due to its inland location. The region
has a robust network of fibre-optic cable connections between its capital and
Stockholm. It hosts the Swedish Civil Contingency Agency (MSB) headquar-
ters, and accommodates Telia’s (the largest Swedish Telecom provider) security
operations centre. Neighbouring Innlandet, Norway, has developed as a Norwe-
gian cybersecurity hub, hosting companies and a research centre. The Interreg
Sweden–Norway project [XXX] 4 aims to strengthen V¨armland and Innlandet in
cyber– and societal security competence, competitiveness and readiness through
cross-border cooperation and cybersecurity training and education.
The goal of our work is to examine the status of cybersecurity competence
and readiness, along with challenges, requirements, and needs for cybersecurity
and competence development measures for different types of organisations in
Inner Scandinavia. As a first step, the project partners conducted surveys and
interviews in V¨armland and in Innlandet to examine these aspects in each region
separately. The results inform discussions on enhancing cybersecurity compe-
tence across borders in Inner Scandinavia through cooperation. To this end, the
article addresses the following research questions for different types of organisa-
tions in V¨armland:
RQ1: What is the current state of cybersecurity and preparedness for these
organisations?
RQ2: What are the cybersecurity education and competence development chal-
lenges for the organisations?
RQ3: What are their main interests and requirements regarding cybersecurity
education and competence development?
In this paper, we report and discuss the results from the two user studies
that we conducted in V¨armland: (1) an online survey (N=19) and (2) semi-
structured interviews (N=6) with key stakeholders from different types of private
and public organisations, including small to medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)
and large-sized companies and public sector organisations. While the survey in-
formed our study, this article focuses on reporting and discussing insights from
the exploratory qualitative interviews. This article makes the following contri-
butions:
– Detailed insights and analysis of the cybersecurity readiness, challenges, and
needs for education and competence development among public and private
organisations in V¨armland in Inner Scandinavia.
1 https://pressrum.coop.se/coop-varmland-information-om-cyberangrepp/
2 https://www.tietoevry.com/en/newsroom/all-news-and-releases/other-
news/2024/01/ransomware-attack-in-sweden-update/
3 https://ncsi.ega.ee/ncsi-index/?order=rank&archive=1
4 Anonymised for blind review
Cybersecurity Competence for Organisations in Inner Scandinavia
3
– A discussion on whether the results are generally applicable or specific to
Sweden and/or V¨armland in Inner Scandinavia.
2
Background and Related Work
2.1
Requirements by new cybersecurity-related regulations
The EU has released a broad range of cybersecurity laws to promote cyber re-
silience and protect its online economy and society. NIS2 and CRA are important
frameworks released as part of the EU’s overarching Cybersecurity Strategy.
NIS2 replaced the NIS Directive from 2016 with rules to be implemented by
national laws of the EU member states. NIS2 expands its scope to a broader range
of public and private entities in the EU that provide “essential or important”
services such as energy, health care, digital infrastructures, and food supply. It
demands member states to strengthen cybersecurity by obliging critical-sector
organisations to implement technical, operational and organisational cyberse-
curity risk management measures, and to report incidents. Specific governance
rules require management bodies in these sectors to follow cybersecurity train-
ing and offer similar training to their employees regularly, so that they can, in
particular, gain knowledge and skills for risk assessment and management.
Effective December 2027, the CRA complements NIS2 by mandating cyber-
security requirements for manufacturers and retailers of products with digital
elements that can be connected to another device or network. It particularly
requires mandatory risk assessments by manufacturers, security by design, se-
curity updates for the expected product lifecycle, and continuous vulnerability
management.
Advanced risk assessment and management are also required by other new
cybersecurity-related regulations, including DORA, which requires a risk man-
agement framework for financial entities, or the AI Act, which demands develop-
ers to conduct a fundamental rights impact assessment for high-risk AI systems.
They come in addition to Data Protection Impact Assessments that may need to
be conducted pursuant to the EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR).
While the scopes of the laws and their risk assessment requirements are not the
same, they still may overlap, and therefore organisations may also have to find
approaches for aligning the different risk assessments for their organisations.
2.2
Cybersecurity competence mappings
The European Cybersecurity Agency (ENISA) supports this effort by its map
of European MSc cybersecurity programs and European Cybersecurity Skills
Framework (ECSF) [3], which defines and categorises relevant roles and skills.
Cybersecurity readiness and shortcomings of Swedish private organisations have
been measured, e.g., by the 2024 Cisco Cybersecurity Readiness Index based
4
Fischer-H¨ubner et al.
on a double-blind survey5. MSB regularly surveys the public sector (with 41
questions) to assess systematic cybersecurity work and the needs for improve-
ments [9]. To our knowledge, this is the first study combining a questionnaire-
based survey with semi-structured interviews of diverse stakeholders from the
private and public sectors in V¨armland / Inner Scandinavia. Thus, it offers
in-depth insights into their cybersecurity situations, challenges, and needs for
cybersecurity education and competence development.
3
Methodology and participants
We first conducted an online survey on the SUNET Survey&Report platform,
which ran for four weeks in February 2024, that provided us with initial insights,
which were further explored through interviews. The survey included three back-
ground/demographics (gender, role, organisational type), twelve main questions
on educational needs and interests, and three concluding questions for general
comments and willingness to join follow-up interviews. The main questions com-
prised six 5-point Likert items on the need for cybersecurity education for dif-
ferent groups (security experts, IT-knowledgeable users, lay users) and interest
in courses on EU risk management compliance, plus four open-ended and two
multiple-choice questions on preferred format and location. Survey participants
(n=19) were recruited via a regional IT cluster mailing list: six from large en-
terprises, eleven from SMEs, and two from the public sector. Appendix B lists
the exact questions asked in the survey.
Next, to gain deeper insights, we conducted a qualitative study with six
semi-structured interviews with selected key representatives/stakeholders from
various V¨armland organisations between April 2024 and February 2025 (average
duration: 40 minutes). The interview, in general, covered participants’ current
cybersecurity practices and readiness, perceived challenges and risks, and needs
or preferences for cybersecurity training and competence development. The in-
terview script is reported in Appendix A. Three participants were recruited from
the survey follow-up list, and three via the authors’ professional networks. All
interviewees were males with extensive IT experience. Their background and
participant identifiers (P1-P6) are:
(P1). The chief security officer from a municipality
(P2). The IT security coordinator from a higher education institute
(P3). The chief executive officer of an SME developing control systems and
embedded software.
(P4). A salesperson from an SME providing IT services and solutions.
(P5). The security responsible for a mobile platform of a large company in the
security and defence sector.
(P6). The education coordinator of another large company in the security and
defence sector.
5 https://newsroom.cisco.com/c/dam/r/newsroom/en/us/interactive/
cybersecurity-readiness-index/documents/Cisco_Cybersecurity_Readiness_
SE.pdf
Cybersecurity Competence for Organisations in Inner Scandinavia
5
Our interview-based research was used as an explorative method for gaining a
better understanding of the research challenges and deriving qualitative results.
We stopped after six interviews, as we reached a point where no new themes
or significant information emerged from the analysis. Two authors participated
in each interview, one was responsible for leading the interview and asking the
questions, and one took notes. All interviews were audio-recorded, transcribed,
and coded by at least two authors. The coding was then synchronised into a joint
code book, from which themes were derived. This thematic analysis followed the
methodology by Clarke and Braun [2].
Participation in the survey and interviews was voluntary with the consent of
the participants, who were also informed that any questions could be left out.
The survey study was conducted in compliance with the GDPR and the Swedish
Ethical Review Act, and ethical approvals for both studies were obtained from
the ethics advisor at the authors’ faculty.
4
Survey and Interview Results
4.1
Survey Results
Although the limited number of responses from organisational representatives
does not allow for fully representative conclusions for all organisations in V¨arm-
land, they offered initial insights into educational interests and needs These
insights were later explored further in the follow-up interview study, revealing
findings such as:
– Most participants from large companies (4 of the 6) indicated a need for
advanced education of cybersecurity experts, including penetration testing
training. They were less interested in other courses, including anti-phishing
training, for other target groups. The majority (5) of them indicated that
their organisations were well or somewhat prepared to meet the new EU
cybersecurity risk management requirements, and none expressed interest in
related courses.
– In contrast, most SME participants (8 of 11) expressed interest in courses to
prepare for EU cybersecurity risk management requirements and basic train-
ing (e.g., anti-phishing), while over half (6) also sought advanced education
for security experts.
– Both public sector organisations indicated high interest in risk manage-
ment courses for preparing for the new laws, and stated a high need for basic
cybersecurity courses, including anti-phishing training for lay users. One of
them also indicated a high interest in advanced cybersecurity courses for
experts.
About 85% of the respondents were interested in cybersecurity training and edu-
cation (which may, however, not be surprising, as probably primarily those who
were interested took the time to respond to the survey). 12 of the 19 respondents
chose a series of shorter (2–3 hours) lessons as a preferred length, and one-day
6
Fischer-H¨ubner et al.
training events were also chosen as suitable options by half of the participants.
The open-ended questions showed that, beyond courses on pentesting, aware-
ness and anti-phishing training or NIS2, also other topics were of high interest,
including cloud security, cybersecurity for embedded systems, secure coding, cy-
bersecurity related to AI, IoT and OT, supply chain security, and cybersecurity
design principles.
4.2
Interviews results
While the survey revealed first insights and patterns, more explorative research
was conducted via our interviews to gain further in-depth insights and to rea-
son about the current situation, challenges, interests, and needs. This section
presents the results answering our three research questions related to these
themes (printed in italic-bold) that were derived from the interview transcripts’
coding via thematic analysis.
Results related to RQ1. At the start of the interviews, participants were
asked about the organisation’s current situation regarding cybersecurity. The
following themes and results emerged:
Cybersecurity threats, human factors and security awareness: Partici-
pants reported a broad range of threats that their organisations are exposed to,
also due to an increased sophistication of attacks (P2), conducted by both insid-
ers and outsiders. All participants reported that cybersecurity threats related to
human factors play an important role. There is an increase in the number and
sophistication of social engineering and phishing attacks, even though awareness
and practical knowledge regarding phishing would increase (P1). P2 describes
his experiences with simulated phishing experiments: “bank account phishing is
very rare in that uh, some that people fall for. . . the most clicked simulation is
one that um, uh, was sent out about free iPhones from the IT department”. Also,
misconfigurations cause security problems (P1).
Short-staffing of qualified personnel with cybersecurity expertise and the lack
of cybersecurity knowledge or interest were mainly mentioned for the public sec-
tor (P1) and the IT services company (P4) regarding a lack of security knowledge
and awareness of their customers.
While P2 thinks that recent cybersecurity incidents worldwide, and specifi-
cally the ransomware attacks that affected V¨armland against Coop and Tieto-
evry (see Section 1) have raised security awareness of its users, P4 observed no
significant impact on the (lack of) security awareness of their customers, point-
ing out that they lack awareness of security risks: “The manager and the CEO
usually say ‘yes, but nobody is interested in us.’ We sell flower pots, or we bend
sheet metal. Or we service cars or whatever it might be. It doesn’t really matter.
It’s the same across the board, so ‘nobody’s interested in us.’ ”
The recent substantial investments in cybersecurity and in the defence in-
dustry in V¨armland may also further increase the security awareness within IT
companies in V¨armland that deliver these industries, as P4 expects.
Cybersecurity Competence for Organisations in Inner Scandinavia
7
Organisational security measures: For analysing the cybersecurity situa-
tion, needs, and educational measures for those organisations that develop secu-
rity products or services, it is important to differentiate between organisational
cybersecurity and product security, as especially highlighted by P3, P5, and P6.
Therefore, we first summarise the findings related to organisational cybersecurity
measures and situations in this and the next theme. Aspects related to product
security are addressed later in the paper.
P1, who works in the public sector, reported that they use the method sup-
port from MSB [10] for systematically working with information security based
on the standards for information security management systems based on the
ISO/IEC 27000 standard series [6]. The other organisations work systematically
with information security by following the ISO 27000 standards for conducting
risk analyses and implementing and following up security measures.
Security readiness level: Organisations typically follow the ISO 27000 stan-
dards for risk analysis and measuring security readiness. Cybersecurity readiness
for the public municipality sector is also typically measured by participating in
MSB’s cybersecurity check (“cybers¨akerhetskollen”) [9]. P1 reported that MSB’s
cybersecurity check shows that at least the basic cybersecurity level (level 1) is
achieved. As the latest MSB report [9] also showed, the systematic information
security work in Sweden’s municipalities is still considerably low and subject
to improvement. P1 also suggests that security education can help to that end:
“I think we all landed on the lowest level except for one part, and that was the
school. . . they were one level above because they have developed their training
program for even the students and the employees.” Managing and harmonis-
ing cybersecurity work across different sub-organisations constitutes, however, a
challenge, especially for a municipality, which comprises sub-organisations and
services (including, for instance, schools, elderly care, cultural and social ser-
vices, leisure facilities, energy and water supply) with different cybersecurity
challenges and requirements, as P1 points out.
The higher education institute (P2) reports that while they do not have a
systematic approach for measuring security readiness, they can assess the cyber-
security readiness level via the number and kind of security-related IT service re-
quests/errands that they receive from employees or students and by the number
of employees participate in online training sessions using a third-party cyberse-
curity awareness and education tool. Especially the number of users that “click”
and fall for simulated phishing attacks issued by that tool provides insightful
indications: “we have some statistics. . . and we can see what type of simulations
they [our users] fall for.” Apart from that, they have no systematic way of mea-
suring security readiness at the moment, even though, according to P2, it would
be a good idea to have.
While P4 states that security standards for their companies are high, they
report a lower security readiness level for their clients. P5 and P6 report a
high security readiness level for both their organisations and for their product
security development. However, as P6 points out, the level of product security
and product security development is more difficult and not straightforward to
8
Fischer-H¨ubner et al.
define and determine, in contrast to the enterprise security level, which can be
measured via security certification and external audit services.
Addressing product security requirements: The four companies that de-
velop products and services discussed the need for different security measures
to enhance product security and/or increase security awareness for developers
and customers. P3 points out the need for enhanced cybersecurity for embedded
systems and on the physical product level: “I think for 20 years, it was a lot
of focus about, uh, yeah, you could connect to a network and you can hack into
to several, uh, computers that are connected to the network. Today we are on
the same page for the embedded system because if you take a car or some else
some other product, you have several nodes in the system, several computers or
ECUs, and uh, you have uh, you could have the Ethernet network or you can
add a CAN network and so on. But there are no encryption about the traffic or
the communication between the nodes.”
New legal requirements pursuant to the CRA regarding security patch up-
dates pose challenges for product development, especially for IoT and embedded
systems: “New here is that when you make a product and it leaves a factory, then
you are. . . responsible that for that time you leave a factory, you comply with all
the regulations. But no, you have to comply. Always. Lifetime? Yeah. . . If there
are any flaws in the security, then you have to patch that security. . . over life-
time” (P3). Therefore, an agile security patch system and special training for
handling security patches and “compliance for lifetime” (P3) is needed.
Product and software accreditation and lifecycle security assurance for prod-
ucts, including design, implementation, and operation phases, is important to
guarantee products with high security requirements, as P5 explores.
P6 discusses challenges for embedding security practices at all parts of the
product development lifecycle. Right from pentesting “through to, you know,
continuous integration, continuous development, that whole cycle and how it fits
in at every part of that into when it’s operational out in the field” (P6).
Lack of awareness of security as a non-functional requirement:
P3
and P4, i.e. the representatives of the two companies that produce products and
services for markets outside the security and defence sector, discuss the lack of
security knowledge and awareness of their software developers and/or customers
regarding the importance of addressing security as a non-functional requirement.
P3 argues that software engineers typically tend to focus on the main func-
tionality of a product, while paying less attention than needed to security as
a non-functional requirement. “It’s knowledge. It’s, uh, you’re afraid of some-
thing new, and it’s not, it’s not building functionality. You want to see progress in
building functionality. Cybersecurity and testing is. It’s almost backwards. . . Yeah.
Non-functional. . . the threshold for, being interested in cybersecurity—it’s too
high. So that’s why I will put all this, for our software engineers to our focus.”
P4 emphasises a lack of awareness of their customers of the legal requirements
for cybersecurity, i.e. the need to consider security as a non-functional require-
Cybersecurity Competence for Organisations in Inner Scandinavia
9
ment, also for the reason of achieving legal compliance: “it’s the tenth percentile
only who have understood this so far...that there will be legislation even now.”
Impact of cybersecurity regulation on educational needs: The wave of
new cybersecurity laws that organisations need to comply with, as well as their
impact on the organisations and their educational needs, play an important role
and are discussed by most participants.
The requirement of the NIS2 Directive for mandatory cybersecurity training
for organisations working with critical information infrastructures was mentioned
as a benefit for motivating organisations to invest and provide cybersecurity
training for their employees, which especially P1 highlights as an argument that
they can bring forward to the board of his municipality (“kommun styrelsen”):
“I think it does help being, uh, how do you say kommun styrylsen as the, um, uh,
group that is that they pinpointed as the group that they intend they need to have
get education within those nine risk fields. Mhm. But that also they say, I mean
in that suggestion or position that all employees should be given the opportunity
to receive education. So I mean now it’s the law. . . But I think it makes it easier
to actually enforce or hopefully budget as well for it.”
P3 discusses future challenges for complying with the CRA’s requirements
for supporting life-long security patch updates for their products. Additionally,
P3 also mentions new laws that put requirements on the automotive and mining
industries, and autonomous mobile solutions that are impacting their business,
and the required competence profiles of their employees.
A general unwillingness by customers to invest in cybersecurity and an un-
awareness or lack of interest in legal compliance for cybersecurity is a problem
experienced by P4, as aforementioned. For increasing awareness, they often ask
customers to sign a statement that, even if it is recommended for achieving le-
gal compliance, they choose not to invest in a higher security level, e.g. that
they do not want to invest in multi-factor authentication (even though it is re-
quired by NIS2 for critical sectors and the Swedish Data Protection Agency, as
a rule of thumb, for complying with the GDPR when processing sensitive in-
formation). Asking the customers to take over this responsibility and liability
for their choices to save money at the expense of having less security and legal
non-compliance usually makes customers reconsider: “Yes. Sign here. They don’t
want. Yes [laughter]. . . an anti-contract. . . so that’s why you should sign this. Be-
cause then you’re telling me here that you’ve understood and you’re abstaining
because otherwise something will happen soon, and then you’ll come to me and
say, ‘you should have said that!’ you have a piece of paper that says I did. And
it’s mostly to get the customer, think outside the box.”
Benefits of education: In addition to facilitating legal compliance, partici-
pants acknowledge various other benefits of cybersecurity education, even though
P5 notes that such benefits may often rather be long-term. Short-term benefits
are, however, apparent regarding the organisation’s vulnerability to phishing
attacks. While the percentages of employees who were falling for (simulated)
phishing attacks had been increasing, this trend stopped in the last year when
10
Fischer-H¨ubner et al.
the organisation started with anti-phishing training for its employees, as P2
reports. P2 measured that the anti-phishing training, provided by their third-
party cybersecurity awareness and education tool, decreased the percentages of
users falling for simulated phishing attacks from 5.6% to 3.5%. “So there’s more
awareness now with this training also” (P2).
P3 also highlighted the potential benefit of raising awareness for security as
a non-functional requirement, while P5 pointed out that education is also about
training employees to think and reflect, which is important for an organisation:
“You also educate how to think. Yes. To take new knowledge in your head or to
have this discussion in your own head and with other people, of course. So that
is also very important.”
Education of software engineers on product development security is also seen
as a necessity for coping with customers’ demands, as P3 mentions: “Just a game
changer here for for a company like us, if we don’t train the personnel and don’t
cope with the demands from our customers, then we don’t have any services to
deliver, uh, in maybe in five years. So, uh, that’s very important for us.”
Receiving certifications for attended security training is also discussed as
important or required for employees of companies in the security and defence
sector (P5, P6), but also for the security consulting business (P4), concerning
their suppliers, customers, and when hiring new employees to prove competence.
Existing education: All participants’ organisations offer “onboarding” cyber-
security training for their new employees, either in the form of online lectures
and exercises that need to be passed, or through introductory lectures. However,
as P2 reports for their higher education institute, participation in these courses
has been voluntary, and only 60% participated in the online courses.
Moreover, the organisations typically have online anti-phishing and aware-
ness training by external providers with simulated attack exercises. Beyond such
online training on security awareness, especially the organisations in the public
and educational sector are currently lacking continuous education and training
on organisational security for their employees, as P1 and P2 point out, with
the exception of security education for IT personnel at annual planning days
(P2). P2 also mentions that cybersecurity education is, in general, only offered
to employees, but not to students.
In addition to education on organisational cybersecurity, the companies of-
fer different training courses for product and product development security to
their software engineers. External consultants usually give courses on penetration
testing or related topics, as stated by all participants from product development
companies (P3, P4, P5, P6).
P3 states that their company has the strategy to spend 4% of its profit on
employee training, including cybersecurity and machine learning courses. Cy-
bersecurity courses related to their products can partly be provided by their
products’ customers who have the required domain knowledge, as P3 reports.
Cybersecurity Competence for Organisations in Inner Scandinavia
11
Results related to RQ2. In the second part of the interviews, participants
were asked about their cybersecurity education and competence development
challenges. Derived themes and related results are:
Recruitment of professionals: Cybersecurity competence of employees can
usually be directly obtained by recruiting cybersecurity experts with the required
knowledge and skills. However, the challenge of recruiting cybersecurity experts
due to a security skills gap is experienced by all participants.
The need for cybersecurity and defence sector employees to have security
clearance and/or to be Swedish or a NATO state citizen further limits the num-
ber of suitable candidates, as P5 and P6 explain. At the same time, the demand
for hiring cybersecurity experts in the defence sector has increased significantly
in recent years due to the recent massive investments in cybersecurity and de-
fence products in Sweden, as mentioned by P5 and P6.
Challenges and obstacles for cybersecurity education: The participants
experienced various challenges in providing cybersecurity education within their
organisation.
As aforementioned, P1 discussed his challenge as a CISO of a municipality
with a broad range of sectors and activities to arrange cybersecurity education
due to the diversity of users in the different sectors, with different tasks, who
have different educational demands. P2 discusses the challenge for cybersecurity
education to keep up with the advances of the cybersecurity field and the chang-
ing security threat landscape. P5 mentions the general problem that education
is often cut first if the workload is high, and still be able to meet deadlines.
Nonetheless, many challenges and obstacles that participants highlight relate
primarily to providing cybersecurity courses for secure product development
rather than to providing courses on organisational cybersecurity.
The problem of courses on product development security being less available
on the market than courses on enterprise/organisational security was raised by
several participants. This becomes even more of an issue if software developers
must be trained in specific technical domains or application areas. For instance,
P3 discusses the lack of courses on embedded systems security, even though this
topic is increasingly becoming important, also for complying with laws, such
as the CRA, as discussed above. When they looked for respective course offer-
ings, they could only find one course in Europe matching their needs: “I’ve been
searching for companies that could give us training in cybersecurity for, I will
say, embedded system or a product cybersecurity. Uh, and um, we’ve done I’ve
done such, uh, just search around and find one company in Austria” (P4). For
developing security for embedded systems, specific competences are needed, re-
lated, e.g., to lightweight and secure encryption, hardware security, Linux system
hardening, regulations to be applied, how to achieve legal compliance, and also
to the application domain, such as connected vehicles or autonomous systems.
Hence, newly designing and holding such a course requires various expertise and
is not easily done. Even with the increase of smart devices and IoT and the
12
Fischer-H¨ubner et al.
need for cybersecurity at the physical product level, the specific topic of em-
bedded systems security was not part of the cybersecurity curricula at Swedish
universities, as P3 observed and criticised.
Also, P6 emphasises that designing courses on product development security
poses challenges, as it needs to include teaching on secure software development,
including pen testing, related to operational security of the specific application
area, but “there’s very few people who really maybe know that area inside out.”
Moreover, P6 brings up that according to their experiences, academia cannot
easily provide contract teaching to meet industrial needs, as it would lack the
required flexibility. Academics are usually tied up time-wise and thus cannot
easily put aside the time and resources needed for course development on shorter
notice, as experienced by P6.
Results related RQ3. Themes and related results derived from discussing
interests and requirements regarding cybersecurity education are the following:
Regulatory requirements for education: As discussed above, the new cyber-
security laws and especially NIS2, put requirements for systematic cybersecurity
work and cybersecurity education and training within the organisations working
in the critical and important sectors listed in NIS2. Especially, P1 referred to
these NIS2 requirements as motivation and arguments for further investments
in cybersecurity education and work within the municipality.
Customer education on the product’s security and how to use it securely
is required during the accreditation phase, according to the Swedish Defence
Forces security requirements for IT systems “krav p˚a IT-s¨akerhetsf¨orm˚agor hos
IT-system” (KSF) [8], as P5 explains.
Cybersecurity topics of interest and need for competence development:
As discussed above, especially P3 and P6 highlighted the interests of their or-
ganisations in cybersecurity courses for software developers on secure product
development, linked to the specific operational environments of the products,
even though, as P6 also pointed out, the needs and requirements for product
security may be more challenging to define.
Furthermore specific cybersecurity topics, where the participants saw an in-
terest or need for competence development of their employees, customers or users
included: Risk management (P2), cybersecurity regulations and legal and GDPR
compliance (P1, P2) also for customers/managers (P4), AI competence for man-
agement and AI driving licence (P1), organisational rules for app (TikTok) and
rules for AI use (ChatGPT) for teachers (P1), advances phishing training (P1),
Azure/MS365 security, host hardening (P3, P4), cloud security and secure cloud
configuration (P2), ethical hacking (P2) and pentesting, also with a focus on
embedded systems (P3), and cryptography and specifically practical and secure
message/light-weight encryption (P3).
P2 states that the most important action would be cybersecurity education
for their IT support staff with an IT background.
Cybersecurity Competence for Organisations in Inner Scandinavia
13
Preferred instance and forms of cybersecurity education and training:
The need for continuous education is discussed by most participants. P1 men-
tions the need to complement the onboarding training for new employees with
continuous training, e.g., training related to social engineering or ensuring legal
compliance in practice: “and that’s what we need to address to get continuity in
training. . . I mean we can’t expect you to, to remember what you did if you’ve
been employed for seven years or how is it possible to even.”
For practical reasons, shorter online presentations and training sessions on a
higher level are preferred for employees, who can be part of a longer education
scattered over time and/or given continuously (P1, P2, P3, P5).
It may be a challenge to conduct education on the users’ devices, as they can
be classified: “but the problem is that resources are often used for simulations or
for testing or so we can’t perhaps do education on it in a very easy way” (P5).
Benefits of on-site training, which also enables group discussions among em-
ployees (P5), are pointed out. On-site and longer training workshops (e.g., 1-2
days) for technical personnel and system admins (P1, P2, P3), e.g., on ethical
hacking or pentesting, or for customers if combined with a social event (P4) were
mentioned as examples. P2 suggests that cybersecurity training within their or-
ganisation should be compulsory to get all employees involved.
Information exchange network/communities on cybersecurity: The par-
ticipants P5 and P6 from the large companies bring up the usefulness of discus-
sion networks consisting of security experts from other companies and organisa-
tions, including from academia, with similar cybersecurity needs and interests.
According to P5, who used to be the chief digitalisation officer for a large com-
pany in V¨armland before his current assignment, participating in a digitalisation
community network with several other larger companies, where cybersecurity
was discussed to some extent, is of value. P5 perceives this exchange of knowl-
edge and experiences on a higher level as very useful and therefore would appre-
ciate a similar community network in V¨armland exclusively for cybersecurity:
“If we could build a similar joint venture in IT security on the critical infras-
tructure. . . I would like to have perhaps more collaborative discussion networks
in this region between companies. I think that it could be, and I think university
is like the spider in the middle. But the companies could also discuss with each
other because there’s a, uh, the knowledge is in the whole community.”
P6’s employer is part of an expert cybersecurity learning lab with other com-
panies and Swedish universities, where participants can discuss experiences and
measures regarding product security education: “it is the competence there. . . and
which is one of the reasons, and also why we’re working across industry in this
. . . consortium as well. Because. . . there is a lot of value in getting experts to talk
to each other. . . what we’re actually trying to do within [this consortium] is get-
ting experts to network from across companies. Um, and maybe that academia
is playing a facilitated facilitation role in that. . . That we see is very important.”
Nonetheless, P5 and P6 also note the challenge of discussing security-classified
topics, which requires keeping the discussions on a higher level.
14
Fischer-H¨ubner et al.
5
Discussion
Our study provided several findings that are of relevance for understanding the
cybersecurity readiness, specifically in terms of competence levels, challenges,
and needs for cybersecurity education, that may be partly specific to organisa-
tions in V¨armland or generally in Sweden and may also partly hold for other
regions in the world.
5.1
Insights from key findings from the interviews
Key findings from our interviews provided us with important insights, which can
be summarised as follows:
– Organisations typically have at least introductory (“onboarding”) cyberse-
curity education for new employees and additionally shorter online training,
especially related to social engineering and phishing, involving simulated
phishing attacks, in place. However, other types of shorter online cybersecu-
rity training and continuous cybersecurity education are lacking for the pub-
lic and educational sector organisations that were interviewed, even though
there is a recognised need (also for complying with NIS2), interest and in-
tention for implementing a broader continuous education for the users and
employees’ competence development for the future.
– It is important to distinguish demands for cybersecurity and for cybersecu-
rity education for organisational security from demands for product security
and education for secure products and their development. For addressing
organisational security requirements, measures are well defined, and there is
a broader range of available courses and certification schemes for organisa-
tional and enterprise security. For product security, especially in relation to
specific operational environments, the demands are more complex to define,
and suitable education (e.g., on embedded systems security) is hard to find.
– Security as a non-functional requirement is often poorly understood by soft-
ware developers and customers of products and services outside the security
and defence industry. Thus, cybersecurity education and training of software
developers and customers in these companies is important for raising their
cybersecurity knowledge and awareness.
– The new European cybersecurity regulations are putting requirements for
implementing cybersecurity education in organisations. They point out the
need for organisations to invest in cybersecurity education and to increase
their expertise and cybersecurity strategies for achieving legal compliance.
– The large-sized companies that were interviewed appreciate regional or na-
tional networks with other companies and academic partners, for sharing
experiences and exchanging ideas with peers on a high level on how to ap-
proach these challenges, and/or how to design and implement education for
secure product development.
– The cybersecurity skills gap and diverse cybersecurity competence expertise
requirements needed by the different organisations and in different oper-
ational environments are well noticeable. For a municipality in V¨armland,
Cybersecurity Competence for Organisations in Inner Scandinavia
15
security competences need to be broad due to its wide range of different types
of sectors and activities, while companies need security competences for var-
ious types of IT systems, services, and operational environments. Graduates
from universities in Sweden will not necessarily have all these competences
required by the different types of organisations and their application and
operational environment, as also e.g. P4 noted related to the specific com-
petences needed for embedded systems security and in line with what P6
discussed related to the specialised competence required for product secu-
rity in specific operational environments.
5.2
Overcoming the cybersecurity skills gap
Findings related to the cybersecurity skills gap are not directly specific to V¨arm-
land and have been observed for several years as a problem in Europe and world-
wide. The latest ISC2 report shows a worldwide increasing cybersecurity work-
force gap and reports that 90% of organisations have a skills gap within their
security teams [5]. Nonetheless, the presence of the defence industry in V¨arm-
land, combined with recent higher investments and demands for cybersecurity
and defence products, have made the skills gap even more severe and noticeable
in V¨armland. For this reason, increasing efforts in cybersecurity education for
organisations in V¨armland and Sweden becomes even more important.
A recent study [1] analyses how well the cybersecurity educational pro-
grammes at Swedish Universities can prepare students for diverse cybersecurity
roles identified by ENISA’s European Cybersecurity Skills Framework ECSF [3].
It shows that none of the Swedish Universities offers courses that prepare stu-
dents for every role in the ECSF framework. This confirms the observation that
graduates from universities in Sweden may not have all the required competen-
cies for different types of jobs and organisations, and they will still need cyber-
security education and training at their jobs. Nonetheless, the same study shows
that every role specified by ECSF is addressed by at least one course at Swedish
universities. Hence, cooperation and sharing of courses and courseware between
Swedish and Inner Scandinavian universities is key to meeting the required com-
petence skills for different cybersecurity roles in different organisations.
5.3
Industry-academia cybersecurity expert networks
For bridging the cybersecurity skills gap, the EU Commission recently launched
an Industry-Academia Network to “strengthen the links between industry and
academia to boost cybersecurity skills, ensuring the European cyber workforce is
adequately equipped to meet growing demands in the sector.” 6 Our interviews also
revealed that the large companies appreciate such type of industry-academia net-
works with other industrial and academic partners from V¨armland, Inner Scan-
dinavia, and/or Sweden. Such industry-academic networks can help to exchange
6 https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/news/commission-launches-
industry-academia-network-bridge-cybersecurity-skills-gap
16
Fischer-H¨ubner et al.
insight and knowledge on topics of high relevance, such as what educational, or-
ganisational, and technical means are needed to comply with new regulations or
enforce trustworthy and robust AI. Additionally, such networks were also consid-
ered important for discussing and addressing challenges relating to the training
of software and system developers in secure product development.
Sweden and other Nordic countries are known for their flat hierarchies in or-
ganisations and their consensus culture [4,7]. In Sweden, the consensus and “fika
paus” (coffee breaks with colleagues) culture, which is dominant at workplaces,
supports informal discussions, team-building, and the decision-making process,
and leads to a better collaboration among colleagues [7,11]. Since Swedes are tra-
ditionally used to and value collaboration at work, it may explain and motivate
why Swedish company representatives value collaboration networks, as indicated
in our interviews. Hence, supporting organisations in Sweden and V¨armland to
establish and/or maintain such cybersecurity expert networks for ensuring that
organisations are well equipped to meet growing demands for cybersecurity, sim-
ilar to ENISA’s approach, may be a good investment to address cybersecurity
skills gap challenges. Moreover, to utilise the competence of the Norwegian cy-
bersecurity hub in Innlandet, establishing a cross-border industry-academia cy-
bersecurity expert network offering regular discussion rounds and workshops for
competence and experience exchange should be further considered.
5.4
Limitations
Our interview study included six participants, which may be considered a limi-
tation; however, they were key stakeholders who are typically difficult to access.
Furthermore, the aim was to conduct explorative research and to derive qual-
itative (rather than quantitative) results from relevant sectors. While there is
the risk that the results may mainly reflect the views from the participating
organisations, the interviews revealed recurring codes/themes across public sec-
tor bodies, SMEs, large companies, and product/service providers.This indicates
that code saturation was largely reached, i.e. hardly any additional aspects were
identified, and further interviews would likely yield redundant information. Code
saturation is a recognised criterion for determining when to stop data collection,
supporting the sufficiency of our six interviews.
6
Conclusions
Our study provides several findings and important insights regarding the cyber-
security situation at different types of organisations in V¨armland, the challenges
for delivering cybersecurity education, and their needs and interests for cyber-
security and education. Our findings suggest in particular to invest more efforts
in developing continuous cybersecurity training especially for the public sector,
creating more specialised courses for secure product development (e.g., for em-
bedded systems or specific operational environments), new course offerings for
preparing for the requirements posed by new European cybersecurity-related
Cybersecurity Competence for Organisations in Inner Scandinavia
17
laws, and the exchange of access to courses/courseware among Swedish univer-
sities and across borders, and maintain and establish industry-academia cyber-
security expert networks for exchanging ideas, insights, expertise in the region,
in Sweden and across borders. Such recommendations may also hold for other
regions or countries with similar public sector structures, emerging cybersecurity
challenges, and a need for specialized training, suggesting that while some find-
ings may be context-specific, many of the recommendations could be applicable
more broadly. The results of this study and the study conducted in parallel in
Innlandet Norway will allow us, as part of our future work, to analyse similarities
and differences between organisations in V¨armland and Innlandet as well as the
potential for strengthening cybersecurity in Inner Scandinavia in cooperation
through addressing educational needs in the region.
Acknowledgements
This study was co-funded by the Cross Border Cyber Capacity (CBCC) project,
an Interreg Sverige-Norge cross-border cooperation, innovative environments
project, which is co-funded by the European Union.
References
1. Behzadi, B.: Examining the efficacy of cybersecurity education at Swedish univer-
sities : A qualitative inquiry through interviews. Master’s thesis, School of Infor-
matics, University of Sk¨ovde (2024)
2. Clarke, V., Braun, V.: Thematic analysis. The journal of positive psychology 12(3),
297–298 (2017)
3. EU Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA): European cybersecurity skills framework
role profiles (2022), https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/european-
cybersecurity-skills-framework-role-profiles, accessed: 2025-04-16
4. Hofstede, G., Hofstede, G.J.: Lokales Denken, globales Handeln: Interkulturelle
Zusammenarbeit und globales Management (Cultures and organizations - software
of the mind). Deutscher Taschenbuch Verlag (2006)
5. International Information System Security Certification Consortium: ISC2 cyber-
security workforce study 2024 (2024), https://www.isc2.org/Insights/2024/10/
ISC2-2024-Cybersecurity-Workforce-Study
6. International Organization for Standardization (ISO): Information security, cy-
bersecurity and privacy protection – information security management systems –
requirements. https://www.iso.org/standard/82875.html (2022)
7. Meyer, E.: The culture map: Breaking through the invisible boundaries of global
business. PublicAffairs (2016)
8. Milit¨ara underr¨attelse- och s¨akerhetstj¨ansten (MUST): Krav p˚a godk¨anda s¨aker-
hetsfunktioner i IT-system (KSF), version 3.1 (2017), https://www.fmv.se/
globalassets/dokument/om-fmv/sakerhetsskydd/ksf-3.1.pdf
9. Myndigheten f¨or samh¨allsskydd och beredskap: Cybers¨akerhetskollen (2024)
10. Myndigheten
f¨or
samh¨allsskydd
och
beredskap
(MSB):
Metodst¨od
f¨or
systematiskt
informationss¨akerhetsarbete:
en
¨oversikt.
https:
//www.msb.se/sv/publikationer/metodstod-for-systematiskt-
informationssakerhetsarbete--en-oversikt/ (2021)
18
Fischer-H¨ubner et al.
11. Ta Thi, T.T., Latt, K.Z.: Cross-Cultural Communication Challenges between
Swedish Managers and Burmese and Vietnamese Employees: How are those Com-
munication Challenges related to GLOBE’s Cultural Dimensions? Master’s thesis,
School of Economics and Management, Lund University (2017)
A
Interview Guide
The interview script is presented in this section. All questions were optional and
could be left out depending on the flow of the conversation.
Introductory Questions
1. Could you tell us about your responsibilities/interests for training and edu-
cation?
Status of the Organisation
Risks
2. What are the most significant cybersecurity threats for your organisation?
Probe: Which of the following threats do you consider in your organisation:
outsider (hacker) attacks, including malware, social engineering attacks, in-
sider attacks, human errors and misconfigurations, etc.
3. How are you addressing these risks?
Current Situation
4. How is the level of cybersecurity expertise and competence of the users in
your organisation?
5. How would you describe your organisation’s cybersecurity readiness level?
6. How does your organisation assess and update its cybersecurity risk profile?
7. What existing measures does your organisation have for cybersecurity train-
ing and education?
8. What cybersecurity competence development offers are currently used or
exist in your organisation?
9. Can you describe a situation where cybersecurity training directly benefited
your organisation?
10. What are the efforts for the recruitment of cybersecurity experts for your
organisation?
Challenges
11. What challenges do you foresee when it comes to cybersecurity training and
education? Probe: What challenges do you face in creating awareness and
recruitment of cybersecurity experts?
12. How would you estimate the relation between efforts/costs and benefits of
cybersecurity training and education?
Cybersecurity Competence for Organisations in Inner Scandinavia
19
13. What are barriers to involving employees in cybersecurity training/education?
Requirements / Concrete Needs for Educational Offers
14. Which of the following is most important and why? Please motivate your
previous answers:
– Advanced education of cybersecurity experts (e.g., penetration testing)
– Cybersecurity education of employees with an IT background (e.g., in-
troduction to penetration testing)
– Cybersecurity education for lay users (with no IT or technical back-
ground), e.g., through a basic cybersecurity education including anti-
phishing training
– Courses on risk management for legal compliance (GDPR, AI Act, Cyber
Resilience Act, NIS 2, etc.)
– Further specific topics?
15. Is customisation of the training content to the needs of your organisation
important?
16. Preferred length of courses:
– 1-day training
– 2–3 days training
– Series of shorter (1–3 hours) lessons
– Others?
17. Preferred locations:
– On site – at X university (redacted to fulfil anonymity requirement)
– On site – at your company
– Online (live) teaching
– Recorded videos and quizzes
18. What access to (internal or external) resources and infrastructure (e.g., cyber
range, hacking tools) is needed for education/training?
19. How frequently should such educational offers be given and updated?
20. Are you using or are you interested in cybersecurity contract teaching?
Need for Private/Public Partnerships
21. What is your position on collaborating with other private/public partners?
B
Survey Instrument
Survey on Cybersecurity Educational Needs. (Reproduced from the sur-
vey instrument that participants answered. Note that answer options to the
questions are listed after each question, separated by comma.)
Q1: How do you identify yourself? Male, Female, Others, Prefer not to say.
Q2: Name of your organisation (optional, free text).
Q3: Please specify your organisation type: Micro Company (< 10 employees),
Small or Medium-size Enterprise/Industry (SME, ≤250 employees), Large
Enterprise/Industry (> 250 employees), Public Sector (authority), Prefer
not to say, Other (please specify).
20
Fischer-H¨ubner et al.
Q4: What is your current role within your organisation? Executive/Management,
IT Security Administrator/Specialist, Other Type of IT Professional, Non-
IT Professional, Other (please specify).
Q5: Is your organisation interested in cybersecurity education and competence
development for employees? Yes, No, Do not know.
Q6: What cybersecurity training or education is needed in your organisation
(beyond what is already offered)? (free text)
Q7: Is there a need for advanced education of cybersecurity experts (e.g., ad-
vanced testing/penetration testing or Capture the Flag (CTF) exercises)?
Five-point Likert Scale answers from Extremely needed to Not at all needed.
Q8: Is there a need for cybersecurity education of employees with an IT back-
ground (e.g., introduction to penetration testing and CTF exercises)? Five-
point Likert Scale answers from Extremely needed to Not at all needed.
Q9: Is there a need for cybersecurity education for lay users (no IT/technical
background), e.g., basic cybersecurity, including anti-phishing training?
Five-point Likert Scale answers from Extremely needed to Not at all needed.
Q10: Are there other cybersecurity courses/topics of interest? (e.g., GDPR, cloud
security, forensics, . . . ) (free text)
Q11: Are there other target groups of interest (beyond employees, e.g., school
students)? (free text)
Q12: What form of training/education would suit your organisation? (select all
that apply) 1 day training, 2–3 days training, Series of shorter (1–3 hours)
lessons, Others (please specify).
What is the preferred length? Please specify (free text).
Q13: What is the preferred location? On-site – at X university [Redacted to fulfil
anonymity requirement], On-site – at the premises of your organisation,
Online (live) teaching, Recorded videos and quizzes (asynchronous), Other
forms (please specify).
Please provide details (free text).
Q14: How well do you think your organisation is prepared for complying with
the risk management requirements of new EU regulations relating to cy-
bersecurity (incl. Cyber Resilience Act, NIS 2, AI Act, Digital Services
Act)? Five-point Likert Scale answers from Very well prepared to Not at
all prepared.
Q15: Is your organisation interested in developing and training approaches for
Risk Analysis to comply not only with GDPR Data Protection Impact
Assessments but also with risk analysis requirements in other laws (incl.
Cyber Resilience Act, NIS 2, AI Act, Digital Services Act)? Yes, No, Do
not know.
Q16: General comments: (free text)
Q17: Are you interested/available for a follow-up talk/interview to discuss how
the project could address cybersecurity education needs for your organisa-
tion? Yes, No.
Q18: Please leave your name, email and/or phone number for contact: (optional,
free text)
