Title: The Role of Machine Learning in Cybersecurity
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2206.09707v1
--------------------------------------------------

The Role of Machine Learning in Cybersecurity
GIOVANNI APRUZZESE∗and PAVEL LASKOV∗, University of Liechtenstein, Liechtenstein
EDGARDO MONTES DE OCA and WISSAM MALLOULI, Montimage, France
LUIS BÚRDALO RAPA, S2 Grupo, Spain
ATHANASIOS VASILEIOS GRAMMATOPOULOS and FABIO DI FRANCO, ENISA, Greece
Machine Learning (ML) represents a pivotal technology for current and future information systems, and many domains
already leverage the capabilities of ML. However, deployment of ML in cybersecurity is still at an early stage, revealing a
significant discrepancy between research and practice. Such discrepancy has its root cause in the current state-of-the-art,
which does not allow to identify the role of ML in cybersecurity. The full potential of ML will never be unleashed unless its
pros and cons are understood by a broad audience.
This paper is the first attempt to provide a holistic understanding of the role of ML in the entire cybersecurity domain—to
any potential reader with an interest in this topic. We highlight the advantages of ML with respect to human-driven detection
methods, as well as the additional tasks that can be addressed by ML in cybersecurity. Moreover, we elucidate various intrinsic
problems affecting real ML deployments in cybersecurity. Finally, we present how various stakeholders can contribute to
future developments of ML in cybersecurity, which is essential for further progress in this field. Our contributions are
complemented with two real case studies describing industrial applications of ML as defense against cyber-threats.
CCS Concepts: • Security and privacy; • Computing methodologies →Machine learning;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Cybersecurity, Incident Detection, Machine Learning, Artificial Intelligence
ACM Reference Format:
Giovanni Apruzzese, Pavel Laskov, Edgardo Montes de Oca, Wissam Mallouli, Luis Búrdalo Rapa, Athanasios Vasileios
Grammatopoulos, and Fabio Di Franco. 2022. The Role of Machine Learning in Cybersecurity. 1, 1 (June 2022), 38 pages.
https://doi.org/x
1
INTRODUCTION
With the rising complexity of modern information systems and the resulting ever increasing flow of big data, the
benefits of Artificial Intelligence (AI) are now widely recognized. Specifically, Machine Learning (ML) methods [85]
are already deployed to solve diverse real world tasks—especially with the advent of deep learning [98]. Fascinating
examples of practical achievements of ML are machine translation [168], travel and vacation recommendations
[77], object detection and tracking [139] and even various applications in healthcare [57]. Furthermore, ML is
rightly considered to be a technology enabler, as it has shown great potential in the context of telecommunication
systems [114] or autonomous driving [8].
Authors’ addresses: Giovanni Apruzzese, giovanni.apruzzese@uni.li; Pavel Laskov, pavel.laskov@uni.li, University of Liechtenstein, Vaduz,
Liechtenstein; Edgardo Montes de Oca, edgardo.montesdeoca@montimage.com; Wissam Mallouli, wissam.mallouli@montimage.com, Mon-
timage, France; Luis Búrdalo Rapa, luis.burdalo@s2grupo.es, S2 Grupo, Spain; Athanasios Vasileios Grammatopoulos, gramthanos@gmail.com;
Fabio Di Franco, fabio.difranco@enisa.europa.eu, ENISA, Greece.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that
copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first
page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from
permissions@acm.org.
© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
XXXX-XXXX/2022/6-ART $15.00
https://doi.org/x
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
arXiv:2206.09707v1  [cs.CR]  20 Jun 2022
2
•
Giovanni Apruzzese, Pavel Laskov, Edgardo Montes de Oca, Wissam Mallouli, Luis Búrdalo Rapa, Athanasios Vasileios
Grammatopoulos, and Fabio Di Franco
Nevertheless, modern society is increasingly relying on information technology (IT) systems—including
autonomous ones—which are also actively leveraged by malicious entities. Digital threats are, in fact, continuously
evolving [90], and according to Gartner attackers will have sufficient capabilities to harm or kill humans by
2025 [3]. To prevent such incidents and mitigate the plethora of risks that can target current and future IT systems,
defensive mechanisms require the capability to quickly adapt to the (i) mutating environments and (ii) dynamic
threat landscape.
Coping with such twofold requirement via static and human-defined methods is clearly unfeasible, and
deployment of ML in cybersecurity is inescapable. Not surprisingly, abundant work addressed integration of
ML in cybersecurity, as evidenced by recent survey papers (e.g., [23, 36, 71]) and technical reports (e.g., [35,
106]). Despite impressive results in research settings, however, the development and integration of ML in
production environments is progressing at a slow pace. A recent survey [93] shows that although over 90% of
companies already use some AI/ML in their defensive tools, we observe that most of these solutions still leverage
‘unsupervised’ methods (e.g., [2, 97]) and mostly for ‘anomaly detection’. Such observation demonstrates a drastic
discrepancy between research and practice, especially in comparison with other domains where ML has already
become an indispensable asset.
The peculiarity of the security domain is that all operational decisions—made by the top management—are
about the trade-off between losses and losses [83]. In simple terms, the rationale is “paying 𝑥to avoid paying
𝑦≫𝑥”. Investment in security should be justified by the prevention of substantially higher but ultimately
unpredictable losses from security incidents. Hence, decision makers must have a clear understanding of the
(i) benefits, (ii) problems, and (iii) challenges of a cybersecurity solution before endorsing their adoption in
practice. However, the current state-of-the-art of ML for cybersecurity fails to deliver such understanding. Taken
individually, research papers—commonly claiming to outperform previous work—often lead to contradictory
results. For instance, [166] show that deep learning methods outperform ‘traditional’ ML methods, but the
opposite is claimed by [134] in the exact same setting. Furthermore, existing literature surveys related to ML
in cybersecurity do not provide a holistic coverage suitable for operational decisions. Some of them are too
technical and hence tailored for ML experts (e.g., [180]), others focus only on research efforts neglecting real
world implications (e.g., [23]) or have a limited scope (e.g., only deep learning [36]). As a result, the role of ML in
cybersecurity is portrayed in a highly fragmented way, thus hindering deployment of ML in practice—despite its
great potential for cybersecurity.
We attempt to rectify this problem. Specifically, this paper is the first effort to provide a comprehensive
analysis of the role of ML in cybersecurity. We distill scientific knowledge and industrial experience related to
deployment of ML within the entire domain of cybersecurity. One of our goals is to make the current state-of-the-
art understandable to any reader, irrespective of their prior expertise in cybersecurity or ML. We also take this
opportunity to clarify many misconceptions related to ML in the context of cybersecurity. We highlight the benefits
of using ML in cybersecurity by listing all the tasks where it outperforms or provides novel capabilities with
respect to traditional security mechanisms. We also elucidate the intrinsic problems of ML in the cybersecurity
context. Such analysis reveals the challenges that require the joint contribution of all relevant stakeholders in
order to improve the quality of ML-driven security mechanisms.
Let us explain how we achieve our objective and outline the structure of our paper, which comprises several
self-contained sections. We begin (§2) by introducing the key concepts of the ML paradigm in a notation-free
form. We also define the intended audience of this paper and outline the differences of our work from previous
literature surveys and reports.
Then, in §3, we present the most emblematic application of ML in security: cyberthreat detection. We distinguish
between three broad areas: network intrusion detection, malware detection, and phishing detection, which is
common in related literature [23, 163]. The goal of this section is to highlight the added value of ML with respect
to traditional detection mechanisms.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
The Role of Machine Learning in Cybersecurity
•
3
Next, in §4, we elucidate the cybersecurity tasks orthogonal to threat detection that can exploit the capabilities
of ML to analyze unstructured data. In contrast to detection problems which require (costly) labels, raw data
is abundant in cybersecurity and can also be exploited via ML. For instance, alerts can be filtered to remove
annoying false alarms, or compressed into more manageable reports. Furthermore, information from diverse
sources can be cross-correlated to anticipate novel attacks, or to identify the weak-spots of a given organization.
The goal of this section is to illustrate that there exist many (and vastly unexplored) additional areas in which
ML can be deployed to enhance the security of modern systems.
We continue (§5) by emphasizing the intrinsic problems of cybersecurity applications of ML. Some of these
problems (e.g., concept drift, adversarial examples, confidentiality) are fundamental and arise from the contrasting
assumptions of cybersecurity and ML. Further problems are specific to either in-house development (e.g., hidden
maintenance costs) or commercial products (e.g., limited scope and transparency). The goal of this section is
highlighting that ML is not perfect and real deployments involve many tradeoffs, which must be known (to
decision makers), mitigated (by ML engineers), and addressed (in future work).
As our main constructive contribution, we outline the impending challenges of ML in cybersecurity in §6.
Solving these challenges will strongly facilitate the operational deployment of ML in cybersecurity. However, it
requires the joint effort of (i) regulatory bodies, (ii) corporate executives, (iii) ML engineers and practitioners,
and (iv) the scientific community. Our takeaway is that rectifying the current immaturity of ML in cybersecurity
requires a radical re-thinking of future technological developments. For instance, research efforts should focus on
more pragmatic results instead of merely “outperforming the state-of-the-art”. However, such efforts necessitate
an increased availability of real data whose disclosure requires authorization by senior management, as well as
potentially new regulations that enable public release of such data.
To establish a connection between research and practice, we discuss two real industrial applications of ML in
cybersecurity in §7. We note that commercial security products are typically provided as ‘black boxes’ with little
technical details about the actual implementation of ML. This section sheds light into the operational tradeoffs
and ‘tricks of the trade’ needed to meet the practical needs of the customers. These case studies are provided
with the contribution of Montimage and S2Grupo1.
This paper is a result of collaboration between researchers, industry practitioners and policy-makers. Our
findings reflect the insights from both recent technical reports and scientific literature. To the best of our
knowledge, no previous work combines such a broad scope with our heterogeneous intended audience.
Contribution Our main goal is to foster the deployment of ML in cybersecurity by bridging the gap between
research and practice. Specifically, our paper make the following contributions:
• it provides an overview of the benefits and problems of ML in the entire cybersecurity domain;
• it considers the twofold perspective of the research and industrial community;
• it identifies many misconceptions that are becoming common in this field;
• it highlights how (i) regulatory bodies, (ii) corporate executives, (iii) engineers, and (iv) the research
community can contribute to future developments of ML in cybersecurity.
• it elucidates two real deployments of ML products.
Furthermore, this paper is meant to be understandable by any reader, irrespective of their technical expertise.
2
BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
To set-up the stage for our paper, we first introduce the main concepts of Machine Learning in a simplified way,
accessible to any reader (§2.1). Our goal is to present the established terminology as well as the common classes
of existing ML methods. We then define the scope and target audience of this paper (§2.2), and highlight the
differences of our effort with respect to previous work (§2.3).
1The names of such vendors are anonymized for Double Blind submission policies.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
4
•
Giovanni Apruzzese, Pavel Laskov, Edgardo Montes de Oca, Wissam Mallouli, Luis Búrdalo Rapa, Athanasios Vasileios
Grammatopoulos, and Fabio Di Franco
2.1
Soft Introduction to Machine Learning
The goal of Machine Learning (ML) is to develop machines2 that automatically learn to make decisions. The
learning is done through a training phase: by instructing a computing device to analyze some ‘existing’ (training)
data via a given ML algorithm, a ML model is developed. Such a model incorporates all the knowledge learned
during the training phase, and implements a function to make decisions on ‘future’ data. Before a ML model
can be deployed in an operational environment, its performance must be assessed. To this end, some ‘validation’
data is processed by the ML model and its predictions are either analyzed by humans or compared with some
known ground truth. We can hence define a ML method as “the process for developing a ML model by using ML
algorithms on some training data”. An exemplary workflow of the training and validation phases is schematically
depicted in Fig 1.
Training
Data
Benign
Malicious
ML algorithm
(Random Forest,
SVM,
Neural Network)
ML model
Learning
input
develop
ML Training Phase
Validation
Data
Benign
Malicious
ML model
ML Validation Phase
for each
Sample
correct?
analysis
Good
Performance
Poor
Performance
yes
no
= benign
= malicious
Fig. 1. Machine Learning development. After collecting some training data and analyzing such data via a ML algorithm, a
ML model is obtained. Such ML model must be tested via some validation data. If the performance of such assessment is
appreciable, then the ML model can be deployed in production.
A crucial factor in the development of ML models is the notion of labels, which represent the target value
for a prediction function on a given sample (e.g., benign or malicious). Depending on the availability of labels,
ML methods can be classified into supervised and unsupervised. Supervised methods explicitly require labelled
training data. In some cases, such labels occur naturally3, otherwise acquiring labels involves dedicated manual
verification. On the other hand, unsupervised methods either do not require labels, or involve limited supervision.
For instance, in reinforcement learning the ML model is built through a feedback mechanism4 that is completely
automated.
An orthogonal classification of ML methods is between shallow and deep learning. Deep learning refers to
ML methods based on neural networks, which typically require more computational power and larger training
datasets compared to shallow ML methods—requirements that could only be met in the recent years [98]. Let
us point out the first misconception: deep learning is not not necessarily better than shallow ML. Indeed,
when the data to analyze has a small number of features, shallow ML can attain similar performance as deep
learning [23], but the latter still requires more resources and the results are more difficult to interpret (e.g., [14]).
In contrast, the advantages of deep learning lie in its ability to deal with data with high complexity, such as
images, unstructured text, or when temporal dependencies must be taken into account. In all such cases, shallow
ML simply cannot be used. Deep learning methods can be supervised or unsupervised, and can also leverage
reinforcement learning—e.g., the popular generative adversarial networks (GAN) [17].
2The notion of a ‘machine’ refers to a software component that can be deployed on any computing device, even in the cloud.
3In time-series forecasting [44], the learning is done by analyzing the past history of a given phenomenon, which is used to make the future
predictions. Such history can be seen as the training data, where each element is associated to its timestamp and its known value (i.e., the
label).
4Such mechanism only requires defining the ‘actions’ that can be taken by the ML model, and the ‘reward’ that should be provided to the ML
model depending on the effects of its actions on the ‘environment’.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
The Role of Machine Learning in Cybersecurity
•
5
We provide an overview of some of the most popular ML algorithms in the above mentioned categories in
Fig. 2. For a more comprehensive description, we refer the reader to [23].
Shallow
Supervised
Deep
Unsupervised
Typical Machine Learning Algorithms
Deep Boltzmann Machines
Stacked AutoEncoders
Generative Adversarial Network
Convolutional Neural Network
Feedforward Neural Network
Recurrent Neural Network
Clustering Algorithms
Association Rules
Reinforcement Learning
Random Forests
Support Vector Machines
Logistic Regression
K-Nearest Neighbot
Decision Tree
Fig. 2. Typical Machine Learning algorithms. An algorithm can be ‘deep’ if it relies on neural networks, otherwise it is ‘shallow’.
Algorithms requiring labelled data are used for ‘supervised’ tasks, otherwise they can be used also in ‘unsupervised’ tasks.
Finally, let us briefly address the performance assessment of ML models. The most common quality measure is
the accuracy metric, which represents the percentage of correct predictions made by the ML model. However,
accuracy can be misleading in the presence of imbalanced data distributions, which is typical in cyber-threat
detection because malicious activities tend to be rare events and are (hopefully) overshadowed by benign samples.
In such context, it is common to differentiate between ‘positives’ (i.e., malicious activities) and ‘negatives’ (i.e.,
benign activities). The performance can then be measured by taking into account the correct (i.e., True Positives
and True Negatives) and incorrect (i.e., False Positives and False Negatives) predictions generated by a given
ML model. A complete list of the most common performance metrics is in Table 1. Note that performance
assessment pertains to ML models and not methods. Depending on the specific setting—e.g., the training data, the
ML algorithm, its parameters—a ML method may yield many ML models, each having a different performance.
2.2
Scope and Target Audience
The scope of our paper is bridging the gap between scientific research and operational practice of ML in
cybersecurity. We do so by unifying in a single document the benefits, problems, and future challenges of ML in
the entire cybersecurity domain. Our paper is meant to be understandable by any reader that is interested in ML
and its relationship with cybersecurity.
Specifically, we address the following three classes of target readers:
• Decision makers (e.g., Corporate Executives, Chief Information Security Officers) who need to understand the
state-of-the-art. This paper should allow more sound decisions on the adoption of ML and its integration
into existing systems to enhance the productivity of security operation centers.
• Security professionals (e.g., security consultants and administrators, digital forensics experts) who should
understand the operational issues affecting ML applications in cybersecurity. Such understanding is crucial
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
6
•
Giovanni Apruzzese, Pavel Laskov, Edgardo Montes de Oca, Wissam Mallouli, Luis Búrdalo Rapa, Athanasios Vasileios
Grammatopoulos, and Fabio Di Franco
Table 1. Typical ML performance metrics. Cyber-threat detection represents a binary classification problem: samples are
positive (malicious) or negative (benign). Accuracy is useful for cybersecurity tasks where such distinction is not possible.
Acronyms: True Positive (TP), True Negative (TN), False Positive (FP), False Negative (FN).
Metric
Description
Formula
Accuracy
(𝐴𝑐𝑐)
It denotes the percentage of correct predictions among all predictions.
It is misleading in the presence of imbalanced distributions (common in cybersecurity).
𝐴𝑐𝑐=
𝑇𝑃+𝑇𝑁
𝑇𝑃+𝑇𝑁+𝐹𝑃+𝐹𝑁
Detection Rate
(𝐷𝑅)
It measures the capacity of identifying attacks, but it does not consider false alarms.
It is also known as Recall, or True Positive Rate.
𝐷𝑅=
𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃+𝐹𝑁
False Positive Rate
(𝐹𝑃𝑅)
It represents the percentage of incorrect ‘positive’ predictions.
Useful for measuring the amount of false alarms.
𝐹𝑃𝑅=
𝐹𝑃
𝐹𝑃+𝑇𝑁
Precision
(𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐)
It denotes the percentage of correct predictions among all ‘positive’ samples.
High values implies low false positives, but nothing can be said about false negatives.
𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐=
𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃+𝐹𝑃
F1-score
(𝐹1)
It combines Precision and Detection Rate into a single metric.
Useful for ‘overviews’, but it is difficult to interpret.
𝐹1 =
𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃+0.5(𝐹𝑁+𝐹𝑃)
for a reliable operation of such instruments in practice, as well as for transparent marketing and assessment
of commercial ML solutions.
• Researchers and Engineers who are interested in devising novel ML solutions for cybersecurity, improving
existing ML systems, or mitigating some of their limitations. The open issues and challenges presented in
this paper should guide future developments of ML for cybersecurity.
The takeaways of this paper leverage the contribution5 and take into account the standpoints of all the above-
mentioned classes of readers. For example, experienced engineers may be aware of the shortcomings of ML, but
they may not know how such issues are received by decision makers. At the same time, security professionals
may know how ML is used, but they can benefit from understanding the most significant future developments in
this field.
2.3
Related Work
With the advent and increasing popularity of ML, abundant works proposed ML solutions for diverse cybersecurity
tasks, resulting in hundreds of research papers. Such abundance inspired many literature surveys that aggregate
or summarize the state-of-the-art. However, most of such studies may provide a detailed analysis but on a
single application, such as cyber risk assessment [137] or IoT security [45]. Others may focus on a specific cyber
detection problem, e.g., malware [13, 71, 160], spam [70, 89] or intrusion detection [46, 102]. Some papers do not
explicitly focus on ML (e.g., [82]), whereas others do not focus on cybersecurity (e.g., [81, 127]). Finally, many
works only consider specific ML paradigms, such as generative adversarial networks (e.g., [180]), adversarial ML
(e.g., [24, 108]), reinforcement learning [121], or deep learning [36]—the latter of which is not necessarily the
best ‘universal’ ML solution for cybersecurity. Such finding was shown in the well-known work by Apruzzese et
al. [23], which has a more limited scope than our paper because they (i) focus on the separation between shallow
and deep learning, (ii) do not delve into cybersecurity tasks beyond threat detection, and (iii) only consider
scientific works. Indeed, ML has undergone significant advances in cybersecurity since the publication of [23]—as
we will show in our study.
All these papers, while being useful for interested and experienced researchers, cannot be appreciated simulta-
neously by security specialists, executives and stakeholders—which are included in our target audience. Indeed,
the excessive depth or limited scope of prior work does not allow to grasp the true role (current and future) played
by ML in the entire cybersecurity domain. At the same time, technical reports (e.g., [35, 106]) may be easier to
5The identity of the authors are concealed due to Double Blind submission policies.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
The Role of Machine Learning in Cybersecurity
•
7
understand by security personnel, but are not useful for researchers due to lack of comprehensive guidelines, and
do not provide much insight on real ML deployments.
We aim to close the gap between research and practice of ML in cybersecurity with a single document. To this
end, we shape this paper so that it is understandable—and usable—by any reader, regardless of their technical
competence in ML. With respect to past works, this paper represents a ‘meta-review’ of the state-of-the-art6 which
provides a (i) comprehensive overview and (ii) practical recommendations and research directions (iii) within the
entire cybersecurity sphere. Moreover, we (iv) clear many misconceptions that are becoming prevalent in this
domain. Finally, we (v) address all potential stakeholders—which include but are not limited to researchers. To
the best of our knowledge, no existing paper unifies all of the above in a single contribution.
3
MACHINE LEARNING FOR THREAT DETECTION
The security lifecycle spans over three processes: prevention, detection, reaction [171]. The complete prevention
of any cyber threat is recognized as an impossible task, whereas the reaction phase assumes that the damage has
already taken place. Hence, most security mechanisms (including ML-based ones) focus on threat detection. For
instance, it is not possible to prevent the creation of a phishing webpage; however, such threat can be defused by
detecting that a given webpage is compromised, and alerting the users before they fall victim to a phishing ‘hook’.
The detection of cyber threats can leverage two distinct approaches: misuse-based and anomaly-based. The
former, also referred to as signature- or rule-based, require defining specific ‘patterns’ that correspond to a given
threat—under the assumption that future threats will exhibit the same patterns. The latter require defining a
notion of ‘normality’, and aim to detect events deviating from such normality—under the assumption that such
deviations correspond to security incidents. These two detection approaches are complementary: misuse-based
approaches are very precise, but can only detect known threats; anomaly-based approaches tend to generate
more false alarms, but have a better chance against novel attacks.
Before the advent of ML, detection mechanisms required manual definition of all the necessary elements for a
given approach (either misuse- and anomaly-based). Aside from being a time consuming and error prone task,
such efforts could not cope with the increasing growth of modern environments. Hence, with the progress of
data analytics techniques, detection systems began to leverage data-driven solutions, such as ML. These solutions
not only required less manual effort but, in some cases, even outperformed traditional hand-written detection
schemes [46]. In the context of ML, such increased performance is due to the intrinsic ability of ML to learn ‘weak’
signals—unnoticed by human operators—in the analyzed data, and use such signals to enhance their detection.
The distinguishing characteristic of ML applications for cyber threat detection (schematically depicted in Fig. 3)
is whether supervised or unsupervised ML methods can be deployed. The former can be used as complete detection
systems, but require labelled data created via some human supervision. The latter do not have a human in the loop,
but can only perform ancillary tasks7. Depending on the data-type to analyze, labels may be easier to acquire: for
instance, any layman can distinguish a legitimate webpage from a phishing one [99], but distinguishing benign
from malicious network traffic is harder [63].
It is common to associate ML methods with anomaly detection (even recent papers suffer from such confusion,
e.g., [34]). This is a misconception, because ML can be used also for misuse-based approaches [91]. Specifically,
by analyzing large amounts of data, ML methods can learn the patterns differentiating benign events from
malicious ones, so as to automatically define the ‘signatures’ for misuse-based approaches. At the same time, ML
can be used for anomaly detection by automatically identifying the ‘normal’ activities that correspond to regular
behaviors within a given environment.
6We observe that our paper includes almost 200 referenced works. However, most of such works are cited only once, i.e., in the section
devoted to the specific problem addressed by the referenced paper.
7For instance, anomaly detection can be done in an unsupervised fashion, but not all anomalies correspond to security incidents.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
8
•
Giovanni Apruzzese, Pavel Laskov, Edgardo Montes de Oca, Wissam Mallouli, Luis Búrdalo Rapa, Athanasios Vasileios
Grammatopoulos, and Fabio Di Franco
Machine Learning
for
Threat Detection
Supervised Approaches
PRO: can be used as full
detection sytstems
CON: require labelled
data, which is costly
Unsupervised Approaches
PRO: can be applied on
raw-data
CON: can only perform
ancillary tasks to detection
Fig. 3. Pros and Cons of Supervised and Unsupervised ML for Cyber Threat Detection.
Let us elucidate some successful applications of ML aimed at the detection of illicit activities that may occur in
a modern enterprise. Without loss of generality, we organize this section by distinguishing three broad cyber
detection areas: network intrusion detection (§3.1); malware detection (§3.2); and phishing detection (§3.3). There are
hundreds of works proposing ML for these tasks, and analyzing all such proposals is outside our scope. Hence,
we focus on some interesting and recent applications of ML, emphasizing their practical results. Our case-studies
in §7 will consider two exemplary applications of ML for cyberthreat detection.
3.1
Machine Learning in Network Intrusion Detection
One of the cybersecurity areas of main interest to modern enterprises is that of Intrusion Detection, which is
accomplished by means of Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS). An IDS can belong to either of two categories: a
Network Intrusion Detection System (NIDS) analyzes activities at the network level; whereas a Host Intrusion
Detection System (HIDS) analyzes activities at the individual host level. In this section we consider NIDS, because
HIDS mostly focus on detecting (local) malware which we discuss in § 3.2.
In the last decade, many ML solutions have been proposed to improve the effectiveness of NIDS, both in
scientific literature [11, 23, 36, 46], and in patents (e.g., [131, 140]). A NIDS can be deployed anywhere in a
network environment, and can exploit ML to detect threats against diverse targets, such as cloud, IoT, endpoint
devices [93], and even automotive controllers [104]. We report in Fig. 4 the typical deployment of a NIDS that
leverages the support of ML, which can analyze data of different types, e.g., full packet-captures (PCAP), network
flows8 (NetFlows), SMNP, or even DNS records. Specifically, with the increasing growth of modern networks,
NetFlow analyses are preferred due to many advantages over traditional PCAP, such as: reduced privacy concerns,
less space required for storage, and faster processing times [176].
ML methods based on unsupervised learning are particularly appreciated because acquiring labelled data for an
entire network is difficult [63]. Among these approaches, we highlight the results obtained by clustering methods.
For example, in [26] the authors aim to detect attacks by clustering NetFlows with similar temporal behavior and,
subsequently, finding the clusters containing hosts that raised alarms from a commercial NIDS based on manual
signatures. The results showed a remarkable increase in detection performance9 with respect to the commercial
signature-based NIDS, which only detected 3 malicious hosts, whereas the integration of ML allowed to detect 12.
Unsupervised methods can also be used to support the (manual) generation of rules for misuse-based NIDS. In
CyberProbe [117], the authors cluster honeypot traffic, and create specific rules for each cluster: such rules allowed
to detect over 75% attacks which were not included in any security feed. Some papers also exploit unsupervised
approaches to counter lateral movement10: the approach in [43] can successfully detect such instances (over
90% recall) with low false positives (10%). Finally, NIDS can also benefit from deep unsupervised algorithms. As
an example, in Kitsune [113] the authors use deep learning to analyze PCAP data and improve the detection
8Netflow: https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/products/ios-nx-os-software/ios-netflow/
9A similar approach has been successfully integrated even in a commercial product, which we cannot name due to NDA.
10Lateral Movement: https://www.lastline.com/blog/lateral-movement-what-it-is-and-how-to-block-it/
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
The Role of Machine Learning in Cybersecurity
•
9
Internet
Organization
Network
NIDS
Router
network
traffic
ML model
network
data
Fig. 4. Typical deployment of a ML-NIDS. The border router forwards all the outgoing/incoming network traffic to a NIDS,
which further analyzes such data via a ML model.
rate from below 1% to over 95% while maintaining a low false positive rate (below 0.1%). The advantages of
unsupervised ML methods make them suitable for commercial products: as an example, the method in [105] is
used by Aizoon11 to support botnet detection via DNS analyses, achieving less than 0.1% false positive rate. Our
detailed case study in §7.1 presents the deployment of unsupervised ML used by Montimage to detect anomalous
activities in a modern network.
On the other hand, approaches based on supervised learning, due to their reliance on good quality labels, are
more expensive to deploy but can also provide excellent results. For instance, Exposure [40] leverages labelled
DNS records to detect domains involved in malicious activities, and achieves less than 10% false alarm rate. A
notable effort against botnets is [155], where the authors collect and label some NetFlows, and then use such
labelled data to develop a ML botnet detector achieving over 95% precision. Moreover, the work in [19] proposes
the usage of probability labels (instead of binary labels) to detect botnet NetFlows that may evade traditional
ML-NIDS, and reach over 97% precision. Remarkable successes also include deep learning methods, such as
the approach in [84] which achieves almost 95% detection rate. In particular, we highlight those solutions that
combine deep learning with temporal analyses: such twofold perspective allows to detect additional malicious
patterns that can improve detection performance. For instance, in [56] the F1-score improves from 0.90 to 0.95
when also temporal dependencies are considered. We will present a real deployment of a similar solution in §7.2,
describing how S2Grupo protects Industrial Control Systems (ICS), showcasing the pros (and cons) of ML with
respect to older techniques based on heuristics.
Let us conclude with a remark: the superiority of deep learning for NIDS is not yet proven. For in-
stance, the authors of [134] and [166] both evaluate shallow and deep ML methods on the same dataset (the
CICIDS17 [147]): while [166] claims that deep learning outperforms traditional ML, the authors of [134] achieve
the opposite result. Specifically, [166] shows a ‘deep’ neural network achieving 0.96 F1-score and a ‘shallow’
decision tree achieving 0.95 F1-score; whereas [134] show a ‘deep’ neural network also achieving 0.96 F1-score,
but their ‘shallow’ decision tree reaches 0.99 F1-score. Our stance on this subject is that, under the assumption
that deep learning is superior, the marginal improvement does not justify its adoption due to its additional
complexity and computational requirements.
11https://www.aizoongroup.com/
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
10
•
Giovanni Apruzzese, Pavel Laskov, Edgardo Montes de Oca, Wissam Mallouli, Luis Búrdalo Rapa, Athanasios Vasileios
Grammatopoulos, and Fabio Di Franco
3.2
Machine Learning in Malware Detection
The fight against malware is one of the most emblematic challenges of cybersecurity. Because malware affects
a specific device, its detection is performed by analyzing data at the host-level, i.e., through HIDS. Indeed,
antiviruses can be considered as a subset of HIDS [94]. A given malware variant is tailored for a given operating
system (OS). The popularity of Windows OS made it the most common malware target for more than two decades.
However, attackers are now turning their attention to mobile devices running, e.g., Android OS12.
Malware detection can use two types of analyses: static or dynamic. The former aim to detect malware without
running any code, by simply analyzing a given file. The latter focus on analyzing the behavior of a piece of
software during its execution, usually by deploying it in a controlled environment and monitoring its activities.
Both static and dynamic analyses, schematically depicted in Fig. 5, can benefit from ML.
File
pdf,
apk,
exe,
[...]
extract
features
ML model
File
pdf,
apk,
exe,
[...]
1
2
3
...
analyze
execute
monitor behavior
ML model
analyze
Static Malware Detection via ML
Dynamic Malware Detection via ML
attributes,
code segments,
hash,
...
Fig. 5. Malware Detection via ML. In static analyses, the properties of a given file are extracted and analyzed by a ML model.
In dynamic analyses, the file is executed and the entire behavior is monitored, and then analyzed by a ML model.
Static Analysis. These analyses are simple, particularly effective against known pieces of malware, and can
be enhanced via ML in many ways. For instance, clustering is useful to identify properties of similar pieces of
malware. A similar method is proposed in [80], with the goal of finding a common treatment against all elements
in each cluster, and reaches up to 90% precision. In contrast, the authors of [100] leverage clustering to improve
the detection of Android malware, and exceed 95% detection rate. Static analyses can be further improved When
labelled data is available. An early example is the detection of malicious PDF files in [153]: here, the authors use
ML to analyze the structural properties of PDF files, extracting features that yield proficient detection results
(over 99% detection rate with less than 0.001% false positive rate). Recently, a different approach leverages deep
learning to transform executables into images, which are then used to perform the detection: the authors of [87]
achieve over 99% accuracy in identifying Windows malware.
Despite these successes, all static malware detection approaches are prone to evasion. This can be easily achieved
by modifying the malware executable, which can be implemented without changing its underlying malicious
logic. To aggravate the problem, advanced malware variants (e.g., polymorphic or metamorphic) automatically
modify their executables, defeating any static detection approach.
Dynamic Analysis. The combination of dynamic approaches with ML techniques yields effective countermea-
sures against polymorphic malware. Multiple ML solutions exploit clustering: grouping malware with similar
behavior allows to focus only on those clusters that have not been seen before. For example, [141] proposes a
dynamic approach combining clustering and anti-virus scanners to detect and sanitize entire groups of malware
variants, achieving almost perfect accuracy against Windows malware. More recently, the work in [15] focuses
12https://www.gdatasoftware.com/news/2019/07/35228-mobile-malware-report-no-let-up-with-android-malware
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
The Role of Machine Learning in Cybersecurity
•
11
on Windows malware by leveraging a combination of graph- and NLP-techniques applied to dynamic API
calls, and achieves 99.99% accuracy. Some papers even propose deep learning, such as [103] which uses deep
neural networks to extract the most relevant dynamic features to classify Android malware, achieving nearly
80%𝑎𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦. Moreover, the authors of [7] apply deep learning to detect Windows ransomware, and achieve
93% detection rate and 97% precision. An interesting work is HeNet [52], which leverages ML for dynamic
malware detection by analyzing hardware-specific (i.e., Intel CPU) data streams, achieving perfect accuracy on
real benchmarks. Finally, it is possible to combine static with dynamic analyses via ML: this is done in EC2 [49]
which combines unsupervised with supervised ML to detect novel android malware, achieving over 90% detection
rate.
3.3
Machine Learning in Phishing Detection
Phishing represents one of the most common vectors for penetrating a target network and is still a rampant
threat in the cybersecurity landscape [90]. Early detection of phishing attempts is of paramount importance to
modern organizations, and can greatly benefit from ML. Specifically, we distinguish two different applications of
ML to counter phishing attempts: detection of phishing websites, where the goal is identifying webpages that
are camouflaged to resemble a legitimate website; and detection of phishing emails, which either point to a
compromised website or induce a response that includes sensitive information. The main difference between
these two approaches is the type of analyzed data: for websites, it is common to use the URL of the webpage, its
HTML code, or even its visual representation [159]; for emails, it is typical to analyze the text, the header or the
attachments of an email [9]. A schematic representation of such applications is shown in Fig. 6, which we now
describe in more detail.
Email
Header
Attachments
BodyText
ML model
extract
analyze
Webpage
URL
Image
HTML
extract
ML model
analyze
Phishing Email Detection via ML
Phishing Website Detection via ML
Fig. 6. Phishing Detection via ML. For websites, the ML model can analyze the URL, the HTML, or the visual representation
of a webpage. For emails, the ML model can analyze the body text, the headers, or the attachment of the email.
Phishing Webpage Detection. Phishing websites are mostly dealt with via blacklists. However, such lists quickly
become unreliable because expert adversaries frequently move their phishing hooks from site to site: as shown
in [159], over 90% of ‘squatting’ phishing websites are not detected by popular blacklists. ML represents a viable
alternative to manual and static blacklisting, and modern web-browsers already leverage its potential [101].
Compared to malware or network intrusion detection, works proposing unsupervised ML against phishing
websites are less prevalent. An example is [185], exploiting clustering to support the detection of phishing
websites, and achieving over 95% accuracy. In contrast, supervised ML is abundant because verifying the legitimacy
of a webpage is relatively simple, which facilitates labelling procedures and allows to develop complete ML
detectors [55, 99, 159]. Some works use ML to analyse features extracted from a given URL. It is interesting to
note that while the authors of [33] use up to 130 features to achieve 99% detection rate, other works (e.g., [144])
use less than 30 features and achieve similar results. Other proposals leverage third-party information provided
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
12
•
Giovanni Apruzzese, Pavel Laskov, Edgardo Montes de Oca, Wissam Mallouli, Luis Búrdalo Rapa, Athanasios Vasileios
Grammatopoulos, and Fabio Di Franco
by reputable sources (e.g., DNS records) which can be derived from the URL: an example is PhishMon [122] which
achieves nearly 96% accuracy while maintaining a low 1% rate of false positives. Some papers consider the twofold
perspective provided by the analysis of both URL- and HTML-based features, which is advantageous when the
single URL is not enough to identify a webpage as phishing or not. For example, the work in [32] achieves 95%
detection rate by combining these two data types. A significant work is [55] which combines the inspection
of the underlying HTML code of the webpage with image processing techniques (based on deep learning) to
identify compromised websites: the results show over 95% detection rate at the cost of 1% false positive rate.
Finally, [159] uses all of the above (images, HTML and URL): for nearly 1000 squatting phishing websites, manual
blacklisting only detected 9%, whereas ML detected 70% of such phishing attempts.
Phishing Email Detection. One of the earliest applications of ML for cybersecurity involves the detection of
unsolicited emails (also often referred to as ‘spam’). Recent advances in Natural Language Processing (NLP) can
be leveraged by ML to analyze the body of an email and identify malicious intent [39].
Only few proposals leverage unsupervised ML, such as [61] which achieves over 95% detection rate. However,
as it is the case for phishing website detection, acquiring ground truth labels for emails is a trivial task, which
facilitates the deployment of supervised ML used by email providers to enhance their automatic filters [89]. For
instance, [9] analyses the text of an email, and reaches almost 99% accuracy with less than 0.01% false positive
rate. The authors of Themis [67] exploit deep learning to analyze both the text and the header of an email and
exceed 99% accuracy. Finally, we mention the work in [73], where the authors leverage supervised ML to detect
spear-phishing attacks by analyzing an email from different perspectives, and achieve over 90% detection rate at
the cost of 1% false positives. Attachments can also be analyzed by any malware detection technique (§3.2).
As a small digression, we mention that the fight against phishing (and spam) has recently moved to Online
Social Networks. This setting exhibits many similarities with the detection of phishing in emails, as it also involves
NLP techniques. As an example, the authors of [172] use deep learning to detect malicious tweets, and obtain
promising results with almost 95% detection rate but with 5% false positive rate. Similarly, MalT𝑃[96] specifically
focuses on tweets luring victims to phishing websites, achieving over 95% detection rate and nearly 90% precision.
Takeaway. Using ML for cyberthreat detection has proven to be greatly successful (e.g., [52, 113, 159]).
4
BEYOND DETECTION: ADDITIONAL ROLES OF MACHINE LEARNING IN CYBERSECURITY
Besides threat detection, there are many additional roles that ML can cover in cybersecurity. Indeed, modern
environments constantly generate massive amounts of data, which may come from heterogeneous sources—
including the very same ML models described in §3. Analyzing such data via (additional) ML can provide insights
that further improve the security of digital systems.
Without loss of generality, we classify all these complementary roles of ML in four tasks: alert manage-
ment (§4.1), raw-data analysis (§4.2), risk exposure assessment (§4.3), and cyber threat intelligence (§4.4). We
now describe each of these tasks, schematically summarized in Fig. 7.
We highlight an enticing characteristic shared by most ML applications described in this section: they do not
require extensive and human-guided labelling procedures, and hence belong to the unsupervised ML category. The
potential of using raw-data almost ‘as-is’ makes all the ML methods discussed in this section readily applicable in
many real scenarios.
4.1
Alert Management
It is well-known that developing the ‘perfect’ detection system is not possible (with or without ML). Hence, to
prevent the automated execution of actions based on wrong predictions, the output of detection systems usually
comes in the form of alerts. Depending on such alerts (e.g., their relevance, the involved hosts, or their number) a
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
The Role of Machine Learning in Cybersecurity
•
13
Machine Learning Beyond Threat Detection
Alert Management
Alert Fusion
Alert Filtering
Alert Prioritization
Raw-data Analysis
Operational Decisions
Labelling Optimization
Risk Esposure Assessment
Penetration Testing
Compromise Indicators
Cyber Threat Intelligence
Internal Sources
External Sources
Fig. 7. Additional tasks that can be addressed via ML in cybersecurity. All such tasks mostly involve dealing with raw and
unstructured data from heterogeneous sources, and provide fertile ground for ML.
more appropriate response can be taken. However, modern environments generate thousands of alerts every
hour (as shown in, e.g., [26, 175]), making manual triaging an impossible task. To address this problem, ML can
be used for filtering, prioritization, a or even fusion of alerts into more general events.
• Alert Filtering. By definition, an alert is not necessarily malicious, and a significant percentage of alerts
correspond to false alarms. Because being notified by many irrelevant alerts is impractical and annoying,
ML can help in filtering redundant alerts, e.g., because they are related to the same underlying problem. An
example is [157], which is specifically tailored for false alarms generated by ML-NIDS: its effectiveness on
real botnet traffic is a remarkable reduction of 75% of the time spent on triaging of false alerts, outperforming
non-ML mechanisms by 45%.
• Alert Prioritization. If security administrators face too many alerts, prioritization techniques can be applied
to identify the most critical alarms. ML is beneficial as it can automatically ‘learn’ the most relevant ranking
criteria with limited supervision. For instance, the very recent work in [164] shows that ML correctly ranks
the most sensitive alerts at the top position in 95% of the cases.
• Alert Fusion. The most intuitive way to manage large amounts of alerts is to aggregate similar alerts, and then
to find correlations between these groups in order to identify causal relationships relevant for security tasks.
For instance, ASSERT [125] leverages clustering to identify which are the preferred protocols and network
ports targeted by malicious activities. Their results highlight that modern attacks are increasingly relying
on the Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP), as it enables lateral movement activities through pivoting [28].
All of the techniques above can be combined together. In this context, we mention the alert management solution
in [110] exploiting deep learning to condense and prioritize alerts: the resulting platform was tested and found
usable by real security analysts.
4.2
Raw-data Analysis
The cybersecurity domain must deal with heterogeneous systems, each generating raw-data of different nature
(e.g., logs, reports, alerts). Such setting represents a fertile ground for ML, whose capabilities could be leveraged
to maximize the opportunities provided by such raw-data. We can differentiate two areas of application of ML in
this context: the support of operational decisions via log data analyses; and the use of (unlabelled) data to optimize
labelling efforts and foster deployment of supervised ML.
Operational Decisions. The abundance of log data in modern information systems makes ML promising in the
context of operational security. The importance of log data analysis became evident after several high-profile
security incidents that involved stealthy exfiltration of confidential data13. Beehive [178] was one of the first
(unsupervised) ML systems focused on knowledge extraction from heterogeneous log data (generated by proxy,
DHCP or VPN servers). The goal was combining all these logs in an anomaly detection fashion: data points not
13An example is the well-known RSA incident: https://www.theregister.co.uk/2011/04/04/rsa_hack_howdunnit/.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
14
•
Giovanni Apruzzese, Pavel Laskov, Edgardo Montes de Oca, Wissam Mallouli, Luis Búrdalo Rapa, Athanasios Vasileios
Grammatopoulos, and Fabio Di Franco
associated with ‘typical’ log patterns represented ‘incidents’ that required manual intervention. Beehive was
evaluated on two weeks of log data at the EMC Corporation and detected almost 800 incidents, 65% of which
related to true security incidents (malicious activities or policy violations). In comparison, non-ML methods
performed much worse, as they were only capable of detecting 8 correct incidents (with a recall of just 1%).
Despite being unsupervised ML, Beehive still required manual feature engineering: the most relevant pieces of
information from every log source had to be determined via expert knowledge. Such problem was overcome with
the advent of deep learning. A prominent example is DeepLog [64], which analyzes heterogeneous log data (e.g.,
Hadoop, or OpenStack logs) with a similar objective as Beehive. DeepLog achieves impressive results in a lab
environment, with close to 100% detection rate after training on only 1% of the available data.
Labelling Optimization. Many threat detection techniques (§3) rely on supervised ML, which may require
huge amounts of labelled data. Such requirement prevents their applicability in real scenarios, because manual
labelling can be prohibitive—especially in Network Intrusion Detection. In contrast, unlabelled data is common
in cybersecurity, and many efforts proposed semi-supervised learning methods to increase the ‘return’ of small
sets of labelled data, and hence enable deployment of fully-supervised ML methods [29]. For instance, the botnet
detector in [184] reaches 0.83 F1-score with only 2400 labels; in contrast, the detector in [21] reaches 0.95 F1-score
on the same network scenario, but requires millions of labelled samples. A parallel line of research leverages
the so-called active learning paradigm. The idea is to use a ML model (trained on a small labelled dataset) to
‘suggest’ which samples should be labelled in a (large) unlabelled dataset, to maximize its ‘learning rate’. As an
example, [183] shows that it is possible to save significant labelling effort (from 30% up to 90%) by providing the
ground truth of only a restricted amount of samples. An intriguing property of active learning is that it can be
used even for already deployed ML models, by following the so-called lifelong learning principle: for instance,
Tesseract [130] can boost its performance from 57% to 70% after being retrained on 700 samples ‘actively labelled’
by a human expert.
4.3
Risk Exposure Assessment
Although the complete prevention of any cyber attack is an unreachable objective, a system can be significantly
strengthened by focusing on its weak spots and anticipating the most likely threats. In this context, ML can help
for several tasks, such as penetration testing, or estimation of compromise indicators.
Penetration Testing. By automatically ‘attacking’ existing security systems, ML can be a great asset for vulnera-
bility assessment. For instance, [74] apply reinforcement learning to synthetically craft attacks against traditional
NIDS: the ML approach found the same amount of vulnerabilities in half the time of manual inspection, and
achieved a speedup of 90% with respect to a random attack procedures. More recently, [21] adopted a deep
reinforcement learning approach to automatically evade, and then harden, a ML-based botnet detector. Sim-
ilarly, [161] assessed the vulnerabilities of databases to SQL-injection attacks crafted via ML. There are even
proposals of dedicated ML-assisted platforms for performing all such assessments [50]. According to a recent
survey [111], the potential of ML for penetration testing is still vastly unexplored.
Estimation of Compromise Indicators. It is possible to use ML to estimate the most likely compromised hosts
in a given system. The authors of [177] study a corporate environment, using ML to analyze information from
heterogeneous sources, such as the behavior of each individual host and of the entire network—as reported
by end-point protection devices (McAfee); or even personal information on the specific user of each host. The
findings revealed that visits to ‘business’ websites represented the most common indicator of a compromised
host (almost 30%), with second place for ‘travel’ websites (nearly 15%)—this is intriguing, considering that such
activities were performed during working hours. A potential opportunity is combining ML with honeypots (with
a different scope than [117]): such strategy is exploited in [72] to identify which hosts are more likely to be
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
The Role of Machine Learning in Cybersecurity
•
15
infected by botnet malware. Finally, Facebook exploits ML to identify fake accounts by correlating different
sources [173], allowing to reduce such annoyance by nearly 30%.
4.4
Threat Intelligence
The main task of threat intelligence is to collect and analyze information for anticipating novel attacks. This is
clearly a powerful instrument for keeping defenses up-to-date in a proactive approach [39]. However, we observe
that a crucial aspect in the protection of enterprises revolves around the value of the items being considered:
hence, ML methods for cyber threat intelligence should be configured so as to prioritize the protection of the
most business-critical infrastructures. Failure to take this into account may limit the usefulness of ML.
Nevertheless, applications of ML for threat intelligence can leverage either internal or external data sources (or
both).
Internal Sources. Foreseeing future attack strategies via ML can be done with exclusive reliance on internal
corporate data. For instance, [158] leverages ML to artificially create alerts corresponding to past cyberattacks,
and then use such alerts to study an attacker’s behaviour—potentially by using additional ML solutions. As
an example, SAGE [116] exploits ML to compress over 300k individual alerts in less than 100 ‘attack graphs’
representing the specific steps of an entire offensive strategy. Another possibility is to use deep learning to
‘disassemble’ some code executables, allowing to identify some potentially malicious patterns that can reappear
in future malware: for instance, EKLAVIA [54] achieves a remarkable 80% accuracy in such task. Finally, internal
and external data sources can be mixed: the authors of [88] exploit historical malware information (provided by
Symantec) to foresee how future malware could affect a corporation, and their ML solution provided up to 4
times as many correct predictions as non-ML baselines.
External Sources. It is possible to use ML for the so-called open source intelligence (OSINT). For example, the
authors of [146] focus on security incidents mentioned on Twitter. Their ML approach identified many malicious
activities occurring in 2016, such as the Mirai botnet (October 2016) or the data breach at AdultFriendFinder
(November 2016), where over 400 million accounts were exposed. Similarly, the deep learning method in [165]
analyzed tweets to study the development of ransomware attacks. It is also possible to use information from
security feeds, such as the Common Vulnerability Score (CVS) stored on well-known databases14. For instance,
in [51] the authors use ML to predict the CVS with almost 1 week earlier than traditional cybersecurity feeds.
Prediction of the CVS with ML can also be done via darkweb data as shown in [12]. The authors use ML to
crawl underground forums and correlate meaningful information with vulnerability descriptions. By validating
the results via third-party signatures (e.g., Symantec), the proposed ML method successfully predicted the
exploitability for about 40% of recorded vulnerabilities compared to about 10% of common feeds. Automated
analyses via ML of underground forums (in different languages) aimed at uncovering ‘cyber-criminal markets’ are
also performed in [135], allowing to infer the prices of malicious exploits. Finally, we even mention the existence
of patents that leverage ML to predict cyberattacks in modern environments [126].
Takeaway. There are many tasks complementary to threat detection that can be covered by ML. The main
challenge lies in obtaining relevant information from unlabelled (e.g.,[29, 125]) or unstructured data coming from
heterogeneous sources (e.g., [12, 64, 173]). Such challenge, however, also represents an intriguing opportunity.
14An example is the CVE database, storing vulnerabilities as well as their exploitance likelihood: https://cve.mitre.org/.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
16
•
Giovanni Apruzzese, Pavel Laskov, Edgardo Montes de Oca, Wissam Mallouli, Luis Búrdalo Rapa, Athanasios Vasileios
Grammatopoulos, and Fabio Di Franco
5
INTRINSIC PROBLEMS OF MACHINE LEARNING IN CYBERSECURITY
As shown in §3 and §4, ML can cover a plethora of roles in cybersecurity. Yet, in this specific domain, unleashing
the full benefits of ML in practice is difficult. Such difficulty stems from the underlying conflict between (a) the
intrinsic characteristics of the cybersecurity domain, and (b) the fundamental assumptions of ML.
Understanding such conflict is crucial for a comprehensive assessment of all the tradeoffs pertaining to ML-
based cybersecurity solutions. Therefore, we now discuss the intrinsic problems of ML in cybersecurity, for which
we provide an overview in Fig. 8. Specifically, we begin by presenting the problems affecting any ML solution for
cybersecurity (§5.1); then, we elucidate the problems of ML solutions developed in-house (§5.3); and we conclude
with the problems related to the adoption of commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) ML products (§5.3).
Concept Drift
Adversarial Setting
Data Confidentiality
Limited Scope
Transparency
Development
Maintenance
In-house ML solutions
COTS ML solutions
Intrinsic Problems of ML in Cybersecurity
Fig. 8. Problems of ML in Cybersecurity. Some are specific to either in-house solutions, or to commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS)
ML products. Others are shared by both of these categories.
We stress that all problems herein described are intrinsic: they can be mitigated to some degree, but the current
state-of-the-art does not allow to completely resolve them.
5.1
General Problems of ML in Cybersecurity
Machine Learning follows the so-called “indipendent, identically distributed random variables” (iid) principle [65].
Such principle states that the data analyzed during the development of the ML model will be similar to the ‘future’
data that the ML model will analyze after its deployment. If the iid assumption is not met, then the deployed
ML model will exhibit a different performance than the expected one (measured during development). Such iid
principle impairs ML deployment in cybersecurity because it interferes with three characteristics of this domain:
the concept drift, the adversarial setting, and the data confidentiality. Let us elaborate each of them.
Concept Drift. Modern systems are continuously evolving: new devices, services, and even users, are added (or
removed) every day. All such mutations contrast the iid assumption, preventing the reliable application of ML in
the long term because the training data quickly becomes obsolete. This problem is often referred to as concept drift,
and while it can affect any application of ML, some domains are less touched by it. For instance, in computer vision
“a cat will always be a cat”, allowing to use a ML model trained on the same data for decades—e.g., the ImageNet
dataset (collected in 2011) is still used today [139]. This is not the case in cybersecurity, and especially for threat
detection: the environment constantly changes, and the adversaries also adapt. A schematic representation of the
concept drift is shown in Fig. 9.
For example, a new vulnerability may be discovered, meaning that some samples previously considered as
benign should be treated as malicious15; a new segment may be attached to a network, with a considerably
different behavior than the other segments, hence generating a lot of (false) anomalies; finally, attackers can
15For instance, hundreds of apps in well-known marketplaces were recently found to be malicious [92].
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
The Role of Machine Learning in Cybersecurity
•
17
Training
Data
Benign
Malicious
ML model
Environment
collect
data
develop
model
Actual
Data
Benign
Malicious
ML model
Environment
collect
data
analyze
Actual
Data
Benign
Malicious
ML model
Environment
collect
data
analyze
Machine Learning: Expectation (iid assumption)
Machine Learning: Reality (concept drift)
Deploy
Training
Data
Benign
Malicious
ML model
Environment
collect
data
develop
model
Deploy
Today
Tomorrow
Fig. 9. Machine Leaning in the presence of Concept Drift. The ML model expects that the data will not deviate from the one
seen during its training. In cybersecurity, however, the environment evolves, and adversaries also become more powerful.
devise novel strategies that cannot be detected by existing mechanisms (e.g., zero-day exploits). As a matter of
fact, many research efforts highlighted the significant performance degradation of ML detectors in the presence
of concept drift [18, 86]. The only practical remedy to concept drift is through constant update of ML systems
with new data (labelled, if supervised ML is used) that reflects the current trends.
Adversarial Setting. The cybersecurity domain implicitly assumes the presence of adversaries. Although most
attacks are ‘stationary’ (which explains why signature-based methods are still widely employed), motivated
adversaries constantly refine and change their offensive strategies. Aside from the risk of zero-day attacks,
deployment of ML also exposes to the threat of adversarial samples [154], which specifically target ML systems.
Such threat, schematically depicted in Fig. 10, involves applying tiny ‘perturbations’ to some input data with
the goal of compromising the predictions of a ML model. Even imperceptible modifications can affect proficient
cybersecurity ML detectors. For instance, [25] evaded 20 ML botnet detectors by appending a few bytes of junk
data to some network communications; whereas [133] and [154] showed a similar effect against ML malware
detectors. Even commercial products are affected, such as Google Chrome’s phishing detector [101]. There exist
a wide array of strategies to carry out attacks based on adversarial samples, which can affect either the pre-
or post-deployment phase of a ML model [24, 154]. Despite the proposal of many countermeasures against
adversarial samples, (e.g., [19, 76]), no universal solution has been found so-far, and some mechanisms can even
decrease the baseline performance (as shown in [21, 59]). The best defense, according to Biggio and Roli [39],
is a proactive approach: the adversary must be anticipated and evaluated (and, possibly, countered) before ML
deployment.
To further stress the importance of such threat, let us clear two misconceptions:
• it is common to refer to adversarial samples as ‘illegitimate’. Such notation is wrong from a security
standpoint: any sample (adversarial or not) analyzed by a ML model is considered as legitimate (i.e., trusted)
by the underlying system that forwarded such sample to the ML model. What is illegitimate is the attack, i.e.,
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
18
•
Giovanni Apruzzese, Pavel Laskov, Edgardo Montes de Oca, Wissam Mallouli, Luis Búrdalo Rapa, Athanasios Vasileios
Grammatopoulos, and Fabio Di Franco
Benign
Malicious
ML model
Regular ML  Operation
Malicious
Sample
Benign
Malicious
ML model
Malicious
Sample
(adversarial)
perturbation
Malicious
Sample
ML under adversarial attacks
Fig. 10. Typical Adversarial Attack against a deployed ML model. By inserting tiny perturbations in the input data, it is
possible to fool a ML model and induce an incorrect prediction.
the application of a perturbation that is specifically crafted to thwart a ML model—but not the adversarial
sample.16
• in related literature, it is common to search for the ‘minimal’ perturbation that allows a sample to thwart a
target ML model. However, real attackers are not subject to such constraint.17
The latter observation is crucial for demystifying the effectiveness of the so-called certified defenses [138], which
only work if the perturbation is minimal or restricted within a very small boundary.
Confidentiality. The cybersecurity domain is characterized by its sensitivity to data-privacy, representing a
strong barrier for long-term reliance on ML. Let us provide a few examples. The increasing usage of encryption can
make some ML systems simply unusable. For instance, a ML-NIDS that inspects the payload of HTTP traffic will
not work if the traffic is encrypted via HTTPS—and HTTPS is increasingly replacing the insecure HTTP protocol
worldwide. Such problem can also affect other use-cases of ML, such as phishing email detectors: if the emails are
encrypted (e.g., via PGP) then it is impossible to analyze their contents with ML. Another problematic scenario
can involve the analysis of confidential data: the constant changes in data regulation (e.g., the GDPR [167]) make
it difficult to identify data that can be reliably used in the long-term. For instance, consider the approach in [177]
(cf. §4.3), which leverages (among others) user information to estimate the infection risk. Such approach could
not be applied today without the explicit consent of all the users of a company. Moreover, both of these issues
(confidential and encrypted data) also impair labelling procedures, because it is not possible to (manually) verify
the ground truth of a sample if such sample cannot be ‘seen’ by a human expert. Finally, it is understandable
that enterprises do not want to publicly disclose their data, generating an overall shortage of publicly available
datasets that can be used to evaluate ML systems [147]. Although this latter problem primarily affects research,
it also implicitly affects practice because showing a ML system that works in different settings can foster its
adoption in real scenarios. We discuss potential solutions to the limited data availability in §6.2.
5.2
Problems with in-house development of ML systems
Despite the problems presented in §5.1, an organization may be willing to create a completely in-house ML
solution. In this case, the organization can fully control the scope, data and overall suitability of the resulting
ML model. However, such advantage comes at a price: the ML model must be first developed and must also be
maintained. Both of these procedures are challenging in cybersecurity.
16To provide a concrete example, let us consider [22]: it is legitimate to increase the size of network communications, but it is illegitimate to
do so with the intent of thwarting a ML model. However, a ML model considers all analyzed samples as trusted, because the ML model is
oblivious of the intent of the data generation process.
17For instance, in [22] adding 1KB of data is more effective than adding only 1B. Hence, a real attacker is more likely to add 1KB than just 1B.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
The Role of Machine Learning in Cybersecurity
•
19
Initial Development. Developing the initial ML model requires three steps: (i) selecting a ML algorithm; (ii) find-
ing the right data; and (iii) fine-tuning the performance. In some domains, these steps are almost straightforward.
For instance, in computer vision it is established that deep learning algorithms outperform others; moreover,
suitable data (potentially labelled) is easier to acquire—either because it is publicly available (e.g., ImageNet [139])
or because it can be cheaply produced (e.g., the popular captchas [47]). Unfortunately, none of these advantages
apply to cybersecurity. For instance, some research works show that deep learning is worse (e.g., [21, 134]) while
others claim the opposite (e.g. [123, 166]). Similarly, there is confusion with respect to which features should be
taken into account (cf. §3.3 where [33] use 130 features and [144] use 30, achieving similar performance). Finding
the right data is also inherently more challenging in cybersecurity. Such challenge includes acquiring data of high
quality and in the right amount. Labelling requires expert knowledge, and according to [112] a company cannot
afford to label more than 80 malware samples per day. For reference, the initial deployment of Tesseract [130]
required 50 thousand labelled samples. Unlabelled data may be easier to acquire, but as shown in §4 it can come
from heterogeneous sources and be in different formats, requiring a detailed preprocessing pipeline to collect,
store, and forward such data to the ML model. Furthermore, the iid assumption (cf. §5.1) prevents a reliable use
of data originating from different environments [149], hence even the (few) publicly available data can have
questionable effectiveness. Finally, a common misconception is thinking that the performance of a ML model
is linearly dependant on the size of its training data18: in some cases, smaller datasets can yield to superior ML
models—we will show this in our case studies (§7.1). Nevertheless, any given dataset must also be balanced: in real
environments, a malicious event is a rare occurrence and a given dataset should reflect such distribution [170].
To aggravate all of the above, it is not possible to determine a priori which combination (algorithm, fea-
tures, dataset, balancing) yields the best performance after deployment. Hence, empirical and time consuming
evaluations—by training and testing multiple ML models—are always a necessity. As a result, finding the most
optimal tuning for real deployments may require a huge amount of manual effort by trial-and-error.
Constant Maintenance. To mitigate the disruptive effects of concept drift (§5.1), it is fundamental to continuously
update a given ML solution with data reflecting the current trends. Such procedures are costly but can be alleviated
via lifelong learning solutions (cf. §4.2). However, a common misconception is that ‘update’ procedures simply
entail finding (and, if necessary, labelling) new data. This is an underestimation, because such procedures
also require to: (i) decide what to do with ‘old’ data; and (ii) finding the ‘sweet spot’ that yields the adequate
performance. Indeed, maintaining old data can be detrimental in some cases (e.g., if some ‘benign’ samples are
discovered to be ‘malicious’), but completely removing it can also adversely affect the performance (e.g., some
‘old’ phenomena can reappear in the future). Nonetheless, even small changes in the training data can decrease
the performance of a ML system (e.g., this is the fundamental principle of poisoning attacks [24]). These issues
require additional manual labour through trial-and-error.
A potential mitigation for all such tuning operations (both pre- and post-deployment) may come in the
development of techniques focused on explaining the decisions of ML systems (e.g. [107]), which are currently
difficult to interpret—especially for deep learning [14]. This is an intriguing direction of research, which has very
recently also touched the area of adversarial ML (e.g. [16, 60])
5.3
Problems of Commercial-off-the-Shelf ML products
Developing an in-house ML model may be prohibitive (e.g., in terms of computational or human resources),
and COTS solutions represent a viable alternative. In this case, all the operations presented in §5.2 must be
performed by the product vendor. However, we point out two drawbacks of such COTS solutions, aggravated in
cybersecurity scenarios. Specifically, such solutions implicitly have a limited scope, and they may (inadvertently)
suffer from lack of transparency.
18According to the founder of Deep Learning, Andrew Ng, this is also becoming true for Deep Neural Networks [152].
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
20
•
Giovanni Apruzzese, Pavel Laskov, Edgardo Montes de Oca, Wissam Mallouli, Luis Búrdalo Rapa, Athanasios Vasileios
Grammatopoulos, and Fabio Di Franco
Limited Scope. Relying on third-party solutions limits any end-user to their intended scope, meaning that some
tasks simply cannot be accomplished with products currently on the market. For instance, any commercial ML
model cannot be trained on the exact data used by an organization—at least initially. The organization can allow
the vendor to collect their data, and use such data to refine the ML model; however, this may not be possible
due to confidentiality reasons (§5.1). Therefore, some commercial solutions can be used only if the deployment
environment (of the organization) resembles the pre-deployment environment (of the vendor) used to generate
the data for the corresponding ML model. For example, phishing websites are malicious ‘everywhere’, meaning
that it is possible to transfer [179] ML phishing detectors. However, such transferring cannot be easily done
for other cybersecurity tasks, such as NIDS [27]. This is because every network is unique [149], and a malicious
behavior in one network can be benign in a different network. Due to such issue, most COTS products leverage
(unsupervised) ML, and mostly for anomaly detection (e.g., [2, 97]).
Lack of Transparency. COTS solutions come as a ‘black-box’, and the decision to deploy such solutions depends
on their advertised performance. This fact leads to many issues, all sharing a common culprit: the cost of
misclassifications in cybersecurity. In some domains, incorrect predictions do not have severe consequences: for
instance, a recommender ML system (e.g., the one in AirBnb [77]) that makes an incorrect recommendation
is not a cause of concern. In contrast, in cybersecurity a single false negative can be the difference between
a compromised and a secure system. At the same time, both employees and security analysts are annoyed by
false alarms, which can even be exploited by attackers to conceal more severe threats [53]. By considering
the performance metrics reported in Table 1 (cf. §2.1), we remark that each metric focuses on a single aspect,
and even good scores can be meaningless if not contextualized.19 Nonetheless, even if a COTS ML solution is
fully transparent (i.e., all metrics are reported and contextualized), the performance will always refer to the
environment of the vendor, which is likely to differ from the real deployment setting. Finally, we mention that—to
the best of our knowledge—no COTS ML solution (including those not pertaining to security tasks) reports its
robustness to potential adversarial attacks, which is a severe deficiency in cybersecurity scenarios.
Takeaway. In cybersecurity, ML can provide great benefits but also presents many risks due to the intrinsic
adversarial setting and the dynamic ecosystem. Such risks must be taken into account today, and should be
addressed by future works.
6
THE FUTURE OF MACHINE LEARNING IN CYBERSECURITY
We have elucidated the benefits (§3 and §4) as well as the problems (§5) of ML for cybersecurity. There are
potentially infinite ways to advance the state-of-the-art, such as increasing existing performance (e.g., [62]),
mitigating known issues (e.g., the poor explainability [16, 145]), as well as development of novel applications of
ML in cybersecurity (e.g., the integration of quantum computing [75]).
As a constructive step forward, this section highlights which future developments can completely revamp
the state-of-the-art of ML in cybersecurity. Although every improvement is appreciated, we believe that the
existing gap between research and practice can only be closed by the joint contribution of four players: regulatory
bodies, corporate executives, engineers, as well as the research community. Specifically, we identify four future
challenges that—if properly addressed—can revolutionize ML in cybersecurity. We now elucidate these challenges
(schematically shown in Fig. 11), explaining their root causes and our recommended course of action for each of
the four ‘players’ indicated above.
19As an example, consider a detector evaluated on a dataset containing 9990 benign samples and 10 malicious samples: an Accuracy of 99.99%
can be obtained by only detecting 1 malicious sample (out of 10), despite its inability to detect 90% of the attacks. Another example is a FPR of
1%: it may appear low, but if the environment generates 300k alarms (as in [116]) such FPR corresponds to 3000 false alarms. Note that also
the inverse is true: an increment of just 1% in the TPR can be either an almost negligible or an extremely significant performance boost.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
The Role of Machine Learning in Cybersecurity
•
21
Future Challenges of Machine Learning in Cybersecurity
ML Certification
Transparent Performance 
Adversarial Robustness
(regulatory bodies)
Data Availability
Data Sharing Endorsement
Actionable Data Regulation
(executives and regulatory bodies)
ML Orchestration
Ensemble architectures
Pipeline architectures
(engineers and practitioners)
Usable ML Security
Pragmatic Results
Realistic Scenarios
(research and peer review)
Fig. 11. Future Challenges of Machine Learning in Cybersecurity. Addressing all such challenges requires the cooperation of
four players: regulatory bodies, corporate executives, engineers, and researchers.
6.1
Certification (Sovereign entities)
The 2020 EU White Paper on Artificial Intelligence [1]—also followed by a 2021 US DHS report [4]—indicates
trustworthiness as one of the key requirements for future ML applications. Especially, emphasis is put on ‘high-risk’
scenarios, where deployment of ML should conform with pertinent legal requirements. Cybersecurity applications
naturally qualify as high-risk, hence procedures that certify the performance and robustness of ML systems should
be developed and enforced by regulatory bodies. Let us elaborate.
Performance Certification. Comprehensive testing represents the only instrument for performance verification
of a ML system. However, despite hundreds of works, there is a lack of standardized evaluation protocols. This
is a problem especially for COTS products, as performance assessments may be carried out in biased environments,
or may consider unfair comparisons that inflate the results to favor a given ML solution. Meaningful assessments
must consider the realistic distribution of data and take into account the (likely) temporal shift. Traditional cross-
validation techniques, typical for ML in the computer vision domain, should be used only for tuning: specifically,
the performance should be validated via statistical tests. Establishing standardized evaluation protocols would
foster pragmatic and fair comparisons, promoting overall ML deployment in practice. Nevertheless, the full details
of such operations (e.g., the data used, the evaluation methodology, and the final results) should be transparent to
the customers of COTS ML systems.
Robustness Certification. The increased interest towards ML led to (scientific) investigations of its robustness in
adversarial scenarios, bringing to light the vulnerability to adversarial examples (§5.1). Yet, no universal solution
has been found so far, with some defenses being broken in the time span between their appearance as a preprint
and their publication as a peer-reviewed article20. The first step to solve this problem is to acknowledge that
no ML solution is flawless. Indeed, to quote a recent survey on the cybersecurity perspective of European
stakeholders [69]: “security of ML and adversarial attacks was not mentioned as one of the key challenges by the
interviewees.”, which epitomizes that such threat is not perceived by the end-users of ML solutions. To address
these issues, assessments of adversarial robustness must become mandatory in evaluations of any ML-based
solution for cybersecurity. The most likely security risks, and their potential consequences, should be known
before real ML deployments. Moreover, all the details of such assessments should be transparently provided.
Recommendation: To ensure better transparency and reliability, regulatory bodies must enforce the development
and adoption of standardized procedures that certify the performance and robustness of ML systems.
6.2
Data Availability (executives and legislation authorities)
The effectiveness of any ML-solution depends on the data used to train the corresponding ML model. However,
among the toughest challenges faced by ML in cybersecurity is finding appropriate data. Despite the recent
20For instance, defensive distillation was proposed in 2016 [128] and broken few months later [48].
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
22
•
Giovanni Apruzzese, Pavel Laskov, Edgardo Montes de Oca, Wissam Mallouli, Luis Búrdalo Rapa, Athanasios Vasileios
Grammatopoulos, and Fabio Di Franco
interest in ML led to the release of more open datasets (e.g., [10, 31, 142]), such datasets exhibit limitations [163].
For instance, inaccurate labels, fast obsolescence, small and synthetic environments (e.g., [115]), or even flawed
generation process—as shown in [66]. All these problems can only be mitigated to some degree (e.g. [37]), and
cannot be solved by the scientific community. The lack of adequate data (i.e., real and labelled) makes evaluations
of ML conducted in research environments to be of questionable value, preventing sound assessments of ML
capabilities, and ultimately hindering its deployment. Addressing the shortage of data is possible, but it requires
the joint intervention of industrial stakeholders and regulation authorities: the former should promote data
sharing, the latter should devise more actionable data regulation policies.
Data Sharing. A solution to the lack of adequate data is the promotion of data sharing practices. In cybersecurity,
some portions of data can be easily shared: for instance, Sophos has recently released over 20M (labelled) malware
samples [78]; similarly, the recent CrimeBB dataset [129] contains 1 million accounts crawled from darkweb
forums for 10 years. In contrast, other pieces of data (especially benign data) are more confidential and hence
their disclosure requires explicit permission from corporate executives. Acquiring such permission is a
tough barrier, especially due to privacy and secrecy issues. However, we observe that sensitive information can
be anonymised (e.g., [136]), and recent advances in federated learning overcame such problems [57].
There indeed exist some success stories of data sharing platforms focused on security information, such as the
EU-OF2CEN project [151]. Similar platforms represent a great opportunity for some companies, as they open the
doors to a new market entirely dedicated to ML datasets, potentially with (updated) ground truth (e.g., [150]). From
this perspective, a promising initiative is STIX CyBox [143]: its goal is creating a threat intelligence platform shared
by multiple parties, facilitating the entire process of incident detection and response. Nonetheless, such platforms
must (i) contain unbiased data—otherwise there a the risk of manipulating future developments [109]—and
(ii) comply with the existing regulation, hence requiring the involvement of the respective authorities.
Actionable Data Regulations. The strategical importance of data gave birth to multiple regulations that ‘protect’
data owners and limit abuse of sensitive information. Despite ensuring more privacy rights, such regulations
introduced additional constraints on data gathering and processing, resulting in yet another barrier to ML
developments—both for research and practice. Specifically, the (already costly) data-labelling procedures are
crucially affected by such regulations (§5.1). Even if action is taken by executives to disclose their corporate
data, existing regulation policies are difficult to interpret and likely to change in the future [124]: for instance,
information that can be shared ‘today’ may not be shareable ‘tomorrow’, hindering long-term projects. However,
we observe that some GDPR compliant data-sharing platforms exist (e.g., [79]). Hence, the regulatory authorities
should promote such efforts even in the cybersecurity context, for instance by providing actionable policies that
ensure the compliance of (open) data in the long-term.
Recommendation: To address the shortage of adequate data, companies should be more willing to share data
originating in their environments (e.g., [151]), whereas regulation authorities should promote such disclosure by
defining proper policies and incentives [124].
6.3
Usable Security Research (scientific community)
The combination of ML and cybersecurity is a fertile opportunity for research, and recently inspired many related
papers. Such trend, however, is a double-edged sword. On the good side, the rising scientific interest demonstrates
the high potential of ML for cybersecurity. On the bad side, such abundance can be detrimental for real ML
deployments, as it may raise more questions rather than provide answers. Specifically, we identify two problems
of existing research: the lack of pragmatic results, and the limited consideration of realistic scenarios.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
The Role of Machine Learning in Cybersecurity
•
23
Pragmatic Results. One of the primary goals of research is to “outperform the state-of-the-art”. In the context
of ML, such goal requires proposing a novel ML method, and then show that such method achieves a better
performance than prior works—an objective that can be achieved without providing any ‘true’ contribution to the
state-of-the-art. For example, by slightly changing the training data it is possible to achieve a superior performance;
similarly, an existing solution may be sub-optimally reproduced (by using, e.g., a different dataset, or different tun-
ing parameters). Note that all such ‘flaws’ can be unconsciously introduced by researchers21. This phenomenon, also
referred to as benchmark lottery [58], results in an overall confusion on what really works best and impairs real ML
deployments. Among the main culprits of such phenomenon is the poor reproducibility of researches, as very
few works disclose the entire information required to replicate their experiments. Therefore, novel researches can-
not properly reproduce previous works; and the peer-review process cannot assess whether the experimental proto-
col is correct and unbiased. At the same time, however, we point out that most scientific venues do not allow (or re-
quire) inclusion of any supplementary and technical resource. Hence, even researchers must face a difficult decision
about what low-level information should be included in the actual submission—which is subject to page limitations.
Recommendation: The peer-review process should facilitate and enforce the inclusion of the material for
replicating ML experiments. At the same time, such material should be evaluated to ensure its correctness—
potentially by a separate set of reviewers with more technical expertise.
Realistic Security Scenarios. As a direct consequence of the benchmark lottery phenomenon, many research
papers simply focus on providing ‘better numbers’ than past work, overlooking the assumptions made by such
past work. In the context of cybersecurity, this is a problem because realistic circumstances must be considered,
and any result that stems from unrealistic scenarios is of questionable value. For instance, there is a superficial
treatment of training data: only few papers (e.g., [18, 130]) consider the concept drift, which is intrinsic in
cybersecurity; moreover, many recent papers (e.g., [156]) still use outdated datasets, such as the NSL-KDD which is
over 20 years old and does not reflect any current environment. The result is that all papers propose ML methods
that achieve near-perfect performance—but what is the practical impact of all such researches? We acknowledge
that public (labelled) data is difficult to acquire, but in the last years several datasets have been openly released
(e.g., [115, 147]). The impression is that the cybersecurity setting is turning into a yet-another research playground
where new ML methods are evaluated on some ‘security-related’ data, but realistic security considerations are
only made in the introduction to provide some justification for a given publication venue. Specifically, there
is a lack of realistic threat models. Such lack is epitomized in the emerging field of adversarial ML (§5.1),
where most attacks against security systems assume extremely powerful opponents. For instance, the authors
of [20] show that the majority of attacks against ML-NIDS require adversaries with direct access to the ML-NIDS
itself, which is an assumption that violates the basic security principles. Similarly, [133] show that adversarial
attacks have a different effectiveness when the opponent cannot manipulate the data-processing pipeline (which
is usually not accessible). Hence, it is not surprising that the industrial stakeholders are either confused or do
not care about adversarial examples—as evidenced by two recent surveys [69, 95] and the detailed case study in [42].
Recommendation: Future researches on ML applications for cybersecurity should have a closer connection
with the real world. The assumed threat model should be realistic, the dataset should resemble recent trends, and
the concept drift should be taken into account.
21A recent paper describing the pitfalls of ML in cybersecurity is [30]
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
24
•
Giovanni Apruzzese, Pavel Laskov, Edgardo Montes de Oca, Wissam Mallouli, Luis Búrdalo Rapa, Athanasios Vasileios
Grammatopoulos, and Fabio Di Franco
6.4
Orchestration of Machine Learning (engineers)
ML is not meant to fully replace existing systems or human experts. Rather, it should provide an additional
‘perspective’ that can be used to identify otherwise overlooked phenomena. However, ML methods exhibit
huge variance (e.g., different performance [134, 162], or adversarial robustness [25]), and a single ML solution
cannot protect against all threats that can target modern organizations.22 Addressing all such issues is possible
by orchestrating diverse ML solutions. Indeed, any ML model (irrespective of its goal) ultimately represents
just a single component of a cybersecurity system—which can be a ‘hybrid’ system that leverages also non-ML
techniques. However, such orchestration requires the expertise of ML engineers, who must coordinate different
outputs to extract actionable information. Specifically, ML (and non-ML) models can be combined either in an
ensemble or in a pipeline architecture, depending on the final goal of the system.
Ensemble architecture. One of the most proficient ways to combine different ML models is the so-called
ensemble [38]. The idea is leveraging many simplified learners with a common goal: each ML model of the
ensemble analyzes the same data, but by focusing on a specific problem. For instance, it is possible to create
ML-NIDS using ensembles of ML models, in which each model has the same goal (i.e., intrusion detection), but
focuses on a specific threat (e.g., botnet or DoS attacks [113]). Despite the proven performance benefits of such
architectures, a tough challenge faced by engineers is the lack of standardized feature sets that can be used
to devise all such systems. Each model of the ensemble must ultimately analyze the same data, and depending on
the features provided as input the performance can greatly differ (as shown in [41]). Our industrial case studies
in §7 consider a similar architecture.
Pipeline architecture. When the system envisions ML models having systematically different inputs and outputs,
they must be organized in a pipeline architecture. For example, it is possible to create an ensemble of ML models
for threat detection (§3), and then use their outputs for threat intelligence (§4). Similar systems already exist,
either as COTS products (e.g., SIEM23 or SOARS 24) or as scientific proposals: for instance, ARCUS [175] is a
security-focused orchestration platform that could benefit from the integration of many of the ML solutions
discussed in this paper. However, such architectures are challenging to implement by engineers: each individual
component is affected by all the issues presented in §5, therefore multiplying their impact.
Recommendation: Orchestrating complex systems that use (combinations of) ML and non-ML solutions is
beneficial for cybersecurity. Hence, ML engineers and practitioners should clearly highlight how to combine all
such components in order to maximize their practical effectiveness.
7
CASE STUDIES: INDUSTRIAL APPLICATIONS OF ML FOR CYBERSECURITY
As a final contribution of this paper, we present two case studies that showcase real and successful industrial
applications of ML in cybersecurity. Many commercial products are advertised as leveraging ML. Yet, most of
these products are provided as black-boxes, preventing any understanding of how ML is actually applied in
practice. Specifically, our case studies involve the two following scenarios:
• using ML for detecting Cache Poisoning Attacks against Named Data Networks. The approach is integrated
in a NIDS developed by Montimage (§7.1);
• combining sequential deep learning with non-ML methods for protecting Industrial Control Systems. The
approach is integrated in a cybersecurity device developed by S2Grupo (§7.2).
22The most exemplary use-case are zero-day attacks, which can easily evade supervised ML methods: zero-day samples cannot—by definition—
be included in the training data. Anomaly detection through unsupervised ML is more feasible, but at the cost of many false positives.
23System Information and Event Managers: https://www.forcepoint.com/cyber-edu/siem
24Security Orchestration Automation and Response Systems: https://www.rapid7.com/solutions/security-orchestration-and-automation/
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
The Role of Machine Learning in Cybersecurity
•
25
Both of these solutions use ML for anomaly detection with limited supervision. Our goal is to provide a high-level
overview on such ‘black-box’ ML systems by elucidating their internal functionalities.25.
7.1
Detection of Cache Poisoning Attacks in Named Data Networks
Information Centric Networking (ICN) is a revolutionary paradigm in the context of communications: while most
of the Internet follows a host-to-host perspective, ICN adopts a host-to-content vision [6]. The ICN architecture
is more suitable for massive content diffusion (e.g., video streaming), representing the major use cases of modern
networks. Despite providing multiple benefits in terms of bandwidth efficiency and scalability, ICN can fall victim
to Denial of Service (DoS) attacks and, in particular, to poisoning attacks [5, 174]. In this case study, we analyze a
real ML detection system that protects against such attacks targeting ICN architectures. The specific techniques
are integrated into the Montimage Monitoring Tool26 (MMT), which is a module of the IDS framework developed
by Montimage [118, 169].
Scenario and Challenges. This case study focuses on the well-known ICN approach of Named Data Networking
(NDN) [181]. Such NDN approach leverages a pull-based mechanism using two kinds of packets: Interest (a
request for a content) and Data (the response with the content). When a given user wants to retrieve some
content, the user (i) specifies the desired content’s name (e.g. “/data/video.mp4”) in an Interest, (ii) sends such
Interest through the NDN network, and (iii) receives the corresponding Data—which can be provided either by
the content producer, or by any intermediate NDN node storing a copy of such Data. The practical implementation
of NDN exposes to the risk of new security attacks, such as the Content Poisoning Attack (CPA) [174]. In CPA,
a malicious producer (content creator) colludes with a malicious consumer (a user requesting content) to force
any NDN node on their path to insert malicious content in their content storage (CS), hence causing poisoning
attacks. This results in nodes answering some requests with such malicious content: for example, a victim may
ask for a specific webpage and instead be redirected to a malicious phishing website. CPA are a dangerous threat
to NDN, as shown in [119]: analyses on real system highlighted that identifying CPA is impossible via static
and human-based approaches. This is due to the intrinsic characteristics of NDN, as each node in the network
topology reacts differently. Moreover, NDN are also susceptible to Interest Flooding Attacks (IFA), which represent
a variant of DoS in which the NDN is ‘flooded’ with interest requests [148] for existing or even non-existing
content that can disrupt the distribution of content. Although IFA are easier to identify than CPA, countering
both IFA and CPA is challenging and requires the usage of more dynamic analytical techniques—such as ML.
Montimage ML-Solution. The ML-solution developed by Montimage leverages ensembles of ML models orga-
nized in a Bayesian Network Classifier (BNC) [120]. The intuition is that detection of CPA is only possible by
monitoring the behaviour of each node in a NDN network—and, specifically, by analyzing and cross-correlating
the evolution of different metrics for each node.
Such goal is achieved by means of specific probes deployed on each node and monitoring its complete activity.
In particular, each probe collect metrics related to the Data plane of NDN: Content Store (CS), Pending Interest
Table (PIT), Faces. The latter, in particular, are an abstraction of a communication channel that NDN uses for
packet forwarding. Such abstraction represents data coming from diverse ‘faces’, i.e.,: overlay tunnels over
TCP and UDP; delivery of NDN network layer packets (e.g., Interest, Data packets); inter-node communication
channels that send packets to other nodes; and intra-node communication channels that send packets to another
process on the same node.
25The commercial nature of such systems—which are built on the end-users data—makes some low-level details to be protected by NDA, but
explicit requests can be made by contacting the respective vendors.
26https://montimage.com/products/MMT_DPI.html
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
26
•
Giovanni Apruzzese, Pavel Laskov, Edgardo Montes de Oca, Wissam Mallouli, Luis Búrdalo Rapa, Athanasios Vasileios
Grammatopoulos, and Fabio Di Franco
The information captured by these probes is then analyzed by ensembles of micro-anomaly-detectors, each
focusing on deviations from the normal behaviour of a single metric captured by each probe. It is true that
CPA can impact many metrics and in different ways, raising hundreds of (likely) false alarms by each micro-
detector. However, correlating all the alarms with a BNC allows to (i) increase the detection performance while
(ii) mitigating the high rate of false alarms generated by individual micro-detectors.
A schematic representation of the considered BNC is provided in Fig. 12: the ‘anomaly’ node (denoted in
red) represents the anomalies that can occur in the entire NDN, whereas the remaining nodes represent the
individual micro-detectors. Hence, each node focuses on a single metric, specifically: Faces, CS, or PIT (denoted
in green, purple and blue in Fig. 12). The (directed) edges in the BNC represent the causal relationships between
the Anomaly node and a metric (or pairs of metrics). An edge connects the ‘causing’ node to the ‘affected’ node.
The causal relationships are deduced based on the processing of each packet arriving to the NDN node.
Fig. 12. Architecture of the Bayesian Network Classifier adopted by Montimage to detect CPA in NDN. Each node represents
a micro detector that focuses on a single metric. The Anomaly node correlates the output of all other NDN nodes.
Fig. 13. Preliminary assessment of the BNC to
identify the optimal size of the training dataset.
Evaluation and Results. It is necessary to conduct a prelimi-
nary assessment of the learning efficency of the BNC before its
deployment. This is because NDN generate a lot of traffic, and
even though the BNC can ‘condense’ the raised alarms it is still
important that such alarms—and, specifically, false alarms—are
within acceptable levels. To this purpose, Montimage first collects
huge amounts of real data from the probes, and then uses such
data (assumed to be benign) to train (and test) a BNC. Specifically,
multiple BNC are assessed, each considering a different training
size: the goal is finding the optimal size that minimizes the rate of
false alarms. The results of such assessment are reported in Fig. 13,
showing the misclassification error (as measured via 5-fold cross-
validation) as a function of the training size. We observe that an
optimal value is achieved when the training set contains ∼280
samples27. For higher values, the error increases due to overfitting
(this phenomenon confirms the misconception outlined in §5.2).
27We observe that such samples represent alarms corresponding to multiple signals, and not to raw events.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
The Role of Machine Learning in Cybersecurity
•
27
Thus, for the considered deployment scenario, Montimage uses training sets of 280 samples—corresponding to 23
minutes of real reportings.
To evaluate the performance in production settings, Montimage reproduces the NDN topology in [182] and
creates two distinct environments, each adopting a specific NDN routing strategy: bestroute or multicast. Then,
each environment is monitored for 10 minutes, and the attack is simulated in the last 5 minutes. Specifically,
multiple CPA are launched, each considering increasing payloads, denoting the number of requests for content
(i.e., Interests) per second; in our case, we consider payloads of 5, 10, 20 and 50 Interests per second. In comparison,
legitimate clients produce 10 Interests per second (on average): hence, the malicious traffic ranges from half to
five times the legitimate traffic. The traffic generated during such simulations is collected and used to assess the
quality of the BNC: the goal is verifying whether the BNC is capable of identifying the CPA, which occurs in the
last 5 minutes.
To provide a twofold perspective of the performance (see §5.3), Montimage measures the True and False
Positive Rate (TPR and FPR—cf. Table 1 in §2.1). The results of such evaluation, performed on a testing set of
240 samples, are reported in Table 2. We observe that the TPR increases for greater payloads, because the CPA
become more conspicuous. Nonetheless, it is appreciable that even CPA with low payload can be effectively
detected. Finally, the low FPR is crucial for real deployments as they are annoying to human operators. All such
results are due to the advantages provided by the BNC, because BNC use a probabilistic approach allowing to
take into account the underlying random nature of the observed metrics. Such property makes BNC tailored
for multi-variate anomaly detection in real environments. In contrast, other ML algorithms present significant
drawbacks: for instance, ‘deep’ neural networks are excessively difficult to develop in such settings (also due to
their poor explainability); whereas other ‘shallow’ algorithms, such as SVM, simply do not allow to efficiently
represent and correlate all the metrics affected by CPA.
Table 2. CPA detection performance for two different routing strategies and increasing attack payload.
Routing
Strategy
Attack payload
(# Interest/s)
5
10
20
50
Bestroute
% True Positive
95.0%
95.3%
97.0%
98.3%
% False Positive
1.0%
1.0%
1.0%
1.0%
Multicast
% True Positive
63.3%
72.8%
79.3%
96.3%
% False Positive
1.0%
1.0%
1.0%
1.0%
The major limitation of BNC is its intrinsic function as anomaly detector: indeed, an anomaly is not necessarily
malicious. For instance, in a NDN setting, a sudden demand for a video from legitimate users could lead to a
temporary increase in traffic, indicating an abnormal activity. To mitigate this problem, Montimage considers four
possible ‘states’: normal state, IFA attack state, CPA attack state, number of users increase. Each state is denoted by
different ‘anomalous’ combinations taking into account a total of 18 metrics: a similar solution allows to maintain
the FPR to acceptable levels (as shown in Table 2). We take this opportunity to make a crucial remark for real ML
deployments: one may believe that defining more ‘states’ and/or increasing the amount of considered metrics
leads to better results. However, according to Montimage a similar approach can yield proficient results only in a
lab environment because it induces overfitting, and the true deployment performance may suffer excessive FPR.
Finally, an intriguing future development of such ML solution involves the consideration of ‘stateful’ analyses
that take into account the time-axis (as done, e.g., in [56]) and allow to detect even anomalies occurring in the
temporal domain. The next case-study by S2Grupo will consider a similar application.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
28
•
Giovanni Apruzzese, Pavel Laskov, Edgardo Montes de Oca, Wissam Mallouli, Luis Búrdalo Rapa, Athanasios Vasileios
Grammatopoulos, and Fabio Di Franco
7.2
Combining ML with non-ML methods to protect Industry 4.0 environments
With the rapid growth of the Industry 4.0 paradigm, industrial environments are even more exposed to Advanced
Persistent Threats (APT) [132]. Specifically, recent developments of Industrial Control Systems (ICS) represent an
attractive target for attackers [68]. In this case study, we share the experience in the design and operation of
CAIAC28, a non-intrusive device that leverages sequential ML to protect ICS against APT and other cyber-threats.
Scenario and Challenges. This case study highlights the advantages of ML applications for anomaly detection
in time-series data. The intuition is that APT leverage zero-day vulnerabilities, and hence cannot be detected via
misuse-based detection approaches—irrespective of being human- or data-driven. However, point-wise and static
anomaly detection approaches are not enough to detect advanced cyberattacks, and the additional perspective
provided by the temporal domain allows may facilitate the detection of refined offensive strategies [132].
In the specific ICS scenario, there are two crucial requirements that must be met by security systems. First,
they should operate in a non-intrusive way, avoiding additional overhead and ensuring the regular functionalities
of the ICS: this is a tough requirement because ICS include hundreds of devices and while excessive false alarms
are annoying, slow reaction times may imply a fallout of the entire ICS. Secondly, they must take into account
the complexity and variability of the data in ICS, which is difficult to manage to the intrinsic heterogeneity of
ICS. Such requirement cannot be met just with traditional approaches for time-series anomaly detection based
on heuristics: to address this problem, S2Grupo leverages the capabilities of deep learning.
S2Grupo ML-Solution. The ML solution developed by S2Grupo, CAIAC, is an intriguing example of ML or-
chestration (§6.4): CAIAC not only leverages the benefits provided by ‘small’ ML models (as done in §7.1), but
also exploits the potential of non-ML methods for time-series analyses. In particular, the idea is to combine
deep learning algorithms, epitomized by Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM) neural networks, with statistical
approaches for time-series forecasting, such as SARIMA (Seasonal Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average).
The result is an ensemble of ML and non-ML models, exploiting the benefits of both approaches and overcoming
their limitations: statistical models can be more manageable, but when the data has high complexity deep learning
is superior. Such design choice is particularly suited for real ICS deployments due to a threefold advantage with
respect to ‘one-size-fits-all’ ML architectures. Specifically:
• individual ML models are easier to train because they must deal only with a tiny portion of the data,
resulting in better performance and lower false alarms;
• it allows combining different algorithms, each addressed to a specific problem and data-type.
• it makes the resulting system more ‘future-proof’, because it each ML model can be individually updated,
removed, or replaced.
Furthermore, CAIAC is based on passive monitoring in near real-time, hence preventing excessive information
overhead while still allowing timely responses.
Let us explain CAIAC in more detail. The intuition is to analyze the network traffic of the considered ICS from
different perspectives, each associated to a specific time-series. Such time-series can differ on the basis of two
criteria: the network metric (e.g., transmitted packets), and the granularity used to aggregate the corresponding
metric in time slots of fixed length. All such time-series are used to devise multiple ML and non-ML models: the
performance of each model can be assessed individually by forwarding its detected anomalies to a higher level
correlation layer (similar to [132]). The goal of this layer is determining the nature of such anomalies: they can
either be legitimate (i.e., a ‘normal’ malfunctioning of a component that must be investigated) or illegitimate (i.e.,
an attack is taking place). Such procedure allows to identify the most suitable models that will be integrated in
CAIAC, depending on the pros and cons of each model. Indeed, LSTM models may yield a superior performance
28https://s2grupo.es/en/research-development-innovation/industrial-cybersecurity/caiac.html
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
The Role of Machine Learning in Cybersecurity
•
29
but require a training phase, whereas statistical models are easier to develop and only require some tuning. Hence,
such (non-ML) models are the preferred choice when they exhibit similar performance to LSTM.
Evaluation and Results. To develop CAIAC, it is necessary to first assess the characteristics of the specific
ICS: indeed, it is not possible to use models trained on different environments (as explained in §5.3). Hence,
S2Grupo monitors and collects the network traffic of the considered ICS, and creates multiple time series, each
considering a given metric and granularity. Some metrics are commonly adopted in NIDS (e.g., transmitted
packets or bytes, in-/out-degree [132]); others are specific of ICS and require dedicated industrial dissectors that
extract the relevant information (e.g., protocol, parameters, command density). Finally, each metric is aggregated
in time slots of varying length, from 1 minute to 1 hour.
After this data collection phase, which in the considered setting typically amounts to about 10GB of data per
day, S2Grupo performs the exploratory analysis focused on determining the most proficient (ML and non-ML)
algorithms for studying each time-series. Let us elucidate the differences between two specific applications of
SARIMA and LSTM, starting from the non-ML algorithm.
Specifically, SARIMA analyzes a time-series by adopting a sliding window approach: all data points within a
given time window are considered by SARIMA to predict a ‘future’ value, which is provided alongside a confidence
range. We provide an example of SARIMA in Fig. 14, showing the time series of the transmitted packets aggregated
in time slots of 5 minutes, over a period of 1 week; the sliding window considered by SARIMA is of 30 minutes.
The actual values are reported in dark-blue, whereas the values predicted via SARIMA are shown in orange; the
confidence window of each predicted value is shown in light-blue: therefore, actual values that fall outside of
such range are treated as anomalous. In particular, vertical gray lines denote the anomalies detected by SARIMA.
From 14, we observe that SARIMA accurately detects stationary deviations. However, SARIMA can only detect
non-stationary changes when they happen within its sliding window. Furthermore, non-stationary (but legitimate)
changes that occur after a long stationary interval are falsely detected as anomalies by SARIMA. Despite some
incorrect predictions, the considered application of SARIMA obtained a performance that was deemed appropriate
for the given task, and integrated in CAIAC.
Let us showcase an application of deep learning via LSTM. Since LSTM do not provide a confidence interval for
each prediction, S2Grupo developed a custom anomaly threshold that takes into account the deviation between
predicted and actual values, as well as the degree of accumulation of such deviation in the past history. An
example of such LSTM application is given in Fig. 15, showing the time-series of the transmitted packets (same
as Fig. 14), but with a time slot of 1 minute. The actual values are shown in blue, whereas the LSTM predictions
are in orange. Vertical grey lines denote the anomalies detected by the LSTM, i.e., when the actual values falls
outside the given anomalous threshold predicted with the LSTM.
From Fig. 15, we can observe that, by reducing the time slot from 5 to 1 minute, the resulting time-series is less
predictable, making statistical methods unfeasible and requiring the advanced capabilities of deep learning. Indeed,
the considered LSTM can detect anomalous values without being affected by non-stationary changes—even
after long stationary intervals. This example highlights the capabilities of (deep) ML to deal with data with high
dimensionality: the LSTM takes into account a long ‘past’ history, allowing to better infer the ‘normal’ behaviour.
In contrast, applying SARIMA on the same time-series resulted in very poor results due to the intrinsic variability
of the sequence, which forced us to aggregate data in 5 minute time slots.
However, it is important to take into account that the LSTM require a training step, whereas SARIMA only
requires some parameter adjustment. In this use-case, the LSTM in Fig. 15 was trained with data collected over
three weeks. Such characteristic implies that a similar LSTM model requires at least 3 weeks of data collection
since no previous network traffic data was available to train the model—alongside the additional computational
resources to store such data, and train the LSTM model (which were within acceptable levels). Hence, CAIAC
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
30
•
Giovanni Apruzzese, Pavel Laskov, Edgardo Montes de Oca, Wissam Mallouli, Luis Búrdalo Rapa, Athanasios Vasileios
Grammatopoulos, and Fabio Di Franco
Fig. 14. Anomaly detection with (non-ML) SARIMA, using a sliding window of 30 minutes. The time-series represents the
transmitted packets (y-axis) within 5 minute slots, over a period of 1 week (x-axis), corresponding to a total of 2K samples.
Dark blue correspond to actual values, orange denotes the values predicted with SARIMA, and light blue denotes the
confidence interval of SARIMA’s predictions. Vertical gray lines correspond to the anomalies detected by SARIMA.
Fig. 15. Anomaly detection with a deep LSTM neural network. The time-series represents the transmitted packets (y-axis)
within 1 minute slots, over the period of 1 week (x-axis), corresponding to a total of 10K samples. Actual values are shown in
blue, and the LSTM predictions are shown in orange. Vertical gray lines denote the anomalies detected by the LSTM.
would initially make use of SARIMA, and then replace it after enough data has been collected to develop a more
proficient LSTM model.
We can conclude that machine (and deep) learning are powerful instruments for protecting modern ICS, but
methods that do not leverage ML are equally important to compensate some of the limitations of ML. As such,
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
The Role of Machine Learning in Cybersecurity
•
31
future developments should not exclusively focus on ML and overlook the benefits provided by other data-driven
methods.
8
CONCLUSION
This paper elucidates the role of Machine Learning (ML) for Cybersecurity by providing a broad and high-level
overview of the benefits, problems, and future challenges of ML in this domain. Our paper is oriented at the
entire cybersecurity sphere, and to make our contribution understandable by a broad audience we limit technical
terms to a minimum. Moreover, we also clarify many misconceptions (summarized in Table 3) that are becoming
common due to the increasing abundance of works that link ML with cybersecurity applications.
After introducing the basic concepts of ML, we provide a concise summary of their applications to detect
three types of cyber threats: Malware, Phishing, and Network Intrusions. Then, we elucidate some additional
cybersecurity areas that can leverage the autonomous capabilities of ML, such as raw-data analysis, alert
management, cyber risk estimation, and threat intelligence. What follows is a description of the fundamental
problems affecting ML within the specific context of operational cybersecurity, which should be known to weigh
the pros-and-cons of the still emerging ML solutions. Some of these problems stem from the intrinsic conflicts
between the fundamental principles of ML and the cybersecurity domain, and can be addressed only by the joint
effort of different worlds: regulatory and authoritative bodies, corporate executives and engineers, as well as the
entire scientific community. To this end, we highlight the future challenges of ML in cybersecurity, which we
integrate by comprehensive recommendations addressed at each of these separate worlds. Finally, we present
two case studies of successful—and operational—industrial deployments of ML to counter cyber threats.
This paper will hopefully inspire meaningful developments of ML in the cybersecurity domain, laying the
foundations for an increased deployment of ML solutions to protect current and future systems.
Table 3. Summary of security ML misconceptions discussed in the paper.
#
Misconception
Ref.
1
Deep Learning vs Shallow Learning
§2.1
2
Machine Learning and Anomaly Detection
§3
3
Legitimacy of Adversarial Samples
§5.1
4
Minimal Adversarial Perturbations
§5.1
5
Size of training data
§5.2
6
Updating ML models with new data
§5.2
REFERENCES
[1] 2020. On Artificial Intelligence - A European approach to excellence and trust. Technical Report. European Commission. 27 pages.
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/commission-white-paper-artificial-intelligence-feb2020_en.pdf
[2] 2021. Darktrace Industrial Uses Machine Learning to Identify Cyber Campaigns Targeting Critical Infrastructure. https://www.
darktrace.com/en/press/2017/204/.
[3] 2021. Gartner Predicts By 2025 Cyber Attackers Will Have Weaponized Operational Technology Environments to Successfully Harm
or Kill Humans. https://www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/press-releases/2021-07-21-gartner-predicts-by-2025-cyber-attackers-will-
have-we.
[4] 2021. S&T Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning Strategic Plan. Technical Report. US Department of Homeland Security. 24 pages.
https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/21_0730_st_ai_ml_strategic_plan_2021.pdf
[5] Alexander Afanasyev, Priya Mahadevan, Ilya Moiseenko, Ersin Uzun, and Lixia Zhang. 2013. Interest flooding attack and countermea-
sures in Named Data Networking. In 2013 IFIP Networking Conference. IEEE, 1–9.
[6] Bengt Ahlgren, Christian Dannewitz, Claudio Imbrenda, Dirk Kutscher, and Börje Ohlman. 2012. A survey of information-centric
networking. IEEE Communications Magazine 50, 7 (2012), 26–36. https://doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.2012.6231276
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
32
•
Giovanni Apruzzese, Pavel Laskov, Edgardo Montes de Oca, Wissam Mallouli, Luis Búrdalo Rapa, Athanasios Vasileios
Grammatopoulos, and Fabio Di Franco
[7] Muna Al-Hawawreh and Elena Sitnikova. 2019. Leveraging deep learning models for ransomware detection in the industrial internet
of things environment. In Proc. IEEE Milit. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf. 1–6.
[8] Mohammed Al-Qizwini, Iman Barjasteh, Hothaifa Al-Qassab, and Hayder Radha. 2017. Deep learning algorithm for autonomous
driving using GoogLeNet. In Proc. IEEE Intell. Vehicles Symp. 89–96.
[9] Areej Alhogail and Afrah Alsabih. 2021. Applying machine learning and natural language processing to detect phishing email.
Computers & Security 110 (2021), 102414.
[10] Kevin Allix, Tegawendé F Bissyandé, Jacques Klein, and Yves Le Traon. 2016. Androzoo: Collecting millions of android apps for the
research community. In 2016 IEEE/ACM 13th Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR). IEEE, 468–471.
[11] Mohammad Almseidin, Maen Alzubi, Szilveszter Kovacs, and Mouhammd Alkasassbeh. 2017. Evaluation of machine learning
algorithms for intrusion detection system. In 2017 IEEE 15th International Symposium on Intelligent Systems and Informatics (SISY).
IEEE, 000277–000282.
[12] Mohammed Almukaynizi, Eric Nunes, Krishna Dharaiya, Manoj Senguttuvan, Jana Shakarian, and Paulo Shakarian. 2017. Proactive
identification of exploits in the wild through vulnerability mentions online. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Cyber Conflict US,
CyCon US 2017. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 82–88.
[13] Nisreen Alzahrani and Daniyal Alghazzawi. 2019. A review on android ransomware detection using deep learning techniques. In Proc.
ACM Int. Conf. Manag. Digit. EcoSyst. 330–335.
[14] Kasun Amarasinghe, Kevin Kenney, and Milos Manic. 2018. Toward explainable deep neural network based anomaly detection. In Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Human System Interaction. 311–317.
[15] Eslam Amer and Ivan Zelinka. 2020. A dynamic Windows malware detection and prediction method based on contextual understanding
of API call sequence. Computers & Security 92 (2020), 101760.
[16] Abderrahmen Amich and Birhanu Eshete. 2021. Explanation-Guided Diagnosis of Machine Learning Evasion Attacks. Proc. ACM ARES
Conf. (2021).
[17] Hyrum S Anderson, Jonathan Woodbridge, and Bobby Filar. 2016. DeepDGA: Adversarially-tuned domain generation and detection. In
Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security. 13–21.
[18] Giuseppina Andresini, Feargus Pendlebury, Fabio Pierazzi, Corrado Loglisci, Annalisa Appice, and Lorenzo Cavallaro. 2021. INSOMNIA:
Towards Concept-Drift Robustness in Network Intrusion Detection. In Proc. ACM CCS Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security.
[19] Giovanni Apruzzese, Mauro Andreolini, Michele Colajanni, and Mirco Marchetti. 2020. Hardening Random Forest Cyber Detectors
Against Adversarial Attacks. IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence 4, 4 (2020), 427–439.
[20] Giovanni Apruzzese, Mauro Andreolini, Luca Ferretti, Mirco Marchetti, and Michele Colajanni. 2021. Modeling Realistic Adversarial
Attacks against Network Intrusion Detection Systems. ACM Digital Threats: Research and Practice (2021).
[21] G. Apruzzese, M. Andreolini, M. Marchetti, A. Venturi, and M. Colajanni. 2020. Deep Reinforcement Adversarial Learning against
Botnet Evasion Attacks. IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management (2020).
[22] Giovanni Apruzzese and Michele Colajanni. 2018. Evading botnet detectors based on flows and Random Forest with adversarial
samples. In Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Network Computing and Applications. 1–8.
[23] Giovanni Apruzzese, Michele Colajanni, Luca Ferretti, Alessandro Guido, and Mirco Marchetti. 2018. On the Effectiveness of Machine
and Deep Learning for Cybersecurity. In Proc. IEEE International Conference on Cyber Conflicts. 371–390.
[24] Giovanni Apruzzese, Michele Colajanni, Luca Ferretti, and Mirco Marchetti. 2019. Addressing Adversarial Attacks against Security
Systems based on Machine Learning. In Proc. IEEE International Conference on Cyber Conflicts. 1–18.
[25] Giovanni Apruzzese, Michele Colajanni, and Mirco Marchetti. 2019. Evaluating the effectiveness of Adversarial Attacks against Botnet
Detectors. In 2019 IEEE 18th International Symposium on Network Computing and Applications (NCA). IEEE, 1–8.
[26] Giovanni Apruzzese, Mirco Marchetti, Michele Colajanni, Gabriele Gambigliani Zoccoli, and Alessandro Guido. 2017. Identifying
Malicious Hosts Involved in Periodic Communications. In Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Network Computing Applications. 1–8.
[27] Giovanni Apruzzese, Luca Pajola, and Mauro Conti. 2022. The Cross-evaluation of Machine Learning-based Network Intrusion
Detection Systems. IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management (2022).
[28] Giovanni Apruzzese, Fabio Pierazzi, Michele Colajanni, and Mirco Marchetti. 2017. Detection and threat prioritization of pivoting
attacks in large networks. IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing 8, 2 (2017), 404–415.
[29] Giovanni Apruzzese, Aliya Tastemirova, and Pavel Laskov. 2022. SoK: The Impact of Unlabelled Data in Cyberthreat Detection. In IEEE
Europ. Symp. Security Privacy.
[30] Daniel Arp, Erwin Quiring, Feargus Pendlebury, Alexander Warnecke, Fabio Pierazzi, Christian Wressnegger, Lorenzo Cavallaro, and
Konrad Rieck. 2021. Dos and Don’ts of Machine Learning in Computer Security. USENIX Security Symposium (2021).
[31] Daniel Arp, Michael Spreitzenbarth, Malte Hubner, Hugo Gascon, Konrad Rieck, and CERT Siemens. 2014. Drebin: Effective and
explainable detection of android malware in your pocket.. In Ndss, Vol. 14. 23–26.
[32] Mehdi Babagoli, Mohammad Pourmahmood Aghababa, and Vahid Solouk. 2019. Heuristic nonlinear regression strategy for detecting
phishing websites. Soft Comput. 23, 12 (2019), 4315–4327.
[33] Ram Basnet. 2014. Learning to Detect Phishing URLs. International Journal of Research in Engineering and Technology 03 (2014), 11–24.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
The Role of Machine Learning in Cybersecurity
•
33
[34] Manjula C Belavagi and Balachandra Muniyal. 2016. Performance evaluation of supervised machine learning algorithms for intrusion
detection. Procedia Computer Science 89 (2016), 117–123.
[35] Jacopo Bellasio and Erik Silfversten. 2020. The Impact of New and Emerging Technologies on the Cyber Threat Landscape and Their
Implications for NATO. Cyber Threats and NATO 2030: Horizon Scanning and Analysis (2020), 88.
[36] Daniel S Berman, Anna L Buczak, Jeffrey S Chavis, and Cherita L Corbett. 2019. A survey of deep learning methods for cyber security.
Information 10, 4 (2019), 122.
[37] Gustavo de Carvalho Bertoli, Lourenço Alves Pereira Junior, Filipe Alves Neto Verri, Aldri Luiz dos Santos, and Osamu Saotome. 2021.
Bridging the gap to real-world for network intrusion detection systems with data-centric approach. Proc. Neural Information Processing
Systems.
[38] Battista Biggio, Igino Corona, Zhi-Min He, Patrick PK Chan, Giorgio Giacinto, Daniel S Yeung, and Fabio Roli. 2015. One-and-a-half-class
multiple classifier systems for secure learning against evasion attacks at test time. In International Workshop on Multiple Classifier
Systems. Springer, 168–180.
[39] Battista Biggio and Fabio Roli. 2018. Wild patterns: Ten years after the rise of adversarial machine learning. Elsevier Pattern Recognition
84 (2018), 317–331.
[40] Leyla Bilge, Engin Kirda, Christopher Kruegel, and Marco Balduzzi. 2011. EXPOSURE: Finding Malicious Domains Using Passive DNS
Analysis.. In Ndss. 1–17.
[41] Adel Binbusayyis and Thavavel Vaiyapuri. 2019. Identifying and benchmarking key features for cyber intrusion detection: an ensemble
approach. IEEE Access 7 (2019), 106495–106513.
[42] Franziska Boenisch, Verena Battis, Nicolas Buchmann, and Maija Poikela. 2021. “I Never Thought About Securing My Machine Learning
Systems”: A Study of Security and Privacy Awareness of Machine Learning Practitioners. In Mensch und Computer 2021. 520–546.
[43] Atul Bohara, Mohammad A Noureddine, Ahmed Fawaz, and William H Sanders. 2017. An unsupervised multi-detector approach for
identifying malicious lateral movement. In 2017 IEEE 36th Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems (SRDS). IEEE, 224–233.
[44] Gianluca Bontempi, Souhaib Ben Taieb, and Yann-Aël Le Borgne. 2012. Machine learning strategies for time series forecasting. In
European business intelligence summer school. 62–77.
[45] Emilie Bout, Valeria Loscri, and Antoine Gallais. 2021. How Machine Learning changes the nature of cyberattacks on IoT networks: A
survey. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut. (2021).
[46] Anna L Buczak and Erhan Guven. 2015. A survey of data mining and machine learning methods for cyber security intrusion detection.
IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials 18, 2 (2015), 1153–1176.
[47] Elie Bursztein, Matthieu Martin, and John Mitchell. 2011. Text-based CAPTCHA strengths and weaknesses. In Proc. ACM Conf. Comp.
Commun. Secur. 125–138.
[48] Nicholas Carlini and David Wagner. 2016. Defensive distillation is not robust to adversarial examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.04311
(2016).
[49] Tanmoy Chakraborty, Fabio Pierazzi, and VS Subrahmanian. 2017. EC2: ensemble clustering and classification for predicting android
malware families. IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing (2017).
[50] Sujita Chaudhary, Austin O’Brien, and Shengjie Xu. 2020. Automated post-breach penetration testing through reinforcement learning.
In 2020 IEEE Conference on Communications and Network Security (CNS). 1–2.
[51] Haipeng Chen, Jing Liu, Rui Liu, Noseong Park, and VS Subrahmanian. 2019. VASE: A Twitter-Based Vulnerability Analysis and Score
Engine. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM). IEEE, 976–981.
[52] Li Chen, Salmin Sultana, and Ravi Sahita. 2018. Henet: A deep learning approach on intel® processor trace for effective exploit
detection. In Proc. IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops. 109–115.
[53] Howard Chivers, John A Clark, Philip Nobles, Siraj A Shaikh, and Hao Chen. 2013. Knowing who to watch: Identifying attackers
whose actions are hidden within false alarms and background noise. Information Systems Frontiers 15, 1 (2013), 17–34.
[54] Zheng Leong Chua, Shiqi Shen, Prateek Saxena, and Zhenkai Liang. 2017. Neural nets can learn function type signatures from binaries.
In 26th {USENIX} Security Symposium ({USENIX} Security 17). 99–116.
[55] Igino Corona, Battista Biggio, Matteo Contini, Luca Piras, Roberto Corda, Mauro Mereu, Guido Mureddu, Davide Ariu, and Fabio Roli.
2017. Deltaphish: Detecting phishing webpages in compromised websites. In European Symposium on Research in Computer Security.
Springer, 370–388.
[56] Andrea Corsini, Shanchieh Yang, and Giovanni Apruzzese. 2021. On the Evaluation of Sequential Machine Learning for Network
Intrusion Detection. In Proc. Int. Conf. Availability, Reliability, Security.
[57] Ittai Dayan, Holger R Roth, Aoxiao Zhong, Ahmed Harouni, Amilcare Gentili, Anas Z Abidin, Andrew Liu, Anthony Beardsworth
Costa, Bradford J Wood, Chien-Sung Tsai, et al. 2021. Federated learning for predicting clinical outcomes in patients with COVID-19.
Nature Medicine (2021), 1–9.
[58] Mostafa Dehghani, Yi Tay, Alexey A Gritsenko, Zhe Zhao, Neil Houlsby, Fernando Diaz, Donald Metzler, and Oriol Vinyals. 2021. The
Benchmark Lottery. In NeurIPS.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
34
•
Giovanni Apruzzese, Pavel Laskov, Edgardo Montes de Oca, Wissam Mallouli, Luis Búrdalo Rapa, Athanasios Vasileios
Grammatopoulos, and Fabio Di Franco
[59] Ambra Demontis, Marco Melis, Battista Biggio, Davide Maiorca, Daniel Arp, Konrad Rieck, Igino Corona, Giorgio Giacinto, and Fabio
Roli. 2017. Yes, machine learning can be more secure! a case study on android malware detection. IEEE Transactions on Dependable and
Secure Computing (2017).
[60] Ambra Demontis, Marco Melis, Maura Pintor, Matthew Jagielski, Battista Biggio, Alina Oprea, Cristina Nita-Rotaru, and Fabio Roli.
2019. Why do adversarial attacks transfer? Explaining transferability of evasion and poisoning attacks. In Proc. USENIX Security
Symposium. 321–338.
[61] Melvin Diale, Turgay Celik, and Christiaan Van Der Walt. 2019. Unsupervised feature learning for spam email filtering. Computers &
Electrical Engineering 74 (2019), 89–104.
[62] Luis Dias, Simão Valente, and Miguel Correia. 2020. Go with the flow: Clustering dynamically-defined netflow features for network
intrusion detection with DynIDS. In 2020 IEEE 19th International Symposium on Network Computing and Applications (NCA). IEEE,
1–10.
[63] Jesús E Díaz-Verdejo, Antonio Estepa, Rafael Estepa, German Madinabeitia, and Fco Javier Muñoz-Calle. 2020. A methodology for
conducting efficient sanitization of HTTP training datasets. Elsevier Future Generation Computer Systems 109 (2020), 67–82.
[64] Min Du, Feifei Li, Guineng Zheng, and Vivek Srikumar. 2017. Deeplog: Anomaly detection and diagnosis from system logs through
deep learning. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security. 1285–1298.
[65] Murat Dundar, Balaji Krishnapuram, Jinbo Bi, and R Bharat Rao. 2007. Learning classifiers when the training data is not IID. In IJCAI,
Vol. 2007. 756–61.
[66] Gints Engelen, Vera Rimmer, and Wouter Joosen. 2021. Troubleshooting an intrusion detection dataset: the CICIDS2017 case study. In
Proc. IEEE Security and Privacy Workshop. 7–12.
[67] Yong Fang, Cheng Zhang, Cheng Huang, Liang Liu, and Yue Yang. 2019. Phishing email detection using improved RCNN model with
multilevel vectors and attention mechanism. IEEE Access 7 (2019), 56329–56340.
[68] Cheng Feng, Tingting Li, and Deeph Chana. 2017. Multi-level anomaly detection in industrial control systems via package signatures
and LSTM networks. In 2017 47th Annual IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks (DSN). IEEE, 261–272.
[69] Simone Fischer-Hübner, Cristina Alcaraz, Afonso Ferreira, Carmen Fernandez-Gago, Javier Lopez, Evangelos Markatos, Lejla Islami,
and Mahdi Akil. 2021. Stakeholder perspectives and requirements on cybersecurity in Europe. Journal of Information Security and
Applications 61 (2021), 102916.
[70] Tushaar Gangavarapu, CD Jaidhar, and Bhabesh Chanduka. 2020. Applicability of machine learning in spam and phishing email
filtering: review and approaches. Artificial Intelligence Review (2020), 1–63.
[71] Joseph Gardiner and Shishir Nagaraja. 2016. On the security of machine learning in malware c&c detection: A survey. ACM Computing
Surveys (CSUR) 49, 3 (2016), 59.
[72] José Tomás Martínez Garre, Manuel Gil Pérez, and Antonio Ruiz-Martínez. 2021. A novel Machine Learning-based approach for the
detection of SSH botnet infection. Future Generation Computer Systems 115 (2021), 387–396.
[73] Hugo Gascon, Steffen Ullrich, Benjamin Stritter, and Konrad Rieck. 2018. Reading between the lines: content-agnostic detection of
spear-phishing emails. In International Symposium on Research in Attacks, Intrusions, and Defenses. Springer, 69–91.
[74] Mohamed C Ghanem and Thomas M Chen. 2018. Reinforcement learning for intelligent penetration testing. In Proc. IEEE Second World
Conference on Smart Trends in Systems, Security and Sustainability. 185–192.
[75] Arnaldo Gouveia and Miguel Correia. 2020. Towards Quantum-Enhanced Machine Learning for Network Intrusion Detection. In 2020
IEEE 19th International Symposium on Network Computing and Applications (NCA). 1–8.
[76] Kathrin Grosse, Nicolas Papernot, Praveen Manoharan, Michael Backes, and Patrick McDaniel. 2017. Adversarial examples for malware
detection. In European Symposium on Research in Computer Security. Springer, 62–79.
[77] Malay Haldar, Mustafa Abdool, Prashant Ramanathan, Tao Xu, Shulin Yang, Huizhong Duan, Qing Zhang, Nick Barrow-Williams,
Bradley C Turnbull, Brendan M Collins, et al. 2019. Applying Deep Learning to AirBnB search. In Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
Discov. Data Mining. 1927–1935.
[78] Richard Harang and Ethan M. Rudd. 2020. SOREL-20M: A Large Scale Benchmark Dataset for Malicious PE Detection. arXiv:2012.07634
(2020).
[79] Martin Horák, Václav Stupka, and Martin Husák. 2019. GDPR compliance in cybersecurity software: a case study of DPIA in information
sharing platform. In Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Availab. Reliab. Secur. 1–8.
[80] Xin Hu, Kang G Shin, Sandeep Bhatkar, and Kent Griffin. 2013. Mutantx-s: Scalable malware clustering based on static features. In
USENIX Annual Technical Conference. 187–198.
[81] Yupeng Hu, Wenxin Kuang, Zheng Qin, Kenli Li, Jiliang Zhang, Yansong Gao, Wenjia Li, and Keqin Li. 2021. Artificial Intelligence
Security: Threats and Countermeasures. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 55, 1 (2021), 1–36.
[82] Martin Husák, Tomáš Jirsík, and Shanchieh Jay Yang. 2020. SoK: Contemporary issues and challenges to enable cyber situational
awareness for network security. In Proc. ARES Conference. 1–10.
[83] Mohammad S Jalali, Michael Siegel, and Stuart Madnick. 2019. Decision-making and biases in cybersecurity capability development:
Evidence from a simulation game experiment. Elsevier The Journal of Strategic Information Systems 28, 1 (2019), 66–82.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
The Role of Machine Learning in Cybersecurity
•
35
[84] Ahmad Javaid, Quamar Niyaz, Weiqing Sun, and Mansoor Alam. 2016. A deep learning approach for network intrusion detection
system. In Proceedings of the 9th EAI International Conference on Bio-inspired Information and Communications Technologies (formerly
BIONETICS). 21–26.
[85] Michael I Jordan and Tom M Mitchell. 2015. Machine Learning: Trends, Perspectives, and Prospects. Science 349, 6245 (2015), 255–260.
[86] Roberto Jordaney, Kumar Sharad, Santanu K Dash, Zhi Wang, Davide Papini, Ilia Nouretdinov, and Lorenzo Cavallaro. 2017. Transcend:
Detecting concept drift in malware classification models. In Proc. USENIX Security Symposium. 625–642.
[87] Mahmoud Kalash, Mrigank Rochan, Noman Mohammed, Neil DB Bruce, Yang Wang, and Farkhund Iqbal. 2018. Malware classification
with deep convolutional neural networks. In 2018 9th IFIP International Conference on New Technologies, Mobility and Security (NTMS).
IEEE, 1–5.
[88] Chanhyun Kang, Noseong Park, B Aditya Prakash, Edoardo Serra, and VS Subrahmanian. 2016. Ensemble models for data-driven
prediction of malware infections. In Proceedings of the Ninth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. 583–592.
[89] Asif Karim, Sami Azam, Bharanidharan Shanmugam, Krishnan Kannoorpatti, and Mamoun Alazab. 2019. A comprehensive survey for
intelligent spam email detection. IEEE Access 7 (2019), 168261–168295.
[90] Houssain Kettani and Polly Wainwright. 2019. On the top threats to cyber systems. In 2019 IEEE 2nd International Conference on
Information and Computer Technologies (ICICT). IEEE, 175–179.
[91] Ahsan Al Zaki Khan. 2019. Misuse intrusion detection using machine learning for gas pipeline scada networks. In Proc. Int. Conf. Secur.
Manag. 84–90.
[92] Platon Kotzias, Juan Caballero, and Leyla Bilge. 2021. How did that get in my phone? Unwanted app distribution on android devices. In
IEEE Symp Secur. Privacy. 53–69.
[93] Nir Kshetri. 2021. Economics of Artificial Intelligence in Cybersecurity. IEEE IT Professional 23, 5 (2021), 73–77.
[94] Gunupudi Rajesh Kumar, Nimmala Mangathayaru, and Gugulothu Narsimha. 2016. An approach for intrusion detection using fuzzy
feature clustering. In Proc. IEEE ICEMIS. 1–8.
[95] Ram Shankar Siva Kumar, Magnus Nyström, John Lambert, Andrew Marshall, Mario Goertzel, Andi Comissoneru, Matt Swann, and
Sharon Xia. 2020. Adversarial machine learning-industry perspectives. In Proc. IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops. 69–75.
[96] Eric Lancaster, Tanmoy Chakraborty, and VS Subrahmanian. 2018. MALT𝑃: Parallel Prediction of Malicious Tweets. IEEE T. Computa-
tional Social Systems 5, 4 (2018), 1096–1108.
[97] Lastline. 2020. Using AI to Detect and Contain Cyberthreats. Technical Report. https://www.lastline.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/
Lastline_WP_AI_Done_Right_web.pdf
[98] Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. 2015. Deep learning. Nature 521, 7553 (2015), 436–444.
[99] Jhen-Hao Li and Sheng-De Wang. 2017. PhishBox: An approach for phishing validation and detection. In Proc. IEEE DASC/PiCom/Data-
Com/CyberSciTech Conf. 557–564.
[100] Yuping Li, Jiyong Jang, Xin Hu, and Xinming Ou. 2017. Android malware clustering through malicious payload mining. In International
symposium on research in attacks, intrusions, and defenses. Springer, 192–214.
[101] Bin Liang, Miaoqiang Su, Wei You, Wenchang Shi, and Gang Yang. 2016. Cracking classifiers for evasion: a case study on the google’s
phishing pages filter. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on World Wide Web. International World Wide Web Conferences
Steering Committee, 345–356.
[102] Hongyu Liu and Bo Lang. 2019. Machine learning and deep learning methods for intrusion detection systems: A survey. Applied
Sciences 9, 20 (2019), 4396.
[103] Zhen Liu, Ruoyu Wang, Nathalie Japkowicz, Deyu Tang, Wenbin Zhang, and Jie Zhao. 2021. Research on unsupervised feature learning
for Android malware detection based on Restricted Boltzmann Machines. Future Generation Computer Systems 120 (2021), 91–108.
[104] Siti-Farhana Lokman, Abu Talib Othman, and Muhammad-Husaini Abu-Bakar. 2019. Intrusion detection system for automotive
Controller Area Network (CAN) bus system: a review. EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking 2019, 1 (2019),
1–17.
[105] Pierangelo Lombardo, Salvatore Saeli, Federica Bisio, Davide Bernardi, and Danilo Massa. 2018. Fast flux service network detection via
data mining on passive DNS traffic. In International Conference on Information Security. Springer, 463–480.
[106] Dimitris Margaritis. 2020. Artificial Intelligence Cybersecurity Challenges. Technical Report. European Union Agency for Cybersecurity.
https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/artificial-intelligence-cybersecurity-challenges
[107] Daniel L Marino, Chathurika S Wickramasinghe, and Milos Manic. 2018. An adversarial approach for explainable ai in intrusion
detection systems. In Proc. IEEE Conf. IndustrialElectronics Society. 3237–3243.
[108] Nuno Martins, José Magalhães Cruz, Tiago Cruz, and Pedro Henriques Abreu. 2020. Adversarial machine learning applied to intrusion
and malware scenarios: a systematic review. IEEE Access 8 (2020), 35403–35419.
[109] Lennart Maschmeyer, Ronald J Deibert, and Jon R Lindsay. 2021. A tale of two cybers-how threat reporting by cybersecurity firms
systematically underrepresents threats to civil society. Journal of Information Technology & Politics 18, 1 (2021), 1–20.
[110] Steven McElwee, Jeffrey Heaton, James Fraley, and James Cannady. 2017. Deep learning for prioritizing and responding to intrusion
detection alerts. In Proc. IEEE Military Communications Conference. 1–5.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
36
•
Giovanni Apruzzese, Pavel Laskov, Edgardo Montes de Oca, Wissam Mallouli, Luis Búrdalo Rapa, Athanasios Vasileios
Grammatopoulos, and Fabio Di Franco
[111] Dean Richard McKinnel, Tooska Dargahi, Ali Dehghantanha, and Kim-Kwang Raymond Choo. 2019. A systematic literature review and
meta-analysis on artificial intelligence in penetration testing and vulnerability assessment. Elsevier Computers & Electrical Engineering
75 (2019), 175–188.
[112] Brad Miller, Alex Kantchelian, Michael Carl Tschantz, Sadia Afroz, Rekha Bachwani, Riyaz Faizullabhoy, Ling Huang, Vaishaal Shankar,
Tony Wu, George Yiu, et al. 2016. Reviewer integration and performance measurement for malware detection. In Proc. Int. Conf. DIMVA.
122–141.
[113] Yisroel Mirsky, Tomer Doitshman, Yuval Elovici, and Asaf Shabtai. 2018. Kitsune: An Ensemble of Autoencoders for Online Network
Intrusion Detection. In Network and Distributed System Security Symposium 2018 (NDSS’18), Vol. 5. 2.
[114] Manuel Eugenio Morocho-Cayamcela, Haeyoung Lee, and Wansu Lim. 2019. Machine learning for 5G/B5G mobile and wireless
communications: Potential, limitations, and future directions. IEEE Access 7 (2019), 137184–137206.
[115] Nour Moustafa and Jill Slay. 2015. UNSW-NB15: a comprehensive data set for network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15
network data set). In 2015 military communications and information systems conference (MilCIS). IEEE, 1–6.
[116] Azqa Nadeem, Sicco Verwer, Stephen Moskal, and Shanchieh Jay Yang. 2021. Alert-driven Attack Graph Generation using S-PDFA.
IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing (2021).
[117] Antonio Nappa, Zhaoyan Xu, M Zubair Rafique, Juan Caballero, and Guofei Gu. 2014. Cyberprobe: Towards internet-scale active
detection of malicious servers. In In Proceedings of the 2014 Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS 2014). 1–15.
[118] Tan Nguyen, Hoang-Long Mai, Guillaume Doyen, Rémi Cogranne, Wissam Mallouli, Edgardo Montes De Oca, and Olivier Festor. 2018.
A security monitoring plane for named data networking deployment. IEEE Communications Magazine 56, 11 (2018), 88–94.
[119] Tan Nguyen, Xavier Marchal, Guillaume Doyen, Thibault Cholez, and Rémi Cogranne. 2017. Content Poisoning in Named Data
Networking: Comprehensive characterization of real deployment. In Integrated Network and Service Management (IM), 2017 IFIP/IEEE
Symposium on. IEEE, 72–80.
[120] Tan N. Nguyen, Xavier Marchal, Guillaume Doyen, Thibault Cholez, and Rémi Cogranne. 2017. Content Poisoning in Named Data
Networking: Comprehensive characterization of real deployment. In 2017 IFIP/IEEE Symposium on Integrated Network and Service
Management (IM), Lisbon, Portugal, May 8-12, 2017. IEEE, 72–80. https://doi.org/10.23919/INM.2017.7987266
[121] Thanh Thi Nguyen and Vijay Janapa Reddi. 2021. Deep Reinforcement Learning for Cyber Security. IEEE Transactions on Neural
Networks and Learning Systems (2021), 1–17.
[122] Amirreza Niakanlahiji, Bei-Tseng Chu, and Ehab Al-Shaer. 2018. PhishMon: A Machine Learning Framework for Detecting Phishing
Webpages. In Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intel. Secur. Inf. 220–225.
[123] Beny Nugraha, Anshitha Nambiar, and Thomas Bauschert. 2020. Performance Evaluation of Botnet Detection using Deep Learning
Techniques. In Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Netw. Future. 141–149.
[124] Livinus Obiora Nweke and Stephen Wolthusen. 2020. Legal issues related to cyber threat information sharing among private entities
for critical infrastructure protection. In IEEE International Conference on Cyber Conflict (CyCon).
[125] Ahmet Okutan and Shanchieh Jay Yang. 2019. ASSERT: attack synthesis and separation with entropy redistribution towards predictive
cyber defense. Cybersecurity 2, 1 (2019), 1–18.
[126] Ahmet Okutan, Shanchieh Jay Yang, and Katie McConky. 2021. Cyberattack Forecasting Using Predictive Information. US Patent App.
16/898,618.
[127] Nicolas Papernot, Patrick McDaniel, Arunesh Sinha, and Michael Wellman. 2018. SoK: Security and Privacy in Machine Learning. In
Proc. IEEE Europ. Symp. Secur. Privacy. 399–414.
[128] Nicolas Papernot, Patrick McDaniel, Xi Wu, Somesh Jha, and Ananthram Swami. 2016. Distillation as a defense to adversarial
perturbations against deep neural networks. In 2016 IEEE symposium on security and privacy (SP). IEEE, 582–597.
[129] Sergio Pastrana, Daniel R Thomas, Alice Hutchings, and Richard Clayton. 2018. Crimebb: Enabling cybercrime research on underground
forums at scale. In Proceedings of the 2018 World Wide Web Conference. International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee,
1845–1854.
[130] Feargus Pendlebury, Fabio Pierazzi, Roberto Jordaney, Johannes Kinder, and Lorenzo Cavallaro. 2019. {TESSERACT}: Eliminating
experimental bias in malware classification across space and time. In 28th {USENIX} Security Symposium ({USENIX} Security 19).
729–746.
[131] Roberto Perdisci and Wenke Lee. 2018. Method and system for detecting malicious and/or botnet-related domain names. US Patent
10,027,688.
[132] Fabio Pierazzi, Giovanni Apruzzese, Michele Colajanni, Alessandro Guido, and Mirco Marchetti. 2017. Scalable architecture for online
prioritisation of cyber threats. In Proc. IEEE International Conference on Cyber Conflicts. 1–18.
[133] Fabio Pierazzi, Feargus Pendlebury, Jacopo Cortellazzi, and Lorenzo Cavallaro. 2020. Intriguing properties of adversarial ml attacks in
the problem space. In Proc. IEEE Symp. Security Privacy. 1332–1349.
[134] Camila Pontes, Manuela Souza, João Gondim, Matt Bishop, and Marcelo Marotta. 2021. A new method for flow-based network intrusion
detection using the inverse Potts model. IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management (2021).
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
The Role of Machine Learning in Cybersecurity
•
37
[135] Rebecca S Portnoff, Sadia Afroz, Greg Durrett, Jonathan K Kummerfeld, Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, Damon McCoy, Kirill Levchenko, and
Vern Paxson. 2017. Tools for automated analysis of cybercriminal markets. In Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on World
Wide Web. 657–666.
[136] Artur Potiguara Carvalho, Fernanda Potiguara Carvalho, Edna Dias Canedo, and Pedro Henrique Potiguara Carvalho. 2020. Big data,
anonymisation and governance to personal data protection. In Proc. Int. Conf. Digit. Govrn. Research. 185–195.
[137] Petar Radanliev, David De Roure, Rob Walton, Max Van Kleek, Rafael Mantilla Montalvo, Omar Santos, Peter Burnap, Eirini Anthi, et al.
2020. Artificial intelligence and machine learning in dynamic cyber risk analytics at the edge. SN Applied Sciences 2, 11 (2020), 1–8.
[138] Aditi Raghunathan, Jacob Steinhardt, and Percy Liang. 2018. Certified Defenses against Adversarial Examples. In International
Conference on Learning Representations.
[139] Vignesh Ramanathan, Rui Wang, and Dhruv Mahajan. 2021. PreDet: Large-scale weakly supervised pre-training for detection. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. 2865–2875.
[140] Supranamaya Ranjan. 2014. Machine learning based botnet detection using real-time extracted traffic features. US Patent 8,682,812.
[141] Konrad Rieck, Thorsten Holz, Carsten Willems, Patrick Düssel, and Pavel Laskov. 2008. Learning and classification of malware behavior.
In International Conference on Detection of Intrusions and Malware, and Vulnerability Assessment. Springer, 108–125.
[142] Markus Ring, Sarah Wunderlich, Deniz Scheuring, Dieter Landes, and Andreas Hotho. 2019. A survey of network-based intrusion
detection data sets. Computers & Security 86 (2019), 147–167.
[143] Farhan Sadique, Sui Cheung, Iman Vakilinia, Shahriar Badsha, and Shamik Sengupta. 2018. Automated Structured Threat Information
eXpression (STIX) document generation with privacy preservation. In Proc. IEEE UEMCon. 847–853.
[144] Ozgur Koray Sahingoz, Ebubekir Buber, Onder Demir, and Banu Diri. 2019. Machine learning based phishing detection from URLs.
Elsevier Expert Syst. Appl. 117 (2019), 345–357.
[145] Wojciech Samek, Thomas Wiegand, and Klaus-Robert Müller. 2017. Explainable artificial intelligence: Understanding, visualizing and
interpreting deep learning models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.08296 (2017).
[146] Anna Sapienza, Alessandro Bessi, Saranya Damodaran, Paulo Shakarian, Kristina Lerman, and Emilio Ferrara. 2017. Early warnings of
cyber threats in online discussions. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW). IEEE, 667–674.
[147] Iman Sharafaldin, Arash Habibi Lashkari, and Ali A Ghorbani. 2018. Toward generating a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion
traffic characterization.. In ICISSP. 108–116.
[148] Salvatore Signorello, Samuel Marchal, Jerome Francois, Olivier Festor, and Radu State. 2017. Advanced interest flooding attacks in
named-data networking. In 2017 IEEE 16th International Symposium on Network Computing and Applications (NCA).
[149] Robin Sommer and Vern Paxson. 2010. Outside the closed world: On using machine learning for network intrusion detection. In Proc.
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy. IEEE, 305–316.
[150] Qiyang Song, Jiahao Cao, Kun Sun, Qi Li, and Ke Xu. 2021. Try before You Buy: Privacy-preserving Data Evaluation on Cloud-based
Machine Learning Data Marketplace. In Proc. ACM Ann. Comp. Secur. Appl. Conf. 260–272.
[151] Paolo Spagnolettia and Andrea Salvia. 2020. Digital Systems in High-Reliability Organizations: Balancing Mindfulness and Mindlessness.
In Proc. Int. Workshop Socio-Techn. Perspective Inf. Syst. Develop.
[152] IEEE Spectrum. 2022. Andrew Ng: Unbiggen AI. Technical Report. https://spectrum.ieee.org/andrew-ng-data-centric-ai
[153] Nedim Šrndic and Pavel Laskov. 2013. Detection of malicious pdf files based on hierarchical document structure. In Proceedings of the
20th Annual Network & Distributed System Security Symposium. 1–16.
[154] Nedim Šrndic and Pavel Laskov. 2014. Practical evasion of a learning-based classifier: A case study. In Proc. IEEE Symposium on Security
and Privacy. IEEE, 197–211.
[155] Matija Stevanovic and Jens Myrup Pedersen. 2014. An efficient flow-based botnet detection using supervised machine learning. In 2014
international conference on computing, networking and communications (ICNC). IEEE, 797–801.
[156] Tongtong Su, Huazhi Sun, Jinqi Zhu, Sheng Wang, and Yabo Li. 2020. BAT: Deep learning methods on network intrusion detection
using NSL-KDD dataset. IEEE Access 8 (2020), 29575–29585.
[157] Yuan-Hsiang Su, Michael Cheng Yi Cho, and Hsiu-Chuan Huang. 2019. False Alert Buster: An Adaptive Approach for NIDS False Alert
Filtering. In Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Comp. Big Data. 58–62.
[158] Christopher Sweet, Stephen Moskal, and Shanchieh Jay Yang. 2020. On the Variety and Veracity of Cyber Intrusion Alerts Synthesized
by Generative Adversarial Networks. ACM Transactions on Management Information Systems 11, 4 (2020), 1–21.
[159] Ke Tian, Steve TK Jan, Hang Hu, Danfeng Yao, and Gang Wang. 2018. Needle in a haystack: Tracking down elite phishing domains in
the wild. In Proc. Internet Measurement Conf. 429–442.
[160] Daniele Ucci, Leonardo Aniello, and Roberto Baldoni. 2019. Survey of machine learning techniques for malware analysis. Computers &
Security 81 (2019), 123–147.
[161] Solomon Ogbomon Uwagbole, William J Buchanan, and Lu Fan. 2017. Applied machine learning predictive analytics to SQL injection
attack detection and prevention. In 2017 IFIP/IEEE Symposium on Integrated Network and Service Management (IM). 1087–1090.
[162] Maneesh Kumar Verma, Shankar Yadav, Bhoopesh Kumar Goyal, Bakshi Rohit Prasad, and Sonali Agarawal. 2019. Phishing Website
Detection Using Neural Network and Deep Belief Network. In Recent Findings in Intelligent Computing Techniques. Springer, 293–300.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
38
•
Giovanni Apruzzese, Pavel Laskov, Edgardo Montes de Oca, Wissam Mallouli, Luis Búrdalo Rapa, Athanasios Vasileios
Grammatopoulos, and Fabio Di Franco
[163] Rakesh M Verma, Victor Zeng, and Houtan Faridi. 2019. Data quality for security challenges: Case studies of phishing, malware and
intrusion detection datasets. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security. 2605–2607.
[164] Kristijan Vidović, Ivan Tomičić, Karlo Slovenec, Miljenko Mikuc, and Ivona Brajdić. 2021. Ranking Network Devices for Alarm
Prioritisation: Intrusion Detection Case Study. In Proc. IEEE SoftCOM. 1–5.
[165] R Vinayakumar, Mamoun Alazab, Alireza Jolfaei, KP Soman, and Prabaharan Poornachandran. 2019. Ransomware triage using deep
learning: twitter as a case study. In Proc. IEEE Cybersecurity & Cyberforensics Conf. 67–73.
[166] Ravi Vinayakumar, Mamoun Alazab, KP Soman, Prabaharan Poornachandran, Ameer Al-Nemrat, and Sitalakshmi Venkatraman. 2019.
Deep learning approach for intelligent intrusion detection system. IEEE Access 7 (2019), 41525–41550.
[167] Paul Voigt and Axel Von dem Bussche. 2017. The EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). A Practical Guide, 1st Ed., Cham:
Springer International Publishing 10 (2017), 3152676.
[168] Lise Volkart, Pierrette Bouillon, and Sabrina Girletti. 2018. Statistical vs. neural machine translation: A comparison of mth and deepl at
swiss post’s language service. In Proceedings of the 40th Conference Translating and the Computer. 145–150.
[169] Bachar Wehbi, Edgardo Montes de Oca, and Michel Bourdellès. 2012. Events-Based Security Monitoring Using MMT Tool. In Fifth IEEE
International Conference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation, ICST 2012, Montreal, QC, Canada, April 17-21, 2012, Giuliano
Antoniol, Antonia Bertolino, and Yvan Labiche (Eds.). IEEE Computer Society, 860–863. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICST.2012.188
[170] Charles Wheelus, Elias Bou-Harb, and Xingquan Zhu. 2018. Tackling class imbalance in cyber security datasets. In Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Inf. Reuse Integration. 229–232.
[171] Laurie Williams, Gary McGraw, and Sammy Migues. 2018. Engineering security vulnerability prevention, detection, and response.
IEEE Software 35, 5 (2018), 76–80.
[172] Tingmin Wu, Shigang Liu, Jun Zhang, and Yang Xiang. 2017. Twitter spam detection based on deep learning. In Proceedings of the
australasian computer science week multiconference. 1–8.
[173] Teng Xu, Gerard Goossen, Huseyin Kerem Cevahir, Sara Khodeir, Yingyezhe Jin, Frank Li, Shawn Shan, Sagar Patel, David Freeman,
and Paul Pearce. 2021. Deep entity classification: Abusive account detection for online social networks. In USENIX Security Symposium.
[174] Zhiwei Xu, Bo Chen, Ninghan Wang, Yujun Zhang, and Zhongcheng Li. 2015. ELDA: Towards efficient and lightweight detection of
cache pollution attacks in NDN. In Local Computer Networks (LCN), 2015 IEEE 40th Conference on. IEEE, 82–90.
[175] Carter Yagemann, Matthew Pruett, Simon P Chung, Kennon Bittick, Brendan Saltaformaggio, and Wenke Lee. 2021. {ARCUS}:
Symbolic Root Cause Analysis of Exploits in Production Systems. In USENIX Security Symposium.
[176] Aviv Yehezkel, Eyal Elyashiv, and Ol Soffer. 2021. Network Anomaly Detection Using Transfer Learning Based on Auto-Encoders Loss
Normalization. In Proc. ACM Comp. Commun. Secur. AISec Workshop.
[177] Ting-Fang Yen, Victor Heorhiadi, Alina Oprea, Michael K Reiter, and Ari Juels. 2014. An epidemiological study of malware encounters
in a large enterprise. In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security. 1117–1130.
[178] Ting-Fang Yen, Alina Oprea, Kaan Onarlioglu, Todd Leetham, William Robertson, Ari Juels, and Engin Kirda. 2013. Beehive: Large-scale
log analysis for detecting suspicious activity in enterprise networks. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Computer Security Applications
Conference. ACM, 199–208.
[179] Jiao Yin, MingJian Tang, Jinli Cao, and Hua Wang. 2020. Apply transfer learning to cybersecurity: Predicting exploitability of
vulnerabilities by description. Knowledge-Based Systems 210 (2020), 106529.
[180] Chika Yinka-Banjo and Ogban-Asuquo Ugot. 2020. A review of generative adversarial networks and its application in cybersecurity.
Artificial Intelligence Review 53, 3 (2020), 1721–1736.
[181] Lixia Zhang, Alexander Afanasyev, Jeffrey Burke, Van Jacobson, Patrick Crowley, Christos Papadopoulos, Lan Wang, Beichuan Zhang,
et al. 2014. Named data networking. ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review 44, 3 (2014), 66–73.
[182] Lixia Zhang, Alexander Afanasyev, Jeff Burke, Van Jacobson, kc claffy, Patrick Crowley, Christos Papadopoulos, Lan Wang, and Beichuan
Zhang. 2014. Named data networking. Computer Communication Review 44, 3 (2014), 66–73. https://doi.org/10.1145/2656877.2656887
[183] Xiaohan Zhang, Yuan Zhang, Ming Zhong, Daizong Ding, Yinzhi Cao, Yukun Zhang, Mi Zhang, and Min Yang. 2020. Enhancing
State-of-the-art Classifiers with API Semantics to Detect Evolved Android Malware. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM SIGSAC Conference
on Computer and Communications Security. 757–770.
[184] Yong Zhang, Jie Niu, Guojian He, Lin Zhu, and Da Guo. 2021. Network Intrusion Detection Based on Active Semi-supervised Learning.
In Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Dependable Syst. Netw. 129–135.
[185] Weiwei Zhuang, Qingshan Jiang, and Tengke Xiong. 2012. An intelligent anti-phishing strategy model for phishing website detection.
In 2012 32nd International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems Workshops. IEEE, 51–56.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2022.
