Title: Bridging the Bubbles: Connecting Academia and Industry in Cybersecurity Research
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2302.13955v1
--------------------------------------------------

1 
 
Bridging the Bubbles: Connecting Academia and 
Industry in Cybersecurity Research 
 
 
Rasha Kashef* 
Electrical, Computer, and Biomedical Engineering, Toronto Metropolitan University 
Rogers Cybersecure Catalyst Fellow 
 
Monika Freunek* 
Lighthouse Science Consulting and Technologies Inc. 
Rogers Cybersecure Catalyst Fellow 
 
Jeff Schwartzentruber 
eSentire Inc. 
Rogers Cybersecure Catalyst Fellow 
 
Reza Samavi 
Electrical, Computer, and Biomedical Engineering, Toronto Metropolitan University 
Vector Institute of Artificial Intelligence 
Rogers Cybersecure Catalyst Fellow 
 
Burcu Bulgurcu 
Ted Rogers School of Management, Toronto Metropolitan University 
Rogers Cybersecure Catalyst Fellow 
 
AJ Khan 
Vehiqilla Inc. 
Rogers Cyber Secure Catalyst Fellow 
 
Marcus Santos 
Computer Science, Toronto Metropolitan University 
Rogers Cybersecure Catalyst Academic Director 
 
 
 
 
*: Corresponding Authors. 
 
Abstract 
There is a perceived disconnect between how ad hoc industry solutions and academic research 
solutions in cyber security are developed and applied. Why is that? Is there a difference in 
philosophy in how solutions to cyber security problems are developed by industry and by 
academia? What could academia and industry do to bridge this gap and speed up the 
2 
 
development and use of effective cybersecurity solutions? This paper provides an overview of 
the most critical gaps and solutions identified by an interdisciplinary expert exchange on the 
topic. The discussion was held in the form of the webinar “Bridging the Bubbles: Connecting 
Academia and Industry in Cybersecurity Research” in November 2022 as part of the Rogers 
Cybersecure Catalyst webinar series. Panelists included researchers from academia and 
industry as well as experts from industry and business development. The key findings and 
recommendations of this exchange are supported by the relevant scientific literature on the 
topic within this paper. Different approaches and time frames in development and lifecycle 
management, challenges in knowledge transfer and communication as well as heterogeneous 
metrics for success in projects are examples of the evaluated subject areas. 
 
Keywords: Cyber Security R&D, Industry Solutions, Academic Research, Development, Knowledge Transfer, 
Commercialization 
1. Introduction 
The global cyber security workforce has been estimated to have reached a record 4.7 million people in 2022 [1]. 
However, the estimated gap in the additional required workforce amounts to another 3.4 million. So far, education, 
training and research in cyber security are emerging topics on a global scale. At the time of writing, less than 20 
Canadian universities offer master programs in cyber security topics even when using a broad definition of cyber 
security [2]. On the other hand, constantly evolving new threats and the asymmetric situation between attackers and 
defenders in cyberspace require a rapid and constant research environment, where not only current threats and 
mitigation strategies are identified and developed, but also future threats and their mitigation are analyzed and 
evaluated. Compared to other scientific fields, this yields a unique, challenging research environment where both a 
shortage of qualified researchers and a need for rapid development and field implementation collide. Cyber security 
research is further unique in that it requires both a fundamental understanding of advanced disciplines within computer 
science, mathematics, statistics, and engineering, such as machine learning, encryption, network theory and hard- and 
software knowledge, but also timely access and practical understanding of real-world applications, systems, and 
operational workflows within real organizations. Some of these application-oriented aspects require an 
interdisciplinary approach. For these reasons, it has been suggested that cybersecurity studies and education should 
be addressed and designed as a “meta discipline” and based on cross-sectoral partnerships ([3]-[5]).  However, cyber 
systems and data are protected from outside access in many real-world applications, including university research 
activities. This poses a barrier to researchers in identifying and understanding current cyber challenges in real 
application environments, but also to industry and the public sector, as solutions from research are not readily 
accessible or directly suitable to the application environment. Consequently, security research for industrial 
applications is often performed within organizations and mostly focuses on selected specific areas. Research activities 
are provided by external private companies or are not pursued at all. 
Cybersecurity research in academia and industry faces several structural challenges that lead to a disconnect between 
the sectors. To improve the understanding of this challenge and identify potential solutions, the research fellows of 
the Rogers Cybersecure Catalyst of Toronto Metropolitan University held a webinar with panelist discussions on the 
disconnect between cybersecurity research in academia and industry [6]. The panelists: the Director of Innovation and 
Policy of the Rogers Cybersecure Catalyst of Toronto Metropolitan University, Sumit Bhatia, the Senior Vice 
President of the Cyber Security Product Engineering of Blackberry, Shiladitya Sircar, Dr. Reza Samavi, associate 
professor in the Electrical, Computer, and Biomedical Engineering, Toronto Metropolitan University and a faculty 
affiliate with the Vector Institute of Artificial Intelligence, and Dr. Jeff Schwartzentruber, a senior Machine Learning 
Scientist at eSentire, Adjunct at Dalhousie University in the Faculty of Computer Science and Special Faculty at the 
University of Guelph in the School of Computer Science, were invited and contributed to the discussion with their 
3 
 
background and experience in cyber security innovation for industrial and academic settings. This work presents the 
results of this event with a focus on solutions. In addition, supporting findings from the relevant scientific literature 
are provided. The paper focuses on four selected major questions. First, the influence of the different development 
approaches in research and industry is discussed, where an evolutionary process is identified to be the most promising 
for practical applications. While academia can provide expertise, the most important and novel research questions in 
cybersecurity can be identified the most reliably in the field of practice itself. Different solutions range from specific 
and often secretive ad hoc solutions in the industry to scientifically peer-reviewed and publicly available research 
outcomes. The second question evaluates the influence of the requirements on lifecycles and development cycles, 
especially regarding the time factor until the implementation of a new solution, and on opportunities to align the 
methodologies between industry and academia. Examples from the automotive sector are outlined. The third thematic 
section identifies solutions to improve knowledge transfer in the cybersecurity field and approaches to overcoming 
so-called knowledge silos with respect to the unique working conditions of the cybersecurity field. An important 
component of this challenge is communication, which is the main topic evaluated in detail in the last guiding question. 
Development goals, requirements and metrics for success are discussed with a focus on the commercial use and 
implementation of cybersecurity solutions. The paper concludes with a summary of the key points of the discussion, 
the significant challenges identified during the webinar and its key recommendations on how to empower the current 
and future cybersecurity research in industry and academia. 
2. Webinar Discussion Questions 
2.1 A disconnect between ad hoc industry solutions and research: how could solutions out of research be sped 
up in their transition to the industry? 
A significant driver of public policy with respect to University-Industry Collaborations (UICs) is to generate 
innovative IP that results in increased economic growth [7], [8]. The positive economic impacts of UICs have been 
well studied [9], with many public policies supporting the creation of networks, clusters, and institutions [10]. 
Research has shown that the economic potential of UICs is maximized through the collaboration of industry, 
universities, and government agencies [11]. However, realizing the economic benefits of UICs depends on their ability 
to generate a fruitful innovation and the speed at which it can be commercialized. One well-documented barrier to 
UICs is the velocity at which academic research can be commercialized [12]. The industry partners' short-term 
directives do not align with academic research's longer and more exploratory nature [11]. The friction caused between 
these two temporal scales reduces the efficacy of UICs. The interplay of the various barriers and enablers of UICs 
results in a complex and confounding discussion concerning commercialization. For the sake of brevity, the following 
section will only focus on discussing factors affecting the ‘speed’ at which industry research can be transitioned to 
industry.   
Within UIC literature, this translation of research from the academic partner to the industry (and vice-versa) is known 
as Knowledge Transfer [13]. However, it should be noted that knowledge transfer does not equal commercialization. 
For example, it is unreasonable to expect that the academic partner has the insight and capability to deploy and 
maintain the generated innovation within the commercial environment of the industry partner. Although knowledge 
transfer overlaps during a UIC project, they can also be viewed as independent in many contexts. One significant 
theme affecting UICs is the transparency between the three parties – the university, industry partner and public sector 
[11], [12]. One area that is especially convoluted during a UIC is understanding the motivations of the various 
stakeholders and the critical success factors [11]. From a university perspective, the primary motivation is fundraising 
for project financing, linked to several university-wide and researcher-specific Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) 
[12]. Comparatively, the motivation of the industry partner is to have access to highly qualified personnel and KPIs 
typically linked to revenue generation or cost reduction [12]. Although each respective stakeholder understands these 
motivations well, they are typically not well received between parties. This difference is especially polarizing for 
industry stakeholders with little understanding of the rigor required by academic research and academics with little 
4 
 
industry experience. Thus, the first step in accelerating the rate of knowledge transfer from UICs is a transparent and 
empathetic perspective of all parties’ motivation for the research. Understanding these motivations will promote the 
development of a project strategy that maximizes KPIs for both parties. Considering that the industry partner is 
typically the primary funder/co-founder of a majority of UIC projects, reducing the commercialization speed of 
academic research is more beneficial for the industry and public sector partner. This perspective commonly puts undue 
pressure on the academic partner, thus deteriorating the relationship. However, should this perspective of short-term 
gains be leading the tempo of the research? What other methods/perspectives could drive/accelerate the collaboration? 
An essential theme behind most public policies that promote UICs is the ability to conduct research and commercialize 
products that neither party could perform independently [8]. That said, the short-term expectations of industry partners 
may hinder a UIC's economic potential for near-sight gains. This temporal component plays an even more significant 
role in cybersecurity research due to the rapid advancement and acceleration of the industry itself. Seeing both sides 
of this temporal coin is critical for the success and sustainability of UICs that result in effective commercialized 
products. Based on these points, it is apparent that many confounding factors affect go-to-market speed, such as 
technical competence, company/university features and the relationship therein [14]. The ability to generate a one-
size fits all recommendation is truly dependent on all parties: the public sector, the academic institution and the 
industry partner. It should also be clear that compromise significantly affects commercialization speed [15], [16]. 
Although it is difficult to ascertain the right approach, tailored strategies need to be developed based on specific 
characteristics of the parties within UICs, focusing on maximizing KPIs. In this spirit, the following strategies can be 
used to help accelerate knowledge transfer for cyber-security UICs: 
Alignment of research objectives with industry partner strategic objectives [11]. The industry stakeholders must have 
a sound understanding of the scientific method and rigor required to generate academic publications. In contrast, 
academic partners need to be cognizant of the deliverables and requirements of the industry partner. 
Engage highly qualified personnel (HQP) outside the core technical competencies required by the UIC. This is 
especially important with cyber-security research, where the substantial technical ceiling requires projects to be led 
by individuals with strong technical competencies and less business acumen. Engagement with these other parties will 
help expand the transparency and outreach of the project while making it more accessible to a wider audience. 
Develop a project strategy that parallelizes the research and industry objectives. For many UICs, work happens 
sequentially and flows from the academic to the industry partner. This method is difficult to manage and scale, 
considering the agile nature of academic research and industry objectives. By parallelizing this workflow, the 
academic partner will be more consistent in generating deliverables, and the industry partner will be more prepared to 
accept them, all while driving increased engagement. 
Align documentation standards between the organizations. For most security projects, there are set standards and 
methods through which both organizations operate. For example, most security software development companies 
follow an agile methodology and have expected technical documentation approaches (i.e., README.md in repos, 
Confluence pages, etc.).  Having the academic output fit more appropriately with these industry templates accelerates 
knowledge transfer and increases the accessibility of the research to individuals outside of the UIC. 
Research outputs should be accessible and in a readily ingestible form. A considerable majority of security research 
can leverage collaborative technologies to iterate and disseminate information (e.g., git, package managers, etc.). By 
leveraging these tools (i.e., pip modules, shared GitHub repos, etc.), the engagement and utility of these deliverables 
are increased. However, these tools are typically an afterthought in UICs, resulting in considerable overhead to 
leverage existing work.  
In addition to strategies specific to the academic and industry partners, the public bodies also play a significant role in 
knowledge transfer. Considering that UICs are typically co-sponsored by governmental agencies or provide some 
5 
 
form of financial relief, the policies they enact considerably affect the adoption and rate of knowledge transfer. Thus, 
the public sector should emphasize collaborations with clear track records of generating deliverables (i.e., patents, 
products, jobs) and a motivation to increase the transparency of the work. 
2.2 Different development cycles in academia and industry: slow, peer-reviewed processes versus ad hoc 
development - how could methodologies be aligned? 
As mentioned during the webinar, one of the key challenges in aligning research in cybersecurity between academia 
and industry is the disconnect in the development cycles of the two ecosystems.  In academia, the research 
methodology is focused on slow, peer-reviewed processes with a long-term time horizon for commercialization. On 
the other hand, the industry is focused on more immediate market-driven cybersecurity challenges.  Because of the 
inherent difference in these methodologies, the commercialization of research in academia and industry does not align, 
and many potential cyber solutions are not brought to the market by the industry. It is, therefore, essential to ensure 
that the correct research problems are defined at the start of any collaborative exercise between industry and academia.  
Such a collaborative exercise should also include feedback from all stakeholders, including potential customers.  There 
should also be a process of carrying out a Return on Investment (RoI) analysis, as this is critical to the success of the 
commercialization of the technology.   
A great case study for better collaboration between industry and academia is the research carried out in the new and 
emerging field of automotive cybersecurity.  “Automotive Cybersecurity” is the application of cybersecurity principles 
and best practices to the ecosystem of “Connected & Autonomous Vehicles (CAVs) / Electric Vehicles (EVs)”.  This 
transformation in the automotive environment has generated new and unknown cybersecurity challenges that are not 
understood by the wider cybersecurity community, whether in academia or industry.  This is because Automotive 
Cybersecurity is different from IT Cybersecurity [17] and needs to be addressed for research purposes.  However, that 
entails a paradigm shift in the perception of cybersecurity applicable in an IT environment to the application of 
cybersecurity for automotive technologies such as CANbus and ECUs in vehicles.   
Currently, the development of cybersecurity solutions in the automotive industry is being driven by market needs and 
spearheaded by the industry itself.  Standards such as ISO 21434 Road Vehicles Cybersecurity Engineering Standard 
[18] have been developed by Industry Cybersecurity leaders to foster cybersecurity application in the automotive 
environment.  Furthermore, Government mandates such as the UNECE WP.29 R155 [19] and R156 [20] are also 
enabling the implementation of cybersecurity in the automotive environment.  These market-driven cybersecurity 
enablers have incentivized the cybersecurity industry to provide solutions which address myriad challenges in 
automotive cybersecurity.  However, academia is still not aligned with the industry in addressing these myriad 
challenges posed by the transformation in the automotive industry.  Based on its research methodology, industry is 
still focused on traditional IT Cybersecurity challenges, and there is only limited research in this critical and new area 
of cybersecurity.  Academia needs to align with the needs of the industry and work closely to meet these cybersecurity 
demands as per the automotive Industry.  There is a need to enable a Joint Innovation Program for Automotive 
Cybersecurity.  Entities such as the CSA Group have recently brought together a Working Group on CAV 
Cybersecurity, Privacy and Data Management and published the gaps identified by these industry leaders [21].  
Research can be carried out in these areas to further enable tools and technologies in Automotive Cybersecurity. By 
applying these principles of Cybersecurity Risk, Compliance and Governance in the Automotive environment, 
academia and industry can come together to add value to this critical sector which is an inherent part of our daily lives.  
Cyber Governance in the Automotive environment has to address the domains of People, Processes and Technology 
from a new dimension [22].  Such a timely collaboration between industry and research would ensure that our future 
roads are safe & secure.   
 
2.3 General Knowledge transfer: how to connect the knowledge silos and different approaches to knowledge 
transfer in industry and academia? 
6 
 
Universities and industry are organizations that both value knowledge. Knowledge discovery and research excellence 
are among the existential objectives of universities.  Modern industrial organizations also use knowledge to achieve 
their financial objectives. Although collaboration between academia and industry comes naturally, its realization 
follows with challenges and impediments. In this webinar, experts from the industry and academia discussed the 
different characteristics and methodologies of knowledge transfer with a focus on cybersecurity from both 
perspectives. The following recommendations were proposed to overcome the challenges both parties face in 
university-industry knowledge transfer and mobilization. 
 
Knowledge Transfer: Generally, the term knowledge transfer (KT) is used to express any exchange of knowledge 
between individuals and organizations. Bloedon et al. [23] define KT as a process by which knowledge related to 
“making or doing of useful things” in one organization is transferred and brought into use within another organization. 
In the context of university-industry collaboration, Friedman et al. [24] define KT as “the process whereby invention 
or intellectual property from academic research is licensed or conveyed through use rights to a for-profit entity and 
eventually commercialized.” For this process to be realized, several activities such as teaching, interaction 
management, sharing data and technology need to be completed. Alignment between these activities, also called “KT 
practices or methodologies,” is necessary for successful knowledge mobilization between organizations. The panelists 
identified the following contrasting views on cybersecurity knowledge creation and transfer between university and 
industry.  
 
Knowledge Discovery vs Business Outcomes: The panel acknowledged that universities and industries have different 
primary outcomes that create barriers to knowledge transfer [25, 26]. The primary objectives of universities are 
knowledge discovery and innovation, and the outcomes of research are disseminated to the research community and 
public through scholarly publications. While knowledge discovery is also important for industry for product 
development and innovation, the key focus of industry is to achieve business outcomes. Industry has multiple 
dimensions and stakeholders, so the commercialization of academic research touches many areas beyond the scope of 
the academic partner. For example, twenty years ago, privacy researchers had no common intersection with designers 
of network security solutions who viewed the data being transmitted. As a result, there is a disconnect between 
academics researching cutting-edge problems in specific areas that are irrelevant to the industry partner. In fact, there 
is no common language between universities and industry, which makes knowledge transfer challenging. 
Operational Effectiveness: A key component to accelerate knowledge transfer is to align and optimize the internal 
drivers (operational effectiveness) of universities and industry [25, 27]. The panel discussed how universities and 
industry could align their internal drivers based on a common goal to collectively solve problems (defined as the 
forcing function by the panel) [28]. When academics and industry agree on a well-defined problem based on the needs 
of the industry, this agreement could lead to the transfer of knowledge, directly assisting the industry partner [29]. 
Poorly defined problems, on the contrary, inhibits the transfer of knowledge, because the outcomes of research are not 
practical or cannot be communicated with the target audience. While defining the problems currently faced by the 
industry is important, academics must also motivate their industrial partner on the long-term potential of their research 
to give the company a future competitive advantage (e.g., the potential of homomorphic encryption in data mining). 
Industrial partners need to collaborate with universities in parallel with the product development processes instead of 
taking over after research is completed. Another proposal by the panel was to incorporate internal drivers for the 
industry into the collaboration measures of success [23]. For example, research proposals would link specific industry 
outcomes to the release of funds. The review of research proposals could also include points/ranking based on 
academics’ success in mobilizing research from lab to industry, such as patents, new products, and estimated revenue. 
Common Language Between University and Industry: It is important to find a common language and/or theme that 
universities and industry can rely on by overlapping the competitive advantages from both sides [30]. For example, 
the main motivation for the industry to collaborate with universities is the opportunity to connect with universities’ 
expertise, the courses they are teaching, and the main research topics being pursued [26]. The panel suggested that 
7 
 
universities open slots in relevant courses (e.g., advanced cryptography) to improve communication between 
academics and industry staff. Researchers should also visit the company (lunch and learn) to explain to the staff their 
research in a non-technical way. The industry must work to expose the academic partner to the various stakeholders 
and perspectives within the company. Academics would benefit from understanding how their research is 
industrialized. The technical staff at the company would also be able to explain their requirements to the academic 
partners (e.g., documentation) to make the transferred knowledge more accessible to the industry. In summary, the 
panel had the following recommendations: 
● 
Academics and industry must work together to clearly define the problem instead of only aligning primary 
outcomes. 
● 
Industry collaborators should consider evaluating research proposals based on researchers demonstrating a 
track record of knowledge transfer from university to industry.  
● 
Universities should leverage their teaching capability to assist industry partners in understanding the 
academic topics being investigated.  
The industry should incorporate academics into their development process so academics understand the 
requirements for their research to be industrialized.  
 
2.4 How to successfully communicate your commercialization plans between academia and industry 
To foster communication of commercialization plans between academia and industry, prevalent differences between 
the two units in terms of their key objectives, work processes, and expected outcomes that may impede their 
collaboration as a coherent unit should be carefully studied.  
Having a clear statement on problems and potential growth opportunities: To enable the commercialization of 
research outcomes and technology innovations, academia should propose a clear definition of a problem statement to 
provide an understanding of the relevant industry problem. Providing a clear assessment of the target market, including 
the market size, targeted segments with growth potential and opportunities, as well as the competitive advantage that 
would be gained in the future, may help the industry adopt the research outcomes and innovation generated by 
academia. On the industry side, while creating a partnership and innovation programs, posing similar questions to 
clarify the problems and expected achievements, such as: “what do we try to accomplish as a company?”, “Where do 
we have the gaps?”, “Which of these knowledge gaps can be refined as opportunities for growth?” would be helpful.  
Once the industry has clear, refined, and easy-to-understand answers to these fundamental questions, finding and 
adopting the novel and innovative solutions offered by academia would be possible. As knowledge transfer from one 
form to the other is indeed challenging, providing clear answers to these questions at earlier stages would help 
transform knowledge to the right form [31] and make it available to consume by the other party.    
 
Establishing channels to enable communication and collaboration between industry and academia: Both academia 
and industry should consider ways to create space for knowledge transfer. Hiring coop students on the industry side 
is one of the examples that a mechanism for interaction and collaboration could take place, which would eventually 
assist with the transfer of knowledge as well as the development of a shared understanding, knowledge, and culture. 
However, these efforts should not be limited to the industry's efforts. The academic culture is often driven by a “publish 
or perish” culture, which doesn’t support the motivation to create space for commercialization [32]. Academia should 
revise their promotion systems to incentivize academics to expand their research context and be motivated to 
contribute to industry projects or commercialize their findings. 
 
Recognizing that commercialization is a multistage process: Commercialization is a multi-stage process that requires 
the active involvement of multiple stakeholders [33, 34, 35]. The first step includes translating research into function, 
which can serve as a foundation for bringing a new product or service to a given market. The validation of a function 
being able to convert that to a new product or service should be followed by the validation of the market of that product 
or service. So, the researcher should not only validate the function but also whether this function is commercially 
8 
 
viable given a specific market. Market validation helps the researcher understand whether the produced function is 
important and valuable enough to be invested in and adopted by the industry, as not all research may be worth 
commercializing. A critical assessment of the characteristics of the market is important to understand whether the 
commercialized product can serve the market's needs and whether the size of the market it is delivered to can make 
the efforts worthwhile and profitable.  
 
Recognizing the role of incubators and futurists in this process: Incubators are one of the intermediary institutions 
that could support and facilitate entrepreneurship through their administrative and consulting services and strong ties 
to business networks [36]. However, currently, there is a gap within the cybersecurity innovation ecosystem such that 
most of the focus on incubators and accelerators lies primarily on active teaching entrepreneurship. However, these 
parties should have a supporting role in transferring knowledge among stakeholders that would lead to 
commercialization. Incubators and accelerators can play an important role in converting research into function and 
market validation exercises, creating an ecosystem where entrepreneurs, academic researchers, and mentors work 
together. Futurists can also have a critical role in bridging the gap between industry and academia that hampers the 
translation of knowledge that may lead to commercialization. In most cases, organizations do not actively seek or 
assess the future viability of academic research and innovation. Futurists can work on understanding the potential of 
technology and research innovations that can be commercialized to gain a competitive advantage. That way, they can 
serve as a layer of the process to help the industry differentiate between the products and services that are worthy of 
investing in or not. Currently, in the cybersecurity ecosystem, the founders aiming to innovate radically usually 
encounter resistance from investment communities because of their interest in short or midterm benefits. However, a 
deep tip ecosystem like cybersecurity needs futuristic technologies, such as algorithmic technologies, yet currently, 
it’s hard to attract any commercial interest to invest in these technologies. Hence, futurists should advocate for the 
products and services that are radical in their innovation to benefit the industry in the long term.  
 
Acknowledging the core differences between academia and industry: Academia and industry have fundamental 
differences in key aspects, including their core objectives, motivations, expected outcomes, promotions systems, etc. 
Since the core motive of academia is not producing a commercial product, or commercialization of generated 
knowledge, technology, or innovation, bringing academia and industry together in the same “commercialization” pot 
would be a futile effort. Instead, both parties should target innovation by solving the right problems, bringing the right 
people, and developing a shared language. Another solution could be supporting the existence of other intermediary 
institutions, such as business innovation centers within universities, to create a conducive context that collocates 
similar activities conducted by academic and industry entrepreneurs to create synergies and spillover effects [37, 38], 
and thus enable the translation of novel technology from lab to market [39]. Commercialization would follow as the 
product of this mutual effort. 
3. Conclusions 
In this paper, we have provided an overview of the most critical gaps and solutions identified by an interdisciplinary 
expert exchange on bridging the bubbles between academia and industry in cyber security research. We focused on 
four primary questions 1) the speed of transition from industry to/from academics as related to R&D solutions, 2) the 
alignment of the development cycles, peer-reviewed processes versus ad hoc development, 3) knowledge transfer, 
mobilizations, and dissemination format of research, and 4) strategies for communicating commercialization plans 
between both parties. Experts from the industry and academia discussed different insights, methodologies, and 
strategies that can connect the gap in academia and industry with a focus on cybersecurity from both perspectives.  
4. Declarations: 
§ Availability of data and material: The link to the webinar is available at: 
9 
 
  https://cybersecurecatalyst.ca/watch-bridging-the-bubbles-connecting-academia-and-industry-in-cybersecurity-
research/ 
§  Competing interests: N/A 
§ Funding: Rogers Cybersecure Catalyst 
§ Authors' contributions:  All Authors contributed Equally. 
o Acknowledgements: The authors acknowledge funding from the Rogers Cybersecure Catalyst at Toronto 
Metropolitan University. We would like to thank the external panelists, Shiladitya Sircar and Sumit Bhatia, the 
catalyst fellows, directors and administration for their contribution and participation to the webinar. 
           
5. References 
[1].  (ISC)², 
Cybersecurity 
Workforce 
Study, 
Alexandria, 
VA, 
US, 
2022, 
https://www.isc2.org/-
/media/ISC2/Research/2022-WorkForce-Study/ISC2-Cybersecurity-Workforce-Study.ashx, assessed 2022-
12-16. 
[2]. Canadian 
Centre 
for 
Cyber 
Security, 
post-secondary 
cyber 
security 
related 
programs, 
https://cyber.gc.ca/en/guidance/appendix-b-post-secondary-cyber-security-related-programs, May 2022, 
assessed 2022-12-16. 
[3]. Krzysztof Cabaj, Dulce Domingos, Zbigniew Kotulski, Ana Respício. Cybersecurity education: Evolution of 
the discipline and analysis of master programs, Computers & Security, Volume 75, 2018, 24-35, ISSN 0167-
4048, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2018.01.015 
[4]. The Royal Society, Progress and research in cybersecurity: Supporting a resilient and trustworthy system for 
the UK Issued: July 2016 DES3800 ISBN: 978-1-78252-215-7. 
[5]. Allen Parrish, John Impagliazzo, Rajendra K. Raj, Henrique Santos, Muhammad Rizwan Asghar, Audun 
Jøsang, Teresa Pereira, and Eliana Stavrou. 2018. Global perspectives on cybersecurity education for 2030: 
a case for a meta-discipline. In Proceedings Companion of the 23rd Annual ACM Conference on Innovation 
and Technology in Computer Science Education 
[6].  “Bridging the Bubbles: Connecting Academia and Industry in Cybersecurity Research”, Webinar of the 
Rogers Cybersecure Catalyst, Toronto Metropolitan University, 21st of November 2022.  
[7]. P. Conceição, P. Conceicao, M. V. Heitor, D. V. Gibson, G. Sirilli, and F. de A. P. Veloso, Knowledge for 
inclusive development. Greenwood Publishing Group, 2002. 
[8]. N. Arshed, W. Ahmad, and U. Hanif, “A spatial temporal exploration of factors motivating academia-
industry collaboration,” J. Knowl. Econ., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 521–540, 2022. 
[9]. R. Pinheiro, P. V. Langa, and A. Pausits, “One and two equals three? The third mission of higher education 
institutions,” Eur. J. High. Educ., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 233–249, 2015. 
[10]. J. Robertson, I. P. McCarthy, and L. Pitt, “Leveraging social capital in university-industry knowledge 
transfer strategies: A comparative positioning framework,” Knowl. Manag. Res. Pract., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 
461–472, 2019. 
[11]. T. Schofield, “Critical success factors for knowledge transfer collaborations between university and 
industry.,” J. Res. Adm., vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 38–56, 2013. 
10 
 
[12]. M. Chedid, T. Carvalho, and L. Teixeira, “University-software industry collaboration: an empirical study 
based on knowledge management,” Knowl. Manag. Res. Pract., pp. 1–13, 2020. 
[13]. N. Lockett, F. Cave, R. Kerr, and S. Robinson, “The influence of co-location in higher education institutions 
on small firms’ perspectives of knowledge transfer,” Entrep. Reg. Dev., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 265–283, 2009. 
[14]. A. M. B. Barbolla and J. R. C. Corredera, “Critical factors for success in university–industry research 
projects,” Technol. Anal. Strateg. Manag., vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 599–616, 2009. 
[15]. A. Hadjimanolis, “A case study of SME–university research collaboration in the context of a small 
peripheral country (Cyprus),” Int. J. Innov. Manag., vol. 10, no. 01, pp. 65–88, 2006. 
[16]. A. M. Attia, “National innovation systems in developing countries: Barriers to university–industry 
collaboration in Egypt,” Int. J. Technol. Manag. Sustain. Dev., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 113–124, 2015. 
[17]. KPMG 
APMA 
Canadian 
Automotive 
Cyber 
Preparedness 
Report 
February, 
2021. 
(https://apma.ca/2021/02/17/canadian-automotive-cyber-preparedness-report/ ) 
[18]. ISO/SAE 
21434:2021 
Road 
Vehicles 
Cybersecurity 
Engineering. 
( 
https://www.iso.org/standard/70918.html ) 
[19]. UNECE 
WP.29 
R155:Cybersecurity 
and 
Cybersecurity 
Management 
System 
(https://unece.org/transport/documents/2021/03/standards/un-regulation-no-155-cyber-security-and-cyber-
security ) 
[20]. UNECE 
WP.29 
R156: 
Software 
Update 
and 
Software 
Update 
Management 
System 
( 
https://unece.org/transport/documents/2021/03/standards/un-regulation-no-156-software-update-and-
software-update )  
[21]. CSA Group: Working Group on CAV Cybersecurity, Privacy & Data Management 
[22]. AJ Khan “Automotive Cyber Governance: Opportunities & Challenges for Cybersecurity in Connected & 
Autonomous Vehicles (CAVs)” Amazon 2022 
[23]. Bloedon, R. V., & Stokes, D. R. (1994). Making University/Industry Collaborative Research Succeed. 
Research Technology Management, 37(2), 44–48. 
[24]. Friedman, J., & Silberman, J. (2003). University Technology Transfer: Do Incentives, Management, and 
Location matter? The Journal of Technology Transfer, 28(1), 17–30.  
[25]. Bruneel, J., d’Este, P., & Salter, A. (2010). Investigating the Factors that Diminish the Barriers to 
University–Industry Collaboration. Research policy, 39(7), 858-868. 
[26]. Galan, V., & Plewa, C. (2016). What Drives and Inhibits University‐Business Cooperation in Europe? A 
Comprehensive Assessment. R&D Management, 46(2), 369-382. 
[27]. Barnes, T., Pashby, I., & Gibbons, A. (2002). Effective University–Industry Interaction: A Multi-case 
Evaluation of Collaborative R&D Projects. European Management Journal, 20(3), 272-285. 
[28]. Mora-Valentin, E. M., Montoro-Sanchez, A., & Guerras-Martin, L. A. (2004). Determining Factors in the 
Success of R&D Cooperative Agreements between Firms and Research Organizations. Research policy, 
33(1), 17-40. 
[29]. Landry, R., Amara, N., & Ouimet, M. (2007). Determinants of Knowledge Transfer: Evidence from 
Canadian University Researchers in Natural Sciences and Engineering. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 
32(6), 561-592. 
[30]. Berman, J. (2008). Connecting with Industry: Bridging the Divide. Journal of Higher Education Policy and 
Management, 30(2), 165-174. 
11 
 
[31]. Fontes, M. (2003). A closer look at the process of transformation of scientific and technological knowledge 
as conducted by academic spin-offs. In R. Oakey, W. During and S. Kauser (ed). New technology-based 
firms in the new millennium. Volume II. Amsterdam, Pergamon 
[32]. Ndonzuau, F. N., F. Pirnay and B. Surlemont (2002). A stage model of academic spin-off creation. 
Technovation 22: 281-289. 
[33]. Prebble, D. R., De Waal, G. A., & De Groot, C. (2008). Applying multiple perspectives to the design of a 
commercialization process. R&d Management, 38(3), 311-320. 
[34]. Cooper, R.G. (2001) Stage-gate systems: a new tool for managing new products. Business Horizons, 
Elsevier, 33, 3, 44– 54. 
[35]. Cooper, R.G., Edgett, S.J. and Kleinschmidt, E.J. (2002) Optimizing the stage-gate process: what best 
practice companies are doing. Research Technology Management, 45, 5. 
[36]. Albert, P., M. Bernasconi and L. Gaynor (2002). Incubators: The emergence of a new industry. Sophia 
Antipolis, CERAM Sophia Antipolis. 
[37]. Lockett, A., A. Vohora and M. Wright (2003). Universities as incubators without walls. The International 
Journal of Entrepreneurship and Innovation 3(4): 245-256. 
[38]. Spilling, O. R. (2004, June). Commercialization of knowledge–conceptual framework. In 13th Nordic 
Conference on Small Business (NCSB) Research. 
[39]. Abd Rahim, N., Mohamed, Z. B., & Amrin, A. (2015). Commercialization of emerging technology: The 
role of academic entrepreneur. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 169, 53-60. 
