Title: Developing and Building Ontologies in Cyber Security
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2306.00377v1
--------------------------------------------------

 
1 
 
Developing and Building Ontologies in Cyber 
Security 
Muhammad Shoaib Farooq1, Muhammad Talha Waseem1  
1Department of Artificial Intelligence, School of System and Technology, University of Management and Technology, Lahore, 54000, Pakistan  
Corresponding author: Muhammad Shoaib Farooq (shoaib.farooq@umt.edu.pk) 
 
ABSTRACT Cyber Security is one of the most arising disciplines in our modern society. We work on Cybersecurity 
domain and in this the topic we chose is Cyber Security Ontologies. In this we gather all latest and previous ontologies and 
compare them on the basis of different analyzing factors to get best of them. Reason to select this topic is to assemble 
different ontologies from different era of time. Because, researches that included in this SLR is mostly studied single 
ontology. If any researcher wants to study ontologies, he has to study every single ontology and select which one is best for 
his research. So, we assemble different types of ontology and compare them against each other to get best of them. A total 24 
papers between years 2010-2020 are carefully selected through systematic process and classified accordingly. Lastly, this 
SLR have been presented to provide the researchers promising future directions in the domain of cybersecurity ontologies. 
INDEX TERMS Cyber security, Ontologies, Cyber security Ontologies.
I. INTRODUCTION 
Network safety is an arising discipline that pointed toward 
safeguarding weaknesses or limiting dangers to mechanical 
foundation like programming, equipment and media 
transmission. Information about network protection issues is 
for the most part held by individuals associated with ICT field, 
because of monstrous utilization of ICT, information about 
network safety ought to be stretched out to overall population. 
Information about network safety has been continuously 
developed thanks to the variety of commitments made by 
various specialists in this field [1]. 
A piece of these commitment has centered on making 
ontologies that assistance to characterize, address and 
coordinate a jargon of ideas connected with this discipline. 
These ontologies give shared information on the various 
perspectives of network protection [2]. To have better 
comprehension of ontologies in the field of network 
protection, this paper addresses the deliberate survey of the 
writing on different ontologies [3] [4] that have been 
accounted for with regards to network safety. 
In this topic, lots of researches done with respect of time but 
in most of researches, authors just studied single ontology & 
explain its pros and cons. We just gather different researches 
and compare them to get precise and unique research for future 
researches. 
The objective of proposed work is to present a Systematic 
literature review in the domain of Cyber security ontologies, 
all we need to assemble all type of ontologies invented in 
single place. So, we do comparison method with different 
ontologies with respect to their nature like; Networking, 
Human factor and more to get valid and desirable set of 
ontologies in one place. 
There are many previous researches on the field of ontologies, 
Like SENSUS method, Onto Saurus method, Web ODE 
method all of these methods wander around one specific 
ontology. But, we assemble all of them here & main reason of 
this research is that in all previous researches most of them 
have data before year 2015. So, we gather data after it and 
compare them with each other to get perfect ontologies of all 
time. Because, lots of researchers wander here and there but 
don’t get latest set of ontologies to enhance their studies so we 
give them all a platform to analyze this research and we assure 
all of them that this is going to be very helpful to them. 
The contributions of this paper related to cybersecurity 
ontologies domain are as follows: In section 2, we represent 
complete detail about ontologies in the field of cybersecurity. 
In section 3, we present research methodology by defining 
research questions, inclusion/exclusion criteria & search string 
to collect reliable studies related to ontologies in cybersecurity 
domain. In section 4, we present data analysis by making 
 
2 
tables from selected papers. In section 5 & 6 we present 
conclusions and future directions respectively. 
II. ONTOLOGIES 
In the starting points of western contemplations, metaphysics 
was viewed as a discipline connected with Philosophy. It was 
situated to the investigation of existing(entities) and their 
connections. 
In 
everyday 
manner. 
Metaphysics 
is 
characterized a jargon in which substances, gentries, assets, 
grounds, capabilities & interactions between the components 
are expressed. Philosophy is significant in light of the fact 
that it empowers Sharing information about a specific space. 
In this writing we track down various techniques or ways to 
deal with make ontologies, for instance: writers propose a 
methodology for the production of ontologies that support 
insightful frameworks in view of information. 
 Additionally, in creators purposed metaphysics creation 
pointed toward catching information, code it and coming 
after coordinate it with existing ontologies. Then again, 
Cactus strategy is introduced. It centers around the 
development in ideology examining an information base that 
utilizes a course deliberation, where the setting of the 
elements is indicated. One of the commonly realized system 
is Meth-ontology, offered by [1]. It assists with making 
another cosmology besides junking expiring ones. This 
system squeezes into an improvement cycle in view of the 
production of models. 
 The SENSUS strategy is another methodology, it utilizes 
existing ontologies making a philosophy skeleton, the 
subsequent model dispenses with terms inconsequential to 
the 
space 
information. 
Another 
philosophy, 
Onto-
Knowledge task that upholds the improvement in ontologies 
for information the executives. At long last creators notice 
the KBSI IDEF5 technique, A strategy that permits, assists 
in creating, change and support of ontologies. Apparatuses 
additionally important for creating ontologies. Instances of 
these apparatuses are: Onto lingua host onto saurus, Protégé, 
Web ODE, Onto Edit with team. Apparatus that is regularly 
utilized in the formation in ontologies is Protégé is free 
multiplatform device which is an extensible engineering. Its 
primary center is the cosmology supervisor, that its 
usefulness can be reached out using modules. 
 One more apparatus that upholds the production of 
ontologies is Onto-saurus. It comprises of two studies: a 
cosmology host, utilizes an information portrayal framework 
and an internet browser which permits altering and 
investigating ontologies utilizing HTML. It’s compulsory to 
take in mind that some of these apparatuses contains unique 
philosophy improvement language. Example dialects are: 
XOL (XML-Based Ontology Exchange Language) SHOE 
(Simple HTML Ontology Extensions) that are augmentation 
of HTML, DAML+OIL and OWL (Web Ontology 
Language). Dialect shifts as per their utilization; other than 
taking into account that dialects would be coordinated with 
augmentations, APIs laid out by the supplier of dialects. 
OWL was one of the dialects ordinarily utilized by 
cosmology engineers. OWL is headed toward distributing 
and sharing ontologies created on Web. OWL inference of 
DAML+OIL that distributes a portion of processes.  
At the point, Metaphysics is created, a significant perspective 
to consider that connected with their check and approval 
(V&V). It very well may be drawn nearer by two viewpoints: 
concerning their quality with respect to their rightness [2].In 
the writing we can discover a few methodologies that address 
the check and approval of a cosmology, for example, the 
highest quality level methodology [3]; corpus-based; task-
based and rules based [1]. As the highest quality level 
methodology [3], it centers around contrasting the created 
metaphysics and a reference cosmology made with specific 
measures. Then again, the corpus-based technique comprises 
in assessing inclusion of a metaphysics with few ontologies 
by a corpus in which decided space is fundamentally 
concealed.  
On account of undertaking-based approach, the assessment 
of a cosmology is focused on a particular errand, in light of 
the outcomes got to work on the information on this 
undertaking. One more methodology comprises in approving 
the philosophy as per a beneficial measure [2], like its 
construction [1], For instance, quantity hubs that a 
metaphysics has, is utilized or perplexing models might be 
utilized. One more methodology depends on specialists, for 
instance, assessments depend on happenstances of classes, 
thickness & intervention that nitty gritty in metaphysics. 
Help instruments for V&V assignments, Onto-Metric, 
normal language app measurements, Onto-Clean, Eva Lexon 
and OOPS! [4] For instance, Onto-Clean, permits the 
assessment of a cosmology in light of its ordered 
construction. Another one is OOPS! [4], an instrument which 
checks the cosmology by utilizing a URL to find potential 
irregularities that might influence its model. 
III. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
The acknowledgment of a SLR is partitioned into three 
stages: (1) Planning, (2) Execution and (3) Reporting, 
following we portray every one of these stages in our unique 
circumstance. As a feature of the arranging stage, the 
convention for SLR is created. It settles examination queries 
& also the targets of this exploration. At first, hotspot 
looking, search string, and the incorporation and prohibition 
models are likewise characterized. In the subsequent stage 
(execution) convention sprints, at this stage we continue with 
pursuits & records with regard to hunt string characterized in 
convention, we additionally do the separation of the records 
as per the consideration and prohibition standards 
characterized in the convention, we moreover do the 
examination and union of the pertinent records. At long last, 
the third stage compares to introduction to finish this SLR. 
 
3 
Principal objective of this SLR is to acquire a superior 
comprehension in detailed ontologies connected with 
network protection space. With deference of this goal, 
following exploration questions have been presented. 
1. 
RESEARCH OBJECTIVES (RO) 
           
             Main aims and objectives for this research:  
              
            RO1: Can we analyze what are the main areas where                                          
ontologies actually held. 
            RO2: Is there any techniques that enhance modern 
ontologies and make them better from traditional ontologies. 
            RO3: We need tools that work on techniques for 
develop better version of ontologies also does we have any. 
            RO4: All modern ontologies we choose are really 
validated or just mashup of validation like traditional 
ontologies. 
       2.   QUESTIONS MOTIVATION (QM) 
 
To complete SLR actually, at first, significant exploration 
questions have been characterized. Further, a far-reaching 
scan arranging expected survey for distinguishing proof & 
extraction of articles has been laid out. The exploration 
assessments tended to in survey with significant inspiration 
referenced in Table I.  
TABLE I. RQ and their major motivations 
 
Research Question 
Major Motivation 
R-
Q1 
Areas of Cyber 
Security where Ontologies     
are reported? 
To identify specific areas 
where these ontologies 
actually held. 
R-
Q2 
Techniques or approaches 
utilized for advancement of 
chosen ontologies? 
To understand methods that 
are used for enhancement 
and improvement of 
selected ontologies. 
R-
Q3 
Which devices or tools have 
been utilized for development 
of announced ontologies? 
To understand the various 
software or tools that are 
used for development of 
selected ontologies. 
R-
Q4 
Have revealed ontologies been 
approved? 
To identify weather 
selected ontologies are 
validated or not? 
 
3. SEARCHING CRITERIA 
Vital period of SLR is readiness of pursuit plan, to find & 
gather potentially huge articles in picked area satisfactorily. 
Interaction involves depiction of search string, literature 
resources 
used 
for 
pursuit, 
and 
isolation 
(inclusion/exclusion) plan to get most significant article's out 
of assortment. Various parts of articles evaluated 
subjectively 
& observationally to address different 
viewpoints related with examination. 
I) SEARCH STRING 
A viable & fair examination has directed by figuring out a 
key-word based string to look & assemble accessible 
investigations in the field utilizing different notable 
computerized 
research 
repositories. 
The 
finished 
watchwords and their elective terms expected to finalize a 
quest string for recognizable proof of pertinent articles are 
determined in Table II. In Table II the '+' sign is utilized for 
inclusion and '- ' sign for exclusion. 
TABLE II. Key-words for search 
Keywords 
 Alternate Keywords 
+ Cyber Security 
Ontologies (CSO) 
Ontology Components (OC),  
Ontologies in Cybersecurity (OCS) 
     + Cybersecurity in  
          ICT (CSICT) 
ICT,  
Cyber Security (CS) 
- 
Cybersecurity   
Vulnerabilities 
(CSV) 
 
- 
 
Final search string consists of three sections. Principal piece 
of string is utilized to restrict outcomes connected with Cyber 
Security Ontologies and the following part connects with the 
forecast of its behavior in ICT, while the latter is utilized to 
keep the outcomes from the inclusion of studies that depend 
on vulnerability occurs in Cybersecurity. Equation (1) 
addressing the numerical plan of the search string.  
𝑅= ∀ [(𝐶𝑆𝑂 ∨𝑂𝐶 ∨𝑂𝐶𝑆) ∧(𝐶𝑆𝐼𝐶𝑇 ∨𝐼𝐶𝑇 𝑉 CS ) ≢
(𝐶𝑆𝑉)]  
 
(1) 
Here in (1), R represents list items get against it, '∀' addressing 
'for all', '∨' utilized for 'OR' operator and '∧' for 'AND' operator 
consolidating with search terms communicated in Table II to 
make equation of total search string by each selected 
repository. Nonexclusive inquiry term utilizing (1) can 
communicated as:  
((Cybersecurity Ontologies OR Ontology Components OR 
Ontologies of Cybersecurity) AND ("Cybersecurity in ICT" 
OR "ICT" OR "Cybersecurity") NOT (Cybersecurity 
Vulnerabilities)) 
II) LITERATURE RESOURCES  
Area explicit & unmistakable diaries are chosen to lead 
writing search from web vaults, devoted research distribution 
and assortment. The subtleties of chosen vaults, applied 
search strings and the outcomes are referenced in Table III. 
TABLE III. Publishers’ repository wise search strings 
Repository 
Search Strings 
Science 
Direct 
(("CYBERSECURITY ONTOLOGIES" OR ONTOLOGY 
COMPONENTS OR ONTOLOGIES OF 
CYBERSECURITY) AND (CYBERSECURITY IN ICT OR 
ICT OR CYBERSECURITY) AND NOT 
(CYBERSECURITY VULNERABILITIES)) 
Springer 
Link 
((CYBERSECURITY ONTOLOGIES OR ONTOLOGY 
COMPONENTS OR ONTOLOGIES OF 
CYBERSECURITY) AND ("CYBERSECURITY IN ICT " 
OR "ICT" OR " CYBERSECURITY ") NOT 
(CYBERSECURITY VULNERABILITIES)) 
 
4 
ACM 
Digital 
Library 
(((((("ALL METADATA":" CYBERSECURITY 
ONTOLOGIES ") OR "ALL METADATA": ONTOLOGY 
COMPONENTS) OR "ALL METADATA": 
ONTOLOGIES OF CYBERSECURITY) AND "ALL 
METADATA": CYBERSECURITY IN ICT) OR "ALL 
METADATA”: ICT) NOT "ALL METADATA": 
CYBERSECURITY VULNERABILITIES) 
IEEE 
Xplore 
(((("ONTOLOGIES" OR "ONTOLOGY") AND 
CYBERSECURITY) OR ONTOLOGY COMPONENTS 
OR (("CYBERSECURITY" AND "ONTOLOGIES") OR 
"MACHINE LEARNING")) AND ((("CYBERSECURITY 
IN ICT" OR "ICT") NOT ("VULNERABILITIES" AND 
"CYBERSECURITY"))) 
III) INCLUSION & EXCLUSION 
 
Criteria for inclusion criteria (IC) is: 
(IC-1) The essential examinations were chosen in view of 
the title, unique and key-words to decide if they are 
recognized as important ones, records were chosen 
considering 
consistence 
with 
the 
accompanying 
consideration rules: All papers written in English language.  
(IC-2) Papers should be distributed in lofty recorded 
settings, for example, Diaries, Proceedings and book parts 
to a companion overview process. 
Exclusion criteria applied on those papers that met a 
portion of the accompanying rejection standards were not 
considered for this SLR, like 
(EC-1) Copied papers, papers whose primary commitment 
not connected with network protection ontologies, banners, 
non-English composed papers and short correspondences 
like letters to manager. 
EC-2) If study included vulnerabilities in cybersecurity. 
4. RELEVANT PAPER SELECTION  
At beginning, we select papers from specific time period that 
resides between 2010 to 2022.When the convention was 
characterized, we continued with the execution stage. The 
recently characterized search string is execute for this, 
utilizing the Scopus data set web search tool. It’s compulsory 
that Scopus is greatest conceptual and reference data set in the 
field of logical writing. At first 214 report results were 
acquired subsequent to running the inquiry string. In the wake 
of applying the consideration and prohibition measures on 
titles, edited compositions and key-words, 72 reports were 
chosen 
From this choice, the total substance of 69 reports was gotten 
to. In the wake of breaking down the substance of these 
documents, 19 were disposed of, so at long last 50 records 
were considered for this audit (applicable papers). As 
indicated by recently depicted, we utilized the Scopus data set 
to run search formula, and items in the applicable records are 
going by their separate publisher, for example, IEEE, 
Springer, ACM, Science Direct, among others. Displayed 
Figure 1, primary Ontology connected with online protection 
was accounted in 2004 (Simmonds et al., 2004), year onwards, 
different irregularly work emerges, it’s from 2014 that the 
quantity of ontologies connected with network safety 
increments, Example, in 2019 eleven ontologies were 
accounted for (Brita, 2019; Vega Barbas et al., 2019; Gasmi et 
al., 2019; Danilova et al., 2019; Scarpato et al., 2019; 
Niyazova et al., 2019; Islam et al., 2019; Basso Moreira et al., 
2019; Kats Antonis et al., 2019; Shaaban et al., 2019; Zamfira 
et al., 2019). 
 
FIGURE I: Ontological order revealed with regards to 
Cybersecurity. 
5. QUALITY ASSESSMENT CRITERIA  
It’s compulsory that same papers utilized in SLR are exposed 
to quality assessment. Nine assessment models adjusted from 
(Kitchenham) were thought of, these measures are connected 
with the time of distribution, the sort of distribution (Journal 
or Conference) also rules connected with the design of the 
chose reports. A Likert-scale is utilized for this, where greatest 
assessment score is set 50 focuses, Table IV shows measures 
utilized for evaluation. 
TABLE IV Evaluation models utilized for this SLR. 
Sr. 
Assessment Questions 
Expected Answers 
Score 
             Internal Scoring 
1 
Is the paper distributed in an 
effect diary? 
a. Yes  
a. 5  
b. No 
b. 1 
2 
Published time? 
a. > 5 year 
a. 5  
b. < 5 year 
b. 1 
3 
   Is the setting of the issue   
       plainly described? 
a. Highest 
a. 5  
b. Lowest 
b. 1 
4 
Is the goal of the study clearly 
expressed? 
a. Highest 
a. 5  
b. Lowest 
b. 1 
5 
Does the paper contain a result 
segment? 
a. Highest 
a. 5  
b. Lowest 
b. 1 
6 
Is it conceivable to replicate the 
review? 
a. Highest 
a. 5  
b. Lowest 
b. 1 
7 
Does the paper address your 
own research questions? 
a. Highest 
a. 5  
b. Lowest 
b. 1 
8 
Does the review report clear, 
unambiguous discoveries in an 
evidence & argument? 
a. Highest 
a. 5  
b. Lowest 
b. 1 
 
 
 
 
5 
9 
Is the paper well/appropriate 
referred to? 
a. Highest 
a. 5 
b. Lowest 
b. 1 
 
 
 
 
THE CREATORS OF THIS PAPER COMPLETED THE ASSESSMENT 
OF THE APPLICABLE REPORTS AND EFFECTS OF THE 
ASSESSMENT WERE ARRIVED TO BE AVERAGED. AS SHOULD 
BE VISIBLE IN TABLE V, NO PAPER IS DISMISSED IN LIGHT OF 
THE ASSESSMENT MODELS UTILIZED 
TABLE V: Quality evaluation result. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
The complete score from each paper is figured utilizing a 
rate. We see every one of important papers yielded a quality 
score, that reaches from great to phenomenal. Typical score 
of assessment is 76%, which is viewed as sufficient quality 
marker for this SLR. 
IV. DATA ANALYSIS 
 
Section gathers results & gives sophisticated answer of every 
chose paper. Chose papers are explored to successfully 
respond to the research questions. Initial segment of this part 
talks about the query items acquired by characterized search 
formula. Portrayal of appraisal score and at last is committed 
to exhaustive conversations respond to research assessments.    
1. SEARCH RESULTS 
The essential pursuit process yields a complete 553 articles 
from different web-based information sources. On this 
assortment, choice cycle portrayed in the past area was 
applied. The stages associated with choice cycle have 
additionally been portrayed beneath Figure 2 & stage wise 
determination results are communicated in Table VI. 
TABLE VI. Repository based selection 
Repository 
Primary 
Search 
P-I 
P-II 
P-III 
IEEE XPLORE 
233 
74 
58 
11 
SCIENCE DIRECT 
170 
68 
32 
8 
SPRINGER LINK 
110 
55 
27 
3 
ACM DIGITAL LIBRARY 
40 
13 
7 
2 
TOTAL 
553 
210 
124 
24 
 
Title based choice is perform by two writers at stage I (P-
1), brings about the determination of 210 papers. Then, copy 
papers are eliminated in stage (P-II), and space immaterial 
papers are likewise screen based on consideration and 
rejection measures characterized in past segment. Unique 
based screening is applied in stage III (P-III) on the 124 
resultant papers acquired from past stage & absolute 24 
articles were seen as generally relevant and settled to 
remember for this SLR for information extraction and 
examination. 
Very acknowledged advanced libraries (DL) to distribute 
research reads up for different Journals, Conference & 
Workshops were utilized to choose reads up for this 
methodical writing survey according to look through 
methodology displayed in Table III. DL-wise dispersion 
proportion of chosen articles, incorporates ACM Digital 
Library 6%, 56% of IEEE Xplore and Science Direct 24%, and 
14% of Springer Link. Distributer based organized savvy 
choice status and appropriation proportion of chosen 
examinations has previously been displayed in Table V. 
 
FIGURE 2.  Selection procedure 
3. RESEARCH QUESTIONS ASSESSMENT 
The 24 primary articles were examined based on research 
questions portrayed in Table I. The realities extricated after 
examination of chose studies are based on examens the 
assessment of data. 
1) QUESTION 1’S ASSESSMENT. AREAS OF 
CYBERSECURITY WHERE ONTOLOGIES ARE 
REPORTED? 
 
Quality % by 
classification 
     No of 
articles 
  % from 
articles  
Worst (<26%) 
                    0                    NIL 
Average (26%-45%) 
                    0                    NIL 
Better (46%-65%) 
                  19                  38% 
Best (66%-85%) 
                  26                  52% 
Extraordinary (>86%) 
                    5                  10% 
 
6 
Concerning question, we distinguished 4 classes where 
ontologies are assembled: General, Networking, Software & 
Human Factor. Overall class alludes for ontologies that 
include a blend of ideas connected with different classes, for 
example, systems administration, programming, or the human 
variable. In the class of system’ administration the ontologies 
address ideas connected with gear, conventions and 
organization displaying. In the product classification, the 
ontologies are chiefly centered around portraying online 
protection ideas from a product improvement point of view. In 
the classification of human element are those ontologies that 
portray ideas connected with the staff engaged with parts of 
online protection in ICTs. Table 7 presents the ontologies 
gathered by the classifications recently portrayed. As 
displayed in Table 7, biggest number of ontologies broke 
down are gathered in general and systems administration 
classifications. 
 
TABLE VII.  Classification of ontologies according to their scope. 
    SCOPE 
No of 
Papers 
% of Papers 
  References 
   
 
 
 
  General 
               
 
 
               
9 
            
 
 
 
              34% 
[1]Petrenko, 
S. 
A., 
& 
Makoveichuk, K. A 
[2] Petrenko, S. A., & 
Makoveichuk, K. A 
 [3] Petrenko, S. A., & 
Makoveichuk, K. A  
     
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Networking 
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
               
8 
              
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               32% 
[4] Chukkapalli et al. 
(2020), Scarpato et al. 
(2019), Katsantonis et al. 
(2019),  
[3] Zamfira et al. (2019), 
Zamfira et al. (2018), 
Mozzaquatro et al. 
(2018), 
 [5] Zheng et al. (2018), 
Albalushi et al. (2018), 
Bergner & Lechner 
(2017), 
  
 
    
 
 
 
 
  Software 
              
 
 
 
 
               
4 
             
 
 
 
 
               18% 
[6] Syed (2020), Bataityte 
et al. (2020), Gasmi et al.  
(2019),  
[7] Alqahtani & Rilling 
(2017),  
 
  
 
 
 
      Human 
      Factor 
            
 
 
               
3 
            
 
 
 
               16% 
[8] Takahashi and 
Kadobayashi (2014), 
Takahashi & 
Kadobayashi (2011) 
 
 
2) QUESTION 2’S ASSESSMENT. WHICH TECHNIQUES 
OR APPROCHES UTILIZED FOR ADVANCEMENT OF 
CHOSE ONTOLOGIES? 
  
With respect to investigate question, we see that the greater 
part of the creators of the revealed ontologies (88%,46 papers) 
don't specify to involve existing techniques for the 
improvement of their ontologies. All in all, the creators portray 
their own methodology that they followed for the 
advancement of their ontologies. Less significantly we see that 
main in seven pertinent papers (12%), the creators notice 
following some current philosophy for the advancement of 
their ontologies. For instance, four creators notice the 
utilization of the Meth-ontology technique (Fernandez et al.), 
while two creators notice the utilization of the system 
Ontology Development 101 (Noy & McGuinness). 
TABLE VIII. Ontologies classification according to their Methodology. 
EXISTING  
METHODS 
NO OF  
PAPERS 
% OF 
PAPERS 
REFERENCES 
 
 
 
 
Without 
following 
existing 
methods 
 
 
 
 
 
     17 
 
 
 
 
 
     88% 
 [4] Chukkapalli et al. (2020),  
[9] Mozzaquatro et al. (2018),  
[7] Alqahtani and Rilling (2017), 
  [1] Petrenko and Makoveichuk 
(2017), 
 [8] Takahashi and Kadobayashi 
(2014), 
Takahashi 
and 
Kadobayashi,(2011), Takahashi 
et al. (2010), Hieb et al., Simmonds 
et al. 
Following 
existed 
methods 
   
    2 
  
   12% 
[10] Kats Antonis et al. (2019), 
[11] Van Vuuren et al. (2014) 
 
As displayed in Table 8, just seven papers report the 
utilization of a system for fostering ontologies. Meth-ontology 
approach was accounted in 4 papers (Zamfira et al., 2019; 
Matheus et al., 2018; Obrest et al., 2014; Razzaq et al., 2014), 
though the philosophy improvement 101 technique is 
accounted in two works (Kats Antonis et al.,2019; Van Vuuren 
et al., 2014). 
3) QUESTION 3’S ASSESSMENT. WHICH DEVICES OR 
TOOLS ARE UTILIZED FOR DEVELOPMENT OF 
ANNOUNCED ONTOLOGIES? 
 
On account of the instruments that help the development of 
ontologies, 40% of the reports (20 papers) creators notice the 
utilization of a device to help the improvement of their 
ontologies. We see that Protégé is the most involved 
instrument for philosophy improvement; its utilization is 
referenced in 16 out of 20 significant reports that notice the 
utilization of a device. Less significantly, the utilization of 
different devices is additionally revealed, for example, Atom-
Tool; Cyber Security Ontology Expert Tool; CYBEX; and 
Intel-MQ. 
TABLE IX. Ontologies arrangement by utilized devices 
  TOOL 
NO OF 
PAPERS 
% OF 
PAPERS 
REFERENCES 
 
 
 
        
 
 
  
 
 
[10] Katsantonis et al.
 
(2019),  
[9] Mozzaquatro et al. 
(2018),  
 
7 
 
Protégé 
 
          16 
 
           68% 
[8] Razzaq et al. (2014) 
ATOM-TOOL 
           2 
             8% 
[12] Moreira (2018) 
Cyber 
Security 
Ontology 
Expert 
           2 
             8% 
 [11] Singer. P (2014) 
CYBEX 
            2 
             8% 
[8] Takahashi and 
Kobayashi (2014) 
INTEL-MQ 
            2 
             8% 
[13] Zheng. H 
 
The apparatuses utilized for philosophy improvement 
typically consolidate dialects that assistance in meaning of 
ontologies. We see that 24% (12 papers) of pertinent archives 
(Chukka Alli et al., 2020; Vega Barbas et al., 2019; 
Doynikova et al., 2019; Zheng et al., 2018; Petrenko and 
Makoveichuk, 2017; Elnagdy et al., 2016; Falk, 2016; Syed 
et al., 2016; Iannacone et al., 2015; Oltramari et al., 2015; 
Salem and Wacek, 2015; Laskey et al., 2015) report the 
utilization of the OWL language (Dean & Schreiber). 
Significantly, utilization of dialects, for example, SPARQL, 
SWRL, XML and OWL 2 is noticed (Baesso Moreira et al., 
2019; Onwubiko et al., 2018; Albalushi et al., 2018; Tseng 
et al., 2017; Bergner and Lechner, 2017; Fontenele and Sun, 
2016; Maines et al., 2015; Geller et al., 2014). 
4) QUESTION 4’S ASSESSMENT. HAVE REVEALED 
ONTOLOGIES BEEN APPROVED? 
 
As to assessment and approval of ontologies revealed in SLR, 
62% of them (31 essential examinations) notice utilization of 
confirmation or approval systems. Instance, 18 applicable 
articles, creators notice utilization of data extraction rules like 
those proposed in (Boley et al.). On account of the ontologies 
here detailed, a few creators play out the check and approval 
of their ontologies in view of the correlation with existing 
ontologies (3 significant papers). One more kind of approval 
noticed is the approval by specialists, move toward referenced 
in other three important papers. The utilization of devices for 
evaluating ontologies is additionally referenced, instruments 
like Onto-Clean (Gangemi et al.), the OQuare measurements 
device (Duque and Fernandez, 2011), Protégé expansion 
called HermiT Reasoner (Data and Knowledge Group) are 
referenced. 
We 
additionally 
notice 
half 
and 
half 
methodologies in which approval is led using models 
(Fernandez et al., 2009) and errands (Welty et al.). At long last, 
we likewise notice the utilization of a measurement base 
approval approach 
In Table X, all of them are briefly explained: 
 
TABLE X.  Ranks of publication sources of selected articles 
EVALUATION 
No of 
Papers 
% of 
Papers 
REFERENCES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Information 
Extraction 
Rules 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                 
11 
  
 
 
 
 
 
                    
66% 
[13]  Zheng. H (2018) 
 [7] Alqahtani and Rilling 
(2017) 
[1] Petrenko 
an 
Malkovich (2017) 
 
[8] Takahashi and Kad 
obayashi (2017), Takahashi 
and Kad Obayashi (2011)) 
Onto-Clean 
3 
6% 
[14] Read. J & Cruz. C 
Expert’s 
Validation 
3 
6% 
[15]  Duque-Ramos (2011) 
Comparison  
by existing 
ontology 
3 
6% 
[13] Zheng et al. (2018) 
Hermit 
Reasoner 
1 
4% 
[16] Niyazova (2011) 
O-Quare  
Metrices 
1 
4% 
[9] Mozzaquatro et al. 
(2018) 
Metrice 
Base 
Validation 
1 
4% 
[17] Scarpato (2019) 
Hybrid 
Approch 
1 
4% 
[18] Ulanov (2010) 
 
 
V. DISCUSSIONS & CONCLUSION 
The most elevated level of ontologies detailed in the field of 
online protection are in the general and systems administration 
classification. The overall class tends to a blend of ideas 
having a place with the systems administration, programming 
and human variable classes. These discoveries propose that 
work is being finished on the meaning of ontologies in 
unambiguous network protection areas. Notwithstanding, we 
likewise notice work on the improvement of ontologies 
tending to broad space of the network protection. 
As to strategies or approaches utilized for the improvement of 
ontologies, we see that in the majority of the important reports 
examined, creators don't make reference to following existing 
philosophies for fostering their ontologies. Just in 12% 
creators notice involving some procedure as a kind of 
perspective. From this rate, the most utilized procedure is 
Meth-ontology (Fernandez et al.). These discoveries appear to 
recommend an absence of inspiration in the utilization of 
existing metaphysics improvement techniques. We see that the 
most generally involved apparatus for development of 
ontologies is Protégé (Noy et al.). 
From ontologies that report utilization of some device, 32% 
report utilization of Protégé. OWL (Dean & Schreiber) is most 
utilized language among ontologies that report utilization of 
language. 
At last, regards to utilization of confirmation and approval 
(V&V) components, we see that 62% of essential 
examinations report utilization of check or approval system, 
with accompanying stick out: utilization of data extraction 
 
8 
rules, making of correlations as for existing ontologies, 
approval by specialists, approval using measurements, also 
utilization of apparatuses for this. We see that continuously 
there is interest in applying V&V components that assistance 
address lacks in advancement of ontologies in area of Cyber 
security. 
VI. FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
It’s compulsory that optional examinations as detailed are 
dependent upon understanding in various stages, in this 
manner suggesting the presence of predisposition. To limit a 
potential predisposition, we followed the principal stages 
with exercises of SLR philosophy. Albeit, gamble of missing 
significant papers was available, think about that, chose 
records for this survey (pertinent papers) address a sufficient 
example of revealed online protection ontologies. 
In this SLR, we didn't think about dim writing, so we accept 
that great quality dark writing of this subject will be 
accounted for in diaries or meetings, along these lines, 
conceivable distribution predisposition might emerge 
because of negative discoveries are not normally distributed. 
We didn't consider reports distributed not in English 
language, albeit isn't a restriction in our provincial setting, it 
tends to be an impression of the limits forced on us by the 
accessible examination around here (refreshed and peer-
evaluated writing is regularly distributed in English). 
Network safety is a youthful discipline wherein trains, for 
example, media communications, hardware and processing 
have met. The appearance of changed ontologies in the field 
of network protection has cultivated more information on 
ideas connected with this discipline. In this examination we 
have detailed consequences of deliberate writing survey on 
network protection ontologies. The primary commitment of 
this auxiliary review is the blend of the discoveries from the 
various ontologies announced concerning regions or spaces, 
systems, instruments and dialects utilized, as well as the 
V&V components revealed. The consequences of our work 
can act as a kind of perspective for future examination on this 
subject. 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
 [1] 
Alqahtani, S. S. also, Rilling, J. (2017). An Ontology-Based 
Approach to Automate Tagging of Software Artifacts. Global 
Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and 
Measurement, 169174. 
[2] 
Baesso Moreira, G., Menditi Calegario, V., Duarte, J. C. 
furthermore, Pereira, Dos Santos, A. F. (2019). 
                Stretching out the VERIS Framework to an Incident Handling 
Ontology. 2018 IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on 
Web Intelligence, 8609628, 440-445. 
[3] 
Chukkapalli, S. S. L., Piplai, A., Mittal, S., Gupta, M. what's 
more, Joshi, A. (2020). A Smart-Farming Ontology for Attribute 
Based Access Control. 2020 IEEE sixth Intl Conference on Big 
Data Security on Cloud, BigDataSecurity 2020, 2020 IEEE Intl 
Conference on High Performance and Smart Computing, HPSC 
2020 and 2020 IEEE Intl Conference on Intelligent Data and 
Security, 9123052, 29-34. 
[4] 
Duque, A. what's more, Fernandez, J. (2011). OQuaRE: A 
SQuaRE-based Approach for Evaluating the Quality of 
Ontologies. Diary of Research and Practice in Information 
Technology. 
 
[5] 
Elnagdy, S.A., Qiu, M. what's more, Gai, K. (2016). Digital 
Incident Classifications Using Ontology-Based. 
[6] 
Fernandez, M., Gomez, A. what's more, Juristo, N. (1997). 
METHONTOLOGY: From Ontological Art Towards 
Ontological Engineering. Spring Symposium on Ontological 
Engineering of AAAI, 33-40. 
                Fernandez, M., Overbeeke, C., Sabou, M. what's more, Motta, E. 
(2009) 
[7] 
Fontenele, M. what's more, Sun, L. (2016). Information the 
executives of network safety mastery: An ontological way to 
deal with ability disclosure. 2016 International Conference on 
Cyber Security and Protection of Digital Services, Cyber 
Security 2016, 7502356.   
[8] 
Mozzaquatro, B.A., Agostinho, C., Goncalves, D., Martins, J. 
furthermore, Jardim-Goncalves, R. (2018). 
                A philosophy based online protection structure for the web of 
things. Sensors, 18(3053). 
[9] 
Niyazova, R., Aktayeva, Al. what's more, Davletkireeva, L. 
(2019). An Ontology based Model for User Profile building 
utilizing Social Network. ACM International Conference 
Proceeding Series, 21.  
[10] 
Obrst, L., Chase, P. what's more, Markeloff, R. (2014). Fostering 
a metaphysics of the network protection area. CEUR Workshop, 
966, 49-56.   
[11] 
Poveda, M., Suárez M. C. furthermore, Gómez, A. (2015). Did 
You Validate Your Ontology? Oh no!. ESWC 2012 Satellite 
Events, 402-407.  
[12] 
Petrenko, S. A. also, Makoveichuk, K. A. (2017). Cosmology of 
network safety of self-recuperating shrewd Grid. CEUR 
Workshop, 2081, 98-106.  
[13]         Raad, J. furthermore, Cruz, C. (2015). A Survey on Ontology 
Evaluation Methods. Procedures of the International Conference 
on Knowledge Engineering and Ontology Development, part of 
the seventh International Joint Conference on Knowledge 
Discovery, Knowledge Engineering and Knowledge 
Management  
[14] 
Scarpato, N., Cilia, N.D. also, Romano, M. (2019). Reachability 
Matrix Ontology: A Cybersecurity Ontology. Applied Artificial 
Intelligence, 33, 643-655.  
 [15] 
Artist, P. W. furthermore, Friedman, A. (2014). Network 
protection and Cyberwar What Everyone Needs to Know. 
Oxford University Press 
[16] 
Takahashi, T. also, Kadobayashi, Y. (2014). Reference Ontology 
for Cybersecurity Operational Information. PC Journal, 58, 
2297-2312.   
[17] 
Ulanov, A., Shevlyakov, G., Lyubomishchenko, N., Mehra, P. 
furthermore, Polutin, V. (2010). Monte Carlo Study of 
Taxonomy Evaluation. In Database and Expert Systems 
Applications (DEXA), 164-168.   
[18] 
Zheng, H., Wang, Y., Han, C., Le, F., He, R. what's more, Lu, J. 
(2018). Learning and Applying Ontology for Machine Learning 
in Cyber Attack Detection. seventeenth IEEE International 
Conference on Trust, 
                Security and Privacy in Computing and Communications and 
twelfth IEEE International 
                Gathering on Big Data Science and Engineering, 
Trustcom/BigDataSE 2018, 8456049, 13091315.  
[7, 19] 
Katsantonis, M. also, Mavridis, I. (2019). Cosmology Based 
Modeling for Cyber Security E-Learning and Training. Software 
engineering, 11841, 15-27.  
 
