Title: Towards Autonomous Cybersecurity: An Intelligent AutoML Framework for Autonomous Intrusion Detection
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2409.03141v1
--------------------------------------------------

Towards Autonomous Cybersecurity: An Intelligent AutoML
Framework for Autonomous Intrusion Detection
Li Yang
Ontario Tech University
Oshawa, Canada
li.yang@ontariotechu.ca
Abdallah Shami
Western University
London, Canada
abdallah.shami@uwo.ca
ABSTRACT
The rapid evolution of mobile networks from 5G to 6G has necessi-
tated the development of autonomous network management systems,
such as Zero-Touch Networks (ZTNs). However, the increased com-
plexity and automation of these networks have also escalated cyberse-
curity risks. Existing Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs) leveraging
traditional Machine Learning (ML) techniques have shown effec-
tiveness in mitigating these risks, but they often require extensive
manual effort and expert knowledge. To address these challenges,
this paper proposes an Automated Machine Learning (AutoML)-
based autonomous IDS framework towards achieving autonomous
cybersecurity for next-generation networks. To achieve autonomous
intrusion detection, the proposed AutoML framework automates
all critical procedures of the data analytics pipeline, including data
pre-processing, feature engineering, model selection, hyperparam-
eter tuning, and model ensemble. Specifically, it utilizes a Tabular
Variational Auto-Encoder (TVAE) method for automated data bal-
ancing, tree-based ML models for automated feature selection and
base model learning, Bayesian Optimization (BO) for hyperparame-
ter optimization, and a novel Optimized Confidence-based Stacking
Ensemble (OCSE) method for automated model ensemble. The pro-
posed AutoML-based IDS was evaluated on two public benchmark
network security datasets, CICIDS2017 and 5G-NIDD, and demon-
strated improved performance compared to state-of-the-art cyberse-
curity methods. This research marks a significant step towards fully
autonomous cybersecurity in next-generation networks, potentially
revolutionizing network security applications.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Security and privacy →Network security; Intrusion/anomaly
detection and malware mitigation; • Computing methodolo-
gies →Machine learning.
KEYWORDS
Autonomous Cybersecurity; Intrusion Detection System; Zero-Touch
Network; AutoML; Machine Learning; Ensemble learning.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
AutonomousCyber ’24, October 14–18, 2024, Salt Lake City, UT, USA
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1229-6/24/10
https://doi.org/10.1145/3689933.3690833
ACM Reference Format:
Li Yang and Abdallah Shami. 2024. Towards Autonomous Cybersecurity:
An Intelligent AutoML Framework for Autonomous Intrusion Detection. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Autonomous Cybersecurity (AutonomousCyber
’24), October 14–18, 2024, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
11 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3689933.3690833
1
INTRODUCTION
The progression of mobile networks has played a pivotal role in the
digital revolution, with each generation bringing forth new technolo-
gies and capabilities. The fifth-generation (5G) networks have signif-
icantly enhanced mobile broadband and enabled massive machine-
type communications with ultra-reliable low latency [23]. 5G net-
works leverages abstraction and virtualization techniques, such as
Software-Defined Networking (SDN), Network Function Virtualiza-
tion (NFV), and Network Slicing (NS), to provide flexible, efficient,
and automated network management and services [18].
For the evolution from 5G to the sixth generation (6G) networks,
network automation has become a necessity to meet the unprece-
dented demand for future network applications. 6G networks are
expected to leverage Artificial Intelligence (AI), Machine Learning
(ML), and automation techniques to provide functional modules and
operational services, leading to self-organizing and autonomous
networks [23]. Previous researchers have extensively dedicated ef-
forts to developing network automation architectures, including
Intent-Based Network Management (IBN), Self-Organizing Network
Management (SON), and Autonomic Network Management (ANM),
etc. [9]. Recently, Zero-Touch Networks (ZTNs) were proposed by
the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) as a
fully autonomous network management architecture with minimal
human involvement [36]. Network automation solutions, including
ZTNs, can effectively decrease network operational costs, enhance
resource utilization efficiency, and mitigate the risks associated with
human errors.
On the other hand, as network and service management requires
a trustworthy and reliable system, cybersecurity has become a crit-
ical component of next-generation networks. Modern networks
are vulnerable to various cyber-attacks, such as Denial of Service
(DoS), sniffing/eavesdropping, spoofing, web attacks, and botnets
[32]. These threats can lead to severe consequences, including finan-
cial losses, disruption of critical services, compromise of sensitive
information, and reputational damage [4]. Therefore, effective cy-
bersecurity measures should be developed to enhance the security
of modern networks, while autonomous cybersecurity solutions are
essential for safeguarding future networks with high automation
requirements.
AI/ML techniques are widely used in network applications to
develop data-driven cybersecurity mechanisms such as Intrusion
arXiv:2409.03141v1  [cs.LG]  5 Sep 2024
AutonomousCyber ’24, October 14–18, 2024, Salt Lake City, UT, USA
Li Yang and Abdallah Shami
Detection Systems (IDSs) and anomaly detection systems, which can
analyze network traffic patterns and identify anomalies or cyber-
attacks [8]. AI/ML models have shown effectiveness in network
data analytics and IDS development, due to their capability to large
volumes of network data, identify complex patterns, and adapt to
evolving threats. ML-based IDSs can detect malicious attacks and
predict potential threats based on historical data, thereby triggering
countermeasures or response mechanisms to safeguard against the
detected attacks [32].
To ensure robust cybersecurity in next-generation networks, such
as ZTNs, it is crucial to incorporate self-management functionali-
ties that address security concerns, such as self-configuration, self-
monitoring, self-healing, self-protection, and self-optimization [2].
To meet these requirements, autonomous cybersecurity solutions,
such as autonomous IDSs, should be developed to automatically
monitor network activities, detect network anomalies, and identify
potential attacks.
Automated ML (AutoML) techniques, which are developed to au-
tomate the design and implementation of ML models, are promising
solutions to realize network automation for ZTNs or future networks
[33]. AutoML techniques offer the advantage of automating labo-
rious and repetitive tasks involved in the ML and data analytics
pipeline, such as data pre-processing, feature engineering, model
selection, and hyperparameter tuning [33]. This automation can ef-
fectively reduce human effort, minimize the occurrence of human
errors, and alleviate the need for extensive expert knowledge. In
the cybersecurity domain, autonomous IDSs can be developed using
AutoML techniques by automatically designing, tuning, and optimiz-
ing ML models that can effectively detect cyber-attacks and achieve
self-monitoring and self-protection.
Therefore, this paper proposes an AutoML-based autonomous
IDS framework to automatically detect malicious cyber-attacks for
safeguading 5G and potential 6G networks. The proposed AutoML
framework enables the automation of critical procedures of the
ML/data analytics pipeline for intrusion detection. Specifically, it
consists of: an Automated Data Pre-processing (AutoDP) component
that focuses on automated data balancing using the Tabular Varia-
tional Auto-Encoder (TVAE) [31] method to address class-imbalance
issues and improve data quality, an Automated Feature Engineering
(AutoFE) component that automatically selects the most relevant fea-
tures based on their average importance scores calculated using the
Gini index and entropy metrics, an automated base model learning
and selection component that automatically trains six tree-based ma-
chine learning models—Decision Tree (DT) [32], Random Forest (RF)
[29], Extra Trees (ET) [12], Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) [7],
Light Gradient Boosting Machine (LightGBM) [16], and Categorical
Boosting (CatBoost) [24]—and selects the top three best-performing
models from them, a Hyper-Parameter Optimization (HPO) compo-
nent that automatically tunes and optimizes the hyperparameters
of the selected ML models using Bayesian Optimization with Tree-
structured Parzen Estimator (BO-TPE) [10] to obtain optimized base
models, and an automated model ensemble component that employs
the proposed novel Optimized Confidence-based Stacking Ensemble
(OCSE) method to generate the meta-learner for final intrusion de-
tection. Overall, the proposed AutoML-based IDS can automatically
process network data and generate optimized ML models capable
of detecting various types of cyber-attacks to safeguard current and
future networks.
This paper presents the following key contributions:
(1) It proposes a novel and comprehensive AutoML framework1.
that enables fully autonomous intrusion detection in next-
generation networks, holding the potential to achieve fully
autonomous cybersecurity.
(2) It proposes a novel automated data balancing method based
on TVAE and class distribution exploration.
(3) It proposes a novel ensemble learning method, OCSE, which
extends the traditional stacking ensemble method by incorpo-
rating confidence values of classes and the BO-TPE method
for model optimization.
(4) It assesses the proposed AutoML-based IDS model using two
public benchmark network security datasets, CICIDS2017 [26]
and 5G-NIDD [25] datasets, which contain state-of-the-art
cyber-attack scenarios.
(5) It compares the performance of the proposed AutoML-based
IDS model with state-of-the-art methods.
To the best of our knowledge, no previous research has proposed
such a comprehensive autonomous IDS model that leverages Au-
toML to automate all essential network data analytics procedures,
ensuring efficient and automatic detection of diverse cyber-attacks
for safeguarding 5G and next-generation networks.
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 introduces the re-
lated work using AI/ML and AutoML-based methods for developing
IDSs and cybersecurity mechanisms. Section 3 presents a detailed
description of the proposed AutoML-based IDS framework, including
AutoDP, AutoFE, automated base model selection, HPO, and auto-
mated model ensemble. Section 4 presents and discusses the experi-
mental results of evaluating the proposed framework on benchmark
network datasets. Finally, Section 5 summarizes the paper.
2
RELATED WORK
AI/ML models have been extensively applied in recent years to the
development of IDSs for modern networks. This related work sec-
tion aims to provide an overview of the critical studies that have
contributed to the development and advancement of IDSs using ML
and AutoML models for future networks.
2.1
AI/ML-based IDSs
Research on developing IDSs using AI/ML models has gained signifi-
cant attention and importance, as threat hunting and cyber-attack
detection are critical components of cybersecurity systems for mod-
ern networks.
Traditional AI/ML algorithms have demonstrated their effective-
ness in intrusion detection, especially tree-based algorithms such as
DT and RF. Sharafaldin et al. [26] created the benchmark network
security dataset, CICIDS2017, and observed that the DT and RF algo-
rithms outperformed the other compared ML models on this dataset.
Maseer et al. [19] proposed a ML-based benchmarking Anomaly-
based IDS (AIDS) approach that develops ten typical supervised and
unsupervised ML models and evaluates their performance on the
CICIDS2017 dataset. The experimental results illustrate that the DT
1Code for this paper is publicly available at: https://github.com/Western-OC2-Lab/
AutonomousCyber-AutoML-based-Autonomous-Intrusion-Detection-System
Towards Autonomous Cybersecurity: ...
AutonomousCyber ’24, October 14–18, 2024, Salt Lake City, UT, USA
Table 1: Comparison of Various IDS Approaches with Emphasis on ML and AutoML Components.
Paper
Benchmark
Dataset
Evaluation
Traditional ML
Models
DL Models
AutoDP
AutoFE
Model
Optimization
Automated
Model
Selection
Model
Ensemble
Sharafaldin et al. [26]
!
!
!
Maseer et al. [19]
!
!
!
Yang et al. [32]
!
!
!
!
Agrafiotis et al. [1]
!
!
Tayfour et al. [28]
!
!
He et al. [13]
!
!
!
!
Khan et al. [17]
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
Elmasry et al. [11]
!
!
!
!
!
Singh et al. [27]
!
!
!
!
!
Proposed AutoML
Framework
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
and K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) based AIDS models perform the best
on the CICIDS2017 dataset among the evaluated ML models. Yang et
al. [32] proposed a Multi-Tiered Hybrid IDS (MTH-IDS) framework
for intrusion detection in vehicular networks. It incorporates both
supervised learning algorithms (DT, RF, ET, and XGBoost) and un-
supervised learning methods (k-means) to detect multiple types of
cyber-attacks. They evaluated their framework on the CAN-intrusion
dataset and the CICIDS2017 dataset to emphasize the model’s effec-
tiveness.
The utilization of Deep Learning (DL) methods in the develop-
ment of IDSs has become prevalent due to their effectiveness in
handling high-dimensional network traffic data. Agrafiotis et al. [1]
proposed the embeddings and Fully-Connected network (Embed-
dings & FC) model to detect malware traffic in 5G networks. This
IDS model employs the Long Short-Term Memory Autoencoders
(LSTM-AE) to transform packets into embeddings and uses the Fully-
Connected (FC) network model to identify attacks. The Embeddings
& FC IDS demonstrates improved accuracy when applied to the 5G-
NIDD dataset, a dedicated dataset for 5G networks. Tayfour et al.
[28] proposed a DL-LSTM method supported by Software-Defined
Networking (SDN) to detect cyber-attacks in the Internet of Things
(IoT) and 5G networks. The DL-LSTM model achieved high accuracy
on the CICIDS2017 dataset, demonstrating the effectiveness of deep
learning in network intrusion detection. He et al. [13] proposed a
Pyramid Depthwise Separable Convolution neural network-based
IDS (PyDSC-IDS) for network intrusion detection. The PyDSC-IDS
model uses Pyramid convolution (PyConv) to extract features from
data and Depthwise Separable Convolution (DSC) to reduce model
complexity. Compared with other DL models, PyDSC-IDS achieves
higher detection accuracy with only a small increase in complexity
on the NSL-KDD, UNSW-NB15, and CICDIDS2017 datasets.
Due to the robustness of tree-based ML algorithms in handling
large-scale, high-dimensional, and non-linear network data, they
are utilized as base models in the proposed framework for intrusion
detection. While DL models offer powerful data analysis capabilities,
they often come with higher computational complexity compared to
traditional ML algorithms. To mitigate the impact of this challenge,
the proposed framework employs the TVAE method, a DL model,
only for synthesizing samples for minority classes. This approach
proves to be more efficient than using it for intrusion detection, as
processing minority class samples is significantly faster than dealing
with the entire large dataset. Furthermore, the development of tradi-
tional ML/DL models for intrusion detection poses several critical
challenges, such as manual effort, human bias & errors, and exper-
tise requirements. These challenges underscore the importance of
automating AI/ML models and developing autonomous IDSs.
2.2
AutoML-based IDSs
AutoML techniques are promising solutions to develop autonomous
IDSs by automating the tedious procedures in the data analytics/ML
pipeline. While AutoML is a relatively new research area in IDS
development, several recent works have already employed AutoML
techniques to create autonomous IDSs for modern networks. Yang et
al. [33] provided a comprehensive discussion on the general and spe-
cific procedures of applying AutoML techniques to IoT data analytics
and conducted a case study to employ AutoML for IoT intrusion
detection tasks. Khan et al. [17] proposed an Optimized Ensemble
IDS (OE-IDS) for intrusion detection in network environments. It
automates the hyperparameter tuning process of four supervised ML
algorithms and uses them to develop an ensemble model based on a
soft-voting method. The OE-IDS model achieved better accuracy and
F1-scores than most other compared traditional ML models on the
CICIDS2017 and UNSW-NB15 datasets. Elmasry et al. [11] proposed
a double PSO and DL-based IDS for network intrusion detection. It
involves the Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) method to select
features and tune hyperparameters of three DL methods: Deep Neu-
ral Networks (DNN), LSTM, and Deep Belief Networks (DBN). This
IDS model outperforms other compared methods in terms of accu-
racy and detection rate on the CICIDS2017 dataset. Singh et al. [27]
proposed AutoML-ID, an AutoML-based IDS designed for Wireless
Sensor Networks (WSNs). The AutoML-ID approach focuses on sim-
ple automated ML model selection and hyperparameter optimization
using Bayesian Optimization (BO). The model AutoML-ID was tested
on a public IDS dataset, Intrusion-Data-WSN, and achieved better
performance than traditional ML models.
The existing literature has demonstrated the advantages of AutoML-
based IDSs in improving performance and reducing human effort in
intrusion detection and cybersecurity applications. However, many
current AutoML-based IDS models only focus on automated model
AutonomousCyber ’24, October 14–18, 2024, Salt Lake City, UT, USA
Li Yang and Abdallah Shami
selection and hyperparameter optimization, leaving significant poten-
tial for improvement in other crucial stages of the AutoML pipeline.
In our proposed AutoML framework, we aim to propose and de-
velop techniques to automate every critical step in the data analyt-
ics pipeline, including the TVAE-based automated data balancing
method in the AutoDP process to handle class imbalance issues, the
tree-based averaging method in the AutoFE process to reduce noise
and data complexity, automated model selection and BO-based hy-
perparameter optimization on tree-based ML algorithms to acquire
optimized base models, and the proposed OCSE method for auto-
mated model ensemble to further enhance model performance. Table
1 summarizes and compares the contributions of existing literature
introduced in Section 2.
Overall, this paper presents a generic, comprehensive, and fully
automated AutoML framework for future networks with high au-
tomation requirements.
3
PROPOSED FRAMEWORK
3.1
System Overview
The objective of this study is to develop an autonomous IDS model
capable of detecting various cyber-attacks to safeguard 5G and po-
tential 6G networks. The overall framework of the proposed AutoML-
based IDS is demonstrated in Fig. 1, which comprises five stages:
AutoDP, AutoFE, automated base model learning and selection, HPO,
and automated model ensemble. During the initial stage, AutoDP,
the input network traffic data undergoes pre-processing, where the
proposed automated data balancing method identifies and addresses
class-imbalance issues through the TVAE model to improve data
quality. In the AutoFE stage, the most relevant features are automat-
ically selected based on their importance scores calculated by the
Gini index and entropy metrics using tree-based algorithms. This
AutoFE process reduces data complexity and improves the general-
ization ability of the IDS model by minimizing noisy and redundant
features. Subsequently, during the automated base model learning
and selection stage, six tree-based ML algorithms (i.e., DT, RF, ET,
XGBoost, LightGBM, and CatBoost) are trained and evaluated on
the training set, and the top three best-performing models are au-
tomatically selected as the base models for further processing. In
the HPO stage, the three selected ML models are further optimized
through automated hyperparameter tuning or HPO using the BO-
TPE method. In the automated model ensemble stage, the confidence
values of all classes generated from the three optimized base models
are integrated using the proposed OCSE model to obtain the final
ensemble IDS model for final intrusion detection.
Overall, this comprehensive AutoML-based framework enables
the integration of advanced AutoML techniques across multiple
stages, collectively enhancing the detection capabilities and robust-
ness of the proposed autonomous IDS model against various cyber
threats for safeguarding next-generation networks.
3.2
Automated Data Pre-Processing (AutoDP)
Data pre-processing is an essential stage in the ML and data ana-
lytics pipeline, since it directly influences the quality of input data
and, consequently, the performance of ML models [6]. However,
data pre-processing procedures can be tedious and time-consuming,
Figure 1: The proposed AutoML-based IDS framework.
often requiring massive human effort and expert knowledge. To ad-
dress these challenges, Automated Data Pre-processing (AutoDP)
has emerged as a critical component of AutoML that aims to auto-
matically identify and address data quality issues in datasets, thereby
ensuring that ML models can learn meaningful patterns from high-
quality data [33].
Towards Autonomous Cybersecurity: ...
AutonomousCyber ’24, October 14–18, 2024, Salt Lake City, UT, USA
In the proposed AutoML framework, the AutoDP component
focuses on automated data balancing, a crucial aspect of data pre-
processing that addresses class imbalance issues. Class imbalance is
a common data quality issue in network data analytics and intrusion
detection problems, as cyber-attacks or anomalies usually occur
less frequently compared to benign or normal events, leading to a
significant imbalance in class distribution. Class imbalance issues
often bias ML models in IDS development, leading them to prioritize
the detection of normal sample and common attacks and neglecting
the less common but critical threats [33].
Data balancing techniques are designed to address class imbalance
issues and can be classified into under-sampling and over-sampling
techniques. Under-sampling methods alter the class distribution
by eliminating instances from the majority classes to balance data,
which can result in the loss of critical patterns of normal network
activities [15]. On the other hand, over-sampling methods balance
data by creating synthetic samples for the minority classes, which
may slightly increase model training time but often outperform
under-sampling methods. Therefore, over-sampling methods are
considered in this research.
Over-sampling methods can be broadly categorized into random
and informed over-sampling methods [33]. Random over-sampling
randomly replicates samples from the minority classes, while in-
formed methods aim to generate higher-quality samples to improve
the data balancing performance. In the proposed framework, the
Tabular Variational Auto-Encoder (TVAE) [31] method is used as
an informed over-sampling method to synthesize minority class
samples to balance tabular network data. TVAE is a DL model that
extends the capabilities of the traditional autoencoder by incorporat-
ing probabilistic modeling and adapting to tabular data [31]. TVAEs
incorporate an encoder to project the input data x as a probability
distribution in the latent space z, denoted as 𝑞(z|x), and a decoder to
reconstruct the data generation process as a probability distribution
𝑝(x|z). The objective function of TVAE is to maximize the Evidence
Lower BOund (ELBO) on the log-likelihood of data, denoted by [5]:
𝐸𝐿𝐵𝑂= E[log𝑝(x|z)] −𝐷𝐾𝐿(𝑞(z|x)||𝑝(z))
(1)
where 𝐷𝐾𝐿is the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, a measure of the
difference between two probability distributions, and E denotes the
expectation.
To automate the data balancing procedure, the proposed AutoDP
method consists of two procedures: automated class-imbalance detec-
tion and automated data synthesis. In the automated class-imbalance
detection procedure, the system calculates three metrics in the train-
ing set: the number of classes, the number of samples in each class,
and the average number of samples per class. Based on these three
metrics, the system will identify minority classes that have fewer
than a certain threshold, defined as half of the average number of
samples per class in the training set, in the proposed framework. If
there are minority classes indicating class imbalance, the system will
automatically perform automated data synthesis by synthesizing
minority class samples using the TVAE method until the number
of samples in each minority class reaches the threshold (half of the
average number of samples). The details of the proposed TVAE-based
automated data balancing method are provided in Algorithm 1. Fi-
nally, a balanced training dataset is automatically obtained using the
proposed AutoDP method, which involves generating high-quality
Algorithm 1: Automated Data Balancing Using Tabular Variational
Auto-Encoder (TVAE)
Input: 𝐷𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛: the original training set of the dataset
Output: 𝐷𝑏𝑎𝑙
𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛: the balanced training set
1 𝑎𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒_𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑠= AverageNumberOfSamplesPerClass(𝐷𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛)
// Calculate the average number of samples per class
2 𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦_𝑐𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑠= IdentifyMinorityClasses(𝐷𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛,
𝑎𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒_𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑠)
// Identify classes with less than half the
average samples
3 𝑠𝑦𝑛𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑐_𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎= []
// Initialize an empty list to store synthetic
data
4 for each class 𝑐𝑙𝑠in 𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦_𝑐𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑠do
5
𝑐𝑙𝑠_𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑠= ExtractClassInstances(𝐷𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛, 𝑐𝑙𝑠)
// Extract instances of the minority class
6
𝑛𝑢𝑚_𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑠= 𝑎𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒_𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑠- Count(𝑐𝑙𝑠_𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑠)
// Calculate the deficit in samples for the class
7
𝑇𝑉𝐴𝐸_𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙= TrainTVAE(𝑐𝑙𝑠_𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑠)
// Train the
TVAE model on the minority class samples
8
𝑛𝑒𝑤_𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑠= GenerateSyntheticInstances(𝑇𝑉𝐴𝐸_𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙,
𝑛𝑢𝑚_𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑠)
// Generate synthetic instances to match the
average class sample size
9
𝑠𝑦𝑛𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑐_𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎.append(𝑛𝑒𝑤_𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑠)
// Append the
new synthetic instances to the synthetic data list
10 end
11 𝐷𝑏𝑎𝑙
𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛= Concatenate(𝐷𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛, 𝑠𝑦𝑛𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑐_𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎)
// Concatenate
the original and synthetic data to form a balanced dataset
12 return 𝐷𝑏𝑎𝑙
𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛
minority class samples that better represent patterns of less common
attacks, thereby assisting in effective IDS model development.
3.3
Automated Feature Engineering (AutoFE)
After the AutoDP stage, Automated Feature Engineering (AutoFE)
is another crucial component of the proposed AutoML framework.
Feature Engineering (FE) involves extracting and selecting the most
informative and relevant features from a dataset, as the original
features are often suboptimal for specific datasets [14]. This process
enhances the performance of ML models. AutoFE aims to automate
the traditional FE process, minimizing human effort on FE tasks. In
the proposed framework, AutoFE focuses on the Feature Selection
(FS) process, aiming to identify and select the most relevant features
to construct a highly efficient and accurate ML model. The proposed
Automated FS (AutoFS) method is designed based on the feature
importance scores generated by the tree-based algorithms used in
the automated model learning process.
To construct a DT in tree-based algorithms, features that result in
significant reductions in Gini impurity or entropy will be assigned
higher importance scores, as they have an important impact on the
node-splitting process. Gini impurity and entropy are two common
evaluation metrics to measure the impurity of nodes in DTs for
classification problems to which intrusion detection problems belong
[35]. The Gini index quantifies the impurity of a node by evaluating
the probability of misclassifying a randomly selected element within
that node. The Gini index is calculated as follows for a multi-class
AutonomousCyber ’24, October 14–18, 2024, Salt Lake City, UT, USA
Li Yang and Abdallah Shami
problem with 𝐾classes [35]:
Gini (𝑝1, 𝑝2, . . . , 𝑝𝐾) = 1 −
𝐾
∑︁
𝑖=1
𝑝2
𝑖
(2)
where 𝑝1, 𝑝2, . . ., 𝑝𝑘indicate the proportions of classes 1, 2, . . .,𝑘.
Entropy is another impurity measure that calculates how much
information is required to identify the class of a randomly selected
element within a node [35]. The entropy for a multi-class problem
with 𝐾classes can be denoted by:
Entropy (𝑝1, 𝑝2, . . . , 𝑝𝐾) = −
𝐾
∑︁
𝑖=1
𝑝𝑖log2 (𝑝𝑖)
(3)
In the proposed AutoFE framework, the FS process is automated by
leveraging the power of tree-based models, as they can automatically
calculate the feature importance scores during their training process.
The specific procedures of this AutoFS process are as follows:
(1) Train the six tree-based ML models (DT, RF, ET, XGBoost,
LightGBM, and CatBoost) on the training set and evaluate
their performance.
(2) Obtain the feature importance scores generated from the top
three best-performing models.
(3) Calculate the average relative importance score for each fea-
ture across the top three best-performing models.
(4) Rank the features from highest to lowest based on these aver-
age importance scores.
(5) Select features from the top of this ranked list, accumulating
their importance scores until the sum reaches a predefined
threshold, 𝛼(default value is 0.9).
(6) Generate the updated training and test sets using the newly
generated feature set that comprises the selected features.
By implementing the proposed AutoFE process, the most relevant
features are selected based on their cumulative relative importance
scores, ensuring a total of 90%. Simultaneously, features with a cumu-
lative importance score below 10% are discarded, effectively reducing
noise and computational complexity. The cumulative feature impor-
tance threshold, 𝛼, can be tuned using the optimization method
presented in Section 3.5 to customize it for specific tasks or problems.
The proposed AutoFE process helps to simplify the model, reduce the
risk of overfitting, improve computational efficiency, and increase
model interpretability.
3.4
Automated Base Model Learning and
Selection
After the AutoDP and AutoFE procedures, the improved network
traffic datasets are learners by supervised ML algorithms to train
ML-based IDS that can detect various types of cyber-attacks. Six
tree-based ML models, i.e., DT, RF, ET, XGBoost, LightGBM, and
CatBoost, are built as base models to perform the initial intrusion
detection.
DT [32] is a fundamental ML algorithm that makes predictions
by learning decision rules inferred from the input features. The
decision rules are formed in a tree structure, where each internal node
represents a test on a feature, each branch denotes a test outcome,
and each leaf node contains a class label [32]. The DT algorithm
recursively partitions data by selecting the best splitting rule, creating
child nodes based on the chosen criterion, and repeating this process
until a stopping condition is met.
RF [29] is an ensemble learning model constructed on multiple DT
models. RF works by generating a set of DTs from randomly selected
subsets of the training set and then aggregates the votes from the
base DTs to decide the final result based on the majority voting rule.
ET [12] is another tree-based ensemble method constructed by
combining multiple DTs. However, it randomizes both features and
cut-point choices to construct completely randomized trees. As the
splitting points in ETs are chosen randomly, the constructed trees in
ETs are more diverse and less prone to over-fitting than in RF.
XGBoost [7] is an ensemble model built on the speed and per-
formance of the Gradient-Boosted Decision Trees (GBDT) model.
XGBoost distinguishes itself from traditional gradient boosting meth-
ods by incorporating a regularization term into the objective function,
which effectively controls the model’s complexity, smooths the fi-
nal weights, and mitigates overfitting [33]. Additionally, XGBoost
uses a second-order Taylor expansion to estimate the loss function,
enabling an accurate model update and fast convergence.
LightGBM [16] is another improved version of the GBDT model
with enhanced model performance and efficiency. Similar to other
tree-based algorithms, LightGBM is constructed on an ensemble of
DTs, but it introduces two advanced techniques, Gradient-based One-
Side Sampling (GOSS) and Exclusive Feature Bundling (EFB) [33].
GOSS is a down-sampling approach that keeps instances with large
gradients and randomly samples instances with small gradients to
save model training time and memory. EFB groups mutually exclu-
sive features into bundles as single features, reducing feature space
dimensionality and improving training efficiency. By utilizing GOSS
and EFB, LightGBM significantly reduces data size without losing
critical information, preserving accuracy in the learning process and
reducing computational cost.
CatBoost [24] is another GBDT-based algorithm that is particu-
larly effective for datasets with categorical features. CatBoost distin-
guishes itself from traditional GBDT algorithms through three major
innovations: symmetric trees, ordered boosting, and native feature
support. Symmetric trees ensure that all the DTs in the model are
symmetric, which simplifies the model and reduces the risk of over-
fitting. Ordered boosting is a novel boosting scheme that prevents
overfitting on small-sized datasets. Native feature support allows
CatBoost to handle categorical features for model performance en-
hancement natively.
The primary reasons for choosing these six tree-based algorithms
as candidate base models are as follows:
(1) RF, ET, XGBoost, LightGBM, and CatBoost are all ensemble
models that combine multiple base DTs to improve model
performance and robustness, and DT can serve as the baseline
model for comparison.
(2) These methods are proficient at handling non-linear and high-
dimensional data to which 5G network data belongs.
(3) They support parallel computation, which can significantly
improve the training efficiency on large network datasets.
(4) These tree-based ML algorithms offer the advantage of au-
tomatically calculating feature importance in their training
process, which assists in efficient feature selection process in
the proposed AutoFE method.
Towards Autonomous Cybersecurity: ...
AutonomousCyber ’24, October 14–18, 2024, Salt Lake City, UT, USA
(5) These tree-based models incorporate randomness during their
tree construction process, which enables the proposed frame-
work to build a robust ensemble model with diverse base
models and increased generalizability.
After training and evaluating the performance of these six tree-
based models on the training set, the three best-performing models
based on their cross-validated F1-scores are automatically selected
as the three base models to construct the ensemble model discussed
in Section 3.6.
3.5
Hyper-Parameter Optimization (HPO)
Tuning hyper-parameters is a crucial step in deploying an effective
ML model to a particular problem or dataset. Hyper-parameters of a
ML model determine its architecture and have a direct effect on the
performance of this ML model. The process of using optimization
methods to automatically tune and optimize these hyper-parameters
is known as Hyper-Parameter Optimization (HPO). In HPO or Au-
toML tasks, Given the hyperparameter search space 𝑋, the goal is
to find the optimal hyper-parameter value or configuration 𝑥∗that
minimizes the objective function 𝑓(𝑥) [30]:
𝑥∗= arg min
𝒙∈𝑋𝑓(𝒙)
(4)
In the proposed AutoML framework, the important hyperparame-
ters of the six tree-based algorithms are optimized during the HPO
process. Utilizing terminology from the Scikit-Learn library, key
hyperparameters for the Decision Tree (DT) include ‘max_depth’,
which sets the maximum tree depth; ‘min_samples_split’, specify-
ing the minimum number of samples required to split a node; and
‘min_samples_leaf ’, defining the minimum number of samples re-
quired at a leaf node. The ‘criterion’ hyperparameter allows selection
between Gini impurity and entropy to measure splitting quality.
As RF and ET are ensemble models built using DTs, they inherit
these four critical hyperparameters from DT. Additionally, RF and
ET include the ‘n_estimators’ hyperparameter, which determines the
number of trees in the ensemble and significantly influences model
performance and efficiency.
The number of base trees and maximum tree depth are two crucial
hyperparameters shared by XGBoost, LightGBM, and CatBoost. Ad-
ditionally, since these three algorithms are gradient-boosting models,
the learning rate is another critical hyperparameter that significantly
impacts their learning speed and overall performance.
Among the various optimization methods for HPO tasks, Bayesian
Optimization (BO) methods have proven to be efficient [10]. BO
leverages a posterior distribution, known as the surrogate, to describe
the function under optimization. As more observations are made,
the posterior distribution improves, which increases the certainty
about promising regions in the parameter space worth exploring
and the unpromising regions. Therefore, BO methods can determine
future hyper-parameter evaluations based on the results of previous
evaluations to avoid unnecessary model assessments [32].
The Tree Parzen Estimator (TPE) is a common surrogate for BO to
model the evaluated configurations [10]. BO with TPE, or BO-TPE,
can handle a tree-structured hyper-parameter search space using
Parzen estimators, also known as kernel density estimators (KDEs)
[30]. In BO-TPE, the hyper-parameter configuration space D is split
into the better group 𝐷(𝑙) and the worse group 𝐷(𝑔) based on a top
quantile 𝑦∗. The KDEs are estimated using a kernel function with
a bandwidth that changes based on a provided dataset. The density
functions of the configurations, modeled by TPE, can be denoted by
[30]:
𝑝(𝒙| 𝑦, 𝐷) =


𝑝

𝒙| 𝑦, 𝐷(𝑙)
,
if 𝑦≤𝑦∗,
𝑝

𝒙| 𝑦, 𝐷(𝑔)
,
if 𝑦> 𝑦∗,
(5)
The ratio between the two probability density functions is utilized
to determine the new configurations for evaluation, facilitating the
gradual identification of optimal configurations. BO-TPE is selected
as the HPO method to tune and optimize the hyperparameters of
the ML models in the proposed framework for the following reasons
[32] [33]:
(1) BO-TPE is effective for handling high-dimensional variables
with multiple types, rendering it suitable for the tree-based ML
methods utilized in the proposed framework, which involve
numerous hyperparameters.
(2) BO-TPE can handle tree-structured search spaces, enabling
flexible and complex hyperparameter optimization, making
it well-suited for the tree-based ML models employed in the
proposed framework.
(3) Unlike other HPO methods, like grid search, which treats
each hyperparameter configuration independently and causes
many unnecessary evaluations, BO-TPE enables more efficient
HPO by exploring promising regions and determining new
hyperparameter configurations based on previous evaluation
results.
(4) BO-TPE has low time complexity of 𝑂(𝑛log𝑛), where 𝑛is
the number of hyperparameter configurations, which is much
lower than other HPO methods, such as grid search, with time
complexity of 𝑂(𝑛𝑘) [33].
By automatically tuning the hyperparameters of the three best-
performing base ML models using BO-TPE, three optimized ML
models with improved intrusion detection effectiveness are obtained
for further analysis.
3.6
Automated Model Ensemble
After selecting the top three best-performing tree-based models and
optimizing their hyperparameters using BO-TPE, the three opti-
mized models are utilized as base models to construct an ensemble
model for further performance enhancement. Ensemble learning is
an advanced technology that combines the prediction outcomes of
multiple individual ML models to make final predictions [34]. Ensem-
ble learning aims to improve model performance and generalizability
by leveraging the collective knowledge of multiple models.
In the last stage of the proposed AutoML framework, a novel
Optimized Confidence-based Stacking Ensemble (OCSE) method is
proposed to construct the final ensemble model by extending the
traditional stacking ensemble strategy. Stacking is a widely-used
ensemble learning method that comprises two layers of models. The
first layer of stacking contains multiple trained base learners, and
their output labels serve as the input for training a robust meta-
learner in the second layer [20].
Compared with the traditional stacking method, the proposed
OCSE method introduces two additional strategies: confidence inputs
and optimization. Firstly, the three optimized base ML models provide
AutonomousCyber ’24, October 14–18, 2024, Salt Lake City, UT, USA
Li Yang and Abdallah Shami
a probability distribution over the target classes for each sample,
which indicates the confidence of the models’ prediction for this
sample. The confidence values output by the base models are used as
input to the meta-learner in the second layer of the proposed OCSE
model.
Secondly, the best-performing base model from the six tree-based
models, based on the cross-validated F1-scores, is selected to con-
struct the meta-learner. Its hyperparameters are optimized by BO-
TPE to obtain the optimized meta-learner, following the same HPO
process used for the base models, as described in Section 3.5. The
specifications of the proposed OCSE method and the entire AutoML
framework are illustrated in Algorithm 2.
The computational complexity of the proposed OCSE model is
𝑂(𝑛𝑐𝑚ℎ), where 𝑛is the number of samples, 𝑐is the number of
unique classes,𝑚is the number of base models, andℎis the number of
hyperparameter configurations of the meta-learner. In the proposed
framework, 𝑐, 𝑚, and ℎare all relatively small numbers.
Compared with other ensemble techniques, the proposed OCSE
method presents the following advantages:
(1) Utilization of Confidence: Unlike many existing ensemble tech-
niques, such as bagging, boosting, and traditional stacking,
which solely rely on the predicted labels to construct the
ensemble model, the proposed OCSE method utilizes the
confidence of all classes as input features, which provides
more comprehensive information about the certainty of base
model’s predictions, resulting in more informed and robust
ensemble predictions.
(2) Automated and Optimized Models: The proposed OCSE method
automatically selects the best-performing base model as the
second-layer meta-learner and tunes its hyperparameters, re-
sulting in an optimized final learner capable of achieving the
optimal overall performance. The automation process also
reduces the need for manual effort and saves time in model
development.
(3) Flexibility: OCSE is a flexible method in which both the base
models and the meta-learner can be replaced with other ML
algorithms to adapt to a wide range of tasks.
Overall, with the use of the novel OCSE method and all the other
critical components described in this section, the proposed AutoML-
based IDS framework can automatically generate an optimized en-
semble model for effective and robust intrusion detection, serving as
a key component for autonomous cybersecurity solutions.
4
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
4.1
Experimental Setup
The proposed AutoML-based IDS framework was developed in Python
by extending the Scikit-Learn [22], Xgboost [7], Lightgbm [16], Cat-
boost [24], Synthetic Data Vault (SDV) [21], and Hyperopt [3] li-
braries. The experiments were performed on a Dell Precision 3630
computer equipped with an i7-8700 processor and 16 GB of memory,
which served as the server machine in 5G and potential 6G networks.
To evaluate the proposed AutoML-based IDS framework, two
public benchmark network traffic datasets, namely CICIDS2017 [26]
and 5G-NIDD [25], are utilized in the experiments. The CICIDS2017
dataset is one of the most comprehensive public cybersecurity datasets,
Algorithm 2: The Proposed AutoML-based IDS Framework Involv-
ing The OCSE Algorithm
Input: 𝐷𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛, 𝐷𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡
Output: 𝐿𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑: Predicted labels for normal and attack samples
1 Stage 1: Automated Data Preprocessing (AutoDP)
2
𝐷𝑏𝑎𝑙
𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛= BalanceData(𝐷𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛) using Algorithm 1
// Address class imbalance using Algorithm 1 and TVAE
3 Stage 2: Automated Feature Engineering and Base Model
Selection (AutoFE)
4
Train and evaluate 𝐵𝑀𝑖(DT, RF, ET, XGBoost, LightGBM,
CatBoost) on 𝐷𝑏𝑎𝑙
𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛
// Train and evaluate base
models using cross-validation
5
𝑚𝑖= Metrics(𝐵𝑀𝑖) for each model 𝑖∈{1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}
// Compute performance metrics for model evaluation
6
𝑀1, 𝑀2, 𝑀3 = SelectTopModels(𝑚𝑖, 3)
// Select the
three best-performing models based on metrics
7
𝐹1, 𝐹2, 𝐹3 = FeatureImportances(𝑀1, 𝑀2, 𝑀3)
// Calculate feature importance for selected models
8
𝐹𝑎𝑣𝑔= 𝐹1+𝐹2+𝐹3
3
// Average the feature importance
scores to improve generalization
9
𝐹𝑠= SelectFeatures(𝐹𝑎𝑣𝑔, 𝛼= 90%)
// Select most
important features that cumulatively meet importance threshold 𝛼
10
𝑀′
1, 𝑀′
2, 𝑀′
3 = RetrainModels(𝑀1, 𝑀2, 𝑀3, 𝐹𝑠)
// Retrain
models using selected features
11 Stage 3: Hyperparameter Optimization (HPO) using BO-TPE
12
𝑀1 = (𝐻1,𝑆1), 𝑀2 = (𝐻2,𝑆2), 𝑀3 = (𝐻3,𝑆3)
// Configure
search spaces for the hyperparameters of three selected base models
13
ℎ∗
1, ℎ∗
2, ℎ∗
3 = OptimizeHP(𝑆1, 𝑆2, 𝑆3) using BO-TPE
//
Optimize hyperparameters using Bayesian Optimization
14
𝑀′′
1 , 𝑀′′
2 , 𝑀′′
3 = GenerateOptimizedModels(ℎ∗
1, ℎ∗
2, ℎ∗
3)
//
Generate models with optimized hyperparameters
15 Stage 4: Model Ensemble using Optimized Confidence-based
Stacking Ensemble (OCSE)
16
𝑃1, 𝑃2, 𝑃3 = ConfidenceValues(𝑀′′
1 , 𝑀′′
2 , 𝑀′′
3 , 𝐷𝑏𝑎𝑙
𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛, 𝐹𝑠)
// Retrieve confidence values from optimized models
17
𝑀= TrainMetaLearner(𝑃1, 𝑃2, 𝑃3, 𝑀1)
// Use the
best-performing ML model to train a meta-learner on model
confidence values
18
𝑀′ = OptimizeMetaLearner(𝑀, BO-TPE)
// Optimize the
meta-learner using BO-TPE
19
𝑃′
1, 𝑃′
2, 𝑃′
3 = TestConfidences(𝑀′′
1 , 𝑀′′
2 , 𝑀′′
3 , 𝐷𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡)
// Retrieve
confidence values for test data
20
𝐿𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑= FinalPredictions(𝑀′, 𝑃′
1, 𝑃′
2, 𝑃′
3)
// Predict final
labels using the optimized meta-learner based on confidence values
21 return 𝐿𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑
created by simulating a real-world network environment and in-
volves six primary types of attacks: DoS, botnets, brute force, infil-
tration, port scan, and web attacks [32]. The diverse attack scenarios
and comprehensive feature set of the CICIDS2017 dataset make it
suitable for network security applications. The 5G-NIDD dataset is
one of the most state-of-the-art network security datasets developed
in December 2022 [25]. This dataset was generated by capturing
network traffic within a 5G testbed under diverse DoS and port
scan cyber-attacks. The 5G-NIDD dataset is particularly suitable for
our research, as it specifically targets 5G networks and enables the
detection of new and sophisticated cyber-attacks.
To develop and evaluate the proposed AutoML-based IDS model,
both cross-validation and hold-out validation methods are used in the
Towards Autonomous Cybersecurity: ...
AutonomousCyber ’24, October 14–18, 2024, Salt Lake City, UT, USA
experiments. The model training and optimization process utilizes
five-fold cross-validation to automatically generate the optimized
ensemble model, while the final model produced by the proposed
AutoML framework is evaluated using an unseen test set, which is
split from an 80%/20% hold-out validation during the initial stage of
data pre-processing.
Due to the inherent class imbalance issues in network intrusion
detection datasets, four model performance metrics—accuracy, preci-
sion, recall, and F1-scores—are considered collectively in the experi-
ments. The F1-score is utilized as the primary performance metric
in the performance-based automated model selection and tuning
process of the proposed AutoML framework, as it offers a balanced
view of anomaly detection results by calculating the harmonic mean
of recall and precision. Additionally, the model execution time, in-
volving the training and inference time of the final OCSE model, is
utilized to assess the model’s efficiency.
4.2
Experimental Results and Discussion
As described in Section 3, the proposed AutoML-based IDS comprises
five critical stages: AutoDP, AutoFE, automated base model learning
and selection, HPO, and automated model ensemble. Initially, the
proposed TVAE-based automated data balancing method applied in
the AutoDP stage automatically balances the distributions of two
datasets, CICIDS2017 and 5G-NIDD, to prevent model bias. During
the AutoFE stage, important features are selected based on the av-
erage importance scores obtained from the three best-performing
ML models, where the accumulative importance score reaches the
threshold 𝛼= 90%. These selected features, along with their relative
importance scores for the CICIDS2017 and the 5G-NIDD datasets, are
illustrated in Figs. 2 and 3, respectively. Subsequently, the three top-
performing ML models—RF, XGBoost, and LightGBM—are optimized
by tuning their hyperparameters using BO-TPE. The hyperparam-
eters tuned, their search spaces, and the optimal values obtained
for these hyperparameters for both datasets are detailed in Table 2.
Finally, the three optimized base ML models are integrated using the
proposed OCSE model to automate the model ensemble, improving
the decision-making effectiveness in intrusion detection.
The performance of the proposed AutoML-OCSE model and sev-
eral state-of-the-art methods in the literature is provided in Table
3 for the CICIDS2017 dataset and Table 4 for the 5G-NIDD dataset.
The performance is evaluated based on the metrics: accuracy, preci-
sion, recall, F1-score, training time, and average test time per sample.
Firstly, as shown in Table 3, results on the CICIDS2017 dataset indi-
cate that RF, XGBoost, and LightGBM perform better than the other
three base models, DT, ET, and CatBoost. Hence, these three ML
models are selected as the base models of the proposed AutoML-
OCSE framework. After optimizing the hyperparameters of the three
selected base models (as detailed in Table 2) and integrating their out-
puts using the proposed OCSE ensemble method, the final AutoML-
OCSE model outperforms all the compared methods in the literature
[32] [26] [19] [28] - [11]. The proposed method achieves the highest
metrics on the CICIDS2017 dataset, with accuracy, precision, recall,
and F1-score of 99.806%, 99.806%, 99.806%, and 99.804%, respectively.
Furthermore, the average test time per sample of the proposed
AutoML-OCSE method is the fastest among the compared methods
[32] [26] [19] [28] - [11], highlighting its efficiency on network traffic
Figure 2: The average importance scores of the selected fea-
tures in the CICIDS2017 dataset (cumulative relative impor-
tance reaching 90%).
Figure 3: The average importance scores of the selected fea-
tures in the 5G-NIDD dataset (cumulative relative importance
reaching 90%).
datasets. Compared with state-of-the-art methods on the CICIDS2017
dataset, AutoML-OCSE demonstrates notable improvements in both
accuracy and inference efficiency. These enhancements are attributed
primarily to the AutoDP, AutoFE, HPO, and automated model ensem-
ble procedures, which collectively enhance data quality, optimize
machine learning models, and reduce feature and model complexity.
Similarly, as indicated in Table 4, the proposed AutoML-OCSE
method outperforms all other compared methods [32] [29] - [24]
[26] [1] on the 5G-NIDD dataset, achieving the highest accuracy,
precision, recall, and F1 score, all at 99.956%. In terms of average
test time per sample, the AutoML-OCSE method matches the fastest
time set by the DT method, demonstrating an exceptional balance
between performance and efficiency.
Regarding the intrusion detection performance of the proposed
AutoML-OCSE on the CICIDS2017 and 5G-NIDD datasets, while
AutonomousCyber ’24, October 14–18, 2024, Salt Lake City, UT, USA
Li Yang and Abdallah Shami
Table 2: The HPO configuration of the three best-performing
models.
Model
Hyperparameter
Name
Configuration
Space
Optimal
Value on
CICIDS2017
Optimal
Value on
5G-NIDD
RF
n_estimators
[50,500]
420
370
max_depth
[5,50]
36
42
min_samples_split
[2,11]
7
4
min_samples_leaf
[1,11]
2
5
criterion
[’gini’,
’entropy’]
’entropy’
’gini’
XGBoost
n_estimators
[50,500]
450
310
max_depth
[5,50]
36
27
learning_rate
(0, 1)
0.78
0.67
gamma
(0, 5)
0.4
0.3
subsample
(0.5, 1)
0.7
0.75
LightGBM
n_estimators
[50,500]
380
340
max_depth
[5,50]
42
34
learning_rate
(0, 1)
0.918
0.784
num_leaves
[100,2000]
900
1100
min_child_samples
[10,50]
42
28
Table 3: Model Performance Comparison on CICIDS2017.
Method
Accuracy
(%)
Precision
(%)
Recall
(%)
F1 (%)
Training
Time (s)
Avg Test
Time Per
Sample (ms)
KNN [26]
96.3
96.2
93.7
96.3
0.007
0.678
DT [32]
99.612
99.612
99.612
99.608
0.6
0.0008
RF [29]
99.718
99.718
99.718
99.714
38.5
0.014
ET [12]
99.245
99.252
99.245
99.243
3.5
0.012
XGBoost [7]
99.757
99.757
99.757
99.755
11.0
0.001
LightGBM
[16]
99.770
99.770
99.770
99.769
2.0
0.004
CatBoost [24]
99.559
99.559
99.559
99.553
4.6
0.008
KNN-AIDS
[19]
99.52
99.49
99.52
99.49
-
-
DL-LSTM [28]
99.32
99.32
99.32
99.32
-
-
PyDSC-IDS
[13]
97.60
90.73
97.81
94.13
-
-
OE-IDS [17]
98.0
97.3
96.0
96.7
-
-
PSO-DL [11]
98.95
95.82
95.81
95.81
-
-
Proposed
AutoML-
OCSE
99.806
99.806
99.806
99.804
35.6
0.0007
Table 4: Model Performance Comparison on 5G-NIDD.
Method
Accuracy
(%)
Precision
(%)
Recall
(%)
F1 (%)
Training
Time (s)
Avg Test
Time Per
Sample (ms)
KNN [26]
99.007
99.008
99.007
99.007
0.006
0.704
DT [32]
99.926
99.926
99.926
99.926
0.25
0.0006
RF [29]
99.942
99.942
99.942
99.942
3.2
0.009
ET [12]
99.926
99.926
99.926
99.926
2.3
0.010
XGBoost [7]
99.942
99.942
99.942
99.942
7.1
0.0009
LightGBM
[16]
99.942
99.942
99.942
99.942
1.9
0.008
CatBoost [24]
99.918
99.918
99.918
99.918
29.7
0.009
Embeddings &
FC [1]
99.123
99.019
98.316
98.666
-
-
Proposed
AutoML-
OCSE
99.956
99.956
99.956
99.956
24.3
0.0006
its accuracy and F1-score are only slightly higher than those of the
best-performing base ML models, this is primarily attributed to the
simplicity of these datasets, where many base ML models can achieve
over 99% accuracy and F1-score. In real-world scenarios, where the
complexity and variability of network traffic datasets are usually
higher than those of public benchmarks, the proposed AutoML-based
IDS is expected to demonstrate more significant improvements. This
enhancement is due to every component of the proposed frame-
work, including AutoDP, AutoFE, automated model selection, HPO,
and automated model ensemble, each contributing to the overall en-
hancement of intrusion detection performance. Additionally, consid-
ering the error rate reduction, the proposed AutoML-OCSE method
achieves significant decreases of approximately 15.65% and 24.13%
in the error rates on the CICIDS2017 and 5G-NIDD datasets, respec-
tively, calculated as 99.806%−99.770%
100%−99.770% and 99.956%−99.942%
100%−99.942% . Furthermore,
without the proposed automated model selection method, researchers
might resort to selecting ML models either randomly or based on
personal experience, which may not always lead to choosing the
best-performing base ML model. This limitation further highlights
the significant potential for improvement offered by the proposed
AutoML method, which can automatically select, optimize, and inte-
grate the best-performing ML models. Consequently, the proposed
AutoML-based IDS can achieve substantial improvements over tradi-
tional cybersecurity methods through its autonomous cybersecurity
strategies.
On the other hand, although the AutoML-OCSE model takes
longer to train than certain base models, such as DT, ET, and Light-
GBM, its training time is still shorter than that of some other models,
like CatBoost. This efficiency is due in part to its AutoFE process,
which reduces data dimensionality and model complexity. Moreover,
the improvement in accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score justifies
the slightly increased training time. Furthermore, the AutoML-OCSE
model achieves the fastest average inference time per sample by
constructing a stacking ensemble model based on confidence val-
ues rather than the original high-dimensional dataset, making it
highly suitable for real-time network data analytics and intrusion
detection applications. In network applications, low inference time
is often more crucial than low training time, as model training typi-
cally occurs on cloud servers with ample computational resources,
while model predictions are performed on edge or local devices with
limited computational capabilities in many scenarios.
Overall, the performance results demonstrate the effectiveness
and efficiency of the proposed AutoML-OCSE method. It integrates
the strengths of various base ML models, automates tedious ML
tasks through AutoML, and achieves high detection performance via
an optimized ensemble strategy. Therefore, the proposed AutoML-
OCSE method and the AutoML framework can serve as powerful
autonomous cybersecurity solutions for intrusion detection in 5G
and potential 6G networks.
5
CONCLUSION
The advent of 5G and the impending transition to 6G networks have
underscored the importance of ZTNs in achieving network automa-
tion. However, the increased connectivity and complexity of these
networks have also escalated cybersecurity risks, making the devel-
opment of effective and autonomous cybersecurity mechanisms a
Towards Autonomous Cybersecurity: ...
AutonomousCyber ’24, October 14–18, 2024, Salt Lake City, UT, USA
critical necessity. In this paper, we propose an AutoML-based Intru-
sion Detection System (IDS) to achieve autonomous cybersecurity for
future networks. By introducing AutoDP, AutoFE, automated base
model learning and selection, HPO, and automated model ensem-
ble components, the proposed AutoML-based IDS can automatically
generate an optimized ensemble model for accurate intrusion de-
tection. This paper also proposed a novel TVAE-based automated
data balancing method and a novel OCSE model to improve the Au-
toML procedures. Through the experiments, the proposed AutoML-
based IDS achieves high F1-scores of 99.804% and 99.956% on two
public benchmark network security datasets: the CICIDS2017 and
5G-NIDD datasets. This illustrates the effectiveness of the proposed
autonomous IDS framework in achieving autonomous cybersecurity.
In future work, the IDS framework will be extended to involve auto-
mated model updating using continual learning and drift adaptive
methods in dynamic networking environments.
REFERENCES
[1] Georgios Agrafiotis, Eftychia Makri, Antonios Lalas, Konstantinos Votis, Dimitrios
Tzovaras, and Nikolaos Tsampieris. 2023. A Deep Learning-based Malware Traffic
Classifier for 5G Networks Employing Protocol-Agnostic and PCAP-to-Embeddings
Techniques. In ACM International Conference Proceeding Series. 193–194. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3590777.3590807
[2] Chafika Benzaid and Tarik Taleb. 2020. ZSM Security: Threat Surface and Best
Practices. IEEE Network 34, 3 (2020), 124–133. https://doi.org/10.1109/MNET.001.
1900273
[3] James Bergstra, Brent Komer, Chris Eliasmith, Dan Yamins, and David D. Cox. 2015.
Hyperopt: A Python library for model selection and hyperparameter optimization.
Computational Science and Discovery 8, 1 (2015).
https://doi.org/10.1088/1749-
4699/8/1/014008
[4] Hala Strohmier Berry. 2023. The Importance of Cybersecurity in Supply Chain.
In ISDFS 2023 - 11th International Symposium on Digital Forensics and Security.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ISDFS58141.2023.10131834
[5] David M Blei, Alp Kucukelbir, and Jon D Mcauliffe. 2018. Variational Inference: A
Review for Statisticians. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.09808.
[6] Karansingh Chauhan, Shreena Jani, Dhrumin Thakkar, Riddham Dave, Jitendra
Bhatia, Sudeep Tanwar, and Mohammad S. Obaidat. 2020. Automated Machine
Learning: The New Wave of Machine Learning. In 2nd International Conference on
Innovative Mechanisms for Industry Applications (ICIMIA 2020). 205–212. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/ICIMIA48430.2020.9074859
[7] Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. 2016. XGBoost: A Scalable Tree Boosting System.
In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining (KDD ’16). 785–794. https://doi.org/10.1145/2939672.
2939785
[8] Dylan Chou and Meng Jiang. 2021. A Survey on Data-driven Network Intrusion
Detection. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 54, 9 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1145/
3472753
[9] Estefania Coronado, Rasoul Behravesh, Tejas Subramanya, Adriana Fernandez-
Fernandez, Shuaib Siddiqui, Xavier Costa-Perez, and Roberto Riggio. 2022. Zero
Touch Management: A Survey of Network Automation Solutions for 5G and 6G
Networks. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials (2022). https://doi.org/10.
1109/COMST.2022.3212586
[10] K Eggensperger, M Feurer, F Hutter, J Bergstra, J Snoek, H Hoos, and K Leyton-
Brown. 2013. Towards an Empirical Foundation for Assessing Bayesian Optimiza-
tion of Hyperparameters. In BayesOpt workshop (NIPS). 1–5.
[11] Wisam Elmasry, Akhan Akbulut, and Abdul Halim Zaim. 2020. Evolving deep
learning architectures for network intrusion detection using a double PSO meta-
heuristic. Computer Networks 168 (2020), 107042. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.
2019.107042
[12] Pierre Geurts, Damien Ernst, and Louis Wehenkel. 2006. Extremely randomized
trees. Machine Learning 63, 1 (2006), 3–42. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10994-006-
6226-1
[13] Jiaxing He, Xiaodan Wang, Yafei Song, and Qian Xiang. 2023. A multiscale intru-
sion detection system based on pyramid depthwise separable convolution neural
network. Neurocomputing 530 (2023), 48–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.
2023.01.072
[14] Xin He, Kaiyong Zhao, and Xiaowen Chu. 2021. AutoML: A survey of the state-
of-the-art. Knowledge-Based Systems 212 (2021), 106622. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
knosys.2020.106622
[15] Qi Kang, Xiao Shuang Chen, Si Si Li, and Meng Chu Zhou. 2017. A Noise-Filtered
Under-Sampling Scheme for Imbalanced Classification. IEEE Transactions on Cy-
bernetics 47, 12 (2017), 4263–4274. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCYB.2016.2606104
[16] Guolin Ke, Qi Meng, Thomas Finley, Taifeng Wang, Wei Chen, Weidong Ma, Qiwei
Ye, and Tie Yan Liu. 2017. LightGBM: A highly efficient gradient boosting decision
tree. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 2017-Decem. 3147–
3155.
[17] Murad Ali Khan, Naeem Iqbal, Imran, Harun Jamil, and Do Hyeun Kim. 2023. An
optimized ensemble prediction model using AutoML based on soft voting classifier
for network intrusion detection. Journal of Network and Computer Applications
212 (2023), 103560. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2022.103560
[18] Madhusanka Liyanage, Quoc Viet Pham, Kapal Dev, Sweta Bhattacharya, Praveen
Kumar Reddy Maddikunta, Thippa Reddy Gadekallu, and Gokul Yenduri. 2022. A
survey on Zero Touch Network and Service Management (ZSM) for 5G and beyond
networks. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 203 (Jul 2022), 103362.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2022.103362
[19] Ziadoon Kamil Maseer, Robiah Yusof, Nazrulazhar Bahaman, Salama A. Mostafa,
and Cik Feresa Mohd Foozy. 2021. Benchmarking of Machine Learning for Anomaly
Based Intrusion Detection Systems in the CICIDS2017 Dataset. IEEE Access 9 (2021),
22351–22370. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3056614
[20] Mohanad Mohammed, Henry Mwambi, Bernard Omolo, and Murtada Khalafallah
Elbashir. 2018. Using stacking ensemble for microarray-based cancer classifica-
tion. In International Conference on Computer, Control, Electrical, and Electronics
Engineering (ICCCEEE 2018). 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCCEEE.2018.8515872
[21] Neha Patki, Roy Wedge, and Kalyan Veeramachaneni. 2016. The Synthetic data
vault. In IEEE International Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics
(DSAA 2016). 399–410. https://doi.org/10.1109/DSAA.2016.49
[22] Fabian Pedregosa et al. 2011. Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python. Journal of
Machine Learning Research 12 (2011), 2825–2830. http://scikit-learn.sourceforge.net
[23] Pawani Porambage, Gürkan Gür, Diana Pamela Moya Osorio, Madhusanka Liyan-
age, Andrei Gurtov, and Mika Ylianttila. 2021. The Roadmap to 6G Security and
Privacy. IEEE Open Journal of the Communications Society 2 (2021), 1094–1122.
https://doi.org/10.1109/OJCOMS.2021.3078081
[24] Liudmila Prokhorenkova, Gleb Gusev, Aleksandr Vorobev, Anna Veronika Doro-
gush, and Andrey Gulin. 2018. Catboost: Unbiased boosting with categorical
features. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 2018-Decem.
6638–6648.
[25] Sehan Samarakoon, Yushan Siriwardhana, Pawani Porambage, Madhusanka Liyan-
age, Sang-Yoon Chang, Jinoh Kim, Jonghyun Kim, and Mika Ylianttila. 2022. 5G-
NIDD: A Comprehensive Network Intrusion Detection Dataset Generated over 5G
Wireless Network. https://doi.org/10.21227/xtep-hv36
[26] Iman Sharafaldin, Arash Habibi Lashkari, and Ali A Ghorbani. 2018. Toward
Generating a New Intrusion Detection Dataset and Intrusion Traffic Characteriza-
tion. In Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy. 108–116. https://doi.org/10.5220/
0006639801080116
[27] Abhilash Singh, J. Amutha, Jaiprakash Nagar, Sandeep Sharma, and Cheng Chi
Lee. 2022. AutoML-ID: automated machine learning model for intrusion detection
using wireless sensor network. Scientific Reports 12, 1 (2022), 1–14. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41598-022-13061-z
[28] Omer Elsier Tayfour, Azath Mubarakali, Amira Elsir Tayfour, Muhammad Nadzir
Marsono, Entisar Hassan, and Ashraf M. Abdelrahman. 2023. Adapting deep
learning-LSTM method using optimized dataset in SDN controller for secure IoT.
Soft Computing (2023), 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00500-023-08348-w
[29] Abebe Tesfahun and D. Lalitha Bhaskari. 2013. Intrusion detection using random
forests classifier with SMOTE and feature reduction. In Proceedings - 2013 Interna-
tional Conference on Cloud and Ubiquitous Computing and Emerging Technologies
(CUBE). 127–132. https://doi.org/10.1109/CUBE.2013.31
[30] Shuhei Watanabe. 2023.
Tree-Structured Parzen Estimator: A Tutorial Tree-
Structured Parzen Estimator: Understanding Its Algorithm Components and Their
Roles for Better Empirical Performance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00099.
[31] Lei Xu, Maria Skoularidou, Alfredo Cuesta-Infante, and Kalyan Veeramachaneni.
2019. Modeling Tabular data using Conditional GAN. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, Vol. 32.
[32] Li Yang, Abdallah Moubayed, and Abdallah Shami. 2022. MTH-IDS: A Multitiered
Hybrid Intrusion Detection System for Internet of Vehicles. IEEE Internet of Things
Journal 9, 1 (2022), 616–632. https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2021.3084796
[33] Li Yang and Abdallah Shami. 2022. IoT Data Analytics in Dynamic Environments:
From An Automated Machine Learning Perspective. Engineering Applications of
Artificial Intelligence 116 (2022), 1–33.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2022.
105366
[34] Abbas Yazdinejad, Mostafa Kazemi, Reza M. Parizi, Ali Dehghantanha, and Hadis
Karimipour. 2023. An ensemble deep learning model for cyber threat hunting in
industrial internet of things. Digital Communications and Networks 9, 1 (2023),
101–110. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcan.2022.09.008
[35] Guangyi Zhang and Aristides Gionis. 2023. Regularized impurity reduction: ac-
curate decision trees with complexity guarantees. Data Mining and Knowledge
Discovery 37, 1 (2023), 434–475. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10618-022-00884-7
[36] ETSI GS ZSM. 2019. Zero-touch network and service management (zsm); reference
architecture. Group Specification ETSI GS ZSM.
