Title: On The Effectiveness of the UK NIS Regulations as a Mandatory Cybersecurity Reporting Regime
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2603.19084v1
--------------------------------------------------

On The Effectiveness of the UK NIS Regulations as
a Mandatory Cybersecurity Reporting Regime
Junade Ali
The Alan Turing Institute
Defence and National Security Programme
London, United Kingdom
jali@turing.ac.uk
Chris Hicks
The Alan Turing Institute
Defence and National Security Programme
London, United Kingdom
c.hicks@turing.ac.uk
Abstract—Existing cybersecurity literature lacks a source of
empirical, representative data as to the true nature of cyberattacks
on Critical National Infrastructure. We have obtained UK-wide
data on incidents reported under the Network and Information
Systems (NIS) Regulations in 2024 causing “a significant impact
on the continuity” of essential services and comparator data from
intelligence agencies. We find that 29% of NIS reports already
concern cybersecurity incidents. As the UK Government seeks
to extend cybersecurity reporting, we find the NIS Regulations
are limited in their effectiveness; whilst our requests revealed 30
cybersecurity incidents reported under the NIS regulations, there
were 89 incidents classified as “highly significant and significant”
captured by the National Cyber Security Centre in the 2024
reporting year. Whereas 36% of Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency reported attacks concerned espionage, from
NIS data we find 100% NIS-reportable cyberattacks concerning
healthcare systems in England in 2024 were ransomware.
Index Terms—Cybersecurity, NIS Regulations, Mandatory
Cybersecurity Reporting, Freedom of Information
I. INTRODUCTION
Empirical, representative data on the behaviour of attackers
remains an enigma in cybersecurity. Existing large-scale
datasets often contain vast amounts of media-reported data,
which may not be representative of the true picture of
cyberattacks on Critical National Infrastructure (CNI) [28],
[33]. However, for cybersecurity research and policy work
to be appropriately targeted, empirical data from real-world
targets is of enormous value [4].
Network and Information Systems (NIS) Regulations in
the UK [27] provide for mandatory reporting of network and
information systems incidents which have “a significant impact
on the continuity” of essential services (including cybersecurity
incidents). However, GCHQ; the “single point of contact” for
NIS Regulation notifications, is not subject to Freedom of
Information (FOI) legislation.
In this paper, we seek to overcome this challenge using two
techniques absent from existing literature. Firstly, we obtain
data related to incidents reported under the NIS Regulations
by subjecting each of the designated competent authorities
(DCAs) to FOI requests. Secondly, as a complementary source,
we have aggregated data from Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency (CISA) advisories to identify the initial access
This research was funded by NCSC, part of GCHQ.
vector and attack type information of attacks which the Five
Eyes intelligence communities have chosen to disclose.
Using this approach, we seek to provide empirical data
from UK DCAs as to cybersecurity incidents which have
“a significant impact on the continuity” of essential services.
Further, we seek to contrast the dataset obtained from CISA
advisories to existing reports based on both our own, and
open-source, data related to the NIS Regulations.
To assist readability, a glossary of key abbreviations is
provided in Table I.
TABLE I
ABBREVIATIONS
Term
Meaning
CER
Critical Entities Resilience Directive (EU)
CISA
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (US)
CNI
Critical National Infrastructure
CTI
Cyber Threat Intelligence
DCA
Designated Competent Authority (under NIS regulations)
DHSC
Department of Health and Social Care (UK)
DI
Digital Infrastructure
DoF
Department of Finance (Northern Ireland)
DORA
Digital Operational Resilience Act (EU)
DWQR
Drinking Water Quality Regulator (Scotland)
ENISA
European Union Agency for Cybersecurity
FIMI
Foreign Information Manipulations and Interference
FOI
Freedom of Information
FOIA
Freedom of Information Act 2000 (UK)
FOISA
Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 (Scotland)
GCHQ
Government Communications Headquarters (UK)
MCA
Maritime and Coastguard Agency (UK)
NCSC
National Cyber Security Centre (part of GCHQ)
NCCS
Network Code on Cybersecurity (EU)
NIS
Network and Information Systems (EU & UK Regulations)
NIS2
Network and Information Systems (EU Regulations)
OES
Operators of Essential Services (under NIS Regulations)
Ofcom
Office of Communications (UK)
RDSP
Relevant Digital Service Providers (under NIS Regulations)
RVA
Risk and Vulnerability Assessments (by CISA)
II. RELATED WORK
A. Reporting Regimes & NIS Regulations
The NIS Regulations [27] form part of retained European
Union (EU) law in the UK. In part, they require “operators
of essential services” (OES) in certain sectors to disclose
to the relevant DCA (and in the case of relevant digital
services, the Information Commissioner) “any incident which
arXiv:2603.19084v1  [cs.CR]  19 Mar 2026
has a significant impact on the continuity of the essential
service which that OES provides”. The thresholds are typically
determined in guidance from the DCA. For example; whilst the
Information Commissioner sets thresholds tailored to digital
services [17], the Department for Health and Social Care (in
relation to England) sets the thresholds based on measures
related to healthcare (e.g. > 0 excess fatalities/casualties, or
> 50 patients at risk of potential clinical harm) [8].
In 2025, the Government announced its intention to put
a Cyber Security and Resilience Bill before Parliament to
extend these requirements, as has been done in the EU with
the implementation of the NIS2 Regulations [6].
Further, from 14th January 2025 to 8th April 2025, the
UK Government consulted on mandatory reporting of ran-
somware [16], specifically to “provide the Government with
an initial report within 72 hours of the attack, covering key
details, and a more in-depth report within 28 days”. 63% of
respondents (both individual and organisational) agreed with
the proposal of: “Economy-wide mandatory reporting for all
organisations and individuals”.
Following the UK’s departure from the EU, the NIS Cooper-
ation Group published a report of EU-wide NIS incidents [26]
in August 2025, tracking coarse root causes (i.e. 51% system
failures and 37% malicious actions), however this is not a
cybersecurity-specific report and provides no granularity as to
the attack types or initial access vector information, noting
“2025 will be covered by NIS2 Directive (NIS2) and incident
reporting process is continuously improving and maturing”.
The authors note: “In terms of processes, there are still more
synergies to be explored with reporting in other sectors, under
other pieces of legislation, such as DORA, the Network Code
on Cybersecurity (NCCS) and the CER Directive”.
Accordingly, there is currently no data providing a UK-wide
picture of NIS reports specifically related to cybersecurity. This
means there is a key gap for policy makers in understanding the
effectiveness of existing reporting regimes and for researchers
to target research at the most high-reward components of
cybersecurity.
B. The Need for Better Data
Against this foreground, there is a backdrop of work
highlighting the importance of data to target cybersecurity
research. A 2025 consensus study report from the US National
Academies [33] has noted: “comprehensive, consistent, and
reliable data and metrics on cybercrime still do not exist -
a consequence of a shortage of vital information resulting
from the decentralized nature of relevant data collection at
the national level”. The work highlights the importance of
more datasets of greater diversity in source, arguing: “an exact
enumeration of cybercrime from any single data resource is
infeasible”.
A systematic review on data availability of cyber risk and
cybersecurity [4] posits that: “the lack of available data on
cyber risk poses a serious problem for stakeholders seeking to
tackle this issue”.
As will be discussed later, there is a volume of material based
on public media reports of cybersecurity incidents, but [28]
estimates that only ≈3% of incidents appear to be publicly
reported, biased by revenue, industry and incident type.
A potential cause for this can be found in [1] which explores
the phenomenon of loss aversion, whereby humans will feel
the pain of a loss to a greater extent than the pleasure of a gain,
leading to issues being covered-up. This is despite the fact that
a representative opinion polling of software engineers found
the ability to discuss and address problems quickly, when they
emerge, was correlated with an 87% higher success rate in
software project success. Similar research in cybersecurity has
echoed these ideals with [9] arguing that “appropriate trust-
building mechanisms such as confidentiality, impunity, and
independence should be anchored in the system”.
C. Impact of AI
There has been increasing work on the use of AI tech-
niques such as reinforcement learning [12] and AI agent
attackers/defenders [37] in the cybersecurity landscape.
Such research highlights the critical nature of empirical
evidence to understand which cybersecurity threats pose
the greatest costs to an organisation, such that risk can be
ascertained and threats can be prioritised against the cost of
remediation.
Foley at al. [12] highlight the asymmetric cost defenders have,
given that an adversary only needs to succeed once whilst a
defender must thwart each attack. The paper therefore proposes
and evaluates reinforcement learning as an approach to level
the playing field. However, such techniques and evaluations
ultimately are dependent on how well the simulated attack
scenarios match real-world attacker behaviour (i.e. the sim-to-
real gap [18]).
Zhang et al. [37] extend this knowledge by evaluating AI
agents against real-world software vulnerabilities arising from
bug bounty platforms, however a key gap is the underlying
assumption that the financial reward of bug bounty programs
matches the (financial) rewards of real-world attackers and the
costs to an organisation if the vulnerability were exploited.
As [13] notes, “A larger number of vendors either lack the
maturity, funding or incentive to invest more in secure software
development”. Furthermore, a longitudinal analysis of bug
bounty programs [36] found that retaining offensive security
professionals remains a common issue.
D. Existing Datasets
Harry et al [14] proposes a taxonomy for classifying
cybersecurity events and provides a review of 3,355 events
from news sources, filtered down to 2,431 after excluding
events which did not have sufficient data. The authors found
the top attack events were: exploitation of application server
(45.1%), “message manipulation” (i.e. defacement or hijacking
a social media page, 17.8%), exploitation of end hosts (17.3%)
and external denial of service (10.8%). However, this data is
limited only to publicised events and specifically focuses on the
effects of attacks instead of the tactics. Accordingly, this paper
does not assist defenders seeking to identify which specific
tactics are the most prevalent and how successful they are.
The European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA)
has provided similar data for the transportation sector specifi-
cally [20] for January 2021 to October 2022, which provides a
useful insight into the attacks facing a sector that forms part of
CNI. However, again this material is limited to threats rather
than tactics. The types of attack listed included ransomware
attacks (38%), data related threats (30%), malware (17%),
denial-of-service (16%), phishing (10%) and supply-chain
attacks (10%).
ENISA also published a 2024 report [10], [11] covering
July 2023 to June 2024 which provides a breakdown of
approximately 11,079 incidents by threat type. The data is
sourced from both open-source information and the agency’s
own cyber threat intelligence (CTI). The report indicates
that 41.1% relate to denial-of-service attacks, 25.79% relate
to ransomware, 19.01% relate to “data”, 6.06% relate to
social engineering threats and 5.19% relate to malware, 0.98%
accounting for supply chain threats and 0.55% related to FIMI
(foreign information manipulations and interference). Web
threats and zero-days are also mentioned as the remainder
but no quantification is provided. However, the data is limited
by being obtained from open-source information (though it’s
unclear to what extent versus ENISA’s CTI) and does not
provide a formal breakdown between attack type and initial
access vector (with initial access vector data not specifically
provided).
Various industry sources also seek to provide data on
the initial access vectors for various cyberattacks. Verizon
Data Breach Investigations Report (DBIR) 2025 [35] provides
information on initial access vectors sourced from both internal
case files, third-party contributors and media reports, although
the breakdown is not available. The data is sourced from 1
November 2023 to 31 October 2024. The breakdown for non-
error, non-misuse breaches (n = 9,891) provided is that the
initial access vectors in 22% of instances was credential abuse,
in 20% of instances exploitation of vulnerabilities and in 16%
phishing attacks.
Mandiant, a subsidiary of Google, has also provided a similar
report [21] sourced from data from 1 Jan 2024 to 31 Dec
2024 where Mandiant was engaged on a consultancy basis.
The number of cases is not described (though claimed to be
based on 450,000+ hours of consultancy work), limited to those
where consultancy work was utilised and 34% of cases have an
unknown initial access vector. Nonetheless, of those where the
initial access vector was known 34% were from exploits, 16%
stolen credentials, 14% email phishing, 9% web compromise,
8% prior compromise, 7% brute force, 5% insider threat and
8% “other”.
CISA has provided a report [3] on attacks on CNI specifically
for the Fiscal Year 2022. The data is limited to a pool of 121
RVAs (Risk and Vulnerability Assessments), which again is
sourced through both open-source data and stakeholder assess-
ment activities. The data provides a very different picture, with
54% of initial access vectors being valid accounts, followed by
spearphishing links as the second most successful compromise
method. Additionally, the UK Government commissioned the
research firm Ipsos to investigate experiences and impacts of
ransomware attacks on individuals and organisations [15].
The UK National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) annual
review for 2024 [24] has shown that from September 2023
to August 2024, the agency has handled 430 incidents (an
increase from 371 in the previous period), 347 data exfiltration
incidents (increase from 327) and 89 “highly significant and
significant” incidents (increase from 62). The report does not
provide a breakdown of the types of attack or initial access
vectors but states: “Ransomware attacks continue to pose the
most immediate and disruptive threat to our CNI, with some
state-linked cyber groups now targeting the industrial control
systems that infrastructure relies on”. No breakdown of initial
access vector or further attack information is provided.
A further review published in 2025, [25] indicated the
number of incidents handled in the following period remained
largely the same (429, one less than the previous period),
however there was a 50% rise in “highly significant” attacks
for the third consecutive year (18 incidents). There was still
no breakdown of initial access vector, and ransomware was
still highlighted as the major threat but no exact quantification
was offered. A chart provided without numbers did highlight
that 10% of cyber incidents categorised as “highly-significant”
or “significant” were ransomware.
Finally, a report published by Waterfall Security [19] has
claimed that in 2024 “87% of identifiable attacks were ran-
somware”. The report only includes publicly reported incidents
which have caused physical consequences in OT systems.
Overall, there is limited empirical research demonstrating
which attacks upon CNI achieved significant disruption, espe-
cially in academic literature.
III. UK NIS REGULATIONS DATA
A. Methodology
In the UK, Regulation 11 of the NIS Regulations 2018
places requirements on mandatory disclosure on “operators of
essential services” to disclose to a DCA “any incident which
has a significant impact on the continuity of the essential service
which that OES provides”. Regulation 12 goes on to place a
similar requirement on operators of “relevant digital service
providers” to notify the Information Commissioner “about any
incident having a substantial impact on the provision of any
of the digital services”.
We seek to use the Freedom of Information Act 2000
(“FOIA”) and the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002
(“FOISA”) to evaluate the collection and recording of this data,
and produce a dataset of initial access vectors of such cyber
incidents. Whilst GCHQ is the “single point of contact” of
which designated authorities must ultimately produce reports,
it is not subject to FOIA and therefore we must contact each
of the DCAs instead.
TABLE II
NIS REGULATIONS NOTIFICATIONS
DCA
Total Count
Cybersecurity Count
Water (Scotland)
0
0
Health (Scotland)
34
7
Civil Aviation
1
0
Water (England & Wales)
9 (+ 5 non-NIS)
3 (+ 5 non-NIS)
Energy (Scotland, England & Wales)
0
0
Health (England & Wales)
6 (+ 48 non-NIS)
5 (unknown non-NIS)
Digital Infrastructure
4
2
Transportation (England & Wales)
11
3
Relevant Digital Service Providers
5 (+ 6 non-NIS)
2
Northern Ireland Government
33
8
TABLE III
NIS NOTIFICATIONS WITH CYBERSECURITY INCIDENT SPECIFICS
Incident
DCA
5 SMS-Teknik Data Breach Incidents [32]
Health (Scotland)
WordPress Plugin Infection
Health (Scotland)
Kerberoasting
Health (Scotland)
5 Ransomware Incidents
Health (England & Wales)
2 Exploitation of Vulnerabilities Incidents
Relevant Digital Service Providers
DDoS (Unknown Type)
Digital Infrastructure
DDoS (DNS Query Flood)
Digital Infrastructure
B. Results
The requests were made from the 25 to 30 September 2025.
Responses began to be received from the 30 September 2025
and were resolved by the 20 November 2025. A summary
of the data is provided in Table II and where cybersecurity
incident specifics have been provided, they are summarised
in Table III. Details of the responses for each of the DCAs
contacted by means of FOI request are provided below.
Water (Scotland): The Drinking Water Quality Regulator
(DWQR) for Scotland stated they “received no NIS reports
in 2024”. An early FOI request published by the Scottish
Government [29] confirmed the DWQR had received no
reports but the Scottish Government had received 20 reports
under the NIS Regulations generally during 2024 (11 of the 20
did not have the incident report submitted to the Government
within 72 hours of the incident occurring).
Health (Scotland): We received a specific response dated the
7th October 2025 from the Scottish Government’s Directorate
for Population Health related to reports received by Health
Boards in Scotland. The Scottish Government confirmed that at
the latest data, there were a total of 34 incidents reported and
7 were cybersecurity related. 5 of the healthcare cybersecurity
incidents related to a data breach related to a third party
supplier, SMS-Teknik [32]. A further incident “involved an
infected WordPress plugin on a corporate site, resulting in
unauthorised links to adult content and a cryptocurrency
miner”. Finally, one incident categorised under “cyber” was
described as follows: “1 incident involved suspicious activity,
including Kerberoasting, a technique that targets the Kerberos
authentication protocol led to the immediate shutdown of
servers”.
Civil Aviation (UK): The Civil Aviation Authority confirmed
they had received one notification for the sub-sector they were
the DCA during 2024, however stated it did not relate to a
cybersecurity incident.
Water (England & Wales): The Drinking Water Inspectorate
said they received 9 reports within the scope of the NIS
Regulations (8 in England and 1 in Wales) and 5 reports
which were below the threshold of the NIS Regulations purely
relating to England. 3 of those within the scope of the NIS
Regulations and all 5 below threshold related to cybersecurity
incidents. The DCA refused to share high-level categorisation
of the attack types and initial access vectors citing national
security grounds, for which an internal review to their decision
was subsequently refused which we did not appeal to the
Commissioner.
Energy (Scotland, England & Wales): The Department for
Energy Security and Net Zero stated: “we can confirm that in
the 2024 calendar year, there were no reported NIS Incident
in the energy sector”.
Health (England & Wales): The Department of Health
and Social Care stated: “54 reports were made to DHSC
in 2024. These related to a mix of cybersecurity and other
broader resilience factors impacting network and information
systems (as specified in the scope of the NIS Regulations
2018)”. They went on to say “Of the six incidents that met
the thresholds, five related to ransomware and one to a power
outage”. They did not hold data on the initial access vectors
of the cyberattacks.
Digital Infrastructure (UK): The Information Commissioner
receives reports from Relevant Digital Service Providers, where
a service was unavailable for > 750,000 user-hours, there
was data integrity/confidentiality/authenticity loss affecting
> 15,000 UK users, the incident created a risk to public safety,
public security, or loss of life or the incident caused material
damage to at least one UK user exceeding £ 850,000 [17].
They responded: “Of the 5 reports considered to be NIS
incidents, 2 were assessed as cyber incidents. The type of
attack was hacking, and the access vector was exploitation of
vulnerabilities”.
In relation to Digital Infrastructure (DI), Ofcom initially
extended the 20 day deadline for a response to 40 days
in order to consider whether an exemption relating to law
enforcement applied to the request and whether the public
interest factors were in favour of releasing the information. We
responded with submissions on the legal basis for disclosure,
technical arguments in favour of the release and comparators
showing other organisations had disclosed the information.
Ofcom then disclosed that: “One mandatory and three voluntary
incident reports relating to the DI subsector were submitted to
Ofcom in 2024”. Two of these were disclosed to be related to
cybersecurity, but a breakdown was not supplied.
More interestingly, however, Ofcom provided the following
information in relation to attack type: “Both of the two
cybersecurity attacks reported to Ofcom during 2024 were
DDoS (Distributed denial-of-service) attacks”. In relation to
initial access vectors they said: “Only one of the DDoS attack
reports provided an initial attack vector which was a DNS
query flood”.
Transportation (England & Wales): The UK Government’s
Department for Transport reported there had been 1 disclosure
related to maritime transport, 3 related to rail and 7 related to
road. All 3 NIS incidents related to rail were cybersecurity
incidents. They refused to disclose type of attack and initial
attack vector data.
Government (Northern Ireland): Whilst the Northern Ireland
Department of Finance (DoF) initially refused to disclose any
information, following negotiation we were able to obtain a
disclosure that on a province-wide basis there had been 33
NIS incidents reported in 2024, 8 were cybersecurity incidents
and a statement that “None of the reported incidents were as
a direct cyberattack on the organisation”.
Government (Wales): The Welsh Government stated: “The
information requested is not held”.
Maritime & Coast (UK): We additionally contacted the
Maritime & Coastguard Agency, which whilst not a DCA, it
is an executive agency of the Department for Transport (which
is a DCA), who stated: “We can confirm that the Maritime
and Coastguard Agency (MCA) does not hold the information
detailed in your request which we have taken to mean reports
made to the MCA under The Network and Information Systems
Regulations 2018. To conclude that the information is not held,
we consulted with our IT and Information Security teams.
There have been no reports made to the MCA during the
period requested”. Similarly, National Highways confirmed
they did not hold the information, as it was not a DCA.
C. Analysis
We note there appears to be differences in the thresholds as
to what different DCAs consider to be “any incident which
has a significant impact on the continuity of the essential
service which that OES provides” [8], [17]. Having different
thresholds for different elements of CNI can make sense to
evaluate disruption, however this can mean that comparing
data across industries for cybersecurity purposes is not on a
like-for-like basis.
We also note that there seems to be greater attack-type detail
on the data obtained related to healthcare in Great Britain,
perhaps due to the public provision of healthcare services.
However, this highlights the critical issue that ransomware
poses on healthcare. Healthcare amounted to 55% of all
cybersecurity incidents in our dataset (excluding Northern
Ireland). The healthcare data from England & Wales highlights
that all incidents were ransomware attacks. In Scotland, the 5
reports related to the SMS-Teknik data breach [32] involved
a ransom note being left by the attackers and a further
incident involving Kerberoasting could be used as part of a
ransomware attack and the final incident involving defacement
of a WordPress website “unauthorised links to adult content and
a cryptocurrency miner” clearly also can contain a profit motive.
Therefore we estimate that 83%−92% of cyberattacks in Great
Britain during 2024 which had a significant impact on the
continuity healthcare services were as a result of ransomware,
and 92% −100% contained a profit motive.
One limitation is that we have only queried data for 2024.
Both FOIA and FOISA contain proportionality limits in relation
to limiting overly costly and “vexatious” requests. Additionally,
requesting more recent data could have caused more data to
be subject to refusals on national security grounds. Using the
methodology we have developed here, future work may wish
to attempt to go deeper into the past with greater data or seek
to obtain more recent data as time progresses.
Our dataset found there were 30 cybersecurity reports within
the scope of the NIS Regulations. We contrast this with the
2024 figure (albeit from reporting window, September 2023 to
August 2024) from the NCSC indicating there were 89 “highly
significant and significant” incidents. If the distribution were
to remain uniform for the rest of the window, this indicates
that potentially around two-thirds of “highly significant and
significant” incidents reported to the NCSC may not currently
be captured under the NIS Regulations. The true extent of
under-reporting is likely to be greater given the following
reporting year, the number of nationally significant incidents
NCSC reported increased from 89 to 204.
It is unclear what the cause of such under-reporting is. One
cause of this may be divergence between the classifications
used by NCSC [23] and those used by DCAs, however there
is a high bar for both types of incident classification. Another
potential cause is that the NCSC has a broader focus than
just what is classified as Critical National Infrastructure under
the NIS Regulations, covering other large organisation and
government bodies/authorities.
Whilst this makes a powerful argument for wider mandatory
reporting of ransomware data that the UK Government con-
sulted on [16], our research has highlighted that such work must
ensure reporting is made available to researchers. Whilst the
NCSC has published annual reviews [24], [25], the granularity
of data would not have been available had we not been able to
workaround the fact that the NCSC is exempt from FOI laws
by making requests to DCAs instead. It is therefore essential
that such mandatory reporting regimes contain mechanisms for
academic researchers and policymakers to gain access to such
data, such that cybersecurity research and public policy can
be as best informed as possible.
IV. CISA ALERTS & ADVISORIES
A. Methodology
The US CISA, alongside other agencies (both domestically
and internationally) publishes cybersecurity alerts and advi-
sories [5] in order for practitioners to mitigate cyberthreats. The
data also potentially provides a source of data to understand
TABLE IV
CISA REPORTED ATTACKS & INITIAL ACCESS VECTORS
Report ID
Type of Attack
Initial Access Vector
AA24-016A
Malware / intrusion
Exploit vuln (web)
AA24-038A
Espionage
Exploit vuln (edge)
AA24-046A
Credential misuse (insider)
Cred abuse (ex-employee)
AA24-060A
Ransomware (Phobos)
Cred abuse (RDP)
AA24-060B
Intrusion
Exploit vuln (SSL-VPN)
AA24-109A
Ransomware (Akira)
Cred abuse (VPN/RDP)
AA24-131A
Ransomware (Black Basta)
Phishing
AA24-207A
Espionage
Exploit vuln (web)
AA24-241A
Ransomware (IAB/enablers)
Exploit vuln (edge)
AA24-242A
Ransomware (RansomHub)
Phishing
AA24-249A
Espionage
Exploit vuln (web/edge)
AA24-290A
Credential abuse
Cred abuse (spray/MFA)
SVR-Cloud (NCSC)
Espionage (cloud)
Cred abuse (spray/MFA)
APT40 Advisory (ASD)
Espionage
Exploit vuln (web)
Vectors aligned to VERIS categories: Exploit vuln (Hacking→Exploit vuln),
Cred abuse (Hacking→Use of stolen creds), Phishing (Social→Phishing).
TABLE V
ATT&CK INITIAL ACCESS TECHNIQUES (COUNT)
ATT&CK Initial Access
Count
Share
T1190 Exploit Public-Facing Application
10
71%
T1133 External Remote Services
7
50%
T1078 Valid Accounts
6
43%
T1566 Phishing
4
29%
the causes of cyberattacks. Whilst the dataset is more curated,
it also provides a specific picture of initial access vectors by
attack type which is missing in much of the data we have
collected from UK DCAs.
We seek to review the reports published during 2024
(although not necessarily concerning events in 2024), to
understand and classify attacks according to the type of attack
using the MITRE ATT&CK [22] and VERIS [34] frameworks.
B. Results
There were 17 reports published during 2024, we find two
which reference simulated attacks and one that discusses trends:
• AA24-326A – CISA Red Team Assessment (critical
infrastructure).
• AA24-193A – CISA SILENTSHIELD Red Team (FCEB).
• AA24-317A – 2023 Top Routinely Exploited Vulnerabili-
ties.
The other 14 reference real-world attacks. The attacks and
the reported initial access vector are provided in Table IV and
the count for each according using the MITRE ATT&CK
Framework are provided in Table V. In relation to the
ATT&CK access vector counts, one incident can involve
multiple techniques, so the total count can be greater than 14;
additionally, brute-force/password spraying and MFA-prompt
fatigue were mapped to Valid Accounts and/or External Remote
Services for initial access accounting.
C. Analysis
This is a curated dataset which is based on advisories that
CISA (or Five Eyes allies, namely the UK’s GCHQ and the
Australian Signals Directorate) have chosen to publish so may
not represent comprehensively the real-world attack landscape.
This is demonstrated by the data from the UK’s NCSC [24]
showing they handled 430 incidents in one reporting period
alone (not to mention 1957 total tip offs).
However, it is of note that when considering the primary
initial access vector, 50% related to human factors (phishing or
credential abuse) and the other 50% related to some form of
exploit vulnerability (i.e. web or edge network). Additionally,
the focus areas the agency have chosen to address are of interest:
5 (35.7%) relate to ransomware and a further 5 (35.7%) relate
to espionage whilst a further 4 relate to other attacks (e.g.
insider credential misuse, 28.6%).
Of 5 attacks which related to ransomware, 4 initial access
vectors related to credential abuse or phishing, whilst only
one related to the exploitation of vulnerabilities - indicating
that authentication security can be a key concern in relation to
ransomware.
Nevertheless, the CISA advice remains focussed on patch-
ing external access vectors, hardening identity systems and
monitoring cloud environments.
V. CYBER SECURITY AND RESILIENCE BILL
We find that 29% (i.e. 30 of 103) NIS reports in 2024
related to cybersecurity incidents, despite the purpose of the
NIS Regulations being targeted at network and information
systems more broadly. However, this research has identified
deficiencies in the existing regulatory environment which
requires consideration for further legislation. The NCSC Annual
Review 2025 [25] also makes the following points:
• “Our sharing communities need to be deeper, faster and
more actionable, sharing data and insight at speed, driving
quicker evidence-based decision making”.
• “We are committed to automating that evidence base and
making it transparent, to invite and encourage challenge
and review”.
• “Technology is currently opaque, and that leads to adverse
cybersecurity outcomes, which favour malfeasant threat
actors”.
The need for focussed regulation on cybersecurity has already
seen policymaking progress in the UK with the proposals for a
Cyber Security and Resilience Bill [6], mirroring similar efforts
of the NIS2 Regulations in the EU and a recent consultation
of mandatory reporting of ransomware [16].
On the 12th November 2025, the UK Government introduced
the Cyber Security and Resilience (Network and Information
Systems) Bill to Parliament [7]. The Bill essentially has the
effect of expanding the coverage of the NIS Regulations to
bring into scope data infrastructure (i.e. data centres), managed
service providers and critical suppliers. The Bill requires initial
notification within 24 hours and then full notification within 72
hours (though remains silent on a full root-cause investigation).
Additionally, there are requirements to send notifications to
GCHQ at the same time as to DCAs. Furthermore, the definition
of “incident” in the NIS regulations is sought to be broadened
from “any event having an actual adverse effect on the security
of network and information systems” to “any event having,
or capable of having, an adverse effect on the operation or
security of network and information systems”.
These measures therefore do address many of the limitations
in the existing regulations which we have been identified
in this paper. However, whilst the methodology outlined
in this paper remains effective if this Bill is enacted as
drafted; and there are other improvements to data sharing with
other public sector organisations, access of data to academic
researchers remains an open question. Whilst in this paper,
we have been able to work around the issue of GCHQ being
exempt from FOIA and FOISA by querying a DCAs (and the
Information Commissioner) individually; this raises other issues
- the process is both time consuming and requires significant
education of those involved in the disclosure process. In total,
we made 22 FOI requests to DCAs and allied organisations to
identify where data was stored (ultimately leading to responses
from organisations). From that point, there was also significant
work required to both clarify requests and also educate some
organisations as to the legal basis for making these requests, the
risks to national security for failure to disclose the information
(in considering the public interest test) and challenging the
risks cited for failing to disclose the information.
For example, the Northern Irish DoF initially refused to
provide any data at all including high-level numeric data
of either NIS reports or the counts of those specific to
cybersecurity. Through both education and negotiation we were
able to negotiate province-wide count data.
However, if a single source of truth was available, those
responsible for disclosure would be able to provide aggregated
data for the fields desired (i.e. a breakdown of all attacks
by sector, attack type or initial access vector), which could
mitigate issues whereby small datasets could be used to target
particular sectors in a particular province.
Both the public reports from NCSC and the data we have
analysed from CISA highlight that data from intelligence ser-
vices is currently curated, limiting use for security researchers.
Accordingly, we highlight this gap to demonstrate that manda-
tory publication of research data either in new legislation or
agreements for voluntary reporting with such organisations.
This would aid in the NCSC’s goal of transparency of the
evidence with their sharing communities.
VI. KEY LESSONS LEARNED & RECOMMENDATIONS
Mandatory reporting of cybersecurity is not unique to the
UK. Indeed, there have been developments in the EU, Australia,
Singapore, South Korea, India, China and the USA [2], [6], [30],
[31]. Our methodology of combining mandatory disclosure
laws with freedom of information laws may benefit researchers
globally in collecting their own data.
Highlighting how global policymakers should ensure report-
ing results in actionable threat intelligence data, our research
found that DHSC in England did not hold initial access data
on the ransomware attacks faced.
Finally; CISA advisories on ransomware attacks concerned
edge or authentication initial access. Scottish healthcare sim-
ilarly saw third-party data breaches, authentication system
attacks and a web vulnerabilities exploited. This highlights the
importance of authentication and edge security for practitioners
- even where the headline attack type is simply ransomware.
VII. CONCLUSION
Firstly, as policymakers consider the impact of new cyberse-
curity reporting requirements, we identify deficiencies in the
existing NIS Regulations. We find that there were significantly
fewer NIS notifications than incidents classified as “highly
significant and significant” by the NCSC in their 2024 reporting
year. We also note that detailed initial access vector data was
either missing or disclosure was refused. This highlights a key
limitation in existing reporting regimes in how they both fail
to capture a complete picture in relation to cybersecurity, and
data is limited for academic research and policymakers.
Secondly, even amongst the curated CISA dataset, we note
that when considering the primary initial access vector, 50%
related to human factors (phishing or credential abuse) and the
other 50% related to some form of exploit vulnerability (i.e.
web or edge network). This highlights the need for cybersecurity
research to focus on edge network security and human factors.
Finally, we note that profit motive seems increasingly to drive
attacks which impact the continuity of critical services. Whilst
36% of CISA reported attacks concerned espionage, based on
the NIS data, we estimate that 83% −92% of cyberattacks in
Great Britain during 2024 which had a significant impact on the
continuity healthcare services were as a result of ransomware,
and 92% −100% of attacks contained a profit motive. This
aligns with a report published by Waterfall Security [19] has
claimed that in 2024 of publicly reported incidents which
have caused physical consequences in OT systems “87% of
identifiable attacks were ransomware”.
Our research highlights the need for providing a single
source of data for mandatory cybersecurity regimes, such that
the data can be aggregated together in a way which is useful for
policymakers and cybersecurity researchers. In the words of the
NCSC [25]: “Technology is currently opaque, and that leads
to adverse cybersecurity outcomes, which favour malfeasant
threat actors”. A single source offers the ability to aggregate
national data, providing breakdowns by sectors and attack
vectors, whilst avoiding the risk that data is de-anonymised.
As the UK Government seeks implement greater mandatory
reporting regimes, there is further work in research to obtain and
analyse this data to provide better signals to both cybersecurity
researchers and policymakers on which areas should be better
targeted for research. Additional further work may wish to
consider applying these methodologies in other jurisdictions,
such as in the EU and United States using the FOI legislation
in those jurisdictions.
REFERENCES
[1] Junade Ali.
“So Am I Dr. Frankenstein? Or Were You a Monster
the Whole Time?”: Mitigating Software Project Failure With Loss-
Aversion-Aware Development Methodologies. In Proceedings of the
4th International Conference on Emerging Practices in Software Process
& Architecture (SOFTPA 2025), volume 15 of Computer Science &
Information Technology (CS & IT) – CSCP, pages 1–9. AIRCC Publishing
Corporation, March 2025.
[2] Megan L. Brown, Jacqueline F. “Lyn” Brown, Sydney M. White,
and Joshua K. Waldman.
CISA reopens comment opportunity
on
cyber
incident
reporting
requirements,
February
2026.
https://www.wiley.law/alert-CISA-Reopens-Comment-Opportunity-on-
Cyber-Incident-Reporting-Requirements Accessed: 2026-02-13.
[3] CISA. CISA analysis: Fiscal year 2022 risk and vulnerability assess-
ments, 2023. https://www.cisa.gov/sites/default/files/2023-07/FY22-RVA-
Analysis%20-%20Final 508c.pdf Accessed: 2025-09-20.
[4] Frank Cremer, Barry Sheehan, Michael Fortmann, Arash N Kia, Martin
Mullins, Finbarr Murphy, and Stefan Materne. Cyber risk and cyberse-
curity: a systematic review of data availability. The Geneva papers on
risk and insurance. Issues and practice, 47(3):698, 2022.
[5] Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency. Cybersecurity alerts
& advisories. https://www.cisa.gov/news-events/cybersecurity-advisories
Accessed: 2025-10-06.
[6] Department for Science, Innovation & Technology. Cyber security and
resilience policy statement, April 2025. https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/cyber-security-and-resilience-bill-policy-statement
Accessed: 2025-11-05.
[7] Department
for
Science,
Innovation
&
Technology
and
Liz
Kendall.
Tough new laws to strengthen the uk’s defences against
cyber
attacks
on
nhs,
transport
and
energy,
November
2025.
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/tough-new-laws-to-strengthen-
the-uks-defences-against-cyber-attacks-on-nhs-transport-and-energy
Accessed: 2025-11-12.
[8] Department of Health & Social Care. The network and information
systems regulations 2018: guide for the health sector in england,
September 2023. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/network-
and-information-systems-regulations-2018-health-sector-guide/the-
network-and-information-systems-regulations-2018-guide-for-the-
health-sector-in-england Accessed: 2025-10-22.
[9] Nico Ebert, Thierry Schaltegger, Benjamin Ambuehl, Tim Geppert,
Ariane Trammell, Melanie Knieps, and Verena Zimmermann. Learning
from safety science: designing incident reporting systems in cybersecurity.
Journal of Cybersecurity, 11(1):tyaf019, 2025.
[10] European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA).
2024 re-
port on the state of the cybersecurity in the union, December
2024. https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/2024-report-on-the-state-
of-the-cybersecurity-in-the-union Accessed: 2025-10-06.
[11] European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA). ENISA threat land-
scape 2024, September 2024. https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/
enisa-threat-landscape-2024 Accessed: 2025-10-06.
[12] Myles Foley, Chris Hicks, Kate Highnam, and Vasilios Mavroudis. Au-
tonomous network defence using reinforcement learning. In Proceedings
of the 2022 ACM on Asia Conference on Computer and Communications
Security, pages 1252–1254, 2022.
[13] Stefan Frei and Oliver Rochford. The case for a bug bounty program
of last resort, 2021. https://techzoom.net/papers/bug-bounty-reloaded/
Accessed: 2025-09-19.
[14] Charles Harry and Nancy Gallagher. Classifying cyber events. Journal
of Information Warfare, 17(3):17–31, 2018.
[15] Home
Office.
The
experiences
and
impacts
of
ransomware
attacks
on
individuals
and
organisations,
January
2025.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-experiences-and-
impact-of-ransomware-attacks-on-victims/the-experiences-and-
impacts-of-ransomware-attacks-on-individuals-and-organisations
Accessed: 2025-10-04.
[16] Home
Office.
Ransomware:
proposals
to
increase
incident
reporting
and
reduce
payments
to
criminals,
January
2025.
https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/ransomware-proposals-
to-increase-incident-reporting-and-reduce-payments-to-criminals
Accessed: 2025-10-04.
[17] Information Commissioner’s Office. Incident reporting. https://ico.org.uk/
for-organisations/the-guide-to-nis/incident-reporting/ Accessed: 2025-10-
22.
[18] Nick Jakobi, Phil Husbands, and Inman Harvey. Noise and the reality
gap: The use of simulation in evolutionary robotics. In Advances in
Artificial Life, pages 704–720. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1995.
[19] Rees Machtemes, Gregory Hale, Monique Walhof, and Andrew Ginter.
The 2025 ot cyber threat report, 2025. https://waterfall-security.com/wp-
content/uploads/2025/03/threat-report-2025-S.pdf Accessed: 2025-11-05.
[20] Apostolos
Malatras,
Zoran
Stanic,
Ifigeneia
Lella,
Ricardo
De Sousa Figueiredo, Eleni Tsekmezoglou, Marianthi Theocharidou,
Rossen
Naydenov,
and
Anastasios
Drougkas.
Enisa
threat
landscape: Transport sector (january 2021 to october 2022), 2023.
https://www.enisa.europa.eu/sites/default/files/publications/ENISA%
20Transport%20Threat%20Landscape RECAST2.pdf
Accessed:
2025-09-19.
[21] Mandiant. M-trends 2025 report, 2025. https://services.google.com/fh/
files/misc/m-trends-2025-en.pdf Accessed: 2025-09-20.
[22] MITRE. MITRE ATT&CK. https://attack.mitre.org/ Accessed: 2025-10-
06.
[23] National Cyber Security Centre.
Categorising uk cyber incidents,
August 2023.
https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/information/categorising-uk-
cyber-incidents Accessed: 2026-02-13.
[24] National Cyber Security Centre. Annual review 2024, December 2024.
https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/ncsc-annual-review-2024 Accessed:
2025-10-06.
[25] National Cyber Security Centre. Annual review 2025, October 2025.
https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/ncsc-annual-review-2025 Accessed:
2025-10-17.
[26] NIS Cooperation Group.
Annual report nis directive incidents
2024,
August
2025.
https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/repository/
document/2025-31/Annual Report NISD Security Incidents 2024
lLl8Yt8at5UKGOymYgsc0rxZrpQ 118680.pdf Accessed: 2025-11-05.
[27] Keeper of Public Records. The network and information systems regula-
tions 2018, 2018. https://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2018/506/contents
Accessed: 2025-11-27.
[28] Seema Sangari, Eric Dallal, and Michael Whitman. Modeling under-
reporting in cyber incidents. Risks, 10(11):200, 2022.
[29] Scottish Government. Network and information systems incidents: Foi re-
lease, March 2025. https://www.gov.scot/publications/foi-202500452926/
Accessed: 2025-10-04.
[30] Nicholas Seng. Cybersecurity incident reporting laws in the asia pacific.
International Cybersecurity Law Review, 4(3):325–346, 2023.
[31] Nicholas Seng. Cybersecurity regulation—types, principles, and country
deep dives in asia. International Cybersecurity Law Review, 5(3):387–
411, 2024.
[32] SMS Technology Munkedal AB. Executive summary – data breach, 2024.
https://www.smsteknik.com/executive-summary-data-breach/ Accessed:
2025-10-08.
[33] Hal S. Stern and Daniel L. Cork.
Cybercrime Classification and
Measurement.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and
Medicine and others, 2025.
[34] Verizon.
Veris framework.
https://verisframework.org/actions.html
Accessed: 2025-11-10.
[35] Verizon.
2025
data
breach
investigations
report,
2025.
https://www.verizon.com/business/resources/reports/2025-dbir-data-
breach-investigations-report.pdf Accessed: 2025-09-20.
[36] Thomas Walshe and Andrew Simpson. A longitudinal study of hacker
behaviour. In Proceedings of the 37th ACM/SIGAPP Symposium on
Applied Computing, pages 1465–1474, 2022.
[37] Andy K Zhang, Joey Ji, Celeste Menders, Riya Dulepet, Thomas Qin,
Ron Y Wang, Junrong Wu, Kyleen Liao, Jiliang Li, Jinghan Hu, et al.
Bountybench: Dollar impact of ai agent attackers and defenders on real-
world cybersecurity systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.15216, 2025.
