Title: An Overview of Cyber Security and Privacy on the Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2209.07842v1
--------------------------------------------------

An Overview of Cyber Security and Privacy on
the Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure
Roberto Metere1,⋆, Zoya Pourmirza2, Sara Walker2, Myriam Neaimeh2,3
1University of York
York, UK
2Newcastle University
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK
3The Alan Turing Institute
London, UK
Abstract—Electric vehicles (EVs) are key to alleviate
our dependency on fossil fuels. The future smart grid is
expected to be populated by millions of EVs equipped
with high-demand batteries. To avoid an overload of the
(current) electricity grid, expensive upgrades are required.
Some of the upgrades can be averted if users of EVs
participate to energy balancing mechanisms, for example
through bidirectional EV charging. As the proliferation of
consumer Internet-connected devices increases, including
EV smart charging stations, their security against cyber-
attacks and the protection of private data become a
growing concern. We need to properly adapt and develop
our current technology that must tackle the security
challenges in the EV charging infrastructure, which go
beyond the traditional technical applications in the domain
of energy and transport networks. Security must balance
with other desirable qualities such as interoperability,
crypto-agility and energy eﬃciency. Evidence suggests a gap
in the current awareness of cyber security in EV charging
infrastructures. This paper ﬁlls this gap by providing
the most comprehensive to date overview of privacy and
security challenges To do so, we review communication
protocols used in its ecosystem and provide a suggestion
of security tools that might be used for future research.
Index Terms—Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure,
Security, Privacy, Communication Protocols, Standards.
I. Introduction
The Climate Change Act of 2008 has proposed to re-
duce 100% of the UK greenhouse gas emissions by 2050
(compared to 1990 levels)[1]. A crucial part of the future
smart cities that can contribute to this goal are zero emis-
sion vehicles, such as electric vehicles (EVs). Indeed, EVs
can decrease our dependency on fossil fuels and support
smart1 and ﬂexible power systems. The management of
EVs should be able to prevent the electricity grid from
overloading, thus minimizing expensive upgrades whose
ﬁnancial impact will be, in the end, suﬀered by consumers.
The panorama of EV chargers changed rapidly from having
⋆A signiﬁcant part of this work was done while at Newcastle
University and The Alan Turing Institute.
1Throughout the paper, we use the attribute smart in its general
meaning of being interconnected with other devices’ networks, often to
the Internet.
a few slow chargers in local (and relatively small) areas,
that need not data links, to several charging stations across
cities. Such stations host a diversity of chargers, oﬀering
fast, smart charging with or without vehicle-to-grid capa-
bility (bidirectional energy transfer), and a multiplicity of
services, where private information needs to be exchanged.
As other elements in a smart city[2], EV charging in-
frastructures include smart functionality, and must ensure
cyber security, data privacy, and interoperability. Several
studies outline a critical role for cyber security considera-
tions for EV charging infrastructure, see Section VI. Apart
from a clear interest on the topic, the evidence reviewed
here suggests that relatively little has been investigated
about security in EV charging infrastructures. This includes
protocols between vehicles and chargers and between
chargers and other entities, e.g., aggregators. Additionally it
is not clear what potential cyber attacks are more relevant
or impactful to the EV charging infrastructure, nor what
are the existing guidelines and standards that relate to
providing a secure charging ecosystem. This paper aims
to ﬁll all these gaps.
A security breach on communication devices in the EV
ecosystem can have a signiﬁcant impact on the Energy and
Transport sectors[3, 4]. Securing the EV ecosystem is of
utmost importance since Energy and Transport are usually
national critical infrastructures, e.g., in the UK, they are two
of the thirteen national infrastructure sectors recognised as
critical. The loss or compromise of critical infrastructures
could impact on national security and on the availability,
integrity or delivery of essential services that are crucial for
a modern country to function and its people’s daily life.
The EV ecosystem is populated by a considerable number
of interconnected devices and entities that expose a large
potential attack surface. Attackers can be insiders, e.g., a
legitimate employee illegally selling corporate data to third
parties, or outsiders, e.g., nation-state backed cyber groups.
As EV charging infrastructures are part of energy systems,
many of cyber security and data privacy concerns related
to energy systems apply[5, 6]. For example, the smart EV
chargers that connect vehicles to the power grid make use
arXiv:2209.07842v1  [cs.CR]  16 Sep 2022
of an additional data connection to exchange information
and control commands between various entities in the
ecosystem; this makes them potential targets for cyber
security attacks.
For the future smart city to work properly, conﬁdential
data needs to be exchanged and its privacy must be
preserved. Data privacy issues relate to the messages that
need to be exchanged across the whole EV charging
ecosystem to enable for a plurality of services to consumers
and the power grid (ancillary services). Such messages
embed conﬁdential information and, thus, need not only
to be protected from leakage by latest cryptographic best
practices, but also to be treated according to data privacy
policies, e.g., General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). A
subset of the data manipulated is users’ data, such as their
identity, their vehicle and their own location, bank account
information, to name a few. Similar private information
are used in several payment systems already, where
secure communications are usually suﬃcient measures:
conversely in the EV charging infrastructure, devices
holding private information, e.g., chargers and vehicles,
are left unattended and exposed to the public for very
long periods of time. Additionally, the high mobility
nature of EVs sees EV attaching to charging stations
that need to be trusted. Trusting the infrastructure by all
participants is fundamental: a distrusting user may decide
not to participate in managed charging initiatives, with a
consequent potential disruption to the services impacting
other users. Ensuring both cyber security and data privacy
is key to gain this trust.
A. The electric vehicle ecosystem
The EV ecosystem is integrated into electricity systems
and populated by many actors, as illustrated in Fig. 1:
EVs (and their drivers), manufacturers, charging point
operators, aggregators, distribution operators, transmission
operators.
Charger points communicate with diﬀerent entities in
the EV ecosystem including vehicles, charging stations,
charging station operators, grid network operators, among
others. For example, to charge an EV, coordination and
communication is required between the vehicle, a charger
in the charging station, whose system is managed by
an operator that can aggregate multiple chargers across
multiple charging stations to oﬀer ancillary services; so,
the aggregator will also communicate with distribution
operators and, possibly, with transmission operators.
control link
sensor link
Customer + Vehicle
requirements
DNO services
Aggregator
data link
data link
Trading on TSO markets
TSO
distribution
system
operator
transmission
system
operator
DNO
Fig. 1. An overview of a smart EV charging infrastructure.
B. The electric vehicle charging infrastructure
The EV charging infrastructure is a signiﬁcant part
of the EV ecosystem. Communication protocols are used
to facilitate the charging management strategies. The EV
charging infrastructure enables the connection between
EVs and the electricity grid via charger points. When
relevant, e.g., when vehicle-to-grid is enabled, the EV
batteries can buy and sell energy; thus, users of EVs are
actively (but indirectly) exposed to the electricity market.
EVs can also oﬀer services to the building or home
(behind-the-meter services), to the neighbourhood or local
electricity networks (distribution system operator services)
and to the whole system or region (transmission system
operator services)[7, 8].
Communication protocols specify the rules to follow for
exchanging messages between entities. Protocols can be
designed for only part of the EV charging infrastructure,
e.g., CHAdeMO speciﬁes the communication between the
EV and the charger, and they may or may not be
interoperable with other protocols, for speciﬁc services that
need to involve multiple entities. This may trivially hinder
security if information must ﬂow unprotected in some
network communication links, i.e., CHAdeMO does not
protect information. Additionally, interoperability allows
for a diversity of entities, e.g. a charger can be replaced
with a charger from another manufacturer as long as it
can operate with the required charging protocols. These
protocols are either proprietary, usually developed and sold
by private groups, or open, which may be developed by an
accredited standard organisation. For open protocols, either
their speciﬁcations or their implementation (code) – or both
– are accessible at no (or minimal) cost. Open protocols
may ease interoperability, as developers of other protocols
can access to their speciﬁcations; they can also play a role
in customer’s trust.
A lack of interoperability may hinder security and pri-
vacy from at least two points of view: ﬁrst, composition
of secure protocols is not automatically secure (see Sec-
tion V-A), and, second, regulations may simply mandate the
use of speciﬁc protocols that may result non interoperable.
The former is well known in the security community;
the latter becomes non-trivial in the EV charging infras-
tructure, as it is regulated by diﬀerent (governmental)
entities that do not usually work together, e.g., the Energy
department and the Transportation department.
II. Vulnerabilities in the electric vehicle charging
infrastructure
The EV charging infrastructure populates the legacy
grid (power grid) with new entities, services, and adds
a communication layer whose entities can be connected
to the Internet. As such, it increases the attack surface
(especially from remote attacks) introducing new potential
vulnerabilities allowing for a series of cyber-attacks. Such
attacks could be perpetrated through communication chan-
nels (as for in the Internet) and aim to provoke disruption to
the power grid and its services, or more in general to the
Energy and Transport sectors. A synchronised and well-
orchestrated attack may exploit multiple vulnerabilities:
this is particularly worrying as the physical dimension
of energy systems is prone to cascading eﬀect in case of
(targeted) failures[9]. Cyber-attacks can be perpetrated in
various ways, some of which go beyond technical vulner-
abilities. In this section we discuss cyber vulnerabilities
in EV charging infrastructures and security standards that
could help secure this infrastructure.
Recent studies[10, 11] identiﬁed the key cyber security
challenges of the complex EV charging ecosystem. They
are: physical limitations of devices and communication
channels; human factor, heterogeneity, scale, and ad-hoc
nature of threats; authentication and identity management;
authorisation and access control; and updating, respon-
sibility, and accountability. Vulnerabilities in the above
challenges potentially put systems at risks of cyber attacks.
To identify the risks of a system, a traditional approach is
to break down the problem in several categories of desired
security goals such as the well-established CIA triad:
conﬁdentiality, integrity and availability. Conﬁdentiality is
to make sure that some data is only accessible by authorised
users. Integrity is to enforce trust in the information that
is ﬂowing, and ensure modiﬁcation can only be done
by authorised agents. Availability is to make sure the
information is available in a timely manner and responds
to the queries of the user within an expected time frame
(e.g., Denial of Service (DoS) attack).
In Table I, we identiﬁed possible attacks according to the
security goals of conﬁdentiality, integrity and availability,
and the impact of attacks in terms of physical impact, cyber
impact or social impact. Detecting cyber-threats against
EV ecosystems is a complicated task, due to the large
spread of the attack surface, and evolving EV charging
infrastructures. The attack surface is enlarged even more if
we consider coexisting networks that partially manipulate
the same data[2]. We can study the cyber-attack against
such systems from various perspectives. For example from
an administrative perspective, a representative infrastruc-
ture and associated cyber-attacks against the power grid
can be simulated in a virtual environment to evaluate and
train operators to identify, detect and respond in a timely
manner. From an end-user perspective it is essential to
educate the users to a variety of risks, which remain to
be identiﬁed (e.g., connecting a vehicle to open wireless
hotspots in the vicinity of charging stations). From a
technical perspective, EVs and the grid must encompass a
range of traditional measures and protection devices such
as ﬁrewalls, intrusion detection systems, disabling default
credentials, encryption of communications, among others.
In this context, we emphasise that batteries in EVs can
quickly transfer an amount of energy comparable to what
several households averagely transfer in a much longer
period of time. As such, some attacks, as load-changing
attacks[12] (see Table I), are far more impactful if they
target EVs rather than traditional residential load.
III. Standards for EV infrastructure
As the proliferation of consumer Internet-connected
devices increases, as traditionally oﬄine systems have now
become online. To ascertain that enough measures have
been taken to provide security, a number of standards have
been developed in diﬀerent contexts. We brieﬂy discuss
security considerations of some of them, whose context
relates to the EV charging infrastructure.
ENCS and ElaadNL[13]. The European Network for
Cyber Security (ENCS) in collaboration with ElaadNL pub-
lished several technical documents oﬀering insights and
considerations to develop secure charging infrastructure.
These include a security test plan for EV charging stations
and a proposed security architecture for charging infras-
TABLE I
Possible security attacks classified according with the CIA triad and impact.
Legend. Security: C – confidentiality, I – integrity, A – availability; Impact: S – Social, C – cyber, P – physical.
C
I
A
S
C
P
Atack type
Specific target
(optional)
Security
Impact
Example
Denial of Service (DoS)
Communication broken either at aggregator level or broader
Bruteforcing
EV
Guess passwords used in the charger’s network
Delay atack
Power requests at incorrect timing may cause breakdowns
Replay atack
Incorrectly replaying power requests may cause breakdowns
Snooping
An atacker may link messages to the same user to stalk,
track, profile, or learn life habits (among others)
Sybil atack
Aggregator
Copy ID tokens to multiply energy charge for free
Impersonation
EV, aggregator
Steal energy from either directions
Cloning
EV owner
If an RFID tag is subject to duplication, an intruder could
identify themself as the tag owner
Man-in-the-middle
Tamper with messages so that charging controls can be sent
in reverse
Repudiation
EV
Denial to charge a legitimate EV
EV misbehave
Aggregator/billing
Adding nois can lead to wrong information yielding wrong
decisions
Misinformation
EV owner
EV owners fed with fake information (incentive to charge at
peak times) can change their behaviour in a way that
corresponds to an atack to the grid
Load-changing atack
EV, aggregator
Synchronise charging or discharging operations to provoke
unbalance in the power grid
tructure. Among their documents, they oﬀer guidelines
for a future-proof design for EV charging devices, and
propose the designs of a peer-to-peer public-key infras-
tructure (PKI)[14] compatible and coexisting with the PKI
proposed by ISO 15118. A brief description of public-key
infrastructures is provided by Metere et al.[10].
BSI PAS 1878 and 1879. Both PAS 1878[15] and
1879[16] are dedicated to energy smart appliances, includ-
ing the EV charging infrastructure and the V2G technology.
BSI PAS 1878 focuses on system functionality and archi-
tecture, while BSI PAS 1879 provides a code of practice
on the demand side response operations. They propose
an end-to-end security framework that secures assets such
as energy smart appliances (ESA) (e.g., EV chargers) and
consumer energy managers (CEM), verifying actors such
as demand-side response providers (DSRSP), and securing
communications between ESA and CEM, or between CEM
and DSRSP. Without explaining all details, we suggest BSI
PAS 1879[16, Table A1] for a quick reference of their
security speciﬁcations.
National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST). The Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) is
one of the six laboratories at NIST, which is responsible to
develop reference data, tests, methods, proof of concept im-
plementations, and technical analyses to improve the high-
quality, independent, and unbiased research and data. NIST
standards are in-line and consistent with standards pub-
lished by the International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) and International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC).
For a brief overview on the cyber security framework from
NIST, we refer to Metere et al.[10].
Cyber Essential and ISO 27001. In 2014 the UK
government launched an assurance scheme called Cyber
Essential (CE)[17] that is the minimum certiﬁcation re-
quired for a government supplier handling personal infor-
mation. CE identiﬁed ﬁve technical cyber security controls
that could be implemented by organizations to provide
a baseline for cyber security. In 2005 an international
standard for information security was introduced, ISO/IEC
27001[18], that speciﬁes best practices for information secu-
rity management systems. ISO 27001 does not have speciﬁc
requirements for compliance similar to the CE and does
not apply to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)
working in the UK. Pourmirza and Walker[11] provide
further comparison between CE and ISO 27001.
We have two ﬁnal remarks. The ﬁrst remark is that
entities in the EV charging infrastructure will also be
connected to IoT devices, e.g., EVs use sensors and can
be connected to (home) networks with smart appliances.
As such, they are also expected to be aware of threats that
may come from those additional networks, and that can
be regulated by diﬀerent policies, e.g., the cyber security
for Internet of Things (IoT) published by the European
Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI)[19, 20]. The
second remark is about the ongoing activity to establish
regulation. The publication of the European Cyber Security
Act has initiated the work on the Network Code on
energy-speciﬁc cyber security2 which is currently under
development. Network Code has legal status within the
EU; as previously part of the EU, the UK has implemented
antecedent related documents.
IV. Privacy challenges
The EV ecosystem, as part of the smart grid, is currently
oﬀering an increasing number of services; consequently,
the amount of sensible data required to enable such services
increases too. This is particularly remarked by the adoption
emerging technologies, e.g. vehicle-to-grid, that promote
consumers (who merely consume energy) to prosumers
(who can provide energy to other consumers).
Private information are exchanged between various enti-
ties in the EV ecosystem with the aim of providing accuracy
and reliability of services. Related communications must
preserve privacy[21, 22] and develop into the already
existing (unrelated) services oﬀered to end-users, e.g., map
directions and remote control. Communications typical of
the broader context of sustainable resilient cities[23] partly
show similar privacy concerns; though we can be more
detailed as our context is narrower.
Mobile users are familiar with providing private data
(i.e., GPS location) in return of an improved personalised
service (e.g., traﬃc-aware driving directions, locations of
nearby restaurants, among others). Especially after recent
regulations on privacy, e.g. GDPR, it becomes more and
more common for users to be able to opt out from
sharing (some of) their data. A service that respects users’
preferences may work with limited functionality or not
work at all.
Similarly to mobile services, drivers of electric vehicles
can participate to (smart) charging services to reduce the
cost of their movements. To enjoy an optimal service,
users would put their trust to operators to control their
charging operations and log their driving patterns (i.e., time
of arrival, departure). Apart from the expected personally
identiﬁable information that can be involved, other usage
data that does not immediately identify as personal can still
be collected and further analysed to extract life patterns
and habits, which are of private concerns. If protecting data
communication is thus a key requirement for a secure EV
2https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/ﬁles/sgtf_eg2_2nd_interim_
report_ﬁnal.pdf
ecosystem, so is security of storages, databases and other
memories that store private information temporarily (e.g.,
cache memory).
The impact and importance of privacy is augmented in
those cases where a vehicle communicates with a mobile
device, and both are often connected to the Internet, see
Fig. 2. Such communication is necessary to oﬀer monitoring
Internet
mobile
application
Car
operating
system
(Android?)
Fig. 2. Scheme of communication between the vehicle and its driver.
and (remote) control functionality, e.g., locking doors,
climate, monitoring, park location, assistance, or charging
preferences. Modern vehicles can be constantly connected
to the Internet; the driver of an EV can share their schedule
with the charging operator through their smart phones.
This would be done to allow the charging operator to set a
charging proﬁle adequate and respectful to upcoming trips
of the driver.
Not all manufacturers oﬀer the same services, and thus
they do not require the same pieces of user’s personal
data. Table II summarises the permissions that are required
from Android applications. As an example of such services,
TABLE II
Summary of permissions of some Android applications to monitor
and remote control cars (as of 2020).
Nissan
Peugeot
Vauxhall
Tesla
Toyota
BMW
Audi,Mini
Renault
Jaguar
VW
DeviceID & call
info
Phone accounts
Phone status
Location
Calendar
Photos/
Media/Files
Contacts
Camera/
Microphone
Full network
access
Prevent sleep
Device & app
history
most mobile apps by manufacturers (e.g.,Tesla, Audi, Toyota
and others) require read-and-write permissions to the
user’s calendar. Certainly, one must be cautious when
accepting permissions in mobile applications; though,
granting permissions does not mean that all permitted
functions will be used. For example, when an user grants
an application to access their calendar, the application will
unlikely retrieve all their past and future events from the
calendar, or share them to some third party. Yet, the granted
permissions might allow to do so. This caveat is linked
to the relevance of oﬀering open source implementations,
where an (experienced) user can practically inspect the
source code, see what information are stored, and where do
they migrate to (e.g., sent to external servers). We strongly
recommend servers that collect user’s data to anonymise
and aggregate such data to protect their privacy.
Misuses of user’s data are (obviously) negatively per-
ceived by users; as a direct implication, they might resist in
participating in necessary initiatives, e.g., smart charging.
Those who distrust “smart” system would not easily adopt
to them. Learning from the past, we refer to when smart
meters were rolled-out in several countries. Their deploy-
ment overlooked non-technical factors, such as social and
ethical considerations. This had a considerable impact on
the (immediate) success of smart meter adoption and, as
a consequence, could have diminished the trust to future
smart energy system.
Scheduling of charging sessions. As electric vehicles
can demand for a signiﬁcant amount of energy, it is fun-
damental to schedule charging operations to avoid unnec-
essary situations of over-demand on peak times. Important
in this context (but not only) is the emerging technology of
vehicle-to-grid (V2G) that enables for bidirectional energy
transfer in EVs. Thus it also enables aggregators to provide
ancillary services to aid the reliability of the power grid,
such as frequency regulation, voltage regulation, power-
loss replacements or other services. Those services, along
with the potential access by private users (e.g., owners
of the electric vehicles) to the energy market, need to be
regulated and controlled. Many algorithms to enact those
services or to obtain optimal performances toward some
desirable goal (i.e., ﬁnancial, resilience, and others) have
been proposed in the literature, see Table III.
From the perspective of cybersecurity, bidirectional
charging requires an additional communication layer where
new sensible data ﬂows and needs to be protected. Failing
to protect such data will permit conﬁdential information to
migrate elsewhere, e.g., through coexisting communication
networks in vehicles[24]. Thus, it is important to consider
what are the data required by those algorithms to run,
and determining what part of data are sensible relating
to privacy. The most relevant parameters to privacy we
consider are: capacity of the EV battery, state of charge
of the EV battery, charging rate of the EV battery (often
the output of the algorithm – negative rate would mean
discharging), arrival/departure time when the EV battery
is attached to the charger, and when it plans to leave,
network topology of aggregators and chargers, aggregator
income or cost relating to the revenue when trading in
the energy market, price oﬀered to EVs when the energy
market is mediated by aggregators which can establish
custom prices, system load the demand of a grid node (e.g.,
distribution), and trip distance or time the distance planned,
or the maximum allowed by a full tank and full battery, and
the time required to cover the distance. We summarised
scheduling algorithms proposed in the literature, especially
those relating to V2G technology, in Table III. Those
algorithms are mainly focused on two aspects: optimisation
economical revenues, by either participating in ancillary
services or optimising the usage of hybrid engines and
trips; and involving V2G into ancillary services, that are
oﬀered by regulating the charging rate of electric vehicles.
V. Communication protocols
Protocols that have been proposed in EV charging infras-
tructures can be grouped into front-end and back-end pro-
tocols[8], as illustrated in Fig. 3. Front-end protocols specify
CHAdeMO
ISO 15118
others
OCPP
OpenADR
IEEE 2030.5
IEC 63110
EEBus
EV ﬂeet
Charger
beyond the charger
Fig. 3. Communications protocols in EV charging infrastructures.
the communication between the EVs and the chargers,
while the back-end protocols specify the communication
between the charger and other entities, or among other
entities beyond the charger. In this section we review some
front-end protocols, i.e., ISO 15118 and CHAdeMO, and
comment on proprietary protocols. Afterward, we review
back-end protocols, i.e., OCCP, IEC 63110, OpenADR, IEEE
2030.5, and EEBus. Finally, we compare these protocols and
draw some security considerations.
A. Security analysis of communication protocols
Before discussing in details the security of protocols in
the EV ecosystem, it might be useful to recall how security
analysis of communication protocols is currently done. In
TABLE III
Summary of data used by proposed algorithms. The symbol
is used when the value is used but as average, approximate or a relatable
value is reqired, otherwise
when it is directly reqired; if the value is not reqired, we use
.
capacity
state of charge
charging rate
arrival/departure time
network topology
aggregator income/cost
price oﬀered to EVs
system load
trip distance/time
Han et al.[25]
Sortomme et al.[26]
Lunz et al.[27]
Shi et al.[28]
Sortomme et al.[29]
Mal et al.[30]
Turker et al.[31]
2010-2013
Mohamed et al.[32]
Ansari et al.[33]
Lin et al.[34]
Ansari et al.[35]
Kavousi et al.[36]
Yu et al.[37]
2014-2017
Lam et al.[38]
Ko et al.[39]
°
Turker et al.[40]
Chen et al.[41]
Li et al.[42]
Liang et al.[43]
Jin et al.[44]
Zhou et al.[45]
2018-2021
Kasani et al.[46]
°: shared between multiple aggregators
fact, we do not attempt to discuss security challenges of
protocols from a technical point of view, but limit ourselves
to provide an overview of their current conﬁguration.
Before that, we notice that the most commonly used suite
of (cryptographic) protocols to secure communication in
the EV charging infrastructure is TLS, as illustrated in
Section V-D. However, we remark that using TLS is not
enough, security can be jeopardised by either an improper
conﬁguration of TLS itself or its composition with other
(even secure) protocols. To appreciate the mechanics of
compositional security ﬂaws and the boundary of a security
property, we provide an intuitive example. The popular
WhatsApp provides end-to-end secure communications
guaranteeing the conﬁdentiality of the messages; however,
as soon as you enable backups to third parties, e.g. Google
Drive, then all “messages you back up are not protected by
WhatsApp end-to-end encryption while in Google Drive”.
Therefore, the backup exposes the unencrypted messages to
another communication protocol (composition) that exports
them to somewhere else, and whose security cannot be
guaranteed by the previously used protocol.
Commonly, the ﬁrst security analysis of a communi-
cation protocol is proposed by their authors as a math-
ematical discussion over some desirable properties (e.g.,
secrecy, authentication) that depend on the context (e.g.,
cloud storage, automotive, mobile application) and the
purpose or application of the protocol (e.g., management
of charging schedule). Security of protocols in the EV
charging infrastructure is not an exception, and some of
the most used protocols do not even attempt to cope with
(information) security[47].
State-of-the-art analysis of cryptographic protocols (in
this and other contexts) currently provides a mechanised
mathematical model of the speciﬁcations along with a
reproducible, automatic analysis of (some) security proper-
ties[48, 49, 50, 51, 52]. The related tools make use of formal
languages and are familiar only to some security experts,
who may still ﬁnd it diﬃcult to choose the right tools for
the protocol to analyse (a useful comparison and guidelines
are from Barbosa et al.[53]). Lauser et al.[54] appreciated
the importance of using the most popular formal security
tools for the protocols used in the automotive industry; but
a security expert is still needed to use such tools properly.
To enable non experts to approach veriﬁcation of security
or protocols, the modelling task needs to be automated
too. Unfortunately, the literature shows little eﬀort toward
automating the modelling task[55, 56, 57, 58]. Still, their
methodology either is not mature enough to be adopted by
non experts or it is not ready to be used outside of the
academic community.
As a ﬁnal remark, we stress that the formal veriﬁcation
process of security protocols, when possible, is very diﬃcult
and time consuming. Thus, it is common that researchers
tend to focus only on the most popular protocols, where
their research could be impactful.
B. Front-end Protocols: EV to Charger
1) CHAdeMO: One of the ﬁrst charging protocols of-
fering bidirectional energy transfer for EVs is CHAdeMO.
It works in direct current and uses the internal commu-
nication network of modern cars, the CAN bus. While
CHAdeMO implements safety, it does not implement se-
cure communications. CHAdeMO follows the standard IEC
61851-23:2014 for the actual charging and discharging
operations, and follows the standard IEC 61851-24:2014
for the digital communication between the car and the
charger. When an EV plugs in with the CHAdeMO cable,
it connects directly its CAN bus to the (untrusted) charger,
and messages are exchanged unencrypted. Hence, security
breaches of the CAN bus directly aﬀect the CHAdeMO
protocol. We refer to Metere et al.[10] for a description
of its vulnerabilities.
2) ISO 15118: A more recent front-end protocol is ISO
15118. ISO 15118 can, but is not limited to, work over
the Combined Charging System (CCS), which is a set of
hardware and software standards for charging systems.
One main characteristic of ISO 15118 is the speciﬁcation
of digital certiﬁcates to authenticate devices. With them
it oﬀers seamless services, as Plug&Charge (PnC), allow-
ing for automated authentication and authorization. To
oﬀer security, ISO 15118 suggests3 the adoption of TLS.
Eavesdropping wireless attacks on the physical-layer of
3"TLS is not mandatory for certain Identiﬁcation Modes other than the
Plug-and-Charge Identiﬁcation Mode", from ISO15118-2:2014 (revised and
reconﬁrmed in 2020).
the CCS[59] have been demonstrated; such attacks can be
avoided by mandating the use TLS.
3) Security of Proprietary protocols: the example of Tesla:
Some companies, e.g., Tesla, implemented their own alter-
native front-end protocols. An analysis based on reverse
engineering[60] showed that their protocol works over the
CAN bus. The general architecture of the CAN bus shows
a central gateway that connect other buses with electronic
units, e.g., ABS, and telematic units, e.g., Bluetooth and
WiFi modules. In a work from Nie et al.[61], authors
describe how they exploited an anomaly in the gateway
that allowed them to use wireless communication to inject
malicious messages into the CAN bus. The attack was so
devastating that they could gain remote control of the car.
Interestingly, this vulnerability was patched by Tesla in
only 10 days.
C. Back-end Protocols: Charger to third party operators
1) OCPP: The Open Charge Point Protocol (OCPP) pro-
vides accessibility, compliance, and uniform communica-
tions between electric vehicle charging stations (CS) and
charging station management systems (CSMS), with no
cost or licensing barriers. This protocol is becoming the de
facto standard protocol and enables customers to switch the
charging network without replacing the charging station.
As of 2019 the use of OCPP 1.6 (or equivalent) is required
for new charging stations in the UK. Since this version,
an Internet connection is enabled and potentially increases
the devices’ attack surface. The latest version, OCPP 2,
improves the security measures: secure connection setup,
security events/logging, and secure ﬁrmware update. Only
recently, the open charge alliance published a standard
way to address (some) security using OCPP 1.6-J, as before
then the security design was fully delegated to individual
implementers of OCPP (in other words, no security was
speciﬁed). OCPP 2 can operate according to three security
proﬁles, illustrated in Table IV: Unsecured Transport with
Basic Authentication, TLS with Basic Authentication and
TLS with Client-Side Certiﬁcates.
2) IEEE 2030.5: IEEE 2030.5 is a standard whose design is
dedicated and optimised for devices in the same home area
network. In relation with the EV charging infrastructure, it
speciﬁes communication protocol suitable for being used
between most entities: aggregators, home-smart devices,
chargers, EVs.
Security is a ﬁrst-class citizen in IEEE 2030.5, diﬀerently
from some of its predecessors, e.g., IEC 61850. In IEEE
2030.5 devices embed a life-long certiﬁcate that cannot
be renewed or revoked and must be exchanged privately.
TABLE IV
OCPP security profiles.
Authentication
Profile
Charging
Station
Charging
Station
Management
System
Security
Unsecured
Transport
with Basic
Authentication
credentials
trusted
–
TLS with Basic
Authentication
credentials
X509
certificate
TLS
TLS with
Client-Side
Authentication
X509
certificate
X509
certificate
TLS
This is in strong contrast with a PKI that is thus not
supported by the standard. We remark that revocation is
a crucial feature. An example from the Internet, in 2014
a bug aﬀecting the TLS protocols was discovered and
aﬀected a signiﬁcant number of server and websites. As
a consequence, the authenticity of their certiﬁcate could
not be trustable any longer and needed to be revoked
and reissued[62]. For this reason, IEEE 2030.5 does not
currently scale and therefore is not applicable to the whole
EV charging infrastructure.
3) OpenADR: At a higher level if compare with OCPP,
we have Open Automated Demand Response (OpenADR).
It is an information exchange model for distributed energy
resources (DERs). Still on a high level, it generally relies
on a (centralised) gateway, or an aggregator to translate
utility Demand Responses (DR) and DER requirements into
speciﬁc device behaviours.
Security of OpenADR is provided by the (mandatory)
use of TLS. TLS is used to oﬀer integrity (including
authentication) and conﬁdentiality. Legacy devices might
not be compliant with OpenADR due to limited resources,
e.g., insuﬃcient processing power or network bandwidth.
Through TLS, an implementation of the PKI for OpenADR
(by Kyrio, Inc. a subsidiary of CableLabs) creates an
ecosystem to trust identities through digital certiﬁcates4.
In OpenADR, the architecture of entities is abstracted
(virtual nodes), taking an indirect approach toward device
control, in contrast with the approach of IEEE 2030.5. Some
of the functionality oﬀered by OpenADR and IEEE 2030.5
overlap; though, their interoperability is possible and (just)
requires some isolation between the two, e.g., avoiding
4More details on PKIs are provided in Metere et al.[10].
controlling the same devices with incompatible decisions.
4) IEC 63110: IEC 63110 is a back-end protocol dedicated
to charging and discharging operations of EVs, still under
development 5. Their approach to cyber security is direct,
as they mandate the use of TLS for all communications; in
particular, it oﬀers end-to-end security between clients and
servers. Additionally, IEC63110 can natively interoperate
with ISO 15118 (with TLS) and fully supports its PKI.
5) EEBus: Due to some similarities that the EV charging
infrastructure has with communications of Internet of
Things (IoT) devices, another suite of protocols that could
be possibly be used is EEBus. EEBus emphasises on what
data structure is used for communication, and how they are
exchanged among entities, and many companies adopted it.
The suite of protocols speciﬁed in EEBus work at diﬀerent
levels: the SPINE (Smart Premises Interoperable Neutral-
message Exchange) protocol works at the information layer
and the SHIP (Smart Home IP) protocol works at the
communication layer. SHIP implements TLS to provide a
secure TCP/IP-based solution. To provide security, SPINE
runs over SHIP. Overall, EEBus can operate along with
the Internet and can be, in principle, used for securing
communications in the EV charging infrastructure. Even if
EEBus speciﬁcations are free and open, no existing actual
implementations is freely available6.
D. Summary of protocols in the EV ecosystem
The Table V summarises front-end and back-end proto-
cols reviewed in Sections V-B and V-C. The table shows
the status of each protocol in terms of cyber security,
openness, and interoperability. This summary reﬂects how
cyber security has been considered in the communication
network of EV charging infrastructure. Although the focus
of this work is on cyber security, we also provide status
about open specs, open code, and interoperability to oﬀer a
comprehensive reference for future practice by researchers
in this area.
VI. Related work
Several studies have investigated cyber security and pri-
vacy challenges and their impact on interconnected energy
systems. This paper signiﬁcantly extends beyond the work
of Pourmirza and Walker[11] and, partly, Metere et al.[10].
On top of them, we provide a single comprehensive and
detailed overview of security and privacy on EV charging
5https://www.ncl.ac.uk/media/wwwnclacuk/cesi/ﬁles/20200115_
MeetIEC63110_PaulBertandSmartFuture-min.pdf
6https://medium.com/grandcentrix/will-microsoft-joining-eebus-
ﬁnally-bring-us-an-open-source-reference-implementation-3432a93dd2e6
TABLE V
Summary of the security of communication protocols in EV
charging infrastructures.
Legend:
– none;
– partial or optional;
– partial (in security,
TLS without no PKI);
– full (in security, TLS and PKI).
Protocol
Security
Open specs
Open code
Interoperability
CHAdeMO
–
Front-end
ISO 15118
–
2.0
OCPP
1.6-J
ISO 15118 TLS
≤1.6
IEC 63110
–
ISO 15118 TLS
OpenADR
IEEE 2030.5
IEEE 2030.5
OpenADR
Back-end
EEBus
infrastructure. We propose a detailed review of front-end
and back-end protocols currently used in the EV charging
infrastructure. Beyond that, we mention additional attack
types and examples. We also extend the discussion on
standards for EV infrastructure by including PAS 1878 and
PAS 1879, to which the authors contributed.
On the same topic as this work, Khalid et al.[63] showed
their concern on a lack of standards addressing cyber
security challenges. However, their research restricts to
battery energy management only, while we cover the whole
EV ecosystem. A relatively less recent work on the same
lines[64] analyses security limiting to a brief discussion of
potential threats on a proposed design of the EV ecosystem.
After a decade of advancements in the ﬁeld, we can refer
to protocols used in the real world.
An overview of cyber security issues related to EVs has
been discussed by Fraiji et al.[65], where they highlighted
the challenges of the Internet of Electric Vehicles, i.e., vehi-
cles, sensors, humans, road infrastructure, and charging sta-
tions. Their discussion does not include the Energy sector.
With close relation to the EV charging infrastructure, Reeh
et al.[66] assessed vulnerability and risks of cyber-physical
attacks that can potentially aﬀect the speciﬁc EV charging
infrastructure of UCLA WinSmartEV™. Though, their study
is far from being comprehensive as their analysis is based
on a collection of potential attacks in similar contexts,
without taking into consideration any of the protocols that
are commonly used in the EV charging infrastructure.
Probably the closest (and most recent) works to ours
are by Antoun et al.[67] and by Van Aubel and Poll[68].
They survey and link attacks and proposed mitigations
found in the literature on the EV charging ecosystem.
However, they focus on the OCPP protocol (EV charger
management) and do not review other back-end protocols
used in the EV charging infrastructure, which are reviewed
in this paper. Van Aubel and Poll[68] share with us the goal
of providing a cyber security analysis; however, ours is
more comprehensive of protocols and we also add privacy
concerns, see Section IV. Our work relates to the situation
of EV charging in the UK, their work could be (partly) used
to compare with the situation of charging infrastructure
Netherlands.
VII. Conclusions and future directions
In this paper we explored cyber security of EV charging
infrastructure by providing an overview of system vulner-
abilities, key challenges, and its requirements. This work is
the most comprehensive study to date of cyber security for
EV charging infrastructure. Moreover, we discussed privacy
concerns for the users and data required to be exchanged
by various entities. Finally, we provided a comprehensive
review of front-end and back-end communication protocols
that are currently used, or are in active development.
Overall, we recommend considerations of the whole
system approach rather than focusing on one particular
entity. The whole system should cover people (consumers),
physical environment (settings where EV ecosystem com-
ponents are installed including consumer premises, service
provider and cloud/edge environment), process (business
process used to deliver services and control decisions), and
technology (technical issues for design and development
of secure components and data). We can appreciate a ten-
dency to adopt security by design, as in recent regulations
proposed in similar contexts, e.g., smart meters or IoT.
Future research on the security related to data and
communications in the EV charging infrastructure can
be carried out with existing tools and techniques. Not
surprisingly, such tools are already used to analyse or
evaluate the security of the larger smart grid or a
portion of it, e.g., cyber-physical systems. We suggest
the following reading to explore similar tools [69]. Apart
from those mentioned in Section V-A that are suitable
for technical analysis of speciﬁc protocols, a commonly
used methodology is simulation of the power network or
the communication network, or a co-simulation of both of
them. Recent eﬀorts [70, 71] suggest that co-simulation is
suitable for modelling security ﬂaws and, in particular, their
eﬀects to the voltage, current or frequency in the simulated
system, that can be devastating [72, 73]. As in other realities
of the smart grid [74], cyber-threat intelligence would be
desirably collected by security practitioners, solutions as
intrusion detection/prevention systems would be adopted,
and proper physical security would be implemented.
Acknowledgment
This research was partly funded by The Alan Turing
Institute Data-Centric Engineering Programme under a
grant from the Lloyd’s Register Foundation (G0095), an
Innovate UK e4Future grant (104227), under a grant from
EPSRC for Active Building Centre (EP/V012053/1), and
supported by the Industrial Strategy Challenge Fund under
the programme grant EP/S016627/1. The authors would like
to thank Charles Morisset, Carsten Maple, Xavier Bellekens,
Ricardo M. Czekster for their review and comments that
made part of our narrative more ﬂuid and rigorous.
References
[1] UK, “Climate Change Act,” https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/
2008/27, 2008.
[2] J. Laufs, H. Borrion, and B. Bradford, “Security and the smart city:
A systematic review,” Sustainable cities and society, vol. 55, 2020.
[3] M. Zeller, “Myth or reality – Does the AURORA vulnerability pose a
risk to my generator?” in 2011 64th Annual Conference for Protective
Relay Engineers.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 130–136.
[4] D. E. Whitehead, K. Owens, D. Gammel, and J. Smith, “Ukraine cyber-
induced power outage: Analysis and practical mitigation strategies,”
in 2017 70th Annual Conference for Protective Relay Engineers (CPRE).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–8.
[5] R. Ebrahimy and Z. Pourmirza, “Cyber-interdependency in Smart
Energy Systems,” in ICISSP, 2017, pp. 529–537.
[6] C. Cameron, C. Patsios, P. C. Taylor, and Z. Pourmirza, “Using self-
organizing architectures to mitigate the impacts of denial-of-service
attacks on voltage control schemes,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid,
vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 3010–3019, 2018.
[7] P. B. Andersen, S. H. Toghroljerdi, T. M. Sørensen, B. E. Christensen,
J. Høj, and A. Zecchino, “The Parker Project,” Final Report, 2019.
[8] M. Neaimeh and P. B. Andersen, “Mind the gap-open communication
protocols for vehicle grid integration,” Energy Informatics, vol. 3,
no. 1, p. 1, 2020.
[9] V. R. Palleti, S. Adepu, V. K. Mishra, and A. Mathur, “Cascading
eﬀects of cyber-attacks on interconnected critical infrastructure,”
Cybersecurity, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–19, 2021.
[10] R. Metere, M. Neaimeh, C. Morisset, C. Maple, X. Bellekens, and R. M.
Czekster, “Securing the Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.02905, 2021.
[11] Z. Pourmirza and S. Walker, “Electric vehicle charging station: Cyber
security challenges and perspective,” in 2021 IEEE 9th International
Conference on Smart Energy Grid Engineering (SEGE).
IEEE, 2021.
[12] L. Arnaboldi, R. M. Czekster, C. Morisset, and R. Metere, “Modelling
load-changing attacks in cyber-physical systems,” Electronic Notes in
Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 353, pp. 39–60, 2020.
[13] ENCS, “EV Charging Systems – Security Requirements,” European
Network for Cyber Security (ENCS) and ElaadNL, White paper, 2019.
[14] ElaadNL, “Exploring the public key infrastructure for ISO 15118
in the EV charging ecosystem,” https://www.elaad.nl/uploads/ﬁles/
Exploring_the_PKI_for_ISO_15118_in_the_EV_charging_ecoystem_
V1.0s2.pdf, ElaadNL, Arnhem, The Netherlands, Report, 2018.
[15] P. 1878, “Energy smart appliances – System functionality and
architecture,” The British Standards Institution, Publicly Available
Speciﬁcation, 2021.
[16] P. 1879, “Energy smart appliances – Demand side response opera-
tion,” The British Standards Institution, Publicly Available Speciﬁca-
tion, 2021.
[17] NCSC
(National
Cyber
Security
Centre),
“Cyber
Essentials,”
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/cyber-essentials-
scheme-overview, 2018.
[18] I. 27001:2013, “Information technology – Security techniques – Infor-
mation security management systems – Requirements,” International
Organization for Standardization, Geneva, CH, Standard, 2013.
[19] ETSI,
“Cyber
Security
for
Consumer
Internet
of
Things,”
https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_ts/103600_103699/103645/01.01.
01_60/ts_103645v010101p.pdf, ETSI, Technical Speciﬁcation, 2019.
[20] ——, “Cyber Security for Consumer Internet of Things: Baseline
Requirements,” https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_en/303600_303699/
303645/02.01.01_60/en_303645v020101p.pdf, ETSI, European Stan-
dard, 2020.
[21] H. M. Khan, A. Khan, F. Jabeen, and A. U. Rahman, “Privacy
preserving data aggregation with fault tolerance in fog-enabled
smart grids,” Sustainable Cities and Society, vol. 64, 2021.
[22] A. Farao, E. Veroni, C. Ntantogian, and C. Xenakis, “P4g2go: A
privacy-preserving scheme for roaming energy consumers of the
smart grid-to-go,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 8, p. 2686, 2021.
[23] M. A. Ferrag, L. A. Maglaras, H. Janicke, J. Jiang, and L. Shu,
“A systematic review of data protection and privacy preservation
schemes for smart grid communications,” Sustainable cities and
society, vol. 38, pp. 806–835, 2018.
[24] H. Abualola, H. Otrok, R. Mizouni, and S. Singh, “A V2V charging
allocation protocol for electric vehicles in VANET,” Vehicular
Communications, p. 100427, 2021.
[25] S. Han, S. Han, and K. Sezaki, “Development of an optimal vehicle-
to-grid aggregator for frequency regulation,” IEEE Transactions on
Smart Grid, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 65–72, 2010.
[26] E. Sortomme and M. A. El-Sharkawi, “Optimal scheduling of vehicle-
to-grid energy and ancillary services,” IEEE Transactions on Smart
Grid, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 351–359, 2011.
[27] B. Lunz, H. Walz, and D. U. Sauer, “Optimizing vehicle-to-grid
charging strategies using genetic algorithms under the consideration
of battery aging,” in 2011 IEEE vehicle power and propulsion
conference.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–7.
[28] W. Shi and V. W. Wong, “Real-time vehicle-to-grid control algorithm
under price uncertainty,” in 2011 IEEE International Conference on
Smart Grid Communications.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 261–266.
[29] E. Sortomme and K. Cheung, “Intelligent dispatch of electric vehicles
performing vehicle-to-grid regulation,” in 2012 IEEE International
Electric Vehicle Conference.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 1–6.
[30] S. Mal, A. Chattopadhyay, A. Yang, and R. Gadh, “Electric vehicle
smart charging and vehicle-to-grid operation,” International Journal
of Parallel, Emergent and Distributed Systems, vol. 28, no. 3, 2013.
[31] H. Turker, A. Hably, and S. Bacha, “Housing peak shaving algorithm
(HPSA) with plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs): Vehicle-to-
Home (V2H) and Vehicle-to-Grid (V2G) concepts,” in 4th International
Conference on Power Engineering, Energy and Electrical Drives. IEEE,
2013, pp. 753–759.
[32] A. Mohamed, V. Salehi, T. Ma, and O. Mohammed, “Real-time energy
management algorithm for plug-in hybrid electric vehicle charging
parks involving sustainable energy,” IEEE Transactions on Sustainable
Energy, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 577–586, 2013.
[33] M. Ansari, A. T. Al-Awami, M. Abido, and E. Sortomme, “Optimal
charging strategies for unidirectional vehicle-to-grid using fuzzy
uncertainties,” in 2014 IEEE PES T&D Conference and Exposition.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–5.
[34] J. Lin, K.-C. Leung, and V. O. Li, “Optimal scheduling with vehicle-
to-grid regulation service,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 1,
no. 6, pp. 556–569, 2014.
[35] M. Ansari, A. T. Al-Awami, E. Sortomme, and M. Abido, “Coordi-
nated bidding of ancillary services for vehicle-to-grid using fuzzy
optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 6, no. 1, 2014.
[36] A. Kavousi-Fard, M. A. Rostami, and T. Niknam, “Reliability-oriented
reconﬁguration of vehicle-to-grid networks,” IEEE transactions on
industrial informatics, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 682–691, 2015.
[37] R. Yu, W. Zhong, S. Xie, C. Yuen, S. Gjessing, and Y. Zhang,
“Balancing power demand through EV mobility in vehicle-to-grid
mobile energy networks,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics,
vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 79–90, 2015.
[38] A. Y. Lam, J. James, Y. Hou, and V. O. Li, “Coordinated autonomous
vehicle parking for vehicle-to-grid services: Formulation and dis-
tributed algorithm,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 9, no. 5,
pp. 4356–4366, 2017.
[39] H. Ko, S. Pack, and V. C. Leung, “Mobility-aware vehicle-to-grid
control algorithm in microgrids,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 2165–2174, 2018.
[40] H. Turker and S. Bacha, “Optimal minimization of plug-in electric
vehicle charging cost with vehicle-to-home and vehicle-to-grid
concepts,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 67, no. 11,
pp. 10 281–10 292, 2018.
[41] X. Chen, K.-C. Leung, A. Y. Lam, and D. J. Hill, “Online scheduling
for hierarchical vehicle-to-grid system: Design, formulation, and
algorithm,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 68, no. 2,
pp. 1302–1317, 2018.
[42] S. Li, C. Gu, J. Li, H. Wang, and Q. Yang, “Boosting grid eﬃciency
and resiliency by releasing V2G potentiality through a novel rolling
prediction-decision framework and deep-LSTM algorithm,” IEEE
Systems Journal, 2020.
[43] Y. Liang, Z. Ding, T. Ding, and W.-J. Lee, “Mobility-aware charging
scheduling for shared on-demand electric vehicle ﬂeet using deep
reinforcement learning,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 12,
no. 2, pp. 1380–1393, 2020.
[44] J. Jin and Y. Xu, “Optimal policy characterization enhanced actor-
critic approach for electric vehicle charging scheduling in a power
distribution network,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 12, no. 2,
pp. 1416–1428, 2020.
[45] K. Zhou, L. Cheng, L. Wen, X. Lu, and T. Ding, “A coordinated
charging scheduling method for electric vehicles considering diﬀer-
ent charging demands,” Energy, vol. 213, p. 118882, 2020.
[46] V. S. Kasani, D. Tiwari, M. R. Khalghani, S. K. Solanki, and J. Solanki,
“Optimal Coordinated Charging and Routing Scheme of Electric
Vehicles in Distribution Grids: Real Grid Cases,” Sustainable Cities
and Society, p. 103081, 2021.
[47] C. Association, “CHAdeMO Association,” https://www.chademo.
com/, consulted on 2020.
[48] K. Bhargavan, B. Blanchet, and N. Kobeissi, “Veriﬁed models and
reference implementations for the TLS 1.3 standard candidate,” in
2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP).
IEEE, 2017.
[49] C. Cremers, M. Horvat, J. Hoyland, S. Scott, and T. van der Merwe,
“A comprehensive symbolic analysis of TLS 1.3,” in Proceedings of
the 2017 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
Security, 2017, pp. 1773–1788.
[50] R. Metere and C. Dong, “Automated cryptographic analysis of
the Pedersen commitment scheme,” in International Conference
on Mathematical Methods, Models, and Architectures for Computer
Network Security.
Springer, 2017, pp. 275–287.
[51] D. Basin, J. Dreier, L. Hirschi, S. Radomirovic, R. Sasse, and V. Stettler,
“A formal analysis of 5G authentication,” in Proceedings of the 2018
ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and communications security,
2018, pp. 1383–1396.
[52] F. Hao, R. Metere, S. F. Shahandashti, and C. Dong, “Analyzing
and patching SPEKE in ISO/IEC,” IEEE Transactions on Information
Forensics and Security, vol. 13, no. 11, pp. 2844–2855, 2018.
[53] M. Barbosa, G. Barthe, K. Bhargavan, B. Blanchet, C. Cremers,
K. Liao, and B. Parno, “SoK: Computer-aided cryptography,” in SP
2020-42nd IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, 2021.
[54] T. Lauser, D. Zelle, and C. Krauß, “Security Analysis of Automotive
Protocols,” in Computer Science in Cars Symposium, 2020, pp. 1–12.
[55] T. Perrin, “The Noise Protocol Framework,” http://noiseprotocol.org/
noise.html, 2018.
[56] L. Arnaboldi and R. Metere, “Poster: Towards a Data Centric Ap-
proach for the Design and Veriﬁcation of Cryptographic Protocols,”
in Proceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security, 2019, pp. 2585–2587.
[57] N. Kobeissi, G. Nicolas, and M. Tiwari, “Verifpal: cryptographic
protocol analysis for the real world,” in International Conference on
Cryptology in India.
Springer, 2020, pp. 151–202.
[58] R. Metere and L. Arnaboldi, “Automating cryptographic protocol
language generation from structured speciﬁcations,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE/ACM 10th International Conference on Formal Methods in
Software Engineering, 2022, pp. 91–101.
[59] R. Baker and I. Martinovic, “Losing the car keys: Wireless phy-
layer insecurity in ev charging,” in 28th USENIX Security Symposium
(USENIX Security 19), 2019, pp. 407–424.
[60] K. Mahaﬀey, “Hacking a Tesla Model S: What we found and what
we learned,” https://blog.lookout.com/hacking-a-tesla, 2015.
[61] S. Nie, L. Liu, and Y. Du, “Free-fall: Hacking tesla from wireless to
can bus,” Brieﬁng, Black Hat USA, vol. 25, pp. 1–16, 2017.
[62] L. Zhang, D. Choﬀnes, D. Levin, T. Dumitraş, A. Mislove, A. Schul-
man, and C. Wilson, “Analysis of SSL certiﬁcate reissues and revoca-
tions in the wake of Heartbleed,” in Proceedings of the 2014 Conference
on Internet Measurement Conference, 2014, pp. 489–502.
[63] A. Khalid, A. Sundararajan, A. Hernandez, and A. I. Sarwat,
“FACTS Approach to Address Cybersecurity Issues in Electric Vehicle
Battery Systems,” in 2019 IEEE Technology & Engineering Management
Conference (TEMSCON).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.
[64] M. A. Mustafa, N. Zhang, G. Kalogridis, and Z. Fan, “Smart electric
vehicle charging: Security analysis,” in 2013 IEEE PES Innovative
Smart Grid Technologies Conference (ISGT), 2013, pp. 1–6.
[65] Y. Fraiji, L. B. Azzouz, W. Trojet, and L. A. Saidane, “Cyber
security issues of Internet of electric vehicles,” in 2018 IEEE Wireless
Communications and Networking Conference.
IEEE, 2018.
[66] D. Reeh, F. C. Tapia, Y.-W. Chung, B. Khaki, C. Chu, and R. Gadh,
“Vulnerability Analysis and Risk Assessment of EV Charging
System under Cyber-Physical Threats,” in 2019 IEEE Transportation
Electriﬁcation Conference and Expo (ITEC).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.
[67] J. Antoun, M. E. Kabir, B. Moussa, R. Atallah, and C. Assi, “A detailed
security assessment of the EV charging ecosystem,” IEEE Network,
vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 200–207, 2020.
[68] P. Van Aubel and E. Poll, “Security of EV-Charging Protocols,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2202.04631, 2022.
[69] R. M. Czekster, C. Morisset, J. A. Clark, S. Soudjani, C. Patsios, and
P. Davison, “Systematic review of features for co-simulating security
incidents in cyber-physical systems,” Security and Privacy, vol. 4,
no. 3, p. e150, 2021.
[70] T. Morstyn, K. A. Collett, A. Vijay, M. Deakin, S. Wheeler, S. M.
Bhagavathy, F. Fele, and M. D. McCulloch, “OPEN: An open-source
platform for developing smart local energy system applications,”
Applied Energy, vol. 275, p. 115397, 2020.
[71] T. Nasr, S. Torabi, E. Bou-Harb, C. Fachkha, and C. Assi, “Power
jacking your station: In-depth security analysis of electric vehicle
charging station management systems,” Computers & Security, vol.
112, p. 102511, 2022.
[72] R. Lee, M. Assante, and T. Conway, “Analysis of the cyber attack
on the Ukrainian power grid. SANS Ind,” Control Syst, vol. 223, pp.
212–223, 2016.
[73] S. Soltan, P. Mittal, and H. V. Poor, “BlackIoT: IoT botnet of high
wattage devices can disrupt the power grid,” in 27th {USENIX}
Security Symposium ({USENIX} Security 18), 2018, pp. 15–32.
[74] R. M. Czekster, R. Metere, and C. Morisset, “Incorporating Cyber
Threat Intelligence into Complex Cyber-Physical Systems: A STIX
Model for Active Buildings,” Applied Sciences, vol. 12, no. 10, 2022.
