Title: Cyber-Security Investment in the Context of Disruptive Technologies: Extension of the Gordon-Loeb Model
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2112.04310v1
--------------------------------------------------

Cyber-Security Investment in the Context of
Disruptive Technologies: Extension of the
Gordon-Loeb Model
Dimitri Percia David1 [0000−0002−9393−1490], Alain
Mermoud1 [0000−0001−6471−772𝑋], and S´ebastien Gilliard1 [𝑛.𝑎.]
Military Academy at ETH Zurich, Department of Defense Economics
Abstract. Cyber-security breaches inﬂict signiﬁcant costs on organiza-
tions. Hence, the development of an information-systems defense capa-
bility through cyber-security investment is a prerequisite. The question
of how to determine the optimal amount to invest in cyber-security has
been widely investigated in the literature. In this respect, the Gordon-
Loeb model and its extensions received wide-scale acceptance. However,
such models predominantly rely on restrictive assumptions that are not
adapted for analyzing dynamic aspects of cyber-security investment. Yet,
understanding such dynamic aspects is a key feature for studying cyber-
security investment in the context of a fast-paced and continuously evolv-
ing technological landscape. We propose an extension of the Gordon-
Loeb model by considering multi-period and relaxing the assumption of
a continuous security-breach probability function. Such theoretical adap-
tations enable to capture dynamic aspects of cyber-security investment
such as the advent of a disruptive technology and its investment con-
sequences. Such a proposed extension of the Gordon-Loeb model gives
room for a hypothetical decrease of the optimal level of cyber-security
investment, due to a potential technological shift. While we believe our
framework should be generalizable across the cyber-security milieu, we il-
lustrate our approach in the context of critical-infrastructure protection,
where security-cost reductions related to risk events are of paramount
importance as potential losses reach unaﬀordable proportions. More-
over, despite the fact that some technologies are considered as disruptive
and thus promising for critical-infrastructure protection, their eﬀects on
cyber-security investment have been discussed little.
Keywords: information systems · security economics · cyber-security
investment · Gordon-Loeb model · security analytics.
arXiv:2112.04310v1  [cs.CR]  8 Dec 2021
2
D. Percia David et al.
1
Introduction
Cyber-security breaches inﬂict signiﬁcant costs on organizations, businesses, and
individuals [4,13,21]. As a result, operators of information systems (IS) must
develop an IS-defense capability. In order to build a capability, investing in
material resources is a prerequisite [42,9,33]. In the context of cyber-security,
such material resources are composed by processes, products and/or services
that are related to the security management of IS in general and, among others,
to cyber-threats monitoring in particular [2,36,39,7] – e.g., intrusion-detection
systems (IDS).
The cyber-security investment issue has received signiﬁcant academic atten-
tion (for an extensive literature review, see [36]), and such a literature is often
directly related to practitioners’ needs. For instance, as organizations face budget
constraints, an important challenge for these same organizations is to maximize
the eﬃciency of any monetary investment in cyber-security processes, products
and/or services [12,20,36]. Prior IS research has produced many quantitative
models that propose to optimize such investment, as well as recommendations to
invest in particular technologies or systems (e.g., [12,24,26,29,38]). These formal
approaches are complemented by less formal practitioner-oriented discussions
[8,40,46]. Among all the available models and approaches, the Gordon-Loeb (GL)
model has received wide-scale acceptance [48]. The GL model is based on microe-
conomics – more precisely on the fundamental economic principle of cost-beneﬁt
analysis [22,20] –, establishing a general setup for determining the optimal level
of cyber-security investment. By specifying a security-breach probability func-
tion (SBPF), the GL model attempts to determine the above-mentioned optimal
investment amount for cyber-security processes, products and/or services (e.g.,
[10,22,28,20,47]).
However, the GL model framework evades dynamic issues such as perverse
economic incentives1 and the advent of a disruptive2 cyber-security technology
[20]. Yet, in the case of the latter, accounting for such dynamic issues could
signiﬁcantly enrich the initial model by giving supplementary time-related in-
sights concerning the potential consequences that disruptive technologies might
trigger for cyber-security investment. If conventional cyber-security processes,
products and/or services such as IDS are essentially assimilated to the targeted
1 For example, externalities arising when the decisions of one party aﬀect those of
others [3].
2 In economic terms, the notion of disruptive technology [17] refers to a radically inno-
vative technology that signiﬁcantly disrupts existing economic structures, markets
and value networks, thus displacing established leading products, processes and/or
services [17]. Therefore, a disruptive technology comes from innovation. However, not
all innovations are disruptive, even though they can be revolutionary. For instance,
the advent of personal computers (PC) in the IT landscape can be considered as
a disruption. The multi-purpose functionalities of PCs, as well as their relatively
small size, their extended capabilities, and their low price facilitated their spread
and individual use. PCs displaced large and costly minicomputers and mainframes,
signiﬁcantly aﬀecting the lives of individuals and the management of organizations.
Cyber-Security Investment in the Context of Disruptive Technologies
3
event-based detection approach [2,39,7], the swift evolution of both the techno-
logical landscape and cyber-threats calls for a complementary approach based
on behavior-anomaly detection [2,39,45,15,18,34,43], and its subsequent (poten-
tially) disruptive technologies.
By extending the original GL model to a multi-period setup, and by re-
laxing the assumption of a continuously twice-diﬀerentiable SBPF, we create
room for additional insights on cyber-security investment by delivering a theo-
retical ground that enables to investigate the eﬀect of a disruptive technology
on such investment. In this article, we illustrate the concept of disruptive tech-
nologies through the case of big-data analytics3 (BDA) technologies and their
related techniques. To the best of our knowledge, our proposed extension of
the GL model is the ﬁrst approach responding to the need of capturing the
aforementioned time-related insights that a disruptive technology might bring
on cyber-security investment.
The remainder of this article is structured as follows. In Section 2, we contex-
tualize this research by emphasizing the evolution of cyber-threats monitoring
approaches and their potential disruptive technologies. In Section 3, we present
an extension of the GL model and we provide related propositions in order to
create room for capturing the consequences of disruptive technologies on cyber-
security investment. In Section 4, we suggest that our framework can be applied
by critical-infrastructure providers (CIP) in order to help them optimize their
investment in IS defense technologies. In the last section, we discuss limitations
and future work.
2
Cyber-Threat Monitoring Approaches
Cyber-threat monitoring approaches can be divided in two broad classes: (1)
targeted event-based detection and (2) behavior-anomaly detection [2,39]. Both
approaches aim to detect suspicious events (i.e., related to security concerns
such as data breaches) through IDS [39]. However, technologies related to (2) are
rapidly evolving and could disrupt the cyber-security market and the investment
in these technologies.
3 In this article, the term big data refers to data whose complexity impedes it from
being processed (mined, stored, queried and analyzed) through conventional data-
processing technologies [27]. The complexity of big data is deﬁned by three attributes:
(1) the volume (terabytes, petabytes, or even exabytes (1018 bytes); (2) the velocity
(referring to the fast-paced data generation); and (3) the variety (referring to the
combination of structured and unstructured data) [27]. The ﬁeld of BDA is related
to the extraction of value from big data – i.e., insights that are non-trivial, previously
unknown, implicit and potentially useful. BDA extracts patterns of actions, occur-
rences, and behaviors from big data by ﬁtting statistical models to these patterns
through diﬀerent data-mining techniques (e.g., predictive analytics, cluster analysis,
association-rule mining, and prescriptive analytics) [35,14].
4
D. Percia David et al.
2.1
The Targeted Event-Based Detection Approach
For the past three decades, scholars, practitioners, and organizations have been
developing numerous conventional technical means to increase cyber-security by
using signature-detection measures and encryption techniques [7,6]. However,
the success of such conventional approaches has been limited [16,7,6,12].
The targeted event-based detection approach essentially relies on signature-
detection measures in which an identiﬁer is attributed to a known threat4 (i.e.,
a threat that had been witnessed in the past), so that this threat can be sub-
sequently identiﬁed [7,39,2]. Examples of targeted event-based detection include
network-IDS, access-control mechanisms, ﬁrewalls and pattern-based antivirus
engines [2,39,7]. For instance, a signature-detection technology such as an anti-
virus scanner might detect a unique pre-established pattern of code that is con-
tained in a ﬁle. If that speciﬁc pattern (i.e., signature) is discovered, the ﬁle will
be ﬂagged in order to warn the end-user that their ﬁle is infected. [7]. Yet, such
an approach is becoming more and more ineﬀective, as the swift evolution of
cyber-threats is becoming more sophisticated [7,2,45,15]. Over the last decade,
cyber-crimes have rapidly increased because hackers have developed new proce-
dures to circumvent IS security to gain unauthorized and illegal access to the
system. For instance, as malware spread from one system to the next, hackers
employ polymorphic code5 techniques in order to (automatically) rapidly modify
the pattern [19], thus evading and circumventing existing detection mechanisms.6
Consequently, such a targeted event-based detection would be ineﬀective because
of the lag that exists between the development of signatures and the rapid ex-
pansion of cyber-threats. Moreover, zero-day7 vulnerabilities cannot be caught
with such an approach.
Therefore, an important limiting factor of the targeted event-based detection
approach is that it is intrinsically reactive in nature [7,2]. Attributing a signa-
ture to a cyber-threat is always preceded by a cyber-incident, which implies that
signatures are unable to identify unknown and/or emerging threats. As a con-
sequence, signature-detection measures can be rendered almost ineﬀective by
hackers [45,15]. Such a scenario is even ampliﬁed in the era of extended digi-
tization and big data [39]. The reasons are that (1) the swift development of
4 Common cyber-risks include malware (spyware, ransomware, viruses, worms, etc.),
phishing, man-in-the-middle attacks (MitM), (distributed) denial-of-service attacks
((D)DoS), malicious SQL injections, cross-site scripting (XSS), credential reuse, and
brute-force attacks.
5 A polymorphic code is a code that employs a polymorphic engine in order to mutate
while keeping the original algorithm intact. In other terms, the code changes itself
each time it runs, but its semantics – the function of the code – will not change [19].
6 Additional techniques such as, sandbox resistance, fast ﬂuxing, adversarial reverse
engineering, social-engineering attacks, spooﬁng, and advanced persistent threats
(APT) are continuously evolving and spreading [2].
7 A zero-day vulnerability is a computer-software vulnerability that is either unknown
to or unaddressed by operators who should be interested in mitigating the vulner-
ability. Zero-day vulnerabilities enable hackers to exploit it in order to adversely
aﬀect computer programs, networks, and data [25].
Cyber-Security Investment in the Context of Disruptive Technologies
5
computer networks (e.g., the extensive use of cloud and mobile computing) in
the past decades generated new channels that expose data to cyber-attack, thus
increasing the pool of systems to be attacked hence amplifying numerous se-
curity issues related to intrusions on computer and network systems [39]; (2),
up to multiple exabytes of information are being transferred daily, usually im-
peding the process of the entire set of security information, e.g., network logs,
access records, etc.; (3) the velocity of data generation makes any type of data
processing diﬃcult through conventional computer hardware and software ar-
chitectures; (4) the complexity of data also impedes security information from
being processed by conventional computers, e.g., data come from diverse sources,
it is stored in diﬀerent formats and on diﬀerent IT. Hence, the damage done by
cyber-threats could be identiﬁed only after an attack, giving hackers more eﬃ-
cient possibilities to access networks, to hide their presence and to inﬂict damage
[16].
2.2
The Behavior-Anomaly Detection Approach
In order to address the drawbacks of the targeted event-based detection ap-
proach, research & development has been focused on a behavior-anomaly de-
tection approach [16,39,34,18,15,43,45]. Such an approach aims to detect sus-
picious/unusual events through the extraction of patterns, by using behavior
anomalies and/or deviations from behaviors (actions, occurrences) of entities
and/or users of a network, rather than patterns of code as in the case of the tar-
geted event-based detection [16,39,34,18,15,43,45]. The targeted event-based de-
tection approach is predominantly based on security analytics8 and aims to pro-
vide dynamic detection of cyber-threats through techniques derived from BDA
by ﬁtting statistical models on these patterns through diﬀerent techniques (e.g.,
predictive analytics, cluster analysis, association-rule mining, and prescriptive
analytics) [35,14] used for network forensics, traﬃc clustering and alert correla-
tion [2]. Some examples have been developed by [43,18,34].
Complementing the targeted event-based detection approach by using signature-
detection measures, such a behavior-anomaly detection approach is envisioned
to foster cyber-threats monitoring by increasing its productivity [16]. Exam-
ples of security analytics applications are the development of security infor-
mation and event management (SIEM). SIEM products and services combine
security-information management (SIM) and security-event management (SEM)
[11]. SIEM provide real-time analysis of information-security alerts generated by
applications and network hardware. SIEM are sold as managed services, as soft-
ware, or as appliances [11]. These products and services are also used to log secu-
rity data and to generate reports for compliance purposes. SIEM products and
8 The ﬁeld of security analytics aims to detect suspicious events by extracting pat-
terns related to behavioral anomalies and/or deviations from behaviors (actions,
occurrences) of entities and/or users of a network. In other words, security analytics
methods aim to distinguish patterns generated by legitimate users from patterns
generated by suspicious and/or malicious users [16].
6
D. Percia David et al.
services are widely used within information-security operation centers (ISOC) –
also called fusion centers – of organizations. The open-threat exchange platform
called AlienVault OTX is an example of SIEM products and services.9
Cyber-security technologies related to the behavior-anomaly detection ap-
proach – and more precisely related to security analytics – are susceptible to
disrupting the cyber-security market [45,43,18,34]. However, the dynamic (i.e.,
time related) consequences of such disruptive technologies on cyber-security in-
vestment cannot be analyzed through the existing GL model and its extensions.
They rely on restrictive assumptions that are not adapted for analyzing dy-
namic aspects of cyber-security investment [20]. Consequently, a supplementary
extension of the GL model is necessary.
3
Extending the Gordon-Loeb Model
By focusing on costs and beneﬁts associated with cyber-security, the GL model
states that each organization’s objective is to maximize its expected net-beneﬁts
in cyber-security function (𝐸𝑁𝐵𝐼𝑆) [20]. This corresponds to minimizing the to-
tal expected cost, equivalent to the addition of the expected loss10 (𝑣𝐿) due to
cyber-security breaches and the expenses (𝑧) in cyber-security processes, prod-
ucts and/or services implemented and/or undertaken in order to counter such
breaches [22,20]. Figure 1 on page 7 illustrates the maximization of the expected
beneﬁts coming from cyber-security expenditures (𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑆).11
In Section 2, we emphasized that the advent of the behavior-anomaly detec-
tion approach – triggered by security analytics and its use of BDA – is bringing
to the fore new cyber-security technologies that have the potential to disrupt
the cyber-security market [45,43,18,34,35] by hypothetically bringing superior
returns on investment vis-`a-vis conventional measures related to the targeted
event-based detection approach [35]. As a consequence, the 𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑆function might
shift to the left. Figure 2 on page 8 illustrates the potential maximization of the
𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑆function in the context of BDA. Accordingly:
Proposition 1: If BDA is employed in order to provide cyber-threats
monitoring, the 𝐸𝑁𝐵𝐼𝑆function will shift to the left due to a greater
productivity of BDA compared to conventional technologies.
Consequently, the optimal level of cyber-security investment will decrease from
𝑧∗to 𝑧∗
𝑑(c.f.: Figure 2 on page 8). For the same level of protection, investment
in cyber-security will decrease – ceteris paribus. Accordingly:
9 https://www.alienvault.com/
10 Wherein 𝑣is is the organization’s inherent vulnerability – deﬁned as the probability
that a threat, once realized (i.e., an attack), would be successful – to cyber-security
breaches, (P); and 𝐿is the potential loss associated with the security breach, ($).
The model description and its assumptions were explained in detail by [22,20].
11 In order to simplify the illustration, ﬁgures 1, 2 and 3 on pages 7 and 9 depicts the
𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑆function instead of the 𝐸𝑁𝐵𝐼𝑆function. The 𝐸𝑁𝐵𝐼𝑆function is obtained by
subtracting the investment (𝑧) to the 𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑆function.
Cyber-Security Investment in the Context of Disruptive Technologies
7
Proposition 2: If BDA is implemented in order to provide cyber-threats
monitoring, the 𝐸𝑁𝐵𝐼𝑆function will witness a discontinuity in its do-
main 𝑍due to a greater productivity of BDA compared to conventional
technologies.
0
vL
45°
EBIS (z)
Investment z
!∗
#$%&'(z)
Fig. 1. Level of Investment in Cyber-Security
Notes to Figure 1: The original function of the expected beneﬁts in cyber-security
(𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑆0(𝑧)) has a do- main 𝑍that yields a distribution between zero and the mon-
etary value of the expected loss (𝑣𝐿) in the absence of any cyber-security investment.
The monetary value (i.e., costs) of the investment (𝑧), corresponds to the 45° line. The
optimal level of cyber-security investment (𝑧∗) is obtained when the diﬀerence between
beneﬁts and costs is maximized (tangent to 𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑆0(𝑧) – where the marginal beneﬁts
are equivalent to the marginal cost of one – yielding a slope of 45°, in blue). N.B.: the
optimal level of cyber-security investment (𝑧∗) is smaller than the expected loss (𝑣𝐿)
in the absence of any investment.
8
D. Percia David et al.
0
vL
#$%&'(z)
45°
#$%&((z)
!(*
EBIS (z)
Investment z
!∗
Fig. 2. Left Shift of the Level of Investment in Cyber-Security
Notes to Figure 2: The new function of the expected beneﬁts in cyber-security
(𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑆𝑑(𝑧)) has also a do- main 𝑍that yields a distribution between zero and the
monetary value of the expected loss (𝑣𝐿) in the absence of any cyber-security invest-
ment. The monetary value (i.e., costs) of the investment (𝑧), also cor- responds to
the 45° line. Similarly to Figure 1, the optimal level of cyber-security investment (𝑧∗
𝑑)
is obtained when the diﬀerence between beneﬁts and costs is maximized (tangent to
𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑆𝑑(𝑧), yielding a slope of 45°, in green). Yet, due to the left shift of the 𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑆
function (from 𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑆0(𝑧) to 𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑆𝑑(𝑧)), the optimal level of cyber-security investment
also shifts from 𝑧∗to 𝑧∗
𝑑.
Figure 3 on page 9 illustrates such a discontinuity in the 𝐸𝑁𝐵𝐼𝑆function de-
scribed in Proposition 2. Yet, as the implementation of a disruptive technology
implicitly triggers a productivity diﬀerential over time, we propose to extend the
GL model in two distinct but related ways.
3.1
A Temporal Setup
First, in order to capture the advent of a disruptive technology and its dynamic
consequences on cyber-security investment, a temporal setup has to be imple-
mented. As the GL model was developed for a single-period, it excludes the
fundamental temporal dimension for analyzing the technological-shift dynamics
induced by eﬃciency improvements. Hence, the extension of the original single-
period model to a multi-period12 setup might bring signiﬁcant insight in under-
12 Even though there is still an open debate in the ﬁeld of mathematics about whether
time should be considered as continuous or discrete [37], in our proposed extension of
Cyber-Security Investment in the Context of Disruptive Technologies
9
0
vL
45°
#$%&)*+(z)
,-
#$%&((z)
!(* !∗
EBIS (z)
Investment z, time t
!)*+
*
#$%&'(z)
Fig. 3. Left Shift of the Level of Investment in Cyber-Security Over Time
Notes to Figure 3: In this graph, the horizontal axis represents both investment (𝑧)
and time (𝑡). The red line represents the function of the expected beneﬁts in cyber-
security over time (𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑆𝑚𝑖𝑥(𝑧)). The red dashed line represents the discontinuity in
the domain 𝑍of the 𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑆𝑚𝑖𝑥(𝑧) function – due to the implementation of a disruptive
technology at time 𝑡1. Without the implementation of a disruptive technology, the
function of the expected beneﬁts in cyber-security remains 𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑆0(𝑧) (in blue). With
the implementation of a disruptive technology from 𝑡= 0, the function of the expected
beneﬁts in cyber-security is 𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑆𝑑(𝑧) (in green). The optimal level of cyber-security
investment is 𝑧∗
𝑚𝑖𝑥= 𝑧∗
𝑑.
standing the dynamic aspects of cyber-security investment that were originally
evaded.
Speciﬁcally, we adapt the GL model from [20], such as the maximization of
the 𝐸𝑁𝐵𝐼𝑆function is determined by an antidiﬀerence operator of this same
function, which has the domain 𝑍⊆R≥0 (representing the set of investment
possibilities, 𝑧𝑖) at the end of the speciﬁed time horizon 𝑇⊆N, wherein each
period 𝑖∈[1, 𝑛]. This yields:
the GL model, we consider time as discrete. Such a choice is determined by the fact
that any further empirical research that would test our extension will be essentially
conditioned by measuring time as a discrete variable. Consequently, the following
extension is based on an antidiﬀerence instead of an antiderivative.
10
D. Percia David et al.
max
𝑧𝑖∈𝑍Δ−1𝐸𝑁𝐵𝐼𝑆(𝑧𝑖) = max
𝑧𝑖∈𝑍
( 𝑛
∑︁
𝑖=1
[𝑣𝑖−𝑆𝐼
𝑖(𝑧𝑖,𝑣𝑖)]𝐿𝑖−𝑧𝑖
)
(1)
wherein for each period 𝑖∈[1, 𝑛]:
– 𝑣𝑖is the organization’s vulnerability13 to cyber-security breaches,
(probability P);
– 𝑆𝐼
𝑖is the organization’s security-breach probability function (SBPF),
deﬁned as the probability that a cyber-security-breach occurs, (prob-
ability P);
– 𝑧𝑖is the organization’s investment in cyber-security, (monetary value
$);
– 𝐿𝑖is the potential loss associated with the security breach, (monetary
value $).
3.2
A Discontinuity in the Security-Breach Probability Function
Second, the presumed technological shift induced by the superior productivity
of a disruptive technology challenges the assumption of a continuously twice-
diﬀerentiable security-breach probability function. The original model deﬁnes
continuously decreasing but positive returns to scale of cyber-security invest-
ment. Yet, this continuously twice-diﬀerentiable setup leaves no room for a dis-
crete emergence of a technological shift brought by a disruptive and more eﬃcient
technology.14 In such a theoretical framework, the elasticity of the protection of
cyber-security processes, products and/or services evades radical technological
progress. However, technological progress induced by the implementation of a
disruptive technology – such as BDA – could considerably reduce cyber-security
investment by bringing suggestively greater returns on investment.15
13 In the original GL model [20], the organization’s inherent vulnerability is deﬁned as
the probability that a threat, once realized (i.e., an attack), would be successful.
14 [20] explicitly acknowledge that they ‘abstract from reality and assume that pos-
tulated functions are suﬃciently smooth and well behaved’, thus creating favorable
conditions for applying basic diﬀerential calculus, hence simplifying the optimization
problem of the security-investment phenomenon. Although a smooth approximation
of the security-investment phenomenon done by [20] is a reasonable ﬁrst approach,
in order to deliver insight concerning the problem of determining an optimal level of
cyber-security investment, such an approach lacks realism. As explicitly mentioned
by [20]: [...] ‘in reality, discrete investment in new security technologies are often
necessary to get incremental result. Such a discrete investment results in discontinu-
ities.’
15 In BDA, an extremely large, fast paced and complex amount of information can be
processed in signiﬁcantly shortened time frames and at almost zero marginal cost
per additional unit of information – once the ﬁxed development and implementa-
tion costs of systems and algorithms for investigating threat patterns are invested
[41]. Furthermore, the real-time analytics provided by big-data algorithms are likely
Cyber-Security Investment in the Context of Disruptive Technologies
11
The investor realizes a Pareto improvement by either obtaining a higher
level of protection for the same investment or by obtaining the same level of
protection at a lower cost; because fewer resources, such as time and human
labor, can be largely substituted by algorithms, and automation might be used.
As a result, with the implementation of BDA, cyber-security investment might
be signiﬁcantly reduced by disruption: BDA would introduce a discontinuity in
the security-breach probability function, hence modifying the original GL model
assumption of continuity. Accordingly, adapting the security-breach probabil-
ity function (𝑆𝐼) from [20], we propose the following security-breach probability
function (𝑆𝐼′
𝑖) in order to capture the advent of a disruptive technology by in-
troducing discountinuity through the parameter 𝑑𝑖:
𝑆𝐼′
𝑖(𝑧𝑖, 𝑣𝑖) =
𝑣𝑖
(𝛼𝑖𝑧𝑖+ 1)𝛽𝑖+𝑑𝑖
(2)
wherein for each period 𝑖∈[1, 𝑛]:
– 𝛼𝑖∈R>0 and 𝛽𝑖∈R≥1 represent productivity parameters of a given
cyber-security technology at period 𝑖(i.e., for a given (𝑧𝑖, 𝑣𝑖), the
security-breach probability function 𝑆𝐼′
𝑖is decreasing in both 𝛼𝑖and
𝛽𝑖);16
– 𝑑𝑖is a discontinuity parameter at period 𝑖, and it is represented by a
dummy variable. This dummy takes the value 0 when no disruptive
technology is used, and 1 otherwise.
From equation 2, equation 1 can be rewritten as:
max
𝑧𝑖∈𝑍Δ−1𝐸𝑁𝐵𝐼𝑆(𝑧𝑖) = max
𝑧𝑖∈𝑍
( 𝑛
∑︁
𝑖=1
[𝑣𝑖−
𝑣𝑖
(𝛼𝑖𝑧𝑖+ 1)𝛽𝑖+𝑑𝑖]𝐿𝑖−𝑧𝑖
)
(3)
Although, in order to extend the original GL model, the multi-period setup
and the suggested security-breach probability function (𝑆𝐼′
𝑖) constitute the main
theoretical contributions, the application of this contribution to a concrete con-
text is necessary in order to exemplify and demonstrate their relevancy, and to
empirically test them in a further research.
to neutralize any attacker’s information advantage, such that the probability of a
cyber-breach should be reduced. For example, an attacker can exploit zero-day vul-
nerabilities by knowing where to attack, whereas the defender does not know, hence
has to protect all potential entry spots. As real-time analytics reveals both the time
and the position of the attack as it happens, the defender can react precisely on the
attacked spot, thus save any unnecessary investment in the protection of spots that
are not attacked.
16 [20] did not specify 𝛼and 𝛽. These productivity parameters could be, for instance,
the relative productivity of a given technology when compared to another (𝛼) and the
joint productivity of the same technology when in interaction with a set of already
employed technologies in an organization (𝛽).
12
D. Percia David et al.
4
Application for CIPs
A cyber-security breach inﬂicted on a critical infrastructure (CI) generates mas-
sive negative externalities, especially due to the increasing interdependency and
to technical interconnectedness of diﬀerent CIs [22,1]. As a result, cyber-security
issues are the main challenge for CIP [5]. Therefore, the issue of cyber-security
investment becomes highly relevant in the context of CIs, and especially so from
a social-welfare perspective [22].
In this respect, cyber-security investment is a national security priority for
the great majority of governments (e.g., [32]). For example, on February 12,
2013, the administration of US President Barack Obama implemented Exec-
utive Order 13636 [31] named Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity.
This executive order stated that ‘The national and economic security of the
United States depends on the reliable functioning of the Nation’s critical infras-
tructure in the face of such threats. It is the policy of the United States to enhance
the security and resilience of the Nation’s critical infrastructure and to main-
tain a cyber-environment that encourages eﬃciency, innovation, and economic
prosperity while promoting safety, security, business conﬁdentiality, privacy, and
civil liberties’ [31]. Following this trend, on May 11, 2017, the administration of
US President Donald Trump implemented Executive Order 13800 [44], named
Strengthening the Cybersecurity of Federal Networks and Critical Infrastructure.
This executive order stated that ‘Eﬀective immediately, each agency head shall
use ‘The Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity’ devel-
oped by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, or any successor
document, to manage the agency’s cyber-security risk. Each agency head shall
provide a risk management report to the Secretary of Homeland Security and the
Director of the Oﬃce of Management and Budget within 90 days of the date of
this order’ [44].
We believe that our suggested extension of the GL model should be general-
izable across any kind of cyber-security concerns, yet we illustrate our approach
in the context of CIP as security-cost reduction related to risk events are of prior
importance because potential losses reach unaﬀordable dimensions [22]. Despite
the fact that BDA is considered a promising method for CIP, its concrete impli-
cations have not been discussed much.
More speciﬁcally, our extension of the GL model provides a theoretical frame-
work for analyzing the impact of the implementation of any given novel technol-
ogy on cyber-security investment over time. In this respect, by subtracting antid-
iﬀerence operators of 𝐸𝑁𝐵𝐼𝑆, Δ−1𝐸𝑁𝐵𝐼𝑆(𝑧𝑖), at two diﬀerent speciﬁed time-span
of same duration, (𝐴−𝐵), a potential decrease in cyber-security investment, Δ𝑍,
can be analyzed – ceteris paribus:
Δ𝑍=

Δ−1𝐸𝑁𝐵𝐼𝑆(𝑧𝐴)
	
−

Δ−1𝐸𝑁𝐵𝐼𝑆(𝑧𝐵)
	
(4)
Cyber-Security Investment in the Context of Disruptive Technologies
13
where 𝐵⊆N is a time-span, wherein each period 𝑖𝐵∈[𝑛, 𝑡], and in
which a given novel technology is implemented; whereas 𝐴⊆N is a time-
span, wherein each period 𝑖𝐴∈[1, 𝑚], and in which no novel technology
is implemented. Note that Í𝑡
𝑖=𝑛𝑖and Í𝑚
𝑖=1 𝑖must be equal in order to
proceed to the comparison.
From equations 1 and 4, equation 5 can be written as:
Δ𝑍=
( 𝑚
∑︁
𝑖=1
[𝑣𝑖−𝑆𝐼
𝑖(𝑧𝑖,𝑣𝑖)]𝐿𝑖−𝑧𝑖
)
−
( 𝑡∑︁
𝑖=𝑛
[𝑣𝑖−𝑆𝐼
𝑖(𝑧𝑖,𝑣𝑖)]𝐿𝑖−𝑧𝑖
)
(5)
From the original equation of [20], equation 5 can be rewritten as:
Δ𝑍=
( 𝑚
∑︁
𝑖=1
[𝑣𝑖−
𝑣𝑖
(𝛼𝑖𝑧𝑖+ 1)𝛽𝑖]𝐿𝑖−𝑧𝑖
)
−
( 𝑡∑︁
𝑖=𝑛
[𝑣𝑖−
𝑣𝑖
(𝛼𝑖𝑧𝑖+ 1)𝛽𝑖]𝐿𝑖−𝑧𝑖
)
(6)
By controlling for every parameters to remain equal between time-span 𝐴
and 𝐵– except for the domains 𝑍, wherein 𝑍𝐴≠𝑍𝐵–, an organization can
determine if any given novel technology generates a greater 𝐸𝑁𝐵𝐼𝑆. If it is the
case, the organization might consider the novel technology implemented in 𝐵
as disruptive; inversely, if the 𝐸𝑁𝐵𝐼𝑆does not substantially changes, the im-
plemented novel technology cannot be considered as disruptive. Note that even
though equation 6 can be used for analyzing the diﬀerential in cyber-security
investment between two time-spans, equation 3 remains necessary in order to
determine the optimal level of cyber-security investment (𝑧𝑖) through the maxi-
mization of the 𝐸𝑁𝐵𝐼𝑆(𝑧𝑖) function.
The application of our GL model extension to the context of CIP should
provide us with a relevant and seminal basis on which our arguments can be
formally modeled and simulated. In the case of human-processed information and
defense tactics, these issues would probably make the optimal level of protection
diﬃcult to attain or even impossible to ﬁnance, as the expected loss would be
extreme in the case of cascading failures of CIs; hence the resulting cyber-security
investment would also have to reach extreme levels. However, with the eﬀects
that the BDA technology (or any similar disruptive technology) could have on
investment in cyber-security, the investment needs by CIP could remain at the
same level or even decrease, as these novel threats are neutralized by the superior
technology that BDA oﬀers.
5
Discussion
In this last section, we present our concluding comments, the policy recommen-
dations resulting from concluding comments, we discuss the limitations of this
study and suggest paths for further research.
14
D. Percia David et al.
5.1
Concluding Comments
In this article, we propose an extension of the GL model by adapting its initial
theoretical framework in order to capture time-related insights related to the
consequences that a disruptive technology can have on cyber-security investment.
We propose two important contributions. First, we argue that a single-period
model is not adapted to capture dynamic aspects of cyber-security investment
such as the advent of a disruptive technology. The extension to a multi-period
model is indeed necessary. Second, in the context of the introduction of a discrete
disruptive cyber-security technology, the security-breach probability function of
the original GL model could not be considered as continuously diﬀerentiable.
These two arguments enrich the initial model by giving supplementary insight on
cyber-security investment. Through our extended 𝐸𝑁𝐵𝐼𝑆function, our proposed
revision of the GL model captures both the ﬁnancial consequences on the optimal
level of investment and the security productivity of the advent of any given novel
(and potentially disruptive) technology. Although we believe that this reasoning
is generalizable across a wide range of cyber-security concerns, we illustrate
our approach in the context of CIP, for which cyber-security breaches inﬂict
unaﬀordable social costs that urgently need to be reduced.
5.2
Considerations for Policy Recommendations
First and foremost, our extension of the GL model is intended to be used for de-
termining the optimal level of cyber-security investment through the maximiza-
tion of the 𝐸𝑁𝐵𝐼𝑆(𝑧𝑖) function. The optimal level of cyber-security investment
is obtained when the diﬀerence between beneﬁts and costs are maximized – i.e.,
where the marginal beneﬁts of cyber-security investment are equivalent to the
marginal cost of potential losses due to cyber-security threats.
Also, our extension of the GL model provides a theoretical framework in
order to analyze the expected net-beneﬁts of the implementation of any given
novel technology over time. By subtracting antidiﬀerence operators of 𝐸𝑁𝐵𝐼𝑆
at two diﬀerent speciﬁed time-spans, and by controlling for every parameters
to remain equal between two time-spans (except for investment), a potential
decrease in cyber-security investment can be analyzed. Throughout our model,
an organization can determine if any given novel technology generates a greater
𝐸𝑁𝐵𝐼𝑆. If it is the case, the organization might consider the novel technology im-
plemented as disruptive; inversely, if the 𝐸𝑁𝐵𝐼𝑆does not substantially changes,
the implemented novel technology cannot be considered as disruptive.
We presented a dynamic analysis for determining the optimal investment
level for IS defense, in the context of potentially disruptive technologies. By con-
ceptualizing a security-breach probability function that includes productivity
parameters (𝛼and 𝛽) of a given cyber-security technology, practitioners can cal-
culate the optimal level of investment in IS defense processes, products and/or
services, and also select them according to the highest productivity parameters.
Although this work remains theoretical, it gives a systematic method for optimiz-
ing IS defense investment in the context of potentially disruptive technologies.
Cyber-Security Investment in the Context of Disruptive Technologies
15
5.3
Limitations and Paths for Further Research
Finally, our research design – based on theoretical modeling and utility maxi-
mization – has some limitations that future research could help relax.
First, the productivity parameters (𝛼𝑖and 𝛽𝑖) of a given cyber-security tech-
nology are theoretically conceptualized, but not empirically measured. Such an
eﬀort could add a substantive beneﬁts in terms of validation/refutation of our
propositions. However, researchers might ﬁnd it diﬃcult to gain access to data
as they are substantially diﬃcult to measure and/or to ﬁnd [30]. A possible so-
lution in order to measure these productivity parameters could be derived from
equation 6, by computing the ratio between 𝑍𝐵and 𝑍𝐴. By doing so, a relative
measure of productivity between a technology employed in Δ−1𝐸𝑁𝐵𝐼𝑆(𝑧𝐴) and
a technology employed in Δ−1𝐸𝑁𝐵𝐼𝑆(𝑧𝐵) could be extracted.
Second, the term disruptive technologies [17] has been qualitatively deﬁned,
but not quantitatively delimited. Such a research eﬀort is necessary in order
to delimit the dummy variable 𝑑𝑖(that takes the value 0 when no disruptive
technology is used, and 1 otherwise). Again, such a quantitative delimitation
could be drawn by determining a threshold value in the aforementioned ratio
between 𝑍𝐵and 𝑍𝐴.
Third, and consequently, this article formally modeled an extension to the GL
model, but it did not simulate or empirically test our suggested extension. We
decided to leave this operationalization to future research as we wanted to focus
on the generalizability of the model. Any simulation or empirical operational-
ization requires a speciﬁcation of the above-mentioned productivity parameters
𝛼𝑖and 𝛽𝑖of each technology considered for investment, as well as the speciﬁca-
tion of the dummy variable 𝑑𝑖for classifying which technologies are considered
disruptive (and when). Such choices make the model more speciﬁc to particular
assumptions about technological and productivity contexts. Hence, we suggest
that our model should be operationalized by a series of diﬀerent simulations and
empirical tests, rather than by one illustrative simulation run. Given the fact
that speciﬁcations of such simulations and/or empirical tests would require mul-
tiple cases and thus multiple contexts (and thus multiple articles). Nevertheless,
we recommend that future research simulates, tests and develops further the
model we proposed here.
Fourth, the security-breach probability function 𝑆𝐼′
𝑖that we employed in this
work can be replaced by many other families of more complex functions. In this
research, we selected the ﬁrst family of security-breach probability function pro-
posed by [20], namely 𝑆𝐼. However, in reality, adding more families of functions
could enrich the analysis (e.g., [28]).
Once the aforementioned points are deﬁned by empirical analyzes and ﬁeld sur-
veys, further research could propose to simulate a multi-player and multi-period
game (e.g., [23]) that models the cyber-security for CIP in the era of disruptive
technologies. Such research – by collecting simulated data and quantitatively
analyzing them – would contribute to complement the theoretical approach pre-
sented in this article, hence test the intuition of our theoretical development.
16
D. Percia David et al.
References
1. Alcaraz, C., and Zeadally, S. Critical infrastructure protection: Requirements
and challenges for the 21st century. 53–66.
2. Amini, L., Christodorescu, M., Cohen, M. A., Parthasarathy, S., Rao, J.,
Sailer, R., Schales, D. L., Venema, W. Z., and Verscheure, O. Adaptive
cyber-security analytics. Tech. rep., 2015. US Patent 9,032,521.
3. Anderson, R.
Why information security is hard – an economic perspective.
In Seventeenth Annual Computer Security Applications Conference (2001), IEEE,
pp. 358–365.
4. Anderson, R., Barton, C., B¨ohme, R., Clayton, R., van Eeten, M. J. G.,
Levi, M., Moore, T., and Savage, S. Measuring the cost of cybercrime. In The
Economics of Information Security and Privacy, R. B¨ohme, Ed. Springer, 2013,
pp. 265–300.
5. Anderson, R., and Fuloria, S. Security economics and critical national infras-
tructure. In Economics of Information Security and Privacy, T. Moore, D. Pym,
and C. Ioannidis, Eds. Springer, 2010, pp. 55–66.
6. Anderson, R., and Moore, T. The economics of information security. 610–613.
7. Anderson, R. J.
Security Engineering: A Guide to Building Dependable Dis-
tributed Systems. John Wiley & Sons, 2010.
8. Azorin, P. Cybersecurity & data privacy trends in 2020.
9. Barney, J. Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. 99–120.
10. Baryshnikov, Y. IT security investment and gordon-loeb’s 1/e rule. In 2012
Workshop on the Economics of Information Security (2012).
11. Bhatt, S., Manadhata, P. K., and Zomlot, L. The operational role of security
information and event management systems. 35–41.
12. B¨ohme, R. The Economics of Information Security and Privacy. Springer, 2013.
13. Campbell, K., Gordon, L. A., Loeb, M. P., and Zhou, L. The economic cost
of publicly announced information security breaches: Empirical evidence from the
stock market. 431–448.
14. Cardenas, A. A., Manadhata, P. K., and Rajan, S. P. Big data analytics for
security. 74–76.
15. Casas, P., Soro, F., Vanerio, J., Settanni, G., and D’Alconzo, A. Network
security and anomaly detection with big-dama, a big data analytics framework. In
IEEE 6th International Conference on Cloud Networking (CloudNet’17) (2017),
IEEE, pp. 1–7.
16. Chen, H., Chiang, R. H. L., and Storey, V. C.
Business intelligence and
analytics: From big data to big impact. 1165–1188.
17. Christensen, C. M., Raynor, M., and McDonald, R.
What is disruptive
innovation? 44–53.
18. Cui, B., and He, S. Anomaly detection model based on hadoop platform and
weka interface. In 10th International Conference on Innovative Mobile and Internet
Services in Ubiquitous Computing (IMIS’16) (2016), IEEE, pp. 84–89.
19. Forest, E., Schmidt, F., and McIntosh, E. Introduction to the polymorphic
tracking code. 2002.
20. Gordon, L. A., and Loeb, M. P. The economics of information security invest-
ment. 438–457.
21. Gordon, L. A., Loeb, M. P., Lucyshyn, W., and Richardson, R. 2005 csi/fbi
computer crime and security survey. 1.
Cyber-Security Investment in the Context of Disruptive Technologies
17
22. Gordon, L. A., Loeb, M. P., Lucyshyn, W., and Zhou, L.
Externalities
and the magnitude of cyber security underinvestment by private sector ﬁrms: A
modiﬁcation of the gordon-loeb model. 24–30.
23. Grossklags, J., Christin, N., and Chuang, J.
Secure or insure?: A game-
theoretic analysis of information security games. In Proceeding of the 17th Inter-
national Conference on World Wide Web (2008), ACM Press, pp. 209–218.
24. Herath, H. S., and Herath, T. C. Investments in information security: A real
options perspective with bayesian postaudit. 337–375.
25. Holm, H. Signature-based intrusion detection for zero-day attacks: (not) a closed
chapter?
In 47th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (2014),
IEEE, pp. 4895–4904.
26. Jerman-Blaˇziˇc, B., et al. Quantitative model for economic analyses of infor-
mation security investment in an enterprise information system. 276–288.
27. Laney, D. 3d data management: Controlling data volume, velocity and variety.
1.
28. Lelarge, M. Coordination in network security games: a monotone comparative
statics approach. 2210–2219.
29. Li, J., and Su, X. Making cost eﬀective security decision with real option think-
ing. In International Conference on Software Engineering Advances (ICSEA 2007)
(2007), IEEE, pp. 14–14.
30. Moore, T., Kenneally, E., Collett, M., and Thapa, P. Valuing cybersecurity
research datasets. In Proceedings of the Workshop on the Economics of Information
Security (WEIS’19) (2019), pp. 1–27.
31. Obama, B. Executive order (13636) – improving critical infrastructure cybersecu-
rity, 2013.
32. OECD. Cybersecurity Policy Making at a Turning Point: Analysing a New Gen-
eration of National Cybersecurity Strategies for the Internet Economy.
OECD
Publishing, 2012.
33. Penrose, E. The Theory of the Growth of the Firm, 4 ed. Oxford University
Press, 2009.
34. Sait, S. Y., Bhandari, A., Khare, S., James, C., and Murthy, H. A. Multi-
level anomaly detection: Relevance of big data analytics in networks. 1737–1767.
35. Sathi, A. Big Data Analytics: Disruptive Technologies for Changing the Game.
Mc Press, 2012.
36. Schatz, D., and Bashroush, R. Economic valuation for information security
investment: a systematic literature review. 1205–1228.
37. Serfozo, R. F. An equivalence between continuous and discrete time markov
decision processes. 616–620.
38. Shirtz, D., and Elovici, Y. Optimizing investment decisions in selecting infor-
mation security remedies. 95–112.
39. Singh, J., and Nene, M. J. A survey on machine learning techniques for intrusion
detection systems. 4349–4355.
40. Smeraldi, F., and Malacaria, P.
How to spend it: optimal investment for
cyber security. In Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Agents and
CyberSecurity (2014), ACM, p. 8.
41. Sowa, J. F. Conceptual Structures: Information Processing in Mind and Machine,
1 ed. Systems Programming Series. U.S. Department of Energy Oﬃce of Scientiﬁc
and Technical Information, 1983.
42. Teece, D. J. A capability theory of the ﬁrm: an economics and (strategic) man-
agement perspective. 1–43.
18
D. Percia David et al.
43. Terzi, D. S., Terzi, R., and Sagiroglu, S.
Big data analytics for network
anomaly detection from netﬂow data. In International Conference on Computer
Science and Engineering (UBMK’17) (2017), IEEE, pp. 592–597.
44. Trump, D. Presidential executive order (13800) – strengthening the cybersecurity
of federal networks and critical infrastructure, 2017.
45. Wang, Y., Wang, Y., Liu, J., and Huang, Z. A network gene-based framework
for detecting advanced persistent threats. In Ninth International Conference on
P2P, Parallel, Grid, Cloud and Internet Computing (3PGCIC’14) (2014), IEEE,
pp. 97–102.
46. Weinberger, S. Computer security: Is this the start of cyberwarfare? 142–145.
47. Willemson, J. Extending the gordon and loeb model for information security
investment. In 2010 International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Se-
curity (2010), IEEE, pp. 258–261.
48. Zhou, L., Loeb, M. P., Gordon, L. A., and Lucyshyn, W. Empirical evidence
on the determinants of cybersecurity investments in private sector ﬁrms. 720–726.
