Title: Graph Mining for Cybersecurity: A Survey
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2304.00485v2
--------------------------------------------------

Graph Mining for Cybersecurity: A Survey
BO YAN, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
CHENG YANG, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
CHUAN SHI∗, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
YONG FANG, Sichuan University, China
QI LI, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
YANFANG YE, University of Notre Dame, USA
JUNPING DU, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
The explosive growth of cyber attacks nowadays, such as malware, spam, and intrusions, caused severe consequences on
society. Securing cyberspace has become an utmost concern for organizations and governments. Traditional Machine Learning
(ML) based methods are extensively used in detecting cyber threats, but they hardly model the correlations between real-world
cyber entities. In recent years, with the proliferation of graph mining techniques, many researchers investigated these
techniques for capturing correlations between cyber entities and achieving high performance. It is imperative to summarize
existing graph-based cybersecurity solutions to provide a guide for future studies. Therefore, as a key contribution of this
paper, we provide a comprehensive review of graph mining for cybersecurity, including an overview of cybersecurity tasks,
the typical graph mining techniques, and the general process of applying them to cybersecurity, as well as various solutions for
diﬀerent cybersecurity tasks. For each task, we probe into relevant methods and highlight the graph types, graph approaches,
and task levels in their modeling. Furthermore, we collect open datasets and toolkits for graph-based cybersecurity. Finally,
we outlook the potential directions of this ﬁeld for future research.
CCS Concepts: • General and reference →Surveys and overviews; • Information systems →Data mining; • Mathe-
matics of computing →Graph algorithms; • Security and privacy;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: cybersecurity, cyber attack, graph mining, graph embedding, graph neural network
1
INTRODUCTION
With the development of the Internet, various cyber attacks occur constantly, not only bringing dramatic losses
to individuals and enterprises but also posing a serious threat to the country. For example, it was pointed out by
[91] that phishing attacks increased by 600% in March 2020. Another example is that the exposure of Hillary
Clinton’s email by hackers caused a huge political impact and even interfered with the U.S. election. Cybersecurity
∗Chuan Shi is a corresponding author. E-mail: shichuan@bupt.edu.cn
Authors’ addresses: Bo Yan, boyan@bupt.edu.cn, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China, 100876; Cheng Yang,
yangcheng@bupt.edu.cn, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China, 100876; Chuan Shi, shichuan@bupt.edu.cn,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China, 100876; Yong Fang, yfang@scu.edu.cn, Sichuan University, Sichuan,
Chengdu, China, 610207; Qi Li, liqi2001@bupt.edu.cn, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China, 100876; Yanfang
Ye, yye7@nd.edu, University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana, USA, 46556; Junping Du, junpingdu@126.com, Beijing University of Posts
and Telecommunications, Beijing, China, 100876.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that
copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from
permissions@acm.org.
© 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
1556-4681/2023/7-ART $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3610228
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
2
•
Yan, et al.
has become a key factor aﬀecting global risks, thus drawing widespread concerns from academia and industry
nowadays.
To combat cyber attacks, ML-based methods have been widely used in cybersecurity applications. Generally,
cybersecurity issues can be modeled as ML tasks. Earlier ML-based solutions mostly use manually constructed
application-speciﬁc features as inputs, and then train ML models (e.g., Support Vector Machine (SVM) and
K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN)) to detect cybersecurity threats. For instance, the Application Programming Interface
(API) call sequence is often utilized to construct behavior features, so as to identify the homology of malware
[130, 217]. However, earlier ML-based methods heavily rely on feature engineering, which is time-consuming and
also limits their generalizability. As a key component of ML, Deep Learning (DL) alleviated these limitations by
the automatic learning of high-level cyber attack features, as well as the considerably higher capacity of learning,
and thus become desirable approaches in the last ten years [114, 137].
Despite the success of these ML-based methods for cybersecurity applications, there exist many explicit
or implicit correlations between real-world cyber entities, like API call relations in Android apps (short for
applications), which can characterize the structural patterns of cyber criminals. Unfortunately, traditional ML-
based methods hardly capture these correlations, which dramatically hinders performance on some tasks. In
recent years, with the surge of study on graph mining methods [54, 60, 86], more and more researchers began to
apply graph mining technologies to cybersecurity. Generally, graph mining technologies are good at mining the
semantic information and spatial correlations of cyber entities for better cyber attack detection. For example,
malware tends to have high density and strong closeness API call graph [7]; Fraudsters are inclined to have
similar interaction behaviors which can be modeled by meta-path based graph mining methods [69, 240]. At
present, graph mining technologies have been proven to the state-of-the-art in many cybersecurity tasks (e.g.,
defaulter detection [240] and rumor detection [10]). In addition, many methods have been integrated into the
enterprise’s security products as a core component [69, 70, 101].
Though many graph mining techniques have been widely used in solving cybersecurity tasks, to the best of
our knowledge, there is no comprehensive survey on graph-based cybersecurity applications. However, this kind
of survey is urgently needed, considering the increasingly severe environment of cybersecurity. It can provide
an overall reference for quickly designing graph-based cybersecurity solutions and also help later researchers
avoid repetitive work. We also notice that there are several surveys on ML/DL in cybersecurity [104, 114, 219], as
well as some surveys on graph mining techniques in other ﬁelds [21, 116, 173, 216]. [74] presents a most relevant
survey to ours. It only summarizes the earlier graph mining solutions for capturing propagation patterns of
malware. In contrast, our survey covers a wide range of existing graph-based solutions for various cybersecurity
tasks.
In this survey, we provide a comprehensive review of graph mining techniques used in cybersecurity. We
give a detailed taxonomy and descriptions of various cybersecurity tasks, as well as their applied graph mining
techniques. We also formulate the general steps of designing graph-based cybersecurity applications for guidance.
After that, detailed graph-based cybersecurity solutions are introduced. Concretely, we classify cybersecurity
tasks mainly based on the applied graph mining techniques, to highlight the unique advantages of graph methods
in solving current hotspot security issues. Besides, for each cybersecurity task, we present typical graph types and
graph mining techniques to guide the development of novel cybersecurity solutions and facilitate the contrast
towards existing ones. Moreover, we ﬁrst collect the typical graph-based public datasets and toolkits used in
cybersecurity to facilitate baseline experiments. Through systematically analyzing existing studies, we elaborate
keynotes in designing graph-based cybersecurity solutions, as well as some promising directions.
The remainder of this survey is organized as follows. In Section 2, we give a taxonomy and descriptions
of cybersecurity tasks. Section 3 introduces the typical graph mining techniques used in cybersecurity tasks.
Section 4 introduces the general process of graph mining for cybersecurity. Section 5 elaborates on cybersecurity
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
Graph Mining for Cybersecurity: A Survey
•
3
&RJQLWLRQ
6HFXULW\
System
Security
Web Spam
7UDQVDFWLRQ
6HFXULW\
BotNet
Application 
Security
Network 
Infrastructure 
Security
Financial Fraud
Fake News 
Review Spam 
Malicious Domain
Network
Security
IntrXsion Detection
Fake Account 
Blockchain Security
Vulnerability 
Underground Market
0DOZDUH
Fig. 1. Taxonomy of cybersecurity in this survey (the lef two main categories and right four sub-categories). For each
sub-category, we list typical tasks modeled by graph mining techniques.
solutions using graph mining techniques. Section 6 provides typical graph-based cybersecurity public datasets
and toolkits. In Section 7, we point out future directions. Finally, Section 8 is a summary of this survey.
2
BASICS OF CYBERSECURITY
Cybersecurity is the collection of tools, policies, actions, and technologies to protect cyber assets. These assets
include users, network infrastructures, applications, systems, and the total transmitted and stored information
in the cyber environment. Cybersecurity aims to ensure the availability, integrity, and conﬁdentiality of these
assets against cyber attacks [179]. Considering its importance, numerous advanced cyber defense strategies are
proposed to ensure the safety of cyberspace. It’s reported that the market for artiﬁcial intelligence in cybersecurity
will grow from $1 billion in 2016 to a $34.8 billion by 2025 [169]. However, cyber-attacks are evolving and taking
adversarial actions constantly, posing persistent threats to cybersecurity. For example, as a key threat carried
out by attackers to breach cybersecurity, malware evolves rapidly to avoid detection due to the technologies
of automatic generation of their variants, leading to an exponential growth of new malware samples [219].
Therefore, some signiﬁcant tasks of cyber attack and defense should be modeled and continuously concerned by
researchers. In this section, we ﬁrst present the taxonomy of cybersecurity, then provide an overview of these
cybersecurity tasks.
2.1
Taxonomy
The taxonomies of cybersecurity tasks are various from diﬀerent perspectives. In this survey, we mainly focus
on cybersecurity tasks that are extensively modeled by graph mining techniques. The detailed taxonomy of
cybersecurity is depicted in Fig. 1. Speciﬁcally, we divide cybersecurity tasks into two main categories, namely,
application security and network infrastructure security. Network infrastructure security focuses on protecting
key infrastructures and components of the internet, such as Domain Name System (DNS), network traﬃc, and
routers, to ensure that the internet works in a trustworthy environment [200]. We further classify network
infrastructure security at the network and system level, which includes speciﬁc network and system security
tasks (e.g., botnet detection and blockchain security). Application security aims to protect the security of various
applications that run on top of network infrastructures, such as social media and ﬁnancial businesses. It was
further classiﬁed into cognition security and transaction security. Cognition security mainly focuses on the
security issues aﬀecting human cognition from various cyber applications (e.g., fake news and review spam),
while transaction security emphasizes security issues in online transactions that threaten human assets and
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
4
•
Yan, et al.
ﬁnancial order (e.g., ﬁnancial fraud and underground markets). It should be noted that most of the cybersecurity
tasks can be abstracted as anomaly detection, which aims to detect rare occurrences in samples [4]. Since this
survey focuses on speciﬁc cybersecurity tasks, we do not introduce anomaly detection separately but describe
related methods in speciﬁc tasks.
2.2
Overview of Cybersecurity Tasks
Based on the taxonomy of cybersecurity, we give an overview of these cybersecurity tasks.
2.2.1
Transaction Security. Over the past years, the rapid developments of the Internet promoted the ﬂourishing
of online transactions and digital ﬁnance. However, it in return has become a ground for attackers to perform
malicious transactions for proﬁts, leading to huge losses of human assets and damaging the regular ﬁnancial
market operation. By means of the Internet, transactions can be performed both on the surface Internet and
darknet, the latter of which is estimated to be much larger than the former. The transactions on the surface
internet are regulated by governments and ﬁnancial institutions. However, malicious transactions still continue
to occur, which is known as ﬁnancial fraud [128]. The transactions on the darknet form the underground market
[41], which is unregulated and thus becomes an ideal platform to execute illegal transactions.
Financial Fraud. Financial fraud aims to obtain beneﬁcial gains in unethical and illegal ways by exploiting
rule vulnerabilities of the ﬁnancial market. It is an essential issue that damages both individuals’ daily life and
the ﬁnancial market and has become the main threat to transaction security. For instance, in the United States,
fraud activities in the insurance ﬁeld led to $300 billion in ﬁnancial losses a year [128]. We mainly focus on four
typical applications that are modeled by graph mining techniques, namely money laundering, catch-out, loan
default, and insurance fraud.
Underground Market. The underground market can be deﬁned as an illegal, untaxed, and unregulated
transaction market running on a portion of the Internet referred to as the darknet [62]. Diﬀerent from the surface
Internet we used daily, the darknet is an encrypted Internet network that hides the IP address and uses virtually
untraceable cryptocurrency (e.g., bitcoin), facilitating anonymous transactions [233]. Numerous illegal trades
(e.g., drug traﬃcking, arms smuggling) happening in the underground market pose great threats to the ﬁnancial
order. For example, it is revealed that a group of cyber-criminals can make a proﬁt of $864 million every year
through renting Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attacks [234]. To combat these criminals, many crucial
tasks are proposed based on underground forum (or hacker forum) analysis, such as key actor detection [235],
account linking [233], illicit product identiﬁcation [41], and Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI) collection [143].
2.2.2
Cognition Security. Among the various content on cyberspace, there is mixed information that is false
or with malicious intentions. This information propagates rapidly through social media, misleading people’s
conceptions and decision-making, and further damaging the democracy and economy of the country [57]. For
example, a widely spread fake news that Barack Obama was injured in the explosion made market value evaporate
13 billion [244]. Cognition security refers to the potential impacts of information on human cognition, ranging
from web spam, fake news, and review spam, to fake accounts, and has become a hot topic in recent years. The
typical threats to cognition security are introduced as follows.
Web Spam. Web spam refers to hyperlinked pages on the Internet that are created with intention of misleading
humans and search engines [58]. By content and link manipulation (e.g., inserting keywords into web content
or deliberately connecting the website to a large number of other websites), web spam obtains a high rank
returned by search engines, which deteriorates the product quality of search engine providers. Moreover, these
high-ranked web spam often serves as means of spreading malware and ﬁshing attacks [158], which is performed
by the known drive-by download attack. That is, the users may pay attention to the web spam and be induced to
click a redirection Uniform Resource Locator (URL) to access a compromised website. To accommodate these
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
Graph Mining for Cybersecurity: A Survey
•
5
issues, the research on web spam detection has become an arms race, especially for search engine industries
[148].
Fake News. Nowadays, the explosive growth of fake news threatens both political and public interests since
the information involved in fake news inﬂuences general cognitive preferences [57]. Social media such as Twitter
and Facebook has become an ideal platform to spread fake news. As a result, detecting fake news from social
media has become a signiﬁcant task for protecting cognition security. Note that there has been no common
deﬁnition for fake news. In this survey, similar to the broad deﬁnition of [244], we deﬁne fake news as Fake news
is false news published by a social member. Such a deﬁnition means the term fake news should be about the entire
information ecosystem. Thus, we also incorporate some related conceptions (e.g., false information [88] and
rumors [17]) as a part of fake news ﬁelds.
Review Spam. Online review is an important factor aﬀecting people’s attitudes towards items in current
e-commerce platforms. Fraudsters utilize this resource to mislead people’s buying decisions for reshaping their
businesses and even execute ﬁnancial fraud. There exist two kinds of review spam, i.e., individual and collective
review spam. Collective review spam (also called review spammer group [196]) refers to a spammer group that
colludes and collectively works together to control the reviews of items. Compared to individual review spam,
collective review spam is more detrimental to e-commerce platforms and harder to be detected due to the more
complex inter-group dynamics [32].
Fake Account. With the boom of social media, numerous users have registered online accounts for communi-
cation, sharing knowledge, and entertainment. However, there also exist masses of fake accounts (also called
Sybils), which do not correspond to real users and are harmful to the trustworthiness of the social network.
For example, they can weaken the credibility of the network if users begin to doubt the authenticity of proﬁle
information [205]. Attackers often create these fake accounts to execute fake social engagement for particular
purposes, e.g, adding the number of page likes or fake Twitter followers to promote services and products [66],
political astroturﬁng [134], and even manipulating voting results [19]. Therefore, detecting and removing fake
accounts is imperative for protecting legitimate users and maintaining the credibility of social networks.
2.2.3
Network Security. The network consistently suﬀers security threats both from outside and inside, such as
DDoS attacks, and malicious scanning. Network security focuses on protecting the entire network environment
against network attacks and ensuring the reliable operation of network infrastructures. Various network security
tasks provide a safe communication guarantee for the development of various activities on the Internet. Network
traﬃc analysis is a fundamental approach to these tasks [137]. Therefore, we review three typical tasks based on
network traﬃc analysis in network security, namely, botnet detection, malicious domain detection, and intrusion
detection.
BotNet. A botnet indicates an infected network, with a large number of compromised devices, each of which
is a bot and controlled by a botmaster. The activity of botnets is mainly divided into 3 stages. First, the criminals
transmit malware and virus to compromised devices. Then, the criminals supervise a few botmasters to manipulate
a mass of bots through Command and Control (C&C) channels. Finally, the bots launch distributed attacks on the
network. A large portion of cyber issues, for example, DDoS attacks, trojans, and malicious bitcoin mining, are
all related to botnets. Botnets have already become prevalent tools, which may be used to perform new cyber
attacks in the future.
Malicious Domain. Domain Name System (DNS) is an import service on the internet, which maps domain
names to their corresponding IP address. As a critical role in network communication, domains are also signiﬁcant
resources for criminals to launch cyber attacks, such as phishing websites, spam mail, and botnets. Detecting
malicious domains has become an essential topic in network security. Even worse, attackers utilize advanced
techniques (e.g., Fast-Flux and Domain-Flux) to improve their ﬂexibility across the domain space. For example,
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
6
•
Yan, et al.
the attackers cover up the real location of a malicious service by continually changing the mapping IP addresses
[164]. These adversarial behaviors by attackers pose a great challenge to malicious domain detection.
Intrusion Detection. Intrusion Detection System (IDS) is a network security measure that proactively protects
the speciﬁc network and system from illegal attacks. It collects and analyzes information from systems or networks
and detects any behavior that attempts to destroy the integrity, conﬁdentiality, and availability of computer
resources, that is, to check whether there are violations of security policies and signs of attacks, and make
corresponding action reactions. For an IDS, cyber threats come from both outside and inside. The outsider threats
mainly refer to malicious behaviors in network communication and hosts, such as abnormal network traﬃc
and vulnerability attack. Insider threats are mostly caused by malicious behaviors of internal employees of the
organization, such as malicious logins [129], leading to a huge loss to the organization.
2.2.4
System Security. System security is an important part of network infrastructure security. It aims to protect
various systems in cyberspace from inside and outside attacks or hidden dangers. As two key components of
security systems, malware and vulnerability detection have become vital measures to ensure the safe, stable, and
long-term operation of cyber systems. In recent years, as a newly emerged cyber system that realizes peer-to-peer
value exchange and trusted data sharing, blockchain has also drawn much attention from both industry and
academic communities, especially the accompanying security issues.
Malware. According to [219], malware (also known as malicious software or malicious code) refers to all
harmful software programs, including viruses, worms, trojans, spyware, bots, rootkits, ransomware, and so on.
These programs are utilized as weapons to launch cyber attacks, such as stealing information, compromising
computers, and crippling critical infrastructures, leading to severe damage to the information systems. It’s reported
that a kind of malware may release the privacy data of victims or permanently block their access unless paying
more than a $5 billion ransom in 2017 [40]. Typically, Portable Executable (PE) malware in Windows systems
is the majority of malware samples and Android-based malware also occupies a large part [219]. Therefore,
we mainly focus on these two kinds of malware. Besides, malware detection and malware family classiﬁcation
are two main tasks related to malware. We refer to these and other malware-related tasks together as malware
analysis for convenience.
System Vulnerability. System vulnerabilities refer to defects or errors during designing software or operating
system, which may be exploited by criminals to attack or control the entire system through the implantation of
Trojans, viruses, etc. The number of system vulnerabilities has increased explosively in recent years. It’s reported
by MITRE Corporation1 that there already have been 17,8581 records in Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures
(CVE) until June 19, 2022. Exploring high-accuracy vulnerability detection methods has become an urgent problem
for system security. System vulnerabilities usually manifest in program code, such as the well-known Structured
Query Language (SQL) injection vulnerability. Therefore, the source code analysis is the basis of the vulnerability
detection task [183, 208].
Blockchain Security. Blockchain is a decentralized and tamper-free system that establishes trust and achieves
trusted transactions for the digital world. Based on the architecture of blockchain, many applications have
proliferated in recent years, such as the well-known Bitcoin. Ethereum is one of the largest blockchain systems
nowadays, whose emergence represents the arrival of the blockchain 2.0 era. Smart contracts are programs
automatically running on top of Ethereum. It can be designed by developers to implement arbitrary rules for
managing digital assets, making the automatic execution of contract terms possible [108, 109]. However, since the
programming languages for the smart contract newly emerge, there may expose many vulnerabilities which are
prone to be attacked. For example, In 2016, attackers exploited the reentrancy vulnerability of the Decentralized
Autonomous Organization (DAO) contract and stole 3.6 million Ether [108]. Besides, due to the anonymity and
high autonomy of blockchain systems, criminal activities occur consistently, such as money laundering and
1https://www.cve.org
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
Graph Mining for Cybersecurity: A Survey
•
7
phishing scams, posing great risks to blockchain digital assets. Therefore, we mainly focus on graph mining
solutions for two kinds of blockchain security threats: (1) vulnerabilities of the designed blockchain system
itself (e.g., smart contract vulnerability). (2) Criminal activities in the blockchain (e.g, malicious users utilize the
blockchain to execute money laundering).
3
OVERVIEW OF GRAPH MINING TECHNIQUES
In this section, we will ﬁrst present some basic concepts of graph mining techniques. Afterwards, detailed
taxonomy and descriptions of typical graph mining techniques used in cybersecurity are introduced.
3.1
Basic Concepts
Many real-world cybersecurity data can be naturally abstracted or manually constructed as a graph, aiming to
model the relationships and complex interactions between cyber components. Formally, a graph is deﬁned as
follows.
Definition 1. Graph. A graph is denoted as 퐺= (푉, 퐸) where 푉is the node set and 퐸is the edge set. A node type
mapping function 푓A : 푉→A and an edge type mapping function 푓R : 퐸→R are deﬁned in the graph, where A
is the node type set and R is the edge type set.
The basic topological information of a graph can be depicted by some properties, which are also important
features to identify cyber threats. For example, as a basic property to measure how tightly interconnected a graph
is, density is also widely used in malware analysis and botnet detection. Here we list typical graph properties and
their descriptions in Table 1. Note that these general properties can be used to characterize all kinds of graphs.
Table 1. Typical graph properties (structure-based statistical features) and their descriptions.
Property level
Property
Description
Node-level
In/out (weighted) degree
The number (weight) of in/out edges associated with the vertex.
Centrality
Measure node importance, including degree centrality, betweenness centrality,
and closeness centrality.
PageRank [150]
Measures the importance of a node. The basic idea is that the importance of a
node is roughly determined by the number and features of links to it.
Local clustering coeﬃcient
Measure the degree of closeness of a node to its neighbors, which can be
calculated by the actual number of edges between neighbors of a node divide the
maximum number of possible edges between neighbors of the node [150].
Edge-level
Shortest path
The shortest path length between node 푖and node 푗.
Graph-level
Diameter [45]
The maximum length of the shortest path between any two nodes in a graph.
Degree distribution [153]
The degree distribution 푃(푘) of a network is deﬁned as the fraction of nodes in
the network with degree 푘. If there are 푛nodes in total and 푛푘of them have
degree 푘, then 푃(푘) = 푛푘
푛.
Density
Measure how tightly interconnected a graph and can be deﬁned as the average
normalized degree.
Broadly speaking, cybersecurity graphs in reality are mostly heterogeneous, such as traﬃc ﬂow graph [81]
and code property graph [208], where the nodes or edges in the graph contain multiple types. We deﬁne the
heterogeneous graph and homogeneous graph as follows.
Definition 2. Homogeneous/Heterogeneous graph [166]. A graph is called heterogeneous graph if the node
type set |A| > 1 or the edge type set |R| > 1, otherwise it is called homogeneous graph.
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
8
•
Yan, et al.
getNetworkCountryISO()
getInstalledApplications()
apps_iterator→hashNext()
getApplicationInfo()
getLine1Number()
SetTimer
HeapAlloc
WriteFile
CreateFileA
SetDoubleClickTime
Lostsaga.zip
LostsagaPC_TW.zip
GarenaPC_25915.zip
GWHookMan.dll
Gamewatcher.exe
PK38.exe
Archive
File
API
Fig. 2. An example of homogeneous graph (lef) [125] and heterogeneous graph (right) [40]. The homogeneous graph is an
API call graph of Android programs, where the nodes denote APIs and edges denote API call relations. The heterogeneous
graph is a file dependency graph of Windows Portable Executable (PE) files. It includes multiple types of nodes (Archive, File,
and API) and edges (e.g., Archives-include-Files and Files-call-APIs).
API
Signature
App
Affiliation
IMEI
Invoke(I)
Associate(A)
Have(H)
Certify(C)
Exist(E)
Possess(P)
(a)
M1:
M2:
M3:
M4:
(b)
I
I-1
E
A
C
E-1
C-1
A-1
Fig. 3. Network schema (a) and meta-paths (b) for Android malware detection [218]. The symbol with superscript -1 indicates
inverse relation (e.g., 퐼−1 indicates "invoked-by").
Example 1. Fig. 2 presents an example of the homogeneous/heterogeneous graph in the malware detection
task. The homogeneous graph (left) is an Android API call graph where nodes denote APIs and edges denote call
relations between APIs. The heterogeneous graph (right) depicts more complex interactions between system
entities which include four types: Archive, File, API, and DLL (short for Dynamic Link Library) .
For homogeneous graphs, the basic structural information can be captured by ﬁrst-order proximity and
second-order proximity [172]. The basic idea of ﬁrst-order proximity is the nodes that are highly interconnected
should be embedded closely together. For example, two Application Interfaces (APIs) with calling relationships
may implement similar functions. However, in some cases, disconnected nodes may also have similar behaviors.
Take the fraud detection task as an example, transactions between malicious accounts often use normal middle
accounts as bridges. First-order proximity fails to model the similarity of these disconnected malicious accounts.
To compensate for this limitation, second-order proximity characterizes the similarity of two nodes by comparing
their neighbor structure, i.e., if two nodes have more common neighbors, their second-order proximity will be
higher.
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
Graph Mining for Cybersecurity: A Survey
•
9
For heterogeneous graphs, the basic pattern can be represented as a network schema [167], which can be
seen as a meta template reﬂecting node types and link relations. While the high-level semantic of the graph,
which is proved more useful for downstream tasks, can be captured by meta-path [167].
Definition 3. Meta-path [167]. A meta-path P is a path deﬁned on a network schema. The path can be denoted
as 퐴1
푅1
−−→퐴2
푅2
−−→· · ·
푅푙
−→퐴푙+1, which deﬁnes a composite relation 푅= 푅1 ◦푅2 ◦· · · ◦푅푙between node type 퐴1 and
퐴푙+1, where ◦denotes the composition operator on relations.
We can simplify the representation of a meta-path P as P = (퐴1퐴2 · · ·퐴푙+1) if no multiple relation types exist
between adjacent node types. For a relation 푅between node type 퐴푖and 퐴푖+1, which is denoted as 퐴푖
푅
−→퐴푖+1,
the inverse relation 푅−1 holds naturally for 퐴푖+1
푅−1
−→퐴푖. Generally, 푅is not equal to 푅−1, unless 푅is symmetric.
Example 2. An example of meta-path designed for Android malware detection is shown in Fig. 3. Fig. 3 (a)
depicts a network schema that includes ﬁve entity types and six relation types. Fig. 3 (b) presents four meta-paths
extracted from the network schema. These meta-paths capture diﬀerent semantic information of the graph. For
example, the meta-path M1: 퐴푝푝
퐼
−→퐴푃퐼
퐼−1
−→퐴푝푝captures the semantics of two Android apps calling the same
API, and the semantics in M4 denotes that the two apps are developed by the same developer.
3.2
Method Taxonomy
According to the graph mining techniques used in cybersecurity, we organize existing methods into two main
categories. (1) Statistical features. The methods in this category are based on manually constructed statistical
features, which are high-dimensional and sparse. Statistical features are further divided into structural and
attributed features, depending on whether leveraging attributed information of the graph. (2) Graph embedding
[52, 191]. Unlike statistical features, graph embedding transforms feature vectors from sparse to dense and
automatically preserves structural and attributes information. We give taxonomies of graph mining methods
from three perspectives: structural/ attributed (whether using attributed information), shallow/deep (whether
using deep learning), and homogeneous/heterogeneous (whether focusing on the heterogeneous graph). These
taxonomies can reﬂect the characteristics of diﬀerent cybersecurity tasks from a comprehensive view. For example,
some cybersecurity tasks (e.g., botnet detection) are sensitive to structural features while other tasks (e.g., fraud
detection) pay more attention to attributed information; the underground market analysis often operates on a
heterogeneous graph and the function call relations are often constructed as homogeneous graphs in malware
analysis. The detailed taxonomy of graph mining techniques used in cybersecurity is given in Fig. 4.
3.2.1
Statistical Features. Most statistical features are manually constructed from the graph, reﬂecting the general
statistical characteristics of graph structure and attributes. Some other statistical features are tailored for speciﬁc
cybersecurity applications, which may be eﬀective but hard to generalize. It is also proved that statistical features
can achieve comparable or even superior performance in depicting some basic graph properties (e.g., counting
substructures), compared with advanced models (e.g., Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)) [26, 48, 206]. We divide
statistical features into two main categories, structural and attributed features, which are introduced as follows.
Structural Features. Structural features depict the basic properties of the graph and have been widely
used in earlier cybersecurity solutions. For instance, in/out-degree is a salient feature to distinguish botnets;
community detection algorithms play a crucial position in identifying community structural patterns of cyber
threats [111, 187, 202, 208]. Here we list typical structural features and their descriptions in Table 1. Despite the
automated learning by prevalent graph embedding technologies, structural features are still served as eﬀective
indicators to detect many potential threats [143]. Besides, some advanced cybersecurity solutions are also
motivated by the statistical characteristics of the graph structure [102, 107].
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
10
•
Yan, et al.
Graph Mining Techniques in Cybersecurity
Statistical Features
Graph Embedding
Attributed
Structural
Shallow (Sha)
Deep (Dee)
Homogeneous (Hom)
Heterogeneous (Het)
Structural (Str)
Attributed (Att)
×
×
Fig. 4. Taxonomy of graph mining techniques in cybersecurity. The symbol × indicates the Hadamard product which means
that the sub-categories from diﬀerent views can perform arbitrary combinations. Accordingly, a graph embedding method
belongs to multiple sub-categories (e.g., Node2vec [54] belongs to Str+Sha+Hom embedding).
Attributed Features. Attributed features, such as node attributes and edge weights, are a signiﬁcant com-
plement of structural features, especially in the scenario of structural features being less discriminative. For
example, in the smart home Internet of Things (IoT) vulnerability detection task, the traﬃc ﬂow graphs may
present similar structures, which is hard to identify vulnerabilities, while the attributes in the edges (ﬂows) can
reveal the vulnerability risks, such as "password" and "token" [78]. Some other attributed features are constructed
for speciﬁc cybersecurity tasks. Take review spammer group detection as an example. The average review time
and rating variance are two key attribute-based features for identifying spammer groups since spammer groups
often post fake reviews in a short period and tend to rate similar scores [195]. Belief propagation (BP) algorithms
are often utilized for passing this homophily between connected nodes [87, 170]. Besides, attributed features are
often incorporated into graph embedding models and served as initialized node vectors.
3.2.2
Graph Embedding. Generally, assuming the data lie in a low dimensional manifold, graph embedding
algorithms aim to not only reduce the high dimensionality of the non-relational data but also capture the structural
and attributed information of the graph [15]. Each node is embedded into a dense vector and then performs
downstream tasks. Thus from the view of utilized information, graph embeddings can be divided into structural
and attributed. Besides, from the view of model architecture, many shallow methods (e.g., methods based on
matrix factorization [209] and random walk [126]) and advanced deep learning-based methods (e.g., GNNs)
are adopted to learn graph embeddings. Also, from the view of organization forms of graph data, the graph
embedding methods focus on either homogeneous graphs or heterogeneous graphs. We divide graph embedding
methods from these three views and the taxonomy on each view can cover all the graph embedding methods.
Typical methods are introduced as follows.
Structural vs. Attributed. Structural embedding aims to preserve the structural information of graphs in
embedding. Intuitively, if two nodes are connected or their local structures are similar, their node embeddings
should have a closer distance. Thus, many works used random walk to sample local node sequences for node
similarity learning. DeepWalk [126] incorporated the topological information into random walks and used Skip-
Gram [115] to maximize the probabilities of neighboring nodes. LINE [172] further introduced weighted node
distribution and proposed ﬁrst-order proximity for modeling the joint probability of nodes with observed links.
Node2vec [54] generalized DeepWalk by using a 2푛푑order random walk procedure to sample node sequences
and learned ﬁrst-order proximity and second-order proximity simultaneously. To model the structural identity,
Struct2vec [138] designs a weighted random walk traversing a hierarchical graph. Structural embedding methods
are widely used in structure-sensitive cybersecurity tasks, such as function call graph structure analysis in
malware detection [39, 125], pattern learning of fake news spreading within a social network [46], transaction
behavior modeling in ﬁnancial fraud detection [111], etc.
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
Graph Mining for Cybersecurity: A Survey
•
11
Unlike structural embedding only considers structural information, attributed embedding captures graph
structure and node attribute information (e.g., fraudster proﬁles in social networks) simultaneously. [209] ﬁrst
proved DeepWalk is equivalent to matrix factorization and proposed text-associated DeepWalk (TADW) to
incorporate node attributes into embedding. Many advanced graph embedding methods also support incorporating
attributed information (e.g., GraphSAGE [60] and Graph Attention Network (GAT) [177]). Attributed embedding
is more suitable for complex cybersecurity tasks where structural features are not distinguishable, such as threat
analysis of dark net [233, 235] and system entity correlation modeling in malware detection [40].
Shallow vs. Deep. In the early stage, the majority of graph embedding methods are based on shallow models,
whose trainable parameters are solely node embeddings [59]. These shallow models applied in cybersecurity
are largely inspired by matrix factorization and random walk techniques. Matrix is a natural tool to denote
graphs such as the adjacency matrix and Laplacian matrix. Therefore, we can easily obtain node embeddings
by matrix factorization. Also, the learning node embedding can also reconstruct the whole graph structure by
matrix multiplication [113]. Compared with matrix factorization which uses a deterministic way to learn node
embedding, methods with random walk are more ﬂexible and mostly included in structural embeddings, such as
Node2vec, Deepwalk, and LINE.
The repaid progress in deep learning has prompted applying deep learning to graph embeddings, which
are known as Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [203, 241]. GNNs are deep models that update node embedding
through neighbor aggregating and provide a more convenient and scalable way to learn graph embeddings. These
deep models can be divided into spectral methods and spatial methods. Graph Convolution Network (GCN)[86]
is a well-known spectral method, which generalized convolutions operation to graph data. Spatial methods,
known as Message Passing Neural Network (MPNN) [50], deﬁne convolution operation based on the spatial
relations between nodes. To capture the importance of messages from diﬀerent neighbors, Graph Attention
Network (GAT) [177] introduced attention mechanisms to the message-passing process. GraphSAGE [60] further
adopted neighbor sampling to achieve scalability. It designs the mini-batch propagation to support inductive
learning. To model temporal changes of the graph (e.g., network traﬃc graphs), Spatial-Temporal Graph Neural
Network (STGNN) incorporates sequential models into the traditional GNNs, which is eﬀective in some real-time
applications (e.g., intrusion detection systems [27]).
Homogeneous vs. Heterogeneous. Homogeneous embeddings have been extensively studied for learning
representations of homogeneous graphs. Many well-known embedding methods, from the random walk-based
methods Node2vec, Deepwalk, and LINE, to the prevalent GNN methods, GCN, GAT, and GraphSAGE, are
designed for homogeneous graphs. Quite a lot of these methods are based on homophily assumption, i.e., nodes
with similar labels tend to connect with each other, and thus should have similar embeddings. Many cybersecurity
tasks also hold this assumption [20, 145]. For example, the connected webs in the web link graph may have the
same label (normal or spam). Correspondingly, these homogeneous graphs are often used to model correlations
or similarities between nodes. Another type of homogeneous graph aims to model dependency relations, such as
function call graphs for malware detection [71], network traﬃc graphs for abnormal traﬃc detection [33], etc.
These graphs are not constructed based on homophily assumption, thus the goal is often to obtain embeddings
for graph-level tasks.
To model the heterogeneity of graphs, many works focus on studying heterogeneous graph embeddings [191].
Semantic information is more signiﬁcant in heterogeneous graph scenarios. For example, the two hosts who
frequently send packets using the same protocol likely have similar purposes and thus should have similar
representations [237]. Meta-path guided random walk was proposed to capture this semantic similarity [40, 227],
which continues the walk along with pre-deﬁned meta-paths. Besides, many advanced heterogeneous embedding
methods rely on aggregating messages from heterogeneous neighbors, which mainly consist of two solutions.
One is transforming attributes from diﬀerent types of entities into the same space through type-speciﬁc mapping
functions [107, 212, 225]. After obtaining target node representations through aggregating speciﬁc types of
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
12
•
Yan, et al.
……
GNN
＋
○
……
Feature vector
M1:
Mn:
Meta-path based neighbor aggregation
GNN
Multi-view fusion
Fig. 5. The typical architecture of heterogeneous embeddings used in cybersecurity (taking malware detection as an example).
It includes two procedures: (1) Meta-path based neighbor aggregation. Multiple homogeneous graphs (views) are constructed
w.r.t. specific meta-path based neighbors, then perform neighbor aggregation in each view to obtain node representations. (2)
Multi-view fusion. Diﬀerent meta-path based node representations are fused to obtain the final feature vectors.
neighbors, multiple fusion methods (e.g., concatenation) can be applied to get the ﬁnal node embeddings. Another
solution is using meta-path guided neighbor aggregation [69, 188, 192]. A typical architecture of this solution is
shown in Fig. 5. Note that the aggregation function has multiple choices. For example, it was designed based on
the attention mechanism in Heterogeneous Graph Attention Network (HAN) [192], which is also a prevalent
choice in many cybersecurity solutions [69, 180, 234]. Finally, the node representations under diﬀerent meta-paths
can be fused by multi-view fusion technologies [131, 192].
4
GENERAL PROCESS OF GRAPH MINING FOR CYBERSECURITY
The general process of graph-based cybersecurity solutions mainly consists of ﬁve steps. First of all, we should
focus on one speciﬁc cybersecurity task (e.g., botnet detection) among various cyber attacks, and analyze task
properties to give a clear task deﬁnition. Then, in terms of the complex cyberspace mixing with all kinds of
entities, we should collect and process the data which support the task properties. Based on the task deﬁnition
and processed data, the application-speciﬁc graph can be constructed, which captures rich interactions between
related cyber entities. Next, an optimization model should be carefully designed for this task. Finally, the proposed
model would be assessed by corresponding metrics and further deployed in real-world scenarios. In this section,
we will introduce these crucial steps for designing eﬀective cybersecurity solutions.
4.1
Task Definition
The step of task deﬁnition requires an in-depth understanding of the cybersecurity task, thus providing detailed
task properties for designing proper models. Task deﬁnition mainly consists of two key steps: (1) Determining
whether a cybersecurity task can be eﬀectively modeled by graph mining techniques. Intuitively, if the real-world
cyber entities or events present explicit graph structure (e.g., botnet [90, 237], transactions [27, 198]) or implicit
relations (e.g., two domains queried by the same end host tend to highly correlated [94]), then the related task can
be modeled by graph mining techniques. (2) Transforming a cybersecurity task into a high-level graph-related
task (e.g., botnet detection can be abstracted as a node-level classiﬁcation task [118]). Note that this process also
provides a guide for graph construction. For example, in the node-level network traﬃc classiﬁcation task, nodes
denote traﬃc ﬂow [239]; while if the task is modeled as graph-level, then nodes can denote packets, and the
whole graph represents a traﬃc ﬂow [153].
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
Graph Mining for Cybersecurity: A Survey
•
13
4.2
Data Collection
Cybersecurity data can be collected from various sources. In the domain of network infrastructure security, traﬃc
ﬂow and log records are two essential data sources since they reﬂect real-time network conditions or system
behaviors. Besides, the passive DNS database (or other data sources, e.g., WHOIS records) stores the mapping
relation between IP and domain. Various tools can be leveraged for traﬃc ﬂow monitoring and collection, such
as Wireshark and Netﬂow. The application security ﬁeld includes more data sources, such as social media, hacker
forums, source codes, etc. After we obtained these raw data from multiple data sources, many of them should be
processed in advance for further utilization. For example, the raw traﬃc data is normally stored in pcap format,
which should be further processed by network traﬃc analysis tools (e.g., tshark, Tstat); in malware detection,
PE ﬁles need to be unpacked ﬁrst by specialized tools (e.g., disassembler and memory dumper tools) if it is
compressed. In addition to manually collected datasets, there are also many public graph-based cybersecurity
datasets, we summarize them in Section 6.
4.3
Graph Construction
Based on task deﬁnition and collected datasets, the graphs can be constructed to explicitly model the internal
relations of data. Generally, task deﬁnition gives a high-level guideline for constructing graphs and the collected
datasets determine the node set and attribute set. The edges capture the relation between nodes, which should be
carefully added based on priori knowledge and speciﬁc tasks.
In terms of the nature of a graph, we can divide the constructed graph into homogeneous and heterogeneous.
Homogeneous graph construction is mostly based on explicit relations of data or manually designed metrics. For
example, the graph whose nodes denote host and edges denote network traﬃc ﬂow can models simple network
communication behavior [187, 190]. The sensor graph in [142] is a KNN graph and is constructed based on
the metric of pair-wise node similarities. Heterogeneous graph construction is more complicated. For example,
the malicious domain detection task requires multiple entities (e.g., domain, IP, Account, CNAME record) and
relations (e.g., map, query, register) [164]. In these cases, one can design the network schema ﬁrst and then
construct the concrete graph instance.
From the view of application scenarios, some graphs may only suit speciﬁc cybersecurity tasks. Many previous
works have designed eﬀective graph types for diﬀerent applications. To avoid making it from scratch, we
summarize typical graph types, the corresponding node and edge sets, and application scenarios in Table 2. We
also give a coarse-grained graph-type taxonomy based on cyber entities (e.g., ﬁles and news). For example, the
ﬁle dependency graph and ﬁle distribution graph are all classiﬁed into ﬁle relation graphs. Note that the Code
Property Graph (CPG) proposed in [208] is a joint data structure merging AST, CFG and PDG, which therefore
incorporates both of their node and edge types.
4.4
Model Design
The model design aims to design optimization models by deeply analyzing the task property and constructed
graphs. The key idea is ﬁnding crime clues and choosing proper graph mining techniques to ﬁlter them. Traditional
methods manually constructed discriminative graph features and fed them into ML classiﬁers. However, in some
cases, suspicious patterns are hard to ﬁnd, especially with the emergence of adversarial and more complicated
crime behaviors. Therefore, graph embedding technologies have been proposed to automatically mine complex
suspicious patterns. We can design these models depending on the task properties. For example, to capture the
structural patterns of a botnet, random walk-based graph embedding methods can be used [118]; for the temporal
patterns of Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) dynamic graphs, STGNN is considered more eﬀective [27]. It is worth
noting that traditional statistical analysis is still a fundamental means to motivate the design of advanced graph
models [107].
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
14
•
Yan, et al.
Table 2. Typical application-specific graphs and their application scenarios.
Graph type
Node
Edge
Application scenarios
Web
Relation
Graph
Web Link Graph
Web
Web links
Web spam
Web Redirect Graph
Web
Web redirection
Web spam
File
Relation
Graph
File Dependency Graph
System entity (e.g., File, API,
process)
Dependency relation
Malware
File Distribution Graph
Network entity (e.g., IP, File,
domain,etc)
Network behaviors (e.g., request)
Malware
Network
Traﬃc
Graph
Host Graph
Host
Network traﬃc between host
Botnet detection; Intrusion
detection
Domain Resolution Graph
Domain/IP
Domain-IP mapping
Malicious domain
Traﬃc Activity Graph (TAG)
Network entity (e.g., IP, Port,
Protocol)
Multiple relations between
network entities
Botnet; malicious domain;
intrusion detection
Flow Similarity Graph
Network traﬃc ﬂow
Flow similarity
Network traﬃc classiﬁcation
Packet Sequence Graph
Packet with direction and
length
Temporal dependency between
packets
Network traﬃc classiﬁcation
Code Graph
Control Flow Graph (CFG)
Basic blocks of a function
The execution order of basic blocks
Vulnerability
Abstract Syntax Tree (AST)
Syntax structures of source
code (e.g, identiﬁer,
expression)
Syntax relations
Vulnerability
Program Dependence Graph (PDG)
Basic blocks of a function
Control and data dependence
Vulnerability
Function Call Graph (FCG)
Function
Function call
Malware detection
Code Property Graph
Incorporate AST, CFG and PDG
Vulnerability; blockchain
News Graph
News Similarity Graph
News content (e.g., word,
image)
Content similarity
Fake news
News Propagation Graph
User behaviors (e.g., retweet,
response)
Temporal order of user behaviors
Fake news
User
Behavior
Graph
Account-device Graph
User/Account/Device
User/Account logins device
Intrusion detection; ﬁnancial fraud
Social Media Interaction Graph
Social media entities (e.g.,
user, tweet, news)
User behaviors (e.g., retweet,
response)
Fake news; fake account
Review Graph
User/Review/Item
User review behaviors
Review spam
Transaction Graph
Transaction entities (e.g.,
user, account, transaction)
Transaction behaviors
Financial fraud; blockchain
Underground Forum Graph
Forum entities (e.g., user,
thread, comment)
User behaviors (e.g., reply,
comment)
Underground market
User Similarity Graph
User
User similarity
Fake news
Social Relation Graph
User/Account
Social Relation
Fake news; fake account
Others
User Interface Graph
UI components (e.g.,
ListView, Button)
Triggered events
Malware
Power Grid Graph
Generators and Substations
Transmission lines
Vulnerability
Vulnerability Dependency Graph
Vulnerability
Vulnerability dependency
Vulnerability
Alert Graph
System alert
Alert correlation
Intrusion detection
Sensor Graph
Sensor
Sensor similarity
Intrusion detection
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Graph
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
Communications between vehicle
Intrusion detection
Character Variation Graph
Character
Variation relation
Review spam
4.5
Model Assessment
The eﬀectiveness of a graph-based cybersecurity solution is measured by the model assessment procedure.
Most of these models are classiﬁcation-based. For example, malware detection is a binary classiﬁcation task to
classify a program as malicious or not, or a multi-class classiﬁcation task to identify malware families. These
classiﬁcation-based models can be assessed by classiﬁcation-based metrics (e.g., accuracy, Micro-F1). Particularly,
IDS pays more attention to reducing false alerts, thus False Positive Rate (FPR) is an important metric to evaluate
the eﬀectiveness of IDS. Besides classiﬁcation-based models, there are also some unsupervised models based
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
Graph Mining for Cybersecurity: A Survey
•
15
Table 3. Typical graph approach used in transaction security.
Task
Graph Type
Graph Approach
Task Level
Paper
Financial fraud
Transactions
Attributed (statistical feature)
Subgraph
[76, 98]
Node
[30]
Att+Dee+Hom (graph embedding)
[111, 198, 199]
Att+Dee+Het (graph embedding)
[69, 70, 240]
Account-device
[102, 106, 107, 180]
Underground market
Underground forum
Str+Sha+Het (graph embedding)
[235]
Att+Dee+Het (graph embedding)
Edge
[233]
[41]
Node
[234]
Word co-occurrence
Att+Sha+Hom (graph embedding)
Node/graph
[143]
Transaction
Structural (statistical feature)
Node
[36]
Host
Attributed (statistical feature)
Subgraph
[51]
on clustering, such as unsupervised malware family clustering [39], which can be assessed by clustering-based
metrics (e.g., Adjusted Mutual Information (AMI)). Code similarity search is a fundamental procedure in malware
detection and its assessment is similar to the recommender system, thus Rank-n and Mean Reciprocal Rank
(MRR) can be used as evaluation metrics. In addition, the real-world deployment of graph-based models requires
high time eﬃciency, which is often measured by running time [38, 207]. Visualization is also a signiﬁcant model
assessment means, especially when the task couldn’t be evaluated by traditional metrics, such as analyzing
diﬀerent application components in mixed network traﬃc [81].
5
CYBERSECURITY SOLUTIONS USING GRAPH MINING
Graph mining techniques have been widely used in cybersecurity tasks. In this section, we summarize and
elaborate on these graph-based cybersecurity solutions based on the taxonomy in Section 2.1.
5.1
Transaction Security
Among the strategies of transaction security protection, graph-based methods model behaviors and attributes
of transactions simultaneously, which attract more attention recently. Typical papers and corresponding graph
approaches are listed in Table 3.
5.1.1
Financial Fraud. Traditional methods most rely on prior knowledge or individual features but ignore the
rich interactions between users. A general characteristic of ﬁnancial fraudsters is community structure, i.e.,
the network containing fraudsters is often dense-connected, which motivates the application of graph mining
techniques in ﬁnancial systems (e.g., Alipay2) [106, 107, 111]. [111] extracted high-risk dense subgraphs and
obtain the risk scores based on homogeneous graph embeddings for further screening. The aggregation and
burst phenomenon observed by [107] suggested that a large number of fraudsters logging the same device in a
short time tend to be high-risk. It initiated user node vectors by temporal activity statistics and utilized GNNs
to aggregate local neighbors. However, normal accounts may also log in to the same device so that the above
2http://render.alipay.com/p/s/download
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
16
•
Yan, et al.
GNN-based models raise a high false positive rate. [106] solved this problem by introducing adaptive receptive
paths. Besides these general solutions, graph mining techniques have also been successfully used in many speciﬁc
tasks of ﬁnancial risk management recently. We introduce these tasks and corresponding solutions as follows.
Money Laundering. Money laundering is a ﬁnancial industry behavior, which makes illegal income legal-
ization. It’s reported that more than 150,000 people were killed by Mexican drug cartels since 2006; 700,000
people per year are sold in a human traﬃcking industry [198]. These illegal activities all rely on complex
money laundering operations. The government and ﬁnancial institutions have paid tremendous resources into
anti-money laundering (AML) but few eﬀects are obtained. Traditional Transaction Monitoring Systems (TMS)
mainly rely on rule-based threshold protocols and scrutinizing by analysts, which suﬀer lower scalability and
higher false positive rate. Graph model has emerged in AML recently since it captures cash-ﬂow structures and
account attributes in a uniform graph. One can use accounts [30, 198] or transactions [199] as nodes and edges
denote cash-ﬂows to model suspicious money laundering behaviors. [30] emphasized the importance of social
network metrics (e.g., centrality scores) for identifying criminals. Scalability and eﬃciency are two key factors
for designing graph-based AML models since the transactions and accounts are dynamically growing [98, 198].
Therefore, existing works utilize scalable and dynamic GNNs (e.g., fastGNN [198], EvolveGCN [199]) to perform
AML. Besides, despite several manually constructed datasets [198, 199], public datasets for research in the AML
community are still rare.
Cash-Out. As another major ﬁnancial fraud, cash-out aims to gain proﬁts through illegal procedures, e.g.,
buying pre-paid cards and re-selling them [69]. Conventional cash-out detection is mainly based on statistical
features of an individual user, but seldom fully exploits rich interaction relation of uses [236]. Statistically, cash-out
fraudsters tend to have consistent behaviors with the meta-path based neighbors. This observation motivates
researchers to construct an Attributed Heterogeneous Information Network (AHIN) with accounts, merchants,
and devices as nodes and propose multiple meta-paths to model the login and fund transfer relations [69]. The
architecture of this heterogeneous embedding model is shown in Fig. 5. Note that similar architecture is also
used in many ﬁnancial fraud detection tasks [70, 180, 240]. Besides, considering the scarcity of available labeled
data, [76] in turn detected dense subgraphs in a single-step transaction graph. It captured suspicious signals by a
class of metrics from four perspectives: time, capital, cyclicity, and topotaxy.
Loan Default. The prevalent online credit payment services such as Ant Credit Pay of Ant Financial3 nowadays
facilitate people in transactions but breed new loan default risks. As a core component of online credit risk
management, default detection has drawn much attention in recent years. It aims to predict whether a user could
fall into default in the future. Traditional methods extract individual user-related features, e.g., user proﬁles,
transaction history, and social relations. However, the related behaviors of defaulting are complicated and couldn’t
be fully modeled by only individual user features. Generally, there are below traits of defaulters that should be
considered: (1) Intrinsic properties, i.e., the individual user-related features mentioned above. (2) Interactions
with other entities. Defaulters often exhibit some suspicious interaction patterns with outsiders. For example,
defaulters may have frequent fund transactions with others [70]. (3) Adversarial behaviors. some defaulters
may deliberately construct complex behaviors such as making a long fund transfer path [240]. To capture these
characteristics, one can also use AHIN to model these entities as well as the complex interactions between them.
Based on AHIN, typical heterogeneous graph embeddings are applied [70, 180, 240]. [240] designed multiple
meta-paths to capture semantic correlations between entities, and multi-view information fusion technology was
applied for aggregating diﬀerent types of neighbors [70, 180].
Insurance Fraud. Insurance fraud indicates that the insured deliberately conceals the actual situation, induces
the insurer to accept insurance, and then swindles the insurance money. Insurance fraud not only reduces the
proﬁts of insurance companies but also aﬀects the social and economic beneﬁts. It’s reported that the Canadian
3https://www.antgroup.com/business-development?tab=ﬁnance
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
Graph Mining for Cybersecurity: A Survey
•
17
User Profiles
Posted Content
Data Collection
Graph Construction
Thread
Reply
Comment
Hacker Forum Graph
Model Design
Hacker Forums
Non-key player
Section
Product
Topic
Post (P)
Sell (S)
Contract (C)
Belong (B)
Discuss (D)
Vendor
Buyer
Meta-paths
Meta-graphs
P
B
B-1
P-1
S
S-1
……
Attach (A)
……
Skip-gram
Meta-path based random walk
……
Multi-view fusion
GNN
GNN
＋
○
Feature vector
Feature vector
Detection
？
Identification
？
Linking
Key player
Fig. 6. The typical workflow of using hacker forums to perform underground market analysis. First, an AHIN (hacker
forum graph) is constructed based on user profiles and their posted content in hacker forums. Then multiple meta-paths or
meta-graphs are proposed to model semantic correlations between hacker forum entities. Next, graph embedding methods
(e.g., meta-path based random walk, neighbor aggregation, and multi-view fusion) are utilized to obtain feature vectors.
Finally, the feature vectors are used to perform three crucial tasks, namely, key player detection, production identification,
and account linking.
automobile insurance fraud led to an estimated loss of 542 million Canadian Dollars in 2007 [194]. Recently, graph
mining technologies have been proven to be useful tools to combat this fraud. Taking Alibaba’s return-freight
insurance fraud as an example, [102] found device-sharing graph can eﬀectively discriminate between normal
and fraud accounts and utilized GeniePath model [106] achieving the best performance compared with graph
embedding and machine learning methods. The application in the real world showed that more than ten thousand
dollars can be saved every month.
Besides the above typical tasks using graph mining in ﬁnancial fraud, there are many others that we haven’t
listed (e.g., online auction [123] and retail holding [176]). Nowadays, graph-based abnormal detection has become a
typical approach to ﬁnancial fraud detection. However, most approaches heavily rely on domain knowledge [128],
leading a poor performance on adaptation and generalization. It’s suggested that researchers endeavor to design
graph-based solutions without any domain or expert knowledge, e.g., identifying abnormal nodes/subgraphs
automatically in an unsupervised manner.
5.1.2
Underground Market. To combat criminals, security analysts need to continuously observe the latest status
and changes of underground market activities [235], which is time-consuming and labored. Naturally, the various
entities (e.g, vendor and buyer) and their interactions (e.g., developing or selling products) in hacker forums can
be modeled as a heterogeneous graph. As a result, recently, researchers begin to utilize AHIN to model user
activities (e.g., comments and posts) in the hacker forums and propose various attributed and heterogeneous
embedding methods to solve crucial tasks in underground market analysis [41, 233, 234]. The typical workﬂow
of these methods is depicted in Fig. 6.
As can be seen from Fig. 6, there are three crucial tasks in underground market analysis. The ﬁrst task is key
actor detection, which was ﬁrst proposed in [235]. Key actors indicate a group of users who play a vital role in the
value chain (e.g., have the ability to initiate cyber criminals). Therefore, it is important to identify key actors in
hacker forums. Toward this goal, only analyzing posts published by users is not enough, the interactions between
users are more important. IDetective [234] is an automatic system to identify key players in hacker forums. It
constructed an AHIN to model complex interactions among various entities in hacker forums. Based on AHIN,
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
18
•
Yan, et al.
meta-path guided neighbor aggregation and multi-view fusion are applied to obtain the ﬁnal user representation.
Another essential task for regulating trade activities is linking diﬀerent accounts to the same individuals [233].
Criminals often possess multiple accounts in the underground market, and linking them automatically is necessary
for tracking criminals. The account linking task of drug traﬃckers was ﬁrst addressed by [233]. It modeled
account linking as a sim-supervised link prediction task (i.e., whether there exists a link between two accounts)
and used a meta-path based AHIN model to obtain the similarity of two accounts. Identifying illicitly traded
products in private contracts in underground markets is also an essential and challenging task [41]. Although the
majority of transactions are private in hacker forums, the information of the vendor and buyer in a transaction is
accessible. Based on this observation, one can leverage user proﬁles and their posts in hacker forums to identify
the traded products [41].
Besides modeling user activities in the hacker forums as a heterogeneous graph, some other graph types
are constructed to perform underground market analysis. [143] constructed a dynamic word co-occurrence
graph based on hacker forums to proactively analyze emerging new threads. Since the hacker forum is also an
important source of Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI), through monitoring the evolution of word embeddings,
experts can pinpoint emerging threats in terms of popularity and functionality. [36] explicitly modeled the drug
trade between buyers and vendors in a transaction graph. Structural statistical features (e.g., density and centrality)
and community detection analysis are utilized to mine the structure of criminal aﬃliations and collaborations.
[51] constructed a host KNN-graph whose edge weight is the cosine similarity between host embeddings. A
graph-based clustering method is proposed to ﬁnd suspicious collaborative subgraphs.
Currently, hacker forums are primary data sources for graph-based underground market analysis. Another
important source is network traﬃc. However, due to darknets hosting neither production services nor client hosts
[51], the information for analyzing the traﬃc is limited. Several studies have presented their eﬀorts to analyze
the traﬃc of darknets using graph mining techniques [51]. Besides, graph mining techniques are mainly utilized
to model ﬁnancial activities in the underground market while some other worse activities (such as murder and
terrorism) still haven’t been well-addressed. Graph mining techniques are promising in mining inconspicuous
clues of these untraceable activities.
5.1.3
Summary. Extensive studies have proved that graph-based methods especially AHIN have great potential
for solving transaction security tasks. Considering the nature of transactions, three aspects should be concerned
when designing a graph-based solution: (1) Rich attributes. The rich attributes of entities and relations in
transactions are important to identify criminals [240]. How select useful attributes and incorporating them into
the graph model is a challenging task. (2) Scalability. The graph size related to transactions is large and increasing
over time. Therefore, the focusing points are not only the model eﬀectiveness but also the memory-eﬃcient
graph representations [198]. (3) Robust. For emerging adversarial behaviors by fraudsters, robust graph-based
solutions for transaction security are urgently required.
5.2
Cognition Security
Traditional methods for protecting cognition security mostly rely on content analysis (e.g., linguistic feature
extraction) and characteristics of participants (e.g., identity and review time) [65, 244]. However, they ignored the
rich interactions between participants and content. In recent years, graph-based methods have been proposed to
capture these interactions and proved more eﬀective and robust in identifying malicious information [95, 120].
In this section, we introduce graph-based solutions for cognition security tasks, which mainly include four
categories, namely, web spam, review spam, fake news, and fake accounts. Besides, we also summarize the main
characteristics of these methods in Table 4.
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
Graph Mining for Cybersecurity: A Survey
•
19
Table 4. Typical graph approach used in cognition security.
Task
Graph Type
Graph Approach
Task Level
Paper
Web spam
Web link
Structural (statistical feature)
Graph
[171]
Node
[20, 160]
Attributed (statistical feature)
[1, 144]
Web redirect
[154, 162]
Review spam
Review
Structural (statistical feature)
Subgraph
[215]
Attributed (statistical feature)
[195, 196]
Node
[135, 146, 181]
Edge
[3]
Str+Sha+Hom (graph embedding)
Subgraph
[32, 83, 133]
Att+Dee+Het (graph embedding)
[151]
Node
[95]
Character variation
Att+Sha+Het (graph embedding)
Graph
[80]
Fake news
User similarity
Str+Sha+Hom (graph embedding)
Node
[202]
Att+Dee+Hom (graph embedding)
[110]
News similarity
Attributed (statistical feature)
[56]
Att+Dee+Het (graph embedding)
Graph
[193]
News propagation
Structural (statistical feature)
[189]
Att+Dee+Hom (graph embedding)
[10]
Social media interaction
Structural (statistical feature)
Node
[211, 243]
Attributed (statistical feature)
[155, 156]
Graph
[82]
Att+Sha+Het (graph embedding)
Node
[46]
Att+Dee+Het (graph embedding)
[120, 223]
Fake account
Social relation
Attributed (statistical feature)
[12, 14, 18, 224]
Structural (statistical feature)
[145]
Social media interaction
Subgraph
[66]
Attributed (statistical feature)
[9, 100]
Att+Dee+Het (graph embedding)
[214]
Node
[97]
5.2.1
Web Spam. Existing web spam detection methods can be divided into two categories: content-based
and link-based. Content-based features include hosts and domains of websites, source codes of webpages, etc.
However, sometimes there are only a few contents on the websites so malicious pages are almost the same as
benign pages except for some malicious URLs. Link-based methods identify web spam by analyzing web link
structure, thus becoming an indispensable compensation of content-based methods. Concretely, web link graph
[155] and web redirect graph [235] are the two mostly used graphs to model structural characteristics of web
spam.
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
20
•
Yan, et al.
Webpage
Website
Data Collection
Graph Construction
http://url1/
img
location
http://url2/
Compromised website
Web spam
Benign website
http://url1/img1
……
Template Construction
Redirection Features
Redirection Graph
Model Design
Max/min chain length
Self-loop on the final page
Redirection to img file
……
Feature Vector
[0.2,0.4,0.6…]
Detection
Fig. 7. The typical workflow of using redirection chain to identify web spam. The malicious redirection chain starts from
a compromised web and ends with web spam. Based on the redirection graph, redirection features and benign/malicious
redirection templates are constructed to form the feature vector for web spam detection.
Low-quality Webpage. For webpages with high rank and low quality, an observation is that the PageRank-
based algorithms for search engine ranking highlight the degree of a website, making criminals add masses of
hyperlinks referring to the target websites to improve rankings. Based on this observation, researchers constructed
the web link graph to analyze the structural patterns of web spam. [8] extracted some structural statistical features
such as in/out-degree and PageRank value from web link graph and performed node-level web classiﬁcation.
Content-based features are further incorporated by [144]. [20] found that linked websites tend to belong to the
same class (malicious or benign), thus applying the clustering algorithm to reﬁne the classiﬁcation results. [1]
enriched web link graph by introducing attributed statistical features (e.g., weighted links) and characterizes the
similarities between websites by adding a graph regulation term. Considering the diﬀerent linking conditions,
[185] further adjusted the weights of the links adaptively according to the link conditions. The results showed
that this method eﬀectively reduced the ranks of spam pages.
Drive-by Download Attack. Web link graph was also used to detect web spam that performs drive-by
download attacks. [160] analyzed the topology and frequency of web spam, and found web spam with diﬀerent
types of neighbor structures (e.g., multiple landing sites link to a single distribution site). [171] extracted structural
features from the web link graph and used them to perform classiﬁcation. To perform drive-by download attacks,
redirection is a common technique used by criminals because multiple redirections can make detection harder.
Compared with content-based features, redirection chains are more robust since they are not easy to obfuscate
[162]. However, distinguishing redirections between benign webs and spam is a challenging thing. [162] ﬁrstly
found that the web redirection graph of spam is diﬀerent from benign webs in attribute and structure. To capture
this discrepancy, some discriminative statistical features (e.g., country diversity and self-loop on the ﬁnal page
[162]) or redirection chain templates [154] are constructed. A typical workﬂow of these methods is depicted
in Fig. 7. It extracted redirection chains from the web redirection graph and constructed benign and malicious
redirection chain templates. The similarity vector between unknown redirection chains and existing templates
was fed into a classiﬁer to detect web spam.
Despite the great successes achieved in web spam detection, search engine industries are still making great
eﬀorts to deal with this threat nowadays. Link-based methods are widely applied and proven to be indispensable
for web spam detection, especially when web contents are unavailable in some scenarios. However, these methods
only capture some relatively simple structures which are easy to evade by smarter crimes. More complex structures
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
Graph Mining for Cybersecurity: A Survey
•
21
Reviewers
Reviews
Data Collection
Graph Construction
Spam Reviewer
Review Graph
Model Design
Items
U1
U2
U3
U4
U5
U1
U2
U4
U3
U5
Co-review
•
Hierarchical 
clustering
•
Community
detection
•
Divide-and-
conquer
•
……
W24
W45
W11
W34
W14
Candidate Groups Extraction
U1
U2
U4
U3
U5
Extraction Methods
Ranking & identification
Group 1
Group 2
Group 3
Spam score
1 2 3
U4
U5
U1
U2
U3
Spammer Group
Non-spam Reviewer
Spam Review
Non-spam Review
Fig. 8. The typical workflow of collective review spam detection using graph mining techniques. A co-review graph is
deduced from the review graph, with atributed reviewers as nodes and collective degrees as edge weights. Based on the
co-review graph, various graph-based methods (e.g., community detection) are used to extract candidate spam groups with
high collective degrees. Each candidate group will be assigned a spam score to perform group ranking and spam group
identification.
and semantic features of malicious webs should be explored in the future, e.g., the semantic relations between
webs in a meta-path.
5.2.2
Review Spam. The attempts for detecting spam reviews/reviewers can be roughly divided into two cate-
gories: content-based and behavior-based. Content-based methods directly ﬁnd clues in the reviews that fraudsters
left. Early spam reviews show duplication characteristics, thus many studies focus on content similarity mining
methods. To combat spammers that use more complex methods to generate reviews, many methods constructed
manually-craft features of contents (e.g., the reviewer’s sentiment) as input, and then perform text classiﬁcation
using machine learning algorithms. However, these content-based methods suﬀer performance decay under the
adversarial actions of reviews. For example, spam reviews camouﬂage themselves as benign ones by replacing
some characters [79]. Behavior-based methods model the interaction between reviewers, reviews, and items,
requiring no inspection of content, thus are more robust. Current behavior-based methods mainly focus on
detecting two kinds of review spam, i.e., individual review spam and collective review spam.
Individual Review Spam. Naturally, online review interactions can be abstracted as a heterogeneous review
graph with reviews, reviewers, and items as nodes [181], which is a basis for individual review spam detection.
Various attributed statistical features were proposed based on review graphs. [181, 182] ﬁrst gave calculation
methods for the trustiness of reviewers, the honesty of reviews, and the reliability of items. [3, 146] further
used belief propagation and clustering methods to obtain abnormal scores of these entities. [135] considered
both content and behavior features and proposed a uniﬁed framework for spam review detection. They also
incorporated meta-data of reviews, such as the reviewer’s identity, the time of posting reviews, and the rating
of reviews. Some new content and structural features were proposed in [121], with a multi-iterative spam
detection algorithm to improve the accuracy and reduce the complexity. To explicitly model the relations between
reviews\reviewers and capture deeper semantic information of spam activity, [95] proposed a GNN-based Anti-
Spam (GAS) model including a heterogeneous review graph and a homogeneous graph of comments, with high
scalability and robustness.
Collective Review Spam. The key factors for describing the review spammer group are review time interval
and rating score deviation [195]. Therefore, most existing works constructed the co-review graph whose nodes
denote reviewer and edges denote collective behaviors (e.g., having similar ratings for items within a short time
window). Based on the co-review graph, the typical workﬂow for review spam group detection is ﬁrst cutting the
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
22
•
Yan, et al.
graph into subgraphs (candidate spam groups), then ranking and identifying spam groups, which is depicted
in Fig. 8. Speciﬁcally, these methods can be divided into (1) structural statistical features. [215] ﬁrst extracted
suspicious subgraphs which do not conform to common structural patterns of social networks, then performed
hierarchical clustering to detect spam groups and their nested hierarchy. (2) attributed statistical features. The
co-review graphs can be further enriched by node or edge attributes. For example, the edge weight was set as the
number of common products reviewed [196]; the review time interval and rating score deviation were considered
when designing spamming indicators [195, 228]. (3) Str+Sha+Hom graph embedding. It mainly uses random
walk-based methods (e.g., node2vec) to learn latent structural patterns of reviewers [32, 83, 133]. The learned
embeddings are further used to perform clustering to mine spammer groups. (4) Att+Dee+Het graph embedding.
The feature vectors of reviewer nodes are initialized by reviews of this reviewer [151]. It proposed a GraphRNN
framework to capture the long-range dependency of reviewers.
Both incorporating content and behavior features of reviews are the most eﬀective and robust in current review
spam detection systems. While graph mining technologies have been successfully applied to behavior modeling,
few works model the content of reviews as a graph. For example, some variations of characters can be modeled
as a character variation graph [80], which can deal with the camouﬂage of spammers. Also, the content can be
presented in diﬀerent languages. The graph structure can link the same meaning of diﬀerent languages, which
may be a potent tool for multilingual review spam detection.
5.2.3
Fake News. Traditional fake news detection methods include manual fact-checking and evidence-based
approaches, which need external fact-checkers or knowledge databases for help. Then machine learning algorithms
are used to detect fake news automatically based on content-based features but ignore the propagation patterns
of fake news. Early studies for fake news propagation are based on social network analysis [28, 175]. They focus
on quantitative analysis of the nature and characteristics of news dissemination in the social network. The
state-of-the-art models currently are mostly based on user-news interaction graphs since they capture interaction
features between users and news, which serves as a signiﬁcant part of the nowadays fake news dissemination
process. According to the above diﬀerent focusing aspects, we divide existing graph-based fake news detection
methods into three main categories, which focus on the analysis of user relations, news relations, and user-news
interactions respectively.
User Relation Analysis. The underline social relations between users are useful for fake news detection.
Intuitively, fake news may be quickly spread in a community structure. Therefore, [202] learned structural
embeddings of user nodes based on community detection algorithms in a given social graph. [110] further
considered the privacy of users in the real world. It argued that social relation graphs such as the following
relationship of tweeters belong to user privacy and can’t be utilized by models. Thus it constructed a fully-
connected user graph where edge weights denote similarities of user traits. The node embeddings are trained
using GNNs to capture potential relationships between users. These methods only use the graph to capture user
relations, but use sequential models to capture behaviors between users and news.
News Relation Analysis. News relation analysis includes two aspects, intra-relation analysis, and inter-
relation analysis. The intra-relation analysis captures the content dependency relation within a piece of news,
while the inter-relation analysis aims to capture the similarities between diﬀerent news contents. For intra-
relation, [193] incorporated multi-modal information of news into a uniﬁed graph, including words, objects in
news pictures, and entity conceptions from external knowledge bases. They used Point-wise Mutual Information
(PMI) as edge weights to model the long-distance dependencies between words. Then a heterogeneous embedding
model was applied to obtain the graph representation to perform fake news detection. For inter-relation, an
attributed statistical method was proposed by [56]. It constructed a news KNN-graph based on the L2 metric,
then performed belief propagation to obtain the labels of unknown news. Similar to user relation analysis, news
relation analysis also failed to consider the rich interactions between users and news.
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
Graph Mining for Cybersecurity: A Survey
•
23
User-news Interaction Analysis. Instead of modeling user relations and news relations independently,
current advanced methods consider interactions between users and news. The intuition is that the user behaviors
toward news, such as comments and forwards, can reﬂect the trustiness of users and news. [82] collected tweets
about a piece of news and construct a tweet graph. A credibility propagation method is applied to obtain the
credibility of the news. Other methods modeled behaviors between user and news through capturing the news
propagation patterns [10, 189, 243]. They pre-deﬁned or automatically learned fake news propagation patterns
[10, 189]. Recently, to explicitly model the interactions between users and news, user-news interaction graphs
were constructed. [156] explored the interactions of publisher-news, user-news, and user-user. It proposed a
tri-relationship fake news detection framework. Some works further captured more subtle hierarchical relations
among interactions [155, 223]. [223] used attention-based heterogeneous embedding to capture local correlations
between source news and forwards, as well as global correlations between news and related users. The micro-level
comments graph and macro-level news propagation graph were constructed separately in [155]. [120] found
the engagement temporality of users is distinctive for fake news, thus adding stance nodes to the user-news
interaction graph, and using a sequence model to capture this characteristic.
Despite the extensive graph-based solutions for fake news detection, there also exist the following concerns.
(1) Interpretability. Interpretability is highly needed in fake news detection since it can enhance the trust of the
public [110]. More causal factors for identifying fake news are expected mined by graph mining techniques. (2)
Unsupervised. The facticity of news is highly time-dependent, thus fake news detection datasets mainly depend
on manual annotation which is time-consuming and costly. Unsupervised fake news detection methods are
emerged in recent years but suﬀer relatively low accuracy [46, 211].
5.2.4
Fake Account. There exist two research directions for fake account detection, account attribute analysis,
and social network analysis. The former focuses on collecting the attributed characteristics of fake accounts, such
as account proﬁles and released information. However, the methods are infeasible when attributed information is
unavailable [100]. Social network analysis models various social entities as a graph, with nodes denoting entities
(e.g., accounts and posts) and edges denoting user behaviors (e.g., friendships and retweets), which focuses on
capturing the abnormal structural patterns of fake accounts. We introduce these social network analysis methods
as follows.
In the early days, fake accounts own some simple structural traits. Many attributed statistical features are
proposed to incorporate these structural traits. [18] found that the connections between fake and normal accounts
are often sparse in social networks. Therefore, a random walk sequence starting from normal accounts most
likely land at normal accounts than fake accounts, and vice versa. They proposed a trust propagation method to
model such probabilities and rank them to obtain suspicious accounts. The lockstep behavior is also a typical
trait of fake accounts, where a group of fake accounts links to another account at around the same time (e.g., a
sudden increase in page likes) [9]. An iterative clustering method is proposed by [9] for identifying groups of
fake accounts. [100] found the fake accounts present a modest degree distribution both in scope and scale. They
utilized local spectral graph diﬀusion to perform clustering near the seed nodes, achieving scalable searching
in large social networks. [93] analyzed the structural and content characteristics (e.g., network density, user
proﬁles, etc.) of social networks on Twitter. Three ﬁne-grained classes of fake accounts are identiﬁed based on
these characteristics.
To evade detection, smart fraudsters may present camouﬂage behaviors. For example, they add links to popular
items or famous stars so that look similar to normal accounts [66]. To tackle this adversarial phenomenon,
some works focus on the early detection of fake accounts, i.e., detecting these accounts when they just appear
(e.g., at the time of registrations) and adversarial actions haven’t been executed [14, 103, 224]. [14] found some
distribution characteristics when new fake accounts sent requests to others. The probability of a new account
being fake is obtained by (1) the choices of requesting others and (2) the targets’ responses. [103, 224] focused
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
24
•
Yan, et al.
on analyzing the characteristics of fake accounts when registering. They extracted synchronized features (e.g.,
fake accounts often have the same IP) and abnormal features (e.g., geo-location inconsistency). Based on these
features, an account similarity graph is constructed and the dense subgraphs are identiﬁed as fake accounts. Other
works focus on robust fake account detection [12, 66, 145, 214]. Early methods aiming to ﬁnd dense subgraphs
may ignore adversarial small-scale groups. To accommodate this, [66] proposed some robust metrics (e.g., edge
density) and [145, 147] instead detect nodes with poorly reconstructed degrees. [12] relaxed the assumption of
sparse connection proposed in [123]. It used account-level features to obtain edge weights and then performed
random walks preferring to higher-weight paths. Attributed heterogeneous graph embeddings were used in
[97, 214], which incorporated more node types (e.g., comment and hashtag) and edge types (e.g., post and reply),
making it hard to carry out camouﬂages. [214] further proposed a reinforcement learning-based neighbor search
mechanism to perceive the camouﬂages of new fake accounts.
Fake account detection based on social network analysis has been well-studied nowadays. However, only a
few works focused on detecting fake accounts just appeared [14, 103, 224]. Since the detection is harder and the
damage is worse over time, early detection or prevention is necessary, which is also the concerning direction of
the present work. However, the information on new accounts is limited, thus it is possible to utilize cross-media
information based on graph mining techniques. Besides, current graph mining techniques mainly focus on
detecting fake accounts on popular social media, such as Twitter and Facebook. With the development of smart
cities, fake accounts have eroded intelligent transportation, IoT, and other newly emerged areas, which may
cause dramatic damages [61]. Graph mining techniques are promising to detect fake accounts in these more
complex environments.
5.2.5
Summary. Graph-based solutions for cognition security provide a uniﬁed framework considering compre-
hensive features, including linguistic information and propagation patterns, user characteristics and behaviors,
and external knowledge such as the background of news and social network. With more intelligent means of
cognition attack [213] (e.g., camouﬂage and social engineering attack), cognition security should be enhanced
by means of interdisciplinary knowledge, such as cognition science, psychology, and neuroscience [57]. In this
regard, graph-based solutions for cognition security are still in the early stage.
5.3
Network Security
Network security has been widely addressed by network traﬃc analysis [114, 230]. Generally, a traﬃc packet can
be represented by a 5-tuple {source IP, target IP, source port, target port, protocol}, and a traﬃc ﬂow consists
of multiple packets with the same 5-tuple. The well-known Deep Packet Inspection (DPI) technology analyzes
traﬃc by inspecting the payload of packets. However, payload-based methods can’t be used in encrypted traﬃc.
To overcome this limitation, header features (e.g., IP, packet length, protocol) and statistic features (e.g, average
duration, maximum inter-arrival time) are utilized to extract malicious features. However, both of the above
methods ignore the graph structural features of traﬃc. Naturally, the network traﬃc components (e.g., traﬃc ﬂow,
domain, IP, etc.) form an enterprise network, or the whole Internet can be abstracted as a Network Traﬃc Graph
(NTG). Compared with traditional methods, graph mining methods based on NTG can avoid inspecting payloads
and facilitate network security analysis [33]. In this section, we explicitly illustrate graph-based solutions for
three main network security tasks, namely botnet detection, malicious domain detection, and intrusion detection.
The characteristics of these solutions are summarized in Table 5.
5.3.1
Botnet. In the early days, botnets are centralized and the main goal is to detect centralized C&C servers.
Therefore, many works analyzed C&C server activities based on traﬃc ﬂows [55, 141, 161]. Later decentralized
P2P-based botnet emerged to circumvent detection. Furthermore, botnets started to use more ﬂexible C&C
channels or mimic the communication patterns of normal hosts [187, 190]. As a result, traditional ﬂow-based
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
Graph Mining for Cybersecurity: A Survey
•
25
Table 5. Typical graph approach used in network security.
Task
Graph Type
Graph Approach
Task Level
Paper
Botnet
Host
Structural (statistical feature)
Node
[118, 186, 187, 190]
Attributed (statistical feature)
[150]
Traﬃc activity
Graph
[90]
Att+Dee+Het (graph embedding)
Node
[237]
Malicious domain
Structural (statistical feature)
[75]
Str+Sha+Hom (graph embedding)
[94]
Att+Dee+Het (graph embedding)
[164, 165]
Domain resolution
Structural (statistical feature)
[84, 117]
Att+Sha+Hom (graph embedding)
[64]
Intrusion detection
Host
Structural (statistical feature)
Subgraph
[33]
Account-device
Node
[45, 129]
Alert
[122]
Traﬃc activity
Attributed (statistical feature)
Subgraph
[78]
Attack
Graph
[231]
Sensor
[142]
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
Att+Dee+Hom (graph embedding)
Node
[27]
methods are not enough to characterize the botnet. Naturally, the centralized botnet presents a relatively simple
graph structure, while decentralized is more complicated. This observation motivated researchers to study traﬃc
topologies of botnets [118, 187, 190, 237].
Botnet Topology Analysis. Many structure-based statistical approaches were proposed based on analyzing
the topological traits of botnets. Due to bots need to communicate with many nodes, one obvious topological
trait is that botnets usually present a dense intra-connection structure [29, 150, 186, 187]. In/out-degree is the
most straightforward statistical feature to depict this characteristic [29, 150, 186]. [190] held that the normal
nodes’ degree follows a power law distribution and used the local ego-net distribution to identify bots. [187]
used a modularity-based community detection algorithm to ﬁnd dense connection structures, and cut the whole
graph into botnet nodes and normal nodes. [186] went a step further. It ﬁrst identiﬁed pivotal nodes (a set of
highly interactive nodes), and then proposed a reﬁned modularity-based community detection algorithm. The
intuition is that bots may have a dense connection with pivotal nodes and a sparse connection with normal
nodes. Another topological trait of botnets is their fast-mixing nature [118], i.e., the graphs of botnets can reach
stationary distribution in a relatively short time. Therefore, [118] performed a uniform random walk in the host
graph, then used the deviation between obtained node probabilities and stationary distributions to distinguish
bots.
In addition to observed structural information such as in/out degree, some implicit structural diﬀerences
between botnets and normal structures can be captured by unsupervised abnormal detection algorithms. [186, 187]
detected abnormal graphs by monitoring the degree distribution of graphs. [29] used Self-organizing Maps (SOM)
algorithm to ﬁlter large normal clusters, for reducing the search space of the botnet. More structural statistical
features were gathered in [150]. It used 7 features to perform abnormal detection using one-class SVM and other
abnormal detection algorithms. Graph edit distance was applied to model the traﬃc structural diﬀerence in [90],
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
26
•
Yan, et al.
and the graph with a large average distance will be classiﬁed as a botnet. Unlike previous methods, they detected
botnets at the graph level, as the graph is deﬁned as a small portion (e.g., a traﬃc session) of the whole botnet.
Compared with the above methods which only utilize structural features, combining traﬃc ﬂow features
into botnet topology analysis will be more eﬀective and robust. The ways to combine these features lie in two
categories. On one hand, in a network traﬃc graph, nodes often represent hosts which have rich ﬂow-based
attributes, e.g., IP, port, and duration, thus both ﬂow features and structural features can be incorporated. On the
other hand, we can train the ﬂow-based model and structure-based model separately and then integrate them
to make the ﬁnal decision. Among the ﬁrst approaches, attribute-based statistical models [90, 150] extracted
multiple ﬂow-based and structural features from the host graph, altogether feeding into clustering/classiﬁcation
modules. In [237], multiple meta-paths and meta-graphs were ﬁrst designed to capture the similarity between
hosts. Then classical homogeneous embedding [86] was applied to obtain the ﬁnal node representation to perform
classiﬁcation. As for the second approach, i.e., ensemble methods, the common way is modeling the ﬂow-based
and structure-based features independently. [190] found that the c-ﬂow sequences of bots have a relatively stable
length, while normal c-ﬂow often mutates during passing. Thus a stability-based analysis is added to ﬁlter bot
c-ﬂows. The proposed model BotMark analyzes traﬃc ﬂow and structural features in an ensemble way. Extensive
experiments proved this model can considerably reduce the false positive rate.
Current graph-based solutions for botnet detection are mainly based on statistical features. With the increasing
complexity of botnets (e.g., encrypted communications and self-destruction mechanisms), statistical features are
hard to be constructed. Therefore, it is expected that more deep embedding methods are applied. Meanwhile,
more botnets with novel types are emerging, while most existing methods are only suitable for speciﬁc known
kinds. Zero-day botnet detection and adaptable graph-based models should be further explored in the future.
5.3.2
Malicious Domain. Blacklist is a basic and eﬃcient method to ﬁlter malicious domains. However, criminals
use Domain Generation Algorithms (DGA) to generate a large number of short-time domains which are hard
to be all blocked by the blacklist. Even worse, with the development of domain ﬂuxing technologies and the
dynamic-changed IP addresses with DNS-based FastFlux tools [94], the blacklist mechanism is far from enough.
Researchers then expect automatically detect malicious domains using learning-based methods, which can be
divided into two categories: content-based and traﬃc-based. Content-based methods extract character features of
the domain name while traﬃc-based methods extract static and dynamic ﬂow features from DNS traﬃc such
as Time To Live (TTL) values and reverse DNS query results [11]. These methods are eﬀective but easy to be
evaded by advanced attacks. The reason is that existing methods only consider the local features of individual
domains, but ignore the relationship between domains, thus making the model not robust. Graph-based methods
capture the global associations between domains and mine the deep semantic features between domains and
other network components. The typical workﬂow of domain association mining is depicted in Fig. 9 and detailed
solutions for mining these associations are introduced as follows.
Domain Association Mining. The insight behind domain association mining is that malicious domains tend
to have similar behaviors. Therefore, the main challenge lies in two folds. (1) How to model the associations of
domains. (2) How to use these associations to detect malicious domains. To model the associations of domains,
a straightforward idea is that domains sharing the same IP address are likely similar. This simple assumption
motivates researchers to construct domain resolution graph to capture the mapping relation between IP and domain
[64, 84, 174]. [117] argued that this assumption does not always hold, and two domains are correlated only if they
share at least one dedicated IP, or share more than one public IP from diﬀerent hosting providers. [94] further
constructed two other bipartite graph, namely domain-host graph and domain-time graph. The observations are
that if two domains are queried by the same host, they tend to be strongly associated; Many domains show strong
temporal correlations. In order to model explicit relationships between domains, [64, 84, 94, 117] exported domain
similarity graph from domain resolution graph by one-mode projection. More complex associations between
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
Graph Mining for Cybersecurity: A Survey
•
27
DNS traffic
DNS log
Data Collection
Graph Construction
Traffic Activity Graph
Model Design
WHOIS
pDNS
DNS
IP
CNAME
Client
Domain
IP address
Segment
CNAME record
Record (R)
Map (M)
Query (Q)
Register (Re)
Belong (B)
Account
DNS
IP
CNAME
Domain Resolution Graph
Domain
IP
D1
D2
D3
D4
D5
D1
D2
D3
D4
D5
0.17
0.33
0.17
0.2
0.33
One-mode
projection
DNS
DNS
DNS
DNS
IP
Q
Q-1
M
M-1
……
GNN
GNN
＋
○
……
D1
D2
D3
D4
D5
• DeepWalk
• LINE
• Belief
propagation
•
……
Homogeneous Graph Representation
Feature vector
Meta-path based neighbor aggregation & multi-view fusion
DNS
DNS
Detection
Fig. 9. The typical workflow of domain association mining in malicious domain detection. The data sources include DNS
logs and traﬀic from the resolver in a LAN, passive DNS (pDNS), and WHOIS datasets from public services [164]. Two main
graphs are constructed to perform domain association mining: (1) Domain resolution graph. It first performs one-mode
projection to deduce domain similarity graph, then used homogeneous graph representation methods to perform node-level
classification. (2) Traﬀic activity graph. It uses meta-path based neighbor aggregation and multi-view fusion to obtain feature
vectors.
domains are modeled by the traﬃc activity graph in [164]. As shown in Figure 9, the intuitions of constructing
this graph are (1) Domain character distribution. (2) The victims infected by the same crime tend to request the
same domains. (3) The resource reuse of malicious domains.
After constructing graphs to capture associations between domains, many graph mining methods are used to
detect malicious domains. (1) Structural statistical features. [117, 174] directly ran the belief propagation algorithm
on the domain resolution graph and propagate label information to get the malicious probabilities of unknown
domains. [75] extracted 12 behavior features and used the random forest algorithm as the classiﬁer. Given a set of
known malicious domain nodes (seeds), [84] used path-based inference to calculate the maliciousness of unknown
nodes based on the distance between these nodes and seeds. (2) Homogeneous embedding. LINE and DeepWalk
were applied on the domain similarity graph by [94] and [64] respectively to obtain a richer representation of
domains. (3) Heterogeneous embedding. To capture more domain semantic associations, as depicted in Figure. 9,
[164] designed multiple meta-paths based on constructed traﬃc activity graphs. It aggregated neighbors that are
sampled by meta-path guided random walk and utilized GraphSAGE to achieve inductive learning. In [165], the
attention mechanism was further applied to fuse diﬀerent semantic information.
Graph mining technologies have been widely used in malicious domain detection. Heterogeneous graph
embeddings are proven to be the most eﬀective and robust methods since they incorporate more domain features
and behaviors. However, there are also some concerns that should be further explored. The ﬁrst is DNS with
stronger encryption protocols. Existing methods assume all the DNS traﬃc is available, but there already have
some encrypted protocols (e.g., DNS over Transport Layer Security (TLS) (RFC 7858)) used in DNS traﬃc [164].
Designing graph-based methods for encrypted DNS is a challenging task. Second, lacking graph-based benchmark
datasets. Engaging in collecting and releasing benchmark datasets is very important to advance the ﬁeld.
5.3.3
Intrusion Detection. According to the technologies that Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) used, we can
divide IDS into misuse-based and anomaly-based. Misuse-based methods (also called signature-based methods)
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
28
•
Yan, et al.
IDS alarm
Social media
Data Collection
Graph Construction
Model Design
Network traffic
System log
……
Dynamic Graph
Similarity Graph
Similarity
Similarity
Attack Graph
Alarm Graph
Linux
sshd accepted
rootkit
port scan
sysfile changed
Graph Anomaly Detection
Density Estimation
Network Reconstruction
Graph Distance
Node Classification
Alarm
Node Features
Matching
Attack
graph
Alarm
graph
Alarm Correlation Mining
Correlation
Alarm
Fig. 10. The typical workflow of IDS using graph mining techniques. It improves the detection performance (alarm quality)
in three ways: (1) Atack graphs guide the generation of alarms and alarm graphs capture the correlations among diﬀerent
alarms. (2) Similarity graphs are constructed to model the atribute and structural similarities among IDS components.
(3) Dynamic graphs are constructed to monitor the chronological events in IDS. Based on similarity and dynamic graphs,
multiple graph anomaly detection methods (e.g., network reconstruction) are applied to detect intrusions.
are rule-based methods, which use pre-deﬁned signatures of malicious activities to identify intrusion behaviors,
thus failing to detect zero-day attacks and needing manually update databases. Traditional anomaly-based
methods can detect zero-day attacks but with a high false positive rate since all out-of-distribution behaviors are
categorized as malicious. The graph-based intrusion detection methods are almost anomaly-based but include
more graph modeling of networks and systems, which eﬀectively decrease the false positive rate. We classify
graph-based intrusion detection methods according to application scenarios, including alarm correlation mining,
IDS components similarity mining, and IDS dynamic analysis. The typical workﬂow of these methods is depicted
in Fig. 10 and details of them are introduced below.
Alarm Correlation Mining. IDS generates massive alarms every day, coupled with false alarms. Alarm
correlation mining aims to reduce the false positive rate of alarms and optimize the alarming quality by capturing
the correlations between alarms or system behaviors. Attack graphs show all attack paths in the network that
can be discovered by the defender, hence becoming a potent tool to guide the alarm correlation process. These
methods are mostly based on statistical features. [231] used frequent patterns mining on multi-source logs to
construct attack pattern graphs. Alarms will be triggered only if the suspicious attack matches the attack graph.
Besides, by introducing the attack graph, the attack process can be restored for further analysis. Attack graphs can
also determine the priority of alarms or ﬁnd new alarm correlations [139]. [122] directly modeled the correlations
between alarms in an alert graph, where nodes denote diﬀerent properties of alarms such as ﬁle path and process,
and edges denote co-occurrence weights. The role dynamic algorithm is applied to monitor the role distributions
of nodes and determine whether to generate alarms.
IDS Components Similarity Mining. The goal of IDS components similarity mining is to use graphs to
capture the similarities between IDS components. One example is the insider threat detection task. [45] modeled
insider threat detection as a node classiﬁcation task, which uses a user-device bipartite graph to represent the
user’s logging behaviors. Behavior patterns of malicious users are captured by structural features of the user’s
k-order neighbors. A similar idea was also used in [13]. The above methods only model the structural similarity
but ignore the attribute similarity. In [142], to detect intrusions in cyber-physical systems, a KNN graph of sensors
is constructed and the weights of the edges incorporate both sensors’ structure similarity (geometric distance)
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
Graph Mining for Cybersecurity: A Survey
•
29
and attribute similarity (measurement diﬀerence). It assumed the measurements follow Gaussian Markov Random
Field (GMRF) distribution, thereby the out-of-distribution graphs are identiﬁed as abnormalities.
IDS Dynamic Analysis. The chronological events in IDS can be modeled as graphs. Therefore, the IDS
dynamic analysis can be abstracted as dynamic graph anomaly detection [4], which aims to identify anomaly
graphs or nodes in a graph sequence. In terms of outsider threat detection, the basic ﬂow of graph-based solutions
is discovering abnormal structural patterns through monitoring the dynamic TAGs in real time. Existing methods
mainly utilized statistical features. [33] decomposed the host graph into subgraphs that correspond to a session.
They give each subgraph an abnormal probability score by comparing the structural diﬀerences between newly
traﬃc graph and the historical graphs. [92] conducted both static and dynamic analyses of host graphs. Static
features (e.g., node degree and the entropy of the degree distribution) model the abnormality of the individual
structure. Graph edit distance is used to model the dynamic structural abnormality. [77] reconstructed the
adjacency matrix through a multi-layer autoencoder and identiﬁed abnormal traﬃc based on the reconstruction
error. In [78], the TAGs were further enriched by introducing edge attributes and the abnormal scores are obtained
by analyzing these attributes.
As for insider threat detection, [129] constructed a sequence of device-login graphs to model user daily remote
logging behaviors. Given a sequence of historical device-login graphs, [129] used the role extraction algorithm
to obtain the role vector of each node, then detected abnormal login nodes based on reconstruction losses
of role vectors. In the Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) network, [27] constructed a UAV graph to model the
communications between UAVs. The spatial relationships of nodes are captured by homogeneous embeddings. It
used an SVM classiﬁer to perform node-level anomaly detection. Besides these node-level anomaly detections,
graph-level anomaly detection has been addressed in [85]. To maintain incrementally graph embedding and
detect anomalous graphs in real-time, the representation of the graph was based on a subgraph structure called
label structure, and graph edit distance was adopted to detect abnormalities.
Although these graph-based intrusion detection methods have achieved desired objectives in network man-
agement and protection, none of them proposed a uniﬁed graph-based framework for general IDS, which is
imperative in the current complex and diverse network environment. Besides, detecting abnormal traﬃc is an
essential but challenging task for IDS since network attacks such as Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) attacks
and spam, the operations of network administrators, and a short-time increased page view can both bring on
abnormal traﬃc. Thus, robust IDS should be paid more attention to. Also, time & space complexity are signiﬁcant
metrics to consider in graph-based IDS, which only be analyzed by several works [85, 142].
5.3.4
Summary. Graph-based traﬃc ﬂow analysis considers both ﬂow attributes and structures, which is more
eﬀective and robust compared with solely ﬂow-based methods. Botnet topology analysis and domain association
mining are two typical applications of graph-based traﬃc ﬂow analysis. Intrusion detection uses both traﬃc
ﬂow analysis and internal components relation mining to ensure a safe and stable network environment. In fact,
abnormal traﬃc is most likely a signal of serious cyber attacks, such as botnets, port scanning, and network worms.
Thus the ability to detect abnormal ones has become indispensable for IDS. Noting that traﬃc classiﬁcation is
also a fundamental task for network security, which aims to categorize traﬃc ﬂows based on diﬀerent standards
(e.g., protocols and applications) [137, 153]. With more ﬁne-grained traﬃc ﬂow representations, these crucial
tasks in network security are promising to achieve higher performance. Besides, current network management
systems are mostly based on rule guidance or statistical features, which is far from enough in an environment
of low fault tolerance. Advanced graph embedding methods with scalability and interpretability are desired to
integrate into these systems.
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
30
•
Yan, et al.
Table 6. Typical graph approach used in system security.
Task
Graph Type
Graph Approach
Task Level
Paper
Malware
Function call
Structural (statistical feature)
Graph
[71, 210]
Attributed (statistical feature)
[49]
Subgraph
[38]
Str+Sha+Hom (graph embedding)
[39]
Str+Dee+Hom (graph embedding)
Graph
[125]
Att+Dee+Hom (graph embedding)
[16]
File dependency
Structural (statistical feature)
Node
[220]
Graph
[204]
Attributed (statistical feature)
Node
[68]
Str+Sha+Het (graph embedding)
[40]
Att+Dee+Het (graph embedding)
[188]
Str+Dee+Het (graph embedding)
[218]
File distribution
Structural (statistical feature)
[73, 170]
Attributed (statistical feature)
[5, 89]
User interface
Structural (statistical feature)
Graph
[23]
System vulnerability
Vulnerability dependency
Node
[136]
Graph
[184]
Code property
Attributed (statistical feature)
[43, 208]
[35]
Att+Dee+Het (graph embedding)
[183, 245]
Blockchain
Transaction
Structural (statistical feature)
Node
[24, 25, 44, 127]
Att+Sha+Hom (graph embedding)
[201]
Att+Dee+Hom (graph embedding)
[6, 197]
Subgraph
[152]
Att+Dee+Het (graph embedding)
[242]
Node
[105]
Code property
Str+Dee+Hom (graph embedding)
Graph
[72]
Att+Dee+Het (graph embedding)
[108, 109, 246]
5.4
System Security
Traditional methods for protecting system security ignore modeling the potential relationships of system compo-
nents and thus may obtain unsatisﬁed results. For example, in malware detection, an unknown ﬁle that always
co-occurrences with many Trojans possibly a malicious Trojan-downloader [40]. Traditional methods only utilize
ﬁle contents thus being unable to identify this kind of malware. These limitations can be improved by graph-based
methods. Therefore, in this section, we review existing graph-based malware and vulnerability detection, as well
as the widely concerned blockchain system security solutions. We list related papers and corresponding graph
approaches in Table 6 and will describe them in detail as follows.
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
Graph Mining for Cybersecurity: A Survey
•
31
APKs
Data Collection
Graph Construction
getDeviceId()
Benign File
Template-based 
Learning-based
Function Call Graph
Model design
Dalvik bytecode
getInstalledApplications()
hashNext()
getApplicationInfo()
True
False
new()
setRequestMode()
Malware
API
Sensitive API
getLine1Nunber()
[0.2,0.4,0.6…]
Sensitive Node
Path
Subgraph
Detection
Classification
Pattern Matching
Similarity
Feature Vector
Node2vec
Community detection
Sensitivity Coefficient
……
Fig. 11. The typical workflow of file-level analysis in malware detection. First, the Dalvik bytecode is obtained from the
Android package (APK) through disassemble tools. Then the function call relations in Dalvik bytecode are captured by FCG.
Based on FCG, template-based methods first construct sensitive templates (e.g., sensitive nodes, paths, and subgraphs), and
then perform patern matching to obtain feature vectors, while learning-based methods directly learn feature vectors through
graph mining algorithms (e.g., Node2vec). The feature vectors are used for malware detection or family classification.
5.4.1
Malware. Using graph mining technologies, diﬀerent granularities of malware structural information
can be captured. Based on this partition, we divide existing graph-based malware analysis methods into four
categories, including function-level, ﬁle-level, system-level, and network-level analysis. From the function level,
relations between diﬀerent blocks within a function can be captured by control ﬂow graphs; from the ﬁle level,
there exist multiple functions in code ﬁles and the inter-call relations between functions can be captured by the
function call graphs; from the system level, the relations between code ﬁles and other system components (e.g.,
processes) can be captured by ﬁle dependency graphs; from the network-level, the relations of distributed ﬁles
among network can be captured by ﬁle distribution graphs.
Function-level Analysis. Control Flow Graph (CFG) is widely used in function-level code analysis such
as binary code similarity searching tasks [207, 222]. As a basic process of malware family classiﬁcation, code
similarity detection aims to ﬁnd similar codes in the database or other platforms. [207] encoded CFGs of codes
from diﬀerent platforms by homogeneous embeddings and then used a siamese architecture to detect whether they
are similar. [222] further considered the semantic and order information of blocks. CFG-based code representation
is a ﬁne-grained method for function-level tasks but ignores the relationship between functions. In addition, it is
time-consuming to extract and analyze CFGs [96].
File-level Analysis. The goal of ﬁle-level malware analysis is to model the function (API) call relation or
function dependency relation within a ﬁle (e.g., Android apps). The typical workﬂow is shown in Fig. 11. We
can see that there exist two main approaches for ﬁle-level malware analysis, i.e., template-based methods and
learning-based methods. Template-based methods ﬁrst deﬁne some patterns of malware and then perform pattern
matching between unknown ﬁles and known patterns. This process mainly utilizes structural statistical features.
[71] ﬁrst deﬁned Approximating Graph Edit Distance for two FCGs to accelerate malware similarity searching.
[210] proposed two-layer FCG where the upper layer models the interactions among android main components
such as broadcast receiver and the lower layer models the API call relations within an upper component. To reduce
the complexity of pattern matching, it only extracted call patterns of sensitive nodes. Inspired by social network
analysis, [37] used community detection methods to extract sensitive subgraphs and performed clustering in
these subgraphs to obtain structural patterns of the malware families. Template-based methods are simple and
convenient but easy to be evaded and fail to detect zero-day malware.
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
32
•
Yan, et al.
Diﬀerent from template-based methods, learning-based methods perform pattern learning and
detection/classiﬁcation simultaneously. Some sensitive structural statistical features were proposed in [38], such
as the number of sensitive motif instances and total sensitive distance. [49] incorporated attributed statistical
features (operations in the function) into the function call graph and used SVM with a neighborhood hash graph
kernel to perform graph classiﬁcation. It also assigned every subgraph a learnable weight to obtain interpretable
results. To obtain higher-level semantics between API calls, [68] further proposed multiple meta-paths (e.g.,
API-Package-API) to formulate a similarity measure over Android apps. Structural embedding technologies such
as node2vec and struct2vec are also used to represent the CFGs [39, 125]. The dense vector representation of CFG
reduces time complexity by a big margin. Recently, [16, 96] used GNNs to incorporate CFG structure features
as well as function attributes (i.e., function name), which makes the representation of CFG more eﬀective and
robust.
System-level Analysis. System-level malware analysis focuses on modeling ﬁle relations and the dependencies
between ﬁles and other system components. The component interactions within a system are important behavior
features to identify malware, especially for PC-based malware analysis. The ﬁle relation was explicitly modeled
in [220]. It constructed a ﬁle co-occurrence graph where Jaccard similarity is used as edge weight. The ﬁle
dependencies among system components are often modeled by the ﬁle dependency graph. Based on this kind of
heterogeneous graph, traditional template-based methods are used to perform PC-based malware analysis [204].
Besides, many advanced graph embedding models are also widely applied. To consider semantic correlations
among API calls and system entities, [40] designed multiple meta-paths for PC-based malware detection tasks,
and then performed meta-path guided random walk to obtain node embeddings. In terms of unknown malware
detection, [188] used GNNs and multi-view fusion technologies to obtain ﬁle embeddings. The maliciousness of
an unknown ﬁle is determined by the similarity between its embedding and known benign ﬁles. Furthermore,
[218] used GNNs and the representations of k-order neighbors to update node embeddings for inductive learning.
Network-level Analysis. The above methods achieved desirable performance by inspecting program contents
(e.g., function and package). However, with the development of repackaging and obfuscation technologies,
content-based methods have shown great limitations in identifying malware. As a result, researchers begin
to study content-agnostic methods for malware analysis. Some useful characteristics are found in malware
distribution networks. First, malware often maintains a relatively close distance from each other, for example, the
maliciousness of ﬁles within a website may be the same. Second, the patterns between benign and malicious ﬁle
download behavior in the network are distinguishable. These ﬁle distribution and downloading characteristics in
the network motivate network-level malware analysis. Existing methods are mainly based on statistical features.
For modeling distribution characteristics, the ﬁle-website bipartite graph was constructed in [170, 178], and belief
propagation was applied to perform malware detection. [5, 73] considered more network entities and constructed
the graph where nodes include ﬁle, IP, URL, etc. Based on this graph, [73] calculated the shortest path length
between unknown ﬁles and malware, [5] incorporated both content-agnostic attributed feature and network
topological information for malware detection. For modeling downloading characteristics, [89] constructed a ﬁle
downloader graph and summarized discriminating features (e.g., domain names, download time, ﬁle behavior,
etc.) for identifying malware.
Malware has been around since the appearance of computers. Static analysis has been extensively applied by
modeling its inherent graph structures (e.g., CFG and FCG). Generally, the methods with ﬁne-grained analysis
consider richer semantic information but suﬀer higher computation costs. The complexity of graph-based
solutions should be carefully considered to accommodate the rapid evolution of malware families. Meanwhile,
the emerging various adversarial techniques (e.g., obfuscation and encryption) may make the malware not
distinguishable by the static analysis but they are hard to evade the dynamic analysis. However, dynamic analysis
is more time-consuming. Therefore, it’s challenging to conduct dynamic analysis with high eﬃciency by means
of graph mining techniques.
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
Graph Mining for Cybersecurity: A Survey
•
33
5.4.2
System Vulnerability. Traditional vulnerability detection technologies include static and dynamic ap-
proaches based on whether needing to run the systems. Static approaches focus on extracting features such as
lexical, control ﬂow, and data ﬂow from source code to detect vulnerabilities, but with high false positives and low
accuracy. Dynamic analysis such as fuzz testing and taint analysis executes the code in real systems or emulators
and detects vulnerabilities by monitoring the running states, however, they suﬀer scalability issues. Nowadays,
static analysis remains the main approach to detect vulnerabilities [99]. The major limitation of traditional static
analysis is that they only model the sequential features of codes [245]. In fact, source codes include rich structural
and semantic information, which can be depicted by graphs such as Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) and Program
Dependence Graph (PDG). As a result, the sequential-based static analysis is far from suﬃcient to model various
vulnerabilities. Therefore, graph-based methods have emerged in recent years. In this section, we summarize
existing graph-based static vulnerability mining works, which can be divided into two aspects: inter-relation
mining and intra-relation mining.
Vulnerability Inter-relation Mining. When evaluating vulnerability threats, traditional methods analyze
vulnerabilities individually, ignoring the correlation between vulnerabilities. For example, attackers often utilize
multiple vulnerabilities to conduct multi-step attacks from diﬀerent paths. The key vulnerabilities should be iden-
tiﬁed and given high-risk value to further protect all subsequent vulnerabilities even the whole system. Therefore,
when assessing the threat of vulnerabilities, we must consider the inter-relations between vulnerabilities.
The inter-relations between vulnerabilities can be modeled as Vulnerability Dependency Graph (VDG), which
is induced from attack graphs. [136] proposed a vulnerability correlation hazard assessment method based on
VDG and risk matrix. It not only utilized the features of vulnerabilities but also considered the correlation
between vulnerabilities in the VDG to assess the threat degree of vulnerabilities. The overall system security
can be assessed by aggregating the risks of vulnerabilities. Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS) is a
standard to measure the severity of vulnerabilities. However, CVSS also fails to model inter-relations between
vulnerabilities. To solve this issue, [184] proposed an improved system security metrics algorithm based on VDG
and CVSS. It aggregated the dependency relation of vulnerabilities into the basic measurement algorithm of
CVSS and obtained scores in terms of the probability and impact of the system being attacked.
Vulnerability Intra-relation Mining. There are three typical graphs to represent programs, that is, Control
Flow Graph (CFG), Abstract Syntax Tree (AST), and Program Dependence Graphs (PDG). Intra-relation mining
aims to model the spatial structure as well as other attributes of programs based on these graphs. Early methods
are mostly based on attributed statistical features. For example, [43] used CFG to represent programs and convert
raw features (CFGs) into high-level numeric vectors to perform scalable vulnerability searching. Code Property
Graph (CPG) [208] merged the above three graphs into a uniﬁed graph, which includes richer information about
programs. [208] deﬁned the traversal algorithm on the CPG. This traverse can characterize a large part of code
vulnerabilities and discover new vulnerabilities. [221] used graph traversal on CPG to execute taint analysis
and detect Server-Side Request Forgery (SSRF) vulnerabilities based on the constraint solving method. CPG
contains rich structural features of programs but ignores the code sequential features. Many augmented CPGs
were proposed by adding additional edges to model sequential features and other information of codes [245].
Based on augmented CPGs, the advanced methods mainly utilized heterogeneous graph embeddings to perform
vulnerability detection [245].
Similar to malware detection, system vulnerability detection is also based on code analysis, especially focusing
on function- or ﬁle-level analysis. The main diﬀerence between these two tasks is that vulnerability detection pays
more attention to the semantics of codes since it focuses on detecting programming defects. Therefore, besides
some insights present in Section 5.4.1, semantic-preserving vulnerability detection is also a key point when
applying graph mining techniques [104]. Existing works have already constructed some semantic-preserving
graphs into code analysis, such as AST and CPG [208, 245], and more related graph types and methods (e.g.,
meta-paths for speciﬁc semantic information ) are expected to be present. The more ﬁne-grained vulnerability
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
34
•
Yan, et al.
detection is another research trend. From application level, ﬁle level, to function level, it’s desired that graph
mining technologies can locate vulnerabilities more accurately, e.g., segment level.
5.4.3
Blockchain Security. To tackle blockchain security risks, many eﬀorts have been made by the blockchain
community and researchers. Traditional network attacks are common threats to cyber systems and many tailored
intrusion detection models are proposed [157]. The rule-based methods are dominant in improving the defects of
blockchain design. For example, studies design new transaction rules to prevent the typical 51% Attack [149]. As
for the criminal activities in the blockchain, traditional methods mainly focus on analyzing important properties
of the activity (e.g., the amount of transferring money). Besides the above eﬀorts, considering the blockchain is a
peer-to-peer network in nature, graph mining technologies have unique advantages in portraying the various
structural patterns of blockchain. In this section, we introduce two main threats to blockchain security, namely
smart contract vulnerability and criminal activities in the blockchain, as well as corresponding graph-based
solutions.
Smart Contract Vulnerability. To detect smart contract vulnerability, like vulnerability intra-relation mining
that we discussed in Section 5.4.2, current graph-based approaches mainly model the smart contract as a code
graph. Structure-based graph embedding was used in [72]. It ﬁrst constructed CFGs by simulating the bytecode
execution of smart contracts, then used graph2vec [119] to obtain code representations. Heterogeneous GNNs are
further used to model complex semantics of code graphs [108, 109, 246]. They model the source code as a contract
graph, whose nodes denote invocations or variables and edges denote multiple semantic relations (e.g., control
ﬂow and data ﬂow). Based on the contract graph, [246] proposed a temporal message propagation network (TMP)
to capture temporal relations of diﬀerent program elements. [108, 109] further integrated expert vulnerability
patterns (e.g., an invocation of call.value is relevant with reentrancy vulnerability) to improve accuracy.
Criminal Activities in the Blockchain. By modeling activities of blockchain in a transaction graph, current
graph-based solutions focus on identifying anomalies of accounts, transactions, and smart contracts in the
blockchain system. Another relevant task is account identity inference (also called de-anonymization), which
aims to infer the possible identity of accounts in blockchain, such as exchanges, phishing accounts, miners, etc
[242]. We will introduce these solutions according to the format of constructed transaction graphs.
Based on the transaction graph whose nodes denote accounts and edges denote transactions, [44, 127] used
structural statistical features (e.g., PageRank and clustering coeﬃcient) to identify suspicious accounts. [25]
further adopt temporal structural analysis to prove the market manipulation of Bitcoin. [201] added timestamp
and amount to the transaction edges and incorporated this semantic information to learn node embeddings. [197]
ﬁrst deﬁned the trust values of the nodes and then propagated trust values through GNNs. To perform account
identity inference, [152] extracted account subgraphs (k-hop neighbors) and then used GNN to obtain account
representations. Another kind of transaction graph whose nodes denote transactions and edges denote payment
ﬂows is used in abnormal transaction detection [6, 127]. Besides, some works incorporated more blockchain
entities and complex relations into the transaction graph [24, 105, 132]. Speciﬁcally, [24] constructed three kinds
of graphs, which model money (Ether) transactions, smart contract creation, and invocation respectively. Based on
these graphs, structural statistical features were proposed to detect anomalies and identify accounts in Ethereum.
[105] modeled these blockchain entities in a uniﬁed heterogeneous graph and used a Heterogeneous Graph
Transformer Network (HGTN) to detect abnormal smart contracts.
As a newly emerged cyber system, blockchain poses great challenges to current system security. The smart
contract vulnerability and criminal activities have been widely addressed by advanced graph embedding tech-
niques. However, enhancing the privacy-preserving ability is still a pain point for building blockchain systems.
With the ever-growing Decentralized Applications (DApps) and online transactions, privacy-preserving graph
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
Graph Mining for Cybersecurity: A Survey
•
35
algorithms are urgently needed, with some typical privacy techniques such as mixing and homomorphic encryp-
tion incorporated. Meanwhile, it’s expected to achieve a well-balanced between eﬃciency, eﬀectiveness, and
privacy-preserving of the algorithms.
5.4.4
Summary. The three typical system security tasks introduced above are mainly based on graph-based code
analysis. Therefore, a well-designed code representation algorithm is signiﬁcant for these downstream tasks.
Considering the rapid development of various advanced attacks (e.g., new malware families and vulnerabilities),
robust code representation is the current research hotspot. A few works have designed attack&defence means
for graph-based code representation model [2, 67]. Also, more graph types should be explored to improve the
eﬀectiveness and robustness of system security solutions. For example, [23] constructed User Interface Graph
(UIG) to discriminate between benign and malicious codes without inspecting their contents. Besides blockchain
systems, with the explosive growth of IoT devices, graph-based solution for the security of IoT system is also a
mainstream research direction [219].
6
OPEN DATASETS AND TOOLKITS
In this section, we summarize existing open datasets and toolkits for graph-based cybersecurity solutions.
6.1
Open Datasets
Over the years, many graph-based cybersecurity datasets have been released to the public for further research.
We summarize these resources in Table 7, including URL, publish year, label, and related papers. We organize
these datasets according to the cybersecurity task taxonomy in Section 2.1. Note that due to privacy, there are
few datasets in some tasks (e.g., ﬁnancial fraud and underground market). Here we introduce representative
datasets among them.
Elliptic. This Bitcoin transaction data is released by Elliptic company for anti-money laundering/blockchain
security tasks with over 200K Bitcoin transactions (nodes), 234K directed payment ﬂows (edges), and 166 node
features. 4,545 nodes (2%) are illicit and 42,019 nodes (21%) are licit. The remains are not labeled. It uses a
heuristics-based reasoning method for labeling. For example, illicit transactions tend to execute transactions with
a lower number of inputs [199].
WEBSPAM-UK2007. This dataset is provided for research on web spam detection tasks. This is a large
collection of annotated spam/nonspam hosts labeled by volunteers. Besides, the dataset also contains hyperlinks
and HTML page content. Within the labeled dataset 5.19% was ’spam’ and 88.33% was ’non-spam’. The rest was
labeled ’undecided’.
Twitter15&Twitter16. These two datasets contain a collection of source tweets with their corresponding
retweets and replies in 2015 and 2016. There are four diﬀerent labels, False Rumor (FR), Non-Rumor (NR),
Unveriﬁed (UR), and True Rumor (TR). The source tweets are annotated by referring to the labels of the events
they are from.
LIAR. LIAR is a large fake news detection dataset that includes 12,836 short statements with subject, con-
text/venue, speaker, state, party, and prior history. It is collected from POLITIFACT.COM’s API4 with a grounded
and natural context, such as political debate, TV ads. LIAR considers six ﬁne-grained labels: pants-ﬁre, false,
barely-true, half-true, mostly-true, and true. These labels are evaluated by POLITIFACT.COM editors for their
truthfulness.
CTU-13. CTU-13 is a popular public benchmark dataset of botnet traﬃc that is from 13 scenarios (e.g.,
ClickFraud, PortScan). For all the scenarios, CTU-13 dataset converts the captured pcap ﬁles to NetFlows and
releases the processed ﬂows. There are three types in the label set, namely background, botnet, and normal. The
4https://www.politifact.com
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
36
•
Yan, et al.
normal labels are assigned by some ﬁlters and a botnet label is assigned if the traﬃc comes from or to know
infected IP addresses [47].
Table 7. Typical public graph-based cybersecurity datasets. TS: Transaction Security; CS: Cognition Security; NS: Network
Security; SS: System Security.
Task
Dataset
URL
Year
Label
Paper
TS
Financial
fraud
Elliptic
https://www.elliptic.co/blog/elliptic-dataset-
cryptocurrency-ﬁnancial-crime
2019
Licit/illicit
[199]
Czech Finan-
cial 1999
https://data.world/lpetrocelli/czech-ﬁnancial-
dataset-real-anonymized-transactions/
1999
None
[98]
Under-
ground
market
D-GEF
https://github.com/HongyiZhu/D-GEF
2020
Attack type
[143]
CrimeBB
https://www.cambridgecybercrime.uk/
datasets.html
-
None
[124]
CS
Web
spam
WEBSPAM-
UK2007
https://chato.cl/webspam/datasets/uk2007/
2007
Spam/non-spam
[144]
WEBSPAM-
UK2006
https://chato.cl/webspam/datasets/uk2006/
2006
spam/non-spam
[1]
Fake
news
Twitter15/16
https://www.dropbox.com/s/
7ewzdrbelpmrnxu/rumdetect2017.zip?dl=0
2017
Fake/non-
fake/uncertain/true
[10, 110, 223]
News Aggre-
gator
https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/News+
Aggregator
2018
None
[202]
PHEME
https://github.com/azubiaga/pheme-twitter-
conversation-collection
2017
Rumour/Non-
rumour
[120, 193, 213]
FakeNewsNet
https://github.com/KaiDMML/FakeNewsNet
2018
Fake/real
[46, 120, 243]
LIAR
http://www.cs.ucsb.edu/~william/data/liar_
dataset.zip
2017
False/true/half-
true, etc.
[211]
weibo
http://alt.qcri.org/~wgao/data/rumdect.zip
2016
Rumour/non-
rumour
[10, 193, 223]
Review
spam
Amazon
review1
http://liu.cs.uic.edu/download/data/
2006
None
[195, 196]
Amazon
review2
http://jmcauley.ucsd.edu/data/amazon/
2014
None
[121, 195]
YelpChi
http://shebuti.com/collective-opinion-spam-
detection/
2013
Spam/non-spam
[135, 195]
YelpNYC
http://shebuti.com/collective-opinion-spam-
detection/
2015
Spam/non-spam
[135, 195]
YelpZip
http://shebuti.com/collective-opinion-spam-
detection/
2015
Spam/non-spam
[135, 195]
op_spam
http://www.cs.cornell.edu/myleott/op_spam
2011
Truthful/deceptive
truthful/deceptive
[121]
SMS/review
https://github.com/Giruvegan/stoneskipping/
tree/master/dataset/review
2019
Spam/non-spam
[80]
Fake
account
Twitter10
http://an.kaist.ac.kr/traces/WWW2010.html
2010
None
[145]
MIB
http://mib.projects.iit.cnr.it/dataset.html
2015
Fake/benign
[97]
Vendor-19
https://botometer.osome.iu.edu
2019
Fake/benign
[214]
NS
BotNet
DDoS Attack
2007
http://www.caida.org/data/passive/ddos-
20070804dataset.xml
2013
None
[186, 187]
Twente traf-
ﬁc traces
http://eprints.eemcs.utwente.nl/17829/
2010
Botnet/normal
[186]
CTU-13
https://www.stratosphereips.org/datasets-
ctu13
2014
Background/botnet/
normal
[29, 90, 187]
BotMark
http://infosec.bjtu.edu.cn/wangwei/page_id=
85
2020
Botnet/normal
[190]
IDS
CERT Insider
Threat
https://www.cert.org/insider-threat/tools/
2016
Malicious/benign
[45]
NSL-KDD
https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/nsl.html
2009
Normal/DOS/
Probe/R2L/U2R
[27]
CICIDS2017
https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/ids-
2017.html
2017
Attack Type
[27]
StreamSpot
https://github.com/sbustreamspot/
sbustreamspot-data
2016
None
[85]
Continued on next page
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
Graph Mining for Cybersecurity: A Survey
•
37
Continued
USTC-
TFC2016
https://github.com/echowei/DeepTraﬃc/tree/
master/1.malware_traﬃc_classiﬁcation
2017
None
[163]
ISCX
VPN-
nonVPN
https://github.com/louiseviden/ns18
2016
Application type
[163]
SS
Malware
Genome
project
http://www.malgenomeproject.org
2012
Attack type
[96, 187]
drebin
https://www.sec.tu-bs.de/~danarp/drebin/
download.html
2014
Malware/benign
[96, 125, 187]
FalDroid
https://github.com/xjtu1025/FalDroid
2018
Family
[96, 187]
androzoo
https://androzoo.uni.lu/lists
2017
Malware/benign
[16, 125]
malicia
http://malicia-project.com
2013
Family
[204]
Virusshare
https://virusshare.com
-
Malware
[37]
System
vulnera-
bility
Devign
https://sites.google.com/view/devign
2019
Vulnerability type
[245]
Draper
VDISC
https://osf.io/d45bw/
2018
Vulnerability type
[42]
FUNDED
https://github.com/HuantWang/FUNDED_
NISL/tree/main/FUNDED/data/data
2020
None
[183]
SARD
https://www.nist.gov/itl/ssd/software-quality-
group/samate/software-assurance-reference-
dataset-sard
-
Vulnerability type
[35]
NSL-KDD. This dataset includes a wide variety of intrusions simulated in a military network environment.
There are four main attack types in this dataset, namely DoS, probing, U2R, and R2L. Every sample has 38
numerical features with three content features. These features are mainly based on basic TCP connections and
content features are collected by domain knowledge within a connection.
Amazon Review. This dataset focuses on review spam detection tasks and involves multiple reviews. Amazon
review1 dataset contains information about reviewers from 1996 to 2006 and corresponding review text, ratings,
products, etc. As the whole dataset is extremely large, many studies only extracted the book review data from the
dataset. The Amazon review2 dataset contains product reviews (ratings, text, helpfulness votes), and metadata
(descriptions, category information, etc) from Amazon from May 1996 to July 2014.
SARD. This dataset contains a growing collection of almost two hundred thousand programs with documented
vulnerabilities. These vulnerabilities have diﬀerent code forms (source code or binary code), diﬀerent languages
(C, Java, Python, etc.), and diﬀerent types (buﬀer error, resource management error, injection, etc.), which cover
over 150 classes of weaknesses. These vulnerabilities are collected in many ways, such as manual injection and
static analysis.
Drebin. This labeled mobile malware dataset is an extension of the Genome project dataset and contains 179
diﬀerent malware families. The samples were collected from August 2010 to October 2012. The VirusTotal service
is used to determine whether an application is malicious or benign. Note that VirusTotal is also widely used in
other malware dataset labeling [37].
6.2
Toolkits
Graph mining and data collection in cybersecurity solutions both beneﬁt from public toolkits. However, few
surveys have summarized these resources. To bring this gap, we present some typical graph mining and data
collection toolkits.
6.2.1
Graph Mining Toolkits. Graph model implementation is a crucial process in cybersecurity solutions. To
facilitate this process, many toolkits have been developed to allow researchers to easily conduct experiments
and build applications. These toolkits provide standard training and evaluation for important graph-based tasks,
including node classiﬁcation, link prediction, graph classiﬁcation, etc. Here we list typical ones of them for
reference.
PyG. PyG is a machine learning library built upon PyTorch to easily implement Graph Neural Networks and
related applications. It covers a wide range of state-of-the-art GNN architectures and training and scalability
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
38
•
Yan, et al.
procedures, which can help users easily reproduce and design GNN experiments. The website of PyG can be
found in https://www.pyg.org.
CogDL. CogDL is an extensive toolkit for deep learning on graphs. Most models in CogDL are developed
based on PyTorch, with high eﬃciency and reproducibility. It provides easy-to-use APIs for running experiments
and utilizes well-optimized operators to speed up training and save Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) memory of
GNN models. The project can be found in https://github.com/thudm/cogdl.
Deep Graph Library (DGL). DGL is a python package building on top of the current prevalent framework
(Pytorch, MXNet, and Tensorﬂow). Besides homogeneous graphs, DGL also supports many heterogeneous graph
models (e.g., HAN, Metapath2vec). This project can be found in https://github.com/dmlc/dgl.
OpenHGNN. This is an Open-source toolkit for Heterogeneous Graph Neural Networks (OpenHGNN) based
on DGL. It provides easy-to-use interfaces for running experiments with many popular heterogeneous graph
models, including RGCN, HAN, KGCN, HetGNN, GTN, etc. This project can be found in https://github.com/BUPT-
GAMMA/OpenHGNN and the documentation is in https://openhgnn.readthedocs.io/en/latest/.
Gamma Graph Library (GammaGL). GammaGL is an open-source graph learning library, which supports
TensorFlow, PyTorch, PaddlePaddle, and MindSpore as the backends. Diﬀerent from DGL, GammaGL’s examples
are implemented with the same code on diﬀerent backends. It allows users to run the same code on diﬀerent
hardware and use a particular framework API based on preferences for diﬀerent frameworks. This project can be
found in https://git.openi.org.cn/GAMMALab/GammaGL or https://github.com/BUPT-GAMMA/GammaGL.
6.2.2
Data Collection Toolkits. Considering the rapid evolution of the cyberspace security situation, many
datasets used in cybersecurity require updating frequently. Data collection is never a trivial process since the raw
data in cybersecurity presents various forms (e.g., pcap) and should be processed in advance. Besides, positive
samples (e.g., malicious traﬃc) are rare in the real world, making the data collection process more challenging.
Thanks to public data collection tools, one can avoid collecting data from scratch. We summarize typical tools as
follows.
Twitter Search API. It is an API that allows us to ﬁnd and retrieve, engage with, or create a variety of diﬀerent
data sources including tweets, retweets, comments, etc, which is an important tool to collect fake news datasets,
such as retrieving tweets of interest by giving certain queries. The API is in https://dev.twitter.com/rest/public/
search.
Snopes. Snopes is a fact-checking site, which can be used to label rumors and non-rumors samples. The
website is in http://www.snopes.com/.
DNSDB Scout. DNSDB is a database that stores and indexes passive DNS data provided by Farsight Security’s
Security Information Exchange and authoritative DNS data provided by various zone operators. The database
also keeps ﬁrst-seen and last-seen timestamps of domain-IP resolutions. The DNS data in this database can be
obtained through the website’s API: https://scout.dnsdb.info.
Semantic. Semantic is a Haskell library and command line tool for parsing, analyzing, and comparing source
code. It can produce an Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) for each function of source code and support more than ten
languages, including Python, Java, PHP, etc. This tool can be found in https://github.com/github/semantic.
VirusTotal. VirusTotal is a platform that analyzes suspicious ﬁles and URLs to detect types of malware and
automatically shares them with the security community. It is commonly used to label samples as malicious or
not. The website is in https://www.virustotal.com/en/.
Cuckoo Sandbox. Cuckoo Sandbox is an open-source dynamic malware analysis system. It spans four
operating system platforms (Windows, Android, Linux, and Darwin) and supports multiple ﬁle forms (executables,
oﬃce documents, pdf ﬁles, emails, etc). It can trace API calls and the general behavior of the ﬁle, which is very
helpful for the dynamic analysis of malware. The URL of this tool is http://www.cuckoosandbox.org/.
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
Graph Mining for Cybersecurity: A Survey
•
39
Wireshark. Wireshark is widely used for analyzing network traﬃcs. This tool can capture packets on the
internet, along with various types of traﬃc features like IP, port, packet length, and protocol. These features can
be further utilized for malicious traﬃc detection. One can download Wireshark at https://www.wireshark.org.
7
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Despite the wide application of graph mining technologies to cybersecurity, proposing an ideal graph-based
cybersecurity solution is still challenging. The increasingly complex cyberspace environment and evolving
criminal behaviors call for exploring new perspectives to design graph-based models. In this section, we give a
discussion of existing graph-based cybersecurity solutions and explore some future research directions.
7.1
Graph Construction and Datasets
Cybersecurity tasks are highly data-driven. However, due to privacy as well as the diﬃculties to access real cyber
environments, public graph-based benchmark datasets are extremely rare. Despite some eﬀorts to carry out this
work recently (e.g., labeled Bitcoin transactions datasets [199] and hacker posts datasets [143]), there is still a long
way to go to create and release high-quality graph-based cybersecurity datasets. This issue makes researchers
have to collect data from the real world. However, the sparseness, implicit relations, and numerous noises of
real-world cyberspace data make graph construction a non-trivial task. Existing works mainly rely on domain
knowledge and manual construction. Take malicious domain detection task as an example [165]. Mining implicit
relations (e.g., segment and canonical name relations) for identifying malicious domains call for some domain
knowledge (e.g., adjacent clients are prone to be infected by the same attacker and the properties of domains with
the same canonical name are similar). Besides, the data collected from DNS traﬃc are full of noises (e.g., inactive
clients and popular domains) and some graph pruning strategies should be applied. In fact, manually constructed
graphs may not be optimal for speciﬁc cybersecurity tasks, thus how to automatically learn an optimal or better
graph structure from cyberspace data is desired in the future.
7.2
Trustworthy Model and Robustness
Although existing graph-based cybersecurity solutions have achieved high performance, most of them lack
consideration of model trustworthiness and robustness. In fact, a trustworthy and robust model is highly desired
in the complex and adversarial cyberspace environment. Interpretability (i.e., the ability to interpret the decisions
made by trained models) is signiﬁcant for trustworthy models. For example, interpretability can enhance the
trustiness of the public towards the fact-checking results of the news; In traﬃc analysis, interpretability can
provide clear traits of malicious traﬃc for network managers. Several works have introduced the attention
mechanism to analyze the importance among node neighbors [180, 240]. [180] selected important apps for default
prediction based on attention value and ﬁnds that these apps are mainly ﬁnancial apps, which is reasonable and yet
enhances the reliance on proposed models. However, in the cybersecurity ﬁeld, the existing interpreting models
only focus on node classiﬁcation tasks (e.g., default user detection), but fail to interpret the subgraph/graph-level
tasks (e.g., malware detection). In addition, the importance of the sub-structure in the graph should also be
explored.
Robustness is another desired property in today’s graph-based cybersecurity solutions. Adversarial behaviors
are ubiquitous in cyberspace, such as data perturbation [53] and camouﬂaged fraudsters [34]. Many existing
models show weakness when suﬀering these adversarial behaviors, thus more robust models are urgently needed.
A few works have considered this issue but have been limited to speciﬁc tasks [2, 67]. Meanwhile, yet maintaining
good performance is still a challenge. Besides, existing graph-based models seldom consider the zero-day threats,
which are more common in real-world environments [137]. Unsupervised methods (e.g., clustering) are expected
to be incorporated to detect zero-day threats, hence improving the robustness of existing cybersecurity solutions.
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
40
•
Yan, et al.
7.3
Data Security and Privacy
The real-world datasets in cybersecurity often contain much private information, such as user accounts and
passwords, making it hard for deep and comprehensive data sharing. Therefore, it is necessary to study the
graph collaborative analysis architecture suitable for cybersecurity data, under the condition that sensitive
parameters are not to be leaked. In recent years, many privacy-preserving collaborative graph mining techniques
have emerged, which aim to perform secure data sharing among trusted members [63, 229]. Several works have
also explored their application on some cybersecurity tasks. For example, [168] proposed a federated graph
learning platform to share key information across institutions for eﬃciently detecting global money laundering
activity. More data-sensitive security scenarios are desired to be explored. Besides, introducing privacy-preserving
algorithms often causes additional computing costs and performance decay. Therefore, privacy-preserving graph
mining while maintaining eﬃcient computations and high performance is expected to be further researched in
the future.
7.4
Large-scale Graph and Parallelization
The real-time interactions between cyberspace entities make the constructed graph dynamic and large-scale.
For example, the online fraud detection system takes approximately 1 hour to score 200 million customers [70];
there are hundreds of parameters of network nodes and connections in the IoT scenarios [159]. This means
that the graph model should be expressive enough to describe adaptive behavior and handle large-scale graphs.
Many scalable graph algorithms have been proposed in recent years, including graph inductive learning [60],
eﬃcient sampling [22], graph distillation [232], etc. These algorithms have been successfully applied to several
cybersecurity tasks (e.g., malicious domain detection [164] and fraud detection [199]). With respect to real-world
deployments of large-scale graphs, distributed and parallel graph training strategies are proposed [112, 226, 238].
These strategies partition graph data into a cluster of machines, and train graph models in a parallel fashion. As
an instance, the Ant Graph machine Learning system (AGL) [226] decomposed the original graph into pieces of
subgraphs (i.e., K-hop neighborhood) for message passing, which is simply implemented by MapReduce [31] and
utilized in ﬁnancial risk control with high eﬃciency. With the ever-growing interactions of cyberspace entities,
it’s necessary to incorporate scalable graph models and large-scale deployment strategies into cybersecurity
solutions.
7.5
Atacker Correlation Analysis and Discovery
At present, the application of graph mining techniques to cybersecurity mostly focuses on modeling the correla-
tions between attack elements to perform attack detection or classiﬁcation (e.g., API call relations within a ﬁle
are captured by API call graphs). However, few researchers use the advantage of graph mining techniques in
correlation analysis to correlate and ﬁnd attackers (or attack organizations). The attack organization information,
including its background, tools, and malicious samples, obtained in the process of digital forensics and tracing
has become an important resource in the network attack defense. Meanwhile, this resource also reveals the
correlations between organizations. For example, it’s reported that there is a lot of code reuse among attack
organizations in North Koreans, which indicates that groups with diﬀerent skills and tools will execute their
focused parts of cyber attacks while also working in parallel when collaborating on large attacks [140]. Therefore,
using graph mining techniques to mine the deep correlations between attack organizations based on massive
organization information and utilize these correlations to perform network attack traceability is a promising
research point. From a more macroscopic point of view, it is expected that applying graph mining techniques to
promote the association and coordination between defenders in the future.
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
Graph Mining for Cybersecurity: A Survey
•
41
8
CONCLUSIONS
In this survey, we conduct a comprehensive overview of the application of graph mining techniques to cyberse-
curity. We provide a new taxonomy of typical cybersecurity tasks based on applied graph mining techniques.
We summarize typical graph mining techniques used in cybersecurity, including statistical features and graph
embedding. we also present general steps for applying these techniques to cybersecurity. Then, we elaborate on
these graph-based cybersecurity solutions. Besides, we summarize public cybersecurity datasets and toolkits for
further research. Finally, we suggest ﬁve promising research directions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. U20B2045, 62192784,
62172052, 62002029, 61772082, 62172055) and BUPT Excellent Ph.D. Students Foundation (No. CX2021118).
REFERENCES
[1] Jacob Abernethy, Olivier Chapelle, and Carlos Castillo. 2010. Graph regularization methods for web spam detection. Machine Learning
81, 2 (2010), 207–225.
[2] Ahmed Abusnaina, Aminollah Khormali, Hisham Alasmary, Jeman Park, Afsah Anwar, and Aziz Mohaisen. 2019. Adversarial Learning
Attacks on Graph-based IoT Malware Detection Systems. In ICDCS. IEEE, 1296–1305.
[3] Leman Akoglu, Rishi Chandy, and Christos Faloutsos. 2013. Opinion Fraud Detection in Online Reviews by Network Eﬀects. The
AAAI Press.
[4] Leman Akoglu, Hanghang Tong, and Danai Koutra. 2015. Graph based anomaly detection and description: a survey. Data Min. Knowl.
Discov. 29, 3 (2015), 626–688.
[5] Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin, YuFei Han, Yun Shen, and Xiangliang Zhang. 2016. Content-agnostic malware detection in heterogeneous
malicious distribution graph. In CIKM.
[6] Ismail Alarab, Simant Prakoonwit, and Mohamed Ikbal Nacer. 2020. Competence of graph convolutional networks for anti-money
laundering in bitcoin blockchain. In Proceedings of the 2020 5th International Conference on Machine Learning Technologies. 23–27.
[7] Hisham Alasmary, Aminollah Khormali, Afsah Anwar, Jeman Park, Jinchun Choi, Ahmed Abusnaina, Amro Awad, DaeHun Nyang,
and Aziz Mohaisen. 2019. Analyzing and Detecting Emerging Internet of Things Malware: A Graph-Based Approach. IEEE Internet
Things J. 6, 5 (2019), 8977–8988.
[8] Luca Becchetti, Carlos Castillo, Debora Donato, Stefano Leonardi, and Ricardo A Baeza-Yates. 2006. Link-based characterization and
detection of web spam. In AIRWeb. 1–8.
[9] Alex Beutel, Wanhong Xu, Venkatesan Guruswami, Christopher Palow, and Christos Faloutsos. 2013. CopyCatch: stopping group
attacks by spotting lockstep behavior in social networks. In WWW. International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee /
ACM, 119–130.
[10] Tian Bian, Xi Xiao, Tingyang Xu, Peilin Zhao, Wenbing Huang, Yu Rong, and Junzhou Huang. 2020. Rumor detection on social media
with bi-directional graph convolutional networks. In AAAI.
[11] Leyla Bilge, Engin Kirda, Christopher Kruegel, and Marco Balduzzi. 2011. EXPOSURE: Finding Malicious Domains Using Passive DNS
Analysis.. In NDSS. 1–17.
[12] Yazan Boshmaf, Dionysios Logothetis, Georgos Siganos, Jorge Lería, José Lorenzo, Matei Ripeanu, and Konstantin Beznosov. 2015.
Integro: Leveraging Victim Prediction for Robust Fake Account Detection in OSNs. In NDSS. The Internet Society.
[13] Oliver Brdiczka, Juan Liu, Bob Price, Jianqiang Shen, Akshay Patil, Richard Chow, Eugene Bart, and Nicolas Ducheneaut. 2012. Proactive
Insider Threat Detection through Graph Learning and Psychological Context. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy Workshops.
IEEE Computer Society, 142–149.
[14] Adam Breuer, Roee Eilat, and Udi Weinsberg. 2020. Friend or Faux: Graph-Based Early Detection of Fake Accounts on Social Networks.
In WWW. ACM / IW3C2, 1287–1297.
[15] Hongyun Cai, Vincent W. Zheng, and Kevin Chen-Chuan Chang. 2018. A Comprehensive Survey of Graph Embedding: Problems,
Techniques, and Applications. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 30, 9 (2018), 1616–1637.
[16] Minghui Cai, Yuan Jiang, Cuiying Gao, Heng Li, and Wei Yuan. 2021. Learning features from enhanced function call graphs for Android
malware detection. Neurocomputing 423 (2021), 301–307.
[17] Juan Cao, Junbo Guo, Xirong Li, Zhiwei Jin, Han Guo, and Jintao Li. 2018. Automatic Rumor Detection on Microblogs: A Survey. CoRR
abs/1807.03505 (2018).
[18] Qiang Cao, Michael Sirivianos, Xiaowei Yang, and Tiago Pregueiro. 2012. Aiding the Detection of Fake Accounts in Large Scale Social
Online Services. In NSDI. USENIX Association, 197–210.
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
42
•
Yan, et al.
[19] Qiang Cao, Xiaowei Yang, Jieqi Yu, and Christopher Palow. 2014. Uncovering Large Groups of Active Malicious Accounts in Online
Social Networks. In CCS. ACM, 477–488.
[20] Carlos Castillo, Debora Donato, Aristides Gionis, Vanessa Murdock, and Fabrizio Silvestri. 2007. Know your neighbors: web spam
detection using the web topology. In SIGIR. ACM, 423–430.
[21] Raghavendra Chalapathy and Sanjay Chawla. 2019. Deep learning for anomaly detection: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.03407
(2019).
[22] Jie Chen, Tengfei Ma, and Cao Xiao. 2018. FastGCN: Fast Learning with Graph Convolutional Networks via Importance Sampling. In
ICLR (Poster).
[23] Kai Chen, Peng Wang, Yeonjoon Lee, XiaoFeng Wang, Nan Zhang, Heqing Huang, Wei Zou, and Peng Liu. 2015. Finding Unknown
Malice in 10 Seconds: Mass Vetting for New Threats at the Google-Play Scale. In USENIX Security Symposium. USENIX Association,
659–674.
[24] Ting Chen, Yuxiao Zhu, Zihao Li, Jiachi Chen, Xiaoqi Li, Xiapu Luo, Xiaodong Lin, and Xiaosong Zhang. 2018. Understanding Ethereum
via Graph Analysis. In INFOCOM. IEEE, 1484–1492.
[25] Weili Chen, Jun Wu, Zibin Zheng, Chuan Chen, and Yuren Zhou. 2019. Market Manipulation of Bitcoin: Evidence from Mining the Mt.
Gox Transaction Network. In INFOCOM. IEEE, 964–972.
[26] Zhengdao Chen, Lei Chen, Soledad Villar, and Joan Bruna. 2020. Can Graph Neural Networks Count Substructures?. In NeurIPS.
[27] Zhuo Chen, Na Lv, Kun Chen, Yanhui Zhang, and Weiting Gao. 2021. UAV network intrusion detection based on spatio-temporal
graph convolutional network (in Chinese). Journal of Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics 47, 05 (2021), 1068–1076.
[28] Flavio Chierichetti, Silvio Lattanzi, and Alessandro Panconesi. 2011. Rumor spreading in social networks. Theor. Comput. Sci. 412, 24
(2011), 2602–2610.
[29] Sudipta Chowdhury, Mojtaba Khanzadeh, Ravi Akula, Fangyan Zhang, Song Zhang, Hugh Medal, Mohammad Marufuzzaman, and
Linkan Bian. 2017. Botnet detection using graph-based feature clustering. Journal of Big Data 4, 1 (2017), 1–23.
[30] Andrea Fronzetti Colladon and Elisa Remondi. 2017. Using social network analysis to prevent money laundering. Expert Syst. Appl. 67
(2017), 49–58.
[31] Jeﬀrey Dean and Sanjay Ghemawat. 2008. MapReduce: simpliﬁed data processing on large clusters. Commun. ACM 51, 1 (2008),
107–113.
[32] Sarthika Dhawan, Siva Charan Reddy Gangireddy, Shiv Kumar, and Tanmoy Chakraborty. 2019. Spotting Collective Behaviour of
Online Frauds in Customer Reviews. In IJCAI. ijcai.org, 245–251.
[33] Hristo Djidjev, Gary Sandine, Curtis Storlie, and Scott Vander Wiel. 2011. Graph based statistical analysis of network traﬃc. In
Proceedings of the Ninth Workshop on Mining and Learning with Graphs.
[34] Yingtong Dou, Zhiwei Liu, Li Sun, Yutong Deng, Hao Peng, and Philip S. Yu. 2020. Enhancing Graph Neural Network-based Fraud
Detectors against Camouﬂaged Fraudsters. In CIKM. ACM, 315–324.
[35] Xu Duan, Jingzheng Wu, Tianyue Luo, Mutian Yang, and Yanjun Wu. 2010. Vulnerability mining method based on code property
graph and attention BiLSTM (in Chinese). Journal of Software (2010).
[36] Scott W Duxbury and Dana L Haynie. 2018. The network structure of opioid distribution on a darknet cryptomarket. Journal of
quantitative criminology 34, 4 (2018), 921–941.
[37] Ming Fan, Jun Liu, Xiapu Luo, Kai Chen, Tianyi Chen, Zhenzhou Tian, Xiaodong Zhang, Qinghua Zheng, and Ting Liu. 2016. Frequent
Subgraph Based Familial Classiﬁcation of Android Malware. In ISSRE. IEEE Computer Society, 24–35.
[38] Ming Fan, Jun Liu, Wei Wang, Haifei Li, Zhenzhou Tian, and Ting Liu. 2017. DAPASA: Detecting Android Piggybacked Apps Through
Sensitive Subgraph Analysis. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 12, 8 (2017), 1772–1785.
[39] Ming Fan, Xiapu Luo, Jun Liu, Meng Wang, Chunyin Nong, Qinghua Zheng, and Ting Liu. 2019. Graph embedding based familial
analysis of Android malware using unsupervised learning. In ICSE. IEEE / ACM, 771–782.
[40] Yujie Fan, Shifu Hou, Yiming Zhang, Yanfang Ye, and Melih Abdulhayoglu. 2018. Gotcha-sly malware! scorpion a metagraph2vec
based malware detection system. In KDD.
[41] Yujie Fan, Yanfang Ye, Qian Peng, Jianfei Zhang, Yiming Zhang, Xusheng Xiao, Chuan Shi, Qi Xiong, Fudong Shao, and Liang Zhao.
2020. Metagraph Aggregated Heterogeneous Graph Neural Network for Illicit Traded Product Identiﬁcation in Underground Market.
In ICDM.
[42] Qi Feng, Chengdong Feng, and Weijiang Hong. 2020. Graph Neural Network-based Vulnerability Predication. In ICSME. IEEE, 800–801.
[43] Qian Feng, Rundong Zhou, Chengcheng Xu, Yao Cheng, Brian Testa, and Heng Yin. 2016. Scalable Graph-based Bug Search for
Firmware Images. In CCS. ACM, 480–491.
[44] Michael Fleder, Michael S. Kester, and Sudeep Pillai. 2015. Bitcoin Transaction Graph Analysis. CoRR abs/1502.01657 (2015).
[45] Anagi Gamachchi, Li Sun, and Serdar Boztas. 2018. A graph based framework for malicious insider threat detection. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1809.00141 (2018).
[46] Siva Charan Reddy Gangireddy, Deepak P, Cheng Long, and Tanmoy Chakraborty. 2020. Unsupervised Fake News Detection: A
Graph-based Approach. In HT. ACM, 75–83.
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
Graph Mining for Cybersecurity: A Survey
•
43
[47] Sebastián García, Martin Grill, Jan Stiborek, and Alejandro Zunino. 2014. An empirical comparison of botnet detection methods.
Comput. Secur. 45 (2014), 100–123.
[48] Vikas K. Garg, Stefanie Jegelka, and Tommi S. Jaakkola. 2020. Generalization and Representational Limits of Graph Neural Networks.
In ICML (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 119). PMLR, 3419–3430.
[49] Hugo Gascon, Fabian Yamaguchi, Daniel Arp, and Konrad Rieck. 2013. Structural detection of android malware using embedded call
graphs. In AISec. ACM, 45–54.
[50] Justin Gilmer, Samuel S. Schoenholz, Patrick F. Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and George E. Dahl. 2017. Neural Message Passing for Quantum
Chemistry. In ICML (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 70). PMLR, 1263–1272.
[51] Luca Gioacchini, Luca Vassio, Marco Mellia, Idilio Drago, Zied Ben-Houidi, and Dario Rossi. 2021. DarkVec: automatic analysis of
darknet traﬃc with word embeddings. In CoNEXT. ACM, 76–89.
[52] Palash Goyal and Emilio Ferrara. 2018. Graph embedding techniques, applications, and performance: A survey. Knowl. Based Syst. 151
(2018), 78–94.
[53] Kathrin Grosse, Nicolas Papernot, Praveen Manoharan, Michael Backes, and Patrick D. McDaniel. 2017. Adversarial Examples for
Malware Detection. In ESORICS (2) (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 10493). Springer, 62–79.
[54] Aditya Grover and Jure Leskovec. 2016. node2vec: Scalable feature learning for networks. In KDD.
[55] Guofei Gu, Junjie Zhang, and Wenke Lee. 2008. BotSniﬀer: Detecting Botnet Command and Control Channels in Network Traﬃc. In
NDSS. The Internet Society.
[56] Gisel Bastidas Guacho, Sara Abdali, Neil Shah, and Evangelos E. Papalexakis. 2018. Semi-supervised Content-Based Detection of
Misinformation via Tensor Embeddings. In ASONAM. IEEE Computer Society, 322–325.
[57] Bin Guo, Yasan Ding, Yueheng Sun, Shuai Ma, Ke Li, and Zhiwen Yu. 2021. The mass, fake news, and cognition security. Frontiers
Comput. Sci. 15, 3 (2021), 153806.
[58] Zoltán Gyöngyi, Hector Garcia-Molina, and Jan O. Pedersen. 2004. Combating Web Spam with TrustRank. In VLDB. Morgan Kaufmann,
576–587.
[59] William L. Hamilton, Rex Ying, and Jure Leskovec. 2017. Representation Learning on Graphs: Methods and Applications. IEEE Data
Eng. Bull. 40, 3 (2017), 52–74.
[60] William L. Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. 2017. Inductive Representation Learning on Large Graphs. In NIPS. 1024–1034.
[61] Badis Hammi, Yacine Mohamed Idir, Sherali Zeadally, Rida Khatoun, and Jamel Nebhen. 2022. Is it Really Easy to Detect Sybil Attacks
in C-ITS Environments: A Position Paper. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 23, 10 (2022), 18273–18287.
[62] Robert Augustus Hardy and Julia R Norgaard. 2016. Reputation in the Internet black market: an empirical and theoretical analysis of
the Deep Web. Journal of Institutional Economics 12, 3 (2016), 515–539.
[63] Chaoyang He, Keshav Balasubramanian, Emir Ceyani, Yu Rong, Peilin Zhao, Junzhou Huang, Murali Annavaram, and Salman
Avestimehr. 2021. FedGraphNN: A Federated Learning System and Benchmark for Graph Neural Networks. CoRR abs/2104.07145
(2021).
[64] Wenxuan He, Gaopeng Gou, Cuicui Kang, Chang Liu, Zhen Li, and Gang Xiong. 2019. Malicious Domain Detection via Domain
Relationship and Graph Models. In IPCCC. IEEE, 1–8.
[65] Atefeh Heydari, Mohammad ali Tavakoli, Naomie Salim, and Zahra Heydari. 2015. Detection of review spam: A survey. Expert Syst.
Appl. 42, 7 (2015), 3634–3642.
[66] Bryan Hooi, Hyun Ah Song, Alex Beutel, Neil Shah, Kijung Shin, and Christos Faloutsos. 2016. FRAUDAR: Bounding Graph Fraud in
the Face of Camouﬂage. In KDD. ACM, 895–904.
[67] Shifu Hou, Yujie Fan, Yiming Zhang, Yanfang Ye, Jingwei Lei, Wenqiang Wan, Jiabin Wang, Qi Xiong, and Fudong Shao. 2019. 훼cyber:
Enhancing robustness of android malware detection system against adversarial attacks on heterogeneous graph based model. In CIKM.
[68] Shifu Hou, Yanfang Ye, Yangqiu Song, and Melih Abdulhayoglu. 2017. Hindroid: An intelligent android malware detection system
based on structured heterogeneous information network. In KDD.
[69] Binbin Hu, Zhiqiang Zhang, Chuan Shi, Jun Zhou, Xiaolong Li, and Yuan Qi. 2019. Cash-out user detection based on attributed
heterogeneous information network with a hierarchical attention mechanism. In AAAI.
[70] Binbin Hu, Zhiqiang Zhang, Jun Zhou, Jingli Fang, Quanhui Jia, Yanming Fang, Quan Yu, and Yuan Qi. 2020. Loan Default Analysis
with Multiplex Graph Learning. In CIKM.
[71] Xin Hu, Tzi-cker Chiueh, and Kang G Shin. 2009. Large-scale malware indexing using function-call graphs. In CCS.
[72] Jianjun Huang, Songming Han, Wei You, Wenchang Shi, Bin Liang, Jingzheng Wu, and Yanjun Wu. 2021. Hunting Vulnerable Smart
Contracts via Graph Embedding Based Bytecode Matching. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 16 (2021), 2144–2156.
[73] Luca Invernizzi, Stanislav Miskovic, Ruben Torres, Christopher Kruegel, Sabyasachi Saha, Giovanni Vigna, Sung-Ju Lee, and Marco
Mellia. 2014. Nazca: Detecting Malware Distribution in Large-Scale Networks.. In NDSS.
[74] Sushil Jajodia, Paulo Shakarian, V. S. Subrahmanian, Vipin Swarup, and CliﬀWang (Eds.). 2015. Cyber Warfare - Building the Scientiﬁc
Foundation. Advances in Information Security, Vol. 56. Springer.
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
44
•
Yan, et al.
[75] Tzung-Han Jeng, Yi-Ming Chen, Chien-Chih Chen, Chuan-Chiang Huang, and Kuo-Sen Chou. 2018. CC-Tracker: Interaction Proﬁling
Bipartite Graph Mining for Malicious Network Activity Detection. In DSC. IEEE, 1–8.
[76] Yingsheng Ji, Zheng Zhang, Xinlei Tang, Jiachen Shen, Xi Zhang, and Guangwen Yang. 2022. Detecting Cash-out Users via Dense
Subgraphs. In KDD. ACM, 687–697.
[77] Guanbo Jia, Paul Miller, Xin Hong, Harsha K. Kalutarage, and Tao Ban. 2019. Anomaly Detection in Network Traﬃc Using Dynamic
Graph Mining with a Sparse Autoencoder. In TrustCom/BigDataSE. IEEE, 458–465.
[78] Yizhen Jia, Yinhao Xiao, Jiguo Yu, Xiuzhen Cheng, Zhenkai Liang, and Zhiguo Wan. 2018. A Novel Graph-based Mechanism for
Identifying Traﬃc Vulnerabilitie in Smart Home IoT. In INFOCOM. IEEE, 1493–1501.
[79] Zhuoren Jiang, Zhe Gao, Yu Duan, Yangyang Kang, Changlong Sun, Qiong Zhang, and Xiaozhong Liu. 2020. Camouﬂaged Chinese Spam
Content Detection with Semi-supervised Generative Active Learning. In ACL. Association for Computational Linguistics, 3080–3085.
[80] Zhuoren Jiang, Zhe Gao, Guoxiu He, Yangyang Kang, Changlong Sun, Qiong Zhang, Luo Si, and Xiaozhong Liu. 2019. Detect
Camouﬂaged Spam Content via StoneSkipping: Graph and Text Joint Embedding for Chinese Character Variation Representation. In
EMNLP/IJCNLP (1). Association for Computational Linguistics, 6186–6195.
[81] Yu Jin, Nick Duﬃeld, Patrick Haﬀner, Subhabrata Sen, and Z Zhang. 2011. Can’t see forest through the trees? Understanding mixed
network traﬃc graphs from application class distribution. In Proc. of 9th Workshop on Mining and Learning with Graphs (MLG2011).
[82] Zhiwei Jin, Juan Cao, Yongdong Zhang, and Jiebo Luo. 2016. News Veriﬁcation by Exploiting Conﬂicting Social Viewpoints in
Microblogs. In AAAI. AAAI Press, 2972–2978.
[83] Parisa Kaghazgaran, James Caverlee, and Anna Cinzia Squicciarini. 2018.
Combating Crowdsourced Review Manipulators: A
Neighborhood-Based Approach. In WSDM. ACM, 306–314.
[84] Issa Khalil, Ting Yu, and Bei Guan. 2016. Discovering Malicious Domains through Passive DNS Data Graph Analysis. In AsiaCCS.
ACM, 663–674.
[85] Abd Errahmane Kiouche, Soﬁane Lagraa, Karima Amrouche, and Hamida Seba. 2021. A simple graph embedding for anomaly detection
in a stream of heterogeneous labeled graphs. Pattern Recognit. 112 (2021), 107746.
[86] Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. 2017. Semi-Supervised Classiﬁcation with Graph Convolutional Networks. In ICLR (Poster).
[87] Danai Koutra, Tai-You Ke, U Kang, Duen Horng Chau, Hsing-Kuo Kenneth Pao, and Christos Faloutsos. 2011. Unifying Guilt-by-
Association Approaches: Theorems and Fast Algorithms. In ECML/PKDD (2) (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 6912). Springer,
245–260.
[88] Srijan Kumar and Neil Shah. 2018. False Information on Web and Social Media: A Survey. CoRR abs/1804.08559 (2018).
[89] Bum Jun Kwon, Jayanta Mondal, Jiyong Jang, Leyla Bilge, and Tudor Dumitras. 2015. The Dropper Eﬀect: Insights into Malware
Distribution with Downloader Graph Analytics. In CCS. ACM, 1118–1129.
[90] Soﬁane Lagraa, Jérôme François, Abdelkader Lahmadi, Marine Miner, Christian Hammerschmidt, and Radu State. 2017. BotGM:
Unsupervised graph mining to detect botnets in traﬃc ﬂows. In 2017 1st Cyber Security in Networking Conference (CSNet). IEEE, 1–8.
[91] Harjinder Singh Lallie, Lynsay A. Shepherd, Jason R. C. Nurse, Arnau Erola, Gregory Epiphaniou, Carsten Maple, and Xavier J. A.
Bellekens. 2021. Cyber security in the age of COVID-19: A timeline and analysis of cyber-crime and cyber-attacks during the pandemic.
Comput. Secur. 105 (2021), 102248.
[92] Do Quoc Le, Taeyoel Jeong, H. Eduardo Roman, and James Won-Ki Hong. 2011. Traﬃc dispersion graph based anomaly detection. In
SoICT. ACM, 36–41.
[93] Kyumin Lee, Prithivi Tamilarasan, and James Caverlee. 2013. Crowdturfers, Campaigns, and Social Media: Tracking and Revealing
Crowdsourced Manipulation of Social Media. In ICWSM. The AAAI Press.
[94] Kai Lei, Qiuai Fu, Jiake Ni, Feiyang Wang, Min Yang, and Kuai Xu. 2019. Detecting Malicious Domains with Behavioral Modeling and
Graph Embedding. In ICDCS. IEEE, 601–611.
[95] Ao Li, Zhou Qin, Runshi Liu, Yiqun Yang, and Dong Li. 2019. Spam review detection with graph convolutional networks. In CIKM.
[96] Qian Li, Qingyuan Hu, Yong Qi, Saiyu Qi, Xinxing Liu, and Pengfei Gao. 2021. Semi-supervised two-phase familial analysis of Android
malware with normalized graph embedding. Knowl. Based Syst. 218 (2021), 106802.
[97] Siyu Li, Jin Yang, Gang Liang, Tianrui Li, and Kui Zhao. 2022. SybilFlyover: Heterogeneous graph-based fake account detection model
on social networks. Knowl. Based Syst. 258 (2022), 110038.
[98] Xiangfeng Li, Shenghua Liu, Zifeng Li, Xiaotian Han, Chuan Shi, Bryan Hooi, He Huang, and Xueqi Cheng. 2020. Flowscope: Spotting
money laundering based on graphs. In AAAI.
[99] Yun Li, Chenlin Huang, Zhongfeng Wang, Lu Yuan, and Xiaochuan Wang. 2020. Survey of software vulnerability mining methods
based on machine learning (in Chinese). Journal of Software 31, 7 (2020), 2040–2061.
[100] Yixuan Li, Oscar Martinez, Xing Chen, Yi Li, and John E. Hopcroft. 2016. In a World That Counts: Clustering and Detecting Fake Social
Engagement at Scale. In WWW. ACM, 111–120.
[101] Chen Liang, ZQ LIU, Bin Liu, Jun Zhou, and Xiaolong Li. 2018. Who stole the postage? Fraud detection in return-freight insurance
claims. In KDD.
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
Graph Mining for Cybersecurity: A Survey
•
45
[102] Chen Liang, Ziqi Liu, Bin Liu, Jun Zhou, Xiaolong Li, Shuang Yang, and Yuan Qi. 2019. Uncovering Insurance Fraud Conspiracy with
Network Learning. In SIGIR. ACM, 1181–1184.
[103] Xiao Liang, Zheng Yang, Binghui Wang, Shaofeng Hu, Zijie Yang, Dong Yuan, Neil Zhenqiang Gong, Qi Li, and Fang He. 2021. Unveiling
Fake Accounts at the Time of Registration: An Unsupervised Approach. In KDD. ACM, 3240–3250.
[104] Guanjun Lin, Sheng Wen, Qing-Long Han, Jun Zhang, and Yang Xiang. 2020. Software Vulnerability Detection Using Deep Neural
Networks: A Survey. Proc. IEEE 108, 10 (2020), 1825–1848.
[105] Lin Liu, Wei-Tek Tsai, Md. Zakirul Alam Bhuiyan, Hao Peng, and Mingsheng Liu. 2022. Blockchain-enabled fraud discovery through
abnormal smart contract detection on Ethereum. Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 128 (2022), 158–166.
[106] Ziqi Liu, Chaochao Chen, Longfei Li, Jun Zhou, Xiaolong Li, Le Song, and Yuan Qi. 2019. Geniepath: Graph neural networks with
adaptive receptive paths. In AAAI.
[107] Ziqi Liu, Chaochao Chen, Xinxing Yang, Jun Zhou, Xiaolong Li, and Le Song. 2018. Heterogeneous graph neural networks for malicious
account detection. In CIKM.
[108] Zhenguang Liu, Peng Qian, Xiang Wang, Lei Zhu, Qinming He, and Shouling Ji. 2021. Smart Contract Vulnerability Detection: From
Pure Neural Network to Interpretable Graph Feature and Expert Pattern Fusion. In IJCAI. ijcai.org, 2751–2759.
[109] Zhenguang Liu, Peng Qian, Xiaoyang Wang, Yuan Zhuang, Lin Qiu, and Xun Wang. 2023. Combining Graph Neural Networks With
Expert Knowledge for Smart Contract Vulnerability Detection. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 35, 2 (2023), 1296–1310.
[110] Yi-Ju Lu and Cheng-Te Li. 2020. GCAN: Graph-aware Co-Attention Networks for Explainable Fake News Detection on Social Media. In
ACL. Association for Computational Linguistics, 505–514.
[111] Jun Ma, Danqing Zhang, Yun Wang, Yan Zhang, and Alexey Pozdnoukhov. 2018. GraphRAD: a graph-based risky account detection
system. In KDD.
[112] Lingxiao Ma, Zhi Yang, Youshan Miao, Jilong Xue, Ming Wu, Lidong Zhou, and Yafei Dai. 2019. NeuGraph: Parallel Deep Neural
Network Computation on Large Graphs. In USENIX Annual Technical Conference. USENIX Association, 443–458.
[113] Yao Ma and Jiliang Tang. 2021. Deep Learning on Graphs. Cambridge University Press.
[114] Samaneh Mahdavifar and Ali A Ghorbani. 2019. Application of deep learning to cybersecurity: A survey. Neurocomputing 347 (2019),
149–176.
[115] Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeﬀrey Dean. 2013. Eﬃcient estimation of word representations in vector space. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1301.3781 (2013).
[116] Michael T. Mills and Nikolaos G. Bourbakis. 2014. Graph-Based Methods for Natural Language Processing and Understanding - A
Survey and Analysis. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. Syst. 44, 1 (2014), 59–71.
[117] Mohamed Nabeel, Issa M. Khalil, Bei Guan, and Ting Yu. 2020. Following Passive DNS Traces to Detect Stealthy Malicious Domains
Via Graph Inference. ACM Trans. Priv. Secur. 23, 4 (2020), 17:1–17:36.
[118] Shishir Nagaraja, Prateek Mittal, Chi-Yao Hong, Matthew Caesar, and Nikita Borisov. 2010. BotGrep: Finding P2P Bots with Structured
Graph Analysis.. In USENIX security symposium, Vol. 10. 95–110.
[119] Annamalai Narayanan, Mahinthan Chandramohan, Rajasekar Venkatesan, Lihui Chen, Yang Liu, and Shantanu Jaiswal. 2017. graph2vec:
Learning Distributed Representations of Graphs. CoRR abs/1707.05005 (2017).
[120] Van-Hoang Nguyen, Kazunari Sugiyama, Preslav Nakov, and Min-Yen Kan. 2020. Fang: Leveraging social context for fake news
detection using graph representation. In CIKM.
[121] Shirin Noekhah, Naomie Binti Salim, and Nor Hawaniah Zakaria. 2020. Opinion spam detection: Using multi-iterative graph-based
model. Inf. Process. Manag. 57, 1 (2020).
[122] Anthony Palladino and Christopher J Thissen. 2018. Cyber anomaly detection using graph-node role-dynamics. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1812.02848 (2018).
[123] Shashank Pandit, Duen Horng Chau, Samuel Wang, and Christos Faloutsos. 2007. Netprobe: a fast and scalable system for fraud
detection in online auction networks. In WWW. ACM, 201–210.
[124] Sergio Pastrana, Daniel R. Thomas, Alice Hutchings, and Richard Clayton. 2018. CrimeBB: Enabling Cybercrime Research on
Underground Forums at Scale. In WWW. ACM, 1845–1854.
[125] Abdurrahman Pektaş and Tankut Acarman. 2020. Deep learning for eﬀective Android malware detection using API call graph
embeddings. Soft Computing 24, 2 (2020), 1027–1043.
[126] Bryan Perozzi, Rami Al-Rfou, and Steven Skiena. 2014. Deepwalk: Online learning of social representations. In KDD.
[127] Thai Pham and Steven Lee. 2016. Anomaly Detection in Bitcoin Network Using Unsupervised Learning Methods. CoRR abs/1611.03941
(2016).
[128] Tahereh Pourhabibi, Kok-Leong Ong, Booi Kam, and Yee Ling Boo. 2020. Fraud detection: A systematic literature review of graph-based
anomaly detection approaches. Decis. Support Syst. 133 (2020), 113303.
[129] Brian A. Powell. 2020. Detecting malicious logins as graph anomalies. J. Inf. Secur. Appl. 54 (2020), 102557.
[130] Yanchen Qiao, Xiaochun Yun, and Yongzheng Zhang. 2016. How to Automatically Identify the Homology of Diﬀerent Malware. In
Trustcom/BigDataSE/ISPA. IEEE, 929–936.
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
46
•
Yan, et al.
[131] Meng Qu, Jian Tang, Jingbo Shang, Xiang Ren, Ming Zhang, and Jiawei Han. 2017. An attention-based collaboration framework for
multi-view network representation learning. In CIKM.
[132] Stephen Ranshous, CliﬀA. Joslyn, Sean Kreyling, Kathleen Nowak, Nagiza F. Samatova, Curtis L. West, and Samuel Winters. 2017.
Exchange Pattern Mining in the Bitcoin Transaction Directed Hypergraph. In Financial Cryptography Workshops (Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, Vol. 10323). Springer, 248–263.
[133] Punit Rathore, Jayesh Soni, Nagarajan Prabakar, Marimuthu Palaniswami, and Paolo Santi. 2021. Identifying Groups of Fake Reviewers
Using a Semisupervised Approach. IEEE Trans. Comput. Soc. Syst. 8, 6 (2021), 1369–1378.
[134] Jacob Ratkiewicz, Michael D. Conover, Mark R. Meiss, Bruno Gonçalves, Alessandro Flammini, and Filippo Menczer. 2011. Detecting
and Tracking Political Abuse in Social Media. In ICWSM. The AAAI Press.
[135] Shebuti Rayana and Leman Akoglu. 2015. Collective opinion spam detection: Bridging review networks and metadata. In KDD.
[136] Xiaoxian Ren, Jie Chen, Chenyang Li, and Yixian Yang. 2018. Hazard assessment of IoT vulnerabilities correlation based on risk matrix
(in Chinese). Netinfo Security 11 (2018).
[137] Shahbaz Rezaei and Xin Liu. 2019. Deep Learning for Encrypted Traﬃc Classiﬁcation: An Overview. IEEE Commun. Mag. 57, 5 (2019),
76–81.
[138] Leonardo FR Ribeiro, Pedro HP Saverese, and Daniel R Figueiredo. 2017. struc2vec: Learning node representations from structural
identity. In KDD.
[139] Sebastian Roschke, Feng Cheng, and Christoph Meinel. 2010. Using vulnerability information and attack graphs for intrusion detection.
In IAS. IEEE, 68–73.
[140] Jay Rosenberg and Christiaan Beek. 2019. Examining Code Reuse Reveals Undiscovered Links among North Korea’s Malware Families.
Examining Code Reuse Reveals Undiscovered Links among North Korea’s Malware Families (2019).
[141] Sherif Saad, Issa Traoré, Ali A. Ghorbani, Bassam Sayed, David Zhao, Wei Lu, John Felix, and Payman Hakimian. 2011. Detecting P2P
botnets through network behavior analysis and machine learning. In PST. IEEE, 174–180.
[142] Hamidreza Sadreazami, Arash Mohammadi, Amir Asif, and Konstantinos N. Plataniotis. 2018. Distributed-Graph-Based Statistical
Approach for Intrusion Detection in Cyber-Physical Systems. IEEE Trans. Signal Inf. Process. over Networks 4, 1 (2018), 137–147.
[143] Sagar Samtani, Hongyi Zhu, and Hsinchun Chen. 2020. Proactively Identifying Emerging Hacker Threats from the Dark Web: A
Diachronic Graph Embedding Framework (D-GEF). ACM Trans. Priv. Secur. 23, 4 (2020), 21:1–21:33.
[144] Naw Safrin Sattar, Shaikh Arifuzzaman, Minhaz F. Zibran, and Md Mohiuddin Sakib. 2019. Detecting Web Spam in Webgraphs with
Predictive Model Analysis. In IEEE BigData. IEEE, 4299–4308.
[145] Neil Shah, Alex Beutel, Brian Gallagher, and Christos Faloutsos. 2014. Spotting Suspicious Link Behavior with fBox: An Adversarial
Perspective. In ICDM. IEEE Computer Society, 959–964.
[146] Neil Shah, Alex Beutel, Bryan Hooi, Leman Akoglu, Stephan Günnemann, Disha Makhija, Mohit Kumar, and Christos Faloutsos. 2016.
EdgeCentric: Anomaly Detection in Edge-Attributed Networks. In ICDM Workshops. IEEE Computer Society, 327–334.
[147] Neil Shah, Hemank Lamba, Alex Beutel, and Christos Faloutsos. 2017. The Many Faces of Link Fraud. In ICDM. IEEE Computer Society,
1069–1074.
[148] Asim Shahzad, Nazri Mohd Nawi, Muhammad Zubair Rehman, and Abdullah Khan. 2021. An Improved Framework for Content- and
Link-Based Web-Spam Detection: A Combined Approach. Complex. 2021 (2021), 6625739:1–6625739:18.
[149] Savva Shanaev, Arina Shuraeva, Mikhail Vasenin, and Maksim Kuznetsov. 2019. Cryptocurrency value and 51% attacks: evidence from
event studies. The Journal of Alternative Investments 22, 3 (2019), 65–77.
[150] Yaoyao Shang, Shuangmao Yang, and Wei Wang. 2018. Botnet detection with hybrid analysis on ﬂow based and graph based features
of network traﬃc. In International Conference on Cloud Computing and Security. Springer, 612–621.
[151] Saeedreza Shehnepoor, Roberto Togneri, Wei Liu, and Mohammed Bennamoun. 2021. HIN-RNN: A Graph Representation Learning
Neural Network for Fraudster Group Detection With No Handcrafted Features. CoRR abs/2105.11602 (2021).
[152] Jie Shen, Jiajun Zhou, Yunyi Xie, Shanqing Yu, and Qi Xuan. 2021. Identity Inference on Blockchain Using Graph Neural Network. In
BlockSys (Communications in Computer and Information Science, Vol. 1490). Springer, 3–17.
[153] Meng Shen, Jinpeng Zhang, Liehuang Zhu, Ke Xu, and Xiaojiang Du. 2021. Accurate Decentralized Application Identiﬁcation via
Encrypted Traﬃc Analysis Using Graph Neural Networks. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 16 (2021), 2367–2380.
[154] Toshiki Shibahara, Yuta Takata, Mitsuaki Akiyama, Takeshi Yagi, and Takeshi Yada. 2017. Detecting Malicious Websites by Integrating
Malicious, Benign, and Compromised Redirection Subgraph Similarities. In COMPSAC (1). IEEE Computer Society, 655–664.
[155] Kai Shu, Deepak Mahudeswaran, Suhang Wang, and Huan Liu. 2020. Hierarchical Propagation Networks for Fake News Detection:
Investigation and Exploitation. In ICWSM. AAAI Press, 626–637.
[156] Kai Shu, Suhang Wang, and Huan Liu. 2017. Exploiting Tri-Relationship for Fake News Detection. CoRR abs/1712.07709 (2017).
[157] Matteo Signorini, Wael Kanoun, and Roberto Di Pietro. 2018. ADvISE: Anomaly Detection tool for blockchaIn SystEms. In SERVICES.
IEEE Computer Society, 65–66.
[158] Nikita Spirin and Jiawei Han. 2011. Survey on web spam detection: principles and algorithms. SIGKDD Explor. 13, 2 (2011), 50–64.
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
Graph Mining for Cybersecurity: A Survey
•
47
[159] Tatiana V. Stepanova and Dmitry P. Zegzhda. 2014. Applying Large-scale Adaptive Graphs to Modeling Internet of Things Security. In
SIN. ACM, 479.
[160] Jack W. Stokes, Reid Andersen, Christian Seifert, and Kumar Chellapilla. 2010. WebCop: Locating Neighborhoods of Malware on the
Web. In LEET. USENIX Association.
[161] W. Timothy Strayer, Robert Walsh, Carl Livadas, and David E. Lapsley. 2006. Detecting Botnets with Tight Command and Control. In
LCN. IEEE Computer Society, 195–202.
[162] Gianluca Stringhini, Christopher Kruegel, and Giovanni Vigna. 2013. Shady paths: leveraging surﬁng crowds to detect malicious web
pages. In CCS. ACM, 133–144.
[163] Boyu Sun, Wenyuan Yang, Mengqi Yan, Dehao Wu, Yuesheng Zhu, and Zhiqiang Bai. 2020. An Encrypted Traﬃc Classiﬁcation Method
Combining Graph Convolutional Network and Autoencoder. In IPCCC. IEEE, 1–8.
[164] Xiaoqing Sun, Zhiliang Wang, Jiahai Yang, and Xinran Liu. 2020. Deepdom: Malicious domain detection with scalable and heterogeneous
graph convolutional networks. Computers & Security 99 (2020), 102057.
[165] Xiaoqing Sun, Jiahai Yang, Zhiliang Wang, and Heng Liu. 2020. HGDom: Heterogeneous Graph Convolutional Networks for Malicious
Domain Detection. In NOMS. IEEE, 1–9.
[166] Yizhou Sun and Jiawei Han. 2012. Mining heterogeneous information networks: a structural analysis approach. SIGKDD Explor. 14, 2
(2012), 20–28.
[167] Yizhou Sun, Jiawei Han, Xifeng Yan, Philip S. Yu, and Tianyi Wu. 2011. PathSim: Meta Path-Based Top-K Similarity Search in
Heterogeneous Information Networks. Proc. VLDB Endow. 4, 11 (2011), 992–1003.
[168] Toyotaro Suzumura, Yi Zhou, Natahalie Baracaldo, Guangnan Ye, Keith Houck, Ryo Kawahara, Ali Anwar, Lucia Larise Stavarache,
Yuji Watanabe, Pablo Loyola, et al. 2019. Towards federated graph learning for collaborative ﬁnancial crimes detection. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.12946 (2019).
[169] Mariarosaria Taddeo, Tom McCutcheon, and Luciano Floridi. 2019. Trusting artiﬁcial intelligence in cybersecurity is a double-edged
sword. Nat. Mach. Intell. 1, 12 (2019), 557–560.
[170] Acar Tamersoy, Kevin Roundy, and Duen Horng Chau. 2014. Guilt by association: large scale malware detection by mining ﬁle-relation
graphs. In KDD.
[171] Choon Lin Tan, Kang-Leng Chiew, Kelvin S. C. Yong, San-Nah Sze, Johari Abdullah, and Yakub Sebastian. 2020. A graph-theoretic
approach for the detection of phishing webpages. Comput. Secur. 95 (2020), 101793.
[172] Jian Tang, Meng Qu, Mingzhe Wang, Ming Zhang, Jun Yan, and Qiaozhu Mei. 2015. Line: Large-scale information network embedding.
In WWW.
[173] Lei Tang and Huan Liu. 2010. Graph mining applications to social network analysis. In Managing and Mining Graph Data. Springer,
487–513.
[174] Hau Tran, An Nguyen, Phuong Vo, and Tu Vu. 2017. DNS graph mining for malicious domain detection. In IEEE BigData. IEEE
Computer Society, 4680–4685.
[175] Rudra M Tripathy, Amitabha Bagchi, and Sameep Mehta. 2010. A study of rumor control strategies on social networks. In CIKM.
[176] Alexey Tselykh, Margarita Knyazeva, Elena Popkova, Antonina Durfee, and Alexander Tselykh. 2016. An Attributed Graph Mining
Approach to Detect Transfer Pricing Fraud. In SIN. ACM, 72–75.
[177] Petar Veličković, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Lio, and Yoshua Bengio. 2017. Graph attention networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10903 (2017).
[178] Andrei Venzhega, Polina Zhinalieva, and Nikolay Suboch. 2013. Graph-based malware distributors detection. In WWW.
[179] Rossouw von Solms and Johan Van Niekerk. 2013. From information security to cyber security. Comput. Secur. 38 (2013), 97–102.
[180] Daixin Wang, Jianbin Lin, Peng Cui, Quanhui Jia, Zhen Wang, Yanming Fang, Quan Yu, Jun Zhou, Shuang Yang, and Yuan Qi. 2019. A
semi-supervised graph attentive network for ﬁnancial fraud detection. In ICDM.
[181] Guan Wang, Sihong Xie, Bing Liu, and S Yu Philip. 2011. Review graph based online store review spammer detection. In ICDM.
[182] Guan Wang, Sihong Xie, Bing Liu, and Philip S. Yu. 2012. Identify Online Store Review Spammers via Social Review Graph. ACM
Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol. 3, 4 (2012), 61:1–61:21.
[183] Huanting Wang, Guixin Ye, Zhanyong Tang, Shin Hwei Tan, Songfang Huang, Dingyi Fang, Yansong Feng, Lizhong Bian, and Zheng
Wang. 2021. Combining Graph-Based Learning With Automated Data Collection for Code Vulnerability Detection. IEEE Trans. Inf.
Forensics Secur. 16 (2021), 1943–1958.
[184] Jiaxin Wang, Yi Feng, Rui You, et al. 2019. Network security measurment based on dependency relationship graph and common
vulnerability scoring system (in Chinese). Journal of Computer Applications 39, 6 (2019), 1719–1727.
[185] Jingjing Wang, Lansheng Han, Man Zhou, Wenkui Qian, and Dezhi An. 2021. Adaptive evaluation model of web spam based on link
relation. Trans. Emerg. Telecommun. Technol. 32, 5 (2021).
[186] Jing Wang and Ioannis Ch Paschalidis. 2014. Botnet detection using social graph analysis. In 2014 52nd Annual Allerton Conference on
Communication, Control, and Computing (Allerton). IEEE, 393–400.
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
48
•
Yan, et al.
[187] Jing Wang and Ioannis Ch Paschalidis. 2016. Botnet detection based on anomaly and community detection. IEEE Transactions on
Control of Network Systems 4, 2 (2016), 392–404.
[188] Shen Wang, Zhengzhang Chen, Xiao Yu, Ding Li, Jingchao Ni, Lu-An Tang, Jiaping Gui, Zhichun Li, Haifeng Chen, and Philip S Yu.
2019. Heterogeneous Graph Matching Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.08074 (2019).
[189] Shihan Wang and Takao Terano. 2015. Detecting rumor patterns in streaming social media. In IEEE BigData. IEEE Computer Society,
2709–2715.
[190] Wei Wang, Yaoyao Shang, Yongzhong He, Yidong Li, and Jiqiang Liu. 2020. BotMark: Automated botnet detection with hybrid analysis
of ﬂow-based and graph-based traﬃc behaviors. Information Sciences 511 (2020), 284–296.
[191] Xiao Wang, Deyu Bo, Chuan Shi, Shaohua Fan, Yanfang Ye, and Philip S. Yu. 2023. A Survey on Heterogeneous Graph Embedding:
Methods, Techniques, Applications and Sources. IEEE Trans. Big Data 9, 2 (2023), 415–436.
[192] Xiao Wang, Houye Ji, Chuan Shi, Bai Wang, Yanfang Ye, Peng Cui, and Philip S Yu. 2019. Heterogeneous graph attention network. In
WWW.
[193] Youze Wang, Shengsheng Qian, Jun Hu, Quan Fang, and Changsheng Xu. 2020. Fake News Detection via Knowledge-driven Multimodal
Graph Convolutional Networks. In ICMR. ACM, 540–547.
[194] Yibo Wang and Wei Xu. 2018. Leveraging deep learning with LDA-based text analytics to detect automobile insurance fraud. Decis.
Support Syst. 105 (2018), 87–95.
[195] Zhuo Wang, Songmin Gu, Xiangnan Zhao, and Xiaowei Xu. 2018. Graph-based review spammer group detection. Knowl. Inf. Syst. 55, 3
(2018), 571–597.
[196] Zhuo Wang, Tingting Hou, Dawei Song, Zhun Li, and Tianqi Kong. 2016. Detecting Review Spammer Groups via Bipartite Graph
Projection. Comput. J. 59, 6 (2016), 861–874.
[197] Ziyu Wang, Nanqing Luo, and Pan Zhou. 2020. GuardHealth: Blockchain empowered secure data management and Graph Convolutional
Network enabled anomaly detection in smart healthcare. J. Parallel Distributed Comput. 142 (2020), 1–12.
[198] Mark Weber, Jie Chen, Toyotaro Suzumura, Aldo Pareja, Tengfei Ma, Hiroki Kanezashi, Tim Kaler, Charles E Leiserson, and Tao B
Schardl. 2018. Scalable graph learning for anti-money laundering: A ﬁrst look. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.00076 (2018).
[199] Mark Weber, Giacomo Domeniconi, Jie Chen, Daniel Karl I Weidele, Claudio Bellei, Tom Robinson, and Charles E Leiserson. 2019. Anti-
money laundering in bitcoin: Experimenting with graph convolutional networks for ﬁnancial forensics. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.02591
(2019).
[200] Angus Wong and Alan Yeung. 2009. Network infrastructure security. Springer Science & Business Media.
[201] Jiajing Wu, Dan Lin, Zibin Zheng, and Qi Yuan. 2019. T-EDGE: Temporal WEighted MultiDiGraph Embedding for Ethereum Transaction
Network Analysis. CoRR abs/1905.08038 (2019).
[202] Liang Wu and Huan Liu. 2018. Tracing Fake-News Footprints: Characterizing Social Media Messages by How They Propagate. In
WSDM. ACM, 637–645.
[203] Zonghan Wu, Shirui Pan, Fengwen Chen, Guodong Long, Chengqi Zhang, and Philip S. Yu. 2021. A Comprehensive Survey on Graph
Neural Networks. IEEE Trans. Neural Networks Learn. Syst. 32, 1 (2021), 4–24.
[204] Tobias Wüchner, Aleksander Cislak, Martín Ochoa, and Alexander Pretschner. 2019. Leveraging Compression-Based Graph Mining for
Behavior-Based Malware Detection. IEEE Trans. Dependable Secur. Comput. 16, 1 (2019), 99–112.
[205] Cao Xiao, David Mandell Freeman, and Theodore Hwa. 2015. Detecting Clusters of Fake Accounts in Online Social Networks. In
AISec@CCS. ACM, 91–101.
[206] Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. 2019. How Powerful are Graph Neural Networks?. In ICLR.
[207] Xiaojun Xu, Chang Liu, Qian Feng, Heng Yin, Le Song, and Dawn Song. 2017. Neural Network-based Graph Embedding for Cross-
Platform Binary Code Similarity Detection. In CCS. ACM, 363–376.
[208] Fabian Yamaguchi, Nico Golde, Daniel Arp, and Konrad Rieck. 2014. Modeling and Discovering Vulnerabilities with Code Property
Graphs. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy. IEEE Computer Society, 590–604.
[209] Cheng Yang, Zhiyuan Liu, Deli Zhao, Maosong Sun, and Edward Chang. 2015. Network representation learning with rich text
information. In IJCAI.
[210] Chao Yang, Zhaoyan Xu, Guofei Gu, Vinod Yegneswaran, and Phillip A. Porras. 2014. DroidMiner: Automated Mining and Character-
ization of Fine-grained Malicious Behaviors in Android Applications. In ESORICS (1) (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 8712).
Springer, 163–182.
[211] Shuo Yang, Kai Shu, Suhang Wang, Renjie Gu, Fan Wu, and Huan Liu. 2019. Unsupervised fake news detection on social media: A
generative approach. In AAAI.
[212] Tianchi Yang, Linmei Hu, Chuan Shi, Houye Ji, Xiaoli Li, and Liqiang Nie. 2021. HGAT: Heterogeneous Graph Attention Networks for
Semi-supervised Short Text Classiﬁcation. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. 39, 3 (2021), 32:1–32:29.
[213] Xiaoyu Yang, Yuefei Lyu, Tian Tian, Yifei Liu, Yudong Liu, and Xi Zhang. 2020. Rumor Detection on Social Media with Graph Structured
Adversarial Learning.. In IJCAI.
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
Graph Mining for Cybersecurity: A Survey
•
49
[214] Yingguang Yang, Renyu Yang, Yangyang Li, Kai Cui, Zhiqin Yang, Yue Wang, Jie Xu, and Haiyong Xie. 2022. RoSGAS: Adaptive Social
Bot Detection with Reinforced Self-Supervised GNN Architecture Search. CoRR abs/2206.06757 (2022).
[215] Junting Ye and Leman Akoglu. 2015. Discovering Opinion Spammer Groups by Network Footprints. In ECML/PKDD (1) (Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, Vol. 9284). Springer, 267–282.
[216] Jiexia Ye, Juanjuan Zhao, Kejiang Ye, and Chengzhong Xu. 2020. How to build a graph-based deep learning architecture in traﬃc
domain: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems (2020).
[217] Yanfang Ye, Lingwei Chen, Shifu Hou, William Hardy, and Xin Li. 2018. DeepAM: a heterogeneous deep learning framework for
intelligent malware detection. Knowl. Inf. Syst. 54, 2 (2018), 265–285.
[218] Yanfang Ye, Shifu Hou, Lingwei Chen, Jingwei Lei, Wenqiang Wan, Jiabin Wang, Qi Xiong, and Fudong Shao. 2019. Out-of-sample
node representation learning for heterogeneous graph in real-time android malware detection. In IJCAI.
[219] Yanfang Ye, Tao Li, Donald A. Adjeroh, and S. Sitharama Iyengar. 2017. A Survey on Malware Detection Using Data Mining Techniques.
ACM Comput. Surv. 50, 3 (2017), 41:1–41:40.
[220] Yanfang Ye, Tao Li, Shenghuo Zhu, Weiwei Zhuang, Egemen Tas, Umesh Gupta, and Melih Abdulhayoglu. 2011. Combining ﬁle content
and ﬁle relations for cloud based malware detection. In KDD.
[221] Hongji Yin and wei Chen. 2020. Server side request forgery vulnerability detection system with graph traversal algorithm (in Chinese).
Computer Engineering and Applications 56, 19 (2020), 6.
[222] Zeping Yu, Rui Cao, Qiyi Tang, Sen Nie, Junzhou Huang, and Shi Wu. 2020. Order matters: Semantic-aware neural networks for binary
code similarity detection. In AAAI.
[223] Chunyuan Yuan, Qianwen Ma, Wei Zhou, Jizhong Han, and Songlin Hu. 2019. Jointly embedding the local and global relations of
heterogeneous graph for rumor detection. In ICDM.
[224] Dong Yuan, Yuanli Miao, Neil Zhenqiang Gong, Zheng Yang, Qi Li, Dawn Song, Qian Wang, and Xiao Liang. 2019. Detecting Fake
Accounts in Online Social Networks at the Time of Registrations. In CCS. ACM, 1423–1438.
[225] Chuxu Zhang, Dongjin Song, Chao Huang, Ananthram Swami, and Nitesh V Chawla. 2019. Heterogeneous graph neural network. In
KDD.
[226] Dalong Zhang, Xin Huang, Ziqi Liu, Jun Zhou, Zhiyang Hu, Xianzheng Song, Zhibang Ge, Lin Wang, Zhiqiang Zhang, and Yuan Qi.
2020. AGL: A Scalable System for Industrial-purpose Graph Machine Learning. Proc. VLDB Endow. 13, 12 (2020), 3125–3137.
[227] Daokun Zhang, Jie Yin, Xingquan Zhu, and Chengqi Zhang. 2018. MetaGraph2Vec: Complex Semantic Path Augmented Heterogeneous
Network Embedding. In PAKDD (2) (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 10938). Springer, 196–208.
[228] Fuzhi Zhang, Xiaoyan Hao, Jinbo Chao, and Shuai Yuan. 2020. Label propagation-based approach for detecting review spammer groups
on e-commerce websites. Knowl. Based Syst. 193 (2020), 105520.
[229] Huanding Zhang, Tao Shen, Fei Wu, Mingyang Yin, Hongxia Yang, and Chao Wu. 2021. Federated Graph Learning - A Position Paper.
CoRR abs/2105.11099 (2021).
[230] Lei Zhang, Yong Cui, Jing Liu, Yong Jiang, and Jianping Wu. 2018. Application of machine learning in cyberspace security research (in
Chinese). Chinese Journal of Computers 41, 9 (2018), 1943–1975.
[231] Lizhe Zhang, Zhaojun Gu, Bo He, and Shufa Liu. 2016. Multi-source attack pattern graph intrusion detection algorithm (in Chinese).
Computer Engineering and Design 37, 11 (2016), 2909–2916.
[232] Shichang Zhang, Yozen Liu, Yizhou Sun, and Neil Shah. 2022. Graph-less Neural Networks: Teaching Old MLPs New Tricks Via
Distillation. In ICLR.
[233] Yiming Zhang, Yujie Fan, Wei Song, Shifu Hou, Yanfang Ye, Xin Li, Liang Zhao, Chuan Shi, Jiabin Wang, and Qi Xiong. 2019. Your
style your identity: Leveraging writing and photography styles for drug traﬃcker identiﬁcation in darknet markets over attributed
heterogeneous information network. In WWW.
[234] Yiming Zhang, Yujie Fan, Yanfang Ye, Liang Zhao, and Chuan Shi. 2019. Key player identiﬁcation in underground forums over attributed
heterogeneous information network embedding framework. In CIKM.
[235] Yiming Zhang, Yujie Fan, Yanfang Ye, Liang Zhao, Jiabin Wang, Qi Xiong, and Fudong Shao. 2018. KADetector: Automatic Identiﬁcation
of Key Actors in Online Hack Forums Based on Structured Heterogeneous Information Network. In ICBK. IEEE Computer Society,
154–161.
[236] Ya-Lin Zhang, Jun Zhou, Wenhao Zheng, Ji Feng, Longfei Li, Ziqi Liu, Ming Li, Zhiqiang Zhang, Chaochao Chen, Xiaolong Li,
Yuan (Alan) Qi, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. 2019. Distributed Deep Forest and its Application to Automatic Detection of Cash-Out Fraud. ACM
Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol. 10, 5 (2019), 55:1–55:19.
[237] Jun Zhao, Xudong Liu, Qiben Yan, Bo Li, Minglai Shao, and Hao Peng. 2020. Multi-attributed heterogeneous graph convolutional
network for bot detection. Information Sciences 537 (2020), 380–393.
[238] Da Zheng, Chao Ma, Minjie Wang, Jinjing Zhou, Qidong Su, Xiang Song, Quan Gan, Zheng Zhang, and George Karypis. 2020. DistDGL:
Distributed Graph Neural Network Training for Billion-Scale Graphs. In IA3@SC. IEEE, 36–44.
[239] Jingwei Zheng and Dagang Li. 2019. GCN-TC: Combining Trace Graph with Statistical Features for Network Traﬃc Classiﬁcation. In
ICC. IEEE, 1–6.
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
50
•
Yan, et al.
[240] Qiwei Zhong, Yang Liu, Xiang Ao, Binbin Hu, Jinghua Feng, Jiayu Tang, and Qing He. 2020. Financial defaulter detection on online
credit payment via multi-view attributed heterogeneous information network. In WWW.
[241] Jie Zhou, Ganqu Cui, Shengding Hu, Zhengyan Zhang, Cheng Yang, Zhiyuan Liu, Lifeng Wang, Changcheng Li, and Maosong Sun.
2020. Graph neural networks: A review of methods and applications. AI Open 1 (2020), 57–81.
[242] Jiajun Zhou, Chenkai Hu, Shengbo Gong, Jiaying Xu, Jie Shen, and Qi Xuan. 2021. BlockGC: A Joint Learning Framework for Account
Identity Inference on Blockchain with Graph Contrast. CoRR abs/2112.03659 (2021).
[243] Xinyi Zhou and Reza Zafarani. 2019. Network-based Fake News Detection: A Pattern-driven Approach. SIGKDD Explor. 21, 2 (2019),
48–60.
[244] Xinyi Zhou and Reza Zafarani. 2020. A Survey of Fake News: Fundamental Theories, Detection Methods, and Opportunities. ACM
Comput. Surv. 53, 5 (2020), 109:1–109:40.
[245] Yaqin Zhou, Shangqing Liu, Jing Kai Siow, Xiaoning Du, and Yang Liu. 2019. Devign: Eﬀective Vulnerability Identiﬁcation by Learning
Comprehensive Program Semantics via Graph Neural Networks. In NeurIPS. 10197–10207.
[246] Yuan Zhuang, Zhenguang Liu, Peng Qian, Qi Liu, Xiang Wang, and Qinming He. 2020. Smart Contract Vulnerability Detection using
Graph Neural Network. In IJCAI. ijcai.org, 3283–3290.
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data.
