Title: A Systems Thinking for Cybersecurity Modeling
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2001.05734v1
--------------------------------------------------

A Systems Thinking for Cybersecurity Modeling
Dingyu Yan
State Key Laboratory of Information Security, Institute of Information Engineering,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
yandingyu@iie.ac.cn
Abstract—Solving cybersecurity issues requires a holistic un-
derstanding of components, factors, structures and their inter-
actions in cyberspace, but conventional modeling approaches
view the ﬁeld of cybersecurity by their boundaries so that we
are still not clear to cybersecurity and its changes. In this
paper, we attempt to discuss the application of systems thinking
approaches to cybersecurity modeling. This paper reviews the
systems thinking approaches and provides the systems theories
and methods for tackling cybersecurity challenges, regarding
relevant ﬁelds, associated impact factors and their interactions.
Moreover, an illustrative example of systems thinking frame-
works for cybersecurity modeling is developed to help broaden
the mind in methodology, theory, technology and practice. This
article concludes that systems thinking can be considered as
one of the powerful tools of cybersecurity modeling to ﬁnd,
characterize, understand, evaluate and predict cybersecurity.
Index Terms—Cybersecurity Modeling, Science of Cybersecu-
rity, Systems Thinking, Holistic Approach
I. INTRODUCTION
Ever since the concept of ”cyberspace” is deﬁned clearly,
the boundary of security is extended to the real-world domain
related to digital technology rather than the only virtual
environment created by computer networks [1]. Though there
are already several works dedicated to cybersecurity modeling
[2] [3], we still have a vague understanding on cybersecurity.
Firstly, it is difﬁcult to exploit and evaluate the synergies
among the defensive measures to enhance cybersecurity [4].
Despite the large investments in the security ﬁeld from na-
tion, enterprises and individuals, we cannot know whether
these defensive measures can really work against cyberat-
tacks. Secondly, the security system lacks the capacity to
measure its current security situation comprehensively and
precisely. Nowadays, there is no set of the uniﬁed and accepted
evaluation system and metrics for cybersecurity modeling.
Thirdly, systemic components, factors and their interaction are
often ignored and omitted in several models [5]. The multiple
relationships and interaction among the components greatly
increase the difﬁculty of cybersecurity modeling and analysis.
To better understand the essential characters of cybersecu-
rity and resolve the cybersecurity challenges, several studies
attempt to apply systems thinking approaches to the cyber-
security ﬁeld [6] [7]. Systems thinking is considered to offer
a novel and comprehensive perspective to reveal the entire
process of cybersecurity as a system. Also, by these systems
thinking approaches, researchers plan to establish a conceptual
framework for measuring and evaluating the cybersecurity
system and its constitutes [8] [9], such as defensive measures,
human factors, security policy. Thus, the typical goals of the
systems thinking for cybersecurity modeling are exempliﬁed
as follows: (1) discovering the multiple impact factors and
their interacting effects; (2) investigating fundamental laws in
cybersecurity; (3) exploring the theoretical and real solution
to the speciﬁc security issue; (4) evaluating effective attack
weapons and defense measures in the speciﬁc scenario.
This article mainly urges the importance of systems thinking
in cybersecurity modeling. Firstly, we analyze the primary
characteristics of cybersecurity and the challenges in cyber-
security modeling in Section II. Then, Section III introduces
systems thinking and explores how systems thinking is applied
for cybersecurity modeling. Finally, we give an example of
systems frameworks for cybersecurity modeling in Section IV.
II. CYBERSECURITY AS A COMPLEX SYSTEM
A. Characteristics of Cybersecurity
Cyberspace can be considered as the ultimate complex
adaptive system of interconnected heterogeneous components
[10] [11], such as multiple types of networks, devices and
stakeholders, intertwined with human behavioral and technical
factors, as shown in schematic ﬁgure Fig.1. In modeling this
complex cybersecurity landscape, the four following charac-
teristics are inevitable.
Complexity. Complexity is the most prominent characteris-
tic of the cybersecurity and has inﬁltrated each part of the
cybersecurity landscape [12] [13]. First of all, complexity
in cybersecurity embodies the diversity in security issues
and the multiplicity in inﬂuence factors. Cybersecurity is
a complex intercross area, covering multiple ﬁelds, such
as society, economics, politics, information technology, etc.
The cybersecurity issues are stemmed from these ﬁelds and
are affected by the combination of factors. For example,
Flame, an example of the advanced persistent threat attack
targeted Middle Eastern countries, is considered as the highly
sophisticated and well-planned nation-state cyberattack for
military and political motives. Moreover, the interrelationships
between components in cyberspace are extremely complicated.
Each component could interact with others in each ﬁeld.
Especially, as the center of cyberspace, the human is the
interface between the natural environment, human society and
information technology. The components of these three ﬁelds
such as social distance, network architecture clearly alter the
arXiv:2001.05734v1  [cs.CR]  16 Jan 2020
Electronic 
Device
Attack Tool
Attacker
Social Network and Individual Behavioral Factors
Electronic Network Factors
Information Technology Factors
Attack 
Strategy
Defense 
Strategy
Network 
Commu
nication
Combinati
on/Decom
position
Cooperati
on/Compe
tition
Defender
Social 
Communi
cation
One-/Two-way Contact
Interaction
Incentive
Resource
Criminology
Policy
Law
Regulation
Norm
Organization
Awareness
Risk Assessment
Communication
Information
Occupation
Family
Hobby
Network 
Architecture
Firewall
Secure
Router
DMZ
…
Data
Server
Network 
Topology
0-day 
Exploits
Vulnerability
UAF Attack
Code Quality
Protocol
Operation 
System
Privilege
Cryptographic 
Scheme
Physical Isolation
…
Security 
Level
Benefits/
Feedback
Loss/
Feedback
…
Fig. 1. The main components, impact factors and their interaction in Cybersecurity.
individual behavior and strategy, but, in turn, the participant
can inﬂuence the dynamic change of components.
Unpredictability. As interactions exist among components
and joint effects of the multiple types of factors, the cyberse-
curity as a whole exhibits an unpredictability and complexity
[11]. First, the behavior, action and strategy of participants
in cyberspace, either adversaries or users, are irrational, un-
predictable and nonuniform [14]. Notably, smart hackers hide
themselves by abandoning the conventional attack technology
and method, so they are challenging to attribute deﬁnitively.
Second, vulnerabilities and malfunctions in system and pro-
tocol, sometimes, are imperceptible. This feature makes it
difﬁcult for the defender to evaluate the system security
and analyze the defense effectiveness quantitatively. Third,
the cybersecurity system can exhibit the unpredictable emer-
gence [15]. As deﬁned in terms of the system-level patterns,
emergence in cybersecurity refers to the new property and
macrocosmic phenomenon as a result of the interactions of
components in the microcosmic level. Thus, it is difﬁcult for
us to evaluate the effectiveness of some speciﬁc attack and
defense technologies on the whole cyberspace.
Dynamics. To further understand the issues associated
with cybersecurity, one must be knowledgeable about the
evolution of each component [16]. On the one hand, the
state of every component and each interaction between every
two components changes dynamically over time. Especially
for participants in cyberspace, their behavior and strategy
may be dynamical and inconsistent [14]. On the other hand,
the dynamics of cybersecurity is the prerequisite of system
emergence [17]. The same input and environmental conditions
do not always guarantee the same output.
Asymmetry. In cybersecurity, there always exists an asym-
metry between the attacker and the defender [18]. This asym-
metry is presented in the following three aspects. First, the
attacker is positive and proactive, while the defender is passive
and reactive [19]. In general, the attacker makes enough prepa-
rations in advance, such as vulnerability scanning, intelligence
gathering, weaponization, which are ensured not clear to the
defender. Moreover, the defender must protect all possible
points of the protected object at any time, while the attacker
can break through the meticulous defense disposition just by
one valid vulnerability. Second, the defender’s evaluation of
his defense effectiveness is often faulty. As mentioned above,
because it is difﬁcult to estimate the effects of the speciﬁc
defense technology or method on the whole cybersecurity, the
defender fails to measure the defense effectiveness comprehen-
sively and accurately. Third, the cost of one attack is less than
that of defense. The defend requires an enormous investment
of money, labor and resource, regardless of researching new
defense technology or establishing the early warning mech-
anism for large-scale cyber attacks. However, these defense
methods and technologies cannot guarantee to resist the cyber
attack completely.
B. Challenges of Cybersecurity Modeling
At present, cybersecurity modeling is still in its infancy.
The existing models and methods are limited to the technical
security study, aiming to address the speciﬁc technical problem
by the technology and approaches [32]. For example, the
modern cryptographic scheme is to solve the problem of
TABLE I
SYSTEMS THINKING THEORIES AND METHODS
Theories
Item
Key Research
Description
Systems Theory
[7] [20]
Systems Theory is an interdisciplinary methodology which employs several systems approaches to
investigating the systems structure, understanding the complex phenomenon and solving the relevant
problems.
Game Theory
[21] [22]
Game Theory attempts to explain the interacting strategy of the players with respect to the utilities
of other rational players. In the security game model, the attacker and defender act as the players in
the game theory.
Cybernetics
[23] [24]
Cybernetics is a broad study of both living and non-living systems guided by principles of feedback,
control, and communications.
Catastrophe
Theory
Catastrophe Theory is a mathematical theory for explaining the abrupt changes and discontinuities
of state (E.g., server crash, defense failure).
Behaviorism
[25] [26] [27]
Behaviorism is a learning approach which focuses on the human behavior in cyberspace.
Methods
Item
Key Research
Description
Dynamics
[16] [28]
Dynamics is a system methodology technique to model the system problems by dealing with stocks,
follows and feedback loops that affect the behavior of the entire system over time.
Network
Analysis
[29] [30]
Network analysis is both a theoretical approach and methodological tool for understanding the
interactions between the actors, exploring the network structure effects and studying the relevant
factors.
Agent-based
Model
[31]
Agent-based model is a way to model or simulate the complex system constituted by autonomous,
interacting agents (e.g., individual, group). The heterogeneity in agents’ strategy decision and
complicated interactions between agents can result in the unpredicted results of the system as whole.
preventing the malicious party from obtaining private in-
formation. Conﬁdentiality, integrity and availability are the
core aspects of the cryptography [33]. Based on where the
security technique works, it often classiﬁes these technical
studies into three classes: applications-based, hosts-based and
network-based security technical studies. For instance, code
injection is the applications-based study and ﬁrewall belongs
to both network-based and host-based security study. Though
abundant technical works have made signiﬁcant contributions
to the research ﬁeld of information security, there are still
several typical challenges technical study: (1) the formalized
description of the technical problems in cybersecurity; (2)
the uniﬁed pattern of the quantitative and qualitative analysis
towards the security technology; (3) coupling the theoretical
guidance with the security technology and practice.
Generally speaking, cybersecurity study should involve the
all relevant factors in the ﬁelds of politics, society, economy
and culture, covering the theory, technology and practices.
Fig.1 demonstrates the cybersecurity is rather a complex sys-
tem, where the multiple components, factors and environment
are interacted and twisted. Thus, cybersecurity modeling is
broader than mere technical study. Recently, researchers have
become interested in the human behavior factors in cyberse-
curity. The Data Breach Investigations Report (DBIR) from
Verizon [34] represented that human factor continues to be a
major issue accounting for the most incidents in enterprise. In
cybersecurity, humans play as both developers and users for
the security products; act as both adversaries and victims for
the cyber attack-defense [35]. For example, game theory, such
as the static game, dynamic game, Bayesian game, is often
applied to investigate the interaction between the attacker and
defender [21] [22]. In the Stackelberg Security Game (SSG),
where a leader makes a decision ﬁrst and then a follower
reacts subject to the leader’s action, the attacker acts as the
follower, and the defender acts the role of the leader. However,
there are still many theoretical and technical difﬁculties that
need to be tackled in characterizing individual behaviors in
cybersecurity. For example, human cognitive bias, gambler
psychology, and the heterogeneity, dynamics and uncertainty
in individual strategy decision can make the conventional
method difﬁcult, even invalid, for investigating the role of
human factors in cybersecurity [14].
The cybersecurity study also needs to address the cyber-
physical security issues, such as industry control systems,
laws and regulations, cybercrime. Playing an essential role
in ﬁnancial services, power grid, transportation and medical
system, industry control systems are often selected as targeted
for cyberattacks [36], especially advanced persistent threat
attacks. These cyberattacks tend to disrupt the order of the
nation, cause public panic and disorder [37]. For example,
Stuxnet, a sophisticated malware with four 0-day exploits
targeting the Windows system and one targeting SCADA,
delayed the process of Iranian nuclear program [38]. In
December 2015, a cyberattack on Ukraine power grid by Black
Energy group took place, and about 225 thousand customers
lose power before Christmas [39]. In order to the ﬁelds as
mentioned above, other specialists strive for a systematic
set of cybersecurity metrics to deﬁne, measure and quantify
TABLE II
RELEVANT STAKEHOLDERS IN CYBERSECURITY
Stakeholders
clusters
Constituent Sub-system Description
Government
Ministries, law enforcements, regulatory
agencies
As policy system from the perspective of government
Academia
Universities, research institutes
As research system from the perspective of security researchers
Private Sectors
Information security enterprises, computer
and network companies
As market system from the perspective of providers of security services
and products
Infrastructure
Internet service providers, urban managers
As urban manage system from the infrastructure managers and planners
cybersecurity [4] [40].
III. APPLY SYSTEMS THINKING TO CYBERSECURITY
MODELING
A. What is Systems Thinking
System thinking is a holistic approach intended to analyze
how the parts of the system interact and how the emergence
changes as a whole entity [41]. Unlike the reductionist think-
ing, which actually treats the world from a static, simple and
one-sided perspective, this holistic thinking emphasizes the
complexity, dynamism and entirety of the system, as well
as the interconnected and multifaceted relationships between
the system components [42] [43]. Systems thinking arose
in the early 20th century and now has been used to the
diverse research ﬁelds, such as public health, environmental
protection, urban management and international relationship.
Nowadays, a tiny amount of researchers attempt to implement
this systems thinking to the cybersecurity study [6] [7].
In our opinion, the best study for ﬁnest and resilient
cybersecurity modeling needs to consider the systems thinking
approaches at this stage. On the one hand, systems thinking
for cybersecurity does not only treat a particular area of cy-
berspace, but allows for the cybersecurity of the whole entity.
This holistic approach to cybersecurity is more readily able
to identify and understand the cybersecurity system, describe
the interaction among cyberspace components, predict the
evolution of cybersecurity actually and help us address the
cybersecurity issues effectively [6]. Systems thinking helps
broaden the cybersecurity study scope to integrate people,
environment, government and other vital aspects. On the
other hand, unlike the traditional enumerative and analyt-
ical methods, which focus the linear and static causality
from an individual perspective, systems thinking emphasizes
on the complexity in the interaction of constituents of the
cyber system. Despite conventional approaches have made
signiﬁcant achievements in network security technology and
cryptology, e.g., detection & prevention technology and public
key cryptography [33], these traditional approaches are not
enough for us to depict, characterize and predict the cyberse-
curity issue and its evolution. In this systems perspective, the
purpose of cybersecurity modeling is to promote the whole
security situation of cyberspace rather just deal with a speciﬁc
technological challenge. This requires us to apply the systems
thinking to gain insight into cybersecurity from a holistic
perspective, rather complement the conventional approach in
some deﬁciencies. Thus, this radical shift in cybersecurity
modeling is requisite.
B. Systems Theories and Methods
Cybersecurity modeling is a scientiﬁc way to make the
cybersecurity and its related activities to represent, deﬁne,
quantify and understand easier. For one proper research, in our
view, the model is as equally signiﬁcant as the experimentation
and results analysis [44]. Thus, one of the difﬁculties in sys-
tems thinking for cybersecurity modeling is which theories and
scientiﬁc methods should be most applicable in the cyberse-
curity model, with respective with different research scenarios
and purposes. Systems thinking provides a logical method
to view the cybersecurity from the guidance of the systems
theories, such as system theory, cybernetics and game theory,
to the assistance and analysis of relevant scientiﬁc methods,
such as network analysis, dynamics and agent modeling from
the particular perspective.
Table I lists a few typical theories and scientiﬁc methods
often used in the cybersecurity models brieﬂy. There are
many theories in systems thinking which refer to a set of
contemplative and rational type of thinking, ideas and princi-
ples from a speciﬁc perspective. Meanwhile, a wide range of
scientiﬁc methods are applied to establish the system models,
understand the interactions among multiple actors, analyze the
phenomena, ﬁnd the explanations and predict the future. Thus,
the theories and methods in one proper research are needed to
tackle with speciﬁc complex cybersecurity issues.
C. Relevant Stakeholders in Cybersecurity
At the center of the cybersecurity system, stakeholder
involves all aspects of the cybersecurity. They are not only
the ties between all sub-systems in cybersecurity, but also act
the driving force of cybersecurity. One of the vital aspects in
systems thinking for cybersecurity modeling revolves around
who are the relevant stakeholders in cybersecurity and how
these stakeholders interact.
Not all stakeholders in cyberspace required to be consid-
ered in cybersecurity modeling. Table II lists four typical
stakeholder clusters. Relevant stakeholders in the cybersecurity
may include: government agencies; academia, standardization
information security enterprises, private sectors, infrastructures
(8)Feedback
(7)Implementation
(9)Validation 
(6)Solution
Practice
Inference
Real 
World
(1)Hypothesis
(2)Observation
Data-/event-/case-
driven Study
Problem-driven
Study
Goal-
directed
Study
Technical Study
(3)Complem-
entation
Mathematical
Modeling
Empirical 
Modeling
Fig. 2. An illustrative example of systems thinking approach for cybersecurity modeling
and users. Each group of stakeholders can be considered to act
as the sub-system, which has its own role in cybersecurity.
IV. AN EXAMPLE OF SYSTEMS FRAMEWORK FOR
CYBERSECURITY MODELING
Currently, cybersecurity researchers usually establish the
cybersecurity model based on research ﬁelds with which they
are familiar. In this section, we provide a typical systems
framework for cybersecurity modeling in Fig.2. This schematic
framework outlines ﬁve essential elements:
• Real World includes both the physical and virtual as-
pects of both the cyberspace. It not only includes the
embodiment of concepts, parameters and equations in the
mathematical model, but also provides the observations
for the empirical models, such as data, events and cases.
• Mathematical Modeling is a type of theoretical approach
to translating the behavior of the cybersecurity system
into exact formulations by mathematical concepts and
language. The mathematical model aims to represent what
is the real-world cybersecurity problem and how the
cybersecurity system evolves.
• Empirical Modeling is a typical study approach es-
tablished from observations of cybersecurity system by
measuring the system outputs, such as relevant data,
security event or cyberattack case. Its goals include
ﬁnding out the empirical rule or characterization of the
real observation, depicting the current network security
situation and estimating the probabilistic future trends.
• Inference refers to the process of concluding by a series
of analytical methods and tools. Driven by the speciﬁc
issue in cybersecurity, the inference is a purposive action,
which aims to ﬁnd the optimal methods and solution for
the real cybersecurity.
• Practice is a process of study, development and imple-
mentation of the real cybersecurity solution under the
guidance of analytic results. This belongs to one aspect of
the technical study, which aims to covert the theoretical
analysis to the real cybersecurity techniques or tools, and
then apply to the real cyberspace scenario.
Mathematical models and empirical models are two signiﬁ-
cant aspects of cybersecurity modeling. A mathematical model
is an abstraction or simpliﬁcation of a real-world cybersecurity
system and scenario, and mathematical modeling is one of the
processes to perform this abstraction and simpliﬁcation from
the real-world cybersecurity by various mathematical tools.
Notably, both the mathematical modeling and its future analy-
sis are based on the hypotheses for the basic framework of the
models (Step (1)) [5]. Then, one of the most challenges in this
modeling is to ﬁnd an appropriate mathematical language to
establish this framework, including the mathematical equation,
variables, function and so on [9]. Empirical modeling mainly
depends on empirical data in cybersecurity, such as security
events, cyberattack cases, experiment results, observed and
obtained from the real-world cybersecurity (Step(2)) [45].
Without the speciﬁc theory and mathematical equation, this
model is challenging to adopt the theoretical analysis. How-
ever, the hypothesized laws and equations in mathematical
models describe the idealized system-level or network-level
situations and often fail to apply to the complex cyber-level
situation. The empirical model is considered as the highly
feasible approach in cybersecurity modeling. Although these
two modeling approaches seems different owing to the dif-
ferent perspective, they can complement each other (Step(3)).
The empirical data are the signiﬁcant source in mathematical
modeling, while the mathematical model, in turn, can help
reﬁne the empirical model.
The mathematical modeling and empirical modeling help
to translate the complex cybersecurity environment into a
descriptive model, which is easy for researchers to deﬁne,
understand and infer by relevant knowledge. Next, researchers
need to analyze the cybersecurity models further and explore
the solutions to the speciﬁc cybersecurity issue. Deduction
(Step (4)) always begins with the assumptions, axioms and
equations in the mathematical models. The conclusion from
deduction follows with certainty if the premise meets the
observations of the real-world. By contrast, the inductive infer-
ence (Step (5)) is directly derived from empirical observations
of the real world. For example, the efﬁcient defense measure
to the current typical cyberattack is no guarantee against
encountering the new one [9]. Based on the above inferences,
the solutions or tools to the speciﬁc cybersecurity issue (Step
(6)) are proposed and then implemented to tackle with the
real-world cybersecurity (Step (7)).
As mentioned in Section II, it is too difﬁcult to predict
the effects of the solution from the analytic inference and
its implementation because the real-world cybersecurity is
complex and subtle. Therefore, an entire cybersecurity model
needs the feedback from cyberspace (Step (8)) [23], adds the
validation to the analytic inference method (Step (9)) and
ﬁnally provides the improvement to both the mathematical and
empirical modeling (Step (10) and (11)). The cybersecurity
model and its analytic inference can help guide the practice
in cyberspace, in turn, the feedback from the cybersecurity
practice can verify the validity of the analysis and improve
the current models.
V. CONCLUSION
Systems thinking allows us to think about cybersecurity
modeling in a holistic and rational perspective. On the one
hand, systems thinking provides a conceptual blueprint or
framework for cybersecurity, where the components, factors
and environments are integrated dynamically. The cyberse-
curity modeling with the systems approach helps us better
understand and characterize the cybersecurity issues, such
as unpredictability, complexity, emergence, asymmetry and
dynamics, which are often ignored in most the current cyberse-
curity study. On other hand, through a set of analytic methods
and real tools in modeling, inference and practice, systems
thinking offers an innovative and universe roadmap to solve
the speciﬁc cybersecurity problems, so that we can not only
obtain the theoretical conclusion and the corresponding real-
world solutions, but also validate the analytic conclusion and
then improve the theoretical model. In this paper, despite we
highlight that systems thinking should be the necessary foun-
dation for cybersecurity modeling, the cybersecurity modeling
with systems thinking still has a long way to go.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Craigen, N. Diakun-Thibault, and R. Purse, “Deﬁning cybersecurity,”
Technology Innovation Management Review, vol. 4, no. 10, 2014.
[2] H. Al-Mohannadi, Q. Mirza, A. Namanya, I. Awan, A. Cullen, and
J. Disso, “Cyber-attack modeling analysis techniques: An overview,” in
2016 IEEE 4th International Conference on Future Internet of Things
and Cloud Workshops (FiCloudW).
IEEE, 2016, pp. 69–76.
[3] X. Koutsoukos, G. Karsai, A. Laszka, H. Neema, B. Potteiger, P. Vol-
gyesi, Y. Vorobeychik, and J. Sztipanovits, “Sure: A modeling and
simulation integration platform for evaluation of secure and resilient
cyber–physical systems,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 106, no. 1, pp.
93–112, 2017.
[4] R.-R. Xi, X.-C. Yun, Y.-Z. Zhang, and Z.-Y. Hao, “An improved
quantitative evaluation method for network security,” Chinese Journal
of Computers, vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 749–758, 2015.
[5] C. Herley and P. C. Van Oorschot, “Sok: Science, security and the elusive
goal of security as a scientiﬁc pursuit,” in 2017 IEEE Symposium on
Security and Privacy (SP).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 99–120.
[6] W. Young and N. Leveson, “Systems thinking for safety and security,”
in Proceedings of the 29th Annual Computer Security Applications
Conference.
ACM, 2013, pp. 1–8.
[7] H. M. Salim, “Cyber safety: A systems thinking and systems theory
approach to managing cyber security risks,” Ph.D. dissertation, Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology, 2014.
[8] E. National Academies of Sciences, Medicine et al., Foundational Cy-
bersecurity Research: Improving Science, Engineering, and Institutions.
National Academies Press, 2017.
[9] J. M. Spring, T. Moore, and D. Pym, “Practicing a science of security:
a philosophy of science perspective,” in Proceedings of the 2017 New
Security Paradigms Workshop.
ACM, 2017, pp. 1–18.
[10] P. W. Phister Jr, “Cyberspace: The ultimate complex adaptive system,”
OFFICE OF THE ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE WASH-
INGTON DC COMMAND AND , Tech. Rep., 2011.
[11] E. Rzeszutko and W. Mazurczyk, “Insights from nature for cybersecu-
rity,” Health security, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 82–87, 2015.
[12] D. M. Dunlavy, B. Hendrickson, and T. G. Kolda, “Mathematical
challenges in cybersecurity,” Sandia Report, February, 2009.
[13] R. Armstrong, J. Mayo, and F. Siebenlist, “Complexity science chal-
lenges in cybersecurity,” Sandia National Laboratories SAND Report,
2009.
[14] A. Oltramari, D. S. Henshel, M. Cains, and B. Hoffman, “Towards a
human factors ontology for cyber security.” in STIDS, 2015, pp. 26–33.
[15] S.
Xu,
“Emergent
behavior
in
cybersecurity,”
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:1502.05102, 2015.
[16] ——, “Cybersecurity dynamics,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.05100,
2015.
[17] D. Yan, F. Liu, Y. Zhang, and K. Jia, “Dynamical model for individ-
ual defence against cyber epidemic attacks,” Iet Information Security,
vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 541–551, 2019.
[18] K. Geers, “The challenge of cyber attack deterrence,” Computer Law &
Security Review, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 298–303, 2010.
[19] G. L. Cai, B. S. Wang, H. U. Wei, and T. Z. Wang, “Moving target
defense:state of the art and characteristics,” Frontiers of Information
Technology and Electronic Engineering, vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 1122–1153,
2016.
[20] S. M. Tisdale, “Cybersecurity: Challenges from a systems, complexity,
knowledge management and business intelligence perspective.” Issues
in Information Systems, vol. 16, no. 3, 2015.
[21] M. H. Manshaei, Q. Zhu, T. Alpcan, T. Bacs¸ar, and J.-P. Hubaux, “Game
theory meets network security and privacy,” ACM Computing Surveys
(CSUR), vol. 45, no. 3, p. 25, 2013.
[22] C. T. Do, N. H. Tran, C. Hong, C. A. Kamhoua, K. A. Kwiat, E. Blasch,
S. Ren, N. Pissinou, and S. S. Iyengar, “Game theory for cyber security
and privacy,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 50, no. 2, p. 30,
2017.
[23] M. D. Adams, S. D. Hiteﬁeld, B. Hoy, M. C. Fowler, and T. C. Clancy,
“Application of cybernetics and control theory for a new paradigm in
cybersecurity,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1311.0257, 2013.
[24] T. Vinnakota, “A cybernetics paradigms framework for cyberspace:
Key lens to cybersecurity,” in 2013 IEEE International Conference
on Computational Intelligence and Cybernetics (CYBERNETICSCOM).
IEEE, 2013, pp. 85–91.
[25] B. K. Wiederhold, “The role of psychology in enhancing cybersecurity,”
2014.
[26] J. L. Marble, W. F. Lawless, R. Mittu, J. Coyne, M. Abramson, and
C. Sibley, “The human factor in cybersecurity: Robust & intelligent
defense,” in Cyber Warfare.
Springer, 2015, pp. 173–206.
[27] M. Anwar, W. He, I. Ash, X. Yuan, L. Li, and L. Xu, “Gender dif-
ference and employees’ cybersecurity behaviors,” Computers in Human
Behavior, vol. 69, pp. 437–443, 2017.
[28] R. Zheng, W. Lu, and S. Xu, “Active cyber defense dynamics exhibiting
rich phenomena,” in Proceedings of the 2015 Symposium and Bootcamp
on the Science of Security.
ACM, 2015, p. 2.
[29] R. J. La, “Role of network topology in cybersecurity,” in 53rd IEEE
Conference on Decision and Control.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 5290–5295.
[30] R. E. Pino, Network science and cybersecurity.
Springer, 2014.
[31] J. M. Such, N. Criado, L. Vercouter, and M. Rehak, “Intelligent cyber-
security agents [guest editors’ introduction],” IEEE Intelligent Systems,
vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 3–7, 2016.
[32] G. B. White, E. A. Fisch, and U. W. Pooch, Computer system and
network security.
CRC press, 2017.
[33] W. Stallings, Cryptography and network security: principles and prac-
tice.
Pearson Upper Saddle River, 2017.
[34] Verizon. (2018) 2018 data breach investigations report.
[35] D. Yan, F. Liu, Y. Zhang, K. Jia, and Y. Zhang, “Characterizing the
optimal attack strategy decision in cyber epidemic attacks with limited
resources,” in International Conference on Science of Cyber Security.
Springer, 2018, pp. 65–80.
[36] S. McLaughlin, C. Konstantinou, X. Wang, L. Davi, A.-R. Sadeghi,
M. Maniatakos, and R. Karri, “The cybersecurity landscape in industrial
control systems,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 104, no. 5, pp. 1039–
1057, 2016.
[37] D. Yan, F. Liu, and K. Jia, “Modeling an information-based advanced
persistent threat attack on the internal network,” in ICC 2019-2019 IEEE
International Conference on Communications (ICC).
IEEE, 2019, pp.
1–7.
[38] M. Ask, P. Bondarenko, J. E. Rekdal, A. Nordbø, P. Bloemerus, and
D. Piatkivskyi, “Advanced persistent threat (apt) beyond the hype,”
Project Report in IMT4582 Network Security at GjoviN University
College, 2013.
[39] G. Liang, S. R. Weller, J. Zhao, F. Luo, and Z. Y. Dong, “The 2015
ukraine blackout: Implications for false data injection attacks,” IEEE
Transactions on Power Systems, vol. PP, no. 99, pp. 1–1, 2016.
[40] M. Pendleton, R. Garcia-Lebron, J. H. Cho, and S. Xu, “A survey on
systems security metrics,” Acm Computing Surveys, vol. 49, no. 4, p. 62,
2016.
[41] R. D. Arnold and J. P. Wade, “A deﬁnition of systems thinking: a systems
approach,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 44, pp. 669–678, 2015.
[42] D. De Savigny and T. Adam, Systems thinking for health systems
strengthening.
World Health Organization, 2009.
[43] S. Xia, X.-N. Zhou, and J. Liu, “Systems thinking in combating
infectious diseases,” Infectious diseases of poverty, vol. 6, no. 1, p. 144,
2017.
[44] V. D. Veksler, N. Buchler, B. E. Hoffman, D. N. Cassenti, C. Sample,
and S. Sugrim, “Simulations in cybersecurity: A review of cognitive
modeling of network attackers, defenders, and users,” Frontiers in
psychology, vol. 9, p. 691, 2018.
[45] C. Herley and P. C. Van Oorschot, “Science of security: Combining
theory and measurement to reﬂect the observable,” IEEE Security &
Privacy, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 12–22, 2018.
