Title: To Patch or Not to Patch: Motivations, Challenges, and Implications for Cybersecurity
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2502.17703v1
--------------------------------------------------

arXiv:2502.17703v1  [cs.CR]  24 Feb 2025
To Patch or Not to Patch: Motivations,
Challenges, and Implications for Cybersecurity
Jason R.C. Nurse[0000−0003−4118−1680]
Institute of Cyber Security for Society and School of Computing,
University of Kent, Kent, UK
j.r.c.nurse@kent.ac.uk
Abstract. As technology has become more embedded into our society,
the security of modern-day systems is paramount. One topic which is
constantly under discussion is that of patching, or more speciﬁcally, the
installation of updates that remediate security vulnerabilities in soft-
ware or hardware systems. This continued deliberation is motivated by
complexities involved with patching; in particular, the various incen-
tives and disincentives for organizations and their cybersecurity teams
when deciding whether to patch. In this paper, we take a fresh look at
the question of patching and critically explore why organizations and
IT/security teams choose to patch or decide against it (either explicitly
or due to inaction). We tackle this question by aggregating and synthe-
sizing prominent research and industry literature on the incentives and
disincentives for patching, speciﬁcally considering the human aspects in
the context of these motives. Through this research, this study identi-
ﬁes key motivators such as organizational needs, the IT/security team’s
relationship with vendors, and legal and regulatory requirements placed
on the business and its staﬀ. There are also numerous signiﬁcant reasons
discovered for why the decision is taken not to patch, including limited re-
sources (e.g., person-power), challenges with manual patch management
tasks, human error, bad patches, unreliable patch management tools,
and the perception that related vulnerabilities would not be exploited.
These disincentives, in combination with the motivators above, highlight
the diﬃcult balance that organizations and their security teams need to
maintain on a daily basis. Finally, we conclude by discussing implications
of these ﬁndings and important future considerations.
Keywords: Patching · Vulnerabilities · Security Updates · Human As-
pects · Decision-making in Cybersecurity · Cyber Resilience · Generative
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (GenAI) · AI for Cybersecurity
1
Introduction
Cyber-attacks can originate from any location across the world and impact busi-
nesses, organizations, governments, and individuals. Ransomware, for instance,
is currently one of the most signiﬁcant threats and a key reason for its promi-
nence is the challenge of identifying, capturing, and prosecuting geographically
2
J.R.C. Nurse
dispersed attackers [38,43]. Another reason why threats such as ransomware, re-
mote code execution and attacks on cloud environments are increasing in promi-
nence is the fact that a large number of technology systems possess vulnerabili-
ties [16,58]. Disclosed vulnerabilities have increased signiﬁcantly over time with
several reasons cited, including: strong competition by technology vendors lead-
ing to shorter product development and testing lifecycles; the large amount of
outdated and legacy systems still continuously in use; a lack of regulation and leg-
islation pertaining to vulnerabilities and software defects; more complex systems
(e.g., the Internet of Things and cyber-physical system (CPS) advances [52]); and
malevolent actors investing more resources into vulnerability research [23].
While existing but yet to be discovered vulnerabilities (zero-days) clearly pose
a challenge, known (and disclosed) vulnerabilities also raise several issues. In an
ideal world, as vulnerabilities are disclosed, product vendors and software devel-
opers would notify those who possess the systems and provide timely patches.
Patches are deﬁned as updates that act to remediate security vulnerabilities or
ﬁx bugs or other errors in a system. The patching of systems has become such a
signiﬁcant event and undertaking that in order to allow organizations across the
world to prepare for updates, Microsoft (and others) instituted ‘Patch Tuesday’
and it has been one of the most anticipated days for security and IT professionals
each month.
The challenge, however, is that we do not live in an ideal world and often
patches issued to system and product owners (be they in business, government,
or are members of the public) are not implemented. To take the example of the
WannaCry ransomware attack of 2017; this attack resulted in reports of at least
45 UK NHS hospital groups unable to use their IT systems and having to cancel
appointments, surgeries, and divert patients [44]. A subsequent National Audit
Oﬃce investigation into the attack found that it could have been prevented – or
at least its impact minimised – had organizations implemented “basic IT security
best practice”, including activities such as patching IT systems as directed by
NHS Digital [44]. This failure to act on security patches is not isolated and
can be seen in various other incidents including the substantial data breach at
Equifax in 2017 [63], and the concerns regarding the Log4j vulnerability in 2021
and MOVEit vulnerability in 2023 [48]. In fact, new research has found that
25% of high-risk Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVEs) are exploited
on the day of their publication [1].
A pertinent question therefore is, why do organizations and cybersecurity
teams fail to patch when notiﬁed given it is often in their interest to protect
themselves as best as possible. One reason frequently quoted is that of the po-
tential adverse eﬀects, a particularly salient point after the recent CrowdStrike
incident where a defective patch resulted in widespread system outages [12]. In
research and practice, there have been several articles exploring the incentives for
patching as well as the disincentives. The diﬃculty nevertheless is that this work
scattered across academic studies, industry reports, and government documents,
and it rarely considers the human aspects perspective. In this paper, we seek to
tackle this challenge by aggregating and synthesizing prominent research in the
Incentives and Disincentives to Patching
3
ﬁeld to provide a topical review on the incentives and disincentives for patch-
ing. This critical review pays special attention to the human aspects perspective
and how it impacts these motives. The remainder of this paper is structured as
follows: Section 2 provides a brief overview of pertinent background on patch-
ing and its importance. Section 3 explores the incentives for patching, including
practices and motives which cause organizations to patch their infrastructure. In
Section 4, we concentrate on the disincentives for patching and identify primary
factors which lead to organizations not updating their systems or failing to do
so in a timely fashion. Finally, Section 5 reﬂects on the previous sections, their
implications and important future considerations, while Section 6 concludes this
article.
2
Patching: Nature and Context
Various entities (or groups of individuals) are involved in the identiﬁcation, dis-
closure, and remediation of vulnerabilities. First, there is the product vendor or
developer; this group is responsible for creating the product and issuing updates
as vulnerabilities are identiﬁed. Next is the group involved in identifying vulner-
abilities, for instance, these may be sanctioned security researchers (e.g., internal
to vendors, or those emerging through bug bounty or vulnerability disclosure pro-
grams) or malicious actors (e.g., nation states or cybercriminal gangs). Product
owners, are the ﬁnal primary group and are those who use a vendor’s products
and are responsible for implementing any patches issued. In an organization,
this last group may be deconstructed even further to consider product owners
and the employees who actually use the product; for example, an employee who
uses cybersecurity software (e.g., a VPN) purchased by their organization (i.e.,
the product owner). Frei et al. provide a succinct overview of the interaction
between these groups including the various possible pathways from vulnerability
discovery to disclosure, patching and exploitation [27].
A topic central to understanding why organizations – and particularly, their
IT/security staﬀ– apply or fail to apply patches is the patch management life-
cycle itself. This involves identifying vulnerable technologies within the organi-
zation, deploying and installing the patches, and ongoing monitoring for patch
compliance. While there are several ways to present this process, Dissanayake et
al. [20] suitably contextualize it within the overall vulnerability and patch time-
line. They deﬁne essential tasks for security and IT teams as patch information
retrieval, vulnerability scanning, assessment and prioritization, patch testing,
patch deployment, and post-deployment patch veriﬁcation. Each of these activ-
ities is critical for organizations to perform and require IT and security staﬀto
have a comprehensive inventory of their systems, tools to scan for the identiﬁed
vulnerabilities, environments to test patches prior to deployment, and policies
regarding deployment to production services and to engage in later patch veriﬁ-
cation. Moreover, these activities are time-critical given that the longer patches
take to be implemented, the more time attackers have to exploit the related
vulnerabilities.
4
J.R.C. Nurse
There have been, and continue to be, various examples of attackers using
publicized but unpatched vulnerabilities to launch their attacks; even the scan-
ning for these vulnerabilities by attackers continues for periods after patches
have been released [11]. This problem has been exacerbated by the advent of
generative artiﬁcial intelligence (GenAI) systems and Large language models
(LLMs) (e.g., ChatGPT, Claude, CoPilot, Gemini, etc.) as they are able to an-
alyze systems for vulnerabilities and even exploit zero-days [17,24,64]. Another
related and popular example of such scanning is the REvil cybercriminal group
who reportedly exploited a vulnerability in Kaseya VSA software at the time
that the organization was actively developing a patch [32]. The reality therefore
is that patching (quickly) remains an important task for organizations and their
security/IT teams as attackers are activity aiming to exploit such weaknesses.
This, however, does not always occur, hence our goal of exploring this topic
further based on industry and academic literature in the subsequent sections.
3
The Incentives that Support the Decision to Patch
The question of why security/IT teams make the active decision to patch their
organization’s systems is a simple, yet complex one. To consider this, we ﬁrst
call attention to the diﬀerent pertinent stakeholders involved: the organization
itself (including IT/security teams), the vendors (inclusive of developers) that it
purchases products from, the organization’s business partners and clients, and
the legal/regulatory jurisdictions that the enterprise operates in. Each of these
can have an impact on decisions regarding patching.
To begin with the organization, patching as an activity is directly in the inter-
est of the IT/security personnel and wider enterprise teams because it helps to se-
cure the company against vulnerability exploits. A primary technique that threat
actors use to compromise systems is unpatched vulnerabilities [44]; therefore, this
acts to mitigate related attack vectors. Although cybersecurity may arguably still
be intangible and a challenge for many organizations, the ﬁnancial and reputa-
tional impacts/harms that would result from a successful breach [5,10,42], are
salient. This may mean, for instance, that in the interest of self-preservation,
concerns about ﬁnances or reputational damage can serve as key motivators for
companies to addressing security concerns, such as patches. These factors can be
central to any proposals that security teams may need to make to their business
colleagues if there are internal deliberations about whether to apply a patch. In
addition to the security it provides, related beneﬁts to patching have also been
cited in minimizing the organization’s downtime in the medium-to-long term,
under the assumption that falling victim to a cyber-attack will result in a longer
period of unavailable services [20]. This, of course, is a delicate argument to
make considering that patching itself also often requires downtime; however, the
length of downtime and its predictability are likely to be better compared to a
security breach. This is an argument that security professionals can use in en-
gaging with their enterprise counterparts as part of a business case for patching
for instance.
Incentives and Disincentives to Patching
5
For IT/security staﬀ, another enabler to the patching of systems is the avail-
ability of more eﬃcient and eﬀective processes and tools to allow it. Tools like
automated patching [21], albeit not perfect, can signiﬁcantly reduce many of the
challenges to patching for security teams; in one study, 76% of organizations used
some form of automated patching and 46% used live patching [61]. The wider roll
out of these processes and tools may therefore assist IT/security personnel even
further in addressing the patch management tasks at hand. Another beneﬁt is
that as a precursor to determining which systems are vulnerable, the tools need
to ﬁnd and scan all endpoints on a network. Prior to any patching therefore,
this action can already help to detect endpoints and systems that administra-
tors may have previously been unaware of. More generally, our also highlighted
that automated patching, for instance, has been promoted due to its ability to
allow organizations to better comply with data protection regulations [49].
Legal and regulatory requirements, business partners, and clients are an-
other signiﬁcant incentive for patching. Over the last decade, governments have
become more stringent regarding the security requirements placed on organiza-
tions as evidenced by the EU’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR),
NIS Directives, new US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) cybersecu-
rity rules, NIST Cybersecurity Framework, and NCSC’s Cyber Essentials. Many
of these regulations and standards have provisions for maintaining the security
of systems, which directly point to the need for timely patching. Undoubtedly,
for many security teams especially those that work in heavily regulated sec-
tors such as ﬁnance and healthcare, the directive to follow these regulations and
standards will suﬃce. In other cases, however, businesses may ignore these either
intentionally due to lack of resources, or unintentionally due to lack of awareness,
until they have no other choice. For instance, it is noteworthy that despite its
wide publicity and it being used as a pre-requisite to apply for some government
contracts, the awareness of (and adherence to) the ﬁve-control Cyber Essentials
scheme is still below 30% in 2024 in the UK [22].
There has also been an increase in international government-initiated eﬀorts
to notify organizations about key vulnerabilities and nudge them towards in-
stalling patches. One example is the Joint Cybersecurity Advisory in 2023 by
the UK’s NCSC, US’ CISA and FBI, and Australia’s ACSC on the top rou-
tinely exploited vulnerabilities [47]. This advisory complements existing national
advisories and alerts issued by these national cybersecurity bodies separately.
An noteworthy development pertaining to how governments engage regarding
patches was the emergency directive by CISA on the 17 December 2021 ordering
federal agencies to investigate and patch their systems against the Log4j vul-
nerability by the 23 December 2021 [14]. This directive speaks directly to those
impacted and requires organizations and their IT/security teams to patch, and
report on the update status to CISA (by the 28 December 2021).
The US’ FTC also subsequently released a warning for organizations to ad-
dress the vulnerability or face the consequences: “The FTC intends to use its full
legal authority to pursue companies that fail to take reasonable steps to protect
consumer data from exposure as a result of Log4j, or similar known vulnerabil-
6
J.R.C. Nurse
ities in the future” [28]. It also then cited Equifax’s failure to patch, the later
impact on 147 million consumers, and the $700 million settlement, as an example
of what can happen to organizations who fail to comply. Such prompts center on
cybersecurity teams and business leaders, as they can provide the ‘push’ incentive
for leaders to prioritize patching even though it may have a short-term impact on
productivity or services. Since that CISA directive, there have been several more
with the most recent in 2024 pertaining to mitigating vulnerabilities in software
from Ivanti [15]. In the UK, similar directives are not as present. However, there
are various examples of public reprimands by the Information Commissioner’s
Oﬃce (ICO). One poignant example is the reprimand of the London Borough
of Hackney after it’s data breach for actions such as the fact that it, “failed
to ensure that a security patch management system was actively applied to all
devices”[31]. These very public notices seek to nudge organizations—here, local
government councils—towards better cybersecurity practices (or face the risk of
similar reprimands and potential ﬁnes).
The aforementioned actions by CISA and the FTC seek to mandate cer-
tain behavior and will have had an impact on organizations (though there is,
at this point, little data available to investigate this). If we consider this dis-
cussion more broadly however, there is an argument that these mandates were
only released due to the signiﬁcance of the vulnerability, coupled with the fact
that many enterprises may not be aware that they use Log4j and thus may be
vulnerable. This is, therefore, unlikely to be standard practice which means that
many lower-impact vulnerabilities (be it in number of organizations impacted
or exploits possible from the vulnerability) would fail to be directly mandated
and instead limited to alert/advisory status if covered at all. Potentially in re-
sponse to concerns such as this, the ACSC has taken the pre-emptive approach
to recommend timeframes for various types of patches. For example, to mitigate
advanced cyber threats to internet-facing services, it recommends that patches
be installed within two weeks, or within 48 hours if an exploit exists [2]. This
guide directs businesses on best practice (as seen by ACSC) for patching in a
simple, straightforward document. A clear report articulated in this way is likely
to be well-received given the wider complexity around patching, however, it re-
mains to be seen whether the recommended timescales are always appropriate.
Business partners and clients can inﬂuence a company’s decisions to patch,
primarily through supply chain agreements (and service-level agreements (SLAs))
and contracts. The rise in supply chain attacks over the last decade has resulted
in an increased level of attention to the security of all supply chain parties.
Current guidance from bodies such as SANS and insight from academic re-
search suggest that organizations in supply chains require others to implement
deﬁned security controls, adhere to security monitoring requirements, and notify
of breaches or incidents amongst other actions [41,55]. It is conceivable there-
fore that as a part of these contracts and agreements the timely remediation of
vulnerabilities via patching is contractually required. On this topic, it is also pru-
dent to mention the inﬂuence of other third parties such as business and cyber
insurance providers and even ﬁnancial institutions such as banks/lenders. The
Incentives and Disincentives to Patching
7
inﬂuence that cyber insurance companies, in particular, have on the cybersecu-
rity practices of organizations (inclusive of Small-to-Medium-sized Enterprises
(SMEs)) has been demonstrated in prior work [4,3], and therefore this may be
another area where positive pressure may be applied.
Vendors also have a key part to play in encouraging good patch management
in organizations. The primary need from their perspective is to provide timely
and robust patches, with suitable documentation for organizations to follow.
CISA and NIST further suggest that tools should also be provided to support
at each stage of the deployment and testing cycle [13]. This ensures that orga-
nizations possess all the guidance needed to remediate vulnerabilities as quickly
and eﬀectively as possible. A positive patching experience for an IT/security
team can have a signiﬁcant impact on future decisions to patch; this is also why
patches that are slow, diﬃcult to implement, or cause unforeseen problems are
so reputationally damaging to the notion of patching.
Considering the central role of vendors, we also explored research pertain-
ing to how this stakeholder group engaged with the vulnerability disclosure and
patching process. In one early study, it was found that vendors are signiﬁcantly
more likely to release patches faster in instances where vulnerabilities are dis-
closed to them and the public at the same time [8]. The public disclosure of
vulnerabilities is a highly contentious topic, with arguments for it (e.g., it nudges
vendors to release of patches quicker) and against it (e.g., it provides attackers
with an unnecessary advantage). The study also found that open-source vendors
patch faster than closed source organizations (a ﬁnding also supported by other
work ), and that vendors respond to (patch) vulnerabilities quicker if they are
disclosed by CERT (or similar authoritative institutions). The latter of these
points is noteworthy and highlights the key role that such bodies play in nudg-
ing vendors to release faster (and ideally higher quality) patches which then
inﬂuences how organizations engage with (e.g., the trust they place in, the speed
of implementation of) their own internal patching processes.
Other research makes a similar point and notes that when there are legislative
pressures, vendors patch vulnerabilities faster [59]. This is signiﬁcant for legisla-
tors and those that inﬂuence policy—a key caveat nonetheless is that a quicker
release of a low-quality patch may also have a substantial negative impact. In
considering these ﬁndings, readers should note that the two studies above are
both quite dated and may not represent the current state of play; unfortunately,
these articles are the most recent academic work that we could ﬁnd investigating
this speciﬁc topic. This clearly represents a gap in current research that should
be addressed.
Finally, some literature has considered how to motivate individuals (i.e., the
ultimate end users) to install updates and patches. While this is not based di-
rectly at the organizational level, it is within the remit of human aspects and
given that non-IT staﬀin organizations have an inﬂuence on whether a patch is
installed or not on their local devices, they may refuse to install updates. Recom-
mendations target various areas including suggesting that updates/patches be
installed at convenient times (e.g., over lunch), an emphasis on education, trans-
8
J.R.C. Nurse
parency and communication, and highlighting the beneﬁts/value [25,26]. They
also consider more punitive approaches such as revoking access of those who do
not update, making activities/support diﬃcult (which may also include forcing
updates before the system or application can be used), rating departments based
on update status, and refusing to patch old systems (thus making older systems
less attractive for use, and encourage staﬀto install newer systems). These ap-
proaches all have their pros and cons and will need to acknowledge the nuances
of end users, their needs and context, and the wider organizational (security)
culture [62]. The reality is that although corporate policy typically mandates
certain processes, there are always edge cases that need to be accounted for, be
it the CEO of an organization or a user who has found a way to circumvent
patching in the interest of being more eﬃcient at their work.
4
What Motivates the Decision Not to Patch?
Patching by its nature is a challenging task which often involves a series of
interdependent activities, complex networks, a range of applications, business
processes and people. Yet, patching is critical to cybersecurity and failure to
patch can result in breaches. The data breach of Equifax in 2017 which impacted
147 million individuals provides an poignant case study, which also highlights
the human aspects involved [63]. In their case, organizational teams failed to
deﬁne strategies for patch management, failed to act on vulnerabilities and install
available patches, failed to deﬁne their assets (a prerequisite to understanding
vulnerabilities that may be present), and failed to specify and follow a reliable
process to gather vulnerability and patch information from product vendors—in
this case, it relied on individual software developers. Such failings are, however,
not new and arguably are as a result of the challenging nature of managing and
deploying patches. Other more recent examples of organizations that have not
patched and suﬀered breaches include the LastPass, Electoral Commission and
the London Borough of Hackney [30,31,35].
There are at least ﬁve primary reasons why vulnerabilities are often not
patched [46]. The ﬁrst reason considers the resources needed to patch systems,
e.g., the money, time and person-power required. For some IT/security teams,
resources may not exist to support patch management, or their environments
may be so complex that patch management is a mineﬁeld. If we consider micro
businesses or Small-to-Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs) as an example, their
priorities are often elsewhere, and they are known to struggle with security gen-
erally even lacking dedicated IT/security teams [9,34]. Even if such organizations
want to patch, they may not have the internal skills or expertise to test, imple-
ment and deploy it, or they may not be able to patch in a timely manner. A
best-case scenario in this context is that internal teams work with managed (se-
curity) service provides or adopt software-as-a-service platforms; and that these
providers then handle patching for the SME. This, however, is not always the
case.
Incentives and Disincentives to Patching
9
For larger organizations and IT/security teams who have the person-power,
ﬁnances and time, the challenge instead is often on the alignment of these re-
sources to identify, implement and follow-up patch management tasks in their
extremely complex environments. Equifax is a relevant example of this where
there were numerous mistakes and failures in the process, and there was lit-
tle accountability demonstrated. Further evidence can be seen in the statement
made by their Chief Information Oﬃcer who led the IT department during 2017,
referring to patching as a “lower level responsibility that was six levels down”
from him [63]. The size and complexity of the organization clearly impacted how
signiﬁcant issues such as patching were perceived. This resonates with existing
studies which discovered that over 70% of security professionals found patching
to be too complex and time consuming [33].
Another major challenge facing both small and large organizations and their
IT/security teams is the volume of patches that need to constantly be applied
and the question of what to patch ﬁrst in such situations. These issues have
been identiﬁed within the top four reasons why organizations delay patches [57].
While automated patching tools can help the process, they are not a panacea.
A telling statistic from another industry study was that 72% of respondents
did not apply patches because of the diﬃculty in prioritizing what needs to
be patched [57]. While scoring systems such as CVSS exist and are used to
prioritize vulnerabilities, the reality is that internal teams will will need to pair
these with the impact on an organization’s individual systems/assets to judge
the risk exposure. This additional step can also prove diﬃcult depending on the
internal team’s understanding of their own environment. A clear understanding
of IT, security and business dependencies as well as close relationships between
these teams is therefore also paramount.
The second reason relates to the challenge of knowing an organization’s full
portfolio of assets and their state. This links to the complexity of organizations
and the reality that maintaining an up-to-date understanding of all assets on
a corporate network is a signiﬁcant undertaking for IT/security teams. Orga-
nizations can possess thousands of networked devices, systems and applications
across IT, OT and IoT environments. Siloed systems and dynamic networks
have also been recognized directly as key contributors to this complexity [29].
The widespread move to remote working due to COVID-19 travel and social
restrictions has made these networks even more complicated, which has further
exacerbated the scale of the patch management problem [33]. With these points
in mind, it is unsurprising that cybersecurity schemes such as CIS’s Critical
Security Controls (CSC) spotlight ‘Inventory and Control of Enterprise Assets’
and ‘Inventory and Control of Software Assets’ as the ﬁrst two controls that are
central to organizational security.
The third and fourth reasons acknowledge the risk that accompanies patching
and the signiﬁcant harm that may be caused if patches negatively impact existing
systems and inadvertently cause business disruption. The reason why systems
may be adversely impacted can vary and pertain to issues at the vendor (e.g.,
low quality or untested patch) or the IT/security product owner (e.g., failure to
10
J.R.C. Nurse
implement patch as directed, or absence of other key prerequisite patches or bug
ﬁxes). A notable example of a case where a security patch resulted in signiﬁcant
disruption is the CrowdStrike patch incident in 2024. Here, a defective patch
released by CrowdStrike inadvertently crashed computers across the world and
led to unavailable systems at hospitals, airlines, banks and other businesses; esti-
mates suggest that it costed $5.4bn in the US alone [60]. Separately, although we
were unable to ﬁnd the speciﬁc reason why NHS systems were not patched and
thus were vulnerable to WannaCry [44], it is not inconceivable that concerns re-
garding system availability—given the criticality of their systems—factored into
such a decision. Other studies support this general idea, with some surprisingly
reporting that over half of professionals surveyed believe that patches (when not
properly executed) cause greater risk of instability than a data breach [53].
Inadvertently disrupting systems is a vital concern, but another one is the
reality that some patches may fail to address the series of related vulnerabili-
ties completely, thus requiring further patches. For security teams therefore, this
would mean preparing, testing, installing, and deploying patches for related vul-
nerabilities multiple times. Such eventualities pose clear disincentives for these
teams to want to patch, or to patch in a timely manner. They also impact trust
in the vendor and the patching process.
The ﬁnal reason is that some systems may not be patchable. This may be
due to the vendor no longer publishing updates, the specialized nature of the
product (e.g., medical devices), or responsibility for the product, or its patching,
existing elsewhere. Medical devices and other similarly critical products pose a
particularly diﬃcult challenge regarding patching. These devices are, as to be
expected, thoroughly checked and vetted prior to their sale. However, patching
remote products deployed in various types and conditions of environment can be
uniquely perplexing. In the UK, NHS Digital’s guidance, for instance, notes that
patching medical devices can take three months from the time that a security
patch is available [50]; even this ideal situation presents a clear window for
attackers in a critical national infrastructure service.
Beyond the primary factors reviewed above, research provides some further
insights which complement the points above but also allude to others including
challenges with manual patch management tasks, human error, and the per-
ception that vulnerabilities would not be exploited [57,61]. The perception that
attackers will not exploit vulnerabilities arguably relates to the intangibility of
cyber risk particularly for those not in security teams. However, there is also
some truth to this point as discovered by other work which suggests that the
majority of registered vulnerabilities are not exploited [45]. The position there-
fore is that inaction may be a plausible strategy—less risky than deploying (po-
tentially problematic) patches—assuming that attackers are unlikely to ﬁnd the
vulnerability in that speciﬁc organization.
A related point to those covered above is that of patch management and
monitoring tools; these can support IT/security teams signiﬁcantly in addressing
vulnerabilities quickly. This is especially relevant now that artiﬁcial intelligence
(e.g., GenAI) is being explored more to support the patching process [6,36,37,40].
Incentives and Disincentives to Patching
11
Unfortunately, they themselves may also pose a source of problems. For instance,
it has been noted that patch management tools can give conﬂicting reports
regarding the status of a patch, i.e., one tool states that a system is patched and
another reports that it is not [7]. Additionally, these tools themselves may be
complex to run and even platform speciﬁc. This confusion and diﬃculty is likely
to frustrate IT/security teams and discourage them from adequately engaging
with the patch management process. Compatibility of tools can also lead to other
issues. Automated agents commonly used to provide endpoint protection (e.g.,
on systems that cannot be patched for some reason) are not always allowed to
execute on vendor systems; moreover, running these agents may void support or
warranty agreements [7]. Such interactions been vendors (IT and security) only
succeeds in harming the organization, and potentially forcing staﬀnot to patch
systems for fear of further negative business or supplier impact.
The ﬁnal salient point relates again to vendors and the fact that supply chain
attacks on vendors can further act against the adoption of good patch manage-
ment practices. The attack on SolarWinds, for example, was signiﬁcant, but
especially so because of how a vendor (i.e., SolarWinds) that supplied several
critical organizations (e.g., various businesses worldwide including telecommu-
nications organizations, US Fortune 500 companies, the US Military, and the
Pentagon) was breached, and then used to compromise clients via system up-
dates [18]. This type of situation now presents a signiﬁcant dilemma, where
organizations and IT/security teams should install patches because it is security
best practice but may simultaneously be worried about whether the patches are
legitimate (or, at an extreme, contain malware). This questions the trust placed
in patches and will undoubtedly add to the various other concerns that may lead
to deciding against patching in a timely manner.
5
Discussion and Future Considerations
To maintain the security of organizations and systems, it is a critical activity
for IT/security teams to install security updates. The incentives for patching
are varied and include fulﬁlling legal and regulatory requirements or security-
related requests from business partners, protecting the organization from secu-
rity incidents, the availability of eﬃcient and eﬀective tools to support the patch
management process for security teams, and a positive patching experience for
IT/security personnel, especially as it relates to vendor engagement. Similarly,
there are several reasons why organizations do not, or are disincentivized, to
patch their systems. Our review detailed issues related to the nontrivial resources
(e.g., person-power) needed to implement patches, the complexity of modern-day
technology environments, the volume of patches to apply (and all of varied prior-
ity levels), the risk of inadvertent business interruption, and key human aspects
factors such as reservations about tools meant to support patch management,
the perception by companies (and evidence that suggests) that vulnerabilities
are not often exploited, and potential questions about trust in vendors.
12
J.R.C. Nurse
Comparing the incentives and disincentives there are compelling reasons on
both sides. Legal and regulatory requirements are clearly one of the strongest
ways to nudge organizations to install patches, and in a timely manner. If the
regulation exists, then IT/security teams (driven by corporate guidance) will
have to, in theory, ﬁnd the resources to overcome issues of resourcing and com-
plexity to implement the requisite patches. This may, however, be considered a
more heavy-handed approach and governments may not want to take this route
in a general case, but rather use actions such as mandates for extremely critical
vulnerabilities, such as with the situation with Log4J and CISA. There is also
the innate challenge with mandating any security controls or actions for all of
a nation’s organizations and how this would be actively promoted, checked and
enforced. There have been interesting discussions for several years on the role
of cyber insurance in security and whether this may be a route to incentivize
better security practices; this, however, has yet to materialize [4,39]. Business
partners are another strong avenue to incentivise patching if such partners are
powerful enough to make demands of others in the supply chain, and if they
fully appreciate the threat posed by unpatched partner systems themselves. The
argument therefore is that if key supply chain organizations were successfully
engaged, then they could place certain requirements related to patching into
their service and security agreements with others in their chains.
While there is clearly a strong argument that organizations interested in
self-preservation will install patches (and that this itself, should suﬃce for moti-
vation), this may be directly contested by concerns about the human resources
(time, person-power, technical expertise) needed to implement patches, the com-
plexity of enterprise environments (where patches are to be applied), the po-
tential that patches may disrupt operations (even if it is linked solely to poor
execution or human error), and the perception and reality that only a small
number of vulnerabilities are actively exploited in the wild. Even in cases where
installing patches from a vendor may be possible, mitigation approaches (e.g.,
virtual patching) may be pursued by (already overworked) security teams in-
stead because they are less invasive. Addressing these concerns is diﬃcult and
requires eﬀorts from organizations and vendors. One way forward may be im-
proved tooling that is capable of more eﬀective and eﬃcient automation of patch
management tasks. This could reduce the workload on IT/security teams, both
in understanding the interdependence of aﬀected systems and implementing re-
quired security updates. Automated tools—even those built on generative AI
systems and LLMs [6,37]—have already been highlighted as an enabler to patch
management, but challenges also exist (e.g., conﬂicting reports, vendor stipu-
lations) hence the need for improvements. These challenges make the role of
security teams extremely diﬃcult, and at a time where the industry is facing
serious issues with respect to burnout [54].
Vendors also play a central role in either enabling or complicating the patch
management activities in organizations. As identiﬁed from our review, a positive
patching experience can have a notable impact on an IT/security (or business)
team’s desire (or support) to patch. This would therefore suggest that if ven-
Incentives and Disincentives to Patching
13
dors were to invest more resources into supporting security updates, therefore
producing higher quality patches—as well as patch guidance and deployment
frameworks—in a quicker manner, their uptake may be increased. A notable de-
velopment here is the OASIS Common Security Advisory Framework (CSAF)
which although it relates to vulnerability notiﬁcation is important as it demon-
strates a move by industry towards better communication system to engage with
product owners. Any eﬀorts by vendors to support patch management can help
to address these concerns and others, including those about the lack of trust
product owners have in vendors or concerns about the unintentional business
risks posed by patches.
Although the challenges to producing and releasing timely, high-quality patches
is clearly nontrivial, it is an important requirement to build trust in the patch-
ing process. We also stress that as supply chain attacks become more rampant,
vendors need to increase their protection mechanisms and avoid scenarios where
breaches in vendor systems can subsequently result in malware deployment to
customers via patches and updates. At the very least, such attacks (or the news
of such attacks) will cause internal teams to take longer to install patches (while
they conduct additional testing and vetting), or in the worst case, result in some
teams recommending against patches completely (or opting for complex mitiga-
tions that do not resolve the core problem).
To complement the discussions on incentives and disincentives, there has
been some relevant work directed speciﬁcally at solutions to these intertwined
challenges. For instance, one suggestion has been that when owners or IT staﬀ
within small-to-medium enterprises (SMEs) look to purchase a software product,
they should ﬁrst check if it is available as a service [19]. If available, the service
oﬀering should then be preferred, presumably because this places the responsi-
bility on patching with the provider which may increase the chances of a swifter
implementation of patches. A similar argument can be made for enterprises mak-
ing the use of more cloud computing services given that this may have the same
impact. NIST’s SP 800-40 adds further weight to these points as it suggests
actions such as using managed services instead of software when feasible, and
working with providers who are less likely to create poor, vulnerability-prone
software [51]. These could be reasonable options for security teams assuming
that reliance on a third-party does not led to further, or other problems.
6
Conclusion
Motivating organizations and their IT/security teams to install security patches
on their systems has been a problem for decades. As discussed in this article,
there are various reasons for this reticence but also several factors that highlight
the value of patching and that support the process. If the uptake of patching is
to be increased, key incentive areas should be further emphasized. In particular,
we would suggest enhancing tooling and automation leveraging generative AI
platforms to support the work of cybersecurity staﬀ, better support from and
engagement with vendors, security nudges to organizations leveraged via trusted
14
J.R.C. Nurse
supply chain partners, increased pressure on vendors to deliver products which
are less vulnerable while also producing patches of higher quality, and ﬁnally
if the situation calls for it, appropriate regulation. There may also be the op-
portunity for new systems development paradigms to gain in popularity such
as evergreen IT, with its incremental, iterative updates; thus reducing the likeli-
hood of particularly vulnerable, dated IT systems. There would also be less work
for security teams which helps with workload and other human aspects issues.
In either case however, while patching may be considered by some as a failing
paradigm [56], the reality is that currently it is arguably impossible to create
a perfectly secure system and therefore patching in some form is likely here to
stay.
References
1. Abbasi,
S.:
2023
Threat
Landscape
Year
in
Review:
If
Everything
Is
Critical,
Nothing
Is
(2023),
https://blog.qualys.com/vulnerabilities-threat-
research/2023/12/19/2023-threat-landscape-year-in-review-part-one
2. ACSC:
Patching
Applications
and
Operating
Systems
(2023),
https://www.cyber.gov.au/resources-business-and-government/maintaining-
devices-and-systems/system-hardening-and-administration/system-
administration/patching-applications-and-operating-systems
3. Adriko, R., Nurse, J.R.C.: Cybersecurity, cyber insurance and small-to-medium-
sized enterprises: a systematic Review. Information & Computer Security 32(5),
691–710 (2024)
4. Adriko, R., Nurse, J.R.C.: Does Cyber Insurance promote Cyber Security Best
Practice? An Analysis based on Insurance Application Forms. Digital Threats:
Research and Practice 5(3), 1–39 (2024)
5. Agraﬁotis, I., Nurse, J.R.C., Goldsmith, M., Creese, S., Upton, D.: A taxonomy of
cyber-harms: Deﬁning the impacts of cyber-attacks and understanding how they
propagate. Journal of Cybersecurity 4(1) (2018)
6. Akuthota, V., Kasula, R., Sumona, S.T., Mohiuddin, M., Reza, M.T., Rahman,
M.M.: Vulnerability detection and monitoring using llm. In: IEEE 9th International
Women in Engineering (WIE) Conference on Electrical and Computer Engineering
(WIECON-ECE). pp. 309–314. IEEE (2023)
7. Alexiou, S.: Practical patch management and mitigation. ISACA Journal 3 (2019)
8. Arora, A., Krishnan, R., Telang, R., Yang, Y.: An empirical analysis of software
vendors’ patch release behavior: impact of vulnerability disclosure. Information
Systems Research 21(1), 115–132 (2010)
9. Bada, M., Nurse, J.R.C.: Developing cybersecurity education and awareness pro-
grammes for small-and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). Information & Computer
Security 27(3), 393–410 (2019)
10. Bada, M., Nurse, J.R.C.: The Social and Psychological Impact of Cyberattacks. In:
Emerging cyber threats and cognitive vulnerabilities, pp. 73–92. Elsevier (2020)
11. Barracuda:
Threat
Spotlight:
Unpatched
software
vulnerabilities
(2021),
https://blog.barracuda.com/2021/07/21/threat-spotlight-unpatched-software-
vulnerabilities/
12. BBC News: CrowdStrike IT outage aﬀected 8.5 million Windows devices, Microsoft
says (2024), https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cpe3zgznwjno
Incentives and Disincentives to Patching
15
13. CISA:
Defending
Against
Software
Supply
Chain
Attacks
(2021),
https://www.cisa.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/publications/defending_against_software
_supply_chain_attacks_508_1.pdf
14. CISA: Emergency Directive 22-02, “Mitigate Apache Log4j Vulnerability” (2021),
https://www.cisa.gov/emergency-directive-22-02
15. CISA: Supplemental Direction V2: ED 24-01: Mitigate Ivanti Connect Secure
and Ivanti Policy Secure Vulnerabilities (2024), https://www.cisa.gov/news-
events/directives/supplemental-direction-v2-ed-24-01-mitigate-ivanti-connect-
secure-and-ivanti-policy-secure
16. CISA:
Known
Exploited
Vulnerabilities
Catalog
(2025),
https://www.cisa.gov/known-exploited-vulnerabilities-catalog
17. Cloudﬂare: Can AI ﬁnd vulnerabilities? (2024), https://www.cloudﬂare.com/en-
gb/the-net/ai-vulnerabilities/
18. CSO:
SolarWinds
attack
explained:
And
why
it
was
so
hard
to
de-
tect (2020), https://www.csoonline.com/article/3601508/solarwinds-supply-chain-
attack-explained-why-organizations-were-not-prepared.html
19. Culaﬁ,
A.:
Why patching
vulnerabilities
is
still
a
problem,
and
how
to
ﬁx it (2021), https://www.techtarget.com/searchsecurity/news/252503950/Why-
patching-vulnerabilities-is-still-a-problem-and-how-to-ﬁx-it
20. Dissanayake, N., Jayatilaka, A., Zahedi, M., Babar, M.A.: Software security patch
management-a systematic literature review of challenges, approaches, tools and
practices. Information and Software Technology 144, 106771 (2022)
21. Dissanayake, N., Jayatilaka, A., Zahedi, M., Babar, M.A.: An empirical study
of automation in software security patch management. In: The 37th IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Automated Software Engineering. pp. 1–13 (2022)
22. DSIT:
Cyber
Security
Breaches
Survey
2024
(2024),
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/cyber-security-breaches-survey-
2024/cyber-security-breaches-survey-2024
23. ENISA:
Is
Software
More
Vulnerable
Today?
(2018),
https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/info-notes/is-software-more-
vulnerable-today
24. Fang, R., Bindu, R., Gupta, A., Zhan, Q., Kang, D.: Teams of LLM Agents can
Exploit Zero-Day Vulnerabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01637 (2024)
25. Forbes
Technology
Council:
Encourage
Your
Team
To
In-
stall
Software
Updates
With
These
10
Tactics
(2019),
https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2019/01/30/encourage-your-
team-to-install-software-updates-with-these-10-tactics/
26. Forbes
Technology
Council:
Actionable
Strategies
To
Get
Your
Software
Users
To
Install
Updates
(2021),
https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2021/02/05/14-actionable-
strategies-to-get-your-software-users-to-install-updates/
27. Frei, S., Schatzmann, D., Plattner, B., Trammell, B.: Modeling the security
ecosystem-the dynamics of (in) security. In: Economics of Information Security
and Privacy, pp. 79–106. Springer (2010)
28. FTC: FTC warns companies to remediate Log4j security vulnerability (2022),
https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/blogs/techftc/2022/01/ftc-warns-companies-
remediate-log4j-security-vulnerability
29. Guy, J.:
Asset
inventory has
become
a
serious
security
problem
(2021),
https://www.scmagazine.com/perspective/asset-inventory-has-become-a-serious-
security-problem
16
J.R.C. Nurse
30. ICO: ICO
reprimands the
Electoral
Commission
after
cyber attack
com-
promises
servers
(2024),
https://ico.org.uk/about-the-ico/media-centre/news-
and-blogs/2024/07/ico-reprimands-the-electoral-commission-after-cyber-attack-
compromises-servers/
31. ICO: London Borough of Hackney reprimanded following cyber-attack (2024),
https://ico.org.uk/about-the-ico/media-centre/news-and-blogs/2024/07/london-
borough-of-hackney-reprimanded-following-cyber-attack/
32. Ivanti: Ransomware Index Spotlight Report Reveals Steady Increase in So-
phistication and Volume of New Ransomware Vulnerabilities and Families
(2021),
https://www.ivanti.co.uk/company/press-releases/2021/ransomware-
index-spotlight-report-reveals-steady-increase-in-sophistication-and-volume-of-
new-ransomware-vulnerabilities-and-families-in-q3-2021
33. Ivanti:
Patch
Management
Challenges
(2024),
https://www.ivanti.com/resources/v/doc/ivi/2634/712cﬀ539c8a
34. Khan, N., Furnell, S., Bada, M., Nurse, J.R.C., Rand, M.: Assessing cyber security
support for small and medium-sized enterprises. In: International Symposium on
Human Aspects of Information Security and Assurance. pp. 148–162. Springer
(2024)
35. Lakshmanan, R.: LastPass Hack: Engineer’s Failure to Update Plex Software
Led to Massive Data Breach (2023), https://thehackernews.com/2023/03/lastpass-
hack-engineers-failure-to.html
36. Liu, J., Lin, G., Mei, H., Yang, F., Tai, Y.: Enhancing vulnerability detection
eﬃciency: An exploration of light-weight llms with hybrid code features. Journal
of Information Security and Applications 88, 103925 (2025)
37. Liu, P., Liu, J., Fu, L., Lu, K., Xia, Y., Zhang, X., Chen, W., Weng, H., Ji, S.,
Wang, W.: Exploring ChatGPT’s Capabilities on Vulnerability Management. In:
33rd USENIX Security Symposium. pp. 811–828 (2024)
38. MacColl, J., Hüsch, P., Mott, G., Sullivan, J., Nurse, J.R., Turner, S., Pattnaik, N.:
Ransomware: Victim insights on harms to individuals, organisations and society
(2024)
39. MacColl, J., Nurse, J.R.C., Sullivan, J.: Cyber insurance and the cyber security
challenge. RUSI Occasional Paper (2021)
40. Martínez, A.L., Cano, A., Ruiz-Martínez, A.: Generative artiﬁcial intelligence-
supported pentesting: A comparison between claude opus, gpt-4, and copilot. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2501.06963 (2025)
41. Melnyk, S.A., Schoenherr, T., Speier-Pero, C., Peters, C., Chang, J.F., Friday,
D.: New challenges in supply chain management: cybersecurity across the supply
chain. International Journal of Production Research 60(1), 162–183 (2022)
42. Mott, G., Turner, S., Nurse, J.R.C., Pattnaik, N., MacColl, J., Huesch, P., Sullivan,
J.: ‘There was a bit of PTSD every time I walked through the oﬃce door’: Ran-
somware harms and the factors that inﬂuence the victim organization’s experience.
Journal of Cybersecurity 10(1) (2024)
43. Mott, G., Turner, S., Nurse, J.R., MacColl, J., Sullivan, J., Cartwright, A.,
Cartwright, E.: Between a rock and a hard (ening) place: Cyber insurance in the
ransomware era. Computers & Security 128, 103162 (2023)
44. NAO:
Investigation:
WannaCry
cyber
attack
and
the
NHS
(2017),
https://www.nao.org.uk/reports/investigation-wannacry-cyber-attack-and-the-
nhs/
45. Nather, W.: Patching All The Things May Not Be The Best Strategy (2018),
https://duo.com/decipher/patching-all-the-things-may-not-be-the-best-strategy
Incentives and Disincentives to Patching
17
46. NCSC: The problems with
patching (2019),
https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/blog-
post/the-problems-with-patching
47. NCSC: NCSC and allies reveal most common cyber vulnerabilities exploited in 2022
(2023), https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/news/ncsc-allies-reveal-2022-common-exploited-
vulnerabilities
48. NCSC: NCSC: Vulnerabilities (2024), https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/section/advice-
guidance/all-topics?topics=Vulnerabilities
49. Neagu,
C.:
Automated
Patch
Management
Explained
(2024),
https://heimdalsecurity.com/blog/automated-patch-management-process/
50. NHS
Digital:
Guidance
on
protecting
medical
devices
(2022),
https://digital.nhs.uk/cyber-and-data-security/guidance-and-
assurance/guidance-on-protecting-connected-medical-devices
51. NIST:
Guide
to
Enterprise
Patch
Management
Planning
(2022),
https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-40r4.pdf
52. Pérez, S.R., van Eeten, M., Gañán, C.H.: Patchy performance? uncovering the vul-
nerability management practices of iot-centric vendors. In: 2024 IEEE Symposium
on Security and Privacy (SP). pp. 154–154. IEEE Computer Society (2024)
53. Ponemon
Institute:
Separating
the
Truths
from
the
Myths
in
Cyberse-
curity
(2018),
https://www.bmc.com/content/dam/bmc/collateral/third-
party/Ponemon%2BReport.pdf
54. Reeves, A., Pattinson, M., Butavicius, M.: Is Your CISO Burnt Out yet? Examining
Demographic Diﬀerences in Workplace Burnout Amongst Cyber Security Profes-
sionals. In: International Symposium on Human Aspects of Information Security
and Assurance. pp. 225–236. Springer (2023)
55. SANS:
Combatting
Cyber
Risks
in
the
Supply
Chain
(2015),
https://www.sans.org/webcasts/combatting-cyber-risks-supply-chain-100657/
56. Schneier,
B.:
Patching
Is
Failing
as
a
Security
Paradigm
(2018),
https://www.vice.com/en/article/439wbw/patching-is-failing-as-a-security-
paradigm
57. ServiceNow & Ponemon: Costs and Consequences of Gaps in Vulnerabil-
ity Response (2019), https://www.servicenow.com/lpayr/ponemon-vulnerability-
survey.html
58. Sowka, K., Palade, V., Jiang, X., Jadidbonab, H.: Towards the generation of hier-
archical attack models from cybersecurity vulnerabilities using language models.
Applied Soft Computing p. 112745 (2025)
59. Temizkan, O., Kumar, R.L., Park, S., Subramaniam, C.: Patch release behaviors
of software vendors in response to vulnerabilities: An empirical analysis. Journal
of management information systems 28(4), 305–338 (2012)
60. The
Guardian:
CrowdStrike
global
outage
to
cost
US
Fortune
500
companies
$5.4bn
(2024),
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/article/2024/jul/24/crowdstrike-
outage-companies-cost
61. Tux Care: State of Enterprise Vulnerability Detection and Patch Management
(2021), https://tuxcare.com/state-of-enterprise-vulnerability-detection-and-patch-
management-report/
62. Uchendu, B., Nurse, J.R.C., Bada, M., Furnell, S.: Developing a cyber security
culture: Current practices and future needs. Computers & Security 109, 102387
(2021)
63. United
States
Senate:
How
Equifax
Neglected
Cybersecurity
and
Suﬀered
a
Devastating
Data
Breach:
Staﬀ
Report
(2017),
https://www.hsgac.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/FINAL%20Equifax%20Report.pdf
18
J.R.C. Nurse
64. Zhou, X., Cao, S., Sun, X., Lo, D.: Large language model for vulnerability detection
and repair: Literature review and the road ahead. ACM Transactions on Software
Engineering and Methodology (2024)
