Title: The Future of Cybersecurity in Southeast Asia along the Maritime Silk Road
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2308.06963v1
--------------------------------------------------

1 
 
The Future of Cybersecurity in Southeast Asia along the Maritime Silk Road 
Roberto Dillon 
James Cook University Singapore 
roberto.dillon@jcu.edu.edu.au 
Abstract 
Southeast Asian countries play a significant role in developing the 'One Belt and One Road' 
initiative, especially in constructing the '21st Century Maritime Silk Road'. They have a high 
demand for connectivity. The resulting extensive digitalization has brought unprecedented 
opportunities for trade and economic growth and new cybersecurity challenges that threaten 
the countries' integrity, security, and resilience in their digital transformation efforts. This paper 
proposes an analysis of the prospects of the cyber security industry and educational ecosystems 
in four Southeast Asian countries, namely Vietnam, Singapore, Malaysia, and Indonesia, which 
are along the Maritime Silk Road, by using two novel metrics: the “Cybersecurity Education 
Prospects Index” (CEPI) and the “Cybersecurity Industry Prospects Index” (CIPI). The CEPI 
evaluates the state of cybersecurity education by assessing the availability and quality of 
cybersecurity degrees together with their ability to attract new students. On the other hand, the 
CIPI measures the potential for the cybersecurity industry's growth and development by 
assessing the talent pool needed to build and sustain its growth. Ultimately, this study 
emphasizes the vital importance of a healthy cybersecurity ecosystem where education is 
responsible for supporting the industry to ensure the security and reliability of commercial 
operations in these countries against a complex and evolving cyber threat landscape. 
Keywords  
Cybersecurity, Education, Maritime Silk Road, TryHackMe.  
 
Introduction  
As the global economy becomes increasingly interconnected, maritime commerce plays 
a pivotal role in facilitating international trade. With the advent of the modern Silk Road, 
represented by maritime routes connecting major economic hubs [1], across Vietnam, 
Malaysia, Singapore and Indonesia (see figure 1) the reliance on digital technologies for 
efficient and secure operations has grown significantly. However, this digital transformation 
has introduced new vulnerabilities, leading to the appearance of sophisticated cyber threats, 
including data breaches, ransomware attacks and more that can target commercial, industrial, 
government and private entities [2]. 
 
2 
 
 
Figure 1: The Maritime Silk Road from China to Southeast Asia1  
 
To improve our resilience across such a wide spectrum of threats, a close synergy 
between the cybersecurity industry, a field in constant need of qualified manpower ([3], [4]), 
and well recognized academic institutions able to supply such talent, is needed. 
Which countries are then in a more favourable position to address these challenges?  
 
Evaluating the future of the cybersecurity ecosystem: the CEP and CIP Indexes  
To answer the previous question, we have to assess a country ability to sustain the need 
for the industry to hire qualified professionals and, for the tertiary education system, to engage 
and educate new cohorts of students keen to enter a field that, while fascinating and rewarding, 
is also seen as very demanding, challenging and complex. As shown in Figure 2, Cybersecurity 
education is at the centre of a cybersecurity ecosystem, taking in input interested people and 
forming them so that they are ultimately able to join the workforce. 
 
 People interested  
 
          Education 
 
 
Industry 
  in Cybersecurity                                             
Figure 2: Education needs to constantly feed skilled professionals to the workforce to build a 
sustainable cybersecurity ecosystem. 
                                                          
1 Belt and Road Initiative. (2023, July 24). In Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Belt_and_Road_Initiative 
3 
 
To estimate the available pool of local talent in each country, i.e. young people within 
the school system and with a strong interest in cybersecurity, the metrics take into account two 
parameters: the tertiary education school enrolment percentage as reported by UNESCO [5] 
and the median value of the top 50 performers on the online training platform TryHackMe [6], 
respectively.   
The former, named EP, for “Enrolment Percentage”2 and shown in Table 1, can give us 
an idea of how accessible education is in a given country. This is a fundamental metric as a 
new cybersecurity workforce has to be highly educated to be proficient in this area. 
Table 1: Tertiary school enrolment as a percentage of all eligible children (EP). World Average (2020): 
40% 
 
Singapore 
Malaysia 
Indonesia 
Vietnam 
EP 
93 
43 
36 
35 
 
The latter instead, named THM, after the name of the platform, is important to gauge 
the interest on cybersecurity topics and education in the local communities. TryHackMe is one 
of the most popular training websites with, at the time of writing, more than 2.1 million users 
around the world. It offers a varied selection of gamified training activities and, by checking 
the score of the Top 50 performers in each country, we can have a measure of how many people 
are engaging with the platform (Table 2). The more competitive it is to reach the top of the 
leaderboard, the more people are engaged in learning activities and we can use this to 
extrapolate a general interest in cybersecurity. Note that the median value is used here instead 
of the average since we are more interested in measuring the performance of the overall 
community rather than in single outliers and top performers. A score higher than 20,000 is 
considered very high on the platform, giving users a rank of “God” and placing them in the 
Top 0.5% worldwide.  
Table 2: Southeast Asian countries along the maritime silk road ranked by median score of their Top 
50 THM performers (data taken on 15/7/23. Number of users are estimated via a simple linear regression 
model based on available data): 
# 
Country 
THM Score (Top 50, Median) Estimated Number of Users 
1 
Vietnam 
32441.5 
17,000 
2 
Indonesia 
29308 
14,000 
3 
Malaysia 
27346.5 
12,200 
4 
Singapore 
24461.5 
10,000 
 
For comparison’s sake, Top 50 median score for the USA is 79,696.5 (world highest), 
for India it is 69,382, for Australia it is 38,114, for Egypt 33,683.5, for the UAE 23,410, for Sri 
Lanka 22,310, and for South Korea 11,957. All these values testify how global the interest in 
cybersecurity is and the raw potential that, in many countries, is still untapped.  
                                                          
2 As defined by UNESCO: Gross enrolment ratio is the ratio of total enrolment, regardless of age, to the 
population of the age group that officially corresponds to the level of education shown. 
4 
 
To assess quality education opportunities, we can look at the dedicated cybersecurity 
degree programs, or related majors, being offered by QS ranked Universities in each country. 
In particular, we have the following (Tables 3,4,5,6): 
Table 3: Vietnam: 5 QS ranked Universities (2024). The following offer specialized degrees: 
University 
QS 
Ranking 
Degree 
Duy Tan University 
514 
Bachelor of IT, Major in Network Security 
Hanoi 
University 
of 
Science and Technology 
1201 
Bachelor in Cyber Security 
Master in Computer Network and Information Security 
 
Table 4: Indonesia: 26 QS ranked Universities (2024). The following offer specialized degrees: 
University 
QS Ranking 
Degree 
Bina Nusantara University 
1001 
Bachelor in Computing, Major in Cyber Security 
Telkom University 
1001 
Master’s Degree in Cyber Security and Digital 
Forensics 
 
Table 5: Malaysia: 28 QS ranked Universities (2024). The following offer specialized degrees: 
University 
QS Ranking 
Degree 
Universiti Malaya 
65 
Master in Cyber Security 
Universiti Putra Malaysia 
158 
Master in Information security 
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
159 
Master in Cyber Security 
Universiti Teknologi Malaysia 
188 
Bachelor of Computer Science, Major in Computer 
Networks & Security 
Taylor's University 
284 
Bachelor of Computer Science (Hons), Major in Cyber 
Security 
Master of Applied Computing, Major in Cybersecurity 
Universiti Teknologi PETRONAS 
307 
Bachelor of IT (Hons), Major in Cyber Security 
Universiti Utara Malaysia 
538 
Master of Science in Cybersecurity 
Universiti Teknologi MARA - UiTM 
555 
Bachelor in Computer Science (Hons), Major in 
Computer Networks 
Master Of Science In Cybersecurity And Digital 
Forensics 
INTI International University 
556 
Bachelor in Computer Science (Hons), Major in 
Network and Security 
Sunway University 
586 
Bachelor of Science (Hons) in IT, Major in Computer 
Networking and Security 
Management and Science University 
621 
Bachelor (Hons) in Computer Forensic 
Universiti Tenaga Nasional 
761 
Bachelor in Computer Science (Hons), Major in Cyber 
Security 
Universiti Malaysia Pahang 
781 
Bachelor in Computer Science (Hons), Major in Cyber 
Security 
Multimedia University 
1001 
Bachelor of Information Technology (Hons.), Major in 
Security Technology 
5 
 
Universiti Kuala Lumpur 
1001 
Bachelor of Information Technology (Hons), Major in 
Computer System Security 
Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia 1001 
Bachelor in Computer Science (Hons), Major in 
Information Security 
Master of Computer Science, Major in Information 
Security 
Universiti Teknikal Malaysia Melaka 
1201 
Bachelor of Computer Science. Major in Computer 
Security 
 
Table 6: Singapore: 5 QS ranked Universities (2024). The following offer specialized degrees: 
University 
QS Ranking 
Degree 
National University of Singapore 
8 
Bachelor of Technology in Computing, 
Major in Cybersecurity 
Nanyang Technological University 
26 
Master of Science in Cyber Security 
James Cook University 
415 
Bachelor of Cybersecurity 
Singapore University of Technology 
and Design 
429 
Master of Science in Security by Design 
Master of Science in Technology and Design 
(Major in Cybersecurity) 
 
To summarize the information in the previous tables, we can define two parameters 
corresponding to the overall number of dedicated degrees (DD) and degrees with specialised 
majors (SM), as shown in Table 7: 
 
Table 7: Overall number of Dedicated Degrees (DD) and Specialized majors (SM) per country 
 
Indonesia 
Malaysia 
Singapore 
Vietnam 
DD 
1 
6 
3 
2 
SM 
1 
14 
2 
1 
 
With these values, we can now define two new metrics that can help us understand the 
big picture and evaluate the future prospects of the cybersecurity ecosystem in each of these 
countries. The CEPI (Cybersecurity Education Prospects Index) and CIPI (Cybersecurity 
Industry Prospects Index) were first introduced in [7] and defined as: 
 
CEPI = 
THM ∗ EP
K (1 + DD + SM)     
 
K=100  
 
 
 
 
(1) 
 
CIPI = 
THM (1 + K1∗ DD + K2∗ SM) 
100 − EP
    
K1 = 2 ; K2 = 1  
 
 
 
(2) 
 
6 
 
To assess the health and growth opportunities of cybersecurity education, CEPI takes 
into consideration the THM median score and multiplies it for the enrolment percentage (EP) 
as a way to evaluate the amount of possible students who can potentially have an interest in 
accessing the courses. Then it divides it according to the number of degrees being offered 
scaled by a factor K, which we can set, for example, to 100 for simplicity. A higher CEPI value 
indicates that a country not only has a reliable talent pool to draw upon, but it also has potential 
to develop further by establishing new courses to educate the next generation of cybersecurity 
talent. A low value may imply that the education sector may not have room to grow, due to 
either a lack of prospective students, or a student population unable to access quality education, 
or an already fully developed and saturated educational offering.  
CIPI, on the other hand, aims at evaluating the future prospects of the industry. To do 
so, it multiplies the THM median score for a factor that takes into consideration the number of 
degrees being offered, as well as assigning a different weight to dedicated degrees compared 
to majors in more general degrees (K1=2 and K2=1 respectively). Then it divides the result by 
taking into account the percentage of students who do not have access to tertiary education, i.e. 
countries that have a low enrolment percentage will find more difficult to sustain industry 
growth since fewer new talents will be formed by the local educational system. A country with 
a low CIPI value will find it challenging to sustain a quality cybersecurity industry as it won’t 
be able to provide a constant stream of new and qualified professionals. Table 8 summarizes 
CEPI and CIPI values for the countries under analysis. 
 
Table 8: CEPI and CIPI values for Southeast Asian countries along the maritime Silk Road. 
 
Indonesia 
Malaysia 
Singapore 
Vietnam 
CEPI 
3,547 
560 
3,792 
2,838 
CIPI 
1,832 
12,954 
31,450 
2,995 
 
Discussion  
All countries show a strong community of highly interested and engaged cybersecurity 
enthusiasts, as testified by a high THM score. This means they are fertile ground for the 
development of a new generation of cybersecurity professionals, and the corresponding CEPI 
and CIPI values allow us to draw some additional insights. 
Malaysia stands out for having the widest offering of specialized cybersecurity degrees 
in the region. This, together with its strong cybersecurity community, makes it one of the best 
placed countries to have a strong professional workforce in the near future (high CIPI). On the 
other hand, the educational landscape is already fully developed and further growth in this 
specific area is unlikely (low CEPI). 
Singapore has both the highest CEPI and CIPI values. Being the technological hub of 
the region, this is not surprising and it is due to its very high EP value, meaning that no talent 
will be left behind as virtually all the local young population will have a chance to fully develop 
7 
 
its talents thanks to a very strong educational system. Since the number of specialized degrees 
being offered is still relatively small, it is also still possible to have further growth in this area 
as well. 
Indonesia’s high CEPI shows very good potential for growth in the cybersecurity 
education field, due to a highly engaged community coupled with a lacking of dedicated 
cybersecurity degrees from its top universities. This, on the other hand, together with its EP 
value below the world average, makes it challenging for a robust local cybersecurity industry 
to emerge, as highlighted by the lowest CIPI in Table 8. The industry can only grow after the 
educational offer becomes stronger. 
Last but not least, Vietnam. This country is particularly noteworthy for having the most 
enthusiastic and most numerous users on THM among the countries here discussed. This shows 
a huge future potential that is nonetheless hampered by its low EP value, which, despite having 
improved significantly in the last few years, is still below the world average. This negatively 
affects both its final CEPI and CIPI results. Until quality education does not become more 
easily accessible, local talents won’t be able to grow, and the industry will find it very hard to 
develop as a consequence.  
 
Conclusions  
From the previous analysis, we can conclude that the Southeast Asian countries situated 
along the Maritime Silk Road are well positioned to build a strong cybersecurity ecosystem in 
the near future. This will have a beneficial impact not only on their internal infrastructure but 
will also indirectly contribute to securing commercial routes close to their territorial spaces, 
like the maritime silk road, by providing, for example, more secure ports and communication 
channels.  
The proposed CEPI and CIPI metrics make the success and future prospect of countries 
such as Singapore apparent, as well as highlighting the rapid development of the specialised 
educational offerings in Malaysia, which reached maturity in the cybersecurity field much 
faster than any other country in Southeast Asia. Nonetheless, we should not forget the 
challenges that the region still faces as a whole. While initiatives like THM clearly show there 
is a growing talent pool of passionate hobbyists, the access to quality education is still an issue 
in several countries, and this may slow down the overall expected development as quality 
degrees are needed to turn a hobbyist into a professional and foster industry growth in an 
organic and sustainable way.  
 
 
 
 
8 
 
References 
[1] https://maritimefairtrade.org/china-invests-in-42-ports-under-maritime-silk-road/ 
[2] Kuah, A., Dillon, R. (2021) Digital Transformation in a Post-Covid World: Sustainable 
Innovation, Disruption and Change, Florida, US:CRC Press, pp.129-154. 
[3] ISACA (2022) State of Cybersecurity 2022:  Global Update on Workforce Efforts, 
Resources and Cyberoperations. Available at www.isaca.org (accessed 15 January 2023) 
[4] 
(ISC)2 (2022) 
Cybersecurity 
Workforce 
Study 
2022. 
Available 
at 
https://www.isc2.org/Research/Workforce-Study (accessed 29 December 2022) 
[5] UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2022) School enrollment, tertiary (% gross). Available at 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.TER.ENRR (accessed 19 July 2023) 
[6] TryHackMe.com https://tryhackme.com  
[7] Dillon, R., Tan, K.L., (2023) Cybersecurity Workforce Landscape, Education, and Industry 
Growth Prospects in Southeast Asia, Journal of Tropical Futures, Vol.1(1). Available at 
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1177/27538931231176903  
