Title: From Cyber Security Incident Management to Cyber Security Crisis Management in the European Union
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.14220v2
--------------------------------------------------

From Cyber Security Incident Management to
Cyber Security Crisis Management in the European Union
Jukka Ruohonena,∗, Kalle Rindellb, Simone Busettic
aUniversity of Southern Denmark, Denmark
bUniversity of Turku, Finland
cUniversity of Teramo, Italy
Abstract
Incident management is a classical topic in cyber security. Recently, the European Union (EU) has started to consider
also the relation between cyber security incidents and cyber security crises. These considerations and preparations,
including those specified in the EU’s new cyber security laws, constitute the paper’s topic. According to an analysis of
the laws and associated policy documents, (i) cyber security crises are equated in the EU to large-scale cyber security
incidents that either exceed a handling capacity of a single member state or affect at least two member states. For this
and other purposes, (ii) the new laws substantially increase mandatory reporting about cyber security incidents, including
but not limited to the large-scale incidents. Despite the laws and new governance bodies established by them, however,
(iii) the working of actual cyber security crisis management remains unclear particularly at the EU-level. With these
policy research results, the paper advances the domain of cyber security incident management research by elaborating
how European law perceives cyber security crises and their relation to cyber security incidents, paving the way for many
relevant further research topics with practical relevance, whether theoretical, conceptual, or empirical.
Keywords:
risk management, risk analysis, incident management, crisis management, regulations, governance, EU
1. Introduction
“Europe has been in crisis management mode for a
decade and a half” (Handler, 2024, p. 1). Although the
statement quoted is true in many respects, it does not
(yet) apply to the cyber security domain. In other words,
to the best of the authors’ knowledge, there has not been a
truly large-scale, pan-European cyber security crisis thus
far.
This statement does not mean that the EU would
not have prepared for such a crisis. These preparations,
including those mandated by the EU’s new cyber security
laws, are what the paper is about. The paper’s relevance
and contributions can be elaborated with four brief points.
To start from practical relevance, first, the topic is
timely. In fact, the European Commission (EC) just re-
cently released a new proposal for handling large-scale,
cross-country cyber security crises in Europe (EC, 2025a).
The second point follows from this timeliness; again to
the best of the authors’ knowledge, the paper is the first
to elaborate cyber security crisis management in the EU
context. While there are some existing works, they have
concentrated on national cyber security crisis manage-
ment (Boeke, 2017; Collier, 2016; Østby and Katt, 2020).
That is, the EU context has been missing thus far, includ-
ing with respect to the EU’s new judicial framework. In
∗Corresponding author.
Email address: juk@mmmi.sdu.dk (Jukka Ruohonen)
addition, governance below national administrations has
received limited attention in general (B´eland et al., 2024).
Subsequently, third, the paper contributes to the recent ef-
forts to digest and analyze the EU’s many new cyber secu-
rity laws and their implications (Alexopoulos et al., 2025;
Busetti and Scanni, 2025; Mueck and Gaie, 2025; Rataj,
2025; Ruohonen, 2024b; Ruohonen et al., 2025b, among
many others). Regarding existing research and knowledge
more generally, fourth and last, the paper contributes to
the incident management research domain by elaborating,
analyzing, and theorizing on how incidents are related to
and may transform into crises.
Because crises typically
have immense consequences, the paper’s overall relevance
is well-justified; it is important to understand how the
EU’s new cyber security legal framework is designed with
crisis management in mind.
With respect to the last point, both incident manage-
ment research and frameworks for it have traditionally op-
erated at the organizational level; incidents are something
that organizations may face, and thus they should also pre-
pare for them. For instance, a classical incident manage-
ment framework from the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) defines cyber security incident as
“a violation or imminent threat of violation” of any cy-
ber “security policies, acceptable use policies, or standard
security practices” established and enforced by organiza-
tions (Cichonski et al., 2012, p. 6). The organizational fo-
cus is thus clear. According to an early literature review,
Computers & Security, 2025, vol. 159, pp. 104689. This version is the authors’ copy.
The publisher’s definite version is available at Elsevier via https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2025.104689.
arXiv:2504.14220v2  [cs.CR]  6 Oct 2025
a similar focus is present in many other well-known frame-
works and standards for incident management and closely
related topics (Tøndel et al., 2014).
From the previous
quotation it also follows that an organization should have
cyber security policies established and enforced because
otherwise an incident remains only implicit and vaguely
defined. A similar claim applies to cyber security crisis
management; also larger entities, whether industry sec-
tors, geographic regions, or countries and beyond, should
have policies in place for handling cyber security crises.
As will be seen, in the EU these policies are partially but
still explicitly written in recent cyber security laws.
A further point about the organizational focus is that it
has typically been present also in different socio-technical
frameworks for incident management and cyber security
management in general (Al Sabbagh and Kowalski, 2015;
Jaatun et al., 2009; van Haastrecht et al., 2021). Moti-
vated by a recent work on layered cyber security frame-
works (Panteli et al., 2025), the paper adopts a multi-level
perspective sometimes used in the socio-technical frame-
works (Malatji et al., 2019), but extends it beyond orga-
nizations. Thus, the first part in the socio-technical term
refers to an adjective societal and particularly a noun Eu-
ropean.
Although societal cyber security is not a well-
defined concept, it has sometimes been discussed in a con-
text of critical infrastructure protection (Gjesvik, 2019).
Such a framing serves also the paper’s purposes well be-
cause among the EU laws considered is an important new
law for critical infrastructure protection in Europe.
With these motivating remarks in mind, the following
three research questions (RQs) are examined:
• RQ.1: What constitutes a cyber security crisis in the
European Union?
• RQ.2: What do recent EU laws impose upon cyber
security incident and crisis management?
• RQ.3: How cyber security crises are managed, gov-
erned, and coordinated in the EU and by whom?
The paper’s remainder is structured into four sections.
The opening Section 2 motivates the background further,
including with respect to the multi-level approach pursued
and the EU laws considered. The methodology for analyz-
ing these is also elaborated, and a few clarifying framings
are also done to restrict and limit the paper’s scope. Sec-
tion 3 continues by elaborating how different law-imposed
incident types are related to the multi-level approach. In
general, the section answers to RQ.1 and RQ.2. The sub-
sequent Section 4 answers to RQ.3 by elaborating the var-
ious institutions, organizations, and networks involved in
cyber security crisis management in the EU context. The
last three Sections 5, 6, and 7 present a conclusion as well
as a few points about limitations and associated future
research directions.
2. Background
2.1. Framings
Some framings are required for limiting and aligning
the paper’s scope to a manageable composition. To begin
with, the paper is framed toward cyber security alone. The
paper’s opening quotation about Europe having been in a
crisis management mode for a long time helps to under-
stand that crises vary a lot; from financial crises all the way
to wars and the existential climate change crisis. While
notions such as cascading effects and risks (Adkins et al.,
2020; Ruohonen, 2024a; Ruohonen et al., 2025b) make it
understandable that many crises may be interconnected to
each other, no attempts are made to connect cyber security
crises to other crises. The same applies regarding threats.
Some cyber security threats, including particularly those
related to advanced persistent threat (APT) actors, are
today, in Europe, often perceived to be linked with a
broader class of so-called hybrid threats (Anagnostakis,
2023; Jungwirth et al., 2023). While acknowledging the
linkage’s theoretical and practical validity, no attempts are
made to move beyond plain cyber security. By implication,
as hybrid threats may involve also a military dimension,
also the EU’s other cyber security pillars (Christou, 2016;
Ruohonen, 2024b), whether cyber defense or data protec-
tion, are excluded from the paper’s scope. Furthermore,
theorizing about different types of cyber security crises are
further omitted for brevity, clarity, and alignment with the
EU’s laws considered.
With respect to large-scale cyber security crises, ENISA
(2024b, p. 12) emphasizes a need to distinguish between a
creeping crisis, “which simmers under the radar” before
“suddenly and unexpectedly erupting”, an acute crisis,
“which is sudden, unforeseen and can have a massive im-
pact in a very short amount of time”, and a recurring cri-
sis, which occurs almost continuously. Similar categoriza-
tions have been presented in the academic literature (Boin
et al., 2018; Head, 2022). Of these three types, denial of
service attacks, in particular, could be seen as something
recurrent, whereas a severe data breach or a successful
ransomware attack might be seen to belong to the cate-
gory of acute crises.
Though, these examples are more
about incidents than crises; therefore, also risk analysis is
presumably more challenging when trying to assess crises
rather than incidents; when operating at a level of societies
or beyond rather than at the conventional organizational
level. At the societal level, an example of a creeping crisis
might involve a discovered large-scale espionage campaign
conducted by an APT actor. Beyond these brief remarks,
as said, more elaborate theorization is left for further work.
2.2. Methodology
The paper operates in the domain of policy studies.
Within this domain, a separation between policy analysis
and policy (process) research is sometimes done. Broadly
speaking, the former is about prescriptive research seek-
ing to inform policy-making, whether in terms of evalua-
tions, impact assessments, or something else, while the lat-
ter is descriptive research focused particularly on theory-
building (DeLeon and Weible, 2010; Secchi, 2016). Given
this characterization, the paper is about policy research.
Regarding descriptive policy research, an ex post, a post
hoc, and generally a retrospective approach is used (cf.
Patton et al., 2016). This choice is also unavoidable be-
cause the EU laws considered have already been enacted.
As soon described in Subsection 2.4, these laws also pro-
vide the primary materials for the study.
Regarding ex ante policy analysis, it is worth remarking
that the EC did prior impact assessments for most—but
not all (EP, 2024)—of the laws considered in the paper.
For the paper’s purposes, it is particularly worth remark-
ing that these assessments indicated a lack of joint situa-
tional awareness and crisis management between the mem-
ber states, and between them and the EU-level administra-
tion; information sharing was concluded to operate on an
ad hoc basis and cross-border spillovers were omitted from
risk analyses (EC, 2020, pp. 21–22). This point justifies an
academic expert evaluation of the three RQs postulated.
Regarding theory-building, the paper analyzes and the-
orizes how the EU’s new laws align with common analyt-
ical frameworks used in incident and crisis management
research.
On the side of engineering and computer sci-
ence, within which theory-building often has a different
meaning, the paper aligns with requirements engineering
research within which legal requirements are a distinct
genre (Ruohonen et al., 2025b).
This research branch
justifies RQ.2. In other words, it is important to know
what laws require, whether from organizations, producers,
or public administrations. Once an answer is known, it
is possible to continue toward empirical policy research;
without knowing the legal requirements, formulation of
relevant research questions is difficult—if not question-
able altogether. This point also applies to the framings
done; insofar as policy analysis is concerned, it is pointless
to evaluate responses to hybrid threats without knowing
about the preparations and frameworks for handling them.
In addition, a brief scenario analysis is presented to bet-
ter elaborate the legal interpretations drawn and their po-
tential practical implications.
By following existing re-
search (Ruohonen et al., 2025c), the short scenario anal-
ysis presented is purely hypothetical, using an imaginary
but still plausible case for the elaborations. Although most
scenario analyses are about foresight and the future (Sus
and Hadeed, 2020), the analysis pursued aligns with the
descriptive tenet in policy studies.
Besides elaborating
the legal aspects, the scenario analysis also helps at the
theory-building tenet, including with respect to the ana-
lytical levels subsequently described.
2.3. Analytical Levels
The paper’s conceptual and theoretical background can
be motivated by considering an analytical relation between
incidents and crisis through different vertical levels of anal-
ysis often used in social sciences. A term multi-level anal-
ysis is sometimes used to refer to approaches that operate
at two or more such levels (B´eland et al., 2024; Hutzschen-
reuter et al., 2020).
A term multi-level governance is
a common alternative (Bartle and Flinders, 2016). The
terms should not be equated to multi-level (cyber) secu-
rity, although there is a rough conceptual similarity be-
cause both involve a hierarchy (cf. Anderson, 2020). In
any case, an incident that involves multiple analytical lev-
els could be called a multi-level incident—or, depending on
which levels an incident has transcended, a cyber security
crisis.
2.3.1. The International Level
The international level is at the top of the hierarchy.
When operating at this level, an analysis typically func-
tions horizontally, focusing on relations between states. In
terms of cyber security, good examples about such inter-
state, transnational relations would cover cyber norms, cy-
ber diplomacy, and even what is known and debated as
cyber war. However, as said, such topics are beyond the
paper’s scope.
Another point is that it is also possible
to consider information systems and other technical solu-
tions at this level; such systems and solutions are those
that transcend both national and organizational bound-
aries (Rukanova et al., 2015). Such transcendence can also
been seen as something that separates cyber security inci-
dents from cyber security crises.
If a cyber security incident escalates to the international
level, it is not really any more a mere incident but rather
a crisis. With this point in mind, Fig. 1 displays seven an-
alytical levels through which incidents may become crises.
As can be seen, the impact is taken to increase the further
a cyber security event is from an incident.
Incident
Crisis
Individual
Organizational
Sectoral
Regional
National
Supranational
International
Vertical
level
Impact
Horizontal 
governance 
at the same
vertical level
Figure 1: Analytical Levels (adopted from ENISA 2024b, pp. 17–18)
2.3.2. The Supranational Level
Below the international level is a supranational level.
This level is at which the EU operates; the European
Union is a supranational union. At the same time, how-
ever, it operates in intergovernmental terms; the Council
of the European Union would be the prime example in this
regard. In contrast, the European Union Agency for Cy-
bersecurity (ENISA) operates at the supranational level,
although intergovernmental tenets may still be present in
terms of staffing and related aspects.
While there is a
classical debate regarding the meaning of and interplay be-
tween these two theoretical governance terms (Bickerton
et al., 2022; Handler, 2024; Tsebelis and Garrett, 2021),
without a particular loss of specificity and rigor, the term
supranationalism is used in case there is no particular rea-
son to emphasize the intergovernmental dimension.
Note also a difference between the terms transnational
and intergovernmental; the latter is about relations be-
tween governments, as is the case in the Council in which
ministers or other heads of states represent their mem-
ber states, whereas the former can be seen to cover also
supranational governance because the meaning is essen-
tially about relations between nations.
These relations
may be about states, but they may also include transna-
tional non-governmental organizations, different transna-
tional collaboration and coordination networks, and inter-
national organizations (G¨anzle et al., 2022). When such
transnational relations are accounted for, the term multi-
level governance can be seen to cover also a horizontal
dimension; a coordination and collaboration between dif-
ferent entities not directly linked to governmental repre-
sentatives. These terminological clarifications are impor-
tant because the EU’s overall multi-level crisis manage-
ment framework covers numerous actors operating at dif-
ferent governance levels and policy areas (Anagnostakis,
2023). The concepts also provide a theoretical foundation
for analyzing the EU’s cyber security crisis management
framework in terms of governance and coordination.
2.3.3. The National, Regional, and Sectoral Levels
When taking a step downwards from the supranational
level, the national level is encountered. Regarding gover-
nance, authoritative computer security incident response
teams (CSIRTs) are particularly relevant in Europe; ac-
cording to both old and new EU laws, each member state
should have an authoritative CSIRT or a related com-
petent authority for nationwide incident management.1
However, presently it remains still somewhat unclear how
national administrations are, or will be, arranged in each
and every member state. By hypothesis, the divergence is,
or will be, large across the twenty-seven member states.
Although there are no clear demarcations, operations at
the national level are sometimes (but not always) about
crisis management rather than incident management. The
same could be said even about the regional level, espe-
cially when keeping in mind that it includes both smaller
geographically bound administrative units as well as larger
1 Here, the adjective authoritative is used for emphasizing a dif-
ference to other CSIRTs, including sectoral teams as well as teams
within organizations and companies. Note also that in practice the
abbreviation CSIRT is equivalent to an abbreviation CERT, denot-
ing a computer emergency response team.
geographic units, such as is the case in the Germany’s fed-
eralist administration. Also crisis management tends to
be decentralized to the regional, L¨ander, level in Germany,
although strategic management and high-level political co-
ordination occurs at the federal level (Christensen et al.,
2016). Without the federalist twist, the setup is rather
similar to many other European countries within which
strategic and political aspects are oftentimes centralized,
while the operational level is often more or less decen-
tralized (Christensen et al., 2016; Gjesvik, 2019; Ramsell
and Wihlborg, 2012). Regions also intervene with indus-
try sectors in many member states. Whether an exam-
ple is about the Ruhr region in Germany or the Emilia-
Romagna region in Italy, specialized industry activity has
often concentrated to specific regions in Europe and also
elsewhere. Authoritative CSIRTs in some European coun-
tries have also been decentralized with sectoral special-
ization in mind (Boin et al., 2018). In terms of incident
management, many industries also have different sectoral
and regional coordination networks and governance hubs.
2.3.4. The Organizational and Individual Levels
Then, below the sectoral level is the organizational
level.
As said in the introduction, this level has been
the traditional focal point in incident management and
its research.
Again, coordination may occur horizon-
tally between organizations (inter-organizational coordi-
nation) and within organizations (intra-organizational co-
ordination), and vertically between organizations and in-
dividuals (Heine, 2019; Panteli et al., 2025). The intra-
organizational coordination is relevant also for establish-
ing organizational CSIRTs; typical choices for large orga-
nizations include outsourcing, a centralized organization-
wide team, or distributed teams across an organization’s
departments (Mitropoulos et al., 2006; Cichonski et al.,
2012). Organizations may also coordinate vertically with
sectoral or regional entities, such as industry associations,
as well as entities operating at a national level, including
authoritative CSIRTs in particular. Finally, as seen from
Fig. 1, it is also possible to consider incidents at a level
of individuals, whether employees, citizens, or consumers.
Given the extensive research and evidence on the human
factors in cyber security, it is also possible that an incident
affecting an individual escalates to the organizational level
or even beyond that.
2.3.5. An Example of a Multi-Level Incident
A good example about a multi-level incident would be
the attacks against Danish energy sector companies in
2023.
Given that over twenty energy sector companies
were compromised, the incident prompted also interna-
tional media attention (Antoniuk, 2023). Regarding the
analytical levels, the example is illuminating because it
involved three or four levels in Fig. 1.
To begin with, the incident was not only organizational
but also sectoral due to the involvement of multiple com-
panies in the same sector.
Given the potential concen-
tration of the energy sector companies to some particular
regions in Denmark, the incident could be perhaps inter-
preted to involve also the regional level. In any case, the
sectoral level manifested itself also in the investigation con-
ducted by SektorCERT (2023), a non-profit CSIRT com-
posed by Danish critical infrastructure companies and op-
erators. The investigation revealed that the compromises
were conducted by exploiting a vulnerability in a firewall
product.2 Furthermore, an update had been available but
the energy sector companies had not patched their firewalls
for a reason or another. During the incident management,
the issue escalated further to the national level.
Among other things, CFCS (2023), the authoritative
CSIRT in Denmark, raised the threat level against the
Danish energy sector to the very high level category. How-
ever: while multiple levels were involved, the incident is
not yet something that could be interpreted as a cyber se-
curity crisis according to the EU’s laws. This point will
become clear in Subsection 3.1 that elaborates different
incident types present in the recently enacted EU laws.
2.4. The EU’s Strategy
The EU’s new cyber security strategy can be sum-
marized in the form of Fig. 2.
Three of the strategy’s
pillars—prevention, detection, and response—resemble
rather similar phases in incident management frameworks.
For instance, the NIST’s noted framework is structured
around preparation, detection and analysis, containment,
eradication, and recovery, and post-incident phases (Ci-
chonski et al. 2012; cf. also Mitropoulos et al. 2006).
Rather analogously, ENISA (2024b) builds upon preven-
tion, preparedness, and response and recovery phases. An-
other example would be prepare, detect and recover, and
learn (Jaatun et al., 2009). A further point is that the
EU’s strategy is structured around specific laws, which
are also supported by funding instruments, education, re-
search, development, and innovation projects, and specific
governance bodies, some of which are new.
Prevent
Detect
Respond
Deter
  NIS2
  CRA
  CSA
  CSOA
CRA
CSOA
NIS2
CRA
CSOA
Diplomacy
Defense
Law enfor.
International cooperation
Investments, skills, science, development, and institutions
Figure 2: The EU’s Current Cyber Security Strategy in a Nutshell
(adopted from EC 2025b)
Before continuing to enumerate the laws covered, it
should be emphasized that there are many further EU laws
2 CVE-2023-28771.
explicitly or implicitly related to cyber security, some of
which are sector-specific and some others of which over-
lap with each other (EC, 2025a; Fischer-H¨ubner et al.,
2021; Ruohonen et al., 2025b).
Against this backdrop,
it is no wonder that regulatory fragmentation and com-
plexity have been a source of commonly expressed criti-
cism (Alexopoulos et al., 2025; Ruohonen, 2024b). In any
case, it should be emphasized that the specific laws con-
sidered are particularly relevant for the paper’s topic. In
other words, as will elaborated in Section 3, the laws also
help to understand how a transcendence from an incident
to a unionwide crisis is legally perceived and structured.
Of the four laws abbreviated in Fig. 2, particularly im-
portant are the second network and information security
(NIS2) directive (EU, 2022a) and the Cyber Resilience
Act (CRA) regulation (EU, 2024).
Although a concept
of essential and important entities (EAIEs) is used in the
NIS2 directive, the directive is essentially about critical in-
frastructure protection. Overall, the directive builds upon
a sectoral approach; numerous sectors are enumerated as
carrying “critical societal or economic activities”, to quote
from the NIS2’s Article 2(2)(b). This quotation aligns with
the notion of societal cyber security noted in the introduc-
tion. The actual sectors specified range from traditional
critical infrastructure sectors, such as energy and trans-
port, to banking, healthcare, finance, drinking and waste
water management, the Internet’s core infrastructure, and
space technologies.
In contrast, the CRA regulation is a product-specific
law. While in the NIS2 directive criticality as a concept
is tied to sectors, as has been typical in the critical in-
frastructure domain, in the CRA products are categorized
according to their real or perceived criticality to cyber se-
curity (Ruohonen et al., 2025a). Regardless of these cate-
gorizations and with a small number of explicitly excluded
products, practically all products must comply with the
CRA’s essential cyber security requirements. As these re-
quirements have already been considered in detail (Ruo-
honen et al., 2025b), including with respect to new obli-
gations regarding vulnerability coordination and disclo-
sure (Ruohonen and Timmers, 2024), in what follows, the
CRA is only discussed with respect to its mandates for in-
cident reporting. Having said that, it is worth remarking
that the CRA’s essential requirement about preferably au-
tomated security updates would have prevented the Dan-
ish energy sector case noted earlier in Subsection 2.3.5,
and, furthermore, some of the essential requirements con-
tain also elements aligning with the technical detection
and prevention of incidents.
Regarding the CRA more generally, also the older Cy-
bersecurity Act (CSA) can be mentioned (EU, 2019).
While it strengthened the role and mandates of ENISA,
it also introduce a common cyber security certification
scheme for information technology products. This certi-
fication scheme aligns with the CRA in that conformance
can be attained also (but not only) through certification.
Given that standards are also an important part of the
CRA and compliance with it, the regulation seems to have
at least partially answered to criticism from the industry
and practitioners (Fischer-H¨ubner et al., 2021). Finally,
recently a new Cyber Solidarity Act (CSOA) regulation
was agreed upon (EU, 2025). As can be seen from Fig. 2,
it covers aspects from all the three pillars noted earlier.
A couple of additional remarks are in order before con-
tinuing to elaborate the laws and their implications in de-
tail. The first remark is that deterring of cyber security
threats appears in Fig. 2. While this topic is beyond the
paper’s scope, it can be noted that deterrence has long
been debated in the literature (Goodman, 2010, among
many others), some authors having taken a critical stance
about the working of deterrence in the cyber security con-
text (among them Soesanto and Smeets, 2021). The sec-
ond remark is that all of the laws are more or less risk-
based, some explicitly and some only implicitly. In partic-
ular, the NIS2 directive’s Article 21 obliges EAIEs to carry
out comprehensive risk analyses. These should be done by
following a so-called “all-hazards” approach, which is also
familiar from the academic literature (Ayyub et al., 2007;
Izumi, 2024). According to NIS2, the approach means that
anything and everything from incident handling, backups,
and supply-chain security to security awareness campaigns
and business continuity should be assessed. The CRA too
is a risk-based regulation; the essential cyber security re-
quirements should be prioritized, designed, implemented
against particular, product-specific risks identified.
3. Incident Types
3.1. Events
Events, including alerts, whether from intrusion detec-
tion systems, other monitoring systems, or somewhere
else, are important building blocks for incident manage-
ment (Cichonski et al., 2012).
These also allow under-
standing how incidents may transform into crises accord-
ing to the EU’s jurisprudence. Thus, Fig. 3 displays the
core event types in the new EU laws. The figure can be
elaborated by moving from the bottom to the top, from
alerts to incidents, severe incidents, and beyond. In line
with the previous discussion, at least the last incident type
shown is analytically already on the side of crises.
As was remarked in Subsection 2.4, the CRA’s essen-
tial cyber security requirements for products contain el-
ements that may (or should) foster the detection cyber
security incidents. For instance, the requirements include
a monitoring functionality for a product’s internal activ-
ity, including with respect to authorizations and integrity
guarantees (Ruohonen et al., 2025b). In addition, as seen
also from the earlier Fig. 2, the CSOA regulation is rele-
vant too with respect to incident detection. In particular,
the regulation envisions a development of a large-scale,
pan-European network of cyber security alert systems for
coordinated incident detection and improved situational
awareness capabilities. While these systems are labeled as
a
Incident
Crisis
Alert
Near miss
Incident
Severe 
incident
Significant 
incident
Event
type
Impact
True
positive
Alert
False
positive
Near
miss
Other
Incident
...
Large-scale 
incident
Figure 3: An Event Type Hierarchy
“cyber hubs” in the regulation, they are essentially what
security operation centers (SOCs) and threat intelligence
systems in general are about.
The network is planned
upon voluntary pooling of national alert systems into large
cross-border systems. The national systems may include
not only those maintained by authoritative CSIRTs but
also those operated by private sector companies.
3.1.1. Near Misses
An alert can be a false positive or a true positive. Al-
though the NIST’s definition noted in the introduction
covers both, for the present purposes, it makes sense to
frame incidents only toward true positives. Regarding false
positives, the EU’s recent laws introduce a concept of near
misses. A near miss is defined in the NIS2’s Article 6(5)
to mean “an event that could have compromised the avail-
ability, authenticity, integrity or confidentiality of stored,
transmitted or processed data or of the services offered
by, or accessible via, network and information systems,
but that was successfully prevented”.
Thus, within the
context of incident management, the concept can be seen
to be about false positives; about alerts that were suc-
cessfully prevented from becoming actual incidents (true
positives). In any case, reporting about near misses is vol-
untary. According to Article 15(2) in the CRA regulation,
manufacturers and other parties, whether natural or le-
gal persons, may voluntarily report near misses either to
a national authoritative CSIRT or ENISA. Likewise, ac-
cording to Article 30 in the NIS2 directive, EAIEs may
voluntary report near misses to a authoritative CSIRT or
some related public sector authority.
Voluntary reporting seems sensible already due to over-
head and related reasons. Because alerts are voluminous
due to various monitoring systems deployed by organi-
zations, most of them are false positives, and interop-
erability is a typical issue with the monitoring systems
and their reporting formats (Alahmadi et al., 2022; Zibak
et al., 2022). Analogously to abuse reporting in the Inter-
net (Jhaveri et al., 2017), a signal to noise ratio is often low.
Against these backdrops, a mandatory reporting of near
misses would have presumably required large financial in-
vestments and considerable coordination between various
stakeholders involved, including the authoritative Euro-
pean CSIRTs and producers of cyber security monitoring
solutions. The issues with false positives in the cyber secu-
rity context are well-recognized in the literature also more
generally; not only is a minimization of them generally
difficult but also a cost of handling them is often signifi-
cant (Bhatt et al., 2014). However, the EU laws do not say
anything how organizations should actually demarcate be-
tween false and true positives, and whether there are any
consequences from accidentally reporting a false positive
as a true positive or the other way around.
3.1.2. Incidents
Also reporting of most (but not all) true positives—that
is, according to the terminology adopted, incidents—is vol-
untary (see Table 1). According to the NIS2’s Article 6(6),
an incident is defined as “an event compromising the avail-
ability, authenticity, integrity or confidentiality of stored,
transmitted or processed data or of the services offered
by, or accessible via, network and information systems”.
When compared to the earlier definition for near misses,
an incident is thus something that has actually compro-
mised data or services. While the definition aligns with
classical framings (Brownlee and Guttman, 1998), there is
a difference to the NIST’s definition noted in the intro-
duction. Although availability, authenticity, integrity, and
confidentiality may well belong to an organization’s cyber
security policy, the NIS2 only notes, in Article 24, cyber
security policies with respect to open source software asso-
ciations. In any case, according to the NIS2’s Article 30,
reporting of these “conventional” incidents is voluntary.
3.1.3. Severe Incidents
When moving a step upward in the event hierarchy
(see Fig. 3), the CRA regulation (but not the NIS2 direc-
tive) uses a concept of severe incidents. It is mandatory
to report such incidents to both a national authoritative
CSIRT and ENISA according to the CRA’s Article 14(3).
A twofold definition for severe incidents is given in the reg-
ulation’s Article 14(5). The first part emphasizes negative
impacts and potential negative impacts upon a product’s
ability to protect the availability, authenticity, integrity,
or confidentiality of data or services, whereas the second
part emphasizes an execution and a potential execution
of malicious code.
It remains to be seen how manufac-
turers will interpret the demarcation between the impacts
and executions on one hand and the potential impacts and
executions on the other hand.
Another important point is that the CRA is about man-
ufacturers of information technology products, not about
operators of such products, including EAIEs covered by
the NIS2 directive. With some relaxations, manufactur-
ers are also mandated to report about actively exploited
vulnerabilities (Ruohonen and Timmers, 2024). These are
archived to a new European vulnerability database main-
tained by ENISA (2025b). In any case, the divergence be-
tween the scopes of the two EU laws reiterates a criticism
expressed both in research and industry about a lack of
an explicit legal synchronization between different report-
ing obligations imposed by different laws (BusinessEurope
2025, p. 49; Fischer-H¨ubner et al. 2021; Ruohonen 2024a).
In particular, in case a manufacturer reports to a national
authoritative CSIRT and ENISA about a severe incident,
either the given CSIRT or ENISA, or both, should presum-
ably consequently report to all EAIEs and others using the
manufacturer’s given product to which the severe incident
applies. Again, it remains to be seen how such consecutive
reporting will work in practice.
3.1.4. Significant Incidents
The remaining two incident types are specified in the
NIS2 directive. According to the directive’s Article 23(3),
a significant incident either “has caused or is capable of
causing severe operational disruption of the services or fi-
nancial loss for the entity concerned”, or it “has affected
or is capable of affecting other natural or legal persons by
causing considerable material or non-material damage”.
The again twofold definition warrants three brief remarks.
The first remark is related to the earlier point about
potential effects; the wording “capable of” yet again en-
tails a demarcation problem between actual significant in-
cidents and those merely conveying a probability of such
incidents.
Presently, no guidance is available upon this
demarcation (Busetti and Scanni, 2025). The second re-
mark is related to the wording about “severe operational
disruption”. Here, it would seem that anything from se-
vere denial of service attacks to severe ransomware attacks
are in the scope. The definition’s emphasis of severe finan-
cial losses further underlines ransomware attacks, although
also other so-called destructive cyber attacks are likely in
the NIS2’s scope. The third remark is about the empha-
sis about “considerable material or non-material damage”
to natural persons. Therefore, it has been suspected that
also severe personal data breaches are in the directive’s
scope (Ruohonen et al., 2025b), but a definite conclusion
can likely be given only after guidelines have been released
or enforcement has occurred.
While keeping these and other potential interpretation
issues in mind, including regarding the rich role of adjec-
tives and other qualifying words in law (Bertoldi et al.,
2007), EAIEs must report about significant incidents to a
national authoritative CSIRTs or, where applicable, other
public authorities, as well as other entities concerned ac-
cording to the NIS2’s Article 23(1).3 Thus, broadly speak-
ing, unlike “conventional” incidents, significant incidents
fall into a category of mandatory reporting by EAIEs. Ac-
cording to guidance from ENISA (2025c), EAIEs should
3 All laws considered contain numerous qualifying words (Ruoho-
nen et al., 2025d). For the present purposes, particularly the many
adjectives present in the definitions listed in Table 1, such as severe,
significant, and considerable, convey also semantic meanings. How-
ever, a contextual interpretation is only possible once guidance is
available or enforcement actions have occurred.
Table 1: References for Legal Definitions and Reporting Obligations
Type
Discussion
Definition
Reporting
Near missa
Subsection 3.1.1
Article 6(5) in the NIS2 directive
Voluntary
Incidentb
Subsection 3.1.2
Article 6(6) in the NIS2 directive
Voluntary
Severe incident
Subsection 3.1.3
Article 14(3) in the CRA
Mandatory
Significant incident
Subsection 3.1.4
Article 23(3) in the NIS2 directive
Mandatory
Large-scale incident
Subsection 3.1.5
Article 6(7) in the NIS2 directive
Mandatory
Actively exploited vulnerabilities
Subsection 3.1.3
Article 3(42) in the CRA
Mandatoryc
a The same article in the NIS2 directive is explicitly referenced in the CRA’s Article 3(45).
b The same article in the NIS2 directive is explicitly referenced in the CRA’s Article 3(43). Although the so-called critical entities
resilience (CER) directive (EU, 2022b) was omitted from the paper’s scope (cf. Fig. 2), an incident is defined also in its Article 2(3).
For a reason or another, however, the CER’s definition is not identical with the NIS2 directive’s definition.
c Though, there is an option to delay reporting (Ruohonen and Timmers, 2024).
also carefully evaluate and document all significant inci-
dents and adjust their risk analysis results accordingly.
3.1.5. Large-Scale Incidents
Finally, there is the notion about large-scale cyber se-
curity incidents. A large-scale incident is defined in the
NIS2 directive’s Article 6(7) as an incident which either
(a) exceeds a handling capacity of a single member state
or which (b) has a significant impact on at least two mem-
ber states. Regarding incident management frameworks,
the first part of the definition resembles a concept of esca-
lation at the organizational level; an organizational CSIRT
or some related security team cannot get an incident under
control on its own (cf. Jaatun et al., 2009). Another point
is that the EC’s (2025a, p. 12) noted recent proposal clar-
ifies that these large-scale incidents are what is meant by
a cyber security crisis in the EU context. While keeping
the earlier remarks about terminology in mind, a cyber
security crisis is thus something that moves from the na-
tional level to the supranational level in Fig. 1. Also the
NIS2’s recital 69 clarifies this point by noting that large-
scale incidents “may escalate and turn into fully-fledged
crises”. Despite such an escalation potential and interest-
ingly enough, NIS2 does not explicitly say about reporting
obligations of large-scale incidents, but because these must
be something that also satisfy the definition for significant
incidents, reporting can be interpreted as mandatory.
The CSOA’s cyber security alert systems noted in Sub-
section 3.1 are also related to large-scale cyber security
incidents. According to the regulation’s Article 7, partic-
ularly the envisioned cross-border alert systems are seen
as relevant for detecting large-scale incidents and shar-
ing information about them. There are also a couple of
other important points to make about the relation between
large-scale incidents and the CSOA regulation.
The first point is about the exceeding of a member
state’s handling capacity used in the definition for a large-
scale cyber security incident. Here, the CSOA’s Article 14
specifies an establishment of a specific cyber security “re-
serve” for handling large-scale incidents. The reserve is
composed by national public sector representatives as well
as other trusted parties. According to Article 15, a mem-
ber state in need may then request help from the reserve
to recover from both significant and large-scale cyber secu-
rity incidents. Furthermore, the CSOA’s Article 19 spec-
ifies that help can be requested also by countries outside
of the EU, provided that they are taking part in the EU’s
Digital Europe Programme (DEP), a funding instrument
for digital technologies and digitalization in general.
The second point is that the CSOA specifies a new cyber
security incident review mechanism. Its scope is restricted
to significant and large-scale incidents. ENISA and a net-
work of authoritative CSIRT are specified as the respon-
sible parties for the actual reviews according to the regu-
lation’s Article 21(1). In line with the post-incident activ-
ities in the NIST’s incident management framework (Ci-
chonski et al., 2012), the reviews are used for improving the
union’s and the member states’ cyber security practices.
Despite an incident’s or a crisis’ negative consequences,
there is always also something to learn from them.
3.2. Deadlines
There are strict deadlines for incidents that are manda-
tory to report.
When comparing the CRA’s Article 14
and the NIS2 directive’s Article 23, the wordings about
the deadlines are not verbatim similar but their meaning
is more or less the same.4 For this reason, the deadlines
can be summarized in the form of Fig. 4. As was noted
in the preceding Subsection 3.1.5, the deadlines for report-
ing about large-scale incidents are implicit but follow from
their inevitable connection to significant incidents.
An-
other clarifying remark needed is that the CRA’s notion
about actively exploited vulnerabilities is not about inci-
dents per se but can be discussed alongside them because
the reporting deadlines are similar.
4 Although data protection was framed out from the paper’s
scope (see Subsection 2.1), it is still worth mentioning that in case
personal data is processed, there is an overlap with the General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) (EU, 2016), as also recognized in ex-
isting research (Ruohonen et al., 2025b). That is, according to the
GDPR’s Article 33, most personal data breaches must be commu-
nicated to data protection authorities within 72 hours. In addition,
some sector-specific laws, such as the one for the resilience of financial
services (EU, 2022c), impose further incident reporting obligations.
   ...   
Time
Within 
24 hours
Within 
72 hours
Upon
request
Notification
Status
updates
Final
report
Within 
14 days
Early
warning
Within
a month
Actively
exploited
vulnerabilities
Incidents
Figure 4: Reporting Deadlines for Actively Exploited Vulnerabilities
and Severe, Significant, and, by implication, Large-Scale Incidents
Thus,
severe,
significant,
and large-scale incidents
should be initially reported to an authoritative CSIRT,
or some other competent authority, no later than twenty-
four hours after becoming aware of them. Then, a more
detailed incident report should be delivered no later than
seventy-two hours after becoming aware of a given inci-
dent. The report delivered should include an initial as-
sessment about a given incident, including its severity and
impact, as well as, where applicable, any indicators of a
compromise.
After these two reports, an authoritative
CSIRT may request status updates at any time. A final
report should be delivered within a month. In addition
to severity and impact, the final report should contain a
root cause analysis, any applied and ongoing mitigation
measures, and, where applicable, an assessment about any
cross-border impacts. The cross-border impact assessment
again signifies the relation to large-scale incidents.
Re-
garding actively exploited vulnerabilities, the CRA’s Arti-
cle 14(2)(c) specifies that a final report should be delivered
already no later than fourteen days.
It should describe
a given vulnerability’s severity and impact, information
about potential exploitation, and details about security
updates or other corrective measures made available.
Finally, it should be emphasized that while these re-
porting obligations and their deadlines are only toward
public authorities, also other parties typically need to be
informed, including further external parties, such as stake-
holders and business partners, and internal parties, such as
an organization’s management and, where applicable, its
employees (Kulikova et al., 2012). Thus, existing incident
management plans at the organizational level presumably
require or benefit from updating; a synchronization with
the law-imposed obligations might be a good idea. Due to
the various reporting obligations and strict deadlines, an
analogous point applies on the public sector side; so-called
incident triaging (ENISA, 2010) likely requires planning.
4. Crisis Management
4.1. Governance Units
The management of cyber security crises is generally
challenging in the EU due to the involvement of at least
two member states, given the definition for a large-scale
cyber security incident noted in Subsection 3.1.5. Given
the analytical levels discussed in Subsection 2.3, the man-
agement is about the national level and the supranational
level. In terms of the former, the term transnational could
be used to characterize the horizontal interstate manage-
ment and coordination between the member states in-
volved. While governments may be involved too in a case
of particularly severe crises, the term intergovernmental
might be too strong or even misleading because the ac-
tual day-to-day crisis management would not likely involve
governmental representatives in most cases. The NIS2 di-
rective also established new crisis management bodies that
are not explicitly and directly about the member states’
central governments. These also coordinate vertically to-
ward units operating at the supranational level.
In general, the NIS2 directive specifies cyber security cri-
sis management to occur through three governance bodies:
1. The first is the authoritative network of European
CSIRTs upon with the EU’s whole cyber security
framework was initially built (Ruohonen et al., 2016).
As the CSIRT network extends beyond Europe, the
international level may be involved too, as also in-
dicated by Fig. 2. In general, NIS2 strengthens the
European CSIRT network further, obliging also the
authoritative CSIRTs to carry out further tasks.
2. The second is a specific NIS2 cooperation group.
However, as specified in the NIS2’s Article 14(4), its
tasks are largely on the political side instead of the
operational crisis management side.
Among other
things, the group is specified to help at formulating
further policies, exchanging best practices and view-
points, including regarding sectoral implementations,
carrying out risk analyses, providing strategic guid-
ance, and meeting with private sector stakeholders.
3. The third is a new European cyber crisis liaison or-
ganisation network (EU-CyCLONe). As specified in
the NIS2’s Article 16, unlike the cooperation group,
EU-CyCLONe is on the operational side; in partic-
ular, it is explicitly tasked to manage large-scale cy-
ber security incidents. In general, the management
involves similar phases that were noted in Subsec-
tion 2.4, among them preparedness and response. The
EU-CyCLONe network is specified to also coordinate
with the network of authoritative European CSIRTs.
The political side of crisis management deserves a fur-
ther comment. This side is seen in the composition of the
NIS2 cooperation group. As specified in the NIS2’s Arti-
cle 14(3), it is composed of representatives of the member
states, the EC, and ENISA, but also other public sector au-
thorities may be present, including the European External
Action Service (EEAS) who is responsible for the EU’s for-
eign policy. While the activities of the EEAS were framed
to outside of the paper’s scope via the discussion in Sub-
section 2.1, it is still worth emphasizing that cyber security
crisis management in the EU may involve also diplomacy
and related foreign policy activities, as also indicated by
the summary in Fig. 2. Analogously, the NIS2 directive’s
Article 16(3)(d) specifies that the EU-CyCLONe network
should also “support decision-making at political level”.
Given these elaborations, it is understandable that some
criticism has been levied about increased administrative
complexity, fragmentation, and bureaucratization of the
EU’s cyber security governance model in general (Ruoho-
nen, 2024a,b). Such criticism aligns with a broader branch
of research on the “bureau-politics” of crisis management
(Rosenthal et al., 1991), including potential “turf wars”
between governance bodies (Finke, 2020; Senninger et al.,
2021). The COVID-19 pandemic provides an excellent ref-
erence point in this regard (cf. Lipscy, 2020; Zahariadis
et al., 2023). This research branch is relevant to note be-
cause rapid responses and timeliness in general are impor-
tant particularly in the cyber security context. As already
the deadlines in Fig. 4 demonstrate, rapid responses are
required from EAIEs and others, but it remains generally
unclear how fast and well the responses travel through the
bureaucracy and politics at the receiving end.
4.2. Management at the Supranational Level
The CSIRT and EU-CyCLONe networks as well as the
NIS2 cooperation group operate both at the national level
and the supranational level. At the former level, these al-
low horizontal coordination between the member states;
at the latter level, these enable the member states to co-
ordinate with EU-level institutions, among them the EC
and ENISA. As was noted in Subsection 2.3.2, the Council
is on the side of intergovernmental governance, and within
the Council, the member states have permanent represen-
tatives through the Committee of the Permanent Repre-
sentatives of the Governments of the Member States to the
European Union—or Coreper in short. With these clarifi-
cations, a high-level crisis management framework at the
EU-level can be illustrated in the form of Fig. 5.
The process starts when an early warning or a later in-
cident notification is received, possibly from an EAIE or
a larger set of EAIEs, through an authoritative CSIRT or
multiple authoritative CSIRTs. For the present purposes,
the phase after the initial assessment, the EU activation
phase, is the crucial one; during this phase, the two part
definition for a large-scale cyber security incident should
be likely assessed. Politically, the activation is done by
the rotating Presidency of the Council after consulting
the EC and the EEAS’ high representative (EU, 2018).
As noted in the CSOA’s Article 20, the political activa-
tion procedure is similar to requesting help from the new
cyber reserve as well as those used for natural and other
disasters requiring civil protection. Technically, however,
the available documentation is unclear about the actual
incident analysis.
The EEAS, EC, ENISA, CSIRT and
EU-CyCLONe networks are mentioned alongside Europol,
the EU’s own CSIRT (known as CERT-EU), and even the
EU’s intelligence and satellite institutions (EC, 2025a; EU,
2017). Given that the political activation depends on, or
should depend on, the adequacy and correctness of a tech-
nical incident analysis, already the amount of potential ac-
tors is enough to reiterate the earlier point about adminis-
trative complexity and its possible consequences. Nor is it
possible to deduce what might be a cost of a false positive.
Assuming that political activation is done, a further bot-
tleneck might be the subsequent phases.
As seen from
Fig. 5, there are preparations and meetings before the ac-
tual EU-level coordination starts looping. If a response
time is short, these phases may cause undesirable delays.
In addition to a technical response, including the con-
tainment, eradication, and recovery tasks in the NIST’s
framework (Cichonski et al., 2012), the EU’s crisis man-
agement plans include also considerations about funding
needs, diplomatic responses, and crisis communication.
In addition to academic research (Kulikova et al., 2012),
the role and importance of crisis communication have re-
cently been emphasized also by ENISA (2024b) who fur-
ther stressed a need to develop clear technical indicators
and decision mechanisms for activating the EU machinery.
4.3. A Hypothetical Scenario
4.3.1. Setup
A brief hypothetical scenario can be presented by ex-
tending the real-world case briefly described in Subsec-
tion 2.3.5 toward a cyber security crisis. Thus, the con-
text is again the energy sector.
Although the Euro-
pean energy sector has not seen frequent incidents (see
Fig. 6), supposedly because of the sector’s cyber secu-
rity maturity (ENISA, 2024a), the energy sector is catego-
rized as critical in the NIS2 directive. The energy sector
also continuously ranks high in terms of criticality assess-
ments (ENISA, 2025a). As will be seen, the sector’s criti-
cality partially stems from potential cascading effects. To
this end and other ends, the energy sector has also been
a topic of exercises conducted by the national and EU-
level authorities (ENISA, 2024a).
To further frame the
hypothetical scenario toward the real-world case, the con-
text can be restricted to the Nordic countries. The elec-
tricity grids in these countries are mostly connected and
synchronized.5 The large synchronized Nordic smart grid
further has non-synchronized links to Germany, Poland,
Lithuania, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, and Es-
tonia (SK, 2025). When keeping in mind the definition
for a large-scale incident or a crisis (see Subsection 3.1.5),
the Nordic smart electricity grid thus provides an excellent
case for the hypothetical scenario.
4.3.2. Events
With the previous notes, consider that a large interna-
tional producer reported both to ENISA and a national
authoritative CSIRT in one Nordic country about an ac-
tively exploited vulnerability in an industrial control sys-
tem product. The producer had reliable evidence about
5 Though, Iceland and parts of Denmark are disconnected.
Constant
monitoring
Analysis 
and advice
Incident
Assessment
No
Preparation
Yes
Presidency
round table
Council 
(or Coreper)
meeting
EU-level
coordination
Impact
monitoring
Technical
response
Cyber
diplomacy
Emergency
funding
Crisis
communication
Ongoing?
Yes
Phasing out
No
ENISA's
report
EU
activation?
Figure 5: Cyber Security Crisis Management at the EU-Level (adopted and modified from EU 2017, Fig. 2)
active exploitation in Southeast Asia but was not aware
about any actual incidents in Europe, including severe inci-
dents that would warrant additional mandatory reporting.
The notification about the actively exploited vulnerability
was done within the 72 hour deadline. The authoritative
CSIRT started to investigate the vulnerability notification.
Public administration
Transportation
Banking and finance
Business services
Digital infrastructure
General public
Manufacturing
Media and entertainment
Healthcare
Energy
Retailing
Education
Information technology
service management
Defense
Agriculture
Space
Share (%)
0
5
10
15
20
Figure 6: Shares of Reported Incidents in Selected Sectors Between
July 2023 and June 2024 in the European Union (adopted from
ENISA 2024a, Fig. 5 on p. 18)
About a week after the initial notification, an author-
itative CSIRT in Southern Europe received a few almost
identical reports about near misses caught by intrusion
detection systems deployed by two companies operating
in the water management sector, which too is defined as
critical in the NIS2 directive. After consulting the compa-
nies, the CSIRT concluded these to be noise that is typical
to intrusion detection systems. It did not notify ENISA or
other coordination bodies. In the meanwhile, the Nordic
CSIRT was still investigating the actively exploited vulner-
ability in collaboration with the international producer.
About two weeks after the initial notification about ac-
tive exploitation outside of Europe, another authoritative
CSIRT in another Nordic country received an urgent no-
tification about a significant incident in the energy sector;
two relatively large regions were out of power due to a
suspected cyber attack. Soon after, a similar notification
was received by the Lithuanian authoritative CSIRT. The
two CSIRTs notified ENISA and started to investigate the
incidents through the EU-CyCLONe network. Thanks to
redundancy mechanisms, the EAIEs involved managed to
solve the power cuts within about eight hours.
As the
incidents were under control, the EU-CyCLONe network
urged the EU-level administration to not active the EU’s
cyber security crisis management framework even though
already the preliminary investigation revealed that the def-
inition for a large-scale incident was satisfied. Neverthe-
less, the coordination network decided that a joint internal
investigation was needed.
About a month after the initial notification, the inter-
nal investigation was ready. It indicated that the power
availability issues had resulted from a cyber attack that
involved tampering with control messages delivered to in-
dustrial control systems used by the EAIEs involved. How-
ever, there had been a significant cyber security incident
only in one Nordic country; the Lithuanian case had oc-
curred merely because of the disruption to the shared grid.
Furthermore, it was concluded that all previous notifica-
tions were related. The root cause was the actively ex-
ploited vulnerability initially reported to another Nordic
authoritative CSIRT. Also the near misses in an unrelated
sector had been about the same vulnerability.
4.3.3. The Points Raised
Although only hypothetically, the scenario illustrates
seven points: (1) the potential involvement of entities out-
side of Europe; (2) the criticality concept’s ties not only
to sectors but also to products; (3) the potential cascad-
ing effects and relationships between confidentiality, in-
tegrity, and availability; (4) the potential difficulties to
triage, analyze, and correlate different notification types;
(5) the potential dangers involved in making decisions
about true and false positives; (6) the potential delays
and related problems in vulnerability and incident coor-
dination; and (7) the potential political and other uncer-
tainties about the EU-level activation. Regarding further
scenarios, whether hypothetical or empirical, particularly
the escalation and containment dynamics require better
understanding. Despite the seventh point raised, the sce-
nario is also a good way to conclude by answering to RQ.1,
RQ.2, and RQ.3.
5. Conclusion
The paper’s conclusion can be summarized by answering
to the three RQs specified in the introduction. Thus:
1. The EU’s new cyber security laws distinguish four
incident types: “conventional” incidents, severe inci-
dents, significant incidents, and large-scale incidents.
Albeit only implicitly, the last incident type is equated
to the concept of a cyber security crisis. The defini-
tion for such a crisis is twofold: a cyber security inci-
dent becomes a cyber security crisis either in case it
exceeds a handling capacity of a single member state
of the EU or in case it significantly affects at least two
member states simultaneously.
2. The EU’s new cyber security laws significantly extend
reporting obligations toward public sector authorities.
Both operators of critical infrastructures and produc-
ers of many information technology products are man-
dated to report incidents; only reporting of the “con-
ventional” incidents is voluntary. The deadlines for
reporting are also strict. Furthermore, there are over-
laps presents between the reporting obligations.
3. Cyber security crisis management and its governance
in the EU are still strongly built upon national au-
thoritative CSIRTs and their EU-level coordination
bodies, including ENISA in particular. However, the
new laws have also brought additional governance
bodies, among them EU-CyCLONe that was specif-
ically established for cyber security crisis manage-
ment. In addition, a new staff reserve has been es-
tablished for helping countries facing cyber security
crises. Despite—or due to—these new crisis manage-
ment bodies and recent policy proposals, it remains
generally unclear how—and how well—crisis manage-
ment works at the EU-level administration.
6. Limitations
The most notable limitation is related to interpretation,
including a degree of subjectivity that inevitably follows
from descriptive policy research dealing with laws and
theory-building.
Among other things, as was noted in
Subsection 3.1.4, many of the qualifying adjectives, such
as significant and severe, are open to further interpreta-
tion. However, definite interpretations are likely possible
only after guidance from the public authorities involved,
including in terms of administrative fines or other enforce-
ment actions.
As both the fines and other enforcement
actions, such as a potential withdrawal of non-compliant
products from the EU’s internal market, can be severe, it
is likely that some future cases will end up also to courts
whose decisions entail the final interpretations.
Another notable limitation is related to the national
adaptations and implementations of the EU laws con-
sidered.
Existing results indicate a substantial varia-
tion already between the national transpositions of some
related EU cyber security laws (Becker, 2025).
In
general—and despite the new EU laws and frameworks
for these (ENISA, 2025a), national and other definitions
for alert levels and criticality itself remain unclear, non-
harmonized, and generally vague (Alexopoulos et al., 2025;
Ruohonen, 2024a; Ruohonen et al., 2025a).6 Thus, further
research is needed to better understand the national level
in Fig. 1. As was noted in Subsection 2.3.3, a divergence
between the member states can be expected.
7. Further Work
The three concluding answers can be accompanied by
four points about further research. To motivate the first
point, it can be noted that despite uncertainties about
actual crisis management particularly at the EU-level, it
seems the NIS2 directive has addressed a commonplace
problem among many member states whose national laws
and frameworks lacked a definition for a cyber security
crisis (Boin et al., 2018). However, the NIS2’s definition for
a large-scale cyber security incident might also be argued
to be about too large crises in a sense that an escalation
to a national level might already be perceived as a crisis
in some severe cases. This point motivates the first avenue
for further research.
Given the overall escalation theme in incident manage-
ment research (Mitropoulos et al., 2006), as already said,
(1) further theoretical and comparative research is needed
about the analytical levels in Fig. 1. Regarding compar-
isons, a good starting point would be a comparative ex-
amination of national laws and frameworks for cyber se-
curity crisis management in the member states. National
adaptations and implementations would also help at ad-
dressing the interpretation limitation.
Also the paper’s
framings noted in Subsection 2.1 would deserve a theoret-
ical visit. Despite the research on hybrid threats, the rela-
tion between cyber security incidents and crises, including
their potential cascading effects, and other incidents and
crises remain arguably poorly understood and theorized.
These points justify further theoretical and conceptual re-
search too. Regarding comparative research more gener-
ally, (2) further research is also needed to compare the
EU’s cyber security crisis management framework with
other countries. China and the United States would be
good candidates for a comparison.
Regarding the EU-level cyber security crisis manage-
ment, (3) further research is required also on the roles,
duties, and other functions of various different administra-
tive units, whether national, supranational, or something
6 For instance, ENISA (2025a, p. 12) has assessed criticality in
terms of socio-economic impacts, spillovers to other sectors and coun-
tries, an incident’s or a crisis’ longitudinal persistence, and reliance
on information and communication technologies. Although sensible
as such, it remains unclear how objective such broad assessment cri-
teria are. Many aspects of criticality are also missing from sectoral
frameworks, including the NIS2 directive (Ruohonen et al., 2025a).
in-between. Composites such accountability, collaboration
and coordination, transparency, information sharing, de-
centralization and autonomy, and responsiveness could be
used to frame an evaluation (cf. Vu et al., 2025). How-
ever: even though it is easy to agree with an argument
that more empirical research is needed on incident man-
agement in general (Tøndel et al., 2014), a problem with
the NIS2’s large-scale incidents is that thus far at least
publicly disclosed cases are missing. In other words, it is
difficult to properly evaluate a management of something
that has not supposedly yet happened in Europe.
Therefore, regarding empirical research, it might make
sense to start from smaller evaluations.
In particular,
(4) the increased reporting obligations, including the strict
deadlines, would offer a good topic for empirical evalua-
tion research. Already the points raised in Subsection 4.3
would provide a theoretical motivation. A lot of research
and other work have also been done to help at evaluat-
ing the efficiency, accuracy, and other aspects CSIRTs and
their incident management practices (Connell and Waits,
2013; Dorofee et al., 2007, among many others). However,
a broader evaluation is required also with respect to EAIEs
and others who are obliged to report about incidents or
do so voluntarily.
Given the CRA’s and NIS2’s strict
deadlines, as well as the penalties from non-compliance,
it may be that organizations and others will report ea-
gerly and possibly incautiously. Thus, the quality of early
warnings, incidents notifications, and particularly final re-
ports (Busetti and Scanni, 2025), including a rate of false
positives, would provide a good research topic with prac-
tical relevance. A related topic would involve examining
whether reporting guidelines and a systematic reporting
format might increase reporting quality and reduce noise.
As it stands, neither the NIS2 directive nor the other laws
say anything about what should be reported.
The reporting topic is generally important because reg-
ulatory obligations upon incident management have re-
cently been argued to work poorly in improving organi-
zations’ cyber security postures (Patterson et al., 2024).
This point serves well to end the paper by reiterating that
something should always be learned from cyber security
incidents and crises. Because the reports are likely confi-
dential, however, it may well be that the topic could only
be studied by indirect means, such as surveys or interviews
of public authorities and EAIEs.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Muhammad Mohsin Hussain for
helpful comments.
References
Adkins, H., Beyer, B., Blankinship, P., Oprea, A., Lewandowski, P.,
and Stubblefield, A. (2020).
Building Secure and Reliable Sys-
tems: Best Practices for Designing, Implementing, and Main-
taining Systems. O’Reilly, Sebastopol.
Al Sabbagh, B. and Kowalski, S. (2015). A Socio-Technical Frame-
work for Threat Modeling a Software Supply Chain. IEEE Secu-
rity & Privacy, 13(4):30–39.
Alahmadi, B. A., Axon, L., and Martinovic, I. (2022). 99% False
Positives: A Qualitative Study of SOC Analysts’ Perspectives on
Security Alarms.
In Proceedings of the 31st USENIX Security
Symposium, pages 2783–2800, Boston. USENIX.
Alexopoulos, M. J., Niemi, A., Skobiej, B., and Torres, F. S. (2025).
Examination of the Critical Infrastructure Resilience Directive
From the Maritime Point of View. Journal of Common Market
Studies, 63(2):667–678.
Anagnostakis, D. (2023). Hybrid Threats: A European Response. In
Balomenos, K. P., Fytopoulos, A., and Pardalos, P. M., editors,
Handbook for Management of Threats: Security and Defense, Re-
silience and Optimal Strategies, pages 425–441. Springer, Cham.
Anderson, R. (2020). Security Engineering. Wiley, New York, third
edition.
Antoniuk, D. (2023).
Nearly Two Dozen Danish Energy Com-
panies Hacked Through Firewall Bug in May.
The Record,
available online in March 2025:
https://therecord.media/
danish-energy-companies-hacked-firewall-bug.
Ayyub, B. M., McGill, W. L., and Kaminskiy, M. (2007). Critical
Asset and Portfolio Risk Analysis: An All-Hazards Framework.
Risk Analysis, 27(4):789–801.
Bartle, I. and Flinders, M. (2016).
Multi-Level Governance.
In
Ansell, C. and Torfing, J., editors, Handbook on Theories of Gov-
ernance, pages 486–498. Edward Elgar, Cheltenham.
Becker, M. (2025). Transposing EU-Legislation on Critical Infras-
tructure Protection Legal Implementation Performance in the
Baltic Sea Region. International Journal of Critical Infrastruc-
ture Protection, 50:100781.
B´eland, D., Marier, P., and Paquet, M. (2024). Subnational Com-
parative Policy Analysis: Institutions, Methodology, and Research
Agenda. Journal of Comparative Policy Analysis: Research and
Practice, 26(6):553–566.
Bertoldi, A., de Oliveira Chishman, R. L., and da Rosa Alves, I. M.
(2007). Adjectival Semantics and the Legal Domain: A Study for
Ontology Improvement. Inteligencia Artificial, 11(33):19–26.
Bhatt, S., Manadhata, P. K., and Zomlot, L. (2014). The Operational
Role of Security Information and Event Management Systems.
IEEE Security & Privacy, 12(5):35–41.
Bickerton, C., Brack, N., Coman, R., and Crespy, A. (2022). Con-
ficts of Sovereignty in Contemporary Europe: A Framework of
Analysis. Comparative European Politics, 20:257–274.
Boeke, S. (2017). National Cyber Crisis Management: Different Eu-
ropean Approaches. Governance, 31(3):449–464.
Boin, A., Ekengren, M., and Rhinard, M. (2018). Hiding in Plain
Sight: Conceptualizing the Creeping Crisis. Risk, Hazards & Cri-
sis in Public Policy, 9(2):116–138.
Brownlee, N. and Guttman, E. (1998). Expectations for Computer
Security Incident Response. RFC 2350, the Internet Engineering
Task Force (IETF), available online in March 2025: https://www.
ietf.org/rfc/rfc2350.txt.
Busetti, S. and Scanni, F. M. (2025). Evaluating Incident Report-
ing in Cybersecurity. From Threat Detection to Policy Learning.
Government Information Quarterly, 42(1):102000.
BusinessEurope (2025).
Reducing Regulatory Burden to Restore
the EU’s Competitive Edge.
Available online in September
2025:
https://www.businesseurope.eu/wp-content/uploads/
2025/02/2025-01-22_businesseurope_mapping_of_regulatory_
burden-d55-1.pdf.
CFCS
(2023).
The
Cyber
Threat
Against
the
Danish
Energy
Sector.
Centre
for
Cyber
Security
(CFCS),
available
online
in
March
2025:
https://www.cfcs.dk/
globalassets/cfcs/dokumenter/trusselsvurderinger/en/
-cyber-threat-against-the-danish-energy-sector.pdf.
Christensen, T., Danielsen, O. A., Pægreid, and Rykkja, L. H.
(2016). Comparing Coordination Structures for Crisis Manage-
ment in Six Countries. Public Administration, 94(2):316–332.
Christou, G. (2016).
Cybersecurity in the European Union:
Re-
silience and Adaptability in Governance and Policy.
Palgrave
Macmillan, New York.
Cichonski, P., Millar, T., Grance, T., and Scarfone, K. (2012). Com-
puter Security Incident Handling Guide Recommendations of the
National Institute of Standards and Technology. National Insti-
tute of Standards and Technology (NIST), Special Publication
800-61, available online in January 2025: https://nvlpubs.nist.
gov/nistpubs/specialpublications/nist.sp.800-61r2.pdf.
Collier, J. (2016). Strategies of Cyber Crisis Management: Lessons
from the Approaches of Estonia and the United Kingdom.
In
Taddeo, M. and Glorioso, L., editors, Ethics and Policies for Cy-
ber Operations: A NATO Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of
Excellence Initiative, pages 187–212. Springer, Cham.
Connell, A. and Waits, T. (2013). The CERT Assessment Tool: In-
creasing a Security Incident Responder’s Ability to Assess Risk.
In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Tech-
nologies for Homeland Security (HST 2013), pages 236–240,
Waltham.
DeLeon, P. and Weible, C. M. (2010). Policy Process Research for
Democracy: A Commentary on Lasswell’s Vision. International
Journal of Policy Studies, 1(2):23–34.
Dorofee,
A.,
Killcrece,
G.,
Ruefle,
R.,
and
Zajicek,
M.
(2007).
Incident
Management
Capability
Metrics
Ver-
sion
0.1.
Software
Engineering
Institute,
CERT
Pro-
gram, Carnegie Mellon University, available online in March
2025:
http://pstorage-cmu-348901238291901.s3.amazonaws.
com/12060836/file.pdf.
EC (2020).
COMMISSION STAFF WORKING DOCUMENT:
IMPACT ASSESSMENT REPORT Accompanying the Docu-
ment Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament
and of the Council on Measures for a High Common Level
of Cybersecurity Across the Union, Repealing Directive (eu)
2016/1148.
COM(2020) 823 final – SEC(2020) 430 final –
SWD(2020) 344 final, the European Commission (EC), avail-
able online in March 2025:
https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/
dae/redirection/document/72176.
EC (2025a). Proposal for a COUNCIL RECOMMENDATION for an
EU Blueprint on Cybersecurity Crisis Management. COM(2025)
66 final, 2025/0036 (NLE), the European Commission (EC), avail-
able online in March 2025:
https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/
dae/redirection/document/113086.
EC (2025b).
Shaping Europe’s Digital Future:
Cybersecurity.
The European Commission (EC), available online in March
2025:
https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/
cybersecurity.
ENISA (2010).
Good Practice Guide for Incident Management.
The European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA). Avail-
able online in March 2025:
https://enisa.europa.eu/sites/
default/files/publications/Incident_Management_guide.pdf.
ENISA
(2024a).
2024
Report
on
the
State
of
Cyber-
security
in
the
Union.
The
European
Union
Agency
for
Cybersecurity
(ENISA).
Available
online
in
August
2025:
https://enisa.europa.eu/sites/default/files/
2024-11/2024%20Report%20on%20the%20State%20of%20the%
20Cybersecurity%20in%20the%20Union.pdf.
ENISA (2024b).
Best Practices for Cyber Crisis Management.
The European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA). Avail-
able online in March 2025:
https://enisa.europa.eu/sites/
default/files/2024-11/ENISA%20Study%20Best%20Practices%
20Cyber%20Crisis%20Management.pdf.
ENISA (2025a). ENISA NIS360 2024: ENISA Cybersecurity Ma-
turity & Criticality Assessment of NIS2 Sectors.
The Euro-
pean Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA). Available online
in March 2025: https://www.enisa.europa.eu/sites/default/
files/2025-03/ENISA%20-%20NIS360%20-%202024_0.pdf.
ENISA (2025b). European Union Vulnerability Database. The Euro-
pean Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA). Available online
in March 2025: https://euvd.enisa.europa.eu/.
ENISA (2025c). Technical Implementation Guidance: On Commis-
sion Implementing Regulation (EU) 2024/2690 of 17 October
2024 Laying Down Rules for The Application of NIS2 Direc-
tive as Regards Technical and Methodological Requirements
of Cybersecurity Risk-Management Measures.
The European
Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA). Available online in
August 2025: https://enisa.europa.eu/sites/default/files/
2025-06/ENISA_Technical_implementation_guidance_on_
cybersecurity_risk_management_measures_version_1.0.pdf.
EP (2024).
Cyber Solidarity Act.
Briefings:
EU Legisla-
tion in Progress, the European Parliament (EP), available on-
line in March 2025: https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/
etudes/BRIE/2023/754614/EPRS_BRI(2023)754614_EN.pdf.
EU (2016). Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the Protection of Nat-
ural Persons With Regard to the Processing of Personal Data
and on the Free Movement of Such Data, and Repealing Direc-
tive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation) (Text With
EEA Relevance).
The European Union (EU), available online
in March 2025: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32016R0679&qid=1750652352977.
EU (2017).
Commission Recommendation (EU) 2017/1584 of 13
September 2017 on Coordinated Response to Large-Scale Cyberse-
curity Incidents and Crises. The European Union (EU), available
online in March 2025:
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reco/
2017/1584/oj/eng.
EU (2018). Council Implementing Decision (EU) 2018/1993 of 11
December 2018 on the EU Integrated Political Crisis Response
Arrangements.
The European Union (EU), available online in
March 2025:
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/dec_impl/2018/
1993/oj/eng.
EU (2019). Regulation (EU) 2019/881 of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 17 April 2019 on ENISA (the European
Union Agency for Cybersecurity) and on Information and Com-
munications Technology Cybersecurity Certification and Repeal-
ing Regulation (EU) No 526/2013 (Cybersecurity Act) (Text With
EEA Relevance).
The European Union (EU), available online
in March 2025: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2019/881/
oj/eng.
EU (2022a).
Directive (EU) 2022/2555 of the European Parlia-
ment and of the Council of 14 December 2022 on Measures for a
High Common Level of Cybersecurity Across the Union, Amend-
ing Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 and Directive (EU) 2018/1972,
and Repealing Directive (EU) 2016/1148 (NIS 2 Directive) (Text
With EEA Relevance). The European Union (EU), available on-
line in March 2025: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/dir/2022/
2555/oj/eng.
EU (2022b). Directive (EU) 2022/2557 of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 14 December 2022 on the Resilience of
Critical Entities and Repealing Council Directive 2008/114/EC
(Text With EEA Relevance).
The European Union (EU),
available online in March 2025:
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/
legal-content/en/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32022L2557.
EU (2022c).
Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 of the European Parlia-
ment and of the Council of 14 December 2022 on Digital Opera-
tional Resilience for the Financial Sector and Amending Regula-
tions (EC) no 1060/2009, (EU) No 648/2012, (EU) No 600/2014,
(EU) No 909/2014 and (EU) 2016/1011 (Text With EEA Rel-
evance).
The European Union (EU), available online in March
2025: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2022/2554/oj/eng.
EU (2024). Regulation (EU) 2024/2847 of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 23 October 2024 on Horizontal Cybersecurity
Requirements for Products With Digital Elements and Amending
Regulations (EU) No 168/2013 and (EU) 2019/1020 and Direc-
tive (EU) 2020/1828 (Cyber Resilience Act) (Text With EEA
Relevance). The European Union (EU), available online in March
2025: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/2847/oj/eng.
EU (2025). Regulation (EU) 2025/38 of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 19 December 2024 Laying Down Measures
to Strengthen Solidarity and Capacities in the Union to Detect,
Prepare for and Respond to Cyber Threats and Incidents and
Amending Regulation (EU) 2021/694 (Cyber Solidarity Act). The
European Union (EU), available online in March 2025: https:
//eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2025/38/oj/eng.
Finke, D. (2020). Turf Wars in Government Administration: Inter-
departmental Cooperation in the European Commission. Public
Administration, 98(2):498–514.
Fischer-H¨ubner, S., Alcaraz, C., Ferreira, A., Fernandez-Gago,
C., Lopez, J., Markatos, E., Islami, L., and Akil, M. (2021).
Stakeholder Perspectives and Requirements on Cybersecurity in
Europe.
Journal of Information Security and Applications,
61:102916.
G¨anzle, S., Kern, K., and Tynkkynen, N. (2022).
Governing the
Baltic Sea Region at Critical Junctures (1991–2021):
How Do
Transnational and Intergovernmental Organizations Cope With
External Regional Change? Journal of Baltic Studies, 54(3):421–
442.
Gjesvik, L. (2019). Comparing Cyber Security: Critical Infrastruc-
ture Protection in Norway, the UK and Finland. Norwegian In-
stitute of International Affairs (NUPI), available online in March
2025:
https://nupi.brage.unit.no/nupi-xmlui/bitstream/
handle/11250/2598280/NUPI_Report_5_2019_Gjesvik.pdf.
Goodman, W. (2010). Cyber Deterrence: Tougher in Theory Than
in Practice? Strategic Studies Quarterly, 4(3):102–135.
Handler, H. (2024). Europe Tested by Crises: The EU on the Path
to a New Identity. Springer, Wiesbaden.
Head, B. W. (2022). Wicked Problems in Public Policy: Understand-
ing and Responding to Complex Challenges. Palgrave Macmillan,
Cham.
Heine, M. (2019).
Managing Systemic Risks: Opening Up Public
Crisis. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Systemic Risks in
Global Networks, Co-Located with the 14. Internationale Tagung
Wirtschaftsinformatik (WI 2019), Siegen. CEUR-WS.
Hutzschenreuter, T., Matt, T., and Kleindienst, I. (2020).
Going
Subnational: A Literature Review and Research Agenda. Journal
of World Business, 55:101076.
Izumi, T. (2024). Introduction and Overview of the All-Hazard Ap-
proach. In Izumi, T., Abe, M., Fujita, K., and Shaw, R., editors,
All-Hazards Approach: Towards Resilience Building, pages 3–15.
Springer, Singapore.
Jaatun, M. G., Albrechtsen, E., Line, M. B., Tøndel, I. A., and
Longva, O. H. (2009). A Framework for Incident Response Man-
agement in the Petroleum Industry. International Journal of Crit-
ical Infrastructure Protection, 2(1–2):26–37.
Jhaveri, M. H., Cetin, O., Ga˜n´an, C., Moore, T., and van Eeten,
M. (2017). Abuse Reporting and the Fight Against Cybercrime.
ACM Computing Surveys, 49(4):1–17.
Jungwirth, R., Smith, H., Willkomm, E., Savolainen, J., Vil-
lota,
M. A.,
Lebrun,
M.,
Aho,
A.,
and Giannopoulos,
G.
(2023).
Hybrid Threats:
A Comprehensive Resilience Ecosys-
tem.
Publications Office of the European Union,
Luxem-
bourg.
A report prepared by the Joint Research Centre
(JRC)
and
the
European
Centre
of
Excellence
for
Coun-
tering
Hybrid
Threats
(Hybrid
CoE),
available
online
in
March 2025:
https://www.hybridcoe.fi/wp-content/uploads/
2023/04/CORE_comprehensive_resilience_ecosystem.pdf.
Kulikova, O., Heil, R., van den Berg, J., and Pieters, W. (2012).
Cyber Crisis Management: A Decision-Support Framework for
Disclosing Security Incident Information. In Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on Cyber Security (CyberSecurity 2012),
pages 103–112, Alexandria.
Lipscy, P. Y. (2020). COVID-19 and the Politics of Crisis. Interna-
tional Organization, 74(51):E98–E127.
Malatji, M., von Solms, S., and Marnewick, A. (2019).
Socio-
Technical
Systems
Cybersecurity
Framework
Cybersecurity
Framework. Information & Computer Security, 27(2):233–272.
Mitropoulos, S., Patsos, D., and Douligeris, C. (2006). On Incident
Handling and Response: A State-of-the-Art Approach. Computers
& Security, 25(5):351–370.
Mueck, M. and Gaie, C. (2025). Introduction to the European Cy-
bersecurity Act. In Mueck, M. and Gaie, C., editors, European
Digital Regulations, pages 229–247. Springer, Cham.
Østby, G. and Katt, B. (2020). Cyber Crisis Management Roles – A
Municipality Responsibility Case Study. In Proceedings of the 4th
IFIP TC 5 DCITDRR International Conference (ITDRR 2019),
pages 168–181, Kyiv. Springer.
Panteli, N., Nthubu, B. R., and Mersinas, K. (2025). Being Respon-
sible in Cybersecurity: A Multi-Layered Perspective. Information
Systems Frontiers, (Published online in February):1–19.
Patterson, C. M., Nurse, J. R. C., and Franqueira, V. N. L. (2024).
“I Don’t Think We’re There Yet”: The Practices and Challenges
of Organisational Learning from Cyber Security Incidents. Com-
puters & Security, 139:103699.
Patton, C. V., Sawicki, D. S., and Clark, J. J. (2016). Basic Meth-
ods of Policy Analysis and Planning. Routledge, London, third
edition.
Ramsell, E. and Wihlborg, E. (2012). Governing Technical Informa-
tion Systems in Local Crisis Management. Public Works Manage-
ment & Policy, 17(3):303–318.
Rataj, P. (2025). Botnet Defense Under EU Data Protection Law.
Computer Law & Security Review, 56:106080.
Rosenthal, U., ’t Hart, P., and Kouzmin, A. (1991). The Bureau-
Politics of Crisis Management.
Public Administration, 69:211–
233.
Rukanova, B., Wigand, R. T., van Stijn, E., and Tan, Y.-H. (2015).
Understanding Transnational Information Systems With Supra-
national Governance: A Multi-Level Conflict Management Per-
spective. Government Information Quarterly, 32(2):182–197.
Ruohonen, J. (2024a). A Systematic Literature Review on the NIS2
Directive. Archived manuscript, available online: https://arxiv.
org/abs/2412.08084.
Ruohonen, J. (2024b). The Incoherency Risk in the EU’s New Cyber
Security Policies. In Proceedings of the 23rd IFIP Conference on
e-Business, e-Services, and e-Society (I3E 2024), Lecture Notes
in Computer Science (Volume 14907), pages 284–295, Heerlen.
Springer.
Ruohonen,
J.,
Choudhary,
G.,
and Alami,
A. (2025a).
An
Overview of Cyber Security Funding for Open Source Software.
Archived manuscript, available online: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2412.05887.
Ruohonen, J., Hjerppe, K., and Kang, E.-Y. (2025b). A Mapping
Analysis of Requirements Between the CRA and the GDPR. In
(Forthcoming) Proceedings of the IEEE 33rd International Re-
quirements Engineering Conference Workshops (REW 2025), Va-
lencia. IEEE.
Available online: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.
01816.
Ruohonen, J., Hyrynsalmi, S., and Lepp¨anen, V. (2016). An Outlook
on the Institutional Evolution of the European Union Cyber Secu-
rity Apparatus. Government Information Quarterly, 33(4):746–
756.
Ruohonen, J., Koskinen, J., Klausen, S. H., and Gerdes, A. (2025c).
A Scenario Analysis of Ethical Issues in Dark Patterns and Their
Research. Archived manuscript, available online: https://arxiv.
org/abs/2503.01828.
Ruohonen, J., Nielsen, J. L., and Sk´orczynski, J. (2025d).
Risks
and Compliance with the EU’s Core Cyber Security Legislation.
Archived manuscript, available online: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2508.21386.
Ruohonen, J. and Timmers, P. (2024). Vulnerability Coordination
Under the Cyber Resilience Act. Archived manuscript, available
online: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.06261.
Secchi, L. (2016). Policy Analysis in Brazil: A Comparison of Ra-
tionalist and Argumentative Approaches. Journal of Comparative
Policy Analysis: Research and Practice, 18(1):88–101.
SektorCERT
(2023).
The
Attack
Against
Danish,
Crit-
ical
Infrastructure.
Available
online
in
March
2025:
https://sektorcert.dk/wp-content/uploads/2023/11/
SektorCERT-The-attack-against-Danish-critical-infrastructure-TLP-
pdf.
Senninger, R., Finke, D., and Blom-Hansen, J. (2021). Coordina-
tion Inside Government Administrations: Lessons from the EU
Commission. Governance, 34(3):707–726.
SK
(2025).
Karta
¨over
transmissionsn¨atet.
Svenska
Kraftn¨at
(SK),
available
online
in
June
2025:
https:
//www.svk.se/om-kraftsystemet/om-transmissionsnatet/
transmissionsnatskarta/.
Soesanto, S. and Smeets, M. (2021). Cyber Deterrence: The Past,
Present, and Future. In Osinga, F. and Sweijs, T., editors, NL
ARMS Netherlands Annual Review of Military Studies 2020: De-
terrence in the 21st Century—Insights from Theory and Practice,
pages 385–400. Asser Press, The Hague.
Sus, M. and Hadeed, M. (2020). Theory-Infused and Policy-Relevant:
On the Usefulness of Scenario Analysis for International Relations.
Contemporary Security Policy, 41(3):432–455.
Tøndel, I. A., Line, M. B., and Jaatun, M. G. (2014). Information
Security Incident Management: Current Practice as Reported in
the Literature. Computers & Security, 45:42–57.
Tsebelis, G. and Garrett, G. (2021). The Institutional Foundations
of Intergovernmentalism and Supranationalism in the European
Union. International Organization, 55(2):357–390.
van Haastrecht, M., Ozkan, B. Y., Brinkhuis, M., and Spruit,
M. (2021).
Respite for SMEs: A Systematic Review of Socio-
Technical Cybersecurity Metrics. Applied Sciences, 11:6909.
Vu, B. T., Obaitor, O. S., Grobusch, L. C., Sett, D., Hagenlocher,
M., Schinkel, U., Nguyen, L. K. H., Bachofer, F., Ngo, S. T., and
Garschagen, M. (2025). Enablers and Barriers to Implementing
Effective Disaster Risk Management According to Good Gover-
nance Principles: Lessons from Central Vietnam. International
Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 120:105344.
Zahariadis, N., Petridou, E., Exadaktylos, T., and Sparf, J. (2023).
Policy Styles and Political Trust in Europe’s National Responses
to the COVID-19 Crisis. Policy Studies, 44(1):46–67.
Zibak, A., Sauerwein, C., and Simpson, A. C. (2022). Threat In-
telligence Quality Dimensions for Research and Practice. Digital
Threats: Research and Practice, 3(4):1–22.
