Title: Research Directions in Quantum Computer Cybersecurity
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2512.23607v1
--------------------------------------------------

Research Directions
in Quantum Computer Cybersecurity
Jakub Szefer
Dept. of Electrical & Computer Engineering
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL, USA
jakub.szefer@northwestern.edu
Abstract—This document presents a concise overview of the
contemporary research directions in quantum computer cyber-
security. The aim of this document is not to be a survey, but
rather a succinct summary of the major research directions in
quantum computer cybersecurity at the end of the first half
of the current decade. The document has been inspired by the
presentations and discussions held at the 3rd Quantum Computer
Cybersecurity Symposium, but goes beyond the contents of the
symposium and aims to summarize at the high level the last five
years of quantum computer cybersecurity work in academia.
It is hoped that the document can provide researchers as well
as government and industry leaders an overview of the current
landscape of security threats and defenses against emergent
quantum computing technologies. The document also includes
a discussion of the current trends in cybersecurity research
on quantum computers, and the perceived research gaps that
should be filled with future funding and through academic and
industry research.
I. INTRODUCTION
Quantum computing research and deployment of (small, but
growing in size) quantum computers have expanded rapidly
in the last decades. We have seen quantum computers go
from 2 qubits [2] in late 1990s, to one of the first cloud-
based IBM quantum computers with a few qubits in around
2016, to now machines with 100s of qubits and projections
of having orders of magnitude larger machines by the end of
this decade [3]. The quantum computing ecosystem is now
huge with not only academia contributing, but with countless
startups and established industry companies working on all
aspects of quantum computing: from software and algorithms,
through compilers, to hardware. As of the end of 2025,
there is a large and growing number of cloud-based services
where users can access real quantum computers. Some major
cloud providers that offer quantum computers include IBM
Quantum [4], Amazon Braket [1], and Microsoft Azure [5].
But the list is growing each year, and many quantum computer
vendors now also offer their own cloud services.
Research on cybersecurity of quantum computers is much
younger than that on quantum computing in general. AA
rough but useful point of reference is the start of the current
decade when significant interest in quantum computer cyber-
security has emerged. Since about 2020, numerous research
papers have emerged showing various theoretical and proof-
of-concept demonstrations of potential attacks on quantum
computers. This growth in quantum computer cybersecurity
was driven from two directions: by security researchers who
started to work on quantum computing, and in a smaller part
by quantum computer researchers who saw an opportunity for
new ways of thinking about quantum computers by consider-
ing the security of these machines.
Discourse about quantum computer cybersecurity is also
reaching broader audiences and more and more academic
venues have emerged where researchers can share their find-
ings. The 1st Quantum Computer Cybersecurity Symposium
(QCCS) was held in 2023, for example, and many quantum
computer security-related workshops and special sessions at
hardware, architecture, and quantum computing conferences
have emerged since then. Through these venues, has begun
to be more visible and to reach more researchers in academia
and industry. Thanks to events such as the Quantum Computer
Cybersecurity Symposium, more attention is now being paid
to the security issues (and possible defenses) of quantum
computers. Most recently, the 3rd Quantum Computer Cy-
bersecurity Symposium attracted the largest interest from
academia and industry, with the highest level of sponsorship
and participation.
Quantum computer cybersecurity has some natural overlaps
with post-quantum cryptography (PQC), but is actually an
orthogonal research direction. It is useful to clarify this dis-
tinction as the mention of “security” together with “quantum
computing” is often interpreted as meaning something related
to post-quantum cryptography. This document, and quantum
computer cybersecurity research discussed here, do not cover
topics related to PQC. While post-quantum cryptography deals
with protection of classical computers, networks, and data
from attackers who have access to quantum computers (and
thus may break some of the current cryptographic algo-
rithms), quantum computer cybersecurity deals with protec-
tion of quantum computers themselves from security attacks.
Quantum computer cybersecurity also deals with protection
This work was supported in part by NSF grant 2332406.
arXiv:2512.23607v1  [quant-ph]  29 Dec 2025
of users’ quantum circuits or programs, including intellec-
tual property of the algorithms and the circuits that realize
them, and any data processed by quantum computers. It
further extends to protection of quantum computers from
attacks, especially considering the now omnipresent cloud-
based quantum computers that almost anybody can access (and
possibly attack).
II. DOCUMENT ORGANIZATION
This document provides an overview of the current research
directions in quantum computer cybersecurity. The document
is not a survey and has limited citations. It instead focuses
on presenting a high-level summary of the key research
directions, and research gaps that researchers and government
and industry leaders should be aware of when they consider
quantum computer security attacks and defenses.
A detailed, but naturally incomplete, listing of quantum
computer cybersecurity research papers can be found in the
public GitHub repository1 maintained by the author [8]. The
repository contains BibTeX files that are regularly updated
with new research papers that appear at the various con-
ferences and on arXiv. The repository can be considered
a companion to this document. Perspectives and research
directions presented in this document are drawn from the
research papers contained in the repository.
III. SECURITY IN THE NISQ ERA
Quantum computing can be broadly divided into NISQ
(Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum) and FTQC (Fault Tol-
erant Quantum Computing) regimes. Much of the early and
current cybersecurity research on quantum computers focuses
on NISQ, which is covered in this section.
NISQ quantum computers are generally described as ma-
chines with a small number of qubits, with relatively higher
error rates, and no error correction. NISQ quantum computers
are thus very noisy and unable to provide real benefits in
many domains, although there is hope and promise of having
benefits when using NISQ quantum computers with variational
algorithms, for example. From a security perspective, perhaps
the most interesting aspect of NISQ quantum computers is
that many of them are available as cloud-based services that
anybody can access, opening up possibilities of interesting
security threats. In parallel, quantum computers are moving
out of research labs, and can be found in hospitals or university
campuses where they are outside strictly secure data center
settings. This opens up other security threats, especially due
to physical attacks.
A. Major NISQ Quantum Computer Cybersecurity Research
Among NISQ quantum computer cybersecurity research, a
strong theme is that researchers have focused on exploiting the
noisy nature of NISQ machines to demonstrate various proof-
of-concept attacks. It should be noted that in many cases these
are not yet real attacks as they make certain assumptions, such
1BibTeX Repository for Quantum Computer Cybersecurity Research, https:
//github.com/caslab-code/qc-hardware-cybersecurity-bibtex
as multi-tenancy, which is not currently offered by quantum
computer providers. Nevertheless, the research demonstrates
in many cases that quantum computers are connected to the
cloud with almost no security mechanisms in place and are
quite vulnerable to attacks.
The majority of existing research on NISQ quantum com-
puter cybersecurity falls into the following categories:
1) Attacks Exploiting Gate Crosstalk: Perhaps one of the
first and major targets of security researchers working
on security of quantum computing was gate crosstalk.
Due to the noisy nature of NISQ quantum computers,
and lack of error correction, as well as use of fixed
frequency couplings (in superconducting qubit quantum
computers), it has been shown that it is relatively easy for
an “attacker” circuit with access to some qubits to induce
noise onto a “victim” circuit running concurrently on the
same machine. Such gate crosstalk can be achieved by the
attacker executing quantum gates on its assigned qubits
as the victim is doing some computation on its assigned
qubits. This can cause the victim circuit to generate
wrong or incorrect results: a type of attack on the integrity
of the computation. These attacks assume multi-tenancy,
which is not yet offered by quantum computer providers.
This is however by far the largest area of security focus
in the last years as noisy gates and qubits are vulnerable
to disruptions and researchers were able to show various
changes in victim circuit outcomes. Limited work has
also explored the crosstalk in the reverse direction where
attacker attempts to observe what computation the victim
is doing by measuring the crosstalk that victim’s compu-
tation induces on attacker’s qubits. This has been explored
only in limited cases, but demonstrates a type of attack
on confidentiality of the victim’s computation. Most work
has been done on superconducting quantum computers,
especially IBM, in large part thanks to IBM’s willingness
to make the machines available, in many cases for free,
to researchers. Recent advances in tunable couplers and
emergent fault-tolerant quantum computers may render
these types of attacks obsolete, but nevertheless, research
on these crosstalk attacks continues and shows new and
novel results every few months.
2) Attacks Exploiting Reset Gates: An interesting class
of attacks has focused on reset gates in superconducting
qubit quantum computers. Imperfect operation of the
reset gates was abused to show that an attacker circuit
could induce incorrect initial qubit states (by manipu-
lating qubits with higher energy states which are not
reset correctly by reset gates) so that the victim circuit
that runs subsequently generates incorrect computation
results. And, it was shown that attacker circuits running
after victim circuits could potentially steal the outputs of
the computation. The reset gate attacks could violate both
integrity and confidentiality of the victim circuit’s compu-
tation. They also do not require multi-tenancy. However,
they do assume use of active reset gates between shots
2
of the victim and attacker circuits, and that victim and
attacker will be interleaved at the granularity of shots.
It is not clear if this setting is currently supported by
quantum computer providers as scheduling algorithms
and use of active reset between different users’ circuits
is not documented publicly.
3) Attacks Exploiting Readout Crosstalk: One of the
newest categories of security attacks in quantum com-
puters leverages readout crosstalk. A feature of super-
conducting quantum computers is that many qubits may
share a single readout line. During readout, the output
or state of one qubit may affect the readout of another,
thus leading to a confidentiality attack (if the attacker sets
a qubit into some state and then tries to observe how
the victim’s readout affected it) or an integrity attack
(if the attacker sets one of their qubits into a specific
state that is likely to affect the readout observed by the
victim). This type of attack has a fairly constrained threat
model, however, as it requires both multi-tenancy and the
victim and the attacker have to access qubits that share the
same readout lines. The attacks, nevertheless, point out
an important lesson that microarchitecture of the quantum
computers (e.g., how qubits share readout lines) can have
significant security implications.
The various research described above, which again can be
found in papers referenced in the quantum computer cyberse-
curity BibTeX repository [8], has disproportionately focused
on superconducting quantum computers, and mainly from
IBM. This is due to early and easy access to IBM quantum
computers. However, works focusing on other types of quan-
tum computers and other providers do exist and may become
more common as other providers give more access to the
quantum computers through cloud services, and as free IBM
access is reduced and queue times increased on IBM. Note that
security of the software stack and the hardware controllers is
discussed separately later in this document.
Many of the attacks have so far been demonstrated on real
quantum computers, thanks to free quantum credits or access
to the machines, and ability to use various features such as
pulse-level access. Casually it can be observed, however, that
these features and free access are getting harder to obtain. As
quantum computing continues to explode in popularity, free
access is reduced, and non-security research projects seem to
get priority when requesting quantum credits or free access.
Further, access to data such as qubit calibration data, qubit
frequencies, or details of the quantum chips is being reduced,
making it harder to analyze the machines. Other features
such as pulse-level access have also been eliminated by a
number of quantum computer providers in recent months.
As the features and access is reduced, the future years may
see more of reverse-engineering type security research, not
different in spirit from security research on classical processors
where various attacks on processor caches or speculative
execution have been found by experimenting with and reverse-
engineering processor features [6].
IV. SECURITY IN THE FTQC ERA
As work on NISQ quantum computers progresses, quantum
computing is steadily advancing into the fault-tolerant regime.
The second half of this decade will almost certainly be about
FTQC quantum computers. FTQC quantum computers are
characterized by use of error correction, where many physical
qubits are used to realize one virtual qubit. This requires many
physical qubits, but has the advantage of almost error-free
virtual qubits that can be used to achieve quantum advantage
on many algorithms, such as Shor’s, that really only work on
error-free quantum computers. FTQC introduces new features
into the quantum computer, notably the error correction codes
and the software and hardware used to decode and correct
the errors. FTQC also abstracts away and reduces the access
that users have to the qubits as each user is given access to a
set of logical qubits and in ideal setting knows nothing about
the physical realization of the hardware. This is not different
from the instruction set architectures of classical processors
where users know instructions, registers, and memory that the
computer supports, but the microarchitectural realization of
the processor is hidden away. Such abstraction in classical
computers did not prevent security threats [7], and same is
likely for FTQC.
As FTQC quantum computers are only now emerging,
security research on FTQC quantum computers is also just
emerging. It should be noted that FTQC quantum computer
access is not available to general public via cybersecurity of
the cloud services. Thus unlike NISQ security research that
in many cases could demonstrate some experiments on real
quantum computers, FTQC security research so far is limited
to simulations of the attacks on simulated systems.
A. Major FTQC Quantum Computer Cybersecurity Research
A new and different feature of FTQC quantum computers
is the use of the error correction codes. Consequently it is
natural that the security research in the FTQC domain focuses
around the error correction.
The majority of emerging research on FTQC quantum
computer cybersecurity falls into the following categories:
1) Attacks on Error Correction: Limited but emerging
work is focusing on error correction in the adversarial
regime. Error correction has not been analyzed well from
the perspectives of attackers who may want to manipulate
the error correction to cause the logical qubits to fail
to error correct, thus forming a type of integrity attack
on the computation. Finding ways that physical qubits
could be flipped is interesting and future direction that
many will likely explore. On the other hand, with limited
access only to logical qubits, it remains an important open
question how attackers could trigger errors in the physical
qubits if they only can control logical qubits. Physical
attacks may be one way around this limitation.
2) Attack on Decoders: FTQC quantum computers re-
quire expanded decoders, typically part of the quantum
computer controller, that deal with the error correction
3
operations. Emerging research has already started to
explore security from the perspective of the decoders
and how the error corrected computation progresses.
Emergent work has demonstrated the ability to observe
the (logical) quantum gate operations from the traces
in FTQC controllers: a type of confidentiality attack.
Other work has explored ways to modify operation of
the controllers or the decoders to induce faults in the
qubits: a type of integrity attack. As quantum controllers
are central to FTQC, more security attacks will likely
emerge in this area.
The recent increase in security work on FTQC demonstrates
that security research is closely following evolution of FTQC.
It is difficult to observe trends in FTQC cybersecurity work
yet, but the focus on the error correction codes and decoders
is clear.
An interesting inflection point will be once FTQC machines
are available for users to actually use. Currently many FTQC
advances are presented in academia and news releases, but
these machines are not easily accessed nor available. There
may be a more quiet period as researchers await access to
real FTQC machines for testing. More simulation-based and
theoretical attacks may emerge in the meantime.
V. SECURITY ACROSS NISQ AND FTQC ERAS
Both NISQ and FTQC quantum computers share many
features, and cybersecurity research of these can affect both
NISQ and FTQC machines. Attacks and research that touches
both NISQ and FTQC include:
1) Attacks on Software and Software Supply Chain:
Software plays key role in quantum computing. From
various software development kits, through compilers,
to public repositories of sample algorithms and code li-
braries, a huge amount of quantum computing is software
focused. Software supply chain security has been largely
not yet explored in quantum computing setting. Some
CVEs have been reported for software development kits,
but much work will likely emerge on security attacks on
the software.
2) Attack on Hardware and Hardware Supply Chain:
Hardware is tightly controlled in quantum computing
world. Vendors are said to physically shred unused and
old quantum computing chips to prevent leakage of
any intellectual property. In parallel, the actual set of
hardware suppliers is very limited, making it easy to
control the hardware. As quantum computing expands
and becomes commoditized, keeping track of the hard-
ware suppliers and vendors will be harder. New types
of supply chain attacks may emerge, and the trust in
the existing hardware may be reduced. Early work on
quantum computer fingerprinting may gain more attention
again; although intersection of fingerprinting and limited
access to hardware due to FTQC may create interesting
challenges for identifying and tracking hardware.
The work on security of software and hardware has many
overlaps with classical security research. Adapting known
techniques may be key to quickly finding new attacks, and
then provisioning security features for defense.
VI. EMERGING RESEARCH ON DEFENSES FOR QUANTUM
COMPUTERS
A theme is clear from the discussion in the prior sections:
much of the current work on quantum computer cybersecurity
focuses on attacks. Attacks usually gain more attention and
tend, at least initially, be easy to publish in academic venues.
Work on defenses has higher bar to pass. Defenses almost
always present some overhead. While this is natural, almost
any degradation in quantum computer fidelity, or increase in
circuit size or duration due to some defense is difficult to
accept. In some sense this is not unlike in classical computers.
Performance (here fidelity) is easy to quantify, while security is
not. Thus any gains in security are difficult to quantify, making
it hard to measure the security benefit vs. performance over-
head that they induce.
Nevertheless a body of work has emerged on defenses. From
early work on detecting malicious quantum circuits to security
architectures for quantum computers, researchers are working
on designing defenses. A unique opportunity, which was
missed with classical computers, is that the defenses could be
integrated now, before quantum computers are commoditized,
ensuring that security is built into quantum computers from
the beginning. As more work on defenses is presented the
research balance may shift from attacks to defenses.
VII. CONCLUSION
The second half of the current decade should bring about
expansion in the security of quantum computers, especially
focusing on FTQC. Many research gaps remain that will
hopefully be filled in by research funding that supports new
research discoveries. In no particular order, and necessarily
incomplete, a list of research gaps includes: 1) verification and
protection of the quantum computing software and SDKs from
attacks, 2) passive and active means to analyze user circuits
for any malicious activity, 3) protection of user circuits from
malicious compilers and SDKs, 4) security architectures to
ensure integrity and confidentiality of user’s code as it runs on
remote quantum computers, 5) physical security as quantum
computers move out of secure data centers, 6) validation
and fingerprinting of quantum computing hardware and proof
that code was executed on a quantum computer, 7) anti
reverse engineering and protections for quantum hardware
vendors and their intellectual property, and 8) security of
quantum networking, quantum sensing, quantum memories
and any other technologies that get integrated and connected to
quantum computers. The future research will hopefully address
these and other emerging threats to quantum computation. The
future will hopefully also bring about increase in the impor-
tance of security features for quantum computation and that
software and hardware vendors prioritize not only performance
and fidelity, but also security of their quantum computers.
4
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This document has been especially inspired by the presen-
tations and discussions held at the 3rd Quantum Computer
Cybersecurity Symposium2. It is also based on the various
research findings published by the academic community and
captured in the public BibTeX repository [8].
REFERENCES
[1] Amazon Web Services. Amazon Braket, 2024.
[2] Jack D Hidary.
A brief history of quantum computing.
In Quantum
Computing: An Applied Approach, pages 15–21. Springer, 2021.
[3] IBM Quantum. The hardware and software for the era of quantum utility
is here, 2023. https://research.ibm.com/blog/quantum-roadmap-2033.
[4] IBM Quantum, 2024. https://www.ibm.com/quantum.
[5] Microsoft Azure. Azure Quantum, 2024.
[6] Jakub Szefer. Principles of secure processor architecture design. Synthesis
Lectures on Computer Architecture, 13(3):1–173, 2018.
[7] Jakub Szefer.
Survey of microarchitectural side and covert channels,
attacks, and defenses.
Journal of Hardware and Systems Security,
3(3):219–234, 2019.
[8] Jakub Szefer. Bibtex repository for quantum computer cybersecurity re-
search. https://github.com/caslab-code/qc-hardware-cybersecurity-bibtex,
2025.
2Quantum Computer Cybersecurity Symposium (QCCS ’25), https://caslab.
io/events/qccs
5
