Title: Practical Cybersecurity Ethics: Mapping CyBOK to Ethical Concerns
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2311.10165v1
--------------------------------------------------

Practical Cybersecurity Ethics: Mapping CyBOK to Ethical
Concerns
Ivan Flechais
University of Oxford
United Kingdom
ivan.flechais@cs.ox.ac.uk
George Chalhoub
University College London
& University of Oxford
United Kingdom
g.chalhoub@ucl.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
Research into the ethics of cybersecurity is an established and
growing topic of investigation, however the translation of this
research into practice is lacking: there exists a small number of
professional codes of ethics or codes of practice in cybersecurity,
e.g. the ISSA or the UK Cyber Security Council’s code of ethics,
however these are very broad and do not offer much insight into
the ethical dilemmas that can be faced while performing specific
cybersecurity activities. In order to address this gap, we leverage
ongoing work on the Cyber Security Body of Knowledge (CyBOK)
to help elicit and document the responsibilities and ethics of the
profession.
Based on a review of the existing literature on the ethics of
cybersecurity, we use CyBOK to frame the exploration of ethical
challenges in the cybersecurity profession through a series of 15
interviews with cybersecurity experts. Our approach is qualitative
and exploratory, aiming to answer the research question “What
ethical challenges, insights, and solutions arise in different areas of
cybersecurity?”. Our findings indicate that there are broad ethical
challenges across the whole of cybersecurity, but also that different
areas of cybersecurity can face specific ethical considerations for
which more detailed guidance can help professionals in those areas.
In particular, our findings indicate that security decision-making is
expected of all security professionals, but that this requires them to
balance a complex mix of different technical, objective and subjec-
tive points of view, and that resolving conflicts raises challenging
ethical dilemmas. We highlight our participants’ concerns about
the growing use of AI technology in cybersecurity, and discuss the
implications of applying AI to decision-making.
We conclude that more work is needed to explore, map, and inte-
grate ethical considerations into cybersecurity practice; the urgent
need to conduct further research into the ethics of cybersecurity AI;
and highlight the importance of this work for individuals and pro-
fessional bodies who seek to develop and mature the cybersecurity
profession in a responsible manner.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
NSPW ’23, September, 2023, Segovia, Spain
© 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing →Empirical studies in HCI; •
Security and privacy →Usability in security and privacy; Social
aspects of security and privacy.
KEYWORDS
cyber security, ethics, cybok, security
ACM Reference Format:
Ivan Flechais and George Chalhoub. 2023. Practical Cybersecurity Ethics:
Mapping CyBOK to Ethical Concerns. In Proceedings of New Security Paradigms
Workshop (NSPW ’23). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 14 pages. https://doi.org/
10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1
INTRODUCTION
Cybersecurity professionals wield enormous power. In pursuing the
goal of protecting computer systems, their responsibilities can vari-
ously lead them to monitor people and review sensitive information;
investigate threat actors; document and prosecute insiders; subject
others to attack through penetration tests or “ethical hacking” activ-
ities; decide on limiting, quarantining, revoking and denying access
to systems and data in the face of ongoing attacks; or deal with the
anguish, betrayal, and trauma arising from harmful cyber attacks.
As noted by Christen et al. [14], “Overemphasising cybersecurity
may violate fundamental values such as equality, fairness, freedom or
privacy. However, neglecting cybersecurity could undermine citizens’
trust and confidence in the digital infrastructure, in policy makers
and in state authorities.” Such power over other people’s actions
and freedoms should come with clear, transparent, and detailed
ethical oversight, however this is far from the case in practice.
Research into the ethics of cybersecurity is an established and
growing topic of investigation (see Sections 2.1 and 2.2), however
the translation of this research into professional practice is lacking:
there exists a small number of professional codes of ethics or codes
of practice in cybersecurity, e.g. the ISSA or the UK Cyber Security
Council’s code of ethics, however these are very broad and do not
offer much insight into the ethical dilemmas that can be faced while
performing specific cybersecurity activities.
Significant efforts are underway to improve the maturity of
cybersecurity: ranging from improvements in secure software de-
velopment lifecycles, data protection law and regulation, cyber in-
surance, or efforts to codify the Cyber Security Body of Knowledge
(CyBOK). In order to investigate the gap we identify between the
research and practice of ethics in the cybersecurity profession, we
propose the following research question “What ethical challenges,
insights, and solutions arise in different areas of cybersecurity?” Our
approach is qualitative and exploratory: drawing on CyBOK and
arXiv:2311.10165v1  [cs.CR]  16 Nov 2023
NSPW ’23, September, 2023, Segovia, Spain
Chalhoub and Flechais
Figure 1: Value Conflicts in CyberSecurity. Arrows with
continuous lines show positive (i.e., supporting) relations,
whereas arrows with dotted lines show conflicting relations.
Reproduced from [15]
the principlist framework for cybersecurity ethics by Formosa et
al. [25], we engage with professionals in the field to elicit, map,
and deepen our understanding of the key issues in specific areas of
cybersecurity.
In Section 2, we review the current state of cybersecurity ethics
in both research and professional practice. Section 3 describes our
research approach, and in Section 4 we present our results. We
discuss these in Section 5, before concluding with suggestions for
future work.
2
BACKGROUND
The ethics of cybersecurity is establishing itself as a field of ethical
research in its own right, sharing similarities with other fields such
as bioethics, digital ethics, or the ethics of artificial intelligence,
but having its own specific characteristics. While the ethics of
cybersecurity has been dominated by concerns around privacy
values, it is becoming clear that there are wider ethical challenges
that arise [9–13, 20, 53]. Christen et al. [15] explore these and Figure
1 summarises some of the key relationships between cybersecurity
values and other ethical values.
In the following we start by presenting an overview of the un-
derlying principles of cybersecurity ethics. We then explore differ-
ent ethical frameworks for cybersecurity which aim to provide a
more pragmatic structure to help evaluate different ethical ques-
tions. Then we provide a brief outline of the Cyber Security Body of
Knowledge (CyBOK), and conclude by focusing on how professional
codes of practice currently provide guidance for practitioners.
2.1
CyberSecurity Ethical Principles
There is a wide variety of different approaches looking at the ethics
of cybersecurity [35]. Aiming to categorise these, Macnish and
van der Ham [38] argue that there are three broad approaches,
calling the first “bottom-up” which examines detailed cases and
identifies ethical issues arising from these. In contrast, the second
is labelled “top-down” and focuses on ethical values or theories
as a starting point which are then applied to the cybersecurity
context. Macnish et. al. also identify a third approach which they
call “pragmatist”, which focuses on the practices of cyber security
professionals. While they note that such approaches usually focus
more on framing the values of information security (such as Con-
fidentiality, Integrity, Availability) rather than identifying ethical
issues, principles, or solutions, it is important to note that there are
a variety of professional codes of practice that fall into this category
(see Section 2.4). Formosa et al. [25] argue for two broad categories
instead. The first aims to apply established ethical theories (conse-
quentialism, deontological ethics, and virtue ethics [42]) for which
the ethical textbook by Manjikian [39] is a prominent example. The
second category aims to outline a series of mid-level and domain-
specific principles, an approach known as “principlism”. In both
categories, Formosa et al. [25] note that casuistry (an applied ethics
approach that uses case-based reasoning to derive ethical insights)
is widely used.
Examining case studies of moral or ethical dilemmas in cyberse-
curity is a widespread approach that provides context and insight.
Common case studies include generic example applications such
as penetration testing or ethical hacking [34], encryption in the
context of privacy vs state surveillance (e.g. Rogaway [48] whose
opening statement “Cryptography rearranges power” neatly encap-
sulates a core issue), or electronic voting [47]. In contrast, other
case studies focus on highly detailed and specific case studies, an ex-
ample of which is the examination of the ENCORE project by Byers
[7]. The ENCORE project [6] proposed a method to explore online
censorship by harnessing cross-origin requests to covertly induce
web browsers running on computers in various different countries
into contacting specific websites and reporting back. Given (1) that
this activity was non-consensual for the owners of those computers,
(2) that there is significant potential harm to these owners arising
from repressive regimes tracking attempts at accessing censored
material, and (3) that the authors had already deployed and tested
their approach in the wild, this research and its publication led
to a significant ethical debate in the academic community. A key
aspect of this debate centred around the fact that the research was
approved by the authors’ Institutional Review Board, who did not
identify ethical issues arising from the technical details of the re-
search. Following lengthy deliberation, the Program Committee
for SIGCOMM voted to publish the paper, however they took the
unprecedented decision to document their ethical concerns in a
statement at the top of the paper [7].
Whether drawing from case studies or applying ethical theories
to the cybersecurity context, a key aim has been to identify and
specify the core ethical values of cybersecurity. The chapter by van
de Poel [57] provides a helpful overview of some of these, noting
that ethical cybersecurity values can be clustered into aspects of
security, privacy, fairness, and accountability. Christen et al. note
in their introductory chapter that cybersecurity involves a balance
between fundamental values such as equality, fairness, freedom or
privacy and the need for protecting citizens’ trust and confidence in
the digital infrastructure, in policy makers, and in state authorities
[14].
Practical Cybersecurity Ethics: Mapping CyBOK to Ethical Concerns
NSPW ’23, September, 2023, Segovia, Spain
2.2
CyberSecurity Ethical Frameworks
Ethical frameworks aim to provide structure to help evaluate ethical
questions. Loi and Christen [37] provide a helpful overview of
these and note that there are several notable ethical frameworks in
cybersecurity.
2.2.1
Human Rights Frameworks. The first type of framework is
based on human rights and how these are embedded in various legal
and regulatory frameworks. Hildebrandt [32] discusses how rights
can interact with cybersecurity, focussing specifically on privacy,
data protection, non-discrimination, due process and free speech.
Under EU law, these rights are protected, however cybersecurity
activities (such as monitoring, profiling, filtering content) can come
in conflict with these rights. Hildebrandt [32] argues that in the
case where a conflict is resolved through a trade-off, infringing
measures have to be balanced by effective safeguards. To achieve
this balance, Hildebrandt draws on the triple test, derived from the
second paragraph of Art. 8 of the European Convention of Human
Rights, which requires that a right’s infringement “must be in ac-
cordance with the law, necessary in a democratic society and have a
legitimate aim.” While a detailed review of various legal frameworks
is beyond the scope of this paper, it is notable that ethical concerns
have played a significant role in the formulation of EU data pro-
tection regulation, such as the General Data Protection Regulation,
which enshrines seven principles (Lawfulness, fairness and trans-
parency; Purpose limitation; Data minimisation; Accuracy; Storage
limitation; Integrity and confidentiality (security); Accountability)
and eight individual rights (The right to be informed; The right of
access; The right to rectification; The right to erasure; The right to
restrict processing; The right to data portability; The right to object;
Rights in relation to automated decision-making and profiling).
2.2.2
Theory of Contextual Integrity. The second approach is Nis-
sembaum’s theory of Contextual Integrity [43]. This theory has
enjoyed widespread success arising from its characterisation of
privacy violations as violations of social norms from the transmis-
sion of information between persons. Social norms are grounded in
the specific contexts of each situation, allowing the exploration of
privacy in a manner that is sensitive to societal, cultural, and wider
contextual factors.
2.2.3
Ethics of Risk. The third type of framework explores the
ethics of risk. Drawing on the significant body of work from Sven
Ove Hansson on the ethics of risk [29], Macnish and van der Ham
[38] argue that cybersecurity is the inverse of risk. Where risk is de-
fined as the likelihood of harm arising from a threat, security grows
as risk reduces; conversely, as security decreases, the likelihood
and impact of harm increases. In positioning cybersecurity in terms
of risk, a number of interesting observations can be made. The first
observation is that security is always forward-looking: since risk
aims to anticipate the likelihood and impact of future threats, then
likewise security is only concerned about the future – should an
incident occur, it is no longer in the realm of risk or security but in
the realm of harm, crisis and security failures. The second obser-
vation was made by Herington [31] who noted that security has
subjective, objective, and affective dimensions: a person could be
secure (objective), believe that they are secure (subjective), but not
feel secure (affective). These qualities are interrelated in that they
can influence one another, however they are distinct and security
needs to satisfy a number of potentially conflicting perspectives:
rational (objective), personal (subjective), and emotional (affective).
Sven Ove Hansson and [29], Macnish and van der Ham [38]
also highlight that there are four notable ethical implications from
looking at risk: (1) the distinction between objective and subjective
harms, (2) the challenges of calculating probabilities, (3) the recog-
nition of fallacies, and (4) the problems arising from risk thresholds
and distribution. Evaluating harm (1) highlights the inherent qual-
ity of security having subjective, objective and affective facets,
however most approaches tend to aim for objective measurements
and eschew subjective or emotional dimensions. Calculating the
probability of a future attack (2) also shares these sensitivities: in
cybersecurity attackers are intelligent adversaries who may not
follow patterns of previously seen behaviour. Consequently, calcu-
lating probabilities requires an element of subjective judgement,
which raises questions when different opinions vary or conflict
with objective data. There are a number of fallacies (3) that per-
meate cybersecurity [30], including the “sheer size fallacy” (if one
risk is smaller than an acceptable unrelated risk, then it should be
accepted), the “technocratic fallacy” (since cybersecurity risks can
be highly technical, only technical people can decide on what to do
about them), or the “fallacy of pricing” (since we have to weigh the
costs of risks against their benefits, it is necessary to place a monetary
value on risks). Finally, it is important to note that risks are not
tolerated equally, and neither are they fairly and evenly distributed
(4): those who make decisions about risks may not be impacted by
them or pay for the costs associated with the risk; a company’s un-
derinvestment in security may result in significant harm to others
(e.g. their customers) and not directly to themselves; one business’s
estimate of a tolerable level of risk may be deemed unacceptable
by a regulator; a poorly implemented authentication solution may
cause usability and productivity impacts to users, etc.
2.2.4
Principlist Frameworks. The last consist of principlist frame-
works, an example of which was used in the highly influential
Menlo report [2]. Principlism is a form of deontology, and prin-
ciplist frameworks are articulated around a small number of fun-
damental principles derived from moral and professional ethical
practices. These principles then drive what duties need to be sat-
isfied, however complications arise when different duties are in
conflict. A principlist framework thus aims to help navigate these
issues by providing a lightweight means of helping to identify pos-
sible conflicts, however the exact nature, context, and importance
of specific factors in these conflicts is left to the deliberation of
researchers and practitioners. Furthermore, the resolution of such
conflicts is also left open to the interpretation of the users of the
framework. The Menlo report proposes four principles: Respect for
Persons, Beneficence, Justice, Respect for Law and Public Interest.
The first three of these are drawn from the Belmont report [56]
that focuses on the protection of human research subjects, and the
fourth is proposed as an additional category to highlight the wider
legal and public interest in cybersecurity.
Formosa et al. [25] noted the growing importance of Artificial
Intelligence and associated ethical issues [24] in the practice of
cybersecurity. Drawing on the Menlo report and other principlist
approaches [2, 37, 41, 57, 59], they propose a principlist framework
NSPW ’23, September, 2023, Segovia, Spain
Chalhoub and Flechais
Figure 2: A principlist framework for cybersecurity ethics. Reproduced from [25]
to address ethical issues according to five different principles, the
definitions of which are reproduced here verbatim:
• Beneficence: Cybersecurity technologies should be used to ben-
efit humans, promote human well-being, and make our lives
better overall.
• Non-maleficence: Cybersecurity technologies should not be
used to intentionally harm humans or to make our lives worse
overall.
• Autonomy: Cybersecurity technologies should be used in ways
that respect human autonomy. Humans should be able to make
informed decisions for themselves about how that technology
is used in their lives.
• Justice: Cybersecurity technologies should be used to promote
fairness, equality, and impartiality. It should not be used to
unfairly discriminate, undermine solidarity, or prevent equal
access.
• Explicability: Cybersecurity technologies should be used in
ways that are intelligible, transparent, and comprehensible,
and it should also be clear who is accountable and responsible
for its use.
This framework outlines different ethical values in cybersecu-
rity, which can further be refined into more detailed concepts as
illustrated in figure 2. Given that this is the first framework to
explicitly include the consideration of the ethics of AI in cyberse-
curity, we chose this approach to help frame the ethical aspect of
our investigation as described in section 3.
2.3
Cyber Security Body of Knowledge
Cybersecurity is a concept that has been defined and characterised
in a variety of different ways, most of which frame it as a process for
protecting information by preventing, detecting, and responding
to attacks [44]. Several properties of cybersecurity are regularly
included in these definitions, the core three being confidential-
ity, integrity, and availability. Additional properties are sometimes
added, such as authentication, non-repudiation, or utility, and the
scope can also be wider than the protection of information to in-
clude computers, electronic communication systems, and electronic
communications.
Going into more detail about the different areas of foundational
and generally recognised knowledge that make up cybersecurity,
the Cyber Security Body of Knowledge (CyBOK [46]) serves as a
guide and maps the core elements of the discipline. At the time of
writing, CyBOK has released v1.1 of its knowledgebase [18], which
breaks down cybersecurity into five main categories: Human, Or-
ganisational & Regulatory Aspects; Attacks & Defences; Systems
Security; Software and Platform Security; and Infrastructure Se-
curity. Within each of these categories, a total of 21 Knowledge
Areas (KA) introduce and outline common material. Taken together,
CyBOK can be used to understand the means and objectives of cy-
bersecurity, mitigate against failures and incidents, and manage
risks. Given that CyBOK provides a comprehensive breakdown of
different areas of cybersecurity, we chose to use it to help frame
our investigation as described in section 3.
2.4
Professional Codes of Practice
A number of professional bodies have adopted codes of practice to
help their members navigate the ethical challenges that can arise
in the performance of their duties. The Association for Computing
Machinery (ACM) with approximately 100,000 members (educators,
researchers, and professionals) is the world’s largest computer so-
ciety, and has published a detailed Code of Ethics and Professional
Practical Cybersecurity Ethics: Mapping CyBOK to Ethical Concerns
NSPW ’23, September, 2023, Segovia, Spain
Conduct ([1]). This outlines and discusses the following general
ethical principles:
(1) Contribute to society and to human well-being, acknowledg-
ing that all people are stakeholders in computing.
(2) Avoid harm.
(3) Be honest and trustworthy.
(4) Be fair and take action not to discriminate.
(5) Respect the work required to produce new ideas, inventions,
creative works, and computing artefacts.
(6) Respect privacy.
(7) Honour confidentiality.
More specifically to cybersecurity, the Information Systems Se-
curity Association (ISSA) has also published a code of ethics [33],
however this is quite short, consisting of the following:
• Perform all professional activities and duties in accordance
with all applicable laws and the highest ethical principles;
• Promote generally accepted information security current
best practices and standards;
• Maintain appropriate confidentiality of proprietary or oth-
erwise sensitive information encountered in the course of
professional activities;
• Discharge professional responsibilities with diligence and
honesty;
• Refrain from any activities which might constitute a conflict
of interest or otherwise damage the reputation of or is detri-
mental to employers, the information security profession, or
the Association; and
• Not intentionally injure or impugn the professional reputa-
tion or practice of colleagues, clients, or employers.
The UK Cyber Security Council has its own code of ethics for
cybersecurity grounded on the principles of integrity, profession-
alism, and credibility. In addition, the council has made available
some guidance for individuals, articulated around Fair Competition,
Honesty, Inclusion, Integrity, Lawful behaviour, Professionalism,
Reporting, and Competence. Complementing this, the council pub-
lished 16 case studies which illustrate the core ethical considera-
tions. In the same way that we use CyBOK to frame our research
into the ethical challenges of cybersecurity, the scenarios presented
by the UK Cyber Security Council are also categorised according
to the five main Knowledge Areas of CyBOK.
The Forum of Incident Response and Security Teams (FIRST)
has also developed its own guidance in the form of a code of prac-
tice for professionals involved in incident response [23]. The code
of practice outlines a number of duties (Duty of trustworthiness;
Duty of coordinated vulnerability disclosure; Duty of confidential-
ity; Duty to acknowledge; Duty of authorization; Duty to inform;
Duty to respect human rights; Duty to Team health; Duty to Team
ability; Duty for responsible collection; Duty to recognize jurisdic-
tional boundaries; Duty of evidence-based reasoning). In addition
to providing a clear definition of these different duties, the code of
practice also includes an appendix for dealing with dilemmas. This
outlines how members may find themselves in a position where no
action seems to satisfy all of the ethical principles. To address such
dilemmas, practitioners are encouraged to reflect on how stake-
holders may be affected by their actions and to favour solutions
that minimize the infringement of the Code.
Overall, the guidance and codes of practice offered by profes-
sional bodies are helpful, but they typically fall short of the detail
and nuance that comes from the ethical work outlined in Sections
2.1 & 2.2. Moreover, we note that beyond mapping exemplar eth-
ical case studies to different areas of cybersecurity, it is not clear
what kinds of ethical questions can arise in the exercise of specific
professional duties. As a result, our research aims to investigate
this by exploring the kinds of ethical challenges, insights, and solu-
tions that arise in different areas of cybersecurity. In the following
section, we describe the methodology we used to investigate this.
3
METHODOLOGY
Based on our review of the existing literature on the ethics of
cybersecurity, we devised an interview guide to answer the research
question: “What ethical challenges, insights, and solutions arise in
different areas of cybersecurity?”
We recruited 15 interviewees
from outside our institutions through a mix of direct contact with
existing connections and previous research participants who had
consented to being contacted about future research. Our selection
criteria required participants to have experience and knowledge of
the cybersecurity profession.
We analysed the data using thematic analysis, which is an induc-
tive coding process to help identify patterns in meaning from the
data. Our analysis identified a number of themes and sub-themes
pertaining to ethical concerns, experiences, and solutions that our
participants related to different areas of cybersecurity.
The study was ethically reviewed and approved by the Depart-
mental Research Ethics Committee at our institution.
3.1
Recruitment
We used several means to recruit our participants, including adver-
tising on Twitter, Reddit, Mailing Lists and Blogs. We also reached
out to participants on Slack channels and LinkedIn. To diversify
our sample, we aimed to interview senior managers and executives
who have likely made important security decisions. Since these are
a hard-to-reach group [22], we used the snowball sampling method
[27] to recruit some participants, and worked with a consultant
advisor who had wider access to senior executives working in secu-
rity. We note that the results of the convenience sampling cannot
be generalised to the target population because of the potential
bias of the sampling technique [3] and cannot be used to identify
differences of population subgroups [3].
All of our participants were working at different companies. At
the time of recruitment, interested participants were employees
who were active at their company.
We asked interested participants to complete an online screening
questionnaire. We received 85 complete responses. In addition to
asking demographic questions, we asked participants to provide
details on their employment as well as their company size.
We selected participants based on those who could best inform
our research question and enhance our understanding of the eth-
ical challenges, insights, and solutions arising in cyber security.
Hence, we chose participants based on occupation (e.g. technical,
managerial), field (e.g. malware, privacy, web security), relevance
to CyBOK’s knowledge base (e.g. human, organisational, and regu-
latory aspects), experience level (e.g. junior, senior), and diversity
NSPW ’23, September, 2023, Segovia, Spain
Chalhoub and Flechais
(e.g. gender, ethnicity). We note that all our participants worked in
the private sector and none worked directly for the government or
government affiliated employers.
We describe the demographics of our participants in Table 1.
3.2
Pilot Study
To validate our initial interview questions, we conducted a pilot
study with two individuals in our research institution. We recruited
the pilot participants through snowball sampling. Two researchers
analysed the pilot interviews. We used the findings to identify
potential problems (e.g., adverse events, time) in advance prior to
conducting the full-scale study. We didn’t use the results from the
pilot interviews, but we have refined our interview questions to
ensure they are non-leading and clearer for participants.
3.3
Demographics
Table 1 summarises the demographics of our sample (n=15). We
interviewed nine male and five female participants. Ages ranged
from 18 to 55. Eight participants were interviewed in person, and
seven remotely.
Additionally, we collected more contextual information about
our participants and the business sector in which they operate
(socioeconomic status of customers, types of products offered, geo-
graphic locations served). We conducted 5 interviews in-person (in
secure locations in our institution) and 10 interviews remotely (on
Microsoft Teams).
Table 1: Study Demographics
P#
Age (M/F)
Occupation
Cyber Security Field
CyBOK
P01
50-55 (M)
Managing Director
Privacy &
Online Rights
[55]
P02
45-50 (M)
Systems Security Lead
Secure Software
Lifecycle
[60]
P03
45-50 (F)
Security Manager
Risk Management
& Governance
[5]
P04
35-40 (M)
Security Engineer
Security Operations &
Incident Management
[19]
P05
40-45 (M)
Cloud Security Lead
Network
Security
[49]
P06
40-45 (F)
Infosec Lead
Web & Mobile
Security
[21]
P07
30-35 (M)
Security Engineer
Malware & Attack
Technologies
[36]
P08
30-35 (F)
Freelance Ethical Hacker
Adversarial
Behaviours
[54]
P09
45-50 (M)
Product Security Lead
Forensics &
Software Security
[45, 50]
P10
18-25 (M)
Security Developer
Malware &
Attack Technologies
[36]
P11
30-35 (M)
Security Engineer
OS & Virtualisation
Security
[4]
P12
25-30 (F)
Penetration Tester
Web & Mobile
Security
[21]
P13
35-40 (F)
Security Manager
Authentication
& Authorisation
[26]
P14
30-35 (M)
Security Consultant
Physical Layer &
Telecom Security
[58]
P15
25-30 (M)
Privacy Engineer
Human Factors &
Law & Regulation
[8, 51]
3.4
Procedure
3.4.1
Semi-structured Interviews. We followed a semi-structured
interview protocol utilising an interview guide to maintain direction
while keeping the interview open for both depth and breadth of
topic exploration. In order to help focus our questions on specific
aspects of cybersecurity professions, we made use of CyBOK’s five
broad categories:
(1) Human, Organisational & Regulatory Aspects (e.g. risk man-
agement & governance, law & regulation, human factors,
privacy & online rights)
(2) Attacks & Defences (e.g. malware & attack technologies,
adversarial behaviours, security operations & incident man-
agement, forensics)
(3) Systems Security (e.g. cryptography, operating systems &
virtualisation security, distributed systems security, formal
methods for security, authentication, authorization & ac-
countability)
(4) Software and Platform Security (e.g. software security, web
& mobile security, secure software lifecycle)
(5) Infrastructure Security (e.g. applied cryptography, network
security, hardware security, cyber physical systems, physical
layer & telecommunications security)
In addition, to help focus on different aspects of cybersecurity
ethics, we used the five principles proposed by [25], outlined above
in Section 2.2. Our interview guide is included in Appendix A.
3.4.2
Thematic Analysis. The interview data was analysed using
Thematic Analysis. According to [16], it is a common method of
analysis in qualitative research and involves identifying, analysing,
interpreting, and reporting patterns of meaning (known as themes
or codes) from qualitative data. Thematic analysis is also frequently
used with existing theoretical frameworks to provide interpretive
power. Given that our approach made use of the principlist frame-
work for cybersecurity ethics proposed by [25], thematic analysis
proved highly suitable in this regard, and helped to provide greater
insight into detailed ethical considerations.
Two researchers were involved in the data collection and analy-
sis. The primary researcher, who conducted most of the interviews,
did an initial coding of the interview transcripts. To ensure credi-
bility of the codes, a second researcher cross-checked all the codes
against the interview transcripts. Any differences and/or issues
arising from the coding were discussed and resolved among the
two researchers. A codebook consisting of 122 codes emerged from
the initial coding. These codes were then applied across other inter-
views through constant comparison, while new codes were added
as they emerged and were deemed necessary. In further analysis,
the researchers discussed and grouped the codes into themes. Reg-
ular coding meetings were held to discuss any emerging codes and
to group the codes into families.
We observed data saturation [17, 28, 52] between the 13th and
the 15th interview; i.e. no additional issues or insights emerged
from data and all relevant conceptual categories had been identified,
explored, and exhausted. Hence, we stopped interviewing.
Practical Cybersecurity Ethics: Mapping CyBOK to Ethical Concerns
NSPW ’23, September, 2023, Segovia, Spain
3.5
Research Ethics
The University of Oxford’s Central University Research Ethics
Committee (CUREC) reviewed and approved the study (C1B-23HT-
COML-003). Prior to each interview, participants were briefed and
signed an informed consent form explaining our study and data
confidentiality practices. Due to the sensitivity of our interviews,
we asked participants not to name specific people or sites so that
the interviews will be anonymous to some degree.
All interviews were AES 256 encrypted and stored in a physical
safe in our organisation. Participants were thanked for their time
with GBP £50 in electronic store vouchers. In addition, participants
were reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenses related to participation,
including travel, meals, accommodation, and childcare. Participants
could withdraw themselves and their data at any point, without loss
of compensation, and without providing a reason. No participant
withdrew.
4
FINDINGS
In this section, we detail the findings of our study. We discuss our
key findings organised according to the main themes of our analysis.
The main themes are:
• Human, Organisational, Regulatory Aspects (§4.1)
• Attacks & Defences (§4.2)
• Systems Security (§4.3)
• Software & Platform Security (§4.4)
• Infrastructure Security (§4.5)
4.1
Human, Organisational & Regulatory
Aspects
Our participants reported a number of ethical concerns, dilemmas
and challenges in relation to the Human, Organisational and Regu-
latory Aspects of cyber security which encompasses Risk Manage-
ment and Governance, Law and Regulation, Human Factors and Pri-
vacy and Online Rights. Participants experience ethical challenges
related to the constant need for maintaining confidentiality (§4.1.1),
balancing the competing interests of protecting their company’s
reputation and maintaining user security (§4.1.2), and disclosing
security risks without making users feel insecure (§4.1.3).
4.1.1
Always Maintaining Confidentiality. Our participants (n=5)
stated that due to the nature of their profession, they handle and
see private, sensitive, and proprietary information that must be
kept entirely secret – adding that maintaining confidentiality is
highly critical. They are instructed to maintain the confidentiality
of information they come upon, or face significant ramifications for
their career. However, they experienced ethical dilemmas and chal-
lenges deciding between maintaining or breaking confidentiality.
Participants struggled to carefully weigh the ethical implications
and informed decisions of whether or not to disclose confidential
information. Our participants stated this is a complex challenge that
is dependent on many factors such as whether there is knowledge
about harm, crime or illegal activities, and whether the confiden-
tial information should be disclosed to law enforcement or other
government agencies. For instance, participant P07, who works at
a cybersecurity and anti-virus company gave more insights on the
ethical challenges to maintaining confidentiality while repairing
their client’s machines:
“We are asked to fix people’s computers all the times.
Our job is getting rid of the virus, not looking at our
clients’ photo albums or tax returns. We don’t care what
data is on their computer, we’re only here to repair it.
I’m not saying we do, but if we ever see any confidential
information, I assume it can get quite complicated. If
someone is cheating on their spouse or avoiding taxes,
then it’s none of our business. But if we find by accident
that there is threat to human life or a child in dan-
ger, we have an obligation to report it.”– P07, Security
Engineer
4.1.2
Conflicts between Business & Security Practices. Our partic-
ipants (n=7) reported that conflicts of interest frequently arise in
cyber security firms due to the competing interests between busi-
ness and cyber security practices. They reported that conflicts of
interest emerge between individual interests, public interests and
corporate interests. Some of our participants suggested that cyber
security practices should be prioritised over business or profit-
making activities, as they strengthen the company’s reputation and
lead to trust over the long term. A common topic of discussion was
the ethical challenges of dealing with data breaches: some compa-
nies tend to be reluctant to inform the public of data breaches in an
attempt to protect their brand. For instance, Participant P01, who
manages a company that specialises in data privacy management
tools, provided more insights on the conflicts of interests arising
between data breaches and reputational damage:
“We had companies where they’ve had multiple breaches,
seriously embarrassing breaches. The company is still
trading and still has actually gone from strength to
strength. When they had the breach, all they did was
lower their prices for a while and then bring it up again.
They actually increased their market reach. CEOs will
then tell you: “We got a plan to deal with it if it occurs”.
They don’t really care about the breach. They obviously
care about the reputational damage. They’ve got a plan
on how to deal with the reputational damage. They’re
actually not addressing the issue.” – P01, Managing
Director
Moreover, Participant P03 who is manager at a small cyber secu-
rity firm stated that a key ethical challenge is whether to conduct
business with clients who are not willing to invest in adequate
cyber security solutions.
4.1.3
Disclosing Security Risks Without Making Users Feel Insecure.
Our participants (n=4) reported ethical challenges, and dilemmas in
disclosing security risks without making their customers or users
feel insecure. Our participants reported that this can be a chal-
lenging balancing act. On one hand, disclosing security risks is
a transparent business practice that improves transparency and
ensures that users take informed decisions. On the other hand,
disclosing security vulnerabilities can risk making users feel un-
necessarily insecure or anxious about their security. For instance,
Privacy Engineer P15 provided more details on this challenge:
NSPW ’23, September, 2023, Segovia, Spain
Chalhoub and Flechais
“Sometimes you don’t want to put the end-user in a
state where they’re not so sure about the systems and
how their data is being processed and stuff just because
there’s a minor issue which you are able to pick on your
own. So it’s very hard sometimes when you’re looking
at the business side as well as the ethical side.” – P15,
Privacy Engineer
4.2
Attacks & Defences
Our participants reported a number of ethical concerns, dilemmas
and challenges in relation to the Attack & Defence aspects of cyber
security which encompasses Malware & Attack Technologies, Ad-
versarial Behaviours, Security Operations & Incident Management
and Forensics. Participants experience ethical challenges related to
ethical security hacking and cyber intrusion (§4.2.1), and defending
against cyber attacks (§4.2.2).
4.2.1
Ethical Security Hacking and Cyber Intrusion. Our partici-
pants (n=3) reported concerns and dilemmas in relation to ethical
security hacking and cyber intrusion. Some of our participants were
ethical hackers hired by different companies to test their security
systems and find security vulnerabilities. They were responsible for
applying offensive cyber tools and techniques to identify and drive
security improvements. In return, they would reveal vulnerabilities
to their client and create guidelines on how to address them, thus
helping to secure company networks to protect trade secrets and
business practices. Our participants reported that their most ethical
concerns or challenges result from the possibility of finding illegal
activity or unethical practices connected to their client. For instance,
participant P08, a freelance ethical hacker who delivers penetration
testing and red teaming capabilities for companies, discussed the
ethical ramifications of the possibility of discovering illegal activity
during a penetration test.
“During a pentest, you could come across illegal activity.
This is where it gets messy. My clients tend to be from
all over the world, what is legal in the UK might be
illegal in other countries. Do you report it to the au-
thorities? You could get investigated yourself. If you
report it, are you breaking your NDA? That all depends
on the jurisdiction. Do you not report it? You could be
complicit to a crime you don’t report. I am personally
aware of pentesting companies that have a provision
allowing them to report illegal activities observed.” –
P08, Freelance Ethical Hacker
Moreover, participant P12, who is a penetration tester, stated
that they evaluate their own values and moral principles; and don’t
take any projects that could create a conflict with their own or with
other societal ethical values.
While this finding is similar to the one reported in Section 4.1.1,
we note that it is more grounded in the context of ethical hacking
through a client-freelancer relationship, whereas the finding in
Section 4.1.1 relates more to ethical dilemmas faced by employees
working in larger companies.
4.2.2
Defending Against Cyber Attacks. Our participants (n=2) re-
ported ethical concerns and challenges in relation to defending
against cyber attacks. Some of our participants were affected by re-
mote attacks (e.g. DDoS) and were concerned about the use of force
to defend against cyber attacks. In some cases, our participants re-
ported the need urgently to take down malicious servers that were
conducting attacks on their infrastructure. While our participants
had an ethical obligation to protect their organisation’s infrastruc-
ture, they had significant ethical concerns over the use of force to
defend against cyber attacks. Participants were concerned that the
use of force may create unacceptable risk to violate the rights of
innocent individuals and organisations, since the collateral effects
of the use of force are unknown. For instance, participant P04, who
works as a security engineer at a large company, explained how
they dealt with DDoS against their company’s servers:
“We get DDoS attacks all the time, these get automat-
ically blocked with our firewall. If the attack is over-
whelming, we’d never retaliate. We go through legal
means. Sometimes this means sending abuse reports to
the host company. Quite recently, we were dealing with
a bunch of IP addresses that were being used to facilitate
DDoS amplification attacks. We reported them to the
host company and they took them down very quickly.”
– P04, Security Engineer
Moreover, Security Developer P10 stated that they avoid the use
of force to defend against cyberattacks because cyberattacks often
involve ‘spoofing’ strategies which make it easy to misidentify the
system responsible for the attack.
4.3
Systems Security
Our participants reported a number of ethical concerns, dilem-
mas and challenges in relation to the Systems Security aspects
of cyber security which encompasses Cryptography, Operating
Systems & Virtualisation Security, Distributed Systems Security,
Formal Methods for Security and Authentication, Authorisation &
Accountability. Participants experience ethical challenges related
to cybersecurity resource allocation (§4.3.1), and contracting third
party security services (§4.3.2).
4.3.1
Cybersecurity Resource Allocation. Our participants (n=4)
reported that there was an ethical concern around the tradeoff
between security and other functionalities or priorities. They ex-
plained that some cybersecurity solutions (i) may consume consid-
erable individual and organisational resources such as time, labour,
money, and expertise; (ii) may negatively impact data storage ca-
pacities, bandwidth (upload/download) speeds, energy usage, and
the usability and reliability of systems. As such, they experienced
challenges in making ethical decisions about how to allocate cyber
security resources to protect the security of their customers without
creating significant burdens (cost, convenience, and functionality).
On one side, not having effective cyber security solutions might
cause serious harm and damage to users’ security. On the other side,
extreme cyber security solutions might be unusable or economi-
cally unsustainable. For instance, security manager P13 discussed
the challenges of balancing password security policies:
“Balancing this is never easy. We made employees change
their passwords every 90 days after one employee had
Practical Cybersecurity Ethics: Mapping CyBOK to Ethical Concerns
NSPW ’23, September, 2023, Segovia, Spain
their passwords leaked. The point was to improve our se-
curity posture, but that didn’t work out. Employees were
writing their passwords everywhere.” – P13, Security
Manager
4.3.2
Contracting Third Party Security Services. Our participants
(n=9) reported that they had ethical concerns about the use of third
party security services. Contracting third party security services
(for purposes such as security auditing, penetration testing, secu-
rity) was effective and cost-efficient for our participants. However,
they were concerned about the ethical behaviour of third party
services, especially those who operate from countries with chal-
lenging political and legal climates. Our participants reported that
they exercised due diligence to ensure that contracted third parties
are responsible and committed to high standards of ethical conduct.
However, some participants reported ethical obstacles that occurred
from contracting third parties security services. For instance, Prod-
uct Security Lead P09 who contracted a remote penetration testing
service to evaluate the security of a computer-forensic online ser-
vice reported a potential inappropriate ethical behaviour.
“We hired this pentesting firm and signed all the paper-
work which clearly said that if they find any vulnera-
bilities, they need to tell us immediately. We discovered
later that they had found but failed to report major vul-
nerabilities in our website. We contacted them multiple
times regarding this, and they never got back to us.” –
Product Security Lead, P09
4.4
Software and Platform Security
Our participants reported a number of ethical concerns, dilemmas
and challenges in relation to the Software and Platform Security
aspects of cyber security which encompasses Software Security,
Web & Mobile Security, Secure Software Lifecycle. Participants
experience ethical challenges related to disclosure and patching
of vulnerabilities (§4.4.1), and prioritising vulnerability patching
practices (§4.4.3).
4.4.1
Disclosure and Patching of Vulnerabilities. Our participants
(n=3) reported ethical concerns and tensions between disclosure
and patching of vulnerabilities. Our participants had an ethical duty
to be transparent about vulnerabilities found on their system – so
that affected parties can make informed decisions. However, they
were wary that disclosing vulnerabilities could make it easier for
malicious or bad actors to exploit them. As such, they experienced
ethical challenges in balancing between the need for security and
the need for transparency. For instance, Systems Security Lead P02
stated that their organisation publicly discloses details of vulnera-
bilities in their products. However, this is done at the discretion of
the organisation and based on a coherent ethical judgement about
what is best to do, given the facts, options, products and interests
at stake. They explained:
“There is no one-size-fits-all approach. You have to weigh
the risks and benefits involved. A common practice is
to disclose them after they have been patched. But, if a
vulnerability is critical and can cause severe harm, you
might need to disclose it as soon as possible.” – Systems
Security Lead, P02
4.4.2
Prioritising Vulnerability Patching Practices. Our participants
(n=6) reported that a common ethical challenge arises when priori-
tising vulnerability patching practices. Our participants reported
that they have an ethical duty to respond to discovered vulnerabili-
ties in a timely manner. Due to the high number of vulnerabilities
reported, our participants have to prioritise which vulnerabilities
and assets to patch and in what order. Our participants revealed
that they often interpret vulnerability risk metrics subjectively and
raise a possible dilemma when weighing whether to protect the
organisation’s interests over those of customers. For instance, Infor-
mation Security Lead P06 revealed that it is ethically challenging to
prioritise between patching vulnerabilities that have been actively
exploited in the wild and patching vulnerabilities that are affecting
company assets. They said:
“It is always challenging to choose which vulnerabilities
to patch first because they always lack context. But
even if you got more context, you have to make difficult
decisions. Do you patch a vulnerability that is being
exploited and affecting your users’ data first? Or do you
patch a vulnerability that can expose your employees’
details?” – P06, Information Security Lead
4.4.3
Disclosing Security Incidents Without Losing Customer Trust.
Our participants (n=3) reported ethical challenges, and dilemmas in
disclosing security incidents that have already been addressed and
no longer pose a security threat to users and customers. Our partic-
ipants expressed concerns that disclosing resolved incidents may
damage customer trust, and could result in reputational damage to
the company or the relevant security team. As such, participants
reported carefully considering the ethical implications of disclosing
already-solved incidents, and made informed decisions. Patched
vulnerabilities were often disclosed but were kept confidential in
some cases. Privacy Engineer P15 explained:
“At that point in time you’re like should we or should
we not tell the end users? Sometimes there’s an incident
which is not visible to the end user and you are able to
detect and fix it internally on your end. And just decid-
ing as in: Should we tell the users that this happened or
should we just remain silent? So you’re trying to weigh
the cost, you’re doing the cost-benefit analysis between
telling the end-user the impact of the business that’s
going to bring. So sometimes you can end up just like:
Hey, fix it internally but don’t even tell the end user,
just keep quiet.” – P15, Privacy Engineer
4.5
Infrastructure Security
Our participants reported a number of ethical concerns, dilemmas
and challenges in relation to the Infrastructure Security aspects of
cyber security which encompasses Applied Cryptography, Network
Security, Hardware Security, Cyber Physical Systems and Physical
Layer and Telecommunications Security. Participants experienced
ethical challenges related to balancing infrastructure security with
privacy (§4.5.1), and ensuring accountability and responsibility in
AI (§4.5.2).
4.5.1
Balancing Infrastructure Security with Privacy. Our partici-
pants (n=2) reported that they faced dilemmas in balancing the
NSPW ’23, September, 2023, Segovia, Spain
Chalhoub and Flechais
security of infrastructure systems with the need to maintain the
data protection and privacy of their users. Infrastructure security
systems often collect and store data for a variety of purposes, such
as protecting users, identifying potential threats, tracking system
performance, and improving security measures. However, partici-
pants were wary of the privacy and ethical ramifications of using
the data of the customers. Security Consultant P14 who works as a
security consultant for a company that manages internet infrastruc-
ture discussed how they take steps to protect the security of their
customers without compromising their privacy. They explained:
“We could scan customer data but we don’t want to do
that because it involves essentially snooping on cus-
tomers traffic. On the flip side of that however, if you
move the perspective away from the customer’s edge
access in their homes, the edge of the network, what we
will do is identify and be provided with a list from vari-
ous agencies and commercial and government groups of
known bad URLs and IP addresses, and we can actually
drop the traffic in the core network. If you imagine our
routing and switching network in London, for example,
if we see packets come in on our consumer network, we
don’t care where they’ve come from, we don’t want to
know who sent them into the network, we’ll see the IP
address that we know is bad or the destination is bad,
and we drop the packets there. The consumer is protected
because they try to go to a website or service, which is
malicious, but we didn’t do the content filtering at the
edge on their premises.” – Security Consultant, P14
4.5.2
Ensuring Accountability and Responsibility in AI. Our partici-
pants (n=9) reported a number of security concerns in infrastructure
security related to ensuring accountability and responsibility for
the use of AI in infrastructure security. They explained that existing
infrastructure can often be complex, opaque and has the potential
for abuse of power and lack of accountability. Moreover, partici-
pants indicated that some infrastructure security systems rely on AI
surveillance to identify and track potential threats, which has the
potential for mass surveillance and violating user privacy without
accountability. Other participants raised ethical concerns about
potential for bias in AI systems and the lack of transparency in how
AI systems make decisions. Cloud Security Lead P05 explained:
“Many companies are now using AI in security tech-
nologies and then selling these to governments who
then integrate them in critical infrastructure. I don’t
know if people are aware that AI systems can be at-
tacked. And these attacks can have significant severe
effects. I think that is one of the biggest ethical concerns
in cybersecurity.” – P05, Cloud Security Lead
We note that unlike other findings, this is a primarily security
concern related to the exploitation of bias and discrimination in
artificial intelligence.
5
DISCUSSION
5.1
Ethics of Cybersecurity Decision-Making
To help frame our discussion, we propose that cybersecurity can
be defined as desirable decisions and actions to manage threats, vul-
nerabilities, and impacts. While cybersecurity exists within a legal
and regulatory framework, this definition helps us to focus on two
fundamental concepts that are central to the ethical challenges that
cybersecurity professionals can face: what is desirable and how are
decisions made.
Desirable relates to perception and judgement of what is and
what is not wanted but, crucially, cybersecurity always has multiple
different stakeholders who may have different perceptions and pri-
orities on matters of security and how to control potential problems.
This can clearly lead to conflicts that require resolution in order to
act, however it is important to remember that cybersecurity has
subjective, objective, and affective dimensions that are specific to
each relevant stakeholder. Thus, being able to understand the varied
nuances and different perspectives between the objective views on
security, the subjective interests of multiple stakeholders, and the
emotional implications of cybersecurity actions is necessary. We
also note that cybersecurity is a highly technical subject and that
cybersecurity actions entail the exercise of power and control over
others in various contexts. As a result, different stakeholders have
varying levels of security understanding, and also hold cultural,
social, and normative views which influence what they perceive to
be threats, and what are desirable ways of managing this.
Moreover, in cybersecurity the authority to decide on actions is
vested in an individual or small group of individuals who usually
(but not always) have the accompanying responsibility of ensuring
the success of cybersecurity activities. In order to achieve optimum
outcomes, these decision-makers need to resolve complex problems
that require a balance between the technical aspects of cybersecu-
rity (threat, vulnerability, impact) and the perceptions and interests
of multiple different stakeholders (including subjective and affective
dimensions), which is guided by overarching principles. Many of
these principles are grounded in “best practice” in cybersecurity (e.g.
the principle of least privilege, defence in depth, separation of duty,
etc.), however these principles also encompass ethical values (e.g.
beneficence, justice, non-maleficence, explicability, or autonomy as
noted in Section 2).
Any decision in cybersecurity is therefore driven by the abil-
ity of a decision-maker to reach a balance between their own and
multiple other stakeholder perspectives on how to manage threats,
vulnerabilities and impact, which covers areas such as compliance
with relevant laws and regulation, being sensitive to contextual
issues (such as cultural, social or religious norms), and adhering to
fundamental security, privacy and ethical principles. While practi-
tioners can rely on precedent and “best practice” to navigate these
decisions, it is readily apparent that there are a number of issues
that are not covered by this. Specifically, while precedent can pro-
vide helpful framing and information pertaining to past decisions,
cybersecurity is an evolving problem: new threats and vulnerabil-
ities get discovered, new security technologies and practices are
devised, the likelihood of attacks happening can change over time,
and so can contextual factors such as attitudes, practices and expec-
tations. Moreover, while there is a strong desire for “best practice” or
Practical Cybersecurity Ethics: Mapping CyBOK to Ethical Concerns
NSPW ’23, September, 2023, Segovia, Spain
“tried-and-tested” security, this typically results in a “solutioneering”
approach: where a pre-existing cybersecurity solution is applied to
multiple different problems and contexts without the understand-
ing required for making appropriate decisions. Furthermore, the
insistence on “tried-and-tested” security means that innovation
is discouraged and improvements are slow to be recognised and
adopted.
5.2
Decisions in Cybersecurity Professions
As our findings indicate, decisions in cybersecurity can be made
by many different individuals across the profession. Using CyBOK,
our findings help map out ethical issues that arise in different areas
of the cybersecurity profession, and provides a useful starting point
for a more systematic exploration. The issues identified in section 4
highlight several issues that arise when making specific decisions:
difficulties in balancing different perspectives on prioritising vul-
nerability patching, navigating the emotional aspects of customer
trust that can be impacted by disclosing information, or resolving
conflicting views about the contrasting interests of the business
against the interests of the customers. More research is needed
to systematically map the different types of decisions that arise
in the pursuit of professional duties, and help to provide a more
specific breakdown of the kinds of ethical dilemmas that may arise
in each relevant area of the profession. This would be beneficial
in cataloguing the variety of security decisions that pose ethical
dilemmas, informing curriculum design and educational material
for cybersecurity professionals, and providing deeper opportunities
to examine cybersecurity ethical issues in more detail. While the
ethics of cryptographic research [48] or vulnerability disclosure
[40] have been highlighted and investigated, we identified a num-
ber of other ethical challenges that need greater scrutiny, such as
considering the ethical implications of associating with irresponsi-
ble third parties (either clients or service providers), possible harm
arising from how security information is interpreted by customers,
or navigating conflicts between company and customer interests.
One dimension that was not identified explicitly by our partici-
pants is the inherent potential for them to be placed in a personal
conflict of interest when making such decisions: for example when
a possible decision outcome would result in a negative personal
impact but a much larger benefit for others, or when weighing the
convenience of simply reusing a pre-existing solution compared to
a more detailed evaluation of how suitable it is to the context of
use.
5.3
Ethical Cybersecurity AI
Finally, it is important to recognise the growing concern over the
use and applicability of AI technology in cybersecurity. It is foresee-
able that this technology will be used in ways to improve the qual-
ity, timeliness and relevance of information available to decision-
makers and also to help them identify appropriate solutions. It is
also likely that AI models will be used and increasingly be relied
upon to make decisions about detailed technical or time-critical
cybersecurity problems, however a fundamental concern about AI
models pertains to their lack of transparency and explicability. AI
decision tools will need to account for the complexity of different
perspectives, values, principles outlined above, however it is likely
that they too will be subject to bias, unfair, and even malicious
influence. Moreover, given the complexity and lack of transparency
inherent in these approaches, such biases, malicious influences, or
conflicts of interest may become harder to identify, challenge, and
remediate.
5.4
Implications for Professional Practice
As noted in Section 2.4, the current codes of practice from profes-
sional bodies do not provide very detailed or nuanced guidance to
help practitioners navigate ethical dilemmas in the pursuit of their
duties. As discussed above, we believe more research is needed to
map and explore the ethical challenges that arise in different areas
of the cybersecurity profession, however it is challenging to make
recommendations for how these problems should be addressed on
a more pragmatic level. Addressing the need for greater considera-
tion of ethical issues through legislation is unlikely to succeed due
to the complex and varied nature of moral dilemmas which can
arise in cybersecurity. However, insights can be drawn from the
long history of medical ethics and practice: from the early origins
of the Hippocratic Oath to more modern Codes of Medical Ethics.
In particular, we note that due to the manner in which the medical
profession is regulated (e.g. through the General Medical Council in
the UK) violations of such codes of conduct can lead to disciplinary
proceedings and result in the loss of a license to practice medicine.
As cybersecurity codes of ethics continue to be developed and up-
dated, we think that it is also important to consider and investigate
how ethical breaches could lead to disciplinary proceedings and
affect professionals’ license to practice cybersecurity.
Furthermore, we believe it is crucial for ethical awareness and
training to be integrated into and throughout the education of cy-
bersecurity professionals. This should complement work towards
embedding ethical and responsible values into the principles, prac-
tices and frameworks that collectively make up the cybersecurity
profession. Both of these recommendations are highly consistent
with the aims of CyBOK, and we argue that (1) more work needs
to be done to identify, map, and inform the ethical implications
of cybersecurity practice in each of the CyBOK Knowledge Areas;
(2) greater efforts need to be made to influence the curriculum,
education, and training of cybersecurity professionals to cover and
help them manage to navigate ethical dilemmas; (3) more should
be done to share and learn from how ethical dilemmas have been
tackled by practitioners, including making room for more “honest”
and “safe” spaces for exchange among security officers in relation
to the ethical dilemmas they encounter. Finally, (4) it is imperative
for more research to be undertaken into the ethics of cybersecurity
AI applications, in order to identify and frame the possible benefits,
disadvantages, and dangers of this technology.
6
LIMITATIONS
Our study has some limitations. First, when we engaged with our
participants, we devised an interview guide that was informed by
two different existing pieces of work: CyBOK and the principlist
framework proposed by Formosa et al. [25]. Despite our best in-
tentions in explaining and grounding our engagement in ethical
principles, it is evident that much of this detail was overlooked
in favour of discussing example cases of ethical challenges. Upon
NSPW ’23, September, 2023, Segovia, Spain
Chalhoub and Flechais
further reflection, it is clear that a principlist approach to empirical
ethical research presents challenges in how to engage with partic-
ipants, however we believe that such principles are very helpful
in interpreting the examples and comments given by our partic-
ipants. In contrast, the detailed breakdown of different areas of
cybersecurity from CyBOK provided a much more helpful framing
for our participants and proved a useful means of prompting for
different experiences of ethical issues across the whole spectrum
of cybersecurity practice.
Second, common to all qualitative studies, researcher bias is a
concern. Both researchers were trained to conduct research inter-
views, taking care to avoid leading questions, and ensuring that par-
ticipants felt comfortable to respond to questions. The researchers
avoided interrupting participants, and probed for more information
when required.
Third, given that cybersecurity and ethics are sensitive topics,
participants may have been concerned about sharing information,
or otherwise been biased in their responses. In order to allay these
concerns, an information sheet was given to all participants which
described the details of the research and how their data would be
used. Each participant was verbally invited to ask questions about
this sheet prior to the interviews starting, and we emphasised
that their comments would be anonymised and the interview data
encrypted and protected. While it is difficult to avoid biased answers
when undertaking interview research, we tried to account for this in
our analysis of the data by carefully reviewing the codes and themes
we identified. Given that our research was positioned as a high level
exploration of ethical issues in different areas of the cybersecurity
profession, we did not feel it necessary to take additional steps to
avoid biases at this stage.
Fourth, the number of interviews is relatively small, and there
may be concerns about the validity or generalisability of these
findings more widely. While qualitative studies do not aim for
statistical representativeness, they do aim to identify conceptual
tendencies that can be considered more widely. In keeping with
other forms of qualitative research, our aim here is to gain an in-
depth understanding of the participants’ views on ethics according
to different areas of the cybersecurity profession. It is from this
detailed understanding that our themes have emerged, and we argue
that these can form the basis of future research aiming to generalise
this to wider populations and the broader field of cybersecurity
ethics.
Finally, in common with other work in empirical ethics, our
qualitative findings are limited to the experiences and views of our
participants. In particular, given that many of our participants had
years of experience working in industry, it is not likely that they
would have benefited from more recent efforts at teaching ethics as
part of the curriculum of cybersecurity education. Furthermore, our
discussion necessarily incorporates our normative views – while we
have endeavoured to ensure that relevant information from our data
and appropriate prior work and relevant theory has been presented,
the choice and conclusions we draw are strongly influenced by our
views as researchers.
7
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have presented a review of existing work in cy-
bersecurity ethics, and the results of our investigation into “What
ethical challenges, insights, and solutions arise in different areas of
cybersecurity?’ We interviewed 15 cybersecurity professionals to
investigate this, and found a number of different challenges which
we analysed and mapped to the different areas of the Cybersecurity
Body of Knowledge. Our findings highlight the inherent complex-
ity and nuance associated with making decisions in cybersecurity,
and we discussed how different objective, subjective and affective
perspectives need to be taken into account, together with balancing
technical, security, and ethical considerations. We further outlined
the challenges for professionals who make such decisions and con-
cluded that future research should investigate how ethical values
can be embedded throughout the cybersecurity profession, includ-
ing its tools, practices, and processes. In addition, it is imperative for
ethical training and education to become part of the cybersecurity
curriculum in order to provide professional practitioners with the
means of identifying and addressing the ethical challenges that will
arise in the performance of their duties, and we believe that CyBOK
offers a very helpful framework for doing so.
Our participants also reported widespread concerns associated
with the use of AI in cybersecurity, and we discussed how the tech-
nology offers opportunities to support ethical decision-making by
providing greater insights and information into the problems being
addressed. We also identified that the challenges of making com-
plex cybersecurity decisions are likely to drive the application and
adoption of AI-based decision-making. Given the complexity, sub-
jectivity, and contextual nature of cybersecurity decision-making,
and coupled with concerns around lack of transparency, possible
biases, and potential for being maliciously influenced, we urge the
research community to continue and expand the work undertaken
in exploring the ethics of cybersecurity AI.
REFERENCES
[1] ACM, 2023. Acm code of ethics and professional conduct.
URL https://www.acm.org/code-of-ethics
[2] Bailey, M., Dittrich, D., Kenneally, E., Maughan, D., 2012. The menlo report. IEEE
Security & Privacy 10 (2), 71–75.
[3] Bornstein, M. H., Jager, J., Putnick, D. L., 2013. Sampling in developmental science:
Situations, shortcomings, solutions, and standards. Developmental Review 33 (4),
357–370.
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0273229713000385
[4] Bos, H., 2021. The Cyber Security Body of Knowledge v1.1.0, 2021. University of
Bristol, Ch. Operating Systems & Virtualisation, kA Version 1.0.1.
URL https://www.cybok.org/
[5] Burnap, P., 2021. The Cyber Security Body of Knowledge v1.1.0, 2021. University
of Bristol, Ch. Risk Management & Governance, kA Version 1.1.1.
URL https://www.cybok.org/
[6] Burnett, S., Feamster, N., 2015. Encore: Lightweight measurement of web censor-
ship with cross-origin requests. In: Proceedings of the 2015 ACM conference on
special interest group on data communication. pp. 653–667.
[7] Byers, J. W., 2015. Encore: Lightweight measurement of web censorship with
cross-origin requests–public review. In: Technical Report.
[8] Carolina, R., 2021. The Cyber Security Body of Knowledge v1.1.0, 2021. University
of Bristol, Ch. Law & Regulation, kA Version 1.0.2.
URL https://www.cybok.org/
[9] Chalhoub, G., 2022. The ux of things: Exploring ux principles to inform security
and privacy design in the smart home. Phd thesis, University of Oxford, available
at https://www.georgechalhoub.com/pdf/chalhoub_thesis_2022.pdf.
[10] Chalhoub, G., Flechais, I., 2020. “alexa, are you spying on me?”: Exploring the
effect of user experience on the security and privacy of smart speaker users.
In: HCI for Cybersecurity, Privacy and Trust: Second International Conference,
HCI-CPT 2020, Held as Part of the 22nd HCI International Conference, HCII 2020,
Practical Cybersecurity Ethics: Mapping CyBOK to Ethical Concerns
NSPW ’23, September, 2023, Segovia, Spain
Copenhagen, Denmark, July 19–24, 2020, Proceedings. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
Heidelberg, p. 305–325.
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-50309-3_21
[11] Chalhoub, G., Flechais, I., nov 2022. Data protection at a discount: Investigating
the ux of data protection from user, designer, and business leader perspectives.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 6 (CSCW2).
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3555537
[12] Chalhoub, G., Flechais, I., Nthala, N., Abu-Salma, R., 2020. Innovation inaction or
in action? the role of user experience in the security and privacy design of smart
home cameras. In: Proceedings of the Sixteenth USENIX Conference on Usable
Privacy and Security. SOUPS’20. USENIX Association, USA.
[13] Chalhoub, G., Flechais, I., Nthala, N., Abu-Salma, R., Tom, E., 2020. Factoring user
experience into the security and privacy design of smart home devices: A case
study. In: Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. CHI EA ’20. Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, p. 1–9.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3334480.3382850
[14] Christen, M., Gordijn, B., Loi, M., 2020. The ethics of cybersecurity. Springer
Nature.
[15] Christen, M., Gordijn, B., Weber, K., van de Poel, I., Yaghmaei, E., 2017. A review
of value-conflicts in cybersecurity: An assessment based on quantitative and
qualitative literature analysis. The ORBIT Journal 1 (1), 1–19.
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2515856220300705
[16] Cooper, H. E., Camic, P. M., Long, D. L., Panter, A., Rindskopf, D. E., Sher, K. J.,
2012. APA handbook of research methods in psychology, Vol 2: Research de-
signs: Quantitative, qualitative, neuropsychological, and biological. American
Psychological Association.
[17] Corbin, J., Strauss, A., 2014. Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and proce-
dures for developing grounded theory. Sage publications.
[18] CyBOK, 2023. Cyber security body of knowledge.
URL https://www.cybok.org/
[19] Debar, H., 2021. The Cyber Security Body of Knowledge v1.1.0, 2021. University
of Bristol, Ch. Security Operations & Incident Management, kA Version 1.0.2.
URL https://www.cybok.org/
[20] Ekambaranathan, A., Zhao, J., Chalhoub, G., jun 2023. Navigating the data
avalanche: Towards supporting developers in developing privacy-friendly chil-
dren’s apps. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. 7 (2).
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3596267
[21] Fahl, S., 2021. The Cyber Security Body of Knowledge v1.1.0, 2021. University of
Bristol, Ch. Web & Mobile Security, kA Version 1.0.1.
URL https://www.cybok.org/
[22] Faugier,
J.,
Sargeant,
M.,
1997.
Sampling
hard
to
reach
popu-
lations.
Journal
of
Advanced
Nursing
26
(4),
790–797,
_eprint:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1046/j.1365-2648.1997.00371.x.
URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1046/j.1365-2648.1997.00371.x
[23] FIRST Ethics special interest group, 2023. Ethics for incident response and security
teams.
URL https://ethicsfirst.org/
[24] Floridi, L., Cowls, J., Beltrametti, M., Chatila, R., Chazerand, P., Dignum, V., Luetge,
C., Madelin, R., Pagallo, U., Rossi, F., et al., 2018. Ai4people—an ethical framework
for a good ai society: opportunities, risks, principles, and recommendations.
Minds and machines 28, 689–707.
[25] Formosa, P., Wilson, M., Richards, D., 2021. A principlist framework for cyberse-
curity ethics. computers & security 109, 102382.
[26] Gollmann, D., 2021. The Cyber Security Body of Knowledge v1.1.0, 2021. Univer-
sity of Bristol, Ch. Authentication, Authorisation & Accountability, kA Version
1.0.2.
URL https://www.cybok.org/
[27] Goodman, L. A., 1961. Snowball sampling. The annals of mathematical statistics,
148–170.
[28] Guest, G., Bunce, A., Johnson, L., 2006. How many interviews are enough? An
experiment with data saturation and variability. Field methods 18 (1), 59–82.
[29] Hansson, S., 2013. The ethics of risk: Ethical analysis in an uncertain world.
Springer.
[30] Hansson, S. O., 2004. Fallacies of risk. Journal of Risk Research 7 (3), 353–360.
[31] Herington, J., 2018. The contribution of security to well-being. J. Ethics & Soc.
Phil. 14, 179.
[32] Hildebrandt, M., 2013. Balance or trade-off? online security technologies and
fundamental rights. Philosophy & Technology 26, 357–379.
[33] ISSA, 2023. Issa code of ethics.
[34] Jamil, D., Khan, M. N. A., 2011. Is ethical hacking ethical? International Journal
of Engineering Science and Technology 3 (5), 3–758.
[35] Kohno, T., Acar, Y., Loh, W., Aug. 2023. Ethical frameworks and computer security
trolley problems: Foundations for conversations. In: 32nd USENIX Security Sym-
posium (USENIX Security 23). USENIX Association, Anaheim, CA, pp. 5145–5162.
URL https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity23/presentation/kohno
[36] Lee, W., 2019. The Cyber Security Body of Knowledge v1.0, 2019. University of
Bristol, Ch. Malware & Attack Technology, kA Version 1.0.
URL https://www.cybok.org/
[37] Loi, M., Christen, M., 2020. Ethical frameworks for cybersecurity. Springer Inter-
national Publishing.
[38] Macnish, K., van der Ham, J., 2021. Ethical approaches to cybersecurity.
[39] Manjikian, M., 2022. Cybersecurity ethics: an introduction. Taylor & Francis.
[40] Matwyshyn, A. M., Cui, A., Keromytis, A. D., Stolfo, S. J., 2010. Ethics in security
vulnerability research. IEEE Security & Privacy 8 (2), 67–72.
[41] Morgan, G., Gordijn, B., 2020. A care-based stakeholder approach to ethics of
cybersecurity in business. The ethics of cybersecurity 21, 119–138.
[42] Mouton, F., Malan, M. M., Kimppa, K. K., Venter, H., 2015. Necessity for ethics in
social engineering research. Computers & Security 55, 114–127.
[43] Nissenbaum, H., 2004. Privacy as contextual integrity. Wash. L. Rev. 79, 119.
[44] of Standards, N. I., Technology, ???? Cybersecurity definition.
[45] Piessens, F., 2021. The Cyber Security Body of Knowledge v1.1.0, 2021. University
of Bristol, Ch. Software Security, kA Version 1.0.1.
URL https://www.cybok.org/
[46] Rashid, A., Danezis, G., Chivers, H., Lupu, E., Martin, A., Lewis, M., Peersman, C.,
2018. Scoping the cyber security body of knowledge. IEEE Security & Privacy
16 (3), 96–102.
[47] Robinson, D. G., Halderman, J. A., 2012. Ethical issues in e-voting security analysis.
In: Financial Cryptography and Data Security: FC 2011 Workshops, RLCPS and
WECSR 2011, Rodney Bay, St. Lucia, February 28-March 4, 2011, Revised Selected
Papers 15. Springer, pp. 119–130.
[48] Rogaway, P., 2015. The moral character of cryptographic work. Cryptology ePrint
Archive.
[49] Rossow, C., Jha, S., 2021. The Cyber Security Body of Knowledge v1.1.0, 2021.
University of Bristol, Ch. Network Security, kA Version 2.0.0.
URL https://www.cybok.org/
[50] Roussev, V., 2021. The Cyber Security Body of Knowledge v1.1.0, 2021. University
of Bristol, Ch. Forensics, kA Version 1.0.1.
URL https://www.cybok.org/
[51] Sasse, M. A., Rashid, A., 2021. The Cyber Security Body of Knowledge v1.1.0,
2021. University of Bristol, Ch. Human Factors, kA Version 1.0.1.
URL https://www.cybok.org/
[52] Seale, C., 1999. Quality in qualitative research. Qualitative inquiry 5 (4), 465–478.
[53] Stein, J. M. L., Vizgirda, V., Van Kleek, M., Binns, R., Zhao, J., Zhao, R., Goel, N.,
Chalhoub, G., Albayaydh, W. S., Shadbolt, N., 2023. You are you and the app.
there’s nobody else.: Building worker-designed data institutions within platform
hegemony. In: Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. CHI ’23. Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3581114
[54] Stringhini, G., 2021. The Cyber Security Body of Knowledge v1.1.0, 2021. Univer-
sity of Bristol, Ch. Adversarial Behaviours, kA Version 1.0.1.
URL https://www.cybok.org/
[55] Troncoso, C., 2021. The Cyber Security Body of Knowledge v1.1.0, 2021. Univer-
sity of Bristol, Ch. Privacy & Online Rights, kA Version 1.0.2.
URL https://www.cybok.org/
[56] United States, 1978. The Belmont report: ethical principles and guidelines for
the protection of human subjects of research. Vol. 1. Department of Health,
Education, and Welfare. National Commission for the Protection of Human
Subjects of Biomedical.
[57] van de Poel, I., 2020. Core values and value conflicts in cybersecurity: beyond
privacy versus security. The ethics of cybersecurity, 45–71.
[58] Čapkun, S., 2021. The Cyber Security Body of Knowledge v1.1.0, 2021. University
of Bristol, Ch. Physical Layer & Telecommunications Security, kA Version 1.0.1.
URL https://www.cybok.org/
[59] Weber, K., Kleine, N., 2020. Cybersecurity in health care. The Ethics of Cyberse-
curity, 139–156.
[60] Williams, L., 2021. The Cyber Security Body of Knowledge v1.1.0, 2021. University
of Bristol, Ch. Secure Software Lifecycle, kA Version 1.0.2.
URL https://www.cybok.org/
NSPW ’23, September, 2023, Segovia, Spain
Chalhoub and Flechais
A
ETHICS OF THE CYBER SECURITY
PROFESSION: INTERVIEW GUIDE
Scoping Questions
(1) Can you tell us about yourself? How long have you worked
in cyber security?
(2) What is your role in the company that you work at?
(3) When did you join the company?
(4) What are your responsibilities?
(5) In which of the following areas of cybersecurity have you
had any professional involvement:
• Human, Organisational & Regulatory Aspects (e.g. risk
management, compliance, law, human factors, privacy)
• Attacks & Defences (e.g. malware, forensics, incident man-
agement)
• Systems Security (e.g. cryptography, virtualisation secu-
rity, Identity/Authentication/Authorization)
• Software and Platform Security (Software Security, Web
& Mobile Security, Software Development Lifecycle)
• Infrastructure Security (e.g. Network Security, Hardware
Security, Cyber Physical Security, Telecommunications
Security)
General Ethical Questions
(1) In your opinion, what are the most important ethical consid-
erations for cyber security professionals?
(2) Do you think that cyber security professionals should be
held to the same ethical standards as other professions?
(3) What challenges or obstacles do cyber security professionals
face when trying to adhere to ethical principles?
(4) How can we ensure that the cyber security profession is
accountable and transparent in its decisions and actions?
(5) Do you think that cyber security professionals should be
held liable for any harm caused by their activities?
Professional Ethical Practices
(1) How do you ensure that your cyber security activities are
conducted in an ethical manner? How do you evaluate the
ethical implications of a cyber security decision or action?
(2) What ethical issues do you encounter in your day-to-day
work as a cyber security professional? Have you ever expe-
rienced ethical dilemmas in your profession? Can you relate
them to the following areas of cybersecurity:
• Human, Organisational & Regulatory Aspects (e.g. risk
management, compliance, law, human factors, privacy)
• Attacks & Defences (e.g. malware, forensics, incident man-
agement)
• Systems Security (e.g. cryptography, virtualisation secu-
rity, Identity/Authentication/Authorisation)
• Software and Platform Security (Software Security, Web
& Mobile Security, Software Development Lifecycle)
• Infrastructure Security (e.g. Network Security, Hardware
Security, Cyber Physical Security, Telecommunications
Security)
(3) Have you ever seen or experienced situations where harm
occurs to users, employees, or organisations arising from
cybersecurity activities or technologies? How would you
handle it? (Non-maleficence)
(4) How do you ensure that cyber security activities are con-
ducted with respect for the rights of users and organisations?
How do you make sure that your activities are beneficial
to humans, promote human well-being, and make our lives
better overall? (Beneficence)
(5) How do you ensure that your cyber security activities respect
human autonomy? How do you make sure that users use in-
formed decisions for themselves about how that technology
is used in their lives? (Autonomy)
(6) How do you ensure that your cyber security activities pro-
mote fairness, equality, and impartiality? How do you make
sure that they do not unfairly discriminate, undermine soli-
darity, or prevent equal access? (Justice)
(7) How do you ensure that your cyber security activities are
used in ways that are intelligible, transparent, and compre-
hensible? How do you make sure it is accountable and re-
sponsible for its use for cyber security technologies? (Expli-
cability)
(8) What do you think the role and implications of AI will be
for cybersecurity ethics?
