Title: Autonomous Vehicles an overview on system, cyber security, risks, issues, and a way forward
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2309.14213v1
--------------------------------------------------

1
 
 
Chapter Name: 
Autonomous Vehicles: an overview on system, cyber security, risks, issues, and a way 
forward 
 
Author: 
(1) Md Aminul Islam, MSc, Advanced Computer Science,  Post Graduate Research, 
Oxford Brookes University 
(2) Sarah Alqhtani, BSc in EEE, Microsoft Intern, Field engineer in Honeywell, Post 
Graduate Research, Oxford Brookes University 
 
 
Table of contents 
Table of Contents ............................................................................................................................. 1 
1. Introduction  ............................................................................................................................................. 2 
2. Autonomous vehicles  ........................................................................................................................... 2 
2.1. Sensors ............................................................................................................................................... 3 
2.2. Detection and Algorithms ........................................................................................................... 9 
2.3. Cloud Robotic ................................................................................................................................ 13 
2.4. IoT ..................................................................................................................................................... 14 
2.5. Blockchain ...................................................................................................................................... 14 
3. Existing Models ..................................................................................................................................... 16 
4. Traffic Flow prediction in Autonomous vehicles  ................................................................... 16 
5. Cybersecurity Risks............................................................................................................................. 18 
6. Risk management ................................................................................................................................ 26 
7. Issues ........................................................................................................................................................ 37 
7.1. Ethical Issues................................................................................................................................. 37 
7.2. Environmental Issues ................................................................................................................ 38 
7.3. Legal Issues .................................................................................................................................... 39 
7.4. Professional Issues ..................................................................................................................... 40 
7.5. Social Issues ................................................................................................................................... 40 
8. Conclusion .............................................................................................................................................. 41 
9. References .............................................................................................................................................. 42 
 
 
2
 
 
1. Introduction: 
Throughout the years, autonomous vehicles (AV) have been in constant development. It 
is not a new technology, but since the 1990s the initiation for innovation started in the 
private and public sectors. These innovations include many systems for advanced driver 
assistance and some functional AV [1]. This technology creates a potential impact in 
travel behaviour, congestion, and safety. Other social impacts that this technology 
provides is fuel efficiency, parking benefits, travel time reduction, and crash savings, 
which is estimated to be 2000$ per year for every AV [2]. There are some challenges that 
may occur with AV like system performance in complex cluttered environments and 
safety while facing uncertain interactions with other participants in traffic. Questions 
regarding reliability and safety needs to be addressed, which can occur in the process of 
end-to-end learning and interactive planning. However, one of the most important 
purposes of the AV is to keep passengers and traffic safe. Most accidents happen due to 
human error, and on a yearly base, more than three thousand lives are lost daily [3].  
In this chapter, the AV system will be discussed in detail. There are many sensors, 
technologies and algorithms that can be used to create different models of AV. However, 
within any technology some issues and risks will arise. Issues can vary from social, 
professional, environmental, legal and ethical, which will be discussed alongside a risk 
management assessment. 
 
 
2. Autonomous Vehicles  
Autonomous vehicles (AV) are usually not systematically organized. The vehicle system 
can differ in so many ways. Sensors are usually very different from one design to the 
other. Some designs completely depend on cameras, however other designs can also have 
a combination of technologies like laser scanners, milli wave radars, GPS receivers, and 
cameras. In autonomous vehicles, software issues should be addressed due to the large-
scale platform. It is more efficient to build up the platform from scratch. The design 
process and application of algorithms such as path planning, vehicle control, and scene 
recognition needs a significant amount of integrated collaboration of knowledge and 
skills, which mostly demands engineering skills. Furthermore, the use of algorithms in 
autonomous vehicles demands huge databases to train the recognition process, and most 
importantly for localization maps of the public roads [4]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3
 
 
2.1. 
 Sensors: 
In every AV the main component that makes it autonomous is sensors. The fusion of data 
gathered from the sensors that should be accurately interpreted, along with the vehicle 
control system is the most important point in AV. For better visualization, the process of 
the AV system can be divided into four main categories (Figure.1). The first category is 
the sensors, which can be many different kinds that are installed in the vehicle. These 
hardware components are installed in the system to sense the surroundings of the 
vehicle. After that the sensors gather the data to translate and process them into 
meaningful information, which is the perception step. Furthermore, the output of the 
perception process is used to determine behavioral planning for the long-range and the 
short-range path plan. Then there is the control system that takes the path plan that is 
generated from the planning subsystem and sends to the vehicle control commands 
accordingly.  
  
Figure.1 – Autonomous vehicle system Diagram 
Sensors are a very important part of the AV, and different types of sensors are used in AV 
designs. The main types of sensors that are most commonly used in this system are radar, 
cameras, sonar, wheel odometry, lidar, inertial measurement unit (IMU), and a global 
positioning system (GPS). These sensors are used to collect data, process them in the 
impeded computing system and use them to control the speed, brakes, and the steer of 
the vehicle.  
 
2.1.1. Camera: 
Camera sensor is usually the preferred choice of sensors that are used in manufacturing 
an AV, and it is the first type of sensor to be used in this system. It is the best way to 
visualize the surroundings of the vehicle. There are many reasons why this type of sensor 
4
 
 
is commonly used, mostly because it is affordable, available, and has an accurate 
classification in interpreting texture. However, the use of the camera needs 
computational power to process the data. In the most recent high-definition cameras, the 
pixel per frame rate can reach up to a million, and this also includes 30 to 60 frames in a 
second. This means that to process in real-time, a multi-megabyte of data is going to be 
processed [5]. 
Unlike the other sensors, which are active, the camera or the optical sensor is a passive 
sensor. It is called a passive sensor because it gathers data in a way that is non-intrusive. 
Due to the affordability of a camera, vehicles can have it both in the rear end and in the 
front. This can enable a 360 degrees vision that can make tracking cars coming from a 
curve or switching lanes more efficient. Moreover, there are many applications that use 
visual information such as traffic sign recognition, lane detection, and object 
identification, which can vary to pedestrians, obstacles, and many other objects that can 
be found on the road. These applications do not cause any need for modification within 
the road infrastructure [6]. 
 
2.1.2. Radar: 
Radars are defined as Radio Detection and Ranging. They are sensors that are embedded 
in the vehicle for different applications like collision warning and avoidance, adaptive 
cruise control, and blind spot warning [5]. These applications are achieved by using the 
radar in object detection, determining their position, and detecting the speed relatively 
to the vehicle. The progressed development in millimeter-wave semiconductor 
technology and signal processing techniques are a main factor in the radar system. Those 
techniques in signal processing made the resolution and estimation process better in 
every measurement dimension, including azimuth-elevation angles, velocity, and range 
of the surrounding objects around the vehicle.  
The radar sensor has the ability to receive and transmit electromagnetic waves. The wave 
frequency band ranges from 3 MHz to 300 GHz. Like other sensors, the radar was made 
for information extraction that includes velocity, location, radar cross section (RCS), and 
range by using the reflected wave from the object targeted. The AV radar system operates 
at a frequency band 24 GHz and 77 GHz in the EM spectrum, which is called mm-wave 
frequency. These frequencies are used to achieve higher range resolution and velocity. 
The three main tasks of a fundamental radar operation are range estimation, direction 
estimation, and relative velocity. 
Range Estimation 
To get the range estimation of a target, the range R can be calculated based on the time 
delay of the round-trip of the EM waves. It is extracted from the target: R = (cτ/2), where 
the delay time of the round-trip is determined in seconds by the value τ, and the value c 
is the speed of light in m/s (c≈3×108 m/s). This τ value estimation will determine the 
range measurement. The radar transmits a type of EM waves that is necessary for the 
time delay estimation of the round-trip. One example is the pulse modulated continuous 
waves (CWs), which contains short and periodic power pulses and silent periods. The 
5
 
 
silent period enables the receiving process of the radar to get the reflected signals, and it 
also serves as a timing mark for the radar's performance of the range estimation. 
However, CW signals that are unmodulated such as cos(2πfct) lack those timing marks, 
therefore they are unused for range estimation. Furthermore, the reflected signal should 
arrive from the target before the start of the next signal. Hence, the radar's maximum 
detectable range relies on the pulse repetition interval TPRF. Due to the loss and 
imperfection of the reflection path from the target, the signal that is transmitted and 
received from the radar undergoes attenuation. The radar electronics have internal noise 
that can affect the received target signal, alongside interferences that are caused by the 
reflected signal of other objects and human-made sources such as jamming. The ambient 
noise that is in the form of additive white Gaussian random process is the only thing that 
is considered in the problem of standard round-trip time delay estimation. The 
demodulation is assumed to already remove the carrier for the target signal x(t) at 
baseband to be modeled as: 
x(t)=αs(t−τ)+ω(t), 
The value of α is a complex scalar that has a magnitude that represents attenuation that 
is caused by path loss, RCS of the target, and antenna gain. On the other hand, the ω(t) 
represents the additive white gaussian noise, which has variance σ2 and zero mean. The 
goal here is to estimate the τ using the knowledge of the radar waveform that is 
transmitted s(t). With the assumption of finite energy Es and having a unit amplitude in 
the signal s(t), a radar receiver that is ideal can be using a matched filter with the impulse 
response 
h(t)=s∗(−t). 
That 
will 
maximize 
the 
ratio 
of 
signal 
to 
noise  
(SNR=(α2Es/σ2)=(α2Tp/σ2)) in the output. The correlation between the transmitted 
and the received signal pulses in this case is found by the matched receiver that is filter-
based. 
y(τ)=∫x(t)s∗(t−τ)dt. 
The time delay maximum likelihood (ML) is estimated to be the time that the magnitude 
of the output's matched filter, which peaks at 
τ^=argmaxτ|y(τ)|. 
The existence of the noise can perturb the peak's location, that will give an estimation 
error. The radar also needs to determine if the received signal has an echo signal from the 
target. Many strategies are being studied and developed when it comes to radar 
technology, but the most known decision strategy can be formed by statistical hypothesis 
testing, which leads to a simplified threshold testing in the matched filter output. Another 
main performance measure is range resolution, which distinguishes close spaced targets. 
If a nonoverlapping return signal in the time domain is produced, two targets can be 
separated in the range domain only. Therefore, the pulse width Tp is proportional to the 
range resolution, which means that higher pulses give higher resolution. While less 
energy can be found in shorter pulses, which means it has a poor receiver detection 
performance and signal to noise ratio (SNR). 
 
6
 
 
Direction Estimation 
In the use of the wideband pulse like the FMCW, a discrimination of the target's velocity 
and distance is provided. The direction's discrimination is enabled by antenna array. In a 
case of traffic for example, there are usually several targets in the area surrounding the 
radar, which collects reflections that are direct and multipath. An angular target's 
location is estimated to deliver a comprehensive representation of the traffic scenery. 
Thus, in automotive radars, the description of the target's location is in the terms of a 
spherical coordination system (R,θ,ϕ), where the (θ,ϕ) coordination denotes respectively 
the azimuthal and elevation angles. If a single antenna radar is used in this case, in 
problems of range-velocity estimation, it might not be very sufficient because of the time 
delay measure τ=(2(R±vt)/c), which lacks the angular locations information of the target.  
In order to make the direction estimation more feasible, the data of the reflected signals 
along multiple distinct dimensions should be collected by the radar. when a target is 
being located using electromagnetic waves in 2-D, the data of the reflected wave from the 
target should be collected in two distinct dimensions. Those two dimensions can be a 
combination of space, time, and frequency. For example, in a wideband waveform such 
as FMCW and in antenna arrays two unique dimensions will be formed. However, mm-
wave bands, which is a smaller wavelength, correlate with smaller aperture sizes. 
Therefore, numerous amounts of antenna elements can be packed densely into an 
antenna array. Hence, a stronger and sharper beam, which is the effective radiation beam, 
in turn increases the angular measurements resolution.  
Velocity Estimation 
Based on the Doppler effect, the velocity of a target estimation can be found. Assume that 
a vehicle is moving forward in a differential velocity v. considering the relative motion 
between two vehicles, there is a delay in the reflected waves by time τ=(2(R±vt)/c). The 
received wave will experience a frequency shift known as the Doppler shift fd=(±2v/λ), 
which is caused by the time dependent delay term. Depending on the direction of the 
target, whether it is moving away or approaching, the sign is determined to be negative 
or positive. This sign along with the wavelength λ are inversely proportional with the 
doppler shift. Although the shift in frequency is possible to detect using CW radar, it is 
not able to measure the range of the target.  
In the case of FMCW radar, it transmits a periodic wideband FM pulses that has an angular 
frequency which increases linearly during the pulse. For the FM modulation constant K 
and the carrier frequency fc, the single FMCW pulse is shown as: 
s(t)=ej2π(Jc+0.5Kt)t0≤t≤T. 
The reflected signal from the target is combined with the transmitted signal to generate 
a beat signal with low frequency, which gives the range of the target. The process is 
repeated for P consecutive pulses. Waveforms that are two-dimensional represent a 
reflective pulse that are successive arranged in a two-time indices. The pulse number 
correspond with the slow time index p. however, the fast time index n is assuming that 
for every pulse, the continuous corresponding beat signal is sampled with the frequency 
fs to get samples N during the duration time T. if the single target is assumed and the 
7
 
 
duration of the reflected signal is neglected, the radar receiver FMCW output function of 
the two-time indices is shown as 
d(n,p)≈exp{j2π[(2KRc+fd)nfs+fdpT0+2fcRc]}+ω(n,p). 
A discrete Fourier transform through fast time n is applicable to get beat frequency 
fb=(2KR/c) coupled with the Doppler frequency fd. Another name for this operation is 
range gating or range transform. This operation is able to estimate the Doppler shift that 
corresponds with a unique gate range, which is possible by applying a second Fourier 
transform along the slow time. Using the two-dimensional Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) 
will enable finding the range-Doppler map [7]. 
 
2.1.3. Lidar 
Light Detection and Ranging (LIDAR) sensors operate on infrared laser beams to estimate 
the distance between the sensor and an object. Lidar sensors that are currently used 
operate on light in the 900 nm wavelength range. However, longer wavelengths are used 
in some lidar sensors, which gives better performance in harsh conditions such as rain, 
snow and fog. The lidar uses laser beams in pulses across its field view, which are 
reflected by the objects within that view. It also has the ability to detect objects at a range 
that varies from a few meters to more than 200m. Yet, unlike the radar sensor, it may face 
difficulties in detecting objects that are at a very close distance. This sensor has a better 
spatial resolution than the radar sensor. That is because the lidar has a larger number of 
vertical direction scan layers, a denser lidar points per layer, and a more focused laser 
beam. It is able to collimate a laser beam with its short 905 to 1,550 nm wavelength, 
therefore it is able to make infrared (IR) spatial resolution on the order of 0.1 degrees. 
This will make extreme high resolution 3D characterization of an object within the scene 
of the sensor possible, without any significant back end processing. When it comes to 
detection in a low light condition, at night for example, lidar sensors can have a very high 
performance. Having said that, the lidar sensor lacks when it comes to directly measuring 
the velocity of an object and it must depend on various positions between two or more 
scans. It is also affected by the dirt on the sensor and the weather conditions in general 
[5][8].  
There are many types of Lidar systems that can be applied to an AV. For the narrow 
pulsed ToF method, there are two types in Lidar beam steering systems. The first type is 
the mechanical Lidar, which uses a rotating assembly and high-grade optics to create a 
wide Field of View (FOV) usually 360-degrees. This aspect provides a high signal to noise 
ratio (SNR) within a wide FOV. Nevertheless, it generated a bulky implementation result. 
The second type is the solid-state Lidar. This lidar has a reduced FOV and no spinning 
mechanical components. Due to these features, this sensor is cheaper than other types. 
To make this sensor that has an FOV that can compete with the mechanical Lidar, multiple 
channels distributed in the front, rear and the sides should be applied to the vehicle, while 
fusing their data [8]. 
For the mechanical Lidar, also known as spinning lidar, the system has an IR-coherent 
light that is emitted from the laser. After that, the light is circularized and collimated to a 
8
 
 
round bean using optics. Every beam is put with a matching receiver, usually an 
avalanche photodiode (APD). Several pairs of the emitter detectors are mounted on a 
column that uses a motor to spin it, usually in frequency value between 10 and 20 Hz. The 
cycle's duty is low to guarantee eye safety. The number of pairs of emitter detectors 
stacked up vertically determines the vertical FOV. Whilst the speed of motor rotation and 
cycle duty determines the resolution of HFOV. This system is known to have the cleanest 
signals, a ratio of noise to date and gives a 360 degrees HFOV. However, the cost and size 
are a challenge in this system. Some doubts are also there about the need for self-
calibration because the motor bearings wear [9]. 
There are several methods for solid-state lidar implementations, including: 
Microelectromechanical system (MEMs) Lidar: 
The MEMs Lidar system implements very small mirrors with a tilted angle that varies 
when inputting a stimulus like voltage. This system substitutes an equivalent of the 
mechanical scanning hardware, which is electromechanical. Typically, in this system the 
light collection receiver aperture, which determines the SNR received, is small making 
only a few millimeters. Cascading several mirrors is required in order for the laser beam 
to move in several dimensions. The alignment process is not significant, however, when 
installed it has a higher risk of vibrations and shocks, which is commonly experienced in 
a moving vehicle. 
Optical phase array (OPA): 
The OPA system is almost equivalent to the phased array radar. It contains an optical 
phase modulator that controls the speed of light going through the lens. This speed of 
light control process makes the optical wave-front shape control possible. A phenomenon 
occurs that would effectively steer the point of the laser beam to a different direction. It 
happens when the top beam does not experience any delay, while the other beams delay 
in an increasing amount. Other methods are also able to steer the backscattered light in 
the direction of the sensor, which eliminates the mechanical parts. 
Flash Lidar: 
The operation in the Flash Lidar is similar to the one in a standard digital camera, which 
applies an optical flash. A single pulse of large-area laser illuminates the surroundings in 
front of it and a photodetectors focal plane array placed close to the laser captures the 
back-scattered light proximity. The image location, distance, and reflected intensity is 
captured by a detector. Since in a single image, the entire scene is captured in this method 
unlike the mechanical laser scanning method, it has a faster data capturing rate because 
the entire image is captured in a single flash. In this method, the systema is more immune 
to the vibration effect that can tamper with the image. However, this method has a 
retroreflector that back-scatters a bit of the light and reflects most of it, which, in real life 
environment, makes an effect blinding the sensor entirely and makes it useless. Another 
downside is the existence of high peak laser power, which is necessary to detect from 
long distances and to illuminate the whole scene. 
Frequency-Modulated Continuous Wave (FMCW) Lidar: 
9
 
 
Unlike the other methods mentioned, this method does not use ToF principle, which is on 
using narrow light pulses. The FMCW Lidar adapts to the coherent method that produces 
a small chirp of frequency modulated laser light. The system is able to measure velocity 
and distance by measuring the frequency and phase of the returned chirps. The optics 
and the computational load are much simpler with the FMCW lidar, yet generating the 
chirps adds complexity [8]. 
 
2.2. 
Detection and Algorithms 
A deeper understanding of the environment is needed for the AV to operate and react 
correctly. The roads in that environment are very hectic and unpredictable. The system 
should recognize objects and their location. The objects are usually vehicles, pedestrians, 
or bicycles. There are also the stationary objects on the road that the AV should recognize, 
such as traffic lights and signs. AV uses algorithms to classify its components. Some of 
those components are path planning, scene recognition, and vehicle control. Those 
classes contain a set of algorithms such as object detection, object tracking, and scene 
recognition that requires localization. The path planning for example, usually falls into 
motion and mission planning, however vehicle control falls into path following.  
Localization and Mapping 
The AV needs a higher accuracy in navigating than the available GPS guidance systems, 
especially when navigating in a dynamic urban environment. The precision in localization 
determines the reliability of autonomous driving. An algorithm is used to enable this 
localization problem, which is the Normal Distributions Transform (NDT) algorithm, in 
particular the 3D module of it. The 3D NDT version applies a scan matching over 3D map 
data and 3D point cloud data. This results in a localization that can perform in an order 
of centimeter, giving high precision 3D map and high-quality 3D Lidar leverage. Not Only 
does the NDT algorithm have the ability to be used in 3D form, but it also has a 
computational cost that is not affected by the map size.  
However, a simple way of applying localization is by obtaining data that helps determine 
the vehicle's location through observation of known and fixed beacons (points of 
reference) in an active environment. It is very straightforward in principle to get the 
position by giving a number of beacon observations. AV uses a wide range of systems that 
are beacon based for the localization problem. In specific, the factory AV use of the laser 
system and reflective beacons is very common. The beacons are based on ultrasonic 
transducers, radar reflectors, and microwave tags [10][11].  
Another algorithm that is used to help with the localization problem is the Kalman Filter 
algorithm (KF). This algorithm is proven to be able to deal with complex localization 
problems in a very simple way, yet it has many limitations. In the KF algorithm an 
estimate of the point of interest is made by a recursive linear estimator, which utilizes a 
model of the observation of the process and a model of the process under consideration. 
It is usual to start the localization problem with a discrete time process model, which 
describes the platform's motion as: 
10
 
 
x(k) = f(x(k - 1), u(k)) + w(k) 
The state or location of the vehicle at a time k is described as x(k), and the average input 
or drive signals of the vehicle at a time k is described as u(k). The f is the kinematic 
function, which describes the vehicle's transition in the time between k-1 and k. whilst 
the w(k) presents the value of a random vector that describes the motion uncertainty of 
the vehicle in time. Observation of the vehicles location at a certain time is made, typically 
by getting the location of the beacons measurements that is applied in known places 
around the environment, according to the observation equation: 
z(k) = h(x{k)) + v(k) 
The z(k) presents the observation that was made at time k, and the h presents a function 
relating the current location of the vehicle to the observation. The v(k) on the other hands 
is described as a random vector of the error that occurs in the observation process. The 
KF computes an estimated vehicle state recursively through a combination, that is linear, 
of the prediction based on the process model: 
x(k I k - 1) = f(x(k - 1 I k - 1), u(k)) 
however, with the correlation that is based on the difference of prediction and true 
observation is shown as: 
x(k I k) = x(k I k - l)+W(k) [z(k) - h(x(k I k - 1)] 
The W(k) is the gain given by the observation and the relative confidence in the 
prediction of the vehicle. 
There are many features for using the KF algorithm, including a continuous confidence in 
the estimate of the location through the matrix of state of covariance, the ability to 
estimate a none directly observed state, the ability to describe in a single coherent form 
a variety of sensors, and the incorporation, incremental, and recursive of information into 
the estimate of a vehicle's location. Furthermore, the KF algorithm also has some 
limitations that should be considered. The first limitation is the need of accurate models 
for both observations and vehicles. Also, the necessity of linearization assumptions 
having a linear predictor corrector form of the updated equation. There are also the terms 
of the true noise that should be bounded by the first two moments of the assumed noise 
model and it should be well behaved.  The last limitation is the form of the model applied, 
which is an analytic form, makes the capturing process of many physical environments 
and sensor properties difficult [12].  
11
 
 
 
Figure.2 - Visualization of the scanning process. The Lidar scanner acquires infrared 
ground reflectivity and range data. Thus, the resulting map is 3D infrared images of the 
ground reflectivity [13]. 
 
Object Detection 
The object detection algorithm is used in AV to avoid accidents and abide by the traffic 
rules. In specific it is used to recognize vehicles, pedestrians, bicycles, traffic lights, and 
traffic signs. There are man features that are desired in an object detection system, such 
as accuracy, real-time capable, able to learn without the need for massive hand-labeled 
training sets, inherently multi-descriptor, inherently multi-class, fewer manual feature 
engineering required, and can also add new object classes and descriptors with no 
relearning from scratch. 
To subtract deeper information, the images get segmented. This results in the removal of 
the local ground plane and the components connected in clusters of the remaining points 
, which is applied on a 2-D grid for efficiency. the segment is inputted into a standard 
tracker that includes velocity and position in its state variable. This track classification is 
important for high performance. Two boosting classifiers are applied to achieve track 
classification. One is the motion descriptors of the whole track, and the other is the 
object’s shape in each frame of the track. Bayes filter is used to combine these predictions, 
and it is shown as the frame descriptor in Figure.3 for three objects, a pedestrian, a car, 
and a bicyclist [11][14]. 
 
12
 
 
Figure.3 - recognized virtual camera intensity images for three objects tracked. 
Segmentation depth of the object provides invariance to the background clutter. The 
depth classification data enables objects addition in a canonical orientation, therefore it 
provides some perspective invariant measures [11]. 
 
When it comes to object recognition, there are two methods, the supervised method and 
the semi-supervised method .  
Supervised method 
The system is real-time, accurate if given a good tracking and segmentation, and 
inherently multi-descriptor and multi-class.  Laser-based objection detection algorithm 
on junior has three components, which are segmentation, tracking, and track 
classification. The first step, the object gets segmented from the surrounding 
environment using depth information. After that it gets tracked with a KF. Therefore, the 
tracking and segmentation methods are model free, which means that no object class 
models are applied during the stages. The tracked object's classification is achieved when 
applying a boosting algorithm across a few high dimensional descriptors spaces, which 
encode shapes, motion properties, and sizes [15].  
The largest error source in the system can be found in the segmentation and tracking 
process. Objects like bicycles and cars continuously avoid being segmented together with 
the surrounding environment, yet when it comes to pedestrians and other objects of 
interest this is not the case. When an object gets closer to another object the system 
generates a false negative.  
In the meantime, to maintain a real-time capability, the system needs to remain feed-
forward, because more mathematically complex methods that simultaneously take 
segmentation, tracking, and classification into consideration do not have real-time 
capabilities. When only classifying pre-segmented objects, the system takes more time on 
each processing each candidate than the sliding window system prevalent in computer 
vision for example. 
Semi-Supervised Method 
Segmentation and tracking that are model free allows a highly effective learning object 
model methods disregarding the need for huge numbers of hand-labeled data. This is 
called tracking based on a semi-supervised method. This method actively learns a 
classifier and collects new and useful training instances by applying tracking information. 
In bicycles, for example, the method can learn to identify half occluded bicyclists from 
tracks that are unlabeled, which includes views that are half-occluded and occluded. The 
method had been tested to show an accuracy that is relatively high of track classification 
with three hand labeled training tracks for every object class only [14]. 
 
2.3. 
Cloud Robotics 
13
 
 
The term cloud robotics has been introduced by James Kuffiner from Google in 2010. This 
term illustrates a new method that allows robotics to use the internet as a source for large 
parallel computation and exchanging massive data resources in real time [16]. It enables 
access on-demand to almost an unlimited computational resource, which can come in 
handy when dealing with bursty computational workloads that need periodically a large 
amount of computation. The idea of a remote computer in robotics in general is not new, 
but it gave so many different possibilities for applications in mobile robot systems like 
the AV. The AV system can access large-scale map data and images through the cloud, 
which eliminates the need for local data storage. It also gives the ability for the AV 
systems to communicate with each other. However, some challenges would come up 
when using remote cloud resources, particularly when using commodity cloud facilities 
like Microsoft Azure and Amazon web services. Those services may bring some variables 
that are beyond the robotic system's control. There is also the issue with communicating 
with remote clouds, which can cause unanticipated delay in the network. The time of 
cloud computation can also depend on available compute resources and the number of 
jobs that are running in that system at this time. In that case, even though the cloud can 
achieve real time performance in a normal case, in the case of times that it may get 
overloaded, latencies may occur and affect the onboard processing which is needed for 
critical tasks. However, target recognition can be moved to the cloud, while maintaining 
the stability control, short-term navigation, and low-level detection local. Using this 
hybrid method can lower the cost to detect many objects in near real time, while limiting 
the negative consequences when the target can not be met in real time [17][18].  
This method is applied in some vehicles like the Google autonomous driving project. The 
system is enabled to access images and maps that are collected and then updated into the 
satellite, crowdsourcing, and streetview from the network, which would generate 
accurate localization. Another example for this application is the Kiva system, which uses 
a new approach to warehouse logistics and automation by applying a huge number of 
mobile platforms in order to move pallets to update tracking data and coordinate 
planforms by using a local network [16]. 
2.4. 
Internet of Things (IoT) 
An integral part of IoT is large-scale application of interconnected actuators and sensors. 
There are many applications made possible with IoT technology, among them is smart 
transportation systems. Those systems that apply communication, control technologies 
and computing together are called cyber-physical systems (CPS). This system requires 
real time processing, because the sensor network is integrated with the control of the 
physical system. This technology provides a system where vehicles can communicate. 
This can be used in intersection management applications. However, this application 
requires secure, low-latency, reliable, and a short-range communication [19]. 
After the invention of IoT an emerging concept came called the internet of vehicles IoV. 
This was the result of the advancements made in AI, wireless networks, and sensor 
technology. This technology already established architectural proposals among which is 
Cisco. The Cisco architecture includes four layers. The first is the end point, which 
contains the vehicle's software and hardware. The second layer is infrastructure, which 
14
 
 
defines all technology that enables connections. The third layer is operation, which 
monitors the flow-based management and the policy enforcements. The last layer is the 
virtual layer, which contains all different types of cloud subscriptions [20].  
 
2.5. 
Blockchain 
In a scenario where AVs are part of an accident, how do these accidents get recorded to 
determine the cause and liability? When it comes to recordings, it is also important for 
this data to be trusted, verified, and not tampered with. To achieve these properties 
blockchain technology can be used for event recording schemes, which can be useful for 
the forensics system. The blockchain contains a series of blocks, each block has a set of 
transactions that are timestamped and a hash of the previous block [21]. Originally 
blockchain technology is made for bitcoin, which is a digital cryptocurrency.   
 
Recording the accident as a timestamp transaction would be saved in real time into a new 
block. AV has the capability to save the vehicle from accidents in real time, however it is 
not always possible due to complex solving of the hash puzzle [22]. A hash function takes 
a set of inputs of different arbitrary sizes, then puts them into a data structure like tables 
that has elements with fixed sizes [23]. One of the recording mechanisms to save events 
into a block is the Proof of Event with Dynamic Federation Consensus. In an accident, the 
directly involved vehicles broadcast an event generation, which can be via IEEE 802.11p 
[DSRC] for example, and only the vehicles that have DSRC communication range can 
respond and receive [22]. DSRC (Dedicated Short Range Communication) is 802.11p 
based wireless communication technology that provides direct communication between 
surrounding infrastructure and vehicles with high speed and high security without 
interrupting surrounding cellular infrastructure [24]. After that, both involved vehicles 
will receive a command to generate and broadcast the event to the vehicular network 
that is defined by the existing cellular network infrastructure. A random federation group 
in the vehicular network is created to save and clarify the accident's data into a new block 
(Figure.). This is done by using a multi-signature scheme. The last steps are saving and 
sending this block to the Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) to be saved in the 
permanent record. This mechanism uses the accident's data collected from different 
sources and the generated hash digest to protect data trustworthiness and integrity. The 
recordings also provide traceable evidence [22]. 
15
 
 
 
Figure.4 - The blocks contains hash values and data from the previous block, and it is all 
confirmed by verified federation vehicles [22]. 
 
 
 
3. Existing Models of Autonomous vehicles 
The myth or science fiction of self-driving cars is now a reality as a fastest growing market 
where riders will enjoy hands free feeling in a safer way. The market will rise from its 
current status of US$54.23 billion to US$556.67 by 2026 and 33 million cars will be on 
road by 2040. [31], [32] 
Some brands are running their operation and some are going to start like Tesla, Nuro, 
Zoox, Baidu, Nissan, GM, Aptiv etc. which have been shown in the table below: [33] 
Table 1: Some AV Companies 
Name 
Cruise 
Waymo 
Voyage 
Nodar 
Seeva 
ABB 
Reality 
AI 
Founde
d Year  
2013 
2009 
2017 
2018 
2016 
1988 
2015 
Home 
Base 
San 
Fransisco 
San 
Fransisco 
San 
Fransisco 
Boston Seattle Colorado New 
York 
4. Traffic Flow prediction in Autonomous vehicles 
With the increase of the living standard, a higher need for the transportation industry 
occurred. There is a higher number of transportation users due to the growing 
population. This resulted in an increasing traffic flow and congestion, which is causing a 
huge problem. In order to solve the traffic problem effectively, the intelligent 
transportation system (ITS) technology can be applied. This technology is a 
transportation management system that merges different technologies like artificial 
16
 
 
intelligence, image analysis, global positioning, electronic information, and many other 
technologies. Furthermore, ITS technology is considered to be an effective way to solve 
transportation problems. It also provides a unique performance, which reduces traffic 
pollution and accidents, and solves traffic congestion in a non-traditional way that is not 
owned by any traditional method. Two roles that are of great importance in the ITS is 
traffic control and guidance [25]. There are also two main theories to guarantee a traffic 
flow guidance system with a good operation. The first one is accurate traffic prediction of 
the data stream, and the second theory is traffic prediction techniques. The traffic flow is 
known to be time-varying, random, and nonlinear, which makes it hard to predict long-
term traffic flow.  
In the urban areas the traffic flow system has characteristics that are chaotic. Taking this 
idea into consideration the approximate restoration of the original system prediction is 
established by a nonlinear mapping construction, which establishes a predictive model. 
There are various researchers that have been conducted to establish this model, including 
methods like K-nearest neighbor (KNN), Bayesian network, radial basis function (RBF), 
neuro-fuzzy system, type-2 fuzzy logic approach, binary neural network, Kalman state 
space filtering, autoregressive integrated moving average, and many other models. The 
Neural Network in these prediction models is the main focus for a lot of experts. This is 
because neural networks have characteristics that are unique such as distributed storage 
and massive parallel structure. It also has a good self-adaptability, self-organization, 
incorrectness tolerance, ability to classify patterns, and a powerful function 
approximation. Yet, the performance of the network can be affected by improper 
preferences. The selection of width value and center vectors of the neural network's 
hidden nodes impacts the generalization and learning abilities greatly [26].  
Another algorithm that can be used is the Artificial bee colony (ABC). The algorithm can 
be used for parameter's combination optimization of the neural network, due to its 
smaller control parameter and simple structure, easy implementation, and high coverage 
speed. However, in that case the algorithm is prone to premature coverage and slow 
coverage speed.  
The ABC algorithm is inspired by the behaviors of honeybees, and the algorithm is 
assumed to be a colony that has groups of onlookers, employed bees, and scouts. 
Employed artificial bees make the first half of the colony, and the onlookers make the 
other half. There is one employed bee for every food source, which means that the 
number of food sources should be equal to the number of employed bees. The scout, on 
the other hand, is a former employed bee that left the food source. In general, the 
employed bee determines the food source from the neighborhood memory, then they 
forward this information to the onlookers which can also have one food source. The 
onlookers have food sources from their chosen neighborhood. After the employed bee 
leaves the food source and becomes a scout, it starts looking for a new food source. The 
algorithm can be summed up in four main steps: 
1) determine the nectar amounts of the employed bees and move them to their food 
source. 
17
 
 
2) Determine the nectar amounts of the Onlooker and move them to their food 
source. 
3) Move scouts so they can search for new food sources. 
4) Store the best food sources into the memory. 
The possible problem solutions to be optimized are represented by the food source.  The 
quality of the solution is represented by the nectar amount. A method called roulette 
wheel selection is applied to put onlookers on their foods. On the other hand, the scouts 
do not have any guidance when looking for food. They just need to find any kind of food 
source. This behavior causes low average food sources and low search cost. Scouts 
sometimes stumble on unknown and rich food sources. The classification of scout bees is 
controlled by limit control parameters. The limit parameter is equal to the number of 
trials for releasing a food source, which is a significant control parameter of the ABC 
algorithm [27][28]. 
6.0 Cybersecurity Risks (ISO 27005): 
The AV must work in an integrated network system where it will be connected to 
internet through GPS, cloud, GPRS, or satellite. However the networking system 
must contain traditional infrastructure like data center, servers, databases, and 
so on. It is also provisioned with IP addressing and subnet system. The whole 
system will contains several types data like travel history, maps, riders data, 
owners profile etc. So it must comply information security where information 
risks will arise. To resolve this we can go through Information Risk Management 
(ISRM). The subsequent topic will focus on network design and ISO 27005. 
 
6.1 Network Design 
 
Figure 5: Model Network Design with IP Address and Zone (by Lucid Chart) 
 
 
 
18
 
 
From the above diagram, it can illustrated that the entire autonomous vehicle system 
must work according to a secure network architecture. The whole network should be 
in an enterprise where no compromise for security ever permitted. Both of the Network 
Operation Centre (NOC) and Security Operation Centre (SOC) would be coordinated 
from a central hub. All possible aspects of zoning, proxy server, IP addressing, router, 
switch, firewall security system where all modern encryption, SSL, TLS, IMAP, SNMP, 
POP, secure protocols would be incorporated as the whole system deals with life of 
human while carrying them in road. The security is a prime concern thereby.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.2 
Risk Management- ISO 27005 
Almost all companies who consider their growth with positive branding, 
y as first of 
sustainability and customer orientation, they always follow the securit
everything where it matters. That’s why all organization are coming forward to 
ional standard guidelines. The ISO/IEC is the most acceptable 
abide by the internat
eals with Information 
standard on information security specially the ISO 27005 d
]
risks. [34
 
 
 
]
35
[ 
Information Security Risk Management Process
: 
Figure 6
 
 
 
 
In our above stated system we will go forward by following the above diagram in Fig 3. 
19
 
 
This diagram will be discussed in detail in the subsequent topic having both in 
general and some focus on AV. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20
 
 
Figure 7: ISO27005 standard based on input, output of each activity [36], [37] 
 
Some Terms of IT Security Risks 
 
There are several terms which are very relevant to both technical and non-technical staff 
of the organization in order to implement ISRM properly which are discussed shortly 
below. [38] 
 
• Threat: Any probable danger which may happen in future. 
 
• Vulnerability: Any weakness what can be exploited by any means. 
 
• Breach: If threat becomes successful through vulnerabilities. 
 
• Risk: When loss is caused as low, high, or medium by any breach.
 
• Relative risk: It signifies multiple risks related to each other. 
 
• Temporal risk: This type of risks can be protected by adequate measures.
 
• Residual risk: It means those which are still present after measures.
 
 
• Compromise: It happens when vulnerabilities are not considered. 
 
• Mitigation: It is tend to repairing activities against of different risk elements. 
 
• Countermeasure: It refers to those threats which are immitigable slightly different from 
mitigation. [39] 
 
 
Risk Calculation Models 
 
There are several models to calculate risk from different aspects which are discussed 
below:
 
21
 
 
 
• CRAMM (CTCA risk analysis and management method) is the risk analysis method 
which involves assets, threats, vulnerabilities associated with risks, countermeasures, 
implementation and audit. 
 
 
 
Figure 8: CRAMM risk assessment method [40]
 
• DREAD: Microsoft proposes the following straightforward DREAD model to practice: 
 
 
Figure 9: Dread Model, threat modeling, EC council [41]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22
 
 
• STRIDE: This model is used along with DREAD model for live systems in internet. 
Figure 10: Stride Model [42]  
 
• FRAP (facilitated risk analysis process) mostly deals with qualitative aspects. [43]  
• OCTAVE Allegro: is developed for strategic planning. [44]  
 
Figure 11: Allergo Octave. [45]  
• Spanning Tree Analysis (SPT): It is mainly used to analyze threats. [46]  
 
 
23
 
 
6.2.1 Context Establishment 
To establish the context both internal and external contexts are the important 
parameters to understand. 
External context: social, cultural, environmental (like natural calamities and climate 
issues), political, legal, financial, technological, security, economic factors, external 
stakeholder’s parameters etc. 
Internal context: strategic objectives, values, standards, resources available, capacities, 
business processes, organizational culture, internal stakeholder’s factors, etc. 
Stakeholder’s factors mean their perceptions, relationships and expectation to the 
organization. Our defined system would be evaluated on the basis of following context: 
Governance, Business continuity & succession planning, Business, Financial, Regulatory, 
Technology, Human resources, Stakeholder. 
 
 
Figure 12: The generic output of the risk evaluation is prioritized risks; source [47] 
 
 
6.2.2 Risk Identification 
We have to keep in mind that for effective system design, it is urgent to design in such a 
way where every possible risks would be discussed in order to get out any probable 
incidents. That’s why we must go for comprehensive risk analysis approach which would 
be started with subsequent phases of context establishment. Now the turn is for risk 
identification which is sampled in a table here. [48] 
 
 
 
 
6.2.3 Risk Analysis 
It is associated with risk exposure, likelihood and severity with proper screening by 
putting adequate attention to get source, history, statistics, W/H info etc. to get the 
background, vulnerability and credibility. 
24
 
 
● Quantitative methods is followed by modelling, statistical analysis, decision 
trees, event tree analysis, probability and consequence analysis.  
● Semi-quantitative methods focus on a quantitative score to a qualitative 
approach for instance, high risk, medium risk or low risk. 
● Qualitative 
methods deal 
with 
brainstorming, 
specialist 
knowledge, 
questionnaires or intuitions. 
 
The relationship among consequences, likelihood, and level of risk is,  
Risk = consequence * likelihood.  [49] 
 
6.2.4 Risk Evaluation 
In this step, we have to consider the organizations capacity as it varies from one to 
another. On top that, it also depends on some factors like: [50] 
▪ 
Organizational  policies 
▪ 
Own goals and objectives 
▪ 
Attitude of  internal and external stakeholders 
▪ 
The environment and geographic location 
▪ 
Managerial structures 
▪ 
Constraints, budget allocation and resiliency 
▪ 
Legal limitations  
▪ 
Approximate maintenance costs 
▪ 
Possible effect of fines by regulatory authority 
▪ 
Ethical, humanitarian or moral practices 
▪ 
Reputation and brand value 
 
 
6.2.5 Risk Treatment 
Risk treatment consists of avoiding,   reducing, sharing, transfer or accepting. It might 
differ with risk type, magnitude and other relevant factors. 
The following table will give the readers a typical concept of risk assessment for 
information system where risk management approach has been performed according to 
ISO 27005. [51] 
Table: Typical Risk Assessment Chart 
25
 
 
Table 2: Risk Analysis with scoring and ranking
 
 
7.0 Risk Management for AV  
To improve transportation system in terms of physical security, user friendliness, 
environmental effects and traffic congestion; the autonomous vehicle (AV) is a delectable 
addition to science, engineering and technology. The continuous advancement in sensor, 
computer and tele-communication would take it into scale of performance though it has 
some new challenges like cyber-security and interaction with other non-autonomous 
vehicles. The next few topics will make sense to the reader on several risks associated 
with the behavior of AV in mixed traffic environment considering the cyber-security 
aspects on the basis of published scientific articles and other relevant data sources. Low-
power lasers and pulse generator can build up a system to make AV sensors or lidar fool. 
Hacker can take controls of brakes, components, other elements remotely. So it is a must 
to examine all possible risks associated with AV to prevent any future accidents. [52] 
The purpose of the risk analysis is to clinch a safer system by protecting it from inherent 
threats of failure from any existing vulnerabilities. The fault tree analysis is used on 
identifying the chronological and sequential catastrophe of a system like designing of 
aircraft processes and nuclear power plant design, and analyzing of risks of AV in Mixed 
Traffic Streams. The difference between the actual outputs and the expected outputs 
quantifies the failure. The fault tree analysis method can provide the minimum path for 
single component or full vehicle failure. 
A safe and reliable transportation system can be obtained by comprehensive risk 
assessment which is the concentration of several researchers for individual subsystem 
of AV. Surveyed motion prediction and relevant risk assessment methods usually look 
for collision prediction which is costly in case of improving efficiency to consider 
physical parameters of AV, weather conditions, road surface conditions speeds 
approaching an intersection, real trajectories, fatigue level of the driver, data from 
vehicle sensors lane departure warning and driving assistance subsystem, pedestrian 
behavior in different traffic scenarios. The Bayesian belief network approach method 
only consider optical system like camera and lidar. 
26
 
 
 
Figure 13: General Research Pattern for Risk Analysis [53] 
The above figure can be a sample of approach for risk assessment of an AV which 
includes risk identification, risk estimation and evaluation of fault tree model.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27
 
 
Table 3: Failure Probabilities, experiment type, methods, and events of Autonomous 
Vehicular Components [54] 
 
 
The table sated above has magnified all the basic events related to AV along with 
description. It also demonstrates which method and experiment can be applied for 
analysis to calculate probabilities of failure. Non-autonomous vehicles crashes usually 
resulting from reckless driving, tiredness, hardware and distractions which are 
considered here. Cyclists were responsible for crashes with AV which are also included 
here. Pedestrian crashes and construction zones are in line with AV for accidents. 
Weather-related incidents are caused for fog, mist, sleet, snow, dust, rain, severe 
crosswind, thunderstorm, and smoke. Road conditions like improper lane marking, holes 
in road, ice formations, fallen tree, and pavement conditions may cause crashes too. 
28
 
 
 
FIGURE 14: Fault tree analysis considering failure related to vehicular components (Q = 
probability value either inputted into the fault tree or calculated by fault tree analysis). 
[54] 
 
29
 
 
 
FIGURE 15: Fault tree analysis considering failure related to transportation 
infrastructure components [55] 
 
30
 
 
A “fixed probability” statistical model can be used to analyze risks on the failure of 
vehicular components of AV and Isograph “Fault Tree+” software models the 
distribution of probability for basic event failure. Fault tree for infrastructure 
component failures for the infrastructure components has been given in figure 3 which 
is based on fault tree. Combined Fault Tree is obtained by bringing the experimental 
estimation and simulation modeling together to form a risk hierarchy for upholding risk 
ranking in terms of score to develop a cut-sets of the main event and it can assist to 
improve the safety performance of AV. 
AV can contribute in a wide range to ensure safe, secure and sustainable transportation 
system for the next generation where proper risk analysis can be a trigger to reduce 
loss in real life before any large scale deployment. In depth fault identification by tree 
analysis might help the developers and researcher to reduce all the probable risks 
before AV gets implemented in a comprehensive approach through continuous 
innovations in computing and communication technologies though it might face some 
limitations in a mixed traffic system for reckless human driver. 
 
 
Nowadays, researchers are very keen and concentrated to study the cybersecurity of AV 
where they have categorized threats as high, medium, and low by considering 
feasibility, probability, frequency, and success rate of every attack. .In order to get anti 
attack techniques, researchers have widely gone through attack and defense sample of 
those steps will be discussed in general in upcoming topics. 
graphs to realize computer networks’ security as a powerful tool in analysis of risks for 
vulnerable components in AVs. These graphs help to visualize all countermeasures 
against each risks. [56] 
 
The proposed plain security model can monitor vulnerable components by the means of 
security nodes. EVITA (E-safety vehicle intrusion protected applications) represents 
countermeasures in a graph having all security states. 
EVITA and CVSS (Common Vulnerability Scoring System) are two widely used 
methodologies to conduct the risk assessment of AV based on likelihood, impact and 
severity. Safety, privacy of drivers, operational performance, and financial losses are 
four important parameters to calculate risks of a vehicle which can be categorized as 
none, low, medium, and high. [57] 
31
 
 
 
Figure 16: (a) Security monitoring unit, and (b) graphical model for secured GPS 
component in AV. [58] 
 
Bayesian defense graph has been introduced here to study the cyber related risks and 
threats of AVs, for example, EVITA has been applied for a framework for GPS signals.  
However, the likelihood of threats from existing vulnerabilities can be declined to 0:01% 
by using anti-spoofing techniques which can mobilize future work. [59] 
 
Vehicles Risk Analysis (VeRA) is an appropriate method for the analysis of different risks 
of single AV and Connected AV (CAV) considering multiple factors (standard SAEJ3061). 
It is comparatively an easier approach which discussed three important parameters 
simultaneously and we will also look at a comparison of VeRA with some other models. 
The knowledge (K) as well as equipment (E) will determine the attack probability (P) has 
also been represented in the following table. 
A formula can be obtained by the combination of attack probability P, severity S and 
human control H as follows: 
Risk value, R= H + S*P 
 
 
 
 
32
 
 
Table 4: VeRA Risk Value calculation using formula. 
 
Table 5: VeRA Severity Scale 
 
Table 6: Relationship among different models and inter-connections. 
 
33
 
 
 
Figure 17: Data Acquisition Strategy for VeRA Model  
 
Table 7: Description of different types of attacks. 
 
 
RACE (Risk Analysis for Cooperative Engines) is another method of risk analysis 
specially developed for CAV which is more efficient over EVITA but it requires much 
effort keeping controllability constant. [60] 
 
34
 
 
Attack probability, severity and vehicle’s automation level form US2 method for AVs to 
determine safety, security and attacks defined by SAE standard J3016 excluding CAVs 
which extends to the CSRL (Cyber Security Risk Level)  for CAVs. The CSRL method is 
slow and it does not take automation and human control into account. [61] 
The international society of automotive engineers (SAE) has found six levels of 
automation which are demonstrated in the table below. [62] 
Table 8: Levels of Autonomy by SAE [63] 
 
 
ISO 26262 process is currently widely used for risk analysis of AV which consists of   
 
● Item Definition,  
● Hazard and Risk Analysis, 
● ASIL Assignment  
● Determination of safety goals. [64] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35
 
 
Table 9: Application of ISO 26262 with STPA for Engine Systems. [65] [66] 
 
 
 
8.  Issues:  
The Internet of Autonomous Vehicles (IoAV)IoAV platform upholds improved 
transportation system besides of better fuel economy, latest safety standards, minimum 
road accidents, and more comfortable journey experience. However, it is associated with 
multiple issues from device design, data management, social, ethical, professional, legal, 
security issues. 
 
 
8.1 
Ethical Issues 
The ethical concepts of HAVs [highly autonomous vehicles] are developed and deployed 
by manufacturers, consumers, government, and stakeholders which is a critical concept 
having so many dilemmas. It can only be trained by policy imposing but still contains 
conflict among: 
● an individual’s interest 
● the community’s interest 
● protecting people from harm 
● providing people healthy lives. 
To have a specific example of such dilemma, the readers are requested to the trolley 
problem. [67] 
The common ethical stand for all information system is to provide safety and reliability 
in all types information and data handling though it varies from system to system like 
open or close networks, LANs, ISPs, backbone sites etc.  
36
 
 
Our system administrator would definitely focus on all possible threats to provide 
privacy, liability, patent and copyright laws. It has to ensure confidentiality, trade 
secrets, fraud and misuse cases, decision making capacity based on ethics and 
responsibility. [68] 
 
 
8.2 
Environmental Issues: 
The environmental issues which are related to mainly with energy consumption, car 
emissions, expired parts reclining etc. So the engineer, designer and researcher of AV 
must consider to ensure low rate of fuel consumption, enhanced use of renewable 
energy, invent new technology for less carbon emissions, high quality road design to 
lessen frictional loss, finding shortest path of travelling.  
 
 
Figure 18: Key elements for environmental concern [69] 
8.3 Legal Issues 
It varies with locality, state, region, country, policy and government. However, AV must 
deal with two different aspects of law, one is road transport law and another information 
system domain law. Our defined system is related to road, transports, information, 
information system, data, finance, cyber security, computer system, people etc. So we can 
term it as multi-disciplinary sector mostly deals with public data. So several legal 
frameworks are available here based socio-economic and geo-political circumstances like 
GDPR, DPA, BSC, IEEE, BCS, and IET etc. We have to abide by all those issues to operate 
our system as a white one. [70] [71] [72] 
● Traffic Acts 
● Vehicle Acts  
● General Data Protect Rule (GDPR) 
● Data Protection Act 
● Road transport law 
 
 
 
 
37
 
 
8.4 Professional Issues 
Any professional who are related to AV must maintain the moral and ethical values along 
with the existing law and regulation of both data security, automobile design and road 
system. It includes all persons like driver, robots, companies, engineer, data 
administrator etc. who are somehow dealing AV operations. Any incidents must spread 
liabilities to all of those personnel to ensure accountability. [73] 
 
 
8.5. Social Issues 
One of the social dilemmas that occurred with AV systems is the question, if 10 pedestrians 
appeared on the vehicles path and the vehicle is not able to break early enough, should the 
algorithm in the autonomous vehicle save the 10 pedestrians or the passenger? One study by 
Bonnefon et al., 2016 investigated human morality when it comes to those two algorithms, the 
utilitarian approach that chooses to save a greater number of lives, and the non-utilitarian 
approach that chooses to save the passenger (passenger-protective). Given this dilemma, 
participants were required to rate which action they thought was more moral.  The result of 
this survey was that the participants found the utilitarian algorithm as the moral choice. On the 
other hand, when another survey was taken where the participants were asked about the 
likelihood of purchasing the vehicle of each algorithm, the study found that people rated the 
vehicle with the non-utilitarian algorithm more likely to purchase. A social dilemma arises due 
to these surprising results. There is a temptation that occurs to act according to self-interest, 
which usually leads to the worst results for everyone involved [29].  
The research that was done created uncertainty in the number of participants. It is possible 
that the responses were different for each question because of limited access to moral 
utilitarian information. One example would be that the participant envisioned themselves as 
the driver, however even the driver would also at some point be the pedestrian. To eliminate 
the conflict in the responses, full description of the utilitarian approach should be given, 
including the utilitarian tasks and their consequences. 
There is a psychological uncertainty found in the different utilitarian choices for scenarios that 
are morally sensitive. The uncertainty can be reduced by comprehensive moral questions and 
tasks. When it came to Bonnefon's study, the utilitarian information was limited. In the study 
participants were asked to envision themselves as the passenger, therefore the participant 
given one side of the situation. A proposal was made that implies that asking the participants 
to envision themselves as the pedestrian too would help with solving the issue of uncertainty. 
This way the participant can have both views of the situation, the passengers view and the 
pedestrian view [30]. 
 
 
9. Conclusion 
The fourth Industrial revolution demands the automation where the autonomous vehicles is a 
key element. The prime aspects has discussed in this chapter shortly. Smart transportation 
does not literally mean AV but it is the synonym of AV in depth realization. The urban planner 
will work to build smarter cities keeping the idea of AV in mind. On the other hand, there are 
lots of challenges for the maintenance of AV in terms of road designing, fuel managing, 
security handling etc. The security concerns are discussed giving emphasize and later on, the 
issues are raised. So it is our belief that, the readers will get passion on AV while going through 
this chapter. As it is a chapter merely so it might have limitations. Because, only AV can be 
38
 
 
covered in several books. However, as a starter it would be a good piece to have insights on 
AV. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References: 
[1] Schwarz, Chris, Geb Thomas, Kory Nelson, Michael McCrary, Nick Sclarmann, and 
Matthew Powell. Towards autonomous vehicles. No. MATC-UI: 117. Mid-America 
Transportation Center, 2013. 
[2] Fagnant, Daniel J., and Kara Kockelman. "Preparing a nation for autonomous vehicles: 
opportunities, barriers and policy recommendations." Transportation Research Part A: Policy 
and Practice 77 (2015): 167-181. 
[3] Schwarting, Wilko, Javier Alonso-Mora, and Daniela Rus. "Planning and decision-making 
for autonomous vehicles." Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems 
(2018). 
[4] S. Kato, E. Takeuchi, Y. Ishiguro, Y. Ninomiya, K. Takeda and T. Hamada, "An Open 
Approach to Autonomous Vehicles," in IEEE Micro, vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 60-68, Nov.-Dec. 2015, 
doi: 10.1109/MM.2015.133. 
[5] J. Kocić, N. Jovičić and V. Drndarević, "Sensors and Sensor Fusion in Autonomous 
Vehicles," 2018 26th Telecommunications Forum (TELFOR), Belgrade, 2018, pp. 420-425, 
doi: 10.1109/TELFOR.2018.8612054. 
[6] Zehang Sun, G. Bebis and R. Miller, "On-road vehicle detection: a review," in IEEE 
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 694-711, May 
2006, doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2006.104. 
[7] S. M. Patole, M. Torlak, D. Wang and M. Ali, "Automotive radars: A review of signal 
processing techniques," in IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 22-35, March 
2017, doi: 10.1109/MSP.2016.2628914. 
[8] Khader M. and Cherian D., "An Introduction to Automotive LIDAR," Texas Instruments, 
May. 
2020. 
Accessed 
on: 
Dec. 
27, 
2020. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.ti.com/lit/wp/slyy150a/slyy150a.pdf?ts=1609169652732&ref_url=https%253A%2
52F%252Fwww.google.com%252F 
[9] R. Thakur, "Scanning LIDAR in Advanced Driver Assistance Systems and Beyond: Building 
a road map for next-generation LIDAR technology," in IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine, 
vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 48-54, July 2016, doi: 10.1109/MCE.2016.2556878. 
[10] S. Kato, E. Takeuchi, Y. Ishiguro, Y. Ninomiya, K. Takeda and T. Hamada, "An Open 
Approach to Autonomous Vehicles," in IEEE Micro, vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 60-68, Nov.-Dec. 2015, 
doi: 10.1109/MM.2015.133. 
39
 
 
[11] J. Levinson et al., "Towards fully autonomous driving: Systems and algorithms," 2011 
IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), Baden-Baden, 2011, pp. 163-168, doi: 
10.1109/IVS.2011.5940562. 
[12] Durrant-Whyte, Hugh, David Rye, and Eduardo Nebot. "Localization of autonomous 
guided vehicles." Robotics Research. Springer, London, 1996. 613-625. 
[13]  J. Levinson, M. Montemerlo and S. Thrun, "Map-Based Precision Vehicle Localization in 
Urban Environments", Robotics Science and Systems, 2007. 
[14] A. Teichman and S. Thrun, "Practical object recognition in autonomous driving and 
beyond," Advanced Robotics and its Social Impacts, Half-Moon Bay, CA, 2011, pp. 35-38, doi: 
10.1109/ARSO.2011.6301978. 
[15] A. Teichman, J. Levinson and S. Thrun, "Towards 3D object recognition via classification 
of arbitrary object tracks," 2011 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 
Shanghai, 2011, pp. 4034-4041, doi: 10.1109/ICRA.2011.5979636. 
[16] Goldberg, Ken, and Ben Kehoe. "Cloud robotics and automation: A survey of related 
work." EECS Department, University of California, Berkeley, Tech. Rep. UCB/EECS-2013-
5 (2013). 
[17] D. Hunziker, M. Gajamohan, M. Waibel and R. D'Andrea, "Rapyuta: The roboearth cloud 
engine", Robotics and Automation (ICRA) 2013 IEEE International Conference, pp. 438-444, 
2013. 
[18] J. Lee, J. Wang, D. Crandall, S. Šabanović and G. Fox, "Real-Time, Cloud-Based Object 
Detection for Unmanned Aerial Vehicles," 2017 First IEEE International Conference on 
Robotic Computing (IRC), Taichung, 2017, pp. 36-43, doi: 10.1109/IRC.2017.77. 
[19] B. V. Philip, T. Alpcan, J. Jin and M. Palaniswami, "Distributed Real-Time IoT for 
Autonomous Vehicles," in IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 1131-
1140, Feb. 2019, doi: 10.1109/TII.2018.2877217. 
[20] D. Minovski, C. Åhlund and K. Mitra, "Modeling Quality of IoT Experience in Autonomous 
Vehicles," in IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 3833-3849, May 2020, doi: 
10.1109/JIOT.2020.2975418. 
[21] J. Dilley, A. Poelstra, J. Wilkins, M. Piekarska, B. Gorlick and M. Friedenbach, "Strong 
federations: An interoperable blockchain solution to centralized third party risks", arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1612.05491, 2016. 
[22] H. Guo, E. Meamari and C. Shen, "Blockchain-inspired Event Recording System for 
Autonomous Vehicles," 2018 1st IEEE International Conference on Hot Information-Centric 
Networking (HotICN), Shenzhen, 2018, pp. 218-222, doi: 10.1109/HOTICN.2018.8606016. 
[23] 
Umsl.edu, 
2020. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.umsl.edu/~siegelj/information_theory/projects/HashingFunctionsInCryptography.h
tml. [Accessed: 30- Dec- 2020]. 
[24] J. B. Kenney, "Dedicated Short-Range Communications (DSRC) Standards in the United 
States," in Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 99, no. 7, pp. 1162-1182, July 2011, doi: 
10.1109/JPROC.2011.2132790. 
[25] G. He and S. Ma, "A study on the short-term prediction of traffic volume based on wavelet 
analysis", Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst., pp. 731-735, 2002. 
40
 
 
[26] D. Chen, "Research on Traffic Flow Prediction in the Big Data Environment Based on the 
Improved RBF Neural Network," in IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 13, no. 4, 
pp. 2000-2008, Aug. 2017, doi: 10.1109/TII.2017.2682855. 
[27] Karaboga, Dervis, and Bahriye Basturk. "On the performance of artificial bee colony 
(ABC) algorithm." Applied soft computing 8, no. 1 (2008): 687-697. 
[28] S. Okdem, D. Karaboga and C. Ozturk, "An application of Wireless Sensor Network 
routing based on Artificial Bee Colony Algorithm," 2011 IEEE Congress of Evolutionary 
Computation (CEC), New Orleans, LA, 2011, pp. 326-330, doi: 10.1109/CEC.2011.5949636. 
[29] Bonnefon, J.-F., Shariff, A., and Rahwan, I. (2016). The social dilemma of autonomous 
vehicles. Science 352, 1573–1576. doi: 10.1126/science.aaf2654 
[30] Martin, Rose, Ivaylo Kusev, Alex J. Cooke, Victoria Baranova, Paul Van Schaik, and Petko 
Kusev. "Commentary: The social dilemma of autonomous vehicles." Frontiers in Psychology 8 
(2017): 808. 
[31] www.analyticsinsight.net/top-10-autonomous-vehicle-companies-watch-2020/  
[32] www.alliedmarketresearch.com/autonomous-vehicle-market 
[33] builtin.com/transportation-tech/self-driving-car-companies 
[34]Patiño, S., Solís, E.F., Yoo, S.G. and Arroyo, R., 2018, April. ICT risk management 
methodology proposal for governmental entities based on ISO/IEC 27005. In 2018 
International Conference on eDemocracy & eGovernment (ICEDEG) (pp. 75-82). IEEE. 
[35] Wangen, G., Hallstensen, C. and Snekkenes, E., 2018. A framework for estimating 
information security risk assessment method completeness. International Journal of 
Information Security, 17(6), pp.681-699. 
[36] Information technology –security techniques –information security risk management. Iso, 
2011  
[37] V. Agrawal, "A Framework for the Information Classification in ISO 27005 Standard," 2017 
IEEE 4th International Conference on Cyber Security and Cloud 
[38] Lepofsky, R. (2014) the manager's guide to web application security: a concise guide to 
the weaker side of the web. Berkeley, CA: Apress (The expert's voice in security). doi: 
10.1007/978-1-4842-0148-0.  
[39] Han, Z. et al. (2016) “Risk Assessment of Digital Library Information Security: A Case 
Study,” The Electronic Library, 34(3), pp. 471–487. doi: 10.1108/EL-09-2014-0158. 
[40] El Fray, I., 2012, September. A comparative study of risk assessment methods, MEHARI 
& CRAMM with a new formal model of risk assessment (FoMRA) in information systems. In 
IFIP International Conference on Computer Information Systems and Industrial Management 
(pp. 428-442). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.  
[41] Gregory, R. and Mendelsohn, R., 1993. Perceived risk, dread, and benefits. Risk Analysis, 
13(3), pp.259-264.  
[42] Jiang, L., Chen, H. and Deng, F., 2010, May. A security evaluation method based on 
STRIDE model for web service. In 2010 2nd International Workshop on Intelligent Systems 
and Applications (pp. 1-5). IEEE.  
[43] Peltier, T.R., 2000. Facilitated risk analysis process (FRAP). Auerbach Publication, CRC 
Press LLC.  
[44] Ali, B. and Awad, A.I., 2018. Cyber and physical security vulnerability assessment for IoT-
based smart homes. sensors, 18(3), p.817.  
41
 
 
[45] Keating, C.G., 2014. Validating the octave allegro information systems risk assessment 
methodology: a case study. 28  
 
[46] Huang, G., Li, X. and He, J., 2006, May. Dynamic minimal spanning tree routing protocol 
for large wireless sensor networks. In 2006 1ST IEEE Conference on Industrial Electronics 
and Applications (pp. 1-5). IEEE. 
[47] Alghamdi, B.S., Elnamaky, M., Arafah, M.A., Alsabaan, M. and Bakry, S.H., 2019. A 
Context Establishment Framework for Cloud Computing Information Security Risk 
Management Based on the STOPE View. IJ Network Security, 21(1), pp.166-176. 
[48] Chou, D.C., 2013. Risk identification in Green IT practice. Computer Standards & 
Interfaces, 35(2), pp.231-237. 
[49] Aven, T., 2015. Risk analysis. John Wiley & Sons. 
[50] Masuoka, Y., Naono, K. and Kameyama, S., Hitachi Ltd, 2004. Network monitoring 
method for information system, operational risk evaluation method, service business 
performing method, and insurance business managing method. U.S. Patent Application 
10/629,920. 
[51] Sheehan, B., Murphy, F., Ryan, C., Mullins, M. and Liu, H.Y., 2017. Semi-autonomous 
vehicle motor insurance: A Bayesian Network risk transfer approach. Transportation Research 
Part C: Emerging Technologies, 82, pp.124-137. 
[52] Bhavsar, P., Das, P., Paugh, M., Dey, K. and Chowdhury, M., 2017. Risk analysis of 
autonomous vehicles in mixed traffic streams. Transportation Research Record, 2625(1), 
pp.51-61. 
[53] Bhavsar, P., Das, P., Paugh, M., Dey, K. and Chowdhury, M., 2017. Risk analysis of 
autonomous vehicles in mixed traffic streams. Transportation Research Record, 2625(1), 
pp.51-61. 
[54] Ullman, G. L., M. D. Finley, J. E. Bryden, R. Srinivasan, and F. M. Council. NCHRP Report 
627: Traffic Safety Evaluation of Nighttime and Daytime Work Zones. Transportation 
Research Board, Washington, D.C., 2008 
[55] Dezfuli, H., A. Benjamin, C. Everett, G. Maggio, M. Stamatelatos, and R. Youngblood. 
NASA Risk Management Handbook. Publication NASA/SP-2011-3422. NASA, 2011. 
 [56] A. Roy, D. S. Kim, and K. S. Trivedi, “Attack countermeasure trees (act):towards unifying 
the constructs of attack and defense trees,” Security and Communication Networks, vol. 5, no. 
8, pp. 929–943, 2012. 
[57] O. Henniger, L. Apvrille, A. Fuchs, Y. Roudier, A. Ruddle, and B. Weyl,“Security 
requirements for automotive on-board networks,” in 9th InternationalConference on Intelligent 
Transport Systems Telecommunications,(ITST), 2009, pp. 641–646. 
 [58J. Petit and S. E. Shladover, “Potential cyberattacks on automated vehicles,” IEEE 
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems ,vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 546–556, April 2015. 
 [59] Behfarnia, A. and Eslami, A., 2019, September. Local voting games for misbehavior 
detection in VANETs in presence of uncertainty. In 2019 57th Annual Allerton Conference on 
Communication, Control, and Computing (Allerton) (pp. 480-486). IEEE. 
42
 
 
 [60] A. Boudguiga, A. Boulanger, P. Chiron, W. Klaudel, H. Labiod, andJ.-C. Seguy, “Race: 
Risk analysis for cooperative engines,” in 7thInternational Conference on New Technologies, 
Mobility and Security(NTMS). Paris, France: IEEE, July 2015. 
[61] Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE), SAE-J3016: Taxonomy and Definitions for terms 
Related to Driving Automation Systems for On-Road Motor Vehicles, Sep 2016. 
[62] G. Sabaliauskaite, J. Cui, L. S. Liew, and F. Zhou, “Integrated safety and  cybersecurity 
risk analysis of cooperative intelligent transport systems,” in SCIS-ISIS, Toyama, Japan, pp. 
723–728, Dec 2018. 
[63] Jeon, S.H., Cho, J.H., Jung, Y., Park, S. and Han, T.M., 2011, February. Automotive 
hardware development according to ISO 26262. In 13th International Conference on 
Advanced Communication Technology (ICACT2011) (pp. 588-592). IEEE. 
 
[64] The traditional ISO 26262 can be applied along with Hazard and Risk Analysis (HARA), 
System Theoretic Process and Analysis (STPA) and Automotive Safety Integrity Level (ASIL) 
for every components of AV separately, as for example for engine systems. 
 
[65] Shastry, A.K., 2018. Functional safety assessment in autonomous vehicles (Doctoral 
dissertation, Virginia Tech). 
 
. 
[66] A. Nanda, D. Puthal, J. J. P. C. Rodrigues and S. A. Kozlov, "Internet of Autonomous 
Vehicles Communications Security: Overview, Issues, and Directions," in IEEE Wireless 
Communications, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 60-65, August 2019, doi: 10.1109/MWC.2019.1800503. 
 
[67] Fleetwood, J., 2017. Public health, ethics, and autonomous vehicles. American journal of 
public health, 107(4), pp.532-537. 
 [68] Duncan Langford (1997) “Ethical Issues in Network System Design,” Australasian 
Journal of Information Systems, 4. doi: 10.3127/ajis.v4i2.367. 
 
[69] Kopelias, P., Demiridi, E., Vogiatzis, K., Skabardonis, A. and Zafiropoulou, V., 2020. 
Connected & autonomous vehicles–Environmental impacts–A review. Science of the total 
environment, 712, p.135237. 
 [70] Takeyoshi Imai (2019) “Legal Regulation of Autonomous Driving Technology: Current 
Conditions 
and 
Issues 
in 
Japan,” IATSS 
Research, 
43(4), 
pp. 
263–267. 
doi: 
10.1016/j.iatssr.2019.11.009. 
 
[71] Maurer, M. et al. (eds) (2016) Autonomous driving : technical, legal and social aspects. 
Berlin: Springer OPen. doi: 10.1007/978-3-662-48847-8. 
[72] Grama, J. L. (2011) Legal issues in information security. Sudbury, Mass.: Jones & Bartlett 
Learning (Jones & Bartlett Learning information systems security & assurance series). 
Available at: INSERT-MISSING-URL (Accessed: December 6, 2020). 
 [73] Liu, N., Nikitas, A. and Parkinson, S., 2020. Exploring expert perceptions about the cyber 
security and privacy of Connected and Autonomous Vehicles: A thematic analysis 
approach. Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 75, pp.66-86. 
 
 
43
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
