Title: Process-Driven Visual Analysis of Cybersecurity Capture the Flag Exercises
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2509.15589v2
--------------------------------------------------

Highlights
Process-Driven Visual Analysis of Cybersecurity Capture the Flag
Exercises
Radek Oˇslejˇsek, Radoslav Chudovsk´y, Martin Macak
• Practical cybersecurity exercises are strongly process-oriented
• They are characterized by knowledge-intensive processes
• Process graphs that can provide insight into trainees’ behavior and
possible exercise suffer from complexity
• Rules for the visualization of multivariate networks are used for generic
design decisions
• A sliding window algorithm is used to analyze changes in trainees’
behavior
• Clustering techniques are used to classify individual and collective be-
havior
arXiv:2509.15589v2  [cs.HC]  23 Sep 2025
Process-Driven Visual Analysis of Cybersecurity
Capture the Flag Exercises
Radek Oˇslejˇseka, Radoslav Chudovsk´ya, Martin Macaka
aMasaryk University, Faculty of Informatics, Botanicka 68a, Brno, 60200, Czech Republic
Abstract
Hands-on training sessions become a standard way to develop and increase
knowledge in cybersecurity. As practical cybersecurity exercises are strongly
process-oriented with knowledge-intensive processes, process mining tech-
niques and models can help enhance learning analytics tools. The design
of our open-source analytical dashboard is backed by guidelines for visualiz-
ing multivariate networks complemented with temporal views and clustering.
The design aligns with the requirements for post-training analysis of a spe-
cial subset of cybersecurity exercises – supervised Capture the Flag games.
Usability is demonstrated in a case study using trainees’ engagement mea-
surement to reveal potential flaws in training design or organization.
Keywords:
process mining, visual analytics, cybersecurity education
2000 MSC: 68U05
1. Introduction
Hands-on training sessions have become a standard way to develop and
increase knowledge in cybersecurity.
They are often organized in cyber
ranges [1] that provide online environments with data monitoring. These
environments typically consist of virtualized computers mutually connected
into an emulated network. They are transparently accessible to trainees as
if they were physical devices. Learning goals are typically related to attack
or defense skills, e.g., finding the vulnerabilities in the network or protect-
ing the infrastructure from attackers. Moreover, the cyber ranges usually
provide some content management system, which is used to inform trainees
about expected cybersecurity tasks and to supervise and coordinate training
sessions.
Preprint submitted to Information Systems
September 24, 2025
1.1. Process Mining Background
Practical cybersecurity exercises are strongly process-oriented. Captured
data logs encode basic steps conducted by trainees in solving cybersecurity
tasks. Even though these event logs represent the primary source of infor-
mation for learning analytics, they are too low-level and difficult to analyze.
Activity graphs produced by process mining techniques on top of the raw
event logs provide behavioral models of higher abstraction. Analysts could
use them to gain insight into behavioral patterns from which hypotheses
about students’ progress, difficulties, or results can be formulated and further
investigated [2]. However, a suitable integration of process mining into the
learning analytics of cybersecurity exercises remains an open question.
This paper explores how visual interactions, complementary to standard
process graphs, can support training designers and supervisors in analyzing
post-training data within a process-driven analytical framework.
1.2. Cybersecurity Training Background
The cybersecurity exercise playthroughs can significantly differ based on
the participants’ knowledge, which is one of the characteristics of knowledge-
intensive processes [3]. A common approach to addressing this challenge is
to reduce the complexity of the analyzed process [4]. We examined proposed
measures for quantifying process complexity and chose to focus on reducing
process average affinity – a complexity measure that calculates the mean of
the pair-wise relative overlap of direct following relations over all sequences
in the event log [5].
In this scenario, variation measures cannot be reduced due to the flexibil-
ity participants have in solving cybersecurity exercises, which often results
in each trace representing a unique process variant. Theoretically, size mea-
sures could be reduced through specialized exercise assignments that limit
the number of steps a participant can take (e.g., restricting them to three
commands to succeed, thereby shortening the process sequence) or by lim-
iting the player in a very closed environment without much freedom (e.g.,
providing only a web page with three buttons to use, thereby reducing the
number of events). However, such constraints are uncommon in cybersecurity
exercises [6] and fall outside the scope of this paper, as exercise assignment
design occurs before post-training analysis.
We restrict the application domain to supervised training. This type of
education represents an obvious approach to cybersecurity learning, where
multiple training sessions are organized for a limited group of students under
2
the supervision of a tutor. Unlike courses that can be attended at any time
without restrictions, e.g., online exercises, supervised lessons take place under
controlled conditions. This results in a lower process average affinity, where
the data – playthroughs from multiple trainees – are less complex from this
perspective and more suitable for joint behavioral analysis.
Nonetheless, even restricting ourselves to supervised sessions, the cyber-
security training still proposes high variability of learning principles ranging
from table-top-like exercises [7, 8], jeopardy games, or attacker-defender com-
petitions to capture the flag (CTF) games [9, 10]. Cyber-defense exercises
(CDX) [11, 12, 13] represent a most advanced type of realistic training that
mimics real-world scenarios involving multiple cooperating and enemy teams.
Individual concepts can significantly differ in the freedom of achieving the
learning objective and then in the average affinity of process models.
We have analyzed the process complexity of all these exercise types and
selected CTF games as the ones with the lowest process average affinity.
Compared to, e.g., CDXs, the training scenarios are more specific, and play-
ers’ behavior is less variable. Tasks are not solved ad-hoc. We can suppose
that participants will take similar steps at similar times. Moreover, in many
cases, CTF games are divided into multiple levels, allowing the process to
be split into subprocesses, thus reducing the process complexity through the
process size.
Therefore, this paper primarily focuses on supervised CTF
games.
Cybersecurity CTF games belong to so-called puzzle-based learning, which
represents a well-known gamification principle where puzzles are used as a
metaphor for getting students to think about how to frame and solve un-
structured problems [14, 15]. Typical puzzles in cybersecurity learning are,
for example, techniques of scanning the network and revealing open services
or techniques of privilege escalation. An example of the gamification princi-
ples of the jeopardy CTF and CDX can be found in [16].
From the perspective of process modeling, puzzle-based content prescribes
consequential tasks as a sequence of expected actions leading to a milestone
– finding the task’s solution. For example, the ipconfig, nmap, or traceroute
commands can be run with multiple parameters on a trainee’s computer con-
nected to the network to explore the network state during the reconnaissance
phase of the training scenario. Obtained event logs – commands and actions
performed by trainees, provide a kind of basic logical structuring that could
be used for drill-down exploration and tackling the information complexity
of the whole training session.
3
1.3. Goals and Research Questions
Despite restricting the application domain to learning strategies that re-
duce the process average affinity, the application of process mining for their
analysis remains challenging. Furthermore, the analysis of commands used
to solve cybersecurity tasks brings additional obstacles to process mining uti-
lization [2]. We aim to overcome these challenges by using visual analytics
methods, where the process models represent multivariate networks that can
serve as higher abstraction models for exploratory visual analysis. In this
paper, we formulate the following research questions:
RQ1 What are the properties of process graphs derived from event logs of su-
pervised CTF games? The complexity of process graphs influences the
design of visualization techniques used to explore them from different
perspectives. Understanding the properties of process graphs obtained
from real data is, therefore, essential for developing meaningful visual
interactions.
RQ2 What are the objectives of learning analytics that process mining can
help overcome? Post-training analysts formulate a wide range of ana-
lytical questions and hypotheses. Our goal is to identify objectives that
are frequent, meaningful, and effectively addressable through process-
driven exploration.
RQ3 What design principles should guide the development of a process-driven
analytical dashboard? There is no universal solution for analyzing cy-
bersecurity training data and meeting diverse analytical objectives.
Thus, we seek to outline key principles for designing tailored process-
driven analytical dashboards.
2. Methodology
Our approach to using process mining in the visual analytics of CTF
games is backed by the conceptual model for the visual analysis process [17].
This framework is characterized by the interaction between data, data mod-
els, visualizations, and hypotheses-based knowledge discovery of analysts.
Data collected from CTF games consists of raw event logs that sparsely
capture trainees’ behavior. Process-oriented data models derived from these
events take the form of process graphs, which are typically visualized as
various types of oriented graphs. However, such static representations are
4
insufficient for learning analytics in cybersecurity learning, as the analyti-
cal objectives of training designers and supervisors are highly variable and
complex. These objectives often involve analyzing temporal changes in be-
havior or classifying trainees based on the tactics used to achieve cybersecu-
rity tasks. Such objectives are difficult to accomplish using static behavioral
graphs alone.
To address these diverse analytical needs, we treat process graphs as
multivariate networks – a concept already researched by the visual analytics
community. Our approach extends static process graphs with complementary
data models and juxtaposed visualizations that incorporate temporal and
clustering aspects of data exploration while adhering to the principles and
guidelines of multivariate network visualizations [18].
Although the visualization techniques of multivariate networks provide
general rules and best practices for effective exploratory interactions, design-
ing a tailored solution remains challenging. Therefore, we use these guidelines
within the Nested Model [19] design methodology as follows.
Domain problem and data characterization. We benefited from the authors’
long-term experience in organizing hands-on cybersecurity training sessions
and conducting process mining analysis in various application domains. This
expertise enabled us to collect raw data, conduct a preliminary analysis,
and then restrict the learning domain to the supervised puzzle-based CTF
games that best fit the requirements of practically usable process mining, as
described in Section 1. Furthermore, we performed statistical analysis of raw
event logs captured from CTF games and corresponding process models to
reveal the basic characteristics from the perspective of multivariate networks,
as discussed in Section 4. The results of this analysis answer the research
question RQ1 and affect consequent design decisions.
Operation and data type abstraction. This phase aims to map the input prob-
lems into a more specific description and then to answer the research question
RQ2. We have performed a comprehensive analysis and formulated a set of
analytical questions that can benefit from the process mining usage. Then,
we consulted them with domain experts – cybersecurity training practition-
ers. The resulting learning objectives of tutors are discussed in Section 5.
Visual encoding and interaction design. A typical visual representation of
process mining models is a graph. We use design rules defined for the visu-
alization of multivariate networks to extend graph-based views with comple-
5
mentary interactive data views. In particular, we employ juxtaposed views of
temporal and clustering models, data filtering tools, and in-depth previews
of activities to enhance the exploratory verification of hypotheses. Interac-
tions and design decisions are discussed in Section 6, answering the research
question RQ3.
Algorithm design. Algorithm design aims to implement visual encoding. We
combine known principles, especially a sliding window algorithm and k-means
clustering, to recognize, classify, and visualize changes in trainees’ behavior.
The dashboard is implemented as a functional prototype. We provide a case
study for the engagement analysis in Section 7 to validate our design.
3. Related Work
3.1. Visual Analytics in Cybersecurity Education
A systematic literature review of using visual analytics in education can
be found in [20]. According to the authors, only a few research studies took
place in classroom settings, missing an opportunity to take advantage of a
controlled environment to get coherent data. This survey also reveals that
the dominant visualization strategy in generic educational learning analytics
is statistical views, followed by graphs.
Cybersecurity training, where users interact with a cyber range via its
interface, can be considered online learning. In [21], Kyi et al. focus on the
usage of visual analysis in online education. They classify visual analytics
techniques into four categories. Two of them, problem-solving and learning
content analysis, share the same goals with our approach. According to the
authors, the problem-solving category dominantly employs glyph-embedded
Sankey diagrams, statistical charts, and map charts to analyze students’ cog-
nitive and noncognitive patterns in the process of solving a series of students’
problems over time [22, 23]. On the contrary, learning content analysis often
uses node-link diagrams, keyword clouds, and concept maps as popular vi-
sual techniques to enhance the quality of online courses [24, 25, 26]. However,
the courses discussed in the paper are strongly based on video records. Our
solution aims to utilize structured event logs.
A few papers address the application of VA methods directly in the cy-
bersecurity education subdomain. A basic overview of analytical tasks and
corresponding visual techniques can be found in [27].
According to their
6
classification, this paper addresses the quality of training exercise and behav-
ior analysis post-training analytical objectives. The same authors published
a series of papers addressing specific solutions for visual-based feedback to
trainees [28, 9], situational awareness of tutors during training sessions [29],
or post-training analysis [30]. However, none of these techniques utilize pro-
cess mining for behavioral analysis.
3.2. Educational Process Mining
Process mining has already been applied in many educational use cases [31].
The prominent area is e-learning analysis of processes, like learning habits [32]
and general usage of online platforms like Moodle [33, 34]. Moreover, process
mining was applied in other areas like curriculum mining [35] and student
registrations [36].
Process mining potential usage was also mentioned in
course achievement analysis [37]. However, all these processes have lower
process complexity than the cybersecurity exercise playthrough.
In the case of the Git process analysis in the software development course [38],
this issue was solved by the categorization of events into smaller categories,
e.g., by the size of the Git commit. However, in the case of the cybersecurity
training session analysis, such categorization would end up with the loss of
relevant information.
Furthermore, in the process analysis of learning difficulties [39], a coding
approach was used on the collected think-aloud data. This is a great approach
to natural language processing. However, its effectiveness is limited in the
process analysis of cybersecurity training session data.
Therefore, there is currently no educational process mining solution that
would solve the issue of process mining applications in cybersecurity training
session analysis.
3.3. Visual Analytics in Process Mining
Some authors have already studied visualization approaches to process
mining models, regardless of the application domain. The earlier works dis-
cuss generic interaction techniques, challenges, and opportunities [40, 41].
Also, specific complementary visualizations for process graphs have been pro-
posed. For instance, histograms of frequency or performance views can help
to cope with deviation or bottleneck analysis [42].
When looking for a general approach, process graphs can be considered
multivariate networks. The framework proposed by Nobre et al. [18] can
help conceptualize complementary visualizations that can extend traditional
7
graph-based views on process data.
Still, the framework provides a wide
variety of possible solutions depending on data characteristics and the aims
of analysts. Nevertheless, we use this framework as a guideline for answering
the research question RQ1.
Multivariate networks provide a static view of behavioral patterns, where
time is captured by only ordering activities (edges in the process graphs).
Therefore, an analytical dashboard should also adopt some temporal visual-
izations of event sequences [43] to cope with the dynamic aspects of trainees’
behavior. In this case, techniques based on sliding windows are often used
for continuous query processing of spatiotemporal data streams, aiming to
recognize activity patterns of human beings [44], discover emerging trends
from temporal data [45], or detect anomalies in behavior [46]. We use a slid-
ing window approach to recognize changes in trainees’ engagement and to
reveal patterns in such changes that could indicate flaws in training design
or the lack of students’ knowledge.
3.4. Behavioral Clustering
Clustering is essential to generic data mining. A clustering process dis-
cussed in [47] explains important steps in the design of clustering approaches
in educational data mining (EDM). The recent survey paper [48] brings a
useful classification of EDM tasks that use clustering models. Also, many
specific approaches can be found in the literature addressing, for instance,
the classification of students of small online courses by features adopted from
business systems [49] or revealing patterns of engagement in massive open
online courses [50].
In cybersecurity education, Svabensky et al. [51] applied pattern min-
ing and clustering techniques to analyze the usage of command-line tools
in hands-on cybersecurity exercises, aiming to support the automated as-
sessment of students. Burska et al. [52] used clustering directly to reveal
gameplay strategies and possible flaws in the training content. Our approach
utilizes process models to capture static patterns of behavior, i.e., typical or
exceptional traces of activities. On the contrary, clustering is used to classify
dynamic changes in behavior over time. Nevertheless, the analyst can com-
bine these views, i.e., to pay attention to similar traces with similar dynamic
changes.
8
4. Properties of Process Graphs
The size, complexity, and other factors can significantly influence the
interactive techniques used to visualize process graphs [18].
This section
analyzes the characteristics of event logs and their corresponding process
models to establish fundamental design constraints for visualizing process
graphs as multivariate networks.
4.1. Quantitative Analysis
To analyze these properties, we used publicly available datasets from
two typical training events [53]. Both datasets contain three types of events.
Game events track activities related to the training scenario and user progress,
such as session start, hint usage, or successfully solved cybersecurity tasks.
The other two event types – Bash commands and Metasploit commands
– record trainee interactions with the network infrastructure. They capture
specific commands and their parameters that were executed on the command
lines of network nodes.
The first dataset included 52 trainees, while the second had 48 partici-
pants. In total, 11757 events were collected. Of these, 3597 were training
progress events, 5669 were Bash commands, and 2491 were Metasploit com-
mands.
Figure 1: The impact of parsing and mapping event logs on graph complexity.
Since
only data from the EVENT column is transformed into process mining activities and
represented as graph nodes, the overall graph complexity depends on whether additional
parameters from the raw event logs are also included in these activities.
9
The size of graphs generated through process discovery largely depends
on how raw data is mapped onto process mining activities [54, 2].
Bash
and Metasploit commands introduce high variability, increasing the average
affinity of the process.
For instance, if all executions of the ssh command are treated as a single
activity, regardless of additional arguments, the resulting graph contains only
one node, as shown in the left-hand example in Figure 1. Conversely, if ssh
commands with different remote addresses are considered distinct activities,
multiple nodes are generated, each representing a unique ssh connection,
e.g., “ssh 192.168.1.10” and “ssh 192.168.1.11”. Other optional parameters
possibly used by users, e.g., “-4 -a” in the example, still do not affect the
graph structure.
There is no universally correct or superior mapping approach, as the
choice depends on the specific analytical objectives. To account for this vari-
ability, we analyzed the lower and upper bounds of graphs derived from the
real datasets using different event mapping strategies. Table 1 summarizes
the observed approximate minimum and maximum number of nodes in the
resulting graphs.
Table 1: Estimation of the size of process mining graphs.
Dataset 1
Dataset 2
raw
events
upper
bound
lower
bound
raw
events
upper
bound
lower
bound
Bash
2749
1322
207
2920
981
137
Metasploit
904
291
86
1587
350
108
Game events
1617
146
146
1980
124
124
Total
5270
1759
439
6487
1455
369
The raw events are introduced only for completeness. This column cap-
tures all events in the dataset, including noise and duplicates that have to
be removed during preprocessing before performing any serious analysis [2].
On the contrary, the upper bound and lower bound columns represent more
realistic estimations of the number of nodes in process graphs.
For the estimation of upper bounds, the commands, including their pa-
rameters, were mapped to process mining activities directly. For instance,
ls -a and ls -al records are considered different Bash commands in this upper
bound analysis, although they do almost the same. On the other hand, all
dummy, duplicate, and noisy data were removed. In particular, we identified
10
a lot of noise in Bash commands caused by copying data into the terminal.
Apparently, some trainees accidentally copied the content of some files, e.g.,
public SSH key, into the terminal, causing each line to be recorded as an
individual command with no semantic meaning for analysis.
Like upper bounds, the lower bound numbers were also measured with
any dummy, duplicate, and noise data removed.
However, only the core
commands without parameters, e.g., ls, were mapped to process mining ac-
tivities. In this case, the process graphs are significantly simpler, but a lot
of details may be missing that could be important for analysts.
In contrast to Bash and Metasploit commands, the variability of game
events is minimal. Therefore, the upper and lower bounds are the same for
this type of event.
4.2. Summary
The analysis has shown that the real size of process graphs may signifi-
cantly vary depending on which raw events are available and which of them
are embraced in the analytical workflow. The upper and lower bounds indi-
cate that the size fits medium (< 1.000) and large (> 1.000) size categories
of Nobre’s classification. The medium size can be achieved if the analysis fo-
cuses on certain aspects of the gameplay or when dealing with only selected
event types. On the contrary, overview graphs capturing the whole game
can reach thousands of nodes. Even worse, our experience has shown that
drilling down into training details, e.g., exploring how a certain puzzle (cy-
bersecurity task) was treated by trainees, small-size graphs (< 100) are often
used for learning analytics. Therefore, analysts can meet all size categories
when exploring training data. As there is no ideal solution, a visual-analysis
tool should adapt to the size of process graphs.
Table 2: Summary of process graph features.
size
type
node
attributes
edge
attributes
topological
structure
small
medium
large
k-partite
heterogeneous
homogeneous
path
single node/edge
With respect to this observation, other aspects of multivariate networks
must be considered when designing the VA tool. They are summarized in
11
Table 2. The puzzle-based structure of training content, where each task
is finished by a milestone (a flag), produces significant k-partite graphs, en-
abling us to split large graphs into middle or small-size sub-parts easily. Node
attributes are heterogeneous because nodes encode varying trainees’ activi-
ties. On the contrary, edge attributes are homogeneous, as they only encode
the number of traces or unified time information.
Regarding significant topological clusters, process graphs are strongly
path-related as they reconstruct traces of behavior, whereas details of a single
node or edge provide important insight into the behavior. We found other
topological structures defined in [18], i.e., communities (clusters of strongly
connected nodes) and networks/sub-networks, less useful for the learning an-
alytics of CTF process graphs. Networks/sub-networks are delimited by the
strong k-partite structure of process graphs produced by puzzle-based train-
ing content. Clustering is important, but in a different context: analyzing
the similarity of traces and then identifying typical or exceptional behavior.
5. Analytical Objectives
Based on the discussion with domain experts – developers of hands-on
cybersecurity exercises and organizers of training sessions, we formulated
three generic objectives that can be used for the initial exploration of training
data, aiming to identify any significant or suspected behavior or flaws in the
training design.
O1 Distinguishing between typical and exceptional behavior. Both aspects
can reveal important features of training design or gameplay strategies.
Outliers can indicate talented or cheating individuals, while the similar
behavior of multiple trainees can be used to prove the clarity of training
instructions, for instance. Depending on the purpose, identified groups
or individuals can be further explored or, on the contrary, temporarily
hidden from the analysis. Therefore, visual awareness of individual vs.
collective behavior should be supported.
O2 Performance. Supervised training is time-limited. However, estimating
the time requirements in advance is very difficult. Moreover, it may
differ even for the same training scenario if the skills of trainees are
different. Therefore, the knowledge of how much time trainees have
spent solving different tasks can help in analyzing the temporal aspects
of training sessions.
12
O3 The change of behavior in time. The behavior of trainees can change
over time due to frustration, unclear instruction, lack of time, or lack
of knowledge. It is necessary to capture such changes and trends to
identify time points or spans when the change happened and potentially
analyze the cause. Together with O1 and O2, it would be possible to
judge if it is the exceptional change or something more serious that
affected the majority of trainees. Therefore, it is necessary to include
time-evolving views and interactions in the VA tool.
An analytical tool that addresses these objectives could effectively prove
or disprove higher analytical hypotheses. In what follows, we discuss three
examples of typical post-training questions that appear to be often asked by
analysts of CTF games.
Engagement. Although the tasks of puzzle games are strictly defined, there
is always a certain freedom in how to finish the task. Trainees can make an
effort to find a solution by themselves or choose the simplest way by taking
hints, for instance. This engagement can be affected in the very beginning
(the trainee was forced to conduct the training without any personal interest),
but also often changes during the training for many reasons, e.g., the lack of
time or flaws in training design or infrastructure. While the active usage of
commands (either correct or incorrect) can indicate high engagement, taking
hints or revealing a complete solution usually indicates a loss of motivation.
Involving these types of events in the O1 and O3 and putting them into
the temporal context O2 can help to prove or disprove hypotheses about
engagement and reasons for its loss.
Cheating. Possible cheating can be recognized by super-performance O2 (the
tasks are solved very quickly), exceptionally high assessment (if assessment
data are present in the dataset), or exceptional behavior (unusual traces of
activities) O1. Partial cheating, i.e., cheating only at a certain part of the
training or since a certain time, also needs the involvement of O3.
Difficulty. The estimation of the difficulty of tasks is crucial for assigning
appropriate time and assessment rules so that trainees stay engaged in the
training. The overall preview can be obtained from performance O2 in com-
bination with behavioral clustering O1, aiming to compare the behavior of
the majority with outliers (either exceptionally skilled or weak individuals).
The differences in the difficulty of individual tasks and then the changes in
the difficulty during the gameplay can be observed from O3.
13
6. Dashboard Design
This section summarizes the visual analytics dashboard proposed to sup-
port exploratory tactics addressing objectives O1 – O3 and reflecting design
constraints derived from the analysis of process graph properties. The lay-
out of the dashboard depicted in Figure 2 is built around the obvious graph
representation of process models (A) complemented by visual tools for tem-
poral behavioral analysis, aka sentiment views (B), tools for individual walk-
throughs (C), data filtering (D), and visual suppression (E). In what follows,
we discuss the functionality of individual parts, as well as their interconnec-
tion and design decisions.
Figure 2: Overview of the analytical dashboard: Process mining graph (A), sentiment
views (B), details of individual walkthroughs (C), raw data filtering (D), and temporary
visual suppression (E).
6.1. Process Graphs
Due to the process-oriented nature of practical cybersecurity exercises,
the prominent part of the analytical dashboard is occupied by the process
graphs (Figure 2 (A)) constructed from event logs automatically using ob-
vious methods of process discovery. It has been shown that heuristic nets
14
fit the analytical goals of CTF educators the best [54]. Obtained frequency
graphs inform the analyst of the number of trainees following the same path,
as shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3: Frequency graph highlighting the importance of traces by bold arrows and
activities of selected trainees by color-coding (red arrows and nodes in the graph).
The plain visualization of the oriented process graph is often decorated by
various visual effects, aiming to attract the analyst’s attention to significant
parts of the graph. We combine several complementary visual principles.
The thickness of the edges corresponds to the number of traces. Moreover,
traces (nodes and edges) of a particular trainee can be highlighted on the
graph by using different color coding so that the analysts can identify specific
activities of a selected individual.
In Figure 3, the path of the selected
trainee is rendered in red. Together, this kind of visual highlighting enables
15
the analysts to glimpse typical and rare walkthroughs and then address the
objective O1).
Figure 4: Frequency graph highlighting activities conducted by multiple trainees at similar
times.
However, the path highlighted by their importance or relevance to selected
trainees does not consider possible time constraints (the objective O2). For
performance analysis, the analyst needs to identify whether some activity
was performed sooner or later by one trainee than another. Or whether it
was performed at the same time.
Therefore, we introduced the so-called
temporal proximity of activities, where events that appear in a user-defined
time span are considered activities performed at the same time. Given a time
point, we can highlight such nearby activities on the process graph. Figure 4
demonstrates the visual encoding. Activities included in the blue area were
16
performed “around the same time” selected by the analyst. We use convex
hulls computed around the corresponding nodes to avoid visual interference
with other highlighting approaches described above. This is feasible because
nodes representing activities close in time are typically positioned close to
each other in the process graph and then localized in a specific part of the
graph.
Figure 5: Performance graph, where numbers on edges encode time spent by activities.
Another approach to exploring time aspects of the training (and then
addressing the objective O2) is based on switching the frequency-based
heuristic net to the so-called performance graph that replaces the number
of trainees on edges with the average, median, maximal, or minimal time
required by trainees to proceed between nodes, as shown in Figure 5. This
view can be used to distinguish between simple and time-demanding tasks
of the exercise.
It appeared that there was no need to show performance and frequency
variants of process graphs simultaneously. The decorated performance graphs
are suitable mainly for the exploration of trainees’ walkthroughs, while fre-
quency graphs are more appropriate for identifying time bottlenecks in train-
ing scenarios. Therefore, the graph view can toggle between the two variants,
never displaying them side by side, saving space in the dashboard. Moreover,
the view is intentionally located in the prominent middle part of the dash-
board with vertical alignment that fits the elongated shape of many graphs
given by the k-partite structure of the data.
Despite the wide area allocated for process graphs, their possible com-
plexity still remains an issue. Our experiments proved satisfying usability for
17
restricted data views, e.g., the analysis limited to only a specific exercise level
(puzzle) or the analysis of the whole exercise but restricted to selected event
types only. Otherwise, the obtained process graphs may become too com-
plex and then incomprehensible. Therefore, we proposed two strategies to
tackle generic graph complexity. First, the analyst should be able to restrict
the data interactively during the analysis. The data filtering and temporary
hiding are discussed below. Second, the dashboard could provide different
views for different levels of abstraction and enable the analysis to drill down
into details only if necessary. The idea lies in replacing a detailed k-partite
graph with a simplified overview, where sub-graphs are replaced with a series
of statistical previews.
Figure 6: Examples of a statistical overview of process graphs, where sub-graphs are
replaced with statistical values. Either simplified (left) or more detailed (right) visual
encoding can be used.
Figure 6 shows an example where five consequent gaming puzzles (i.e.,
cybersecurity tasks) that normally form sub-graphs of the complete process
model are replaced with aggregated statistical views, e.g., the average num-
ber of used commands. The visual encoding may differ depending on analyst
requirements. The left view simply uses the size of circles to visually encode
the measured values, while the right-hand side example provides a more de-
tailed statistical distribution of values, e.g., histograms. As these visualiza-
tions are very compact, they can include multiple metrics, e.g., the average
number of commands used, trainees’ engagement, or the relative time spent
by trainees solving the task. Regardless of visual encoding, the visualization
can be adaptive, enabling the analyst to show different metrics (rows) and
drill down into detailed process graphs.
18
6.2. Sentiment View
Sentiment view is a term used in this paper for analytical visualiza-
tions dealing with dynamic changes in trainees’ behavior, possibly reflecting
changes in mood, sentiment, or other types of mental state (Figure 2(B)).
Its primary purpose is twofold: Visually detecting changes in behavior over
time and classifying trainees into groups based on these changes.
Sentiment Metric
Frequency process graphs can reveal behavioral patterns. However, they
provide only a static view aggregated from the behavior of multiple trainees.
To address the objective O3, we need a compact visualization emphasizing
changes in the behavior of individual participants in time. Therefore, we
proposed an algorithm that analyzes changes in trainees’ behavior in time
and transforms them into a visual representation.
The algorithm is based on a user-defined sliding time window in which a
behavioral sentiment metric is computed. The window sequentially scans the
entire span of the exercise in user-defined steps. The changes in the metric
values become the subject of analytical visualizations.
The window size and the step size are adjustable. They are expressed as
percentages of the measured lengths of game levels (puzzles), adapting the
results to variable time requirements of cybersecurity tasks.
For the i-th time window, the metric value is computed as follows. First,
a score is computed for each trainee as the sum of the number of weighted
occurrences of involved events:
scorei =
X
e∈events
we · ne,i,
(1)
where we detonates the weight of the event e and ne,i the number of occur-
rences of e in the time window i. Then, the values are normalized to the
range from −1 to 1 using linear interpolation to the following range:
median(scorei) ∓max(scorei),
(2)
where median and max denote median and maximal score values among all
trainees. Using this metric, a negative value represents lower performance
by the trainee (e.g., lower engagement) compared to other trainees at that
moment, and vice versa.
19
Drawing the values cumulatively provides insight into the changes in the
measured trainees’ behavior in time, as shown in Figure 2(B) and in detail in
Figure 10. The X-axis represents a timeline that includes steps of the sliding
window. The Y-axis includes the cumulative values of the metric measured
in the sliding window for each trainee. Ascending trends indicate an increase
in the measured performance. Measured values are depicted as points on the
lines. However, because the graph is dense, the close points are replaced with
a single joint point, reducing visual complexity.
Sentiment view also serves as the selection tool for process graphs. When
the mouse hovers over points of the sentiment chart, corresponding trainees
and activities close in time are selected and highlighted on the graph view.
Moreover, the graph is zoomed into the convex hull area, providing a detailed
view of possible complex graphs. Moving the mouse over the timeline of
the sentiment chart can produce an animation of convex hulls, enabling the
analyst to “replay” trainees’ activities when their sentiment changes.
Clustering
Generic clustering methods have been shown to support visual learning
analytics [52] in practical cybersecurity education in general. We use them
to cluster dynamic changes in behavior (the objective O1), i.e., the values
computed by behavioral metrics and presented on the cumulative graph. Two
different clustering views are proposed.
Figure 7: Clustering trainees by their changes in behavior. Line chart (A) and spider chart
views (B).
The line chart view depicted in Figure 7 (left) is visually and function-
ally identical to the cumulative graph of the individual walkthroughs. It is
more sparse as now the lines group individual trainees with similar shapes,
indicating similar changes in behavior. A simple bar chart shows how many
20
trainees belong to clusters. Whole clusters (their trainees) can be filtered out
from the analysis using switches under bars.
The second view depicted on the right-hand side in Figure 7 has the form
of an obvious spider chart.
This visualization better shows relationships
between clustering features, possibly revealing patterns in changes in the
behavior.
Clustering visualizations are not visible in the dashboard overview in
Figure 2 because they occupy the sector (B) together with the previous visu-
alization. This is because they are never used simultaneously. They represent
different tactics to analyze and filter dynamic changes in trainees’ individual
or collective behavior. Therefore, these views can be switched easily, and
only one view is visible at the time.
Also, broad configuration options are available, including the elbow func-
tion analysis to estimate an appropriate number of clusters. Currently, we
use an unsupervised k-means method as the clustering algorithm. Although
the results have shown good results from the perspective of generated clus-
ters [55], the k-means approach suffers from randomness. It can produce
different clusters for every invocation and then confuse the analyst. There-
fore, other methods, e.g., tree-based clustering, could be used instead. On
the other hand, these methods are often supervised, which can pose problems
for varying exercises with only a few realized training sessions.
6.3. Detailed Traces of Activities
Highlighting the paths on the process graphs enables analysts to pay at-
tention to selected trainees and their activities. Still, the data are aggregated.
The view shows how many trainees used the given command (in the case of
the frequency graphs) or how long they spent on the activity (in the case of
the performance graphs). However, for an in-depth investigation, an analyst
has to be able to distinguish between the activities of individual trainees.
We introduced a compact view that complements the process graphs
by decomposing individual paths into per-trainee details. The visualization
shown in Figure 2(C) has the form of a matrix where rows represent indi-
vidual trainees, columns are data events, and cells provide necessary details.
Currently, simple color dots are used to indicate the presence or absence of
per-trainee activities. Details, e.g., complete commands with parameters, are
provided as tooltips. This view helps tackle the performance of individuals
(the objective O2) and compare them with others (the objective O1).
21
The matrix is fully connected with other views, so it always displays rel-
evant data depending on constraints put on trainees, activities, and time
spans triggered by other dashboard parts. For example, suppose the analyst
selects trainees and a time span in the sentiment view. In that case, relevant
paths are highlighted on the process graph, the process graph is zoomed into
the corresponding activities (the blue convex hulls), and the matrix shows
commands of related trainees. In this way, the analyst can dynamically ex-
plore trainees’ behavior just by moving the mouse pointer over the sentiment
chart and observing all relevant data side-by-side. On the other hand, the
interaction can be frozen for a while in the sentiment view so that the ana-
lyst can fix the views and conduct an in-depth exploration, e.g., moving and
zooming the process graph or exploring the matrix of trainees’ commands.
6.4. Raw Data Filtering
The data analysis discussed in Section 4 has shown that events captured
during the real training sessions can include meaningless records or data unre-
lated to analytical objectives. Therefore, we proposed an interactive filtering
user interface that enables analysts to tackle information and visualization
complexity already at the level of raw data filtering. The interface, shown in
Figure 2(D), reflects multiple data abstractions observed during the analysis
of event types and their characteristics.
Filtering by trainees. Implemented as a simple select box that enables the
analyst to exclude data of particular trainees from the analysis, as shown
in Figure 8(A). It can typically happen if the collected data contains some
testing walkthroughs from dry runs that should be ignored. All trainees are
included by default.
Filtering by training levels. Implemented also as a simple select box (Fig-
ure 8(B)). Data from unchecked game levels (training tasks) are removed
from the analysis. However, we found it very confusing if non-subsequent
levels were chosen, omitting some levels between them. Therefore, the selec-
tion of only subsequent levels is possible, e.g., levels 2 & 3 & 4, but not 2 &
4.
Filtering commands. The data analysis revealed the presence of many noisy
events that are usually caused by copying a file or web content to the ter-
minal. The content is then recorded as many Bash or Metasploit garbage
events. Therefore, the filtering tool supports composing boolean expressions
22
Figure 8: GUI for raw data filtering.
Examples for trainees (A), training levels (B),
commands (C), and game events (D).
that exclude Bash or Metasploit events with given content from the analysis
(Figure 8(C)). Multiple rules can be added and removed dynamically. They
are interpreted as logical AND between them. Each rule defines a text repre-
senting either a keyword or a regular expression. Events containing the text
are either included in or excluded from the analysis. Besides filtering the
whole Bash and Metasploit commands, the tool also supports user-defined
mapping of commands and their arguments onto process mining activities,
as discussed in Section 4.
Therefore, it is possible to interactively define
rules that distinguish between “ssh root@172.18.1.5” and “kali@172.18.1.5”
commands while considering all other ssh commands the same activity, for
instance. Often-used rules could be predefined in the future.
Filtering game events. While commands represent steps in solving cybersecu-
rity tasks, game events can be rather perceived as the state of the gameplay,
i.e., the progress in the training. Moreover, they are much more reliable with-
out noisy data. This is why they are treated differently during the analysis.
First, some game events can be considered mandatory because they are used
to identify the progress of the trainee, e.g., the successful solving of a task.
23
Filtering such events makes no sense. On the contrary, some expressions re-
lated to game events could be valuable, e.g., when focusing only on trainees
who used hints at certain levels. Therefore, the filtering tool supports the
filtering of events such as hints taken, solution displayed, and wrong answer
in specified game levels (Figure 8(D)). The design of interaction follows the
principles of command filtering, i.e., dynamically managed rules connected
with implicit logical AND.
6.5. Temporary Visual Suppression
While raw data filtering aims to completely exclude irrelevant data from
the analysis, temporary filtering is intended to be used during the analysis to
simplify the view of the data. It aims to attract analysts’ attention to only
relevant pieces of information while temporarily hiding or visually suppress-
ing less important data. Nevertheless, temporarily suppressed data are still
used in the underlying learning analytics, e.g., clustering or the computation
of changes in behavior.
Showing only selected trainees has been identified as a very important
requirement of analysts. Therefore, an easily accessible preview of trainees
is exposed as a prominent part of the dashboard in the Temporary Filtering
panel (E) in Figure 2.
It has the form of a list sorted either by trainee
names (IDs) or by behavioral clusters. The latter allows trainees with similar
behavior to be shown or hidden quickly. The panel can be extended with
other data types in the future if needed, following the already discussed raw
data filtering design principles.
The suppressed data are still shown in the analytical visualizations as they
provide important context for analysts. However, they are shown less notice-
ably. Figure 9 depicts the situation when only four trainees are selected.
Paths and activities of other trainees are still preserved in the process graph
but rendered transparently. The strength of suppression (transparency) is
maintainable. Behavioral clusters and sentiment lines are also computed for
all trainees in the sentiment view. However, only selected trainees are shown.
7. Case Study: Engagement Analysis
A prototype implementation of the analytical dashboard is available as an
open-source project developed at Masaryk University 1. This case study aims
1https://gitlab.fi.muni.cz/kypo-analyst
24
Figure 9: Temporary visual suppression.
to demonstrate the ability of the dashboard to support training designers
and supervisors of cybersecurity CTF exercises in analyzing post-training
data by interactively combining and evaluating analytical objectives O1–O3,
as defined in Section 5. We chose engagement to showcase highly relevant
hypotheses formulated at a higher level of abstraction.
Interactions and analytical workflows presented in this case study are
backed by the initial qualitative evaluation that has been conducted to as-
sess the overall usability of the dashboard and gain feedback from domain
experts for further development. We involved five users who were experienced
in supervising practical cybersecurity exercises organized in the KYPO Cy-
ber Range Platform [56] or in CTF game design. Initially, we gathered basic
information about the participants and their skills. Then, they familiarized
themselves with the analytical tool. They were provided with an instructional
video that explained the basic concepts and different types of visualizations,
as well as guidance on configuration and filtering options. Finally, the partic-
ipants were asked to complete four analytical tasks and answer questionnaires
related to their findings, the difficulty of the tasks, and the usefulness of vi-
sualizations. The evaluation tasks are briefly summarized below, while the
detailed information and supplementary materials can be found in [57, 58].
T1 Identify trainees with consistently low or high engagement throughout
the exercise.
T2 Identify trainees whose engagement increased or decreased during the
exercise.
25
T3 Verify hypotheses that a selected trainee’s low engagement was due to
the lack of time.
T4 Verify hypotheses that a selected trainee’s low engagement resulted
from insufficient prior knowledge.
7.1. Dataset and Training Scenario
The data used in this case study are publicly available as dataset1 from [53].
The related training scenario consists of the following steps:
• After the introductory information and instructions, the trainees were
given credentials for an attacker KALI Linux machine. The trainees
were expected to use a tool nmap with an option -sV to scan the
server and find the name of a vulnerable service running on an open
port, which also served as a flag for this level.
• In the next task, trainees were supposed to find a CVE code of the vul-
nerability to exploit. To find the code, trainees could search the internet
or use other tools such as Metasploit – a command-line cybersecurity
tool often used to gain access to or information about vulnerabilities
of potential targets.
• The following task consisted of teaching the trainees how to use Metas-
ploit and search for and apply exploits. The goal was to exploit the
vulnerability CVE-2019-15107 that they had found previously and ac-
cess the server. The flag was a five-digit number located in a file in the
/root/ directory. Trainees found an exploit based on the name of the
service, chose the correct one, and learned how to set up the options
for the exploit, such as setting RHOSTS to the victim’s IP address,
before running it.
• Trainees learned that the hacker group deleted all their files on this
server. It is, however, probable that they backed up all their files to
another server. The trainees’ task was to explore the local .bash history
file and find a clue that could lead to the new IP address, mainly looking
for the usage of the scp command.
• The following task consisted of searching the currently exploited server
for information, allowing them to access the new server. The task was
to obtain the private SSH key on the server and crack its passphrase.
26
Trainees were assumed to use a password cracking tool john for a dic-
tionary attack using a provided script and wordlist on the attacker’s
machine.
• The final level informed students that they connected to the other
server and found a note from the hacker group.
We used raw data for the evaluation, preprocessed according to the lower
bound complexity estimation discussed in Section 4. It means that dummy,
duplicate, and noisy data records were removed. On the contrary, commands
were mapped to activities without parameters, i.e., the “ssh 192.168.1.10”
and “ssh 192.168.1.11”, for instance, were considered the same command
by default, appearing in the process graph as a single node. Although the
respondents were informed about the possibility of changing the mapping,
they did not do that as it was not necessary for engagement analysis.
7.2. Initial Settings of the Sentiment Metric
Engagement can be considered sentiment, whose changes can be esti-
mated from correct answers, wrong answers, taking hints, displaying solu-
tions, and the active usage of Bash or Metasploit commands.
A higher
frequency of taking hints can indicate the trainees’ loss of motivation to find
a solution by themselves. Therefore, the default weight of this event was set
to -5. Reading step-by-step solution instructions by the trainee can be con-
sidered a complete resignation to making an effort to solve the cybersecurity
task. Therefore, this event type had the weight set to -20. Similarly, the
weight of wrong answers was set to -1 as their frequent appearance in the
time window can indicate frustration of the trainee, causing an engagement
decrease. On the contrary, a high frequency of commands can be considered
positive engagement with the weight set to 1 by default. For a typical one-
hour CTF game, the optimal window size seems to be 50% of the game level
length and the step size 40%.
The metric values were determined only using several simple experiments.
Further research is required to establish strong foundations for the system
of meaningful metrics used in the accumulative behavioral graph. Although
the weights are configurable in the GUI and then fully customizable, they
were not changed by participants during the evaluation, as fine-tuning the
engagement metric was not the objective of the testing.
It is to be pointed out that these metric settings aim to demonstrate
the principles of capturing changes in trainees’ engagement. Another metric
27
combining different events with different weights can be used to reflect other
moods.
7.3. Detection of Low Engagement
The identification of trainees with low engagement was covered by two
evaluation tasks T1 and T2. First, the respondents were required to identify
trainees with low and high engagement throughout the entire game. This
involved comparing individual performance (objective O2) against that of
other trainees (objective O1). Second, respondents had to identify trainees
who either lost or gained engagement during the training.
This task fo-
cused on analyzing temporal aspects (objective O3) in relation to individual
performance (objective O2). In both cases, the sentiment view served as
a key entry point for process analysis, allowing users to explicitly track en-
gagement changes, cluster trainees based on engagement levels, and explore
detailed insights through other juxtaposed views on the dashboard.
Figure 10: Sentiment view with marked examples of three types of engagement changes.
The horizontal stripe suggests the time window delimiting nearby activities highlighted in
other views.
28
Most respondents followed this workflow, dominantly using the sentiment
view with preset engagement metrics for their initial interaction. Three clus-
ters were used by default, but the analyst could explore the elbow function
and try different numbers of desired clusters.
Figure 10 shows the initial state of the sentiment chart. A quick inspec-
tion of the view reveals that several trainees from the same cluster experi-
enced low engagement during the whole exercise. Two students maintained
stable, high engagement during the exercise.
For one student, the graph
shows a significant increase in the middle of the exercise. Of course, the
behavior of other trainees can also attract an analyst’s attention.
All respondents identified the same trainees with low and high engage-
ment during the whole game. However, their answers diverged when it came
to the second or third trainees with such characteristics. Moreover, the re-
spondents disagreed in selecting trainees who either lost or gained engage-
ment during the training. This inconsistency may originate from the multiple
correct options, where the specific selection depends on the personal prefer-
ences of the analysts. Moreover, some participants interpreted the task as
the selection of a single trainee, while others listed all trainees who exhibited
changes in engagement.
Overall, respondents rated finding trainees with low, high, or changing
engagement as an easy task and confirmed the usefulness of the sentiment
chart for getting an overview of engagement in the training session.
7.4. Inferring the Cause
To investigate the possible reasons for the low, high, or changed engage-
ment, the analysts have to combine multiple process views and interactions.
In what follows, we turn our attention to the low-engaged trainee. The drill-
down exploration of the cause typically starts on the sentiment chart, which
appeared to be the favorite way to take an overview of trainees’ behavior.
The analyst can move the mouse pointer over the sentiment lines. Traces of
activities are dynamically highlighted in the process graph. Simultaneously,
corresponding events are updated accordingly in the detailed matrix view.
This animation-like interaction helps the analyst distinguish between typical
and exceptional behavior (objective O1). For example, the analyst might
observe that the blue areas in the process graph usually remain compact
throughout the interaction. This suggests that the corresponding trainees
exhibit similar behavior, as their events were recorded at similar times. In
contrast, moments where these areas spread across distant parts of the graph
29
indicate those parts of the training session where the behavior of selected
trainees diverged. Moreover, data of other participants can be suppressed to
reduce the visual complexity of visualizations, e.g., restricting the views to
specific game levels (cybersecurity tasks) only.
Figure 11: Behavioral data of the trainee with low engagement spread across juxtaposed
views.
Combining animation-like interaction with the sentiment chart and infor-
mation suppression can help analysts efficiently investigate specific trainees
in detail (objective O3). Figure 11 marks data of the trainee with low engage-
ment spread across juxtaposed views. The event matrix in the bottom-right
corner reveals that, compared to other trainees, this individual frequently
relied on hints and often displayed complete solutions. Although Bash and
Metasploit commands are not visible in the screenshot, enabling them in the
visualizations would reveal that, with few exceptions, the trainee did not
actively execute any meaningful commands.
The performance graph can reveal a trainee’s performance (objective O2).
Figure 12 displays traces of the selected trainee together with other players
(visually suppressed paths).
It can be seen that it takes several minutes
on average to provide the correct solution to the cybersecurity task (paths
between LevelStarted and CorrectAnswerSubmitted nodes), while the trainee
with low engagement went through the game levels very quickly.
30
Figure 12: Performance graph of the trainee with low engagement.
These observations suggest that the assignment was either completely
incomprehensible to the trainee (possibly due to insufficient initial skills) or
that they were simply unmotivated to engage with the CFT game.
The
data were collected from a training session involving cybersecurity students
who were expected to have the necessary knowledge. However, since their
performance in the exercise was not formally assessed and only attendance
was required to pass, this may explain the trainee’s low engagement.
To examine our expectations about using the dashboard for drill-down
investigation of individual behavior, we asked participants of the prelimi-
nary evaluation to prove or disprove hypotheses that the low engagement of
the selected trainee was caused by the lack of time (T3) or insufficient prior
knowledge (T4). The observation gained from the evaluation and feedback
provided by participants has shown that these tasks were more difficult than
just detecting trainees with low engagement. Moreover, the analysts were
able to confirm their hypothesis with only limited certainty. All respondents
came to the conclusion that the primary reason was insufficient prior knowl-
edge of the trainee. Regarding the possible lack of time, the answers covered
31
the full range of possible responses, from “very unlikely” to “very likely”. It is
to be pointed out that the respondents were not familiar with the motivation
of the assessment context described above.
The drill-down strategies and then the utilization of views and filtering
capabilities differed among the participants as well. Some of them responded
quickly, relying only on the performance process graph, while others engaged
with multiple visualizations and provided more in-depth explanations for
their decisions. The sentiment chart, the raw data filtering, and the perfor-
mance process graph were reported to be the most valuable for cause analysis,
followed by the temporary visual suppression, the detailed activity matrix,
and the frequency process graph.
7.5. Lessons Learned From the Evaluation
Preliminary qualitative analysis conducted on the dashboard’s prototype
proved the usability of the process-oriented concepts for post-training anal-
ysis of cybersecurity of CTF games.
On the other hand, the study also
identified a few bottlenecks and possible improvements.
• The semantics behind the sentiment chart were unclear for analysts
who were unsure whether the graph displays trends or specific values.
• The performance process graph was primarily used by analysts to an-
swer time-related questions about trainees’ walkthroughs.
However,
some analysts were missing statistical information like that depicted
in Figure 6 that was not yet implemented in the prototype. One par-
ticipant mentioned that “From the performance process graph, I can
gain a time-based context regarding the participant’s walkthrough. For
example, I can observe that the trainee spent 5 minutes on this level,
which initially seems reasonable, as they spent a similar amount of
time on other levels. However, if I were able to view statistical data for
other trainees and found that the average time for this level is only one
minute, it would no longer seem fine, and I would want to investigate
the issue further.”
• One participant suggested adding icons to the matrix of individual
walkthroughs (Figure 2(C)) to visually encode types of events and com-
mands, as the current use of colors does not provide any new meaningful
information, and the labels are excessively long.
32
• The timeline is crucial for temporal filtering. However, analysts often
overlook the current implementation of the timeline in the sentiment
chart. A more prominent location and a visually significant redesign
are needed.
8. Conclusion and Future Work
This paper introduces a vital application domain where process mining
enhanced with complementary visualizations can help gain insight into the
behavior of trainees and possible flaws of hands-on cybersecurity exercises.
We addressed three research questions as follows:
RQ1 – What are the properties of process graphs derived from event logs
of supervised CTF games?
In-depth analysis of real datasets has shown
high variability in the size of process graphs. Nevertheless, other revealed
features like homogeneity of edge attributes, k-partite structuring of graphs,
or significant topological structures allow the designers of analytical tools to
select and combine visual approaches respecting the guidelines proposed for
the visualizations of multivariate networks.
RQ2 – What are the objectives of learning analytics that process min-
ing can help overcome?
Together with domain experts – practitioners in
designing and supervising practical cybersecurity exercises, we formulated
three low-level objectives O1–O3 and three typical post-training questions –
engagement, cheating, and difficulty that can be solved by combining O1–O3
approaches to prove or disprove corresponding hypotheses. We demonstrated
the interactions in the case study of engagement analysis. Also, the results
and lessons learned from preliminary user testing were discussed.
RQ3 – What design principles should guide the development of a process-
driven analytical dashboard?
Our approach is built upon the conceptual
framework for the visual analysis process, with three specific data models
being involved: process graphs, models of temporal changes based on sliding
windows, and clustering models. Design decisions for visual interactions are
backed by the observed properties of process graphs and guidelines formu-
lated for the visualization of multivariate networks. A prototype dashboard
described in the paper will serve as a framework for developing and enhancing
interactive visualizations in cybersecurity learning analytics.
We believe there are several directions for future work that can signif-
icantly strengthen our abilities to investigate practical cybersecurity exer-
cises using human-in-the-loop learning analytics. These research challenges
33
include:
• Other types of cybersecurity games.
As this paper only focused on
CTF games, the utilization of process mining and visual analytics in
other types of games needs to be explored.
In particular, unsuper-
vised training and free cyber defense exercises pose a challenge due to
the variability and complexity of game playthroughs, as described in
Section 1.2.
• Automatic hints. Enhancing the proposed approach with automatic
hints for the analyst might provide an improved analysis experience.
The hints can arise in general uncommon situations, e.g., loops in the
process, a very fast transition between game events, and temporal pat-
terns, which can be discovered using a declarative process mining ap-
proach.
• Categorization of events. The current approach can also be enhanced
with new perspectives.
For example, adding a finer-grained catego-
rization of events to this approach might help the analyst get more
abstraction levels and then finely tackle information complexity.
• Real-time analysis. To enhance situational awareness during the train-
ing, there is a possibility to utilize real-time process mining and visu-
alization approaches. Real-time analysis can help to see the current
status of the trainees. Furthermore, we can also analyze the probabili-
ties of the training success for each trainee.
• User-defined metrics.
Temporal analysis based on a sliding window
can be applied to variable data types, aiming to reflect different be-
havioral aspects than engagement. The generalization of the principles
suggested in this paper and the evaluation of possible metrics is neces-
sary.
• Multi-level abstraction of process graphs. Although the visual complex-
ity reduction techniques shown in Figure 6 had not yet been imple-
mented in the dashboard during the evaluation, one participant identi-
fied statistical overviews above the process graph as potentially highly
valuable. Therefore, replacing traditional graph-based visualizations
with simplified statistical overviews for high-level abstractions could
34
improve drill-down exploration. However, further research is needed to
develop suitable visualization techniques.
References
[1] M. M. Yamin, B. Katt, V. Gkioulos, Cyber ranges and security testbeds:
Scenarios, functions, tools and architecture, Computers & Security 88
(2020) 101636.
[2] M. Macak, R. Oslejsek, B. Buhnova, Applying process discovery to cy-
bersecurity training: an experience report, in: 2022 IEEE European
Symposium on Security and Privacy Workshops (EuroS&PW), IEEE,
2022, pp. 394–402.
[3] N. Gronau, C. M¨uller, R. Korf, Kmdl-capturing, analysing and improv-
ing knowledge-intensive business processes., J. Univers. Comput. Sci.
11 (4) (2005) 452–472.
[4] M. Vidgof, B. Wurm, J. Mendling, The impact of process complex-
ity on process performance:
A study using event log data (2023).
arXiv:2307.06106.
[5] C. G¨unther, Process mining in flexible environments, Phd thesis, Tech-
nische Universiteit Eindhoven (2009). doi:10.6100/IR644335.
[6] M. Ismail, N. T. Madathil, M. Alalawi, S. Alrabaee, M. Al Bataineh,
S. Melhem, D. Mouheb, Cybersecurity activities for education and cur-
riculum design: A survey, Computers in Human Behavior Reports 16
(2024) 100501. doi:10.1016/j.chbr.2024.100501.
[7] G. N. Angafor, I. Yevseyeva, Y. He, Game-based learning: A review of
tabletop exercises for cybersecurity incident response training, Security
and privacy 3 (6) (2020) e126.
[8] J. Vykopal, P. ˇCeleda, V. ˇSv´abensk´y, M. Hofbauer, M. Hor´ak, Research
and practice of delivering tabletop exercises, in: Proceedings of the 29th
Annual ACM Conference on Innovation and Technology in Computer
Science Education (ITiCSE’24) [to appear], New York, NY, USA, 2024.
doi:10.1145/3649217.3653642.
35
[9] V. ˇSv´abensk`y, P. ˇCeleda, J. Vykopal, S. Briˇs´akov´a, Cybersecurity knowl-
edge and skills taught in capture the flag challenges, Computers & Se-
curity 102 (2021) 102154.
[10] F. M. Zennaro, L. Erd˝odi, Modelling penetration testing with rein-
forcement learning using capture-the-flag challenges: Trade-offs between
model-free learning and a priori knowledge, IET Information Security
17 (3) (2023) 441–457.
[11] E. Seker, H. H. Ozbenli, The concept of cyber defence exercises (cdx):
Planning, execution, evaluation, in: 2018 International Conference on
Cyber Security and Protection of Digital Services (Cyber Security),
IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–9.
[12] J. Almroth, T. Gustafsson, Crate exercise control–a cyber defense exer-
cise management and support tool, in: 2020 IEEE European Symposium
on Security and Privacy Workshops (EuroS&PW), IEEE, 2020, pp. 37–
45.
[13] K. Maennel, A. Brilingait˙e, L. Bukauskas, A. Juozapaviˇcius, B. J. Knox,
R. G. Lugo, O. Maennel, G. Majore, S. S¨utterlin, A multidimensional
cyber defense exercise: Emphasis on emotional, social, and cognitive
aspects, SAGE Open 13 (1) (2023) 21582440231156367.
[14] D. R. Michael, S. L. Chen, Serious Games: Games that Educate, Train,
and Inform, Muska & Lipman/Premier-Trade, 2005.
[15] Z. Michalewicz, M. Michalewicz, Puzzle-based Learning, in: Proceedings
of the 2007 AaeE Conference, 2007, pp. 1–8.
[16] E. Russo, M. Ribaudo, A. Orlich, G. Longo, A. Armando, Cyber range
and cyber defense exercises: Gamification meets university students,
in: Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Gamification in
Software Development, Verification, and Validation, 2023, pp. 29–37.
[17] D. Sacha, A. Stoffel, F. Stoffel, B. C. Kwon, G. Ellis, D. A. Keim,
Knowledge generation model for visual analytics, IEEE transactions on
visualization and computer graphics 20 (12) (2014) 1604–1613.
36
[18] C. Nobre, M. Meyer, M. Streit, A. Lex, The state of the art in visualizing
multivariate networks, in: Computer Graphics Forum, Vol. 38, Wiley
Online Library, 2019, pp. 807–832.
[19] M. Meyer, M. Sedlmair, T. Munzner, The four-level nested model revis-
ited: blocks and guidelines, in: Proceedings of the 2012 BELIV Work-
shop: Beyond Time and Errors-Novel Evaluation Methods for Visual-
ization, 2012, pp. 1–6.
[20] C. Vieira, P. Parsons, V. Byrd, Visual learning analytics of educational
data: A systematic literature review and research agenda, Computers
& Education 122 (2018) 119–135.
[21] X. Kui, N. Liu, Q. Liu, J. Liu, X. Zeng, C. Zhang, A survey of visual
analytics techniques for online education, Visual Informatics 6 (4) (2022)
67–77.
[22] M. Xia, R. P. Velumani, Y. Wang, H. Qu, X. Ma, Qlens: Visual an-
alytics of multi-step problem-solving behaviors for improving question
design, IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
27 (2) (2020) 870–880.
[23] S. Tsung, H. Wei, H. Li, Y. Wang, M. Xia, H. Qu, Blocklens: visual
analytics of student coding behaviors in block-based programming envi-
ronments, in: Proceedings of the Ninth ACM Conference on Learning@
Scale, 2022, pp. 299–303.
[24] N.-F. Huang, H.-H. Hsu, S.-C. Chen, C.-A. Lee, Y.-W. Huang, P.-W.
Ou, J.-W. Tzeng, Videomark: A video-based learning analytic technique
for moocs, in: 2017 IEEE 2nd International Conference on Big Data
Analysis (ICBDA), IEEE, 2017, pp. 753–757.
[25] C. Liu, J. Kim, H.-C. Wang, Conceptscape: Collaborative concept map-
ping for video learning, in: Proceedings of the 2018 CHI conference on
human factors in computing systems, 2018, pp. 1–12.
[26] X. Wang, H. Zeng, Y. Wang, A. Wu, Z. Sun, X. Ma, H. Qu, Voicecoach:
Interactive evidence-based training for voice modulation skills in public
speaking, in: Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, 2020, pp. 1–12.
37
[27] R.
Oˇslejˇsek,
V.
Rusˇn´ak,
K.
Doˇckalov´a
Bursk´a,
V.
ˇSv´abensk´y,
J. Vykopal, J. ˇCegan, Conceptual model of visual analytics for hands-on
cybersecurity training, IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Com-
puter Graphics 27 (2021). doi:10.1109/TVCG.2020.2977336.
[28] J. Vykopal, R. Oˇslejˇsek, K. Bursk´a, K. Z´akopˇcanov´a, Timely feedback in
unstructured cybersecurity exercises, in: Proceedings of the 49th ACM
Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2018, pp. 173–
178.
[29] K. D. Bursk´a, V. Rusˇn´ak, R. Oˇslejˇsek, Enhancing situational awareness
for tutors of cybersecurity capture the flag games, in: 2021 25th In-
ternational Conference Information Visualisation (IV), IEEE, 2021, pp.
235–242.
[30] K. D. Bursk´a, V. Rusˇn´ak, R. Oˇslejˇsek, Data-driven insight into the
puzzle-based cybersecurity training, Computers & Graphics 102 (2022)
441–451.
[31] A. Bogar´ın, R. Cerezo, C. Romero, A survey on educational process
mining, Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge
Discovery (2018) 1–17.
[32] P. Mukala, J. Buijs, M. Leemans, W. van der Aalst, Learning analytics
on coursera event data: a process mining approach, in: 5th International
Symposium on Data-Driven Process Discovery and Analysis, 2015, pp.
18–32.
[33] C. Romero, R. Cerezo, A. Bogar´ın, M. S´anchez-Santill´an, Educational
process mining: a tutorial and case study using moodle data sets, Data
mining and learning analytics:
Applications in educational research
(2016) 1–28.
[34] R. Dolak, Using process mining techniques to discover student’s ac-
tivities, navigation paths, and behavior in lms moodle, in: Innovative
Technologies and Learning, 2019, pp. 129–138.
[35] N. Trcka, M. Pechenizkiy, From local patterns to global models: Towards
domain driven educational process mining, in: 2009 Ninth International
Conference on Intelligent Systems Design and Applications, 2009, pp.
1114–1119.
38
[36] S. Anuwatvisit, A. Tungkasthan, W. Premchaiswadi, Bottleneck min-
ing and petri net simulation in education situations, in: 2012 Tenth
International Conference on ICT and Knowledge Engineering, 2012, pp.
244–251.
[37] M. Macak, M. Sepela, Discord achievement system for education gami-
fication, in: EDULEARN24 Proceedings, 16th International Conference
on Education and New Learning Technologies, IATED, 2024.
[38] M. Macak, D. Kruzelova, S. Chren, B. Buhnova, Using process min-
ing for git log analysis of projects in a software development course,
Education and information technologies 26 (5) (2021) 5939–5969.
[39] M. Bannert, P. Reimann, C. Sonnenberg, Process mining techniques for
analysing patterns and strategies in students’ self-regulated learning,
Metacognition and learning (2014) 161–185.
[40] S. Kriglstein, M. Pohl, S. Rinderle-Ma, M. Stallinger, Visual analyt-
ics in process mining: Classification of process mining techniques., in:
EuroVA@ EuroVis, 2016, pp. 43–47.
[41] T. Gschwandtner, Visual analytics meets process mining: challenges
and opportunities, in: Data-Driven Process Discovery and Analysis: 5th
IFIP WG 2.6 International Symposium, SIMPDA 2015, Vienna, Austria,
December 9-11, 2015, Revised Selected Papers 5, Springer, 2017, pp.
142–154.
[42] P. M. Dixit, H. G. Caballero, A. Corvo, B. Hompes, J. C. Buijs, W. M.
van der Aalst, Enabling interactive process analysis with process mining
and visual analytics, in: Special Session on Analysis of Clinical Pro-
cesses, Vol. 6, SCITEPRESS, 2017, pp. 573–584.
[43] Y. Guo, S. Guo, Z. Jin, S. Kaul, D. Gotz, N. Cao, Survey on visual
analysis of event sequence data, IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics 28 (12) (2021) 5091–5112.
[44] J. Ortiz Laguna, A. G. Olaya, D. Borrajo, A dynamic sliding window
approach for activity recognition, in: User Modeling, Adaption and
Personalization: 19th International Conference, UMAP 2011, Girona,
Spain, July 11-15, 2011. Proceedings 19, Springer, 2011, pp. 219–230.
39
[45] M. S. Khan, F. Coenen, D. Reid, R. Patel, L. Archer, A sliding windows
based dual support framework for discovering emerging trends from tem-
poral data, in: Research and Development in Intelligent Systems XXVI:
Incorporating Applications and Innovations in Intelligent Systems XVII,
Springer, 2010, pp. 35–48.
[46] P. D. Talagala, R. J. Hyndman, K. Smith-Miles, S. Kandanaarachchi,
M. A. Munoz, Anomaly detection in streaming nonstationary temporal
data, Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics 29 (1) (2020)
13–27.
[47] A. Dutt, M. A. Ismail, T. Herawan, A systematic review on educational
data mining, Ieee Access 5 (2017) 15991–16005.
[48] T. Le Quy, G. Friege, E. Ntoutsi, A review of clustering models in edu-
cational data science toward fairness-aware learning, Educational Data
Science: Essentials, Approaches, and Tendencies: Proactive Education
based on Empirical Big Data Evidence (2023) 43–94.
[49] H. Wang, Research of spoc online learning behavior analysis based on
rft, in: 2021 IEEE International Conference on Progress in Informatics
and Computing (PIC), IEEE, 2021, pp. 515–518.
[50] M. Khalil, M. Ebner, Clustering patterns of engagement in massive open
online courses (moocs): the use of learning analytics to reveal student
categories, Journal of computing in higher education 29 (2017) 114–132.
[51] V. ˇSv´abensk´y, J. Vykopal, P. ˇCeleda, K. Tk´aˇcik, D. Popoviˇc, Student
assessment in cybersecurity training automated by pattern mining and
clustering, Education and Information Technologies 27 (7) (2022) 9231–
9262.
[52] K. Doˇckalov´a Bursk´a, J. R. Mlyn´arik, R. Oˇslejˇsek, Using data clustering
to reveal trainees’ behavior in cybersecurity education, Education and
Information Technologies (2024) 1–27.
[53] R. Oˇslejˇsek, M. Macak, K. Doˇckalov´a Bursk´a, Hands-on cybersecu-
rity training behavior data for process mining, Data in Brief 52 (2024)
109956.
40
[54] M. Mac´ak, R. Oslejsek, B. Buhnova, Process mining analysis of puzzle-
based cybersecurity training, in: Proceedings of the 27th ACM Confer-
ence on Innovation and Technology in Computer Science Education Vol.
1, 2022, pp. 449–455.
[55] R. Chudovsk´y, Analyzing loss of motivation in cybersecurity train-
ings, Master’s thesis, Masaryk University, Faculty of Informatics, Brno,
https://is.muni.cz/th/fbxyn/ (2023).
[56] J. Vykopal,
R. Oˇslejˇsek,
P.
ˇCeleda,
M. Vizv´ary,
D. Tovarˇn´ak,
Kypo cyber range:
Design and use cases,
in:
Proceedings of
the 12th International Conference on Software Technologies - Vol-
ume 1:
ICSOFT, SciTePress, Madrid, Spain, 2017, pp. 310–321.
doi:10.5220/0006428203100321.
[57] T. Kadav´y, Time-oriented process analysis of cybersecurity exercises,
Master’s thesis, Masaryk University, Faculty of Informatics, Brno,
https://is.muni.cz/th/cfaux/ (2025).
[58] V. Mal´y, Process-oriented visual analysis of cybersecurity exercises,
Master’s thesis, Masaryk University, Faculty of Informatics, Brno,
https://is.muni.cz/th/f1405/ (2025).
41
