Title: Cybersecurity Cost of Quality: Managing the Costs of Cybersecurity Risk Management
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1707.02653v1
--------------------------------------------------

Cybersecurity Cost of Quality: Managing the Costs of 
Cybersecurity Risk Management 
 
Nicole Radziwill and Morgan Benton 
 
Abstract 
There is no standard yet for measuring and controlling the costs associated with implementing
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cybersecurity programs. To advance research and practice towards this end, we develop a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
mapping using the well-known concept of quality costs and the Framework Core within the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cybersecurity Framework produced by the National Institute of Standards and Technology
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(NIST) in response to the Cybersecurity Enhancement Act of 2014. This mapping can be easily
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
adopted by organizations that are already using the NIST CSF for cybersecurity risk
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
management to plan, manage, and continually improve cybersecurity operations. If an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
organization is not using the NIST CSF, this mapping may still be useful for linking elements in
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accounting systems that are associated with cybersecurity operations and risk management to a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
quality cost model. 
 
Keywords​: cyberquality, cybersecurity, quality costs, cybersecurity cost of quality (CCoQ),
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
standards, risk management 
 
 
Introduction 
In 1995, The American Society for Quality (ASQ) presented an article in its flagship publication
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Quality Progress about “cyberquality” - defined as ​information about quality you can find on
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the internet​. Because technology has progressed by orders of magnitude over the past two
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
decades, this use of the term now seems overly simplistic! There is a new “cyberquality” which is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
readily apparent in the ISO 9001 definition of quality: “the totality of characteristics of an entity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that bear upon its ability to satisfy stated and implied needs.” If that entity is a networked,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
connected device or system, then the stated and implied needs of customers and other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stakeholders cannot be met without cybersecurity.  
 
With the growth and evolution of the Internet of Things (IoT), people, vehicles, homes, city
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
infrastructures, and industrial infrastructures are becoming more tightly interconnected,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
requiring new strategies for designing quality into systems. (Radziwill & Benton, 2017) At the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
same time, we will need more robust metrics for controlling and continuously reducing the costs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
associated with both quality assurance and cybersecurity risk management. Cyberquality will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
become the net effect of simultaneously meeting quality goals and cybersecurity goals, so it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
makes sense to explore cost metrics that are linked to both domains. 
 
As the number of networked components increases, so does the potential for catastrophic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
impact. Over the last several years, reports of software deployed over the Internet designed to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
destroy infrastructure have increased - and infrastructure impacts all organizations. Such “cyber
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
attacks” typically occur when software is deployed, usually (but not always) via a network, onto
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
other systems - with the intent of destroying physical or information assets. These attacks occur
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
via a number of attack vectors, and not all are technological: systems can also be breached
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
maliciously or accidentally by insiders, and “social engineering” can be used to trick trusted
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
users into giving up their passwords or answers to security questions. With nearly 26 million IoT
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
endpoints expected by the year 2019, the pace and intensity of intrusions will increase.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Trautman & Ormerod, 2017) 
 
Because “repeated cyber intrusions into critical infrastructure [demonstrated] the need,” in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2013, President Obama issued Executive Order 13636 (EO 13636) directing the National
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) to create a “framework to reduce cyber risks to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
critical infrastructure” (Obama, 2013, p. 11739). In the context of this order, “critical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
infrastructure” refers to: 
 
“… systems and assets, whether physical or virtual, so vital to the United States
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that the incapacity or destruction of such systems and assets would have a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
debilitating impact on security, national economic security, national public
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
health or safety, or any combination of those matters​.” (Obama, 2013, p. 11739) 
 
This paper explores the intersection of the NIST Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) and quality
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cost models, with the goal of making it easier for organizations to study, monitor, and control
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the costs associated with cybersecurity. Although the NIST CSF was intended to support the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
critical infrastructure systems that most production systems rely on, it is broadly applicable for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
cybersecurity risk management at organizations of all sizes. 
 
 
Background 
There are four topics that inform the mapping that serves as the primary contribution of this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
article. They are: cybersecurity economics, the NIST CSF, the concept of quality costs, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
models that describe how quality costs are typically distributed in organizations. These topics
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are covered in order in the following sections. 
 
Cybersecurity Economics 
Protecting the confidentiality, integrity, and accessibility of information takes time, effort, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
money. Research on the costs of cybersecurity date back nearly two decades, mostly focused on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
two themes: budgeting appropriately, and determining the economic impacts of cyber attacks.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For example, Campbell et al. (2003) examined the economic implications of cybersecurity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
breaches using stock market performance as an indicator. By creating models that estimated the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stock valuation in the absence of an attack, and comparing them to stock performance after
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
attacks, they found detectable dips in stock price only following attacks that involved
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unauthorized access to confidential data. Attacks that did not appear to have direct impact on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the customer were not associated with this same pattern. 
 
Böhme (2010) performed a comprehensive review of the literature to examine relationships
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between the costs of information security and benefits realized from making those expenditures.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This author recognized that there is a baseline level of security provided by preventive efforts for
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
risk mitigation, along with testing those elements. At some point, the costs level out, so that to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
provide robust mitigation of external breaches, it would cost much more than many
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
organizations are willing to invest. There is “art and science” associated with identifying the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ideal balance, so the author recommends using ​Return on Security Investment (ROSI)​, which is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
the benefits less the costs, divided by the costs, and converted into a percentage. 
 
Figure 1.​ Cost/benefit relationships in information security. From Böhme (2010). 
 
Brecht & Nowey (2013) reviewed all techniques that had been applied to assessing costs of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information
security,
and
categorized
them
into
four
areas:
cost/benefit
analysis of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cybersecurity (including research on optimal investment), cost of cybercrime, surveys
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
summarizing the actual costs of cybersecurity management, and quality cost models. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
category on quality cost models was the only one that did not cite research directly related to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
domain of information security, but rather seemed to suggest that applying quality cost models
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would be a logical next step. They suggest that effective cost models in cybersecurity will address
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the costs of purchasing, operating, implementing, and depreciating tools and systems; costs of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
operating those tools and systems; costs of consulting or other labor; and cost of risk or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
uncertainty.  
 
Gordon et al. (2011) examined the impact of cyber attacks on stock returns, and found that when
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
grouped according to the three tenets of information security (confidentiality, integrity, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
availability), breaches that impacted availability have the greatest negative effects. Gordon et al.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2015) extended the Gordon-Loeb (GL) Model for determining the optimal level of investment in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cyber security activities to account for externalities such as botnets (global networks of infected
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
computers that can be used to launch denial of service attacks, or compromised individuals that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
engage in psychological warfare on behalf of a nation-state, terrorist, or activist group). With
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
externalities considered, they found that most organizations underinvest in cybersecurity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
operations, and affirm that “governments around the world are justified in considering
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regulations and/or incentives designed to increase cyber security investments by private sector
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
firms.” 
 
Moore et al. (2016) interviewed 40 executives with primary responsibility for cybersecurity,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
selected from Chief Information Security Officers (CISOs) and Chief Information Officers (CIOs)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drawn mainly from healthcare, financial, retail, and government. 31 of the respondents were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from the US, and 9 were international. The questions, which were exploratory in nature, focused
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on how threats were identified, prioritized, and managed, and the decision-making process for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cybersecurity investments at the respondents’ organizations. They noticed few differences
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between the industry sectors, and remarked that finding qualified cybersecurity professionals
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
seemed, in general, to be much more challenging that finding funding to support cybersecurity.  
 
These authors also drew a conclusion that is directly relevant to the need for the present study.
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
They report that in practice, “there is much less focus on the actual results of cybersecurity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
efforts, such as examining costs and the effectiveness of controls. This may be due to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
widespread use of frameworks [such as the NIST Cybersecurity Framework] which promote the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
use of process measures.” A mechanism for examining costs that is aligned with a process-based
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
framework thus may have rather broad applicability. 
 
 
The NIST Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) 
The Cybersecurity Enhancement Act of 2014 further clarified the intent of EO 13636, directing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) to “facilitate and support the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
development of a voluntary, consensus-based, industry-led set of standards, guidelines, best
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
practices, methodologies, procedures, and processes to cost-effectively reduce cyber risks to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
critical infrastructure.” (S.1353, 2014)
Responding to this charge, NIST published three
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
requests for information (RFI) to learn how organizations were managing cybersecurity risk,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and to identify best practices. NIST published its first version of the CSF, which captured and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
organized the results, in February 2014. 
 
The NIST CSF provides proactive risk-based guidance and a common, technology-neutral
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
language for cybersecurity management. It complements an organization’s cybersecurity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
operations, can be used to launch a cybersecurity program where none exists, and can be used in
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conjunction with other standards and guidance, including ISO 31000 (Risk Management), the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ISO/IEC 27000 series (Information Security Management Systems), and NIST Special
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Publication (SP) 800-39 (Managing Information Security Risk). Although designed with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
protection
of
critical
infrastructure
(power generation, water/wastewater management,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transportation systems) in mind, it can be applied to manage cybersecurity risk in any
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
environment. The framework is voluntary, not prescriptive, and can be used with many different
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
risk management tools, techniques, and practices. 
 
NIST CSF is a toolkit of 98 “pointers” to guidance provided by five standards or collections of
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
best practices. The pointers, called “subcategories,” are classified into five functions: ​Identify​,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Protect​, ​Detect​, ​Respond​, and ​Recover​. The five functions are further broken down by tasks
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in cybersecurity risk management, which are referred to as categories. The table of functions,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
categories, subcategories, and informative references is called the Framework Core. 
 
Figure 2 shows how the Framework Core begins. The first category, “Asset Management,”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contains 6 of the 98 total subcategories (“pointers” to the standards and guidance in the far right
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
column). Each subcategory represents an objective, task, or group of tasks that must be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
performed to advance cybersecurity risk management. For example, ID.AM-1 is “Physical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
devices and systems within the organization are inventoried.” This specifies ​what ​must be done,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not ​how ​it should be done. The “Informative References” column on the far provide directs the
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIST CSF user to applicable areas of standards and guidance that could be considered as the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
organization is deciding ​how​ to inventory devices and systems. 
 
 
Figure 2.​ The first category (Asset Management) in the Framework Core. (NIST, 2014b) 
 
There are five standards/guidance that are leveraged by the NIST CSF. Together, they provide a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
comprehensive platform for unified cybersecurity operations, risk management, and strategic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
management. These are: 
●
Center for Cybersecurity Top 20 Critical Security Controls (CCS CSC) - a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
standard for computer security that outlines 20 key actions that can be taken to block or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mitigate the effects of known attacks. (CIS, 2016) The 20 controls have been mapped to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the five NIST CSF functions. (SANS, 2016) 
●
COBIT 5 (ISACA, 2012) - a business framework for management and governance of
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information security. Used to translate business and customer-focused needs into
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
actionable operations objectives. 
●
ISA/IEC
62443-2-1:2009/ISA
62443-3-3:2013 (ISA/IEC, 2013) - standards
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
specifically for the security of industrial control systems, formerly known as ISA99. 
●
ISO/IEC 27001:2013 (ISO/IEC, 2016) - standards describing best practices for the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
management of information security, and also providing a path towards compliance with
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
HIPAA, Sarbanes-Oxley, and Payment Card Industry (PCI) regulations. 
●
NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-53 Rev. 4 (NIST, 2013) - security controls and
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
assessment procedures organized into 18 groups, each with its own specific function (e.g.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
access control, contingency planning, incident response) 
 
An alternative view of the Framework Core is also available. (NIST, 2014c) Shown in Figure 3,
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this mapping provides the same information as in the Framework Core, but no descriptions are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
provided and there is a separate column for each reference. This supplement is useful for
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
organizations that already have institutional capabilities aligned with one or more of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
references, and do not plan to consult every one. The coverage of subcategories is also more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
clear in the alternative mapping of the Framework Core than it is in NIST (2014b). 
 
 
Figure 3.​ Alternative mapping of the Framework Core. (NIST, 2014c) 
 
 
The NIST CSF links strategic planning, quality management, risk management (e.g. using ISO
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31000), and cybersecurity operations. Because it fills the gap between cybersecurity operations
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
and the quality/risk planning efforts that are usually only done at the executive and business
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
process levels, it plays a central role in other tools and frameworks. This includes the Baldrige
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cybersecurity Excellence Builder (BCEB), and the widely-applied Cybersecurity Capability
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Maturity Model (C2M2) family for domain-specific assessment and continuous improvement of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cybersecurity risk management. C2M2 guidance covers electric power generation and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
distribution, oil/natural gas, and dams. (Miron & Muita, 2014) 
 
 
Figure 4. NIST CSF complements cybersecurity operations, risk management, and quality
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
management. [Adapted from Fig. 2 in NIST (2014).] 
 
 
Quality Cost Models 
Quality is often promoted as a key element for achieving and maintaining competitiveness, and
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cost of quality metrics can be used to facilitate quality improvements that translate into cost
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reductions. (Campanella, 1999a) This concept has been applied to manufacturing tangible
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
products, software-intensive products and systems, and components in the Internet of Things
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(IoT), and can be applied in both development and operations contexts. (Radziwill, 2006)  
 
There are many variations on quality cost models (sometimes referred to as “cost of poor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
quality”) in the literature. All models address the cost of conforming to requirements, and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cost of failing to conform to those requirements; some even include opportunity costs (the costs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
associated with not taking a certain action). (Schiffauerova & Thomson, 2006) The most
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
commonly used models establish that the ​cost of conformance is the sum of the cost to ​prevent
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
issues and the cost to ​test ​them (appraisal); the ​cost of nonconformance​, also sometimes called
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cost of rework​, is the ​cost of internal failures added to the ​cost of external failures - those
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
problems that are recognized, or directly experienced by, customers and other stakeholders.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Internal and external failures are distinguished based on ​who is impacted. In many papers,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
these are referred to as Prevention-Appraisal-Failure (PAF) models. To summarize: 
 
Cost of Quality (CoQ) = Cost of Conformance + Cost of Nonconformance 
 
Cost of Conformance = Cost of Prevention + Cost of Appraisal 
 
Cost of Nonconformance = Cost of Internal Failures + Cost of External Failures 
 
Cost of Quality = Cost of Prevention + Cost of Appraisal + Cost of Internal Failures + Cost of 
External Failures 
 
 
Thomas (2009) proposed a “cost of security” model based on the Loss Distribution Approach
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(LDA) that mentions costs of quality, but does not build on its models. Brecht & Nowey (2013)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
and Böhme (2010), in their studies of costs in information security, both identified that quality
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cost models may be appropriate for cybersecurity. Böhme (2010), however, did not mention
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
quality costs directly, but identified the quality cost categories in his articulation of cost/benefit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relationships in information security. In Figure 5, “protection measures” are prevention,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“qualitative evaluation” and “penetration testing” are appraisal, “incident counts” could be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
categorized by whether the incidents had internal or external impact, and “direct loss” refers to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
external failures. 
 
Figure 5. Quality costs within cost/benefit relationships in information security. Adapted from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Böhme (2010). 
 
 
Although similar to the production of tangible products in many ways, the development of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
software is an economically unique activity. Table 1 identifies some of the differences.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cybersecurity shares many of the same characteristics as software-intensive production: in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
particular, specifications change extremely rapidly, and defects are related to human
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understanding of the current state of threats, vulnerabilities, and capabilities.  
 
Product Manufacturing 
Software-Intensive Production 
Physical product 
Intellectual product 
Output is subject to physical laws and constraints 
Output is subject to human constraints and logical 
constraints 
Specification is stable 
Specification is constantly changing 
Product defects more often the result of faulty 
materials, machines, or inspection 
Product defects more often the result of human 
mistakes and misunderstandings, or not 
anticipating ways in which product will be used 
Effectively executing processes to satisfy 
requirements is key 
Understanding requirements is key 
Marginal cost associated with producing more units 
of a product 
No marginal cost for producing additional product 
Table 1.​ Differences between product manufacturing and software-intensive production. 
 
Because of these similarities, and also because so many security controls revolve around
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
software or the software development lifecycle (e.g. CCS CSC 2) the PAF model for quality costs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can be extended to include development activities. In the context of cybersecurity operations,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the assumption is made that any of the items that contribute to cost of quality also contribute to
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cost of cybersecurity. As a result, an executive-level dashboard might show two values for cost of
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
quality: one specific to activities that enhance cybersecurity, and one for other quality-related
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
costs that are not specific to cybersecurity.  
 
Figure 6 shows how costs of quality are related to total development costs. If an organization
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
measures cybersecurity cost of quality (CCoQ) in addition to ordinary cost of quality, there will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be an additional branch off total development costs. Even though there is only one block in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6 that expressly calls out cost of labor, it is likely that many of the blocks will be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dominated
by
labor
costs
because
of
the
unique
economic
aspects
of
developing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
software-intensive systems discussed earlier. 
 
 
 
Figure 6.​ Quality costs applied to software development. (From Radziwill, 2006) 
 
 
Quality Costs in Practice 
This model provides great flexibility for organizations that want to examine opportunities for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
improving resource utilization from several perspectives at once: 
 
Total Development Costs = Cybersecurity Cost of Quality (CCoQ) +  
Cost of Quality (CoQ) + Cost of Development 
 
There are many different ways to use this data. Total development costs, or any of its three
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
components, can be tracked longitudinally on a monthly or quarterly basis. Only cybersecurity
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
cost of quality can be tracked, and this can still add value. Total cost of quality, ordinary cost of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
quality, and/or cybersecurity cost of quality can be expressed as a percentage of total
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
development costs  and tracked over time.  
 
For best results, however, data should be collected at the lowest levels of the hierarchy
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(appraisal, prevention, internal failures, and external failures in cost of quality; cost of labor,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cost of materials and contracts in cost of development). With data organized this way, any of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
intermediary categories can also be tracked (e.g. cost of nonconformance vs. cost of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conformance, or cost of rework). Important patterns that will help managers facilitate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
improvements to cybersecurity programs can be found in any of these elements, and so some
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experimentation will be required. 
 
Examples of cybersecurity-related activities that fall into each of the quality cost categories is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
shown in Table 2. The example activities were drawn from the Center for Internet Security’s Top
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 Critical Security Controls, which provides guidance in the NIST CSF. This list is meant to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
illustrative, not exhaustive. 
 
Quality Cost Category 
Cybersecurity Activities​ (Selected from CIS, 2013) 
Prevention 
CSC 1: Inventory of authorized and unauthorized devices 
CSC 2: Inventory of authorized and unauthorized software 
CSC 3: Secure configurations for Hardware and software 
CSC 5: Control use of administrative privileges 
CSC 7: Email & web browser protections 
CSC 8: Malware defenses 
CSC 9: Limit & control ports, protocols, services 
CSC 11: Secure configurations for network devices 
CSC 12: Boundary defense 
CSC 13: Data protection 
CSC 14: Controlled access based on need-to-know 
CSC 15: Wireless access control 
CSC 16: Account control & monitoring 
CSC 18: Application software security 
Appraisal 
CSC 3: Test secure configurations for hardware and software 
CSC 4: Continuous vulnerability assessment & remediation 
CSC 5: Test use of administrative privileges 
CSC 6: Maintenance & monitoring of audit logs 
CSC 7: Test email & web browser protections 
CSC 8: Test malware defenses 
CSC 9: Test limiting of ports, protocols, services 
CSC 10: Test data recovery  
CSC 11: Test secure configurations for network devices 
CSC 12: Test boundary defense 
CSC 13: Test data protection 
CSC 15: Test wireless access control 
CSC 17: Security skills assessment 
CSC 18: Test application software security 
CSC 20: Penetration tests & red team exercises 
Internal Failures 
CSC 4: Continuous vulnerability assessment & remediation - respond to 
internal breaches and notifications from agencies that monitor vulnerabilities 
CSC 5: Respond to internal misuse of administrative privileges 
CSC 10: Respond to internal data recovery issues 
CSC 12: Respond to internal boundary defense issues 
CSC 15: Respond to internal issues that result from wireless access control 
CSC 19: Internal incident response 
External Failures 
CSC 4: Continuous vulnerability assessment & remediation - respond to 
external breaches 
CSC 10: Respond to data recovery issues due to external breaches 
CSC 19: External incident response 
Table 2.​ Examples of cybersecurity activities in quality cost categories. 
 
 
Quality Costs and Organizational Maturity 
There has been little work relating the relative levels of quality costs in each category to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
organizational maturity, and no work to date relating cybersecurity costs of quality to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
maturity of an organization’s cybersecurity risk management. Several very limited papers exist
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that show patterns in quality costs for one organization, but these are of limited value because
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
generalizability is low. Of the two models that do exist in the literature (Knox, 1993; Sower et al.,
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2007), both indicate nearly the same results: that as an organization matures, total quality costs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
decrease, but cost of prevention increases to make this possible.  
 
This is illustrated in Figure 7 from the paper by Knox (1993), who explored quality costs in
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relation to the maturity of software development processes only. Both appraisal costs and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prevention costs follow a similar pattern as well: they peak when an organization has systematic,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
repeatable processes and regular, effective training, but then decrease as feedback from learning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and integration becomes stronger. 
  
 
Figure 7. Quality costs classified by organizational maturity (CMM 1=low, CMM 5=high). From
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Knox (1993) 
 
The value of cybersecurity cost of quality will increase as studies are performed to link measured
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
costs from organizations in different industries to maturity levels. Most likely, this maturity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would be assessed using tools like the three levels of the Cybersecurity Capability Maturity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Model (C2M2) or the implementation tiers of the Baldrige Cybersecurity Excellence Builder
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(BCEB), both of which are designed to work well with the NIST CSF. Because the BCEB was not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
specifically designed to assess maturity, newly proposed structures may be required.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Almuhammadi & Alsaleh, 2017) 
 
Mapping of NIST CSF to Quality Costs 
The primary contribution of this paper is a mapping of the 98 subcategories in the NIST
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) to the four main quality cost categories. By categorizing the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elements of the NIST CSF at this level, organizations that use the CSF or a similar model can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
more easily adopt quality costs as a metric. 
 
Methodology 
The mapping was produced using a consensus process with two observers (the authors).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Independently, each observer classified the 98 NIST CSF subcategories into the four quality cost
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
categories. Multiple classifications were allowed. To distinguish appraisal activities from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prevention in the NIST CSF, keywords like “audit,” “assess,” and “verify” were used. To
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
distinguish between appraisal and failures, the likelihood of the appraisal to be ordinary (that is,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to ​not detect a failure) was considered. To distinguish between internal failures and external
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
failures, the likelihood of information about a breach reaching a non-insider audience was
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
considered. 
 
Interrater reliability was assessed using Cohen’s kappa, with the guideline outlined by Landis
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and Koch (1977), where the strength of the kappa coefficients =0.01-0.20 slight; 0.21-0.40 fair;
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.41-0.60 moderate; 0.61-0.80 substantial; 0.81-1.00 almost perfect.
Because there were so
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
many subcategories in the NIST CSF that map to both internal and external failures, a fifth
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
category was added for the kappa calculation to reflect this combination. For elements in which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
one rater marked one quality cost category, and the other rater marked that category plus an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
additional category, one agreement mark was given for the category in agreement, and one
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
disagreement mark to reflect the disagreement. As a result, 106 ratings were used to compute a
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
kappa of 0.64, indicating substantial agreement. Of the five categories that were assessed for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
agreement, the strongest agreements were in prevention and the elements that combined
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
internal failures and external failures. The least agreement was for classifications into the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
internal failures category. 
 
Although a kappa of 0.64 suggests substantial agreement, the next step involved discussing
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
classifications where there was disagreement to determine how a consensus recommendation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
could be achieved. There were 23 elements that required consensus determination; 7 were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
resolved easily, and 16 required more extensive discussion. The final mapping is shown in Table
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
3 with annotations. The analysis indicates that greater resolution is needed in the accounting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system to accommodate for quality costs associated with several of the NIST CSF subcategories,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
including: 
 
●
PR.IP-4: Backups of information are conducted, maintained, and tested periodically:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conducting backups (Prevention) should be accounted for separately from testing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
backup processes (Appraisal) to see if they are functioning as anticipated. 
●
PR.PT-1: Audit/log records are determined, documented, implemented, and reviewed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in accordance with policy: Auditing and verification (Appraisal) should be tracked
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
separately from developing processes for logs (Prevention). 
●
RS.RP-1,
RS.CO-2
through
RS.CO-5,
RS.AN-3,
RS.AM-4,
RS.MI-1 and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RS.MI-2 need to be accounted for by organizations in more detail, depending upon
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
whether the work was associated with an internal or external failure.  
●
RS.MI-3: Newly identified vulnerabilities are mitigated or documented as accepted
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
risks. This item is complex, encompasses many activities, and may even need to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
revisited in the next update of the NIST CSF. When newly identified vulnerabilities are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
identified, that is an appraisal activity, but when steps are taken to prevent breaches
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
before they occur, that is prevention. Furthermore, the identification of the vulnerability
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
may take place in the context of responding to an internal failure or an external failure. 
 
In addition, care should be taken when charging any activities to the subcategories in the Detect
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(DE) function. Detection occurs prior to the determination of a breach, and does not depend
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
upon the audience that is impacted by that breach. Costs associated with the outcomes of these
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
detections should be accounted for by subcategories in the Respond (RS) and Recover (RC)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
functions. 
 
[INCLUDE SPREADSHEET on “FINAL MAPPING” tab AT 
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1t6_1DLJHJqzA7zB7DM1GYEo7I
Mm_JVi4zfg-aQJbF7A/edit?usp=sharing​  AS TABLE 3]  
Table 3. ​Mapping of the NIST CSF to the four quality cost categories. 
 
 
 
Application 
Using the mapping in Table 3, any work accounting system (such as an organizational Work
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Breakdown Structure or WBS) that is aligned with the NIST CSF can be adjusted to easily report
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cybersecurity cost of quality. The only change that may be required is to split some elements of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
the NIST CSF into two so that the appropriate quality cost categories can be assessed.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternatively, if this is not feasible, an organization can create one category called “rework” in
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which all costs related to recovery from internal and external failures are grouped. Cost of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rework may be just as useful a metric, particularly for organizations where a process approach
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
and cybersecurity risk management are not as mature. 
 
The organization can present this data as bar charts or Pareto charts, or can track the evolution
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of these values over time on segmented bar charts or in time series. Trends should be examined
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and discussed by staff and those with decision-making authority to identify opportunities for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
improvement. All values should be considered with respect to the maturity of the organization,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in terms of quality management, risk management, and cybersecurity management. Most
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
importantly, all organizations will require a period of adjustment and calibration when adopting
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a quality cost approach to help continually improve cybersecurity. 
 
 
Discussion & Conclusions 
This article presented a mapping of the 98 subcategories in the Framework Core of the NIST
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cybersecurity Framework to the four categories of quality costs (prevention, appraisal, internal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
failure, and external failure). The value of reporting costs of cybersecurity in terms of quality
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
costs lies less in the levels themselves, and more in how the values relate to one another, change
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
over time, and change in response to changes in strategy, organization, or cybersecurity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investments. The primary limitation of this study is that the practical applicability of the model
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can only be assessed through future work on a broad scale: implementation at different
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
organizations, case studies, and empirical research. 
 
Based on this exercise, it became apparent that the NIST CSF does not distinguish between
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
internal and external failures, and this is critical for managing the costs of cybersecurity - unless
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
an organization chooses a simpler quality cost model, and groups internal and external failures
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to track cost of rework. Furthermore, there are a few subcategories in the NIST CSF that should
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be segmented in work accounting systems to reflect whether those tasks are being performed as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
preventive measures, or to test and appraise preventive measures. Organizations may also wish
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to customize the mapping to better align with their unique systems, structures, and work
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
processes. 
 
Using cybersecurity cost of quality, organizations can answer questions like: 
●
Is there enough emphasis on prevention?​ Typically, unless an organization’s 
process maturity is high, this category will be associated with the greatest costs. If costs 
of prevention do not occupy the greatest proportion of quality costs, and  
●
Is there too much or too little time being spent on appraisal (testing)?​ If too 
little time is spent on appraisal activities, the cost of rework will be high. An excessively 
low cost of rework coupled with a high cost of conformance suggests that too much time 
is being spent on appraisal. 
●
Is testing aggressive enough that it is triggering internal failures, or is the 
cost of internal failures small or nonexistent?​ This is an indication that appraisal 
efforts should be made more rigorous. 
 
Key questions to be answered in future research include: 
●
What are the theoretical and empirical relationships between the amount spent on 
quality cost categories (Prevention Appraisal, Internal Failure, External Failure) and the 
amounts spent on each function in the Framework Core (Identify, Protect, Detect, 
Respond, Recover)? 
●
Does the distribution of cybersecurity costs of quality change in a systematic way as an 
organization’s cybersecurity risk management system matures? 
●
Does the distribution of cybersecurity costs of quality change in a systematic way as an 
organization’s software lifecycle management matures? 
●
Do the costs of external failures increase proportionally as the attack surface expands? 
●
Are the costs of external failures similar for all organizations? Live benchmarking could 
help organizations identify whether they are being targeted for attacks. 
 
Cost of quality is a time-tested and well documented model for identifying and assessing
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
opportunities for improvement that will result in cost savings. By extending this model to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cybersecurity risk management using a framework that is well known and widely applied, future
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
empirical research that can provide cost benchmarks and additional methods for anomaly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
detection is enabled. 
 
 
References 
 
Almuhammadi, S., & Alsaleh, M. (2017). Information Security Maturity Model for NIST 
Cybersecurity Framework. Computer Science & Information Technology, 51. 
 
Böhme, R. (2010, November). Security Metrics and Security Investment Models. In IWSEC (pp.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10-24). 
 
Brecht, M., & Nowey, T. (2013). A closer look at information security costs. In The Economics of
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Information Security and Privacy (pp. 3-24). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 
 
Campanella, J. (1999a, January). Principles of quality costs: Principles, implementation, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
use. In ASQ World Conference on Quality and Improvement Proceedings (p. 507). American
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Society for Quality. 
 
Campanella, J. (1999). Quality Costs: Principles and Implementation and Use, 3rd Ed.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Milwaukee, WI: Quality Press. 
 
Campbell, K., Gordon, L. A., Loeb, M. P., & Zhou, L. (2003). The economic cost of publicly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
announced information security breaches: empirical evidence from the stock market. Journal of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Computer Security, 11(3), 431-448. 
 
Center for Internet Security (CIS) (2013). Center for Cybersecurity Top 20 Critical Security
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Controls (CCS CSC). Available from ​https://www.cisecurity.org/controls/  
 
Clauson, J. (1995). Cyberquality: Quality resources on the Internet. Quality Progress, 28(1), 45. 
 
Farwell, J. P., & Rohozinski, R. (2011). Stuxnet and the future of cyber war. ​Survival​, 53(1),
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23-40. 
 
Gordon, L. A., Loeb, M. P., & Zhou, L. (2011). The impact of information security breaches: Has
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
there been a downward shift in costs?. Journal of Computer Security, 19(1), 33-56. 
 
Gordon, L.A., Loeb, M.P., Lucyshyn, W. and Zhou, L. (2015). Externalities and the Magnitude of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cyber Security Underinvestment by Private Sector Firms: A Modification of the Gordon-Loeb
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Model. ​Journal of Information Security​, 6, 24-30. ​http://dx.doi.org/10.4236/jis.2015.61003  
 
Information Systems Audit and Control Association (ISACA) (2012). COBIT 5 (Control
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Objectives for Information and Related Technologies). (ISACA Standard No. COBIT 5).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Available from ​http://www.isaca.org/COBIT/Pages/default.aspx  
International Society of Automation (ISA)/International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2013). Security for industrial automation and control systems (ISA Standard No. 62443).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Available from ​https://www.isa.org/isa99/  
 
International
Organization
for
Standardization
(ISO)/International
Electrotechnical
 
 
 
 
 
 
Commission (IEC). (2016). Information security management (ISO/IEC Standard No. 27001).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Retrieved from ​https://www.iso.org/isoiec-27001-information-security.html  
 
Johnson -- Cybersecurity: Protecting Critical Infrastructures from Cyber Attack -- Chapter 6
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=DHR3CAAAQBAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PA255&dq=%
22cost+of+cybersecurity%22&ots=LSGNjJkKvW&sig=2DqIoX8H9uZobXDF31MOd-jktAs#v=o
nepage&q=%22cost%20of%20cybersecurity%22&f=false  
 
Knox, S. T. (1993). Modeling the cost of software quality. Digital Technical Journal, 5, 9-9. 
 
Landis, J. R., & Koch, G. G. (1977). The measurement of observer agreement for categorical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
data.  Biometrics, 33, 159-174. 
 
Liang, G., Weller, S. R., Zhao, J., Luo, F., & Dong, Z. Y. (2016). The 2015 Ukraine blackout:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Implications for false data injection attacks. ​IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, ​32(4), pp.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3317-18. 
 
Miron, W., & Muita, K. (2014). Cybersecurity capability maturity models for providers of critical
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
infrastructure. Technology Innovation Management Review, 4(10). 
 
Moore, T., Dynes, S., & Chang, F. R. (2016). Identifying how firms manage cybersecurity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investment. University of California, Berkeley. 
 
National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) (2013). NIST Special Publication (SP)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
800-53 Rev. 4: NIST Special Publication 800-53 Revision 4, Security and Privacy Controls for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Federal Information Systems and Organizations. NIST, April 2013 (incl. updates from January
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15, 2014). 
 
National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) (2014a). Framework for improving 
critical infrastructure cybersecurity, Version 1.0. Retrieved from 
https://ws680.nist.gov/publication/get_pdf.cfm?pub_id=915385  
 
National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) (2014b). Framework Core. Retrieved
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from ​https://www2.nist.gov/file/270221 
 
National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) (2014c). Alternative view of Framework
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Core. Retrieved from ​https://www2.nist.gov/file/270226 
 
Obama, B. (2013, Feb 12). Executive Order #13636–Improving Critical Infrastructure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cybersecurity. ​Federal Register​, 78(33), 11739. 
 
Radziwill, N. M. (2006). Cost of Quality (CoQ) metrics for telescope operations and project 
management. In Proc. of SPIE Vol (Vol. 6271, pp. 627104-1). 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1117/12.669399  
 
Radziwill, N. M. & Benton, M. C., 2017: Design for X (DfX) in the Internet of Things (IoT). 
Journal of Quality Management Systems, Applied Engineering, & Technology Management 
(JoQAT). ​Vol. 1. 
 
S.1353, 113th Cong. (2014). Cybersecurity Enhancement Act of 2014. (enacted). Retrieved from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://www.congress.gov/bill/113th-congress/senate-bill/1353/text​.  
 
Schiffauerova, A., & Thomson, V. (2006). Managing cost of quality: insight into industry
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
practice. The TQM Magazine, 18(5), 542-550. 
 
Sower, V. E., Quarles, R., & Broussard, E. (2007). Cost of quality usage and its relationship to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
quality system maturity. International Journal of Quality & Reliability Management, 24(2),
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
121-140. 
 
SysAdmin, Audit, Network, and Security Institute. (SANS) (2016). Critical security controls v. 
6.0. Retrieved from 
https://www.sans.org/media/critical-security-controls/critical-controls-poster-2016.pdf  
 
Thomas, R. C. (2009, April). Total cost of security: a method for managing risks and incentives
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
across the extended enterprise. In Proceedings of the 5th Annual Workshop on Cyber Security
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and information intelligence Research: Cyber Security and information intelligence Challenges
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and Strategies (p. 61). ACM. 
 
Trautman, L. J., & Ormerod, P. C. (2017). Industrial Cyber Vulnerabilities: Lessons from Stuxnet
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and the Internet of Things. Available at SSRN: ​https://ssrn.com/abstract=2982629  
 
