Title: Introducing and Interfacing with Cybersecurity -- A Cards Approach
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2307.16535v1
--------------------------------------------------

Introducing and Interfacing with Cybersecurity – A Cards Approach
RYAN SHAH, MANUEL MAAREK, SHENANDO STALS, LYNNE BAILLIE, SHEUNG CHI CHAN,
ROBERT STEWART, HANS-WOLFGANG LOIDL AND OLGA CHATZIFOTI†, Heriot-Watt University,
Edinburgh and Glasgow School of Art†, UK
Cybersecurity is an important topic which is often viewed as one that is inaccessible due to steep learning curves and a perceived
requirement of needing specialist knowledge. With a constantly changing threat landscape, practical solutions such as best-practices
are employed, but the number of critical cybersecurity-related incidents remains high. To address these concerns, the National Cyber
Security Centre published a Cybersecurity Body of Knowledge (CyBOK) to provide a comprehensive information base used to advise
and underpin cybersecurity learning. Unfortunately, CyBOK contains over 1000 pages of in-depth material and may not be easy
to navigate for novice individuals. Furthermore, it does not allow for easy expression of various cybersecurity scenarios that such
individuals may be exposed to. As a solution to these two issues, we propose the use of a playing cards format to provide introductory
cybersecurity knowledge that supports learning and discussion, using CyBOK as the foundation for the technical content. Upon
evaluation in two user studies, we found that 80% of the participants agreed the cards provided them with introductory knowledge of
cybersecurity topics, and 70% agreed the cards provided an interface for discussing topics and enabled them to make links between
attacks, vulnerabilities and defences.
CCS Concepts: • Security and privacy →Human and societal aspects of security and privacy; • Applied computing →
Education.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: security, playing cards, knowledge base, design
1
INTRODUCTION
Cybersecurity remains a fundamental concern to users of computer systems, with security often being overlooked due
to its portrayal as a subject pertaining to issues of perceived technical difficulty, steep learning curves and a requirement
of specialist knowledge and/or expertise [15, 27, 28]. While the security foundations of computer-based systems have
improved over time, limiting the potential for, or mitigating the effects of, attacks arising from vulnerabilities, requires
the involvement of all users of these systems (e.g. the general population) and is a necessary step to improve the
understanding of cybersecurity [10]. Moreover, the increasing complexity and diversity of the threat landscape for
cybersecurity [16, 29, 51] further substantiates the need for improving understanding of cybersecurity. In the domain of
software engineering, practical solutions to achieve this include activities such as the documentation of vulnerabilities
of computer systems and updating respective knowledge bases. Open databases such as the Common Vulnerabilities
and Exposures (CVE) [1] and Common Weakness Enumeration (CWE) [36], have played a pivotal role in raising the
awareness of known vulnerabilities such that appropriate defensive measures can be developed or updated. While these
reference databases are well maintained, they may still appear complex to the general population and may contribute
to the already existing problems of inaccessibility and specialist requirements that are pinned against the topic of
cybersecurity. Because of this, several knowledge bases have been developed to inform and underpin cybersecurity
education and training [5, 35, 38], which aim to address these issues at a high-school or higher-education level. Although
they may be a useful learning resource for providing key cybersecurity knowledge, their primary purpose is to be used
by those who are already knowledgeable in cybersecurity to develop further curricula to teach those who may have
little-to-no knowledge of cybersecurity. Furthermore, among these knowledge bases, there may be some key topics
which are not covered and their format and density may not be perceived as accessible to novice users. Thus, this may
1
arXiv:2307.16535v1  [cs.CR]  31 Jul 2023
Shah et al.
directly impact one’s ability to understand key cybersecurity topics but also to make links between these topics to
capture real-world cybersecurity scenarios. Ultimately, the weaknesses of existing solutions regarding limitations of
accessibility, steep learning curves and a perceived requirement of specialist knowledge/expertise, must be ameliorated
by a new solution that provides an answer to the following research questions. Specifically, can a new solution:
RQ1 Provide introductory cybersecurity knowledge to novice users?
RQ2 Provide material for expressing interpretation and documentation of key cybersecurity topics, which can support
independent learning and self-efficacy?
RQ3 Act as an index for the CyBOK knowledge base which provides an interface for discussion on key cybersecurity
topics?
RQ4 Provide links between key cybersecurity topics, allowing the generation of concepts which can capture various
cybersecurity scenarios?
In this paper, we provide an answer to these research questions by proposing the use of a playing cards format as a
medium to provide: introductory knowledge of key cybersecurity topics, acting as an index for the CyBOK knowledge
base [3, 35]; support independent learning and self-efficacy; and allow for links to be made between key cybersecurity
topics to capture real-world scenarios. The novelty of this work is three-fold. We first present the design principles
for the cybersecurity cards to address these limitations. Second, we provide an evaluation of the cards in a workshop
with masters-level students to understand whether the cards satisfy the aforementioned provisions. The output of this
evaluation is a second revised deck of the cybersecurity cards. Third, we carried out the same workshop but with a
different demographic to the first, with participants at late primary and early secondary school level (ages ranging from
10 to 15 years old, mean 12.8 years).
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2 provides background and related work, as well as
the selection procedure we applied to the production of our cybersecurity cards using the CyBOK knowledge base
and the limitations of other approaches. The design principles applied to the cybersecurity cards, as well as the initial
implementation (Version 1), are described in Section 3. An evaluation of Version 1 of the cards is provided in Section 4.
In Section 5, we present Version 2 of the cards as a result of the findings from the first evaluation, as well as a further
evaluation of the second version of the cards in Section 6. In Section 7, we provide a discussion of the results from both
evaluations and the paper concludes in Section 8.
2
BACKGROUND
The need for practical and easy-to-learn cybersecurity learning material is a constant problem which stems from the
evolving nature of cybersecurity and computing technologies as the number of connected users and devices scales. In
recent years, the number of critical cybersecurity incidents have increased significantly, correlating with increasing
numbers of online users during the Covid-19 pandemic, for example, as well as an increase in the adoption of various
connected computer systems in day-to-day activities. Among these incidents, research shows that around 95% of
cybersecurity breaches occur as a result of human error [6] and that organisations lack the sophistication, interest
and/or knowledge to handle these threats [7, 8].
It has been shown that those in cybersecurity careers require a set of skills, involving the abilities to carry out
various tasks at any time in non-traditional environments, and adapt to the dynamic nature of these environments [4].
In the domain of software engineering, basic cybersecurity training such as password best-practices and multi-factor
authentication are employed for individuals to conform to, with the aim of alleviating concerns and mitigating the
2
Introducing and Interfacing with Cybersecurity – A Cards Approach
potential for liabilities that arise as a result of cybersecurity-related incidents [11, 42, 52]. It has been identified that a
large number of Android applications contain security-related code snippets copied and pasted from Stack Overflow, of
which nearly 98% contained at least one insecure code snippet [23]. The value of security information depends strongly
on its source [40] and reputable information sources are only useful, so long as they are well-understood and perceived
as actionable [41, 47]. While sites such as StackOverflow are reputable for providing actionable solutions, it is clear
that the security of solutions are not well understood. For novice individuals, such as those who write and/or deploy
software code without formal software engineering training, it may not be true that they may fully comprehend the
impact of not adhering to security best-practices.
To address this, various curricula guidelines and knowledge frameworks have been developed for cybersecurity,
covering a range of fundamental topics ranging from software and hardware security, to networks and cyber-physical
systems. The Joint Task Force (JTF) on Cybersecurity Education proposed a draft of curricular guidance on cybersecurity
to support educational efforts in the USA [17]. They designed a framework model for a body of knowledge that covers
six knowledge areas which several concepts span over, targeting specific disciplines and application areas that pertain
to the demographic of cybersecurity professionals. The National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) [38]
is a cybersecurity workforce framework, developed by NIST in the USA, which aims to provide a foundation for
describing and sharing information about knowledge, skills and abilities in cybersecurity to strengthen an organisation’s
cybersecurity. The National Cyber Security Center (NCSC) in the UK proposed a Certified Master’s Program that defines
several pathways to address knowledge and skill gaps in cybersecurity education, which describe what topics must
be covered and to what depth [5]. While all these frameworks tend to agree on key cybersecurity topics that must be
understood, they only promote greater emphasis on a subset of topics. For example, NICE covers a wide range of key
topics but gaps exist such as with topics related to cyber-physical systems and human factors. The NCSC Certified
Master’s Program does not place much emphasis on attacks and defences, but in contrast focuses on key topics such as
software security.
The Cybersecurity Body of Knowledge (CyBOK) is a knowledge base developed by University of Bristol funded
by the NCSC. It was developed to encompass the wide variety of topics within the field of cybersecurity and to show
that it also spans multiple disciplines. In practice, it has been successful in providing a framework for NCSC certified
degrees and academic/professional training programmes [2]. CyBOK is decomposed into 21 knowledge areas (KAs)
(as of version 1.1), each introduced by a reference document and a set of topics presented as a branch of the overall
Knowledge Tree (Figure 1) [3]. Each of these knowledge areas are organised into a hierarchy of between 3 to 5 categories
that present as a tree of topics. For each KA in CyBOK, there are a number of chapters that form an encyclopedic
collection of knowledge of key concepts that are based on state-of-the-art academic literature. These key concepts are
known as Topics, with some Topics decomposed further into a set of more specialised subjects (Sub-Topics). For example,
the category of Software Security in the Software and Platform Security KA contains 4 overarching themes, split into 20
sub-topics (e.g. structured output generation vulnerabilities), each of which describe further specialised information
(e.g. sql injection).
It has been shown that, in comparison with other knowledge frameworks, CyBOK covers a wider range of knowledge
areas and does not have gaps that are present within other frameworks [26]. While CyBOK facilitates a body of
knowledge which attributes to the production of material for cybersecurity education and professional training, there
are some weaknesses which may render it an inaccessible resource to more novice individuals such as those in the
domain of software engineering who write or deploy code with no formal software engineering training. First, the
links between meaning and relationships among topics and sub-topics vary across the entire Knowledge Tree, which
3
Shah et al.
Human, Organisational &
Regulatory Aspects
Attacks & Defences
Systems Security
Human Factors
Software & Platform
Security
Infrastructure Security
...
...
Malware &
Attack Technologies
...
...
...
Software
Security
Web & Mobile
Security
Secure Software
Lifecycle
...
...
...
...
...
Fig. 1. Partial View of CyBOK 1.1 Knowledge Tree [20]. The knowledge areas and topics that are highlighted show the subset of the
CyBOK knowledge base that was selected due to the link to the domain of software engineering.
prevents easy expression of various cybersecurity scenarios. Second, the material across the CyBOK knowledge base
and its indexing structure is not easy to traverse for novice users. Gonzalez et al. [25] show that it would be difficult
for novice individuals to infer the links between various topics, given that some follow either a single predominant
theme or span several topics themselves. Ultimately, to support novice users as well as those more experienced, key
cybersecurity knowledge provided by knowledge bases such as CyBOK require adequate presentation that can facilitate
independent learning whilst also providing a suitable interface for discussion of various cybersecurity scenarios to
make the links between meaning and relationships among topics.
Aside from knowledge frameworks, cybersecurity information has also been presented in other ways. Capture the
Flag (CTF) activities provide a series of competitive exercises used to find vulnerabilities in computer systems and
applications and have shown to be a valuable learning tool [44, 45, 48]. Thomas et al. [47] propose the use of a collectible
card game (CCG) as a means of teaching cybersecurity to high school students, given the benefits of prevalence culturally
to all age groups (familiarity) and encouraging the understanding of competitive strategy and mistake-making as
a way of learning [49]. Anvik et al. [13] propose the use of a web-based card game for learning programming and
cybersecurity concepts, using simple vocabulary to create ubiquitous learning experiences. Denning et al. [21] propose
the use of a tabletop card game, Control-Alt-Hack, with the aim of providing awareness training for cybersecurity,
arguing that playing card games can provide a reachable foundation for providing digestible cybersecurity information
to large audiences. However, while these gamified approaches show various levels of success, there are limitations.
First, many of these different approaches have different target personas and goals. Second, card game approaches
such as Control-Alt-Hack [21] do not cover a broad range of key cybersecurity topics, such as those identified by
knowledge frameworks such as CyBOK, and do not adequately highlight the links between vulnerabilities, attacks and
defences. Specifically, attacks are typically highlighted first, which does not help users understand how attacks present
themselves (opportunistic vulnerability targeting) and how to protect against them. Third, while CTF activities, for
example, are beneficial in this aspect [45, 48], a key disadvantage pertains to novice users wherein competitions rely on
technical expertise and the ability to traverse computer systems using various command-line tools and other bespoke
applications [24], or requiring (at a minimum) a basic understanding of cybersecurity concepts in order to progress in
finding vulnerabilities [37].
4
Introducing and Interfacing with Cybersecurity – A Cards Approach
3
CYBERSECURITY CARDS – VERSION 1
To answer the research questions presented in Section 1, we propose a novel approach to represent key cybersecurity
knowledge, utilising specially designed playing cards. In recent years, it has been shown that specially designed cards
used as a tool for education attributes to positive outcomes in the space of learning, attitudes and critical thinking
skills [30, 31]. With a large portion of the general population familiar with card-based games, it is clear that a playing
card format is a good medium, both physically and digitally, with relatively intuitive logic if they are designed well.
The cards proposed in this work were developed by a team of experts in the fields of cybersecurity, human-computer
interaction and games experts. A subset of the cards we propose in this section have been made available for viewing and
can be found online1. The full set of cards will be made publicly available under the CC BY-NC-SA Creative Commons
license after the research project ends in January 2024.
3.1
Focus of Knowledge
In order to establish a good grounding for an evaluation of a card-based solution to address the proposed research
questions, an important factor is to determine what information the cards represent (𝑅𝑄1). In this work, we leverage
the information found in the CyBOK knowledge base and produce the cybersecurity cards to address the limitations of
the knowledge base. Specifically, the focus of knowledge we chose to take is in the domain of software engineering
and secure coding, given recent increases in threats pertaining to this domain [39, 43] and the observation of finding
people with skills in secure coding reported as the most difficult task [53]. The topics that fall within the scope of the
focus of knowledge in this work were derived from a filtering and selection procedure, where the CyBOK knowledge
tree was traversed from Knowledge Areas to Topics. Given that not all KAs in CyBOK are related to the domain of
software engineering, we selected topics that relate to this theme. As highlighted in Figure 1, we chose the following
knowledge trees to traverse: Human Factors, Malware & Attack Technologies, Software Security, Web & Mobile Security
and the Secure Software Lifecycle. For each KA, we follow each branch of the tree to the leaf nodes. For each of the
leaves, we pick up the topic and provide a better description of that name to create the first version of the card. If there
are duplicates or highly similar topics in the CyBOK mapping, these are either merged together or split into distinct
types. For example, CyBOK’s information on Cross-Site Request Forgery is mapped to two vulnerabilities: Inadequate
Data Authenticity and Origin Verification and Inadequate Session Expiration. Any leaves that fall within Topics that, for
example, may not follow a single predominant theme and do not relate to the selected focus of knowledge are cut out.
The category of Software & Platform Security is directly related to the scope of this work whereas others are not, such
as Forensics which involves identifying and analysing data to support legal proceedings. This process was carried out
by two academic researchers in cybersecurity who decided on the final first set of cards in consensus.
3.2
Design and Structure
The playing cards format is easy to handle in both a physical or digital medium [12] and are designed to be handled
individually or combined into a set of cards (known as a deck). The deck of cards is first split into three distinct classes:
Vulnerability, Attack and Defence, following suit from common threat modelling approaches and security catalogues
that encompass the vulnerability-attack-defence trichotomy [1, 22, 32, 36, 46]. Within each of these classes, the deck
is further split into General and Detailed cards (Figure 2). General cards represent a type of one of the classes (e.g.
Code), while Detailed cards provide lower-level, concrete examples that relate to the General card. In terms of design
1https://anonymous.4open.science/r/cybersecurity_cards-9F00/ (anonymous repository for double-blind reviewing purposes)
5
Shah et al.
General
Detailed
3
1
2
Fig. 2. Organisation and Design of Cybersecurity Cards (Version 1). General cards contain the icon of its corresponding class (1), with
Detailed cards containing an identifier code (2) which is used to make links between attacks, defences and vulnerabilities (3). The
arrows demonstrate the links between the presented attacks, vulnerabilities and defences.
(Figure 2), attack and vulnerability cards are encased in a square border, with attack cards filled with a solid red colour
while vulnerability cards are signalled with a diagonal line to separate white from red. The defence cards resemble an
octogonal shape (akin to a shield) which has a white fill colour. The diagonal separation of white and red in vulnerability
cards aims to highlight vulnerabilities as the central focal point. General cards in the deck include: a title representing
the KA topic; a type represented by a symbol (see 1 ); and a description related to the topic it represents. Detailed cards
are assigned a unique identifier in the form 𝑎_𝐵𝑖in the top right corner 2 , where 𝑎refers to the class of the Detailed
card, 𝐵referring to the first letter of the General card it is categorised under and 𝑖acting as an index number in the
set of 𝑁Detailed cards for the category 𝐵. The symbol for the Detailed card’s category is made opaque in the center
of the card, behind the description of the Detailed card. Attack cards also contain a description of the impact of the
attack. Defence cards contain a target symbol to help further identify the vulnerability it aims to protect against attacks.
Vulnerability cards also describe an attack vector with associated attack card identifiers, as well as the consequence
of the vulnerability with associated defence card identifiers 3 . The aim of the identifiers is to provide a means to
make links between key cybersecurity topics by allowing users to capture various attack-defence scenarios that revolve
around specific vulnerabilities (𝑅𝑄4). In total, there are 124 cards in the deck which is composed of 30 vulnerability
cards, 32 attack cards and 47 defence cards, each of which are categorised under one of the 15 General cards.
3.2.1
Relationships Between Cards. Given that cybersecurity stems from conflict between attackers and defenders
targeting one or more vulnerabilities, creating a capturable many-to-many relationship is essential when introducing
cybersecurity concepts. Thus, the cybersecurity cards should represent this relationship, where multiple attacks can
target multiple vulnerabilities that can, in turn, be mitigated or countered by multiple defences. While CyBOK does
contain information about these relationships, it is hard to infer these from implicit references within the reference
material. Thus, the cards aim to act as an index for the CyBOK knowledgebase by providing a means for presenting
these implicit relationships in a manner that supports independent learning and self-efficacy (𝑅𝑄2, 𝑅𝑄3). In Figure 2,
we can see that the vulnerability card "Blind Trust of User Input" is linked to a set of identifier codes 3 for a number of
6
Introducing and Interfacing with Cybersecurity – A Cards Approach
Phase
Activity
Rationale
Duration (min)
Prep
Participant information sheet
Inform participants
5
Informed consent form
Inform consent
5
Demographic Questionnaire
Participant profiles
5
Activity
Introduction to workshop theme
Introduce theme
10
Introduction to cybersecurity cards and experts roaming
around the room providing help when needed
Familiarity with cards
10
Theme exploration – devising attack and defence scenarios
Cybersecurity trichotomy
20
Post
Cybersecurity Questionnaire
Evaluate cards
10
Table 1. Workshop Structure Showing Phases, Activities and Duration (min)
related attacks and defences. This example shows a link to the "Command Injection" and "Memory Thief" attacks (𝑅𝑄4).
The first attack involves the execution of unauthorised commands to a system (which may be input by a user) and the
second involves the stealing of confidential information from memory. In contrast, two defence examples are shown
as links to the attacks and the vulnerability, which include "Code Assertions" and "Input Sanitisation" which involve
monitoring code execution and sanitising user input to eliminate malicious code or escape characters, respectively.
4
EVALUATION
The logical next step after designing the cybersecurity cards was to conduct a user evaluation to see if the participants
could use the cards, and whether the cards provided a clear communication of these topics and an interface for discussing
them.
4.1
Methodology
Participants were recruited to take part in a workshop, advertised to university students, where they interacted with
the cybersecurity cards in order to analyse and devise a cybersecurity scenario. Ethical approval was granted by the
University ethics committee for the workshop recruitment and procedure before the study took place. A participant
information sheet was provided via a link in the online registration form, as well as being used to obtain written consent
from participants. Furthermore, the workshop was held in Spring 2022 and we had a special clause added to state we
would follow local government guidelines on the Covid-19 protocol [9] which provided guidance on reducing risks
from transmitting Covid-19, such as staying home if participants had symptoms or tested positive for Covid-19. In
total, we managed to recruit 13 participants but only 11 had usable data. Upon registration for the workshop, we found
that the 11 participants were masters-level students who were between 22 and 35 years old (mean 26.3 years). The
participants were enrolled in a conversion masters program in computer science and came from either an engineering
(6), mathematics (3), computing (1) or biology (1) background. When asked if the participants had any prior experience
or skills with cybersecurity, only one participant mentioned they had experienced anomaly detection but others stated
they had no prior experience or skills in cybersecurity. Further, when asked if they had any experience or skills with
secure coding, 8 of the participants said they had no experience or skills with secure coding, 2 responded neutral and 1
said they had some experience. We hypothesise that the low number of participants to be attributed to the Covid-19
global pandemic leaving individuals with more dynamic priorities and commitments.
7
Shah et al.
An overview of the workshop structure can be seen in Table 1. Participants were given the information sheet, consent
form and demographic questionnaire to fill out in advance of the workshop, with copies of the consent form brought
on the day as back ups in case they forget to send or bring the consent form. When they arrived they were split into
three groups (consisting of three or four participants). During the workshop, participants were first introduced to
the theme of the workshop which was Code Security – the practice of developing software that embeds security and
best-practices into the code. After this, they were given an introduction to the deck of cybersecurity cards where they
had time to explore and familiarise themselves with the various attacks, defences and vulnerabilities. Cybersecurity
experts that were present would roam around the room and were able to answer any questions participants may have
had when going through the deck. After this, they would use the cybersecurity cards to find vulnerabilities and devise
attack and defence scenarios within the theme of the workshop. At the end of the workshop, each participant was
individually asked to fill in a self-assessment questionnaire online (Appendix A) on how using the cards contributed
to the themes described in Section 4.2. The rationale behind this questionnaire was to collect both quantitative and
qualitative data regarding a participant’s experience of interacting with the cybersecurity cards. The quantitative aspect
of the questionnaire (Q1) makes use of a 7-point Likert scale, ranging from strongly disagree to strongly agree, to assess
the performance and effort from participants while using the cards. The qualitative aspect (Q2–5) aims to understand
motivations and thoughts behind using the cards. Question 2 and 4 gave participants a series of options (checkboxes),
which were then coupled with a follow-up question (Q3 and Q5 respectively) to further elaborate on their choices.
Two experienced postdoctoral researchers independently analysed and coded the qualitative responses, grouping them
into themes, which were then discussed systematically and final agreements on codes were made in consensus. This
analytical technique has been applied successfully in various bodies of work [19, 54]. The data from questionnaires is
presented as italics in quotation marks, alongside a participant ID (e.g. W1P1 for this first workshop) where relevant.
4.2
Results
Fig. 3. Results of Workshop 1. This figure shows an overview of the responses for Q1 in Appendix A. (1) Providing a knowledgebase =
(a)–(d); (2) Independent learning and self-efficacy = (e)–(f); (3) Interface for discussion: (g)–(h).
An overview of the results from this evaluation can be seen in Figure 3. For subsequent discussion, the results from
the questionnaires will initially follow three themes, noted by the title of each subsection.
4.2.1
Providing a Knowledge Base. The first theme aimed at determining whether our cybersecurity cards provided
users with introductory cybersecurity knowledge, whilst also supporting learning in a well-documented manner.
8
Introducing and Interfacing with Cybersecurity – A Cards Approach
Providing a knowledge base looked into four aspects: providing knowledge of individual concepts, cybersecurity
terminology, wider scope of topics, and the trichotomy of attacks, defences and vulnerabilities (a–d) in Question 1 of the
questionnaire in Appendix A). Overall, we observed that our cards were able to effectively provide key cybersecurity
knowledge, adapted from the CyBOK knowledge base, in an accessible manner. Interestingly, with regard to individual
concepts and the relationships between attacks, defences and vulnerabilities, three participants strongly agreed with
this. Furthermore, four participants also strongly agreed that the cards were able to provide them with knowledge
about wider scope. For cybersecurity terminology, only two responded with somewhat disagree, which we believe may
be due to the text on cards using too much technical terminology. It is clear that the cards have indeed achieved a
positive result regarding providing users with knowledge of fundamental cybersecurity knowledge (𝑅𝑄1), as well as
providing links between topics that allows the generation of concepts which capture the relationships between attacks,
vulnerabilities and defences in scenarios pertaining to the theme of Code Security (𝑅𝑄4).
4.2.2
Independent Learning and Self-Efficacy. With regard to independent learning and self-efficacy (e,f), we found
that 8 participants agreed the cards enabled them to undertake independent learning with three strongly agreeing.
Furthermore, we found that 9 participants agreed the cards provided them with access to key cybersecurity knowledge
when one of the rotating experts was not present in the group. In both cases, only a single participant disagreed.
Ultimately, the results demonstrate that our cards approach provides a means for expressing interpretation and
documentation of key topics that supports independent learning and self-efficacy (𝑅𝑄2).
4.2.3
Providing an Interface for Discussion. The final theme looks at whether the cards provide users with an interface
for discussing key cybersecurity topics (g,h). Interestingly, we found that more participants agreed that they could hold
discussions on these topics with the expert (9), in comparison with other participants in their group (7). However, while
both cases show a majority in agreement, when discussing topics with others in their group more participants remained
neutral as opposed to disagreeing. While we see a positive outcome regarding the cards providing an interface for the
discussion of key cybersecurity topics (𝑅𝑄3), it is important to determine what was not clear and why this was the case,
as well as understanding how the cards could be improved.
4.2.4
Understanding Drawbacks Of Using The Cards. The next part of the questionnaire involves questions that were
designed to help uncover and understand any limitations of the cybersecurity cards, such that improvements can be
made to better fulfill the goals of the research questions described in Section 3. The first step was to determine which
category or subset of the cybersecurity cards the participants did not use and why this was the case. We found that the
least used cards were the general and detailed defence and vulnerability cards. The next question asked participants why
the cards they had selected were not used, one participant stated that "general cards gave some idea about the content"
(W1P6) and another stated that they were only "engaged in attack and defence" (W1P11). With this said, however, most
participants described that they had used all of the categories, for example stating they had used "at least one card [from]
each" (W1P1) or only "concentrate[d] on a few cards" (W1P9). This suggests that while the cards which were said to not
have been used may not have been critical to discussions they had about certain topics, they may have still been looked
at and thought about. We then asked participants about how the cards could be improved. We found that 5 participants
recorded that the number of cards in the deck was too high. This may be due to the use of a physical medium and the
number of categories and types of each General card and is further suggested by 3 other participants stating that there
were too many types or categories. Interestingly, 5 participants stated that both the color coding of the types/categories
was not clear, as well as the relationships between the cards, with one participant describing that "Threat cards [were]
9
Shah et al.
difficult to handle/understand" (W1P7). This may also correspond with the feeling that the number of cards was too high,
but also a perceived difficulty of understanding links between the cards and the terminology used. In contrast to this,
however, one participant mentioned that the "Cards provides an entry point for more detailed scenarios of cybersecurity
and helps to create relationship between attack and defense situations more clear" (W1P4). Interestingly, 3 participants
recorded that the information on the cards were too abstract, with no participants stating that they were too detailed.
Thus, this helps reinforce the understanding that the difficulty relating to understanding the cards may be linked to a
lack of clarity on the relationships between them.
5
CYBERSECURITY CARDS – VERSION 2
Upon review of the results from the evaluation questionnaire, the cybersecurity cards were in places redesigned and
the new deck is hereafter referred to as Version 2. As well as providing the subset of the Version 1 cards for viewing, the
equivalent subset for Version 2 of the cards have also been made available and can be found online2. The full set of
cards will be made publicly available under the CC BY-NC-SA Creative Commons license after the research project
ends in January 2024.
5.1
Structural Redesign
One of the limitations that required addressing was with regard to the number of cards in the deck, which some
participants felt was too high and "difficult to handle and understand (W1P7)". In contrast with a standard deck of playing
cards used for the likes of Solitaire and Poker, which has 52 cards, Version 1 of our cards has more than double this
amount (109) resulting in it being perceived by participants as hard to handle. Thus, reducing the number of cards will
likely be better received, whilst still meeting our requirements. In Version 2, the first major revision is reducing the
number of cards in the deck. The first decision made with regard to this was the removal of General cards (types of
attack, defence or vulnerability), given that participants specified these as the least used cards in the deck. In Version 2,
General cards are replaced with a glossary (Appendix B) that provides a description for each type, alongside a symbol
associated with the type in the top left of the card to help improve readability and visibility ( 4 in Figure 4). We also
merged some cards when distinctions were too specific, by identifying cards of overlapping topics and a set of 2 or
more attack similar attack cards were merged by a more general card. For example, the Smudge Attack, Shoulder Surfing
and Social Engineering cards were merged to Social Engineering. This reduces the number of cards in Version 2 to a total
of 70 cards, made up of 20 attack, 20 vulnerability and 30 defence cards. By providing a glossary, users can refer to this
sheet as a form of guidance when looking at devising particular cybersecurity scenarios. Furthermore, we also added
two new classes of vulnerability. First, Human is split into User and Management. The User class captures the impact of
vulnerabilities from careless or malicious users (e.g. insider attackers), while Management captures bad management
practices such as poorly implemented security policies. Second, we provide a System vulnerability type which relates to
computer infrastructure, to better capture attacks and defences that target the computer system.
In terms of general design (Figure 4), the red background is made slightly lighter making it easier on the eyes, with
the symbols watermarked in the background of the card also made lighter to maintain focus on the content of the card
whilst also still highlighting the card type. Further, the language of the text in the cards has been improved with the
aim of improving clarity and reducing technical jargon that some participants had struggled with. For example, “attack
2https://anonymous.4open.science/r/cybersecurity_cards-9F00/ (anonymous repository for double-blind reviewing purposes)
10
Introducing and Interfacing with Cybersecurity – A Cards Approach
3
4
1
2
Version 1
Version 2
Codes Replaced
By Icons
Descriptions Made
Clearer and Simpler
Red Color Made Lighter
Fig. 4. Design Comparison Between Version 1 and 2. Version 1 identifier codes at the top right of each card (1) has been replaced by
icons corresponding to its class and a unique class index number for each card (3). Links between cards using codes (2) have been
replaced with the corresponding icons in vulnerabilities (4), and links between presented cards are demonstrated using the arrows.
vectors” and “consequences” were replaced with “related attacks” and “related defences” respectively. Finally, defence
cards are now more akin to a stop sign to aid with better distinguishing them from the attack cards.
5.2
Relationship Clarification
The next revision made in Version 2 of the cards is a clarification of the links between the cards to highlight relationships
between various vulnerabilities, attacks and defences, which was described to be inadequate. Figure 4 shows a comparison
between Version 1 and 2 of the cards. In Version 1, identifier codes in the top right corner were used to distinguish
between types of attacks, defences and vulnerabilities 1 . The relationships between attacks, defences and vulnerabilities
is clarified by linking attack and defence codes within the vulnerability cards 2 . In Version 2, card identifiers are
replaced with a symbol and card number related to each type positioned in the top left corner 4 . The card number
is the number of the card within a type. For example, Command / Data Injection is card number 2 for the Injection
attack type. The links between vulnerabilities follow a similar approach to Version 1, but with the codes replaced by
pairs of symbols with ID numbers and related vulnerabilities are detailed within attack and defence cards 3 . Links to
vulnerabilities are given to encourage users to use intuition to make links by learning from card content, rather than
looking at explicit relationships.
11
Shah et al.
6
EVALUATION – VERSION 2
To evaluate the second version of the cards, we make use of the same workshop format and methodology (Table 1) as
described in Section 4. In this second workshop, we recruited 23 participants with ages ranging from 10 to 15 years old
(mean 12.8 years) from either senior primary school or early high school. When asked to describe any experience and/or
skills they may already have with cybersecurity, one participant stated they know the basics, one stated that passwords
are important, one stated they know about hacking, and all other participants saying they have either no experience
(17) or are unsure (3). When asked about experience or skills with coding, two participants stated they had limited
experience with Python programming, six stating they have used Scratch or other block-based visual programming
tools, with the remainder (15) having no programming experience. Only 2 participants stated they had experience
with secure coding, with one neutral and the remainder either disagreeing or strongly disagreeing with this. While
the demographic of participants in this second workshop differs from the first workshop, with participants in this
workshop being younger, their experience with cybersecurity and code security remains similar and the activity within
both workshops are the same following the theme of Code Security. After the workshop, the participants were given the
same questionnaire to answer as those received in the first workshop (Appendix A). For subsequent discussion, we
will discuss the results of the evaluation on the second version of the cards on the same themes as the first version
presented in Section 4.2. The data from questionnaires is presented as italics in quotation marks, alongside a participant
ID (e.g. W2P6 for this second workshop) where relevant. An overview of the results for the second evaluation can be
seen in Figure 5.
Fig. 5. Results of Workshop 2. This figure shows an overview of the responses for Q1 in Appendix A.
6.1
Results
6.1.1
Providing a Knowledge Base. For the first theme of determining whether the cards provided introductory cy-
bersecurity knowledge that supports learning in a well-documented manner (𝑅𝑄1), we look at the four items (a–d)
in Question 1 of the questionnaire in Appendix A. For individual concepts (a), 17 of the participants agreed that the
cards provided them with knowledge of cybersecurity concepts, terminology and topics (6 somewhat agree, 4 agree and
7 strongly agree) with 3 participants scoring neutral and 3 somewhat disagreeing with this. For wider scope (b), 17
participants agreed (3 somewhat agree, 6 agree and 8 strongly agree) that the cards provided them with this knowledge,
with 2 disagreeing and 4 remaining neutral. For relationships between attacks, defences and vulnerabilities (c), 16 agreed
(6 somewhat agree, 3 agree and 7 strongly agree) that the cards facilitated the understanding of the links between cards
12
Introducing and Interfacing with Cybersecurity – A Cards Approach
that capture the vulnerability-attack-defence trichotomy that is present in cybersecurity (𝑅𝑄4), with 4 neutral and 3
disagreeing. Finally, with regarding to cybersecurity terminology (d), 14 participants agreed (4 somewhat agree, 4 agree
and 6 strongly agree) that the cards provided them with knowledge on terminology. Three participants disagreed with
this and the remaining 6 were neutral.
6.1.2
Independent Learning and Self-Efficacy. The theme of independent learning and self-efficacy relate to items (e,f)
in Question 1. The first item asked participants if the cards helped them undertake independent learning of cybersecurity
(e). We found that for the second version of the cards, 11 participants agreed (2 somewhat agree, 4 agree, 5 strongly
agree), 7 were neutral and 5 disagreeing (1 strongly disagreeing). For the second item, we asked if the cards provided
access to cybersecurity knowledge without the presence of an expert. We found that 13 participants agreed (3 somewhat
agree, 3 agree and 7 strongly agree), with 5 participants neutral to this and 5 disagreeing (1 strongly disagreeing). These
results show that the second version of our cards successfully supports independent learning and self-efficacy (𝑅𝑄2).
6.1.3
Providing an Interface for Discussion. The final theme explored relates to the cards providing an interface for
discussing key cybersecurity topics (𝑅𝑄3) and relates to items (g, h) in Question 1. The first question related to this
theme asked participants if the cards enabled them to discuss cybersecurity topics with an expert g. We found that 14
participants agreed with this (3 somewhat agree, 5 agree and 6 strongly agree), with 6 participants remaining neutral to
this and 3 disagreeing (1 strongly disagreeing). The final question in this theme asked them if the cards enabled them to
hold discussions on key cybersecurity topics with others in their group h. We found that 14 participants agree with this
(4 somewhat agree, 4 agree and 6 strongly agree), with 5 participants neutral and 4 disagreeing with this.
6.1.4
Understanding Drawbacks of Version 2. As done in the first workshop, the next three questions were designed to
gather an understanding of any limitations to the design of the cards and whether there may be any improvements that
can be made. In Question 2, we asked participants whether there were any categories or subset of cards not used by them
in the workshop. The difference in this question compared to the same questionnaire employed for evaluating Version 1
is due to the removal of the General cards and that they are replaced with a Glossary. Thus, in Appendix A, we refer to
Question 2 (Version 2 Evaluation) which includes the Glossary as an option, as well as cards within a specific category for
each of the classes. We found that the least used items were the Glossary (7 participants) and Race Condition (7) cards,
with the next least used cards being Injection (6), Memory (6), Mitigation (6) and Education (6). Looking at Question 3 to
understand why these types of cards (excluding the glossary) in particular were not used, some participants mentioned
that they “didn’t need them” (W2P8), were “unnecessary” (W2P20) or “don’t know” (W2P9). This was because some
participants had decided to focus on a different aspect of cybersecurity. With regard to the glossary, some participants
stated that “nobody reads the glossary” (W2P10), suggesting that this was not needed and the cards alone for some
participants were enough to facilitate learning and understanding of key cybersecurity topics. Interestingly, some
participants had stated that they had “used all the cards” (W2P4, W2P6), with some others giving a similar reason
yet selecting many (if not all) checkboxes for all cards. In Question 4, we asked participants if there were any other
improvements to the cards they would like to suggest. Most participants (14) said “No” to this question, however one
participant suggested to use “simple wording”, which may correlate with why certain cards (e.g. Race Condition or
Memory attacks) were not used. As well as this, three participants suggested to make the cards “easier to use” (W2P2,
W2P14), however any suggestions as to how they might think this could be achieved were not elaborated.
13
Shah et al.
7
DISCUSSION
The aim of this research is to understand how a playing cards approach can provide clear communication of key
cybersecurity topics and an interface for discussing them, leveraging the information from the CyBOK knowledge
base. To investigate this, we were guided by the research questions proposed in Section 3. Subsequent discussion will
encompass the evaluations of both versions of the cards and follows each of the research questions in turn.
RQ1: Do the cybersecurity cards provide introductory cybersecurity knowledge to novice users?
Cybersecurity is often overlooked as a subject due to issues such as perceived technical difficulty, steep learning
curves and a requirement of specialist knowledge and/or expertise. In industry, for example, the lack of cybersecurity
professionals has been linked to a lack of practical cybersecurity content within learning materials [18]. While CyBOK
aims to rectify this learning gap, traversing the knowledge base and understanding the material requires prior knowledge,
as evidenced by the primary usage of CyBOK in the development of higher education programmes [26]. Ultimately,
this means it may not be considered accessible for novice individuals. In this work, we show that our cybersecurity
cards achieved a positive result with regard to providing introductory knowledge of key cybersecurity topics to novice
users. Specifically, we found that 82% of participants from the first workshop in higher education agreed with this
(Section 4.2.1). In our second workshop involving late-primary and secondary aged school children. We found that
around 70% of them also agreed with this (Section 6.1.1). Both of these results are significant as participants described
themselves initially as having little-to-no cybersecurity experience.
RQ2: Do the cybersecurity cards provide material for expressing interpretation of key topics that supports
independent learning and self-efficacy?
One of the concerns surrounding cybersecurity relates to the preconception of steep learning curves and a requirement
of specialist knowledge and expertise [15, 16], which is a problem that is not adequately managed by the CyBOK
knowledge base. From our evaluation of the cards, we found that most of our participants in higher education from
the first workshop agreed they were able to understand key cybersecurity topics independently (Section 4.2.2). In the
second workshop, we found that half of the primary and secondary participants also agreed with this (Section 6.1.2).
It appears that removing the general cards and replacing them with a glossary may have impacted this, backed up
by statements from the participants saying that nobody reads the glossary. In terms of self-efficacy, we found that
participants in the first workshop agreed that even without a cybersecurity expert present in the group, they were able
to access cybersecurity knowledge solely using our cybersecurity cards. In the second workshop, we found that more
participants agreed on this compared to understanding topics independently.
RQ3: Do the cards act as an index for the CyBOK knowledge base, which provides an interface for
discussion on key cybersecurity topics?
CyBOK has been shown to lack depth of cybersecurity knowledge and is hard to traverse, particularly in the aspect of
practical experience such as discussing key topics, which is essential for mastering cybersecurity skills [26, 34]. The use
of playing card formats as an alternative approach for learning cybersecurity topics has shown to be successful, but
are either designed for those with existing cybersecurity knowledge [44, 45, 48] or do not leverage a peer-reviewed
and well-established knowledge foundation such as CyBOK [13, 21]. This is important as the value, actionability and
perception of security information strongly depends on the source [40, 41]. While in this work we also propose the use
14
Introducing and Interfacing with Cybersecurity – A Cards Approach
of a playing cards format, we leverage a strong information foundation and the intended use is not in the context of
games which other playing cards approaches are. Furthermore, our cards have a single target persona of someone with
little-to-no expertise in cybersecurity that writes software code. The first version of our cybersecurity cards show that
the majority of participants agreed they were able to discuss key topics with cybersecurity experts that periodically
checked in on them, as well as with other members in their group (Section 4.2.3). In Version 2, we found similar results
with more strongly agreeing compared to those in higher education using the previous cards. While in both cases
some participants disagreed with this, this may be due to reasons such as simply not wanting to discuss topics with
the experts. Interestingly, in the second workshop, we found that more participants disagreed that the cards enabled
them to hold discussions with others in their group. This could be due to a lack of interest in doing so, or potentially
they simply did not know they could do that. In this work, we demonstrate that our playing cards approach can act
as a suitable index for CyBOK and provides an interface for discussing key cybersecurity topics for even novice or
non-technical users.
RQ4: Do the cards provide links between key cybersecurity topics, allowing for the capture of various
scenarios?
In the evaluation questionnaire, we asked participants whether the cards provided them with knowledge about the
relationships between attacks, defences and vulnerabilities (Section 4.2.1). We found that the majority of participants
agreed with this. This is further strengthened given that most participants in the first workshop also agreed the cards
promoted discussion of key cybersecurity topics with both experts and other members in their groups (Section 4.2.3),
with similar results seen in the second workshop (Section 6.1.3). While the CyBOK knowledge base does encapsulate
the attack-defence-vulnerability trichotomy, it is difficult to identify whether some topics focus on a single predominant
theme or whether it spans across various themes [25]. Furthermore, it has been shown that because of this difficulty,
these links could be identified from series of keywords which are only meaningfully extracted via specialised algorithms
such as topic model analysis [25, 26]. With regard to other learning approaches for cybersecurity, Capture The Flag
(CTF) activities can aid with highlighting links between attacks, defences and vulnerabilities by prioritising the focus of
finding vulnerabilities [44, 45, 48]. However, the disadvantage to CTF approaches relates to requiring technical expertise
(e.g. using command-line tools) in order to progress in finding vulnerabilities [37]. In this work, we found that those
with little-to-no cybersecurity or coding expertise can use our cards to make links across the cybersecurity trichotomy,
whilst devising various cybersecurity scenarios in the domain of code security.
7.1
Reported Limitations
From the evaluation of the first version of the cards, we identified some limitations from participant responses. First,
some participants felt the overall number of cards was too high (124 cards in total) and General cards were not used.
In the second version, the deck size was reduced to improve physical handling, whilst also adhering to the primary
goals, with General cards also replaced by a glossary. In the second workshop, we found that there were no further
suggestions to reduce the size of the deck. Second, the layout and content of first version of the cards were described as
difficult to go through by participants in the first workshop. In version 2, we improved the contrast of the red colour,
as well as the layout of card elements to help improve clarity, as well as improving the terminology used to describe
each of the cards. In the second workshop, none of the participants suggested any further design changes. Finally, we
believed the issue of readability in Version 1 to form links from vulnerabilities was likely due to the identifier codes and
instead replaced them with a symbol and index number.
15
Shah et al.
7.2
Future Work
A first point of future work would be to revisit the glossary, as some participants indicated that the glossary was not
useful and in some cases not used at all. Given that the purpose of the glossary is to improve meaning and uniformity
in the usage of technical terminology, one potential solution to improve our approach is to improve the content of the
glossary (e.g. the language). As well as this, the importance of the glossary can also be better highlighted when using
the cards. While the current approach makes links to the glossary using the class symbol (e.g. attack) may be suitable,
better engagement with the glossary could be achieved through informing users of the importance of the glossary
when introducing the cards. In the case of digital cards, hyperlinks within cards (e.g. via the symbol) to the glossary
could be made clear for improved accessiblity. With regard to the layout and written content, the language used for
each of the cards can be further refined. As well as this, another design change can be to better visibly distinguish the
classes of cards. In previous work, it has been studied whether different colours of warnings can affect one’s perception
of risk [14, 33]. For example, the same red color could be used for attack cards as it is typically associated with danger
and a higher perceived relative amount of risk. An orange or amber colour is typically used for warnings and the colour
yellow for caution, which could be used to signal the vulnerability cards. The defence cards could be represented with a
blue colour. For example, blue has represented defence in some areas of military, such as to signal a friendly icon for
NATO APP-6/A affiliation [50].
8
CONCLUSION
Cybersecurity is a complex subject area that is constantly changing due to the dynamic nature of vulnerabilities, attacks
and defences. Many users who may have little-to-no knowledge of cybersecurity are left vulnerable, with the key
question of whether best practices are truly understood remains unclear. Existing knowledge bases such as CyBOK
provide key cybersecurity information, but are typically designed to support the development of educational curricula
or those with prior knowledge. In this work, we propose an approach leveraging a playing cards format with the goals
of introducing cybersecurity topics to novice users, facilitating independent learning and understanding of the various
relationships found in the cybersecurity ecosystem. Upon evaluation, we found that our approach was successful in
achieving these goals for a wide age group (10-35 years) of both non-technical users and those with some experience.
Using the data from this evaluation, we designed a second version of these cards and further evaluated them and
showing they still meet the proposed requirements. Ultimately, our cybersecurity cards provide a comprehensive
and effective tool that allows novice individuals to gain introductory knowledge of cybersecurity, while promoting
understanding and independent learning of cybersecurity.
REFERENCES
[1] [n.d.]. Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE). https://www.cve.org/ Accessed 19/07/2023.
[2] [n.d.]. The Cyber Security Body of Knowledge (CyBOK) - Use Cases. https://www.cybok.org/usecases/ Accessed 19/07/2023.
[3] [n.d.]. The Cyber Security Body of Knowledge (CyBOK), Version 1.1. https://www.cybok.org/ Accessed 19/07/2023.
[4] 2015. NICCS Cybersecurity Workforce Planning. https://niccs.us-cert.gov/careers/workforce-planning Accessed 19/07/2023.
[5] 2017. NCSC Certified Master’s in Cyber Security. Accessed 19/07/2023.
[6] 2020. After reading, writing and arithmetic, the 4th ’r’ of literacy is cyber-risk. World Economic Forum. https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2020/
12/cyber-risk-cyber-security-education Accessed 19/07/2023.
[7] 2020. Securing What’s Now and What’s Next 20 Cybersecurity Considerations for 2020. Cisco. https://www.cisco.com/c/dam/m/en_hk/ciscolive/
2020-ciso-benchmark-cybersecurity-series.pdf Accessed 19/07/2023.
[8] 2021. Ransomware Recovery Cost Reaches Nearly $2 Million, More Than Doubling in a Year. SOPHOS (Apr 2021). https://www.sophos.com/en-
us/press-office/press-releases/2021/04/ransomware-recovery-cost-reaches-nearly-dollar-2-million-more-than-doubling-in-a-year
16
Introducing and Interfacing with Cybersecurity – A Cards Approach
[9] 2022. Coronavirus (COVID-19): staying safe and protecting others. https://www.gov.scot/publications/coronavirus-covid-19-staying-safe-and-
protecting-others Accessed 19/07/2023.
[10] Anne Adams and Martina Angela Sasse. 1999. Users are not the enemy. Commun. ACM 42, 12 (1999), 40–46.
[11] Bashayer Alotaibi and Haya Almagwashi. 2018. A review of BYOD security challenges, solutions and policy best practices. In 2018 1st International
Conference on Computer Applications & Information Security (ICCAIS). IEEE, 1–6.
[12] Nathan Altice. 2014. The playing card platform. Analogue Game Studies 4, 2 (2014).
[13] John Anvik, Vincent Cote, and Jace Riehl. 2019. Program wars: a card game for learning programming and cybersecurity concepts. In Proceedings of
the 50th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education. 393–399.
[14] Lina María Arenas, Jolyon Troscianko, and Martin Stevens. 2014. Color contrast and stability as key elements for effective warning signals. Frontiers
in Ecology and Evolution 2 (2014), 25.
[15] Alex Asen, Walter Bohmayr, Stefan Deutscher, Marcial González, and David Mkrtchian. 2019. Are you spending enough on cybersecurity?. Boston
Consulting Group. Accessed 19/07/2023.
[16] Sahba Bahizad. 2020. Risks of Increase in the IoT Devices. In 2020 7th IEEE international conference on cyber security and cloud computing
(CSCloud)/2020 6th IEEE international conference on edge computing and scalable cloud (EdgeCom). IEEE, 178–181.
[17] Matt Bishop, Diana Burley, Scott Buck, Joseph J Ekstrom, Lynn Futcher, David Gibson, Elizabeth K Hawthorne, Siddharth Kaza, Yair Levy, Herbert
Mattord, et al. 2017. Cybersecurity curricular guidelines. In Information Security Education for a Global Digital Society: 10th IFIP WG 11.8 World
Conference, WISE 10, Rome, Italy, May 29-31, 2017, Proceedings 10. Springer, 3–13.
[18] Tracey Caldwell. 2013. Plugging the cyber-security skills gap. Computer Fraud & Security 2013, 7 (2013), 5–10.
[19] Bonnie Chinh, Himanshu Zade, Abbas Ganji, and Cecilia Aragon. 2019. Ways of qualitative coding: A case study of four strategies for resolving
disagreements. In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–6.
[20] CyBOK. 2021. The Cyber Security Body of Knowledge v1.1, Web and Mobile Security Knowledge Tree. https://www.cybok.org/media/downloads/
Web_Mobile_Security_v1.0.1.pdf Accessed 19/07/2023.
[21] Tamara Denning, Adam Lerner, Adam Shostack, and Tadayoshi Kohno. 2013. Control-Alt-Hack: the design and evaluation of a card game for
computer security awareness and education. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM SIGSAC conference on Computer & communications security. 915–928.
[22] Lauren S Ferro, Andrea Marrella, and Tiziana Catarci. 2021. A Human Factor Approach to Threat Modeling. In International Conference on
Human-Computer Interaction. Springer, 139–157.
[23] Felix Fischer, Konstantin Böttinger, Huang Xiao, Christian Stransky, Yasemin Acar, Michael Backes, and Sascha Fahl. 2017. Stack overflow considered
harmful? the impact of copy&paste on android application security. In 2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, 121–136.
[24] Vitaly Ford, Ambareen Siraj, Ada Haynes, and Eric Brown. 2017. Capture the flag unplugged: an offline cyber competition. In Proceedings of the 2017
ACM SIGCSE Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education. 225–230.
[25] Ana I González-Tablas and Mohammed Rashed. 2022. Exploring CyBOK with Topic Modeling Techniques. In Human Aspects of Information Security
and Assurance: 16th IFIP WG 11.12 International Symposium, HAISA 2022, Mytilene, Lesbos, Greece, July 6–8, 2022, Proceedings. Springer, 49–65.
[26] Joseph Hallett, Robert Larson, and Awais Rashid. 2018. Mirror, mirror, on the wall: What are we teaching them all? Characterising the focus of
cybersecurity curricular frameworks. In 2018 USENIX Workshop on Advances in Security Education ({ASE} 18).
[27] Richard J Harknett and James A Stever. 2009. The cybersecurity triad: Government, private sector partners, and the engaged cybersecurity citizen.
Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency Management 6, 1 (2009).
[28] Lance J Hoffman, Diana Burley, and Costis Toregas. 2011. Thinking across stovepipes: Using a holistic development strategy to build the cybersecurity
workforce. IEEE Security and Privacy 1 (2011), 13.
[29] Nektaria Kaloudi and Jingyue Li. 2020. The ai-based cyber threat landscape: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 53, 1 (2020), 1–34.
[30] Maria Kordaki and Anthi Gousiou. 2016. Computer card games in computer science education: A 10-year review. Journal of Educational Technology
& Society 19, 4 (2016), 11–21.
[31] Maria Kordaki and Anthi Gousiou. 2017. Digital card games in education: A ten year systematic review. Computers & Education 109 (2017), 122–161.
[32] Barbara Kordy, Sjouke Mauw, Saša Radomirović, and Patrick Schweitzer. 2014. Attack–defense trees. Journal of Logic and Computation 24, 1 (2014),
55–87.
[33] S David Leonard. 1999. Does color of warnings affect risk perception? International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics 23, 5-6 (1999), 499–504.
[34] Daniel Manson and Ronald Pike. 2014. The case for depth in cybersecurity education. ACM Inroads 5, 1 (2014), 47–52.
[35] Andrew Martin, Awais Rashid, Howard Chivers, Steve Schneider, Emil Lupu, and George Danezis. 2021. Introduction to CyBOK Knowledge Area
Version 1.1. Technical Report.
[36] Bob Martin, Mason Brown, Alan Paller, Dennis Kirby, and S Christey. 2011. Common Weakness Enumeration (CWE). SANS top 25 (2011).
[37] Lucas McDaniel, Erik Talvi, and Brian Hay. 2016. Capture the flag as cyber security introduction. In 2016 49th Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences (HICSS). IEEE, 5479–5486.
[38] William Newhouse, Stephanie Keith, Benjamin Scribner, and Greg Witte. 2017. National initiative for cybersecurity education (NICE) cybersecurity
workforce framework. NIST special publication 800, 2017 (2017), 181.
[39] Bernardi Pranggono and Abdullahi Arabo. 2021. COVID-19 pandemic cybersecurity issues. Internet Technology Letters 4, 2 (2021), e247.
[40] Emilee Rader and Rick Wash. 2015. Identifying patterns in informal sources of security information. Journal of Cybersecurity 1, 1 (2015), 121–144.
17
Shah et al.
[41] Elissa M Redmiles, Noel Warford, Amritha Jayanti, Aravind Koneru, Sean Kross, Miraida Morales, Rock Stevens, and Michelle L Mazurek. 2020. A
comprehensive quality evaluation of security and privacy advice on the web. In 29th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 20). 89–108.
[42] Nic Sarginson. 2020. Securing your remote workforce against new phishing attacks. Computer Fraud & Security 2020, 9 (2020), 9–12.
[43] Neetesh Saxena, Emma Hayes, Elisa Bertino, Patrick Ojo, Kim-Kwang Raymond Choo, and Pete Burnap. 2020. Impact and key challenges of insider
threats on organizations and critical businesses. Electronics 9, 9 (2020), 1460.
[44] Cliffe Schreuders. 2022. Complete index of CTF scenarios mapped to CyBOK. https://github.com/cliffe/SecGen/blob/master/README-CyBOK-CTF-
Scenarios-Indexed.md. Accessed 19/07/2023.
[45] Matthew Swann, Joseph Rose, Gueltoum Bendiab, Stavros Shiaeles, and Fudong Li. 2021. Open Source and Commercial Capture The Flag Cyber
Security Learning Platforms-A Case Study. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Cyber Security and Resilience (CSR). IEEE, 198–205.
[46] Matt Tatam, Bharanidharan Shanmugam, Sami Azam, and Krishnan Kannoorpatti. 2021. A review of threat modelling approaches for APT-style
attacks. Heliyon 7, 1 (2021), e05969.
[47] Michael K Thomas, Andria Shyjka, Skip Kumm, and Rigel Gjomemo. 2019. Educational design research for the development of a collectible card
game for cybersecurity learning. Journal of Formative Design in Learning 3, 1 (2019), 27–38.
[48] Erik Trickel, Francesco Disperati, Eric Gustafson, Faezeh Kalantari, Mike Mabey, Naveen Tiwari, Yeganeh Safaei, Adam Doupé, and Giovanni Vigna.
2017. Shell We Play A Game?{CTF-as-a-service} for Security Education. In 2017 USENIX Workshop on Advances in Security Education (ASE 17).
[49] Selen Turkay, Sonam Adinolf, and Devayani Tirthali. 2012. Collectible card games as learning tools. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences 46
(2012), 3701–3705.
[50] Margaret Varga, Carsten Winkelholz, and Susan Träber-Burdin. 2019. An exploration of cyber symbology. In 2019 IEEE Symposium on Visualization
for Cyber Security (VizSec). IEEE, 1–5.
[51] David S Wall. 2017. Crime, security and information communication technologies: The changing cybersecurity threat landscape and its implications
for regulation and policing. Security and Information Communication Technologies: The Changing Cybersecurity Threat Landscape and Its Implications
for Regulation and Policing (July 20, 2017) (2017).
[52] Melissa Walters and Erika Matulich. 2011. Assessing password threats: Implications for formulating university password policies. Journal of
Technology Research 2 (2011), 1.
[53] D WILLETTS. 2014. Cyber security skills—business perspectives and govenment’s next steps. Technical Report. Tech. rep., HM Government.
[54] Himanshu Zade, Margaret Drouhard, Bonnie Chinh, Lu Gan, and Cecilia Aragon. 2018. Conceptualizing disagreement in qualitative coding. In
Proceedings of the 2018 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 1–11.
A
WORKSHOP EVALUATION QUESTIONNAIRE
Question 1
Each item below is scored using a Likert-type scale (1 - 7): (1=Strongly disagree, 2= disagree, 3= somewhat disagree, 4=
don’t know/neutral, 5= somewhat agree, 6= agree, 7= strongly agree).
The Cybersecurity cards that I have used during the workshop:
Strongly
Disagree
Disagree
Somewhat
Disagree
Don’t Know /
Neutral
Somewhat
Agree
Agree
S
(a) Provided me with knowl-
edge about individual cyber-
security concepts
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
(b) Provided me with knowl-
edge about the wide scope of
cybersecurity concepts
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
18
Introducing and Interfacing with Cybersecurity – A Cards Approach
(c) Provided me with knowl-
edge about the relationship
between cybersecurity con-
cepts, such as the relation-
ships between attacks, de-
fences and vulnerabilities
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
(d) Provided me with knowl-
edge about cybersecurity ter-
minology
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
(e) Enabled me to undertake
independent learning about
cybersecurity
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
(f) Provided access to cyber-
security knowledge when the
cybersecurity expert was not
present
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
(g) Enabled me to discuss cy-
bersecurity with the cyberse-
curity expert
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
(h) Enabled me to discuss cy-
bersecurity with others (i.e.
not including the cybersecu-
rity expert
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
Question 2
Which category or subset of the cybersecurity cards did you not use, if any? Please tick all the boxes that apply in your
opinion:
□General Attack Cards
□General Vulnerability Cards
□General Defence Target Cards
□General Defence Cards
□Detailed Attack Cards
□Detailed Vulnerability Cards
□Detailed Defence Cards
Question 2 (Version 2 Evaluation)
Which category or subset of the cybersecurity cards did you not use, if any? Please tick all the boxes that apply in your
opinion:
The logos in the Glossary indicate the specific categories of Attack, Defence and Vulnerability cards.
□Glossary
□Attack cards (in general) (fully red cards)
19
Shah et al.
□Vulnerability cards (in general) (cards with half red/half white diagonal)
□Defence cards (in general) (white cards with red border)
□Attack – Injection cards
□Attack – Memory cards
□Attack – Race condition cards
□Attack – Side channel cards
□Attack – Authentication cards
□Attack – Web cards
□Attack – System cards
□Attack – Human factors cards
□Defence – Detection cards
□Defence – Mitigation cards
□Defence – Education cards
□Defence – Prevention cards
□Vulnerability – Code cards
□Vulnerability – System cards
□Vulnerability – Environment cards
□Vulnerability – User cards
□Vulnerability – Management cards
□
Other
20
Introducing and Interfacing with Cybersecurity – A Cards Approach
Question 3
Looking at the types of cards you selected in the previous question, why did you not use those cards?
Enter your answer
Question 4
How could the cybersecurity cards potentially be improved in your opinion? Please tick all the boxes of the
statements below you agree with:
□The total number of cards was too high.
□The total number of cards was too low.
□There were too many different types/categories of cybersecurity cards.
□The logos and icons were not clear.
□The numbering of the cards was not clear.
□The colour-coding of the different types/categories of cybersecurity cards was not clear.
□The relationships between the different cybersecurity cards was not clear.
□The information provided by the cybersecurity cards was too abstract.
□The information provided by the cybersecurity cards was too detailed.
□The information provided by the cybersecurity cards was too technical or too difficult to understand.
□The Glossary overview of the different types of cybersecurity cards was not clear. (Version 2)
□
□
Other
Question 5
Are there any other improvements to cybersecurity cards you would like to suggest?
Enter your answer
21
Shah et al.
B
VERSION 2 GLOSSARY
Glossary
Attack
Injection
Memory
Race Condition
Side Channel
Authentication
Web
System
Human Factor
Defense
Detection
Mitigation
Education
Prevention
Vulnerability
Code
System
Environment
User
Management
Targets the memory and storage of modern computers or 
hides its existence in the memory in fileless status
Alters original functionality or adds extra executions on 
the original services
Abuses conditions of systems where their substantive 
behaviours are dependent on the sequence or timing of 
multiple uncontrollable events.
Studies the outside behaviour to get information of the 
execution paths, resources used or other hidden details 
for further attack
Breaks normal authentication process to perform actions 
with fake or privileged identity
Targets web services or redirects attacks towards other 
users by abusing web services
Tricks users to providing information of some privileged 
access or resources, also refers to insiders purposely 
doing damage to internal services
Spreads through computers without user notice in the 
form of malicious software or bundle of attack commands 
that target basic system functionality and settings
Detect and notify the administrator about possible 
attacks happening, allowing live defence and tracing for 
forensic purposes.
Decrease the possibility or effect of certain attacks
Provide education to users to decrease the chance of 
being targeted
Stop some types of attack
Badly written code can allow malicious users to alter the 
functionality. Extra checking and safer coding practices 
are needed.
Computer infrastructure with not enough security 
protection which in need of fine tuning and addition 
security measures.
Badly configured execution environment that require fine-​
tuning to prevent leaking out information through the 
working environment and connections.
Bad practices, habits or activities done by careless users 
or corrupted users with not enough awareness or affected 
by social and psychological skills.
Bad understanding of the harm of from company 
management leads to incomplete security policies and 
contingency procedures for using the company system 
infrastructure
22
