Title: Building a Cybersecurity Risk Metamodel for Improved Method and Tool Integration
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2409.07906v1
--------------------------------------------------

Building a Cybersecurity Risk Metamodel
for Improved Method and Tool Integration
Christophe Ponsard
CETIC Research Centre, Charleroi, Belgium
christophe.ponsard@cetic.be
Keywords:
Cyber security, risk analysis, metamodel, threat modelling, standards, testing, essential services
Abstract:
Nowadays, companies are highly exposed to cyber security threats. In many industrial domains, protective
measures are being deployed and actively supported by standards. However the global process remains largely
dependent on document driven approach or partial modelling which impacts both the efficiency and effective-
ness of the cybersecurity process from the risk analysis step. In this paper, we report on our experience in
applying a model-driven approach on the initial risk analysis step in connection with a later security testing.
Our work rely on a common metamodel which is used to map, synchronise and ensure information traceability
across different tools. We validate our approach using different scenarios relying domain modelling, system
modelling, risk assessment and security testing tools.
1
INTRODUCTION
Many domains have become dependent on infor-
mation or industrial control systems (ICS) for their
daily operation.
While digital technologies enable
systems to be more responsive, automated and com-
petitive, their growing amount, complexity and inter-
connection increase their attack surface (Trustwave,
2020). It is becoming an essential concern in many in-
dustrial sectors which need to make sure their organ-
isation, services and products are able to cope with
this evolution. This has triggered the evolution and
creation of many standards and frameworks (NIST,
2014)(CIS, 2022). Europe is also aware of this and
has taken action with the NIS (Network Information
System) directive in an increasing number of essential
sections (transport, energy, water treatment, health,
etc.) (EU, 2016).
Deploying security measures requires actions
along several lines of defence (protection, reaction,
recovery) and the adoption of a strong risk manage-
ment approach to first identify the risks, evaluate them
before deciding on the measures to reduce them to
an acceptable level (ISO, 2009). Such measures need
to be implemented and tested for their effectiveness
either at development time (functional security test-
ing, at deployment time (penetration testing) and at
run-time using security monitoring, based on a De-
vSecOps lifecycle (Myrbakken and Colomo-Palacios,
2017).
Risk management is well defined in many do-
mains and a mandatory step in all standards with a
degree of detail and adoption varying according to
the considered domain. For example, while the in-
formation technology (IT) sector benefits from the
ISO27K standard series since 2005, while other sec-
tors have only more recent adoption: industrial sys-
tems and aeronautics around 2010 and automotive
only in 2021.
This diversification is positive as it
is pushing to cope with the specific aspects of each
domain in terms of assets and technologies, such as
IT (Information Technology) and/or OT (Operation
Technology). However, the diversity also results in
more barriers to their understanding and control. At
the conceptual level, some risk-related concepts used
may be used with slightly different semantics, level
of granularity or be domain specific. Considering tool
support, it is also more difficult to easily establish and
automate mappings between various tools taking part
in a DevSecOps toolchain, especially when consid-
ering a model-based approach. In the scope of this
paper, we will more specifically focus on the output
of modelling, risk management and testing tools.
This paper is organised as follow. First Section 2
gives an overview of existing metamodels. Section
3 outlines the proposed conceptual model covering
notions such as assets, risks, threats and measures.
Then, section 4 presents our validation on existing
tools and discusses it in Section 5. Finally, Section
6 concludes and presents our future work.
arXiv:2409.07906v1  [cs.CR]  12 Sep 2024
2
SURVEY OF RISK
METAMODELS
This section quickly depicts a number of risks
metamodels published in the literature in order to
identify they commonalities and interesting features
to capture in order to build a rich conceptual model
able to cope with the needs of various domains, life-
cycle activities and the related tooling. We start from
more general and simpler metamodels and comment
their progressive enrichment.
2.1
Generic Risk Model
Figure 1 presents a Cost-Risk metamodel developed
for optimisation purposes in the context of regulation
but not specific to cybersecurity. It reveals interesting
core concepts such as asset, objective, threat and con-
trol in the top part. In the bottom part, risk (with dif-
ferent flavours such as inherent and residual) is bound
to assets and controls.
Figure 1: Cost-Risk Model from (Chouba and Sottet, 2018)
2.2
Simple ISO27K Cybersecurity Risk
Model
Figure 2 presents a simple cybersecurity risk model
for the ISO 27001 standard (ISO, 2013) which spec-
ifies the requirements on the information security
management system based on a risk-management ap-
proach (Milicevic and Goeken, 2010). Compared to
the previous metamodel, specific security concepts
such as vulnerability and exploits are added. Require-
ment is used but is connected with the notion of ob-
jective. A responsibility role is also identified. Note
that the risk concept is not explicitly modelled here.
Figure 2: Simple Risk Model for ISO27K from (Milicevic
and Goeken, 2010)
2.3
EBIOS Risk Model
Figure 3 depicts a metamodel for EBIOS (”Ex-
pression des Besoins et Identification des Objectifs
de S´ecurit´e”) which is a French method supported
by ANSSI, the national cyber security authority of
France. It is compliant with the ISO27005 (ANSSI,
2010). The concepts in French cover our assets (”ac-
tifs”) in two flavours: business (”essentiel”) and sup-
port. Risk is modelled explicitly and bound with a
notion of scenario which can impact a security objec-
tive with a quantified impact (”importance”). Threat
is capture as a relation linking the risk to the targeted
support asset.
Figure 3: EBIOS Risk Model (Akoka et al., 2018)
2.4
IEC/ISA 62443 Conduits
Another interesting cybersecurity standard is the
IEC/ISA 62443 aiming at securing components or
systems used in industrial automation and control sys-
tems (IACS) (IEC, 2010). Compared to ISO27K is
focusing on information technology at the enterprise
and information management layers, this standard is
also considering operation technology such as con-
trol/ supervision and industrial sensors/actuators. An
interesting point is the support of partition into zones
and conduit depicted in Figure 4. This provides isola-
tion to better organise lines of defence.
Figure 4: Conceptual modelling of zones and conduits in
ISO 62443
2.5
Risk Model for Security
Engineering
Figure 5 presents the risk metamodel from a wider
metamodel aiming at proposing a usable security en-
gineering approach and composed of various sub-
models viewpoints for tasks, goals, risk and respon-
sibilities.
It also shares some commonalities with
metamodels of requirements engineering tools such
as KAOS and i* which are too general to explore here
but interesting to use as validation case (see section
4). Additional concepts here relate to the more ex-
plicit modelling of the attacker which his capability
and motive. Attack scenarios are also structured as
more general misuse cases. Measures are named re-
sponses and classical strategies such as accept, trans-
fer or mitigate are modelled as specialisations. Coun-
termeasures are more specifically linked to the miti-
gate strategy.
2.6
Risk Model for Safety-Security
Co-Engineering
Finally, we also explore a wider and more recent ap-
proach mixing safety and security which share many
similarities although the context and also the culture
of their respective engineers are quite different. Fig-
ure 6 shows such an ontology build for that purpose
(Bakirtzis et al., 2022). Compared to our previous
metamodel, the concepts are harder to map: assets are
captured rather through functions (primary) or com-
ponent (support). Attack vector relate to a threat and
are activated by a loss scenario. The interesting point
is the connection with safety through the triggering of
unsafe action. As this model is less aligned and not
Figure 5: Risk metamodel for security engineering from
(Faily and Ki-Aries, 2019)
expressed at the same granularity level, it points the
limit of trying to encompass multiple target domains.
Figure
6:
Risk
metamodel
for
safety-security
co-
engineering from (Bakirtzis et al., 2022)
3
CONSOLIDATED
CONCEPTUAL RISK MODEL
This section describes our consolidated concep-
tual risk model build based on the survey performed
in the previous section.
Figure 8 structures the business and support assets
according to the classification proposed by EBIOS as
well as the structuring in zones and conduits of ISO
62443. Figure 7 describes the articulation between
Figure 7: Risk Analysis concepts and their relationships
Figure 8: Classification of essential and support assets
the business assets, the security properties to be guar-
anteed, the risks and the control measures. The key
features are:
• the part relating to the organisation allows the
structured modelling of objectives via goal trees.
This makes it possible to link security properties
to other system goals and to use goal-oriented
requirements engineering notations and methods
such as KAOS (van Lamsweerde, 2009) or i* (Yu
and Mylopoulos, 1997).
• In a dual way, the notion of attacker is made ex-
plicit and his motivations are captured by anti-
goals called here dreaded events (EBIOS term)
which are materialised via attack scenarios. This
part linked to the modelling of the attacker is rep-
resented in a red colour in the figure 7.
• the risk itself is captured according to its dimen-
sions of impact (in connection with the business
assets and properties) and feasibility (in connec-
tion with the supporting assets which are those
that can contain vulnerabilities exploitable by at-
tack scenarios).
• Finally, security risks are addressed by strategies
that implement controls. These are located on dif-
ferent lines of defence specified using the NIST
CSF framework (NIST, 2014).
4
VALIDATION
In order to validate our model, we used a practi-
cal approach trying to model or capture different con-
cepts in various tools at specific stage of the DevSec-
Ops process, more specifically:
• the piStar strategic modelling tool (Pimentel,
2018) already investigated in a previous work [ref-
erence removed]
• the MONARC web-based risk assessment tool
(N3C-LU, 2018)
• the Capella extension for risk assessment (Naouar
et al., 2021)
• the CYRUS test framework (CETIC, 2022)
The method used was either
Figure 9: piStar modelling of a water treatment facility
• to try to use the tooling and implement some
exchange of data, e.g.
between piStar and
MONARC based on the concept revealed by their
diagrams, tables or data format. We used a simple
water treatment facility as example.
• to study an available published metamodel or
database schema, in the line of what was done in
section 2, e.g. for Capella and CYRUS
We then confront the retrieved concepts with our
metamodel to identify the mapping and possible lim-
itations or refinement needs.
4.1
piStar Strategic Tool
Figure 9 depicts the strategic rationale diagram used
to capture the business level of a water treatment val-
idation case. The legend shows the full range of con-
cepts used. We can easily map goals, resources (sup-
port assets), attackers, anti-goals (dreaded events) and
malicious tasks (attack scenarios). The organisation
is captured through a collection of agents but the no-
tion of role is not totally captured (although identified
earlier) because the person concept is distinct from
its role. Those concept are also easy to export using a
JSON format proposed in the tool interface (Pimentel,
2018).
4.2
MONARC Risk Assessment Tool
MONARC is a method and tool supporting the ISO
27005. Figure 10 represents the user interface of the
tool depicting the different assets (on the left part.
It also feature a more generic level of reusable as-
sets which can be reused. The table shows a list of
risks characterised with the related thread, vulnerabil-
ity and a set of measures than are used to address them
with different strategies described earlier (accept, mit-
igate, transfer,...). The tool also provides a rest in-
terface allowing to create/read/update/delete differ-
ent concepts through projects endpoints for assets,
risks, vulnerabilities, threats which directly match our
Figure 10: MONARC risk assessment tool
Figure 11: Capella metamodel for Risk Assessment
metamodel. Note however that the relationship be-
tween primary assets and support assets is captured
through an aggregation link: the primary asset is sup-
posed to be at the top level and support assets at lower
levels of the navigation tree. The same structure is re-
flected at the API through nested assets in the JSON
format.
4.3
Capella Tool
Capella is a system modelling tool implementing the
Arcadia methodology (Roques, 2017). A specific ex-
tension was designed to provide a semantic alignment
between risk assessment concepts and system mod-
elling concepts (Naouar et al., 2021). Figure 11 de-
picts the proposed extension directly implemented as
EMF metamodel and that can be queried using an
OCL-based query language. Most of the concepts di-
rectly match our metamodel. More specific aspects
concern the system modelling in terms of functions,
interactions and data. A missing notion in our model
is the notion of stakeholder which can both act as nor-
mal user or threat the system which would maybe re-
quire a more precise modelling in Capella but an in-
teresting point is that some agent could have both ”co-
operative” and ”attacker” facets.
4.4
CYRUS
Finally, we conducted a test with a R&D framework
supporting test plan generation and reporting (CETIC,
2022).
The tooling is implemented in a relational
database with an web interface and a Birth report-
ing feature. Figure 12 depicts a partial view of the
CYRUS metamodel. It described the System Under
Test (SUT) as a collection of components and inter-
faces like Capella and thus in a more detailed way as
inferred from risk analysis frameworks. Those assets
are connected to the risk analysis through their vul-
nerabilities which leads to attack path and results in
test suites which are then traced to test results/reports
from test sessions. This makes the connection back
to the SUT. Globally, the metamodel is totally sound
with our framework which allows us to easily im-
port risks and vulnerabilities from our risk analy-
sis through API calls in MONARC and then inject
them in the CYRUS test framework using SQL up-
date statements or higher level API calls.
5
DISCUSSION
The proposed conceptual model offers a refer-
ence framework that can first be useful for learning
about risk analysis and for transposing similar notions
between different frameworks and standards. How-
ever, the main contribution concerns the transition to a
model-driven risk analysis approach that is more pre-
cise and automated than previous manual approaches
based on tables and textual documents that quickly
show their limits on complex systems.
About the business analysis for estimating im-
Figure 12: CYRUS metamodel (partial)
pacts, specific modelling notations can implement
our metamodel, e.g.
we developed a i* extension
[REF REMOVED] which captures metamodel con-
cepts related to business assets: goals, agents (zones),
dependencies (conduits), attacker, assets (resources),
dreaded events (anti-goals) and malicious tasks (at-
tack scenarios). The use of an tool such as piStar im-
mediately enables the capture these concepts and to
make connections with the different standards. The
use of higher level model such as the i* strategic
model or system model helps to captures the main
functional objectives of the system as well as the in-
tention of an attacker. This enable to identify the se-
curity properties to be ensured e.g. on data (integrity)
or services (availability).
At the technical level, infrastructure diagrams can
also be build and mapped to our metamodel especially
through the structuring in zones and conduits. The en-
ables automated vulnerability analysis, e.g. based on
known attack patterns and CVE (Common Vulnera-
bility Enumeration). Gathering this with the impact
information for the business analysis enables an au-
tomated generation of the risk matrix and guidance
in the identification of countermeasures. It can also
support the process of test plan generation and cover-
age check as shown in our validation. Of course, the
more precise the models the more relevant the risks
analysis will be but this can also be decided based
on the criticality and isolation level of specific sub-
systems to also take into account the risk management
effort. The integration of the modelling at (infrastruc-
ture as) code level also support this, e.g. with tools
like Threagile (Schneider, 2020).
Our work share similarities with other modelling
effort for risk and security. UML has been extended
to capture security properties, for example UMLSec
(J¨urjens, 2002). The goal-directed requirements en-
gineering methods already mentioned have also been
applied more specifically. i* has security extensions
for vulnerability analyses (Elahi et al., 2010), Secure
Tropos allows to deal with socio-technical systems
(Paja et al., 2013) and a security specific ontology has
also been proposed (Sales et al., 2018). Our meta-
model is based on a series of already published meta-
models and ontologies reviewed in Section 2.
6
CONCLUSION AND
PERSPECTIVES
In this paper, we have proposed a metamodel of
concepts giving a unified synthesis of the risk anal-
ysis approach by reviewing different cyber security
frameworks and standards. We have validated it us-
ing different tools and show it is globally consistent
despite possible improvements in the alignment with
some concepts such as the modelling of agents and
roles.
Our future work will focus on the refinement of
our metamodel as we progress in the implementation
of a more elaborated toolchain covering more steps in
the DevSecOps lifecycle beyond the risk anakysis and
functional testing. We would also like to capture in-
formation form penetration testing and from run-time
monitoring back into our risk analysis model. Regard-
ing the risk analysis activity, in addition to the concep-
tual model, we also plan to elaborate a process model
for this activity in order to provide a more unified sup-
port across variants proposed in different standards.
REFERENCES
Akoka, J., Laoufi, N., and Lammari, N. (2018).
M´eta mod`ele de la s´ecurit´e des syst`emes
d’information : enrichissement par le contexte.
In INFORSID 2018, Nantes, France.
ANSSI (2010). Expression des Besoins et Identifica-
tion des Objectifs de S´ecurit´e. https://www.
ssi.gouv.fr.
Bakirtzis, G. et al. (2022). An ontological metamodel
for cyber-physical system safety, security, and
resilience coengineering.
Softw. Syst. Model.,
21(1):113–137.
CETIC (2022). CYRUS Test Framework. https:
//www.cetic.be/CYRUS-EN.
Chouba, I. and Sottet, J. (2018).
Cost-risk opti-
mization applied in the context of regulation.
In Proceedings of the 6th International Con-
ference on Model-Driven Engineering and Soft-
ware Development, MODELSWARD 2018, Fun-
chal, Madeira - Portugal, January 22-24, 2018,
pages 536–543. SciTePress.
CIS (2022).
The 18 cis critical security controls.
https://www.cisecurity.org/controls/
cis-controls-list.
Elahi, G., Yu, E., and Zannone, N. (2010).
A
vulnerability-centric requirements engineering
framework. Requir. Eng., 15(1).
EU (2016).
Dir. 1148 concerning measures for a
high common level of security of network and
information systems across the Union.
http:
//data.europa.eu/eli/dir/2016/1148/oj.
Faily, S. and Ki-Aries, D. (2019). Usable and secure
requirements engineering with CAIRIS. In 27th
IEEE International Requirements Engineering
Conference, Korea (South), September 23-27.
IEC
(2010).
61508
-
functional
safety
of
electrical/electronic/programmable
elec-
tronic
safety-related
systems.
http:
//www.iec.ch/functionalsafety.
ISO (2009).
Risk management – vocabulary.
ISO
Guide 73.
ISO (2013).
27000 Family - Information Security
Management Systems. https://www.iso.org.
J¨urjens, J. (2002). UMLsec: Extending UML for Se-
cure Systems Development. In UML - The Uni-
fied Modeling Language.
Milicevic, D. and Goeken, M. (2010).
Ontology-
based evaluation of iso 27001.
volume 341,
pages 93–102.
Myrbakken, H. and Colomo-Palacios, R. (2017). De-
vsecops: A multivocal literature review. SPICE.
N3C-LU (2018). Monarc - optimised risk assessment
methodology. https://www.monarc.lu.
Naouar, D. et al. (2021). Towards the integration of
cybersecurity risk assessment into model-based
requirements engineering. In 29th Int. Require-
ments Engineering Conference.
NIST (2014). Cybersecurity Framework. https://
www.nist.gov/cyberframework.
Paja, E. et al. (2013). STS-Tool: Specifying and Rea-
soning over Socio-Technical Security Require-
ments. In Proc. of the 6th International i* Work-
shop 2013, Valencia, Spain, June 17-18.
Pimentel, J. (2018). pistar tool for i* 2.0. https:
//www.cin.ufpe.br/˜jhcp/pistar.
Roques, P. (2017).
Systems architecture modeling
with the Arcadia method: a practical guide to
Capella. Elsevier.
Sales, T. P. et al. (2018). The common ontology of
value and risk. In Conceptual Modeling - 37th
Int. Conf., ER 2018, Xi’an, China, Oct.
Schneider, C. (2020). Threagile - agile threat model-
ing. https://threagile.io.
Trustwave (2020). Global Security Report.
van Lamsweerde, A. (2009). Requirements Engineer-
ing - From System Goals to UML Models to Soft-
ware Specifications. Wiley.
Yu, E. and Mylopoulos, J. (1997). Enterprise mod-
elling for business redesign: The i* framework.
SIGGROUP Bull., 18(1).
