Title: Towards Cyber Security for Low-Carbon Transportation: Overview, Challenges and Future Directions
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.15071v1
--------------------------------------------------

arXiv:2305.15071v1  [cs.IT]  24 May 2023
Towards Cyber Security for Low-Carbon Transportation:
Overview, Challenges and Future Directions
Yue Caoa, Sifan Lia, Chenchen Lva, Di Wanga,∗, Hongjian Sunb, Jing Jiangc, Fanlin Mengd,
Lexi Xue and Xinzhou Chenge
aSchool of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
bDepartment of Engineering, Durham University, Durham, DH1 3LE, UK
cDepartment of Mathematics, Physics and Electrical Engineering, Northumbria University, Newcastle, NE1 8ST, UK
dAlliance Manchester Business School, The University of Manchester, Manchester, M15 6PB, UK
eChina Unicom Research Institute, Beijing, 100048, China
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Low-Carbon Transportation
Internet of Vehicles
Vehicle to Grid
Denial of Service Attack
Sustainable City
Blockchain
Intrusion Detection System
Information and Communication Tech-
nology
Edge Computing
Trust Management
A B S T R A C T
In recent years, low-carbon transportation has become an indispensable part as sustainable de-
velopment strategies of various countries, and plays a very important responsibility in promoting
low-carbon cities. However, the security of low-carbon transportation has been threatened from
various ways. For example, denial of service attacks pose a great threat to the electric vehicles
and vehicle-to-grid networks. To minimize these threats, several methods have been proposed
to defense against them. Yet, these methods are only for certain types of scenarios or attacks.
Therefore, this review addresses security aspect from holistic view, provides the overview,
challenges and future directions of cyber security technologies in low-carbon transportation.
Firstly, based on the concept and importance of low-carbon transportation, this review positions
the low-carbon transportation services. Then, with the perspective of network architecture and
communication mode, this review classiﬁes its typical attack risks. The corresponding defense
technologies and relevant security suggestions are further reviewed from perspective of data
security, network management security and network application security. Finally, in view of
the long term development of low-carbon transportation, future research directions have been
concerned.
1. Introduction
According to the latest report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change "Climate Change 2022: Mitigation
of Climate Change" [1], the world is likely to suﬀer extreme climate impacts unless global greenhouse gas emissions
peak by 2025. To reduce carbon emissions, various countries have introduced relevant policies, such as low-carbon
transportation, to alleviate carbon emissions. The "low-carbon transportation" literally means choosing a way for
transportation service with low energy consumption, low emission and low pollution, as the general trend of urban
sustainable development. Here, the "low-carbon" refers to reducing the emission of greenhouse gases (mainly CO2).
The emergence of electric vehicles (EVs) smart charging and smart grid collaboration technology is helpful
to accelerate the evolution of low-carbon transportation [2]. The EV smart charging and smart grid collaboration
technology can reduce the emission of vehicle pollutants by EV orderly charging and vehicle-to-grid (V2G) technology
[3]. Moreover, the EV charging and battery swapping mainly obtain electricity from smart grid. The auxiliary charging
includes vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) charging and other charging methods. As the intermediary between the EV and the
smart grid, the charging pile can realize the bidirectional ﬂow of electricity [3]. It can supply electricity to EVs, and
also recycle the rich electricity of EVs. In recent years, since renewable energy sources (such as solar energy, tidal
energy, wind energy, water energy, etc.) generation is environmental friendly, it has become a part of the electricity
source of smart grid [4].
Cyber security is of importance in the reliability and stability of low-carbon transportation system. Firstly, data
security is the ﬁrst line of defense to guarantee conﬁdentiality, unforgeability, and non-repudiation. Secondly, to
ensure the reliability, and the integrity and correctness of data exchanged within network system, there is necessity
to implement network management security, including trust management, misbehavior detection, intrusion detection
∗Corresponding author
Email address: 2020102210009@whu.edu.cn (D. Wang)
ORCID(s): 0000-0003-0104-3136 (D. Wang)
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 1 of 34
Short Title of the Article
Abbreviation
EV
electric vehicle
V2X
vehicle-to-everything
V2V
vehicle-to-vehicle
V2G
vehicle-to-grid
V2I
vehicle-to-infrastructure
ICTs
information and communication technologies
DoS
denial of service
CAN
controller area network
LiDAR
light detection and ranging
ECU
electronic control unit
CS
charging station
MITM
man-in-the-middle
IoV
internet of vehicle
XOR
exclusive OR
RSU
road side unit
CP
charging pad
HMAC
Hash-based message authentication code
GPS
global positioning system
OCPP
open charging point protocol
IP
internet protocol
DDoS
distributed denial of service
EVCS
electric vehicle charging station
SDN
software-deﬁned networking
VANETs
vehicular Ad-Hoc networks
RSSI
received signal strength indication
IDS
intrusion detection system
EC
edge computing
system (IDS), and ﬁrewall. Finally, personalized network applications lead to diﬀerent security requirements, in which
edge computing security and software-deﬁned security should be paid attention to.
To this end, this review focuses on analyzing and studying the ecosystem operation of low carbon, with major
focus on the cyber security of low-carbon transportation. The target of this review is to unlock the importance and
impact of cyber security in low-carbon transportation and promote the coordinated development of EV, transportation,
energy, information and cyber security. Combining with the latest blockchain, software-deﬁned networking (SDN)
and edge computing (EC) technologies, this review summarizes and discusses the methods of attacks defense such as
authentication, encryption, trust management, misbehavior detection, IDS, and ﬁrewall. Towards cyber security for
low-carbon transportation, the main contribution of this review is as follows:
• Based on the concept and importance of low-carbon transportation, this review positions the low-carbon
transportation service.
• Review of cyber security challenges and their mitigation solutions.
• In view of the current development trend of low-carbon transportation, challenges and research directions have
been discussed.
The rest of this review is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces application scenarios, digitalized technologies,
security incidents and typical attacks on low-carbon transportation. In Section 3, 4, related defense technologies (such
as authentication, encryption, trust management, misbehavior detection, IDS, ﬁrewall etc.) are listed. In Section 5,
network application security which includes SDN, EC security is introduced. Finally, challenges and future research
directions are discussed in Section 6.
2. Background
The integration of transportation, energy and information networks could promote the development of low-carbon
transportation. However, various application scenarios and information interaction in low-carbon transportation will
expose its vulnerable attacks. For attacks in application scenarios or communication modes, a security defense system
is compulsory. This section ﬁrstly lists typical application scenarios and components of low-carbon transportation.
Secondly, it analyzes typical information and communication technologies (ICTs) about E-Mobility, smart grid, in-
vehicle and vehicle-to-everything (V2X) communication. Finally, potential cyber risks and typical attacks on low-
carbon transportation are given.
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 2 of 34
Short Title of the Article
2.1. Components of Low-Carbon Transportation
In Figure 1, as the energy consumers, EV could obtain energy from charging station (CS) or battery swap station.
The smart grid generates energy to supply CS, battery swap station, etc. As an intermediary, CS and battery swap
station process the energy demand from EV.
Smart Grid
Energy Trading
E-Mobility
Energy Generation
Energy Supply
Energy Demand
Energy Consumption
Figure 1: Concept of Low-carbon Transportation
2.1.1. EV Application Scenarios
Due to the environmental advantages brought by EVs, the marketization of EVs is steadily advancing. Following
this global trend, traditional car companies, such as Mercedes-Benz and BMW, or EV company Tesla, have been
planning transformation towards vehicle electriﬁcation. Since 2009, with the strong support of national subsidy policy,
China has vigorously promoted the development of EVs. As of 2019, the annual sales of EVs in China was 1.206
million, ranking the ﬁrst for ﬁve consecutive years. To realize the transition of EVs from policy-led to market-driven
in China, the General Oﬃce of the State Council issued the "New Energy Automobile Industry Development Plan
(2021-2035)" [5] in November 2020.
Figure 2 shows typical EV application scenarios. At present, the charging modes of EVs are divided into grid-
to-vehicle (G2V) charging, V2G charging, V2V charging, and dynamic charging. The G2V refers to the smart grid
provides energy supply to the EV with insuﬃcient electricity. Conversely, the V2G means that the EV with suﬃcient
electricity sells the excess electricity back to the smart grid, ensuring that the load balance of smart grid during peak
electricity consumption. Besides, the V2V charging refers that the EV with suﬃcient-electricity, is able to supply
those with insuﬃcient electricity in a peer-to-peer manner. The dynamic charging is that the driving EV is charged by
the charging pads (CPs) laid on the ground through electromagnetic induction. However, compared with the charging
modes including G2V and V2G, the battery switching mode achieves a shorter service time, by replacing a depleted
battery with a fully charged one.
2.1.2. Smart Grid Application Scenarios
One of the core concepts of smart grid is compatibility, including centralized and distributed power generation
infrastructures and access of various energy storage devices. Distributed power refers to the generation and storage
of various small-sized devices connected to the smart grid or the distribution system, known as distributed energy
resources (DER). The DER system is a decentralized, modular and more ﬂexible technology, utilizing renewable
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 3 of 34
Short Title of the Article
Battery Swapping
CS
V2G/G2V Charging
Discharging EV
GC
Charging EV
V2V charging Queue
V2V Charging
CS-Selection
Charging/Discharging
GC
EV
EV
EV
RSU
Dynamic Charging
RSU1
RSU2
Charging Layer
Charging 
AreaPrimary
Coils
Power
Converter Shielded
Area
Secondary
Coil
BSS 
Batteries Cycling
EV
Battery Swap
GC
Where to swap?
C
Communication between GC and Charging Station
Communication between GC and EV
EV
Communication between GC and Charging EV
Communication between GC and Discharging EV
Communication between RSU and Charging Layer
Communication between GC and RSU
Discharging EV
Charging EV
Communication between RSU and Charging EV
Communication between RSU and CS
Communication between RSU and CS
Figure 2: EV Application Scenarios
Wind Power
Solar Power
Hydropower
Thermal 
Power
Renewable 
energy
Non-renewable 
energy
Smart Grid
Energy storing 
device
Transmission 
system
Charging Station
Energy Flow
Energy Flow
Energy Flow
Information Flow
Figure 3: Smart Grid Application Scenarios
energy including small-scale solar energy and wind energy. Otherwise, conventional power stations (such as coal,
gas and nuclear power plants, hydropower dams and large-scale solar power stations) are centralized power. As shown
in Figure 3, small-scale solar power and wind power belong to distributed power, while thermal power belongs to
centralized power. Under the uniﬁed dispatching and control of smart grid system, the V2G technology is developed to
realize the two-way exchange of information ﬂow and energy ﬂow. Through the cooperation of intelligent dispatching
power generation capacity, energy storage facilities and intermittent renewable energy generation, the load demand of
users can be better implemented.
The 5G and artiﬁcial intelligence empowered smart grid will help improve energy transportation and utilization
eﬃciency. For example,in 2020,the China Telecomannouncedthat the ﬁrst phase of Qingdao 5G smart grid projecthas
been jointly developed with State Grid Qingdao Power Supply Company, China Telecom Qingdao Branch and Huawei,
marking the formal completion of the largest 5G smart grid in China [6]. Besides, DeepMind and the National Grid
plan to add DeepMind’s artiﬁcial intelligence technology to the UK’s smart grid system [7]. The project will deal with
a large amount of information such as weather forecast and internet search, so as to develop a forecasting model of
demand surge.
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 4 of 34
Short Title of the Article
Where to charge
Moving to CS
Communication between Vehicles and CS
Communication between Vehicles
EV
EV
Route of Vehicles
CS 
Plug-in 
Charging
CS 
Plug-in 
Charging
EV
Where to charge
seek power 
replenishment
Charging status
Charging status
Figure 4: The Diagram of V2X Communication Scenario
2.1.3. V2X Communication Application Scenarios
The limited EV battery capacity and long trips in urban cities lead to frequent charging demands of EVs. In general,
CSs are typically deployed in places with high EVs density, e.g., shopping malls and parking lots. However, in case CS
has no sense of arrival of EVs with charging demand, a potential charging service congestion may occur. Beneﬁting
from V2X communication technology,it is possible to share such knowledge to optimally manage the charging process.
For example, as shown in Figure 4, an EV seeking power replenishmentobtains the charging status of CSs throughV2X
communication, then moving towards the CS with the earliest charging service availability. In addition, by adopting
V2X communication, EVs can also actively send requests to seek power replenishment from suitable EVs in a peer-
to-peer manner.
At present, the traﬃc planning is of great importance for future city and its economic improvement. The emergence
of V2X can promotethe developmentof traﬃc planning.The application of V2X technologymakes it possible to realize
intelligent traﬃc management. It can accurately classify vehicle types and rationally arrange vehicle routes according
to the traﬃc jams in the urban areas, so it can improve traﬃc eﬃciency and bring additional productivity. For example,
London is upgrading urban infrastructure by leading the way in 5G infrastructure. The Smart Mobility Living Lab in
London (SMLL) is deploying the world most advanced urban testbed. The city will test vehicle-to-infrastructure(V2I)
and V2V capabilities in a real world environment, by taking advantage of high-speed 5G. The city launched Sitraﬃc
Fusion, a program designed to manage traﬃc through data obtained from connected vehicles.
2.2. ICTs in Low-Carbon Transportation
2.2.1. ICTs in Smart Grid
At present, the State Grid Corporation of China has built a power backbone communication network, based
on optical ﬁber communication and various communication methods (such as microwave, carrier) coexisted. The
backbone communication network consists of transmission network, business network and supporting network.
In particular, the transmission network includes optical cable, optical communication, microwave communication,
satellite communication, carrier communication, etc.
2.2.2. Open Charging Point Protocol (OCPP)
Despite the evolution of EVs has been paid extensively from both academia and industrial sides, factors such as
imperfect charging facilities, non-standardization and non-uniform standards restrict the development of EV industry.
Under the joint eﬀorts of policies and industries in the world, EVs and charging facilities are expanding rapidly.
Therefore, it is necessary for charging standards and protocols to be standardized. The open protocol allows the
interconnection of CSs and back-end systems, without special information interfaces or gateways. The OCPP is a
general-purpose open communication protocol that addresses the challenges posed by private charging networks.
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 5 of 34
Short Title of the Article
2.2.3. Charging Pile Communication
The communication mode of charging pile is mainly classiﬁed into wired communication and wireless commu-
nication modes. The wired communication mode mainly includes industrial serial bus, wired Ethernet, etc. Here,
industrial serial bus data transmission is more reliable, but with high complexity, low communication capacity, poor
ﬂexibility, high construction cost and poor scalability. The wired Ethernet network has higher capacity and reliable
data transmission, despite of complex wiring, poor ﬂexibility, high construction cost and poor expansibility.
2.2.4. V2X Communication Technologies
The V2X enables all-round communication among vehicles, people, transportation infrastructures and cloud
centers. Here, V2X communications are mainly divided into four categories: V2V, V2I, vehicle-to-pedestrian (V2P),
and vehicle-to-network/cloud (V2N/C). Among them, V2V, V2I and V2P are with characteristics such as low delay,
high reliability and dynamic connectivity, while V2N/C has slightly lower requirements on these characteristics.
2.3. Security Incidents in Low-Carbon Transportation
2.3.1. Smart Grid
Due to the upgrade of ICTs, the concept of smart grid has been introduced in past few years. In the smart grid,
fruitful information is exchanged and monitored to trigger the decision making of power system control. However,
althoughthe access network improvesthe eﬃciency of system operation,it will endangerthe security of system because
of its dependence on information ﬂow.
Since communication links are vulnerable for cyber attacks and enemy inﬁltration, the smart grid is not immune
to attacks by hackers, whether motivated by politics or proﬁt, that have proliferated in recent years. In 2015, 1.4
million residents of Kiev and western Ukraine suddenly found their homes with electricity cut-down, not because
of a power shortage, but due to cyber attacks [8]. According to the Head of cyber espionage intelligence at iSight
Partners, the cyber attack, known as BlackEnergy, ordained from a Russian hacking group using malware. The Black
Energy generates client programs for infected hosts, and command scripts for architecture in command and control
(C&C) servers. Attackers can easily set up botnets by using hacker software. Attackers can issue simple instructions
in the Command and Control server, then botnet victim hosts will uniformly execute their instructions.
In 2019, hackers used known vulnerabilities in Cisco’s ﬁrewalls to launch a denial of service (DoS) attack on
a Utah renewable power company [9]. The incident aﬀected California, Utah and Wyoming. The North American
Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) reported in September that the security breach aﬀected the Web interface
of ﬁrewalls used by the victims, and the attackers triggered DoS conditions on those devices, causing them to restart.
This caused a breakdown in communication between the organization’scontrol center and ﬁeld equipment at its various
sites.
In June 2020,a Brazilian powercompany,Light S. A, was hacked and ransomed for $14 million. Security research at
AppGate analyzed it as Sodinokibi ransomware [10]. Sodinokibi can be used in ransomware as a service (RaaS) mode,
it may be operated by threats associated with Pinchy Spider (the organization behind ransomware). The research also
found that the software can enhance privileges by exploiting 32-bit and 64-bit vulnerabilities of CVE-2018-8453 in
Win32k components. In addition, the ransomware family does not have a global decryptor, meaning that the attacker’s
private key is required to decrypt ﬁles.
2.3.2. Vehicle System
Francillon et al. [11] elaborated threat of relay attacks against passive keyless entry and start systems. The attacker
ampliﬁed the signal from the key and car, so that both could receive and respond to radio frequency signals over
a short distance. By completing the challenge-response communication process, the attacker ﬁnally achieved the
goal of unlocking vehicles. In addition to relay attacks, Wouters et al. [12] found outdated encryption algorithms
and insuﬃcient mutual authentication during keyless-to-vehicle authentication. The Tencent security research team
conducted security analysis on the electronic control units (ECUs) of various BMW models, and found 14 general
security vulnerabilities, involving in-vehicle infotainment systems, in-vehicle communication modules, and in-vehicle
gateways [13]. In addition, the team also identiﬁed security vulnerabilities for in-vehicle infotainment system and
in-vehicle communication module of Mercedes-Benz [14].
Keuper et al. [15] found that the vehicle could be connected to the Wi-Fi network through the in-vehicle Wi-Fi
device. By exploiting vulnerabilities for in-vehicle infotainment system, authors could send controller area network
(CAN) messages to the CAN bus so as to control the center screen, speakers, microphones, etc.
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 6 of 34
Short Title of the Article
Hackers exploited vulnerabilities in Tesla [16] to remotely control the Model X via Wi-Fi or cellular networks, such
as opening the doors or trunk, controlling the brakes, or controlling the car’s radio to play music. The Keen security
lab of Tencent [17] successfully injected malicious information into the CAN bus of Tesla Model S to remotely control
parking and driving modes. After it submitted the vulnerability report to Tesla, Tesla introduced the code signing to
defend against attacks.
Targeting autonomous vehicles, Cao et al. [18] proposed an optimization-based approach, namely light detection
and ranging (LiDAR)-Adv, to generate realistic adversarial objects that can evade LiDAR-based detection systems
under various conditions. Through 3D-printed optimized adversarial objects, authors demonstrated that their work can
consistently mislead LiDAR systems equipped on vehicles. In addition, the research in Keen security lab analyzed
the visual recognition system of autopilot ECU through static reverse engineering and dynamic debugging, and
successfully implemented attacks [19]. Through the generated adversarial sample stickers, the research successfully
misled the automobile into the opposite lane, causing the wrong way. Shen et al. [20] conducted safety research on
global positioning system (GPS) for autonomous vehicles. Research has shown that the multi-sensor fusion positioning
scheme of an autonomous vehicle is attacked by means of "GPS spooﬁng", causing the vehicle to lose control. This
safety issue has sounded the alarm for manufacturers who have accelerated the commercialization of autonomous
driving in recent years.
2.4. Typical Attacks in Low-Carbon Transportation
Electric
Vehicle
User
Smart 
Phone
Smart 
Charger
Smart 
Meter
EV:
w Sybil Attack
w Botnet Attack
w Data Attack
w Denial of Service Attack
w Spoofing Attack
EVSE:
w Physical Damage
w Denial of Service Attack
w Botnet Attack
w Spoofing Attack
w Data Attack
Aggregator
Control 
Center
Server
Communication 
Link
Communication Link/Server:
w Botnet Attack
w Denial of Service Attack
w Jamming Attack
w Spoofing Attack
w Data Attack
w Sybil Attack
Smart Grid
Smart Grid:
w Jamming Attack
w Denial of Service Attack
w Jamming Attack
w Botnet Attack
w Data Attack
w Physical Damage
r
reg
Figure 5: Six Typical Attacks Against EV, EVSE, Server, Communication link, and Smart grid
Cyber security is one of the major challenges that all countries in the world are facing at present. The promotion
and development of low-carbon transportation can not be without the escort of cyber security. The perfect cyber
security protection and prevention system is the cornerstone of low-carbon city development. However, the low-carbon
transportationis facing many attacks and security threats. The attacks of low-carbon transportationare mainly classiﬁed
into jamming attack, spooﬁng attack, data dimension attack, DoS attack, botnet attack and sybil attack. Note that, apart
from typical cyber attacks, there is also vulnerability of physical attack by using violent means to attack EV, charging
pile and other ﬁrmware etc. Here, regular safeguard and maintenance on those key infrastructures are needed. Table
1 classiﬁes cyber attacks and summarizes defense solutions. Figure 5 shows six typical attacks and scenarios against
EV, electric vehicle service equipment (EVSE), server, communication link, and smart grid.
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 7 of 34
Short Title of the Article
Table 1
Comparisons of Attack Threats
Types of attack
Attack Type
Attack target
Consequences
Solutions
Jamming attack
Active
EV and charging in-
frastructure
EV unable to charge
Cloaking and acous-
tic
Spooﬁng attack
Active
EV, EVCS
Private data leakage,
EVCS infected
Digital signature
Data dimension attack
Active
Passive(eavesdropping)
Data transmission
Data is stolen and
corrupted
Authentication, En-
cryption
DoS attack
Active
Charging pile, EVCS,
EV, Smart Grid
EVCS can not work
Authentication, IDS
Botnet attack
Active
Charging pile, EVCS,
EV, Smart Grid
Loss of control
Authentication, IDS
Sybil attack
Active
Global Controller
Network
congestion
and energy shortage
Authentication,
Trust
assessment
test
2.4.1. Jamming Attack
The attacks apply wireless technologyto interferewith the communicationbetween EV and charging infrastructure.
Consequently, the EV may not receive the available status of CS when in need of charging.
2.4.2. Spooﬁng Attack
In order to disturb the network operation, the spooﬁng attack creates fake or spoofed identities to legitimately
communicate with victim or send fake messages. Attackers commonly used network spooﬁng methods mainly include
address resolution protocol (ARP) spooﬁng, internet protocol (IP) spooﬁng, domain name spooﬁng, Web spooﬁng and
email spooﬁng.
The attacker communicates with EV disguised as a CS, aggregator or charging pile. If the EV is not authenticated,
private data such as the identity, battery status and location of EV may be illegally released to attackers. Similarly, in
case the charging infrastructure does not authenticate the EV, this may lead to malicious EV injecting abnormal data
into charging infrastructure being attacked.
2.4.3. Data Attack
As an important channel across EVs, smart grid, charging pile, control center and infrastructure, the data
transmission is vulnerable to tampering, injection, delay, eavesdropping, man-in-the-middle (MITM) attack etc. For
example, under the MITM attack, an attacker acts as an intermediary to receive, eavesdrop, forge information between
EVs and charging infrastructures. Besides, the attacker can inject false information into the EV battery status and
sends to the CS, this misleads the decision of CSs. When EV conducts energy transaction, attackers eavesdrop on the
power information collected by CS and global controller (GC) to obtain sensitive information (such as EV’s identity,
location and user preferences). Meanwhile, once sensitive data (such as the user’s transaction password, amount and
management password) is stolen and maliciously tampered with, it may cause damage to the smart grid and operation
of EV.
2.4.4. DoS Attack
The goal of a DoS attack is to prevent the target machine from providing service. DoS is one of attacks that are
diﬃcult to solve and defend, where distributed denial of service (DDoS) is the most harmful one. The diﬀerence
between DDoS and DoS is that DDoS is a kind of distributed DoS. It combines multiple computers to launch DDoS
attacks on one or more targets, thus increasing the harm of DoS attacks by times.
DDoS attacks are created by hacking into smart grid devices, to gain control and directing them to launch targeted
DoS attacks. Charging piles and CSs are vulnerable to DoS attacks, mainly for the following reasons. First, many
charging piles or CSs are connected devices, and these smart grid devices often do not have password or password is
relatively simple. Second, the large number of smart grid devices are also easily facilitated by attackers to maximize
the impact of DDoS. Third, malicious smart grid devices are hard to detect even if devices are hacked.
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 8 of 34
Short Title of the Article
Schneider Electric has announced that it has patched several new vulnerabilities in its EVlink CSs [21]. These
include cross-site request forgery (CSRF) and cross-site scripting (XSS) vulnerabilities, which can be exploited
to perform operations on behalf of legitimate users. Schneider Electric warned that failure to act on the EVlink
vulnerabilities, could lead to tampering and leaks of CS settings status, accounts, etc. Such tampering can lead to
DoS attacks, resulting in unauthorized use of CSs, interruption of service, failure to send changes about charging data
records, disclosure of regulatory systems and CS conﬁgurations. An attacker can exploit these vulnerabilities to control
EV charging station management system (EVCSMS) and lock down the underlying EV charging station (EVCS) or
disable speciﬁc features in its conﬁguration, thereby denying physical and virtual access to legitimate clients.
2.4.5. Botnet Attack
Attackers can launch a variety of cyber attacks by infecting large numbers of botnets and hosts. For example, an
attacker can launch DoS attacks or internet probing/reconnaissanceactivities to a target. To achieve this, an attacker can
leverage server-side request forgery (SSRF) vulnerabilities to use the compromised EVCS as proxies. Consequently,
SSRF vulnerabilities force them to redirect requests towards internal/externalendpoints, and perform lateral movement
on the network as well as scan third-parties. The infected EVCS could potentially be used to conduct cyber attacks
on integrated infrastructure such as smart grid. Attackers can also leverage a large number of infected EVCSMSs to
initiate simultaneous charging operations, or reverse current ﬂow back to the smart grid by increasing the discharge
supply. Both of these attacks destabilize the smart grid, by causing sudden increases in power load to disrupt the power
load balance of smart grid, leading to cascading failures.
2.4.6. Sybil Attack
Attackers manipulate their identities and send false information to GC, leading to abnormal decision making of GC
and failure of charging service. Active and passive attacks are classiﬁed depending on the attack behavior. Here, active
attacks mean that the attackers will tamper, forge or discard data packets. In contrast, passive attacks only eavesdrop
on data or obtain the frequency of data transmission.
Internal and external attacks are classiﬁed according to the role of attackers. Here, internal attacks refer to the
authenticated users to launch the attacks. In contrast, external attacks refer to the unauthenticated users to launch the
attacks.
2.5. Taxonomy of Defense Technologies
Given typical attacks been introduced and investigated in lien with the use cases under low-carbon transportation
system, dedicated defense technologies are of great importance. Here, depending on how those defense technologies
perform within the low-carbon transportation system, we classify those into data security, network management
security and network application security. Details of these can be referred at following sections, and there relations
can be referred to Figure 6.
3. Data Security
The data security guarantees the conﬁdentiality, unforgeability, and non-repudiation. In this section, literature on
current defense technologies (i.e. encryption and authentication) are reviewed. To enhance data security, decentraliza-
tion and traceability are essential, thus blockchain as an emerging technology is concerned. Here, the applications of
blockchain in smart grid and vehicular Ad-hoc networks (VANETs) are also covered.
3.1. Blockchain
As the advent of bitcoin, blockchain began to rise as a distributed ledger [22]. Cryptography and consensus ensure
data security and data consistency, respectively. Moreover, chain structure traces the source and accountability. As
tamper proof code, smart contract realizes the application of blockchain, where peer-to-peer network is applied to data
dissemination and veriﬁcation.
Due to its security, such as tamper resistance and consistency, blockchain has attracted much attentions and widely
applied in smart grid [23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28] and VANETs [29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34]. The application of blockchain in
smart grid mainly includes energy trading [23, 24], demand response [25, 26], and payment [27, 28]. The application
of blockchain in VANETs mainly includes data sharing [29, 30], ride sharing [31, 32], and EC [33, 34]. Table 2 shows
the application of blockchain in smart grid and VANETs.
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 9 of 34
Short Title of the Article
Firewall
Encryption
Authentication
SDN
EC
Blockchain
ICT
Trust 
management
Misbehavior 
detection
IDS
Applications
Privacy 
protect
Access
control
Trustworthy
Operation 
computation
Information 
exchange
Decentration 
and reliability
Decentration 
and reliability
Trust
evaluation
Behavior
detection
Section 3:
Data Security
Section 4:
Network 
Management 
Security
Section 5:
Network 
Application 
Security
Figure 6: The Relationship Among Defense Technologies
Li et al. [23] proposed a consortium blockchain-based secure energy trading, and then utilized reputation
mechanism to improve the speed of transaction. Finally, the stackelberg game is applied to optimize pricing. Although
diﬀerential privacy can ensure data privacy, the introduction of noise aﬀects the correctness and integrity of data. In
response to these challenges, Gai et al. [24] introduced noise into the neighboring energy trading system to prevent
attackers from inferring the trading distribution trend.
Zhou et al. [25] proposed an incentive-compatible power demand response scheme, by applying consortium
blockchain to realize the creation, transmission and veriﬁcation of transactions. Then, convex programming is applied
to optimize social welfare. To ensure the load balance and stability of smart grid, Jindal et al. [26] applied blockchain
to initialize energy trading and uplink storage, in which energy trading includes responding to the energy demand
of residential, commercial, and industrial areas. Moreover, this work has been applied to California to prove its
eﬀectiveness.
Gao et al. [27] proposed a privacy protected payment scheme for V2G network, which requires vehicles to
register and trade on the blockchain. The scheme is deployed in Hyperledger to verify its eﬀectiveness. Dimitriou
and Mohammed [28] proposed a bitcoin-based payment scheme to encourage users to share power data to suppliers,
reducing the cost of users.
To choose data providers, Gawas et al. [29] proposed a reputation evaluation mechanism for blockchain combined
with machine learning (ML). This scheme solves the sharp increase of block data and prevents attackers from damaging
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 10 of 34
Short Title of the Article
Table 2
The Applications of Blockchain in Smart Grid and VANETs
Application Field
Application Scenario
References
Smart Grid
• Energy trading
• Demand response
• Payment
• [23, 24]
• [25, 26]
• [27, 28]
VANETs
• Data sharing
• Ride sharing
• EC
• [29, 30]
• [31, 32]
• [33, 34]
consensus. Facing that roadside units may be attacked in data sharing, Cui et al. [30] proposed a data sharing and
enhanced delegated proof-of stake without road side units (RSUs) assistance, to ensure the robustness of data and
miners.
Li et al. [31] proposed a ride sharing service with privacy protection, by applying private proximity test and private
blockchain to realize proximity matching and data audit respectively. Baza et al. [32] utilized blockchain to match
appropriate drivers for riders. Moreover, zero knowledge proof and time lock are applied to verify pick up point and
deposit respectively.
To address limited storage of edge nodes, Lu et al. [33] proposed a ﬂexible blockchain storage structure by rewriting
the data withoutaﬀecting the integrity of originaldata. Along with the increase of the numberof nodes, the performance
advantage of this scheme is more obvious. Yuan et al. [34] leveraged the blockchain to provide eﬃcient storage,
reputation assessment, and rewards for the collaborative edge. This scheme promotes secure, reliable, and eﬃcient
completion of task collaboration and oﬄoading.
3.2. Authentication
3.2.1. Authentication Protocols for V2G Charging
Table 3 and Table 4 review authentication protocols in V2G charging, also elaborate merit and demerit of existing
works. Bansal et al. [35] proposed a lightweight authentication and key agreement protocol based on physically
uncloneable function (PUF) for V2G. Firstly, the challenge response and key agreement are applied to achieve mutual
authentication and prevent the aggregator from being captured, respectively. The EV authenticates with the aggregator
via a pseudonym. Then the EV and aggregator respectively select a random number to embed in public non-linear
function. Finally, the EV and the aggregator generate session keys respectively to ensure communication security.
Liu et al. [36] proposed mutual authentication schemes for V2G under home mode and visiting mode, in which
virtual battery vehicle (VBV) assists aggregators in validating EVs. Under home mode, VBV is responsible for
generating pseudonym and session identiﬁcation. Under visiting mode, VBV generates parameters that assist the
authentication between EVs and aggregator. In addition, the aggregator generates the parameter pseudo-status to
achieve dynamic joining and leaving of the EV.
According to the V2G architecture of the Chinese market [37], provincial power service providers are regarded
as central aggregators (CAGs), and municipal power service providers are regarded as local aggregators (LAGs). The
CAG allocates licenses to EV for authentication, and the subset covering framework is applied to revoke departing
users. In other words, the revoked recipients are divided into a group, while the unrevoked users are divided into
diﬀerent subsets. The scheme applies a strongly unforgeable one-time signature to prevent attackers from associating
the license with the real identity of EV.
Saxena et al. [38] proposed an authentication protocol for centralized charging and distributed charging in V2G,
respectively. For centralized charging, EV ﬁrst hashes the pseudonym and timestamp, then sends the result and a
selected random number to the aggregator. Subsequently, the aggregator sends the pseudonym of EV, the random
number selected by EV, and other parameters to the certiﬁcate authority (CA). For distributed charging, in the home
mode, the EV authenticates home CA through home aggregator. In the multi-visiting mode, to prevent the attacker
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 11 of 34
Short Title of the Article
Table 3
Authentication Protocols in V2G Charging
Scheme
Primitives
Merit and Demerit
A lightweight authentication
and key agreement protocol [35]
• PUF
• Message
authentication
code
(MAC)/HMAC
• Encryption/Decryption
• XOR operation
• Lightweight, privacy preserving,
and secure.
• Only logical analysis. Smart Grid
must be trusted so that it can not
resist internal attacks. Too many
times of encryption/decryption.
A mutual
authentication scheme[36]
• HMAC
• Symmetric encryption
• Bitwise logical operation
• Pseudo-random number genera-
tion
• Deﬁned arithmetic functions
• Resist major attacks, such as im-
personation attacks, replay at-
tacks, and DoS attacks.
• Lack of comparison with existing
works. There are many bitwise
logic operations for each entity.
An anonymous
authentication scheme[37]
• HMAC
• Hash function
• Bilinear pairing
• Vector commitment
• Group signatures
• Dynamically revoke users, aggre-
gation, and batch veriﬁcation.
• The revocation list needs to be
updated
frequently.
Generating
certiﬁcates for each member con-
sumes lots of overheads. AHO sig-
nature generated when revoking
members has large overheads.
from using the home charging pile as a legitimate user, a two-factor authentication is utilized to realize malicious node
tracking and anonymous authentication.
Su et al. [39] proposed a lightweight authentication protocol based on non-supersingularelliptic curve, in which the
third party and dispatching center generate the master key through two-party computation protocol to solve the issue
of master key leakage. Speciﬁcally, EV and CS ﬁrstly register at RSU. Then, EV and CS embed their own selected
random numbers in the parameters. Finally, EV and CS negotiate to generate public parameters. Under the random
oracle model, the protocol is proven to be secure based on the elliptic curve discrete logarithm problem (ECDLP). In
addition, the comparison experiment also shows that the performance of the scheme is excellent, but the scheme can
not resist MITM attacks.
Ahmed et al. [40] proposed a lightweight authentication and key agreement protocol via signcryption and hash
operation. The electrical service provider (ESP) embeds the random number, its own identity and identity of CS into
the shared key for secure communication between ESP and CS. EV and CS complete mutual authentication with the
assistance of ESP. Speciﬁcally, ESP authenticates the identities of CS and EV, by verifying that the key-hash response
sent from CS and EV. Once the authentication is successful, ESP generates session keys for CS and EV to ensure secure
energy trading between CS and EV.
To resist traceability attacks and impersonation attacks in V2G, Sureshkumar et al. [41] designed an authentication
protocol based on elliptic curve cryptography (ECC) to achieve mutual authentication among EV, CS, and service
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 12 of 34
Short Title of the Article
Table 4
Authentication Protocols in V2G Charging
Scheme
Primitives
Merit and Demerit
An authentication protocol[38]
• Hash function
• Bilinear pairing
• Internal attacks resistance.
• Large overheads in the visiting
V2G network.
A lightweight authentication
protocol curve[39]
• Hash function
• Non-supersingular elliptic curve
• Two-party computation proto-
col
• Internal attacks resistance and
lightweight.
• Unable to resist MITM attacks.
A lightweight authentication
and key agreement[40]
• One-way hash functions
• XOR operation
• Signcryption
• Low computing overhead, suit-
able for resource-constrained en-
vironments.
• Unable to resist internal attacks
and energy overheads are large.
An enhanced mutually
authenticated security protocol [41]
• One-way hash functions
• XOR operation
• Ensure secure
communication
among
EV,
CS,
and
service
providers.
• Formal proof is ignored.
providers. Additionally, the session key is generated to ensure secure communication among EV, CS, and service
providers, whereas a formal proof is ignored.
3.2.2. Authentication Protocols for V2V Charging
Table 5 reviews authentication protocols in V2V charging, and elaborates merit and demerit of existing works.
Roberts et al. [42] proposed an authentication protocolfor V2V charging based on mutual response. To resist the MITM
attack, the shared key is negotiated through Diﬃe-Hellman key exchange. Then the shared key and the random number
are applied to ﬁnish V2V charging authentication. Finally, two Android phones are applied to simulate the charging
demand side and the discharging side. A notebook is utilized to simulate the dedicated short range communication unit.
Although the scheme can resist MITM attacks, it ignores security proof and location privacy protection. Additionally,
the scheme can not resist other attacks, such as eavesdropping attacks.
Baza et al. [43] proposed a privacy protection scheme for charging-station-to-vehicle (CS2V) and V2V charging
based on blockchain. In V2V charging privacy protection scheme, preﬁx linkable anonymous authentication is applied
to realize the anonymous authentication of EV. To prevent double-spending and stolen coin spending attacks, zero
knowledge proof is applied to verify currency ownership in batches on the premise of ensuring privacy. The shared key
is applied to resist spooﬁng attacks. The transparency and unforgeability of blockchain are applied to prevent attackers
from forging secret parameters. However, with the increase of the number of EV, the public blockchain suﬀers from
high gas consumption and data storage redundancy.
To prevent energy aggregators from leaking privacy by analyzing user data, Almuhaideb and Algothami [44]
proposed a privacy protection authentication protocol based on elliptic curve qu-vanstone (ECQV) for V2V charging.
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 13 of 34
Short Title of the Article
Table 5
Authentication Protocols in V2V Charging
Scheme
Primitives
Merit and Demerit
[42]
• Key exchange
• AES encryption
• MD5 and SHA-256 hash functions
• MITM attacks resistance.
• Lack of formal security proof. Location privacy
leakage.
[43]
• Preﬁx linkable anonymous authentication
• Blockchain
• Zero knowledge proof
• Support privacy-preserving.
• Gas consumption increases as the number of
EV increases.
[44]
• Elliptic curve qu-vanstone
• Balance anonymity and traceability.
• Communication overhead is large.
The proposed scheme utilizes the credentials generated by ECQV to authenticate EV, so as to balance anonymity and
traceability. Nonetheless, the communication overhead of this protocol is large.
3.2.3. Authentication Protocols for Dynamic Charging
Table 6 reviews authentication protocols in dynamic charging, and elaborates merit and demerit of existing works.
Ponnuru et al. [45] proposed lightweight authentication and key agreement protocols, for dynamic charging systems
based on fog computing architecture. Speciﬁcally, RSU acts as an access point for dynamic charging. EV and RSU
ﬁnish mutual authentication via hash operation and exclusive OR (XOR) operation. After passing the authentication,
EV and CP within the range of RSU will ﬁnish mutual authentication. This scheme proposes a handover authentication
to improvethe eﬃciency of EV switching between adjacent RSUs. Althoughthe computationaloverhead of this scheme
is small, it is with a large communication overhead.
Badu et al. [46] proposed a robust authentication protocolfor dynamic charging based on cloud and fog architecture.
For mutual authentication, the EV and RSU embed the random number generated by the fog server into hash-based
message authentication code (HMAC). Then, RSU hashes the session key to generate the veriﬁcation key, which is
sent to EV to verify the validity of session key. After mutual authentication between EV and RSU is successful, the
RSU applies the session key to encrypt the random seed, which is sent to the EV and CPs. However, the computing
overhead of RSU is large. Additionally, this protocol assumes that the cloud server is completely trustworthy, leading
to a single point of collapse.
Li et al. [47] applied pseudonyms to provide location privacy protection for EVs, and improved the eﬃciency of
authentication through symmetric keys. To balance the security and overhead of the authentication protocol, the session
key is generated for CP during low traﬃc ﬂow in advance, to prevent the slow speed of key generation when the traﬃc
ﬂow is dense. Inspired by the roaming charging mode of smart phones, EV owners can subscribe to service providers
accordingto their needs. The authentication protocolis deployedin Raspberry Pi-2 for experimentalsimulation.Results
showed that the veriﬁcation eﬃciency was signiﬁcantly improved.
Under fog and cloud architecture, Roman et al. [48] proposed a charging request authentication scheme for
dynamic charging. EVs and RSUs realize mutual authentication through the fog server. After the authentication is
passed, RSU broadcasts a message to the CP indicating that the EV can be charged. The identity anonymity of EV is
protected by purchasingtickets fromthe chargingservice provider.The scheme realizes secure paymentand anonymous
authentication, but the communication overhead will increase sharply with the increase of the number of CPs.
To improve the timeliness of authentication in dynamic charging, Pazos-Revilla et al. [49] proposed an authen-
tication scheme based on physical layer, in which EV uses a shared key to authenticate with RSU. EV and CP are
authenticated by secret seeds. The scheme is simulated under various transmission power, and the transmission power
is dynamically adjusted according to diﬀerent weather. Finally, the optimal transmission power against eavesdropping
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 14 of 34
Short Title of the Article
Table 6
Authentication Protocols in Dynamic Charging
Scheme
Primitives
Merit and Demerit
[45]
• Hash functions
• Message Authentication Code
• XOR operation
• Lightweight authentication protocol.
• High communication overheads.
[46]
• ECC
• Hash function
• XOR operation
• HMAC
• Total costs are low.
• RSUs have high computational overheads and
charging server is threatened with single point
of collapse.
[47]
• AES encryption
• Digital signature
• Support location privacy protection and key
pre-distribution. Authentication eﬃciency has
been greatly improved.
• Lack of formal security proof.
[48]
• Blind signature
• Bilinear pairing
• Hash functions
• Support secure payment and location privacy
protection.
• The number of messages increases linearly
with the increase in the number of charging
tablets.
[49]
• Hash function
• XOR operation
• Secret sharing
• Realize eﬃcient authentication and privacy
protection in the physical layer.
• Lack of formal security proof.
[50]
• Stream cipher
• Blockchain
• Support eﬃcient dynamic charging and pay-
ment of authorized EV.
• Tokens consume high computational over-
head.
is selected. This scheme realizes the secure and eﬃcient authentication of the physical layer, but still lacks the formal
security proof.
To ensure eﬃcient dynamic charging and payment of authorized EV, Alshaeri et al. [50] applied stream cipher
and blockchain to realize authentication between EV and CP within 0.051 milliseconds. Stream cipher is utilized to
generation tokens, while blockchain is utilized to assist charging service providerin energy trade (i.e. bidding,charging,
and billing). However, tokens used for authentication inevitably consume computational overhead.
3.3. Encryption
3.3.1. Homomorphic Encryption
Table 7 compares related works in homomorphic encryption. Here, Chen et al. [51] introduced EC and full
homomorphicencryption,to ensure the conﬁdentialityand privacy of traﬃc data transmitted by edgenodes. In addition,
distributed edge nodes apply ciphertext to train model parameters, protecting the privacy of model parameters. Finally,
parameters of model are stored on the blockchain for updating the model parameters robustly and reliably.
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 15 of 34
Short Title of the Article
Table 7
Related Works in Homomorphic Encryption
Scheme
Primitives
Merit and demerit
[51]
• Full homomorphic encryption
• Blockchain
• The privacy of model parameters is protected,
ensuring a trusted, asynchronous, and decen-
tralized model update.
• Low computational eﬃciency
[52]
• Lattice-based full homomorphic encryption
• Protect a theoretical basis for post quantum
cryptography.
• Secure access to private data sacriﬁces over-
heads because of the introduction of a secret
bootstrapping key.
[53]
• Paillier cryptosystem
• Chinese Remainder Theorem
• Proxy re-encryption
• Hash functions
• Support privacy-preserving sensory data shar-
ing.
• Unable to resist MITM attacks and sybil
attacks. Fewer experimental comparisons and
lack of formal security proof.
[54]
• Access control
• Homomorphic encryption
• Onion-level encryption
• Support layered privacy protection.
• Operation time per transaction is large.
[55]
• Full homomorphic encryption
• Blockchain
• Protect data conﬁdentiality.
• The eﬃciency of decryption is low.
[56]
• Homomorphic encryption
• Protect the privacy of vehicle data.
• The data pre-processing and encryption are
time-consuming.
Karim and Rawat [52] proposeda privacy risk assessment model to prevent attackers fromtracking vehicles through
toll transponders. The model comprehensively considers privacy impact, breach impact, and shareability impact to
classify security threats. According to the threat level, the appropriate encryption level is utilized to protect the driver’s
privacy. Finally, the scheme proposed a lattice-based full homomorphic encryption to verify the correctness of the risk
assessment model, and this provides a theoretical basis for post quantum cryptography.
To prevent collusion between the trusted center and RSU, as well as privacy disclosure caused by vehicle
crowdsensing, Kong et al. [53] proposed a privacy protection scheme without the participation of the trusted center.
RSUs encrypt data via the improved Paillier cryptosystem, then the ciphertext is transformed into re-encrypted
ciphertext for retrieval.
According to the diﬀerent security requirements of V2G management, Han and Xiao [54] integrated access
control, data aggregation, onion-level encryption and other technologies to protect users’ privacy. In onion encryption,
the homomorphic encryption is applied to safely calculate the data stored in the database and aggregate power
data. Compared with data aggregation without homomorphic encryption, the scheme achieves great advantages in
throughput and time cost.
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 16 of 34
Short Title of the Article
Table 8
Related Works in Broadcast Encryption
Scheme
Primitives
Merit and Demerit
[57]
• Identity-based broadcast encryption
• Proxy re-encryption
• Hash function
• Bilinear pairing
• Total costs is low
• Overheads of proxy server are large. Lack of
formal security proof.
[58]
• Group broadcast encryption
• Ensure secure communication among group
members.
• Details on bridging groups are lacking.
[59]
• Bilinear pairing
• Certiﬁcate-based broadcast encryption
• Solve the problem of certiﬁcate management
and decryption cost is constant.
• The ciphertext size increases linearly with the
increase of the number of receivers.
[60]
• Access control
• Certiﬁcate-based broadcast encryption
• Bilinear pairing
• Solve key escrow issues. The system parame-
ter size, key length, and decryption cost are
constant.
• The ciphertext size increases linearly with the
increase of the number of receivers.
[61]
• Identity-based broadcast encryption
• Proxy re-encryption
• Bilinear pairing
• Hash function
• Realize the ﬂexible revocation of visitors.
• Storing and updating delegatee lists and revo-
cation list requires signiﬁcant overheads.
[62]
• Hash function
• Bilinear pairing
• Direct revocation
• Lagrange interpolation
• Dynamically adjust data access.
• Revocation list requires signiﬁcant overhead.
[63]
• Identity-based signcryption
• Realize one-to-many data sharing.
• The issue of key escrow is introduced.
To protect the conﬁdentiality of data interaction between cloud center and vehicle manufacturer, Cui et al. [55]
applied homomorphic encryption to process data. Moreover, the key switch is applied to alleviate the sharp increase
of ciphertext dimension, and reduce the noise introduced by ciphertext calculation.
Boudguigaet al. [56] protected the privacy of vehicle data via homomorphicencryption.Due to delays in the remote
cloud,vehicles oﬄoad computingtasks to the edge server,then serverclassiﬁes driving behaviorvia a three-layerneural
network. Nevertheless, the data pre-processing and encryption are time-consuming.
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 17 of 34
Short Title of the Article
3.3.2. Broadcast Encryption
Table 8 compares related works in broadcast encryption. Zhong et al. [57] proposed identity-based broadcast
encryption to solve data redundancy. Vehicles in the group initially register with the trusted authority (TA), then those
have passed identity authentication will receive the ciphertext encrypted by TA. To reduce the computational burden
of TA, the proxy server converts the ciphertext into re-encrypted ciphertext, to realize secure and eﬃcient one-to-
many communication. Bunese et al. [58] further proposed a group broadcast encryption for vehicle communication,
by dividing network data into the plaintext, group messages, and secure group messages.
In view of certiﬁcate management issues in the existing broadcast encryption based on public key cryptosystem,
Li et al. [59] proposed a broadcast encryption based on anonymous certiﬁcate, with suitability for large-scale receivers
with limited computing power. Under the random oracle, the scheme is proven to meet the adaptive CCA-secure with
the computational bilinear Diﬃe Hellman assumption. More importantly, the decryption time was constant. However,
the communication overhead of ciphertext increases linearly with the number of receivers.
To solve the key leakage caused by the key escrow in identity-based cryptosystem and protect the anonymity
of authorized users, Chen et al. [60] proposed a broadcast encryption with identity anonymity. Under the standard
model, the scheme is proven to meet the adaptive CCA2-secure with q-augmented bilinear Diﬃe-Hellman exponent
assumption and 1-bilinear Diﬃe-Hellman exponent inversion assumption. More importantly, the communication
overheadof system parametersand keys, and decryptiontime wereconstant. However,the length of ciphertextincreases
linearly with the number of receivers.
Ge et al. [61] proposed an identity-based broadcast encryption that supports key revocation to realize ﬂexible data
outsourcing encryption and revocation. Users apply a random polynomial to randomize their private keys, to resist the
collusion between agents and attackers. Delegatee list (denoted by S) and revocation list (denoted by R) are applied to
realize data access control. Subtracting R from S is a new delegatee list. Under the random oracle, based on (f, g, F) -
general decision Diﬃe-Hellman exponet (GDDHE) assumption [64], the scheme is proven to CPA-secure. However,
storing and updating lists still require signiﬁcant overheads.
Aiming at the low eﬃciency of user authority revocation in smart grid, Niu et al. [62] proposed an identity-based
broadcast encryption scheme for managing user authority. This scheme is proven to be semantically secure under the
random oracle, and realizes secure data transmission of smart grid. However, the revocation list inevitably leads to
large overheads.
Zhao et al. [63] proposed a broadcast signcryption scheme for vehicular platoon. The platoon leader generates a
ﬁxed-length instruction based on identity-based signcryption to realize one-to-many data sharing. The communication
overhead of ciphertext is lightweight because the length of ciphertext does not increase with the number of platoon
members. However, the issue of key escrow is introduced.
3.3.3. Attribute-Based Encryption
Table 9 compares related works in attribute-based encryption. Existing attribute-based encryption uses time-
consuming bilinear mapping, resulting in slow computing speed. Feng et al. [65] proposed an attribute-based
encryption scheme, which applies tree access structure to support parallel outsourcing decryption based on Spark and
MapReduce framework. To improve the universality of scheme, the linear secret sharing is converted into an access
tree structure.
To eﬃciently and dynamically regulate traﬃc lights, Cheng et al. [66] proposed attribute-based encryption
supporting ﬁne-grained access to balance privacy and availability. Here, attributes are divided into static attributes
(such as inherent attributes) and dynamic attributes (such as modiﬁable attributes).
Zhao et al. [67] proposed an attribute-based encryption scheme based on ciphertext policy, to realize eﬃcient
revocation of vehicles for vehicular platoon. Part of the decryption task is outsourced to edge nodes, to reduce the
computing overhead of vehicles. Finally, jamming attacks, velocity ﬂuctuation and distance ﬂuctuation are applied to
evaluate the eﬀectiveness of scheme.
To supportﬁne-grained access accordingto users’ interests and attributes, Ma et al. [68] proposedan attribute-based
encryption for VANETs. To prevent single point of collapse caused by centralization, blockchain is applied to store
shared traﬃc data. Nonetheless, this scheme ignores the eﬃciency of data veriﬁcation and retrieval in the blockchain,
as well as the gas consumption of smart contract.
To prevent privacy disclosure when data is outsourced to the cloud platform, Eltayieb et al. [69] proposed an
attribute-based searchable encryption scheme for smart grid. The scheme supports oﬄine and online encryptions, in
which oﬄine encryption refers to the pre-processing without plaintext and attribute sets. Online encryption refers to the
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 18 of 34
Short Title of the Article
Table 9
Related Works in Attribute-based Encryption
Scheme
Primitives
Merit and demerit
[65]
• Tree access structure
• Linear secret-sharing
• Bilinear pairing
• Secure parallel outsourced decryption
• High computational complexity.
[66]
• Blockchain
• Hash functions
• Attributes are divided into static attributes
and dynamic attributes to realize ﬁne-grained
access.
• Along with the increase of attributes, the
encryption time is longer.
[67]
• Attribute-based encryption based on cipher-
text policy
• Linear secret-sharing
• Access structure
• Support ﬁne-grained access and dynamic re-
vocation of vehicles.
• Computing overheads of edge nodes are not
evaluated.
[68]
• Access tree
• Blockchain
• Bilinear pairing
• Solve access control of the announcement
message on the VANETs.
• Ignore the eﬃciency of data veriﬁcation and
retrieval in the blockchain, as well as the gas
consumption of smart contract.
[69]
• Hash function
• Bilinear pairing
• Bilinear pairing
• Realize secure data retrieval.
• Ciphertext size is large.
[70]
• Hash function
• XOR operation
• Support multi-attribute-based secure commu-
nication.
• Lack of formal security proof and communica-
tion cost is large.
[71]
• Ciphertext polity attribute-based encryption
• Realize the secure access control.
• The encryption eﬃciency is low.
computation required for generating ciphertext when plaintext and attribute sets are known. The cloud center searches
the data according to the trapdoor submitted by the user, to realize the secure access and privacy protection of the data.
Nonetheless, the length of ciphertext does not have obvious advantage.
Chaudhary et al. [70] proposed a secure multi-attribute communication scheme with attributed-based encryption.
The cuckoo ﬁlter is applied to improve data forwarding eﬃciency, despite that the communication cost is still large.
However, a formal security proof is ignored in this work.
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 19 of 34
Short Title of the Article
Anish T. P et al. [71] proposed a weighted ciphertext polity attribute-based encryption, wherein blockchain is
utilized to distributed verify, store and share data. Moreover, a hierarchical access control polity is provided for multi-
role entities. The proposed scheme further realizes the secure access control, providing reliable data for forensics.
However, the encryption eﬃciency is low.
4. Network Management Security
Studies in Section 3 only ensure the conﬁdentiality of data, and the legality veriﬁcation of network entity, with only
defending against external attacks such as illegal access, traﬃc sniﬃng, and traﬃc analysis. However, these studies
cannot verify data from internal attackers with legitimate credentials, since these studies do not focus on the data and
behavior of legal network entities. Therefore, network management security (including trust management, misbehavior
detection, IDS, and ﬁrewall) ensures the reliability, and the integrity and correctness of data exchanged within network
system.
4.1. Trust Management
4.1.1. Trust Management for VANETs
Trust Mechanism Model: Due to limited capacity of vehicles, typical technologies requiring much higher
computation resource such as intrusion detection, password encryption, and decryption technology are not applicable.
Alternatively, the purpose of trust mechanism is to evaluate the trust level of vehicles, based on their interaction history.
Using this as evaluation guidance, it is able to abandon malicious vehicles, and encourage trustworthy vehicles for data
interaction. Depending on the scope of trust model, the following four categories are introduced:
Entity-based trust model: Literature based on entity-based trust model mainly evaluates the credibility of vehicles.
Here, the direct trust and indirect recommendation trust are applied jointly, to detect untrusted or malicious vehicles.
Tan et al. [72] applied graph theory to evaluate the routing trustworthyness of vehicles based on packet transmission
rate and average delay. Xiao et al. [73] proposed a trust model based on historical interaction between vehicles. Such
history is further used to construct a relatively stable trust link graph. In addition, authors refer to PageRank in terms of
calculating the trust value from global level, so as to unlock the cooperation potential of vehicles in trust management.
Data-based trust model: The data-based trust model aims to evaluate the reliability of data level. Here, this trust
model requires to collect data from a variety of sources, including vehicles themselves, their neighbors and RSUs.
Huang et al. [74] proposed a novel voting mechanism based on the distance relationship between the vehicle and
reported event. Here, the vehicle decides whether to believe the received event data depending on voting result, where
a closer distance to event implies a higher voting weight. Besides, the signal strength and vehicle geographic location
(e.g., GPS) are applied in literature [75]. This work further combines Bayesian estimation algorithm together with
geographical determination to identify malicious data.
Combined trust model: The combined trust model by default, takes advantages of two types of trust models. It
not only evaluates the trust degree of vehicles, but also calculates the reliability of data. Inherently, the motivation
of combined trust model is that, the trust of vehicles aﬀects the reliability of data due to the impact of interaction
behavior, while the trust of data, in turn, reﬂects the reliability of vehicles due to the forwarding path that a data
will be traversed. The attack-resistant trust (ART) management [76] estimates the reliability of vehicles and data in
a hybrid manner. Firstly, ART applies the Dempster–Shafer evidence theory to evaluate the reliability of data. Then,
ART applies a collaborative ﬁltering algorithm to calculate the reliability of vehicles, based on functional trust factor
and recommendation trust factor. Despite of high accuracy in terms of malicious vehicles detection, the performance of
ART is inﬂuenced when there are insuﬃcient number of vehicles participating the trust computing. In addition, Farhan
et al. [77] proposed a trust model to resist dedicated MITM attacks. Firstly, the trust value of sender is calculated by a
multi-dimensional entity-centered trust evaluation. Once the receiver has veriﬁed the credibility of sender, sequentially
the credibility of data is thus evaluated. Table 10 lists related works in trust management.
4.1.2. Trust Management in Smart Grid
Fadul et al. [78] proposed a robust and conﬁgurable trust management toolkit, to protect smart grid from cyber
attacks. This trust management toolkit assigns diﬀerent trust values to all smart grid devices (those to be protected in
grid), where a low trust value indicates a higher security risk, and vice versa. The toolkit combines reputation-based
trust with network-ﬂow algorithms, to identify and mitigate faulty smart grid protection nodes. In addition to possible
attacks, the toolkit also assigns a low trust value to faulty devices, indicating a high-risk failure that cannot be detected.
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 20 of 34
Short Title of the Article
Table 10
Related Works in Trust Management
Scheme
Primitives
Merit and Demerit
[72]
• Fuzzy logic
• Game theory
• Formulate imprecise empirical knowledge used
for trust management
• Lack of adaptation ability
[73]
• PageRank
• Beyasian theory
• Socially-aware trust model to reﬂect the inter-
action between vehicles
• Concern on randomness in trust management
[74]
• Voting weight related to distance
• Overcome information cascading and over-
sampling problem
• Lack of study on information delay for voting
decision
[75]
• Voting weight related to distance
• Overcome information cascading and over-
sampling problem
• Lack of study on information delay for voting
decision
[76]
• Probabilistic estimation for vehicle level
• Deterministic estimation for data level
• Combination of probabilistic and deterministic
approach
• Lack of timely decision making response
[77]
• Direct and indirect trust management
• Multi-dimensional plausibility checks
• Identify MITM attacks as well as revokes their
credentials
• Lack of investigation on social network impact
[78]
• Reputation-based trust
• Network-ﬂow algorithms
• Trust-management toolkit
• Automation level is the concern
[79]
• Signature
• Veriﬁcation
• Encapsulating the properties and trust value
for tracing
• Low computation overhead
Gong et al. [79] proposed a sensing layer remote attestation mechanism to perceive the real-time trust of sensor
nodes, and implemented trusted access control between sensor nodes. Based on the formal description of sensor nodes,
this mechanism proposes a real-time trust measure for sensor nodes. Through the real-time tracking of node trust,
this mechanism achieves the trusted communication between the terminal and control server node in the network
environment.
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 21 of 34
Short Title of the Article
Table 11
Related Works in Misbehavior Detection
Scheme
Primitives
Merit and Demerit
[80]
• Location prediction
• Kalman ﬁlter
• Accurately predict the movement of vehicles
in the presence of errors.
• Violate the privacy of vehicle.
[81]
• Distance-bounding
• Accurately verify the location range of vehicle.
• High requirements for time delay.
[82]
• Deep neural networks
• DNNs are deployed on RSUs, avoiding the
problem of limited vehicle resources.
• High RSUs requirements for the large data of
VANETs.
[83]
• Cluster
• Consider the downstream data transmission
procedure.
• Due to the high mobility of vehicles, frequent
clustering is required.
[84]
• Watchdog
• Evaluating the trust of neighbor vehicles based
on their forwarding behavior.
• It does not consider the situation when the
neighbor vehicle is malicious or the trust of
neighbors is false.
[85]
• Rate limit
• Eﬀectively alleviate ﬂooding attacks.
• Can not alleviate DDoS.
[86]
• Received signal strength indication
• Consider the physical characteristics of vehi-
cles that can not be hidden.
• Characteristics of RSSI may be exploited by
attackers.
4.2. Misbehavior Detection
4.2.1. Detection Based on Message Content
Table 11 compares related works in misbehavior detection mechanisms. Jaeger et al. [80] tracked the trajectory of
vehicle by analyzing the sequence of cooperative awareness messages (CAMs). By using the Kalman ﬁlter to track the
vehicle, this work can predict the following position range of vehicle, thereby verifying the location contained within
CAMs. However, the Kalman ﬁlter can be interfered by multiple fake CAMs, thus the fake location contained in CAMs
can fall within the prediction range.
Yang et al. [81] proposed a scheme to verify the range of vehicles location based on the distance-bounding
protocols. Here, the approximate distance between the veriﬁer and prover could be determined, by the round-trip time
of cryptographic challenge-response pairs and the signal propagation speed. If the sum of response error and timeout
error is greater than the predeﬁned threshold, the prover is considered to be out of the predeﬁned distance range.
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 22 of 34
Short Title of the Article
Alladi et al [82] proposed an anomaly detection framework for VANETs based on deep neural networks (DNNs)
with applying a sequence reconstruction and thresholding algorithm. The sequence reconstruction reconstructs the
sequence that the messages extracted from the network (including faults, attacks and genuine messages) are converted
into. The thresholding algorithm calculates a potential threshold based on the error between the original sequence and
reconstructed sequence. Finally, this work classiﬁes the sequence as anomalous or genuine based on the calculated
potential threshold. It is worth mentioning that their work deploys DNNs on RSUs to alleviate the problem of limited
vehicle resources.
Gu et al [83] proposed a cluster-based malicious vehicle detection mechanism for false downstream data in fog
computing-based VANETs. This work supervises the downstream data forwarded by cluster-head vehicles, and detects
malicious cluster-head vehicles. It ﬁrst clusters vehicles based on their distance and link reliability, and selects cluster-
head vehicles and edge monitoring vehicles. Then the fog server is applied to detect suspicious data and record the
suspicious cluster-head vehicles reported by edge monitoring vehicles in each cluster. Finally, paired edge monitoring
vehicles exchange and verify the data received from corresponding cluster heads to identify malicious cluster-head
vehicles.
4.2.2. Detection Based on Network Behavior
In addition to the content of data received, malicious vehicles can also be detected based on the behavior of network
participant,including forwarding,tampering,discarding, and selective discarding.The advantage of mechanisms based
on network behavior is completely independent of the data content.
Dias et al. [84] assigned an initial reputation score to qualify vehicle. When the vehicle establishes contact with
other vehicles, it will also receive the neighbor’s reputation scores for other vehicles from the neighbor. Then the
reputation score of vehicle is updated based on its historical score, the score received from other vehicles, and the
score assigned by the watchdog system. Thus, the watchdog system performs appropriate management based on the
reputation score of vehicle. Li et al. [85] applied a rate limiting mechanism to prevent ﬂooding attacks. The proposed
mechanism limits the number of message creations and replications within a predeﬁned time interval. The rate limiting
is achieved by adding a rate limiting certiﬁcate to the data package, which is issued and proven the validity by a trusted
organization. This work is also able to detect false counts, claimed by the attacker through the idea of claim-carry-and-
check. It can indeed eﬀectively alleviate ﬂooding attacks, however with certain limitations to defend against DDoS.
4.2.3. Detection Combined with Sensor
When the few vehicles do not collect suﬃcient messages for detection, it is diﬃcult to judge the forged data, that is,
it is diﬃcult to judge from the data content level alone. Yao et al. [86] measured the received signal strength indication
(RSSI) value, summarized and captured four characteristics about RSSI: a) Channel quality changes with time in
VANETs. b) Considering complex reﬂection, refraction, diﬀraction, and multi-path eﬀects caused by obstacles, the
signal propagation model requires setting diﬀerent parameters for diﬀerent environments. However, the surrounding
environment of vehicle is diﬃcult to dynamically perceive, therefore the signal propagation model is diﬃcult to adjust
with such change. c) The RSSI time series of attacking vehicles and fake sybil vehicles has very similar patterns.
d) The RSSI of sybil vehicles frequently changes, while normal vehicles do not. In view of these characteristics,
authors adopted time series similarity measurement and time series change point detection to detect sybil vehicles. The
proposed detection method does not rely on the trust relationship between vehicles, and instead considers the physical
characteristics of vehicles that can not be hidden. However, these characteristics may be exploited by attackers to hide
their misbehavior. Another disadvantage is that RSSI is greatly aﬀected by the environment.
4.3. Intrusion Detection System
4.3.1. IDS in V2G Network
The smart grid is highly vulnerable to DoS attacks due to blackouts and disasters. DoS attacks attempt to delay,
block, or disrupt communications,which can seriously degradenetwork performance.The deep learning-basedIDS can
promote the detection and mitigation of DoS attacks. It is deployed at the edge of smart grid to analyze information
ﬂow characteristics (such as time and frequency). The normal behavior pattern of information ﬂow is constructed
based on spatio-temporal features and context relations. Besides, the real-time schedulability analysis extracts timing
speciﬁcations and model parameters of information ﬂow. Then the IDS generates a real-time model that accurately
describes the time characteristics, to represent the normal behavior of smart grid infrastructures. Finally, with the
packet attribute analysis and the deep learning-based data consistency model, the normal behavior pattern of physical
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 23 of 34
Short Title of the Article
Table 12
Related Works in the IDS of V2G and Connected Vehicles
Scheme
Primitives
Merit and Demerit
[87, 88, 89, 90, 91]
• Low false-positive rate
• Update
database
signatures
when new threats emerge.
• Maintain a large database of
known
automobile
network
threats.
[92, 93, 94, 95, 91, 96, 97, 98, 99]
• Identify
and
forecast
attacks
based on the training and learn-
ing process.
• Low-size injected attacks are dif-
ﬁcult to detect.
information system and the source of cyber attack can be traced. Table 12 compares related works in the IDS of V2G
and connected vehicles.
Paria Jokar et al. [87] proposed an intrusion detection and prevention system for ZigBee-based home Local Area
Network (LAN) in smart grid. The system adopts model-based intrusion detection mechanism and machinelearn-based
intrusion prevention system (IPS), to protect the network from various types of attacks. This detection module makes
a judgment of network state by extracting network features. In order to detect DoS attacks, Basnet [88] implemented
DNN and long short-term memory (LSTM) algorithms in charging piles to detect DoS attacks. In literature [89],
authors suggested adding encapsulation in the OCPP to avoid MITM attacks. Rubio et al. proposed a method that
preserves privacy when sending smart meter data in OCPP. Besides, by studying possible security mechanisms and
further add these to the EV infrastructure for upgrades or versions of the OCPP speciﬁcation.
In literature [92] and [93], the inﬂuence of tampering OCPP message on smart grid performance is shown. In
literature [92], a security assessment of EV charging infrastructure was proposed, by classiﬁng the cyber threats in
the context of both public and private charging facilities. literature [93] proposed a cyber-physical system approach to
understand the interaction of various components within smart charging equipment. Furthermore, this work introduces
the diﬀerent types of vulnerabilities, attacks and approaches to improve CPS security. Morosan and Pop [94] proposed
a back-propagation neural network that is only applicable to detect DDoS attacks. Here, the back-propagation neural
network is based on anomaly detection to classify the traﬃc into two classes: malicious traﬃc and benign. The
diﬀerence between the two classes is the value from the output that delimits the classes using a threshold.
4.3.2. IDS for In-vehicle Network
The IDS attracts much attention because of its useability to quickly identify attacks. In general, if there is any
abnormality in the system, the network or host IDS will detect it and give an alarm. According to the technical basis
of intrusion detection, the IDS is divided into two categories:
Signature-based IDS: This IDS analyzes known attacks to extract their distinguishing features and patterns,
which is called the signature. Signature-based IDS has the advantage of high detection rate for known attacks, but
the disadvantage is that it is not able to detect unknown or new attacks. Despite it having a high true-positive rate,
when new threats emerge, it has to update its signature database [90]. Signature-based IDSs have to maintain a large
database of known automobile network threats [91]. Extracting the attack characteristics of moving targets in real time
is diﬃcult and time-consuming.
Anomaly-based IDS: This type of IDS is also known as behavior-based IDS, by using supervised or unsupervised
learning methods to build models based on features. The model can identify normal and abnormal network ﬂow
patterns, with advanced capability to detect unknown and new attacks. This strategy is implemented using statistical
and ML techniques.
[Statistical Approaches]
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 24 of 34
Short Title of the Article
Table 13
Related Works on Firewall
Scheme
Primitives
Merit and Demerit
[101]
• The ﬁrewall was divided into three parts.
• Analyze packets by header, port number, ser-
vice, etc.
[102]
• A cloud-based ﬁrewall
• Combine cloud computing technology with
traditional infrastructure security capabilities.
[103]
• A fog-based ﬁrewall (a semantic reasoning
scheme)
• Utilize a context selection based on semantics
to defend against threats.
Cho et al. [95] created a clock-based IDS, which ﬁngerprints each ECU based on the interval between data
exchanges. Authors applied the least square cost function and a sequential analysis technique called the cumulative
sum algorithm to ﬁnd anomalies. It is diﬃcult to detect low-volume injection data and counterfeit disabled ECU, just
like prior techniques.
In addition, the Hamming distance is also used in intrusion detection in many studies. For example, Stabili et al.
[91] examined the payload of CAN and captured every bit in the data ﬁeld. If the calculated Hamming distance function
obviously deviates from the expected Hamming distance function, the attack is identiﬁed. Regarding the periodic CAN
ID, Koyama et al. [96] applied the quantized interval anomaly detection system, and checked the diﬀerence of CAN
payload values through the quantized interval anomaly detection system. It is proved that the solution successfully
resists message injection attacks. Instead, low-size injection assaults are diﬃcult to be detected with their approach.
[ML Approaches]
The ML is applied in IDS to extract and learn normal/abnormal behavior, then create a model to identify attacks.
ML-IDS is widely applied to process a large number of CAN traﬃc data because of its many characteristics. By
using DNN, the rule pattern is learned from unstructured samples, and the deviation is identiﬁed as abnormal [97].
Meanwhile, the unsupervised deep belief network (DBN) is adopted to pre-process the data and ﬁnd the regular
trend. In addition, for the dataset, authors simulated CAN frames by running network software, and added noise to
provide randomness. This solution processes the original CAN bus data without data reduction and extraction in the
pre-processing stage. Seo et al. [98] applied generative antagonism network to detect patterns in CAN data without
classiﬁcation. The scheme is tested in DoS, frame fuzzing and spooﬁng attacks. Approaches based on the decision
tree are able to classify normal or anomalous CAN data. During the training step, decision trees require supervised
labeled data sets to make subsequent judgments. By using a gradient boosting approach, Barletta et al. [99] applied a
regression decision tree to build a classiﬁer. For designing the selection method, authors applied entropy to evaluate
CAN ID and the data payload time. For the dataset, authors used 750000 real records of CAN data, and made changes
to the dataset in the form of random value for testing.
4.4. Firewall
A ﬁrewall is a barrier between public and private networks. It can detect attacks and ﬁlter malicious network ﬂow.
The new generation ﬁrewall can also combine DoS attack detection and network protocol identiﬁcation technology.
The former is used to ﬁlter attack ﬂow and reduce the threat of attack, while the latter is used to deal with injection
and spooﬁng. Table 13 lists related works on ﬁrewall. Here, transport layer security (TLS) and secure sockets layer
(SSL) protocols can be combined with SHA, HMAC and other encryption technologies to complete the operation of
communication to data check [100].
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 25 of 34
Short Title of the Article
4.4.1. Firewall in Smart Grid
As part of the smart grid system, the host and server’s IP address in the network can be determined. Therefore, the
packet ﬁltering function of ﬁrewall can be achieved with a whitelist. First of all, the ﬁrewall checks network ﬂow based
on the protocol type, port number, and destination IP address, so as to judge whether traﬃc complies with speciﬁed
standards, regulations and whitelists. Then, the location of ﬁrewall can be set according to the structure of smart grid
network. Note that, the ﬁrewall needs to facilitate the management of relevant staﬀ. Finally, the ﬁrewall in smart grid
also needs to establish a secure access policy to identify and ﬁlter access with diﬀerent permissions [104]. For example,
the smart grid management center can access substations, but the substation can not access the core network of the
control center. The ﬁrewall of smart grid in [101] was divided into three layers. The ﬁrst layer of ﬁrewall is based on
analyzing the IP packet and its header ﬁelds. The second layer of ﬁrewall analyzes the packet based on the port number
of origin and destination process, control codes, number ﬁeld, and acknowledgment ﬁeld. The third layer protects the
smart grid based on the type of service and application. Diovu et al. [102] proposed a cloud-based ﬁrewall to mitigate
DDoS attacks in a smart grid advanced metering infrastructure (AMI) network. It is able to detect and mitigate the
eﬀects of DDoS attacks, additionally prevent them before attacks are launched. It combines the latest technological
advances in cloud computing technology with traditional infrastructure security capabilities.
4.4.2. Firewall in EV
Firewalls on the EV side are also being developed to deal with a variety of attacks. One of the characteristics of
in-vehicle network is that network conﬁguration information is essentially static. The original equipment manufacturer
(OEM) typically has a communication matrix or database that deﬁnes the rules for communication between devices in
the vehicle [105]. As a result, the ﬁrewall technology of in-vehicle network is generally based on "whitelist" ﬁltering
rules. In other words, according to the predeﬁned communication matrix, the data that meets the conditions will be
forwarded or processed, otherwise it will be discarded. In [103], a fog-based ﬁrewall system for internet of vehicle
(IoV) is proposed to protect the security of IoV. Through mining potential threats in packets, a semantic reasoning
scheme is proposed, by utilizing a context selection scheme based on semantics. This fog-based ﬁrewall system can
defend against both content threats and network layer threats.
Note that, In-vehicle ﬁrewalls are divided into interdomain and boundary ﬁrewalls. Interdomain ﬁrewalls control
the forwardingof interdomaintraﬃc. Interdomain security policies match traﬃc by IP address, time range, service (port
or protocol type), user, etc., and implement packet ﬁltering control (permit or deny) for CAN packets that meet the
requirements. The interdomain ﬁrewall is used to control the communication between the external devices. It matches
the network ﬂow by IP address, time range, service (port or protocol type), etc., and controls packet ﬁltering (permit
or deny) for the CAN packets that meet the conditions, allowing or denying the communication between the external
devices and the internal devices.
Boundary ﬁrewalls are "gatekeepers" that use one or more of the following methods to control network ﬂow. First,
the static packet ﬁltering is based on the header information of data. Second, stateful checking is a common ﬁrewall
method that records outgoing network ﬂow, and allows network ﬂow that corresponds to the initial request to be sent
back. Third, vehicles utilize the vehicle gateway to manage communicationbetween the in-vehicle network and external
systems. Similar to the home gateway, the vehicle gateway isolates the internal ECU from attack, which has become the
vulnerability for hackers. Therefore, vehicle manufacturers and OEMs need to protect the vehicle gateway from attacks.
Meanwhile, there is also necessity to implement ﬁrewall ﬁltering rules to control network ﬂow, which is forwarded to
the internal network.
5. Network Application Security
Network application security is a challenge, which involves the complexity proportional to the environment.
Protecting subnets, switches, routers, and ﬁrewalls is a traditional ﬁeld, but it is diﬃcult to improve security by using
EC, SDN and other new services. Meanwhile, in EC, SDN, and other services, security risks are still prominent in all
network environments.
5.1. Software-Deﬁned Networking Security
In 5G network, the SDN architecture aims to achieve ﬂexible control and eﬃcient data forwarding. Due to various
control functions (routing decision-making function, etc.) in the network being separated, uniﬁed scheduling and
distribution network is realized by a central controller. The architecture of a SDN includes a data layer and application
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 26 of 34
Short Title of the Article
Table 14
The Applications of SDN in the Security of Smart Grid and IoV
Application Field
Application Scenario
References
Smart Grid
• Monitor network traﬃc
• IDS/IPS and ﬁrewall
• SCADA
• [106]
• [107]
• [108]
IoV
• Service interruption
• VANETs
• [109]
Table 15
The Applications of EC in the Security of Smart Grid and IoV
Application Field
Application Scenario
References
Smart Grid
• UAV monitors transmission lines
• Detect NTL
• Authentication
• CASB
• [110]
• [111]
• [112]
• [113]
IoV
• VANETs
• Veriﬁcation delay
• [114]
• [115]
layer. The data layer is responsible for formulating network protocols, integrating and processing network data, thus
providing network services. The application layer is responsible for providing application services.
Using software to deﬁne network architecture is beneﬁcial to make the smart grid architecture ﬂexible and reliable.
The application of SDN technology in the smart grid includes the data layer responsible for processing communication
network data and forwarding power network data. The control layer is responsible for providing communication
network and smart grid integration services. The application layer is responsible for providing application services
for smart grid.
Table 14 shows the applications of SDN in the security of smart grid and IoV. Sedef et al. [106] detected and
mitigated insider attacks in smart grid, by monitoring and analyzing network traﬃc in real time using SDN concepts.
Due to the programmability of SDN, the development of cyber security devices such as ﬁrewalls and IDS/IPS are
promoted. Duha et al. [107] further studied smart grid SDN integration resilience against attacks. It dynamically
conﬁgures the network by using SDN to prevent attacks and isolate them if possible. In [108], authors proposed an IDS
that leverages the properties of SDN and supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) for traﬃc classiﬁcation.
The development of SDN technology also enhances the security in IoV. First of all, intelligence and dynamic
programmability of SDN can solve the problem of service interruption, caused by transmission interference during the
communicationprocess between EVs and RSUs. Secondly,in queuingscenarios (await for traﬃc lights), the application
of SDN in IoV can mitigate replay and jamming attacks [109].
5.2. Edge Computing Security
The EC decentralizes the processing of data, operation of applications and realization of functional services from
the central server to the edge of network [116]. Since EC is close to users, it is expected to meet the requirements
of high bandwidth and low latency to improve service quality. Meanwhile, by deploying services and caches at the
edge of network, the central network can not only reduce network congestion but also eﬃciently respond to user
requests. For example, in the ﬁeld of unmanned driving, unmanned vehicles need to respond quickly to the surrounding
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 27 of 34
Short Title of the Article
infrastructures in a high-speed moving state. In this case, the response time becomes crucial. To achieve this eﬃciency,
it is necessary to rely on EC.
In recent years, vehicular edge computing (VEC) has been brought into vehicular networks to enhance their
computing capabilities [116]. Through VEC technology, service providers directly provide hosting services, reducing
latency and improving the quality of service. The VEC targets applications with widely distributed deployments. Since
VEC further extends the beneﬁts brought by cloud computing services to the network edge [117], the goal of VEC is
to apply widely distributed applications.
Along with EC mechanism, the deployment location of EC nodes is shifting away from central security protection.
Nevertheless, the security level of EC nodes will be reduced, making it easier for attackers to access the hardware of EC
nodes. Attackers can access network ports through illegal connections to obtain data transmitted over the network. In
addition, traditional cyber attack methods still threaten EC systems, such as malicious code intrusion, buﬀer overﬂow,
data theft, tampering, loss, falsiﬁcation of data, etc.
To reduce the bandwidth and storage requirements of a cloud, Huang et al. [114] proposed a model named Meet-
Fog. The Meet-Fog is based on fog and Meet-Table technologies to accurately spread negative messages like certiﬁcate
revocation list (CRL) in VANETs. This scheme completely transfers the computing requirements to the edge instead
of cloud.
In [115], authors proposed an eﬃcient revocation architecture for VANETs. This scheme increases the eﬀectiveness
of certiﬁcate status checking process by utilizing EC and Merkle hash tree. Compared with other methods using CRL
check, the veriﬁcation delay is also reduced. To protect edge nodes from accessing the cloud, Ahmad et al. [113]
introduced an overview of existing cloud access security broker (CASB) strategies and how strategies are applied to
the cloud computing environment. Authors applied principal component analysis (PCA) to study diﬀerent independent
parameters that aﬀect CASB. The result of analysis is to determine ﬁve parameters that aﬀect PCA analysis.
Applying EC technology to smart grid enables plug-and-play and interoperability [110]. For example, when an
unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) monitors power lines, the EC can be integrated with system services. The connection
between the microgrid control center and EC nodes, is helpful in solving the real-time demand-side power consumption
scenario.
In [111], authors proposed an EC-enabled non-technical loss (NTL) fraud detection scheme called ENFD. It is
supported by an EC framework, which provides a big data security analytic (BDSA) algorithm to analyze big data
to detect NTL fraud in the smart grid. A lightweight key exchange and mutual authentication protocol [112] was
proposed for edge-based smart grid environments. The design of this protocol applies a one-way hash function, XOR
computation, and ECC instead of another heavy cryptographic function. Table 15 shows the applications of EC in the
security of smart grid and IoV.
6. Future Research Directions
In previous sections, perspectives from data security, network management and network application security have
been reviewed in detail. Here, it is clear that most of literature have paid attention on data security as that is the
dominant element in low-carbon transportation, is of importance to trigger service in safety manner. Besides, the
network management security is complementary to data security, based on the ground that the secure data can be
utilized as guidance for enabling network management, including monitoring and detecting malicious network devices
(normally those have passed the authentication or is eligible to participate data encryption/decryption). Thanks to
this, both the defense technologies in SDN and EC, will be reliable to resist against threats from external attackers
(defensed through authentication and encryption technologies) and those malicious attackers (detected through trust
management, malicious behavior detection, IDS and ﬁrewall).
Indeed, there are still open issues remaining to communities. The primary direction is to promote the intelligent
level of vehicles in low-carbon transport system, so as to beneﬁt from much powerful digitalized services and cyber
security technologies. Other emerging directions such as detachable security technology, zero knowledge proof are
worthwhile investigation in line with the integrated control for low-carbon transportation. These potential directions
are introduced as follow:
6.1. Intelligent Connected Vehicles (ICV)
The ICV is widely integrated with vehicle information and communication, artiﬁcial intelligence, software,
Internet, etc. Meanwhile, the ICV requires coordinated development across industries and ﬁelds. At present, the ICV is
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 28 of 34
Short Title of the Article
in the stage of rapid increase with penetration rate. The ICV can integrate millions of mobile applications into EVs, and
achieve a breakthrough in EV applications. Thus, the ICV are expected to become a new generation of super terminals
after the smartphone. In addition, due to the rampant cyber attacks, the security of ICV needs to be concerned.
6.2. Detachable Security Technology
As the continuous improvement of various technologies and the emergence of new technologies, from hardware
architecture to software algorithms, each technology is combined with each other to achieve dedicated functions.
However, these technologies are not combined with certain level, and also need to achieve a balance between function
and performance.
The problem of multi-functional and simple ﬁrewalls is a typical example. For choosing a ﬁrewall, its performance
and functions should be considered. The more functions a simple ﬁrewall reduces, the higher its performance will be.
If the function of a multi-functional ﬁrewall increases, its performance will be reduced accordingly. Therefore, both the
multi-functional ﬁrewall and the simple ﬁrewall need to strike a balance between function, performance, applicability
and stability.
6.3. Integrated Control Problem
In the context of policy support and environmentalprotection, people will be more inclined to buy EVs. Along with
the numberof EVs rapidly increasing,the communicationin the IoV needs attention.Then, when a largenumberof EVs
are connected to the smart grid, the impact on the smart grid system will become greater. Therefore, the integrated
control problem of EV smart charging and smart grid collaborative technology is also one of the future research
directions. It can be mainly divided into the identity authentication of the EV with charging demands, the secure
communication in IoV, and the stable operation of smart grid system. How to ensure secure access, communication
and control the charging/discharging time is particularly important.
6.4. Zero Knowledge Proof
The security of intelligent transportation relies on large, heterogeneous, and multi-source data. To ensure
computational security, zero knowledge proof is gradually applied to intelligent transportation systems [118]. Zero
knowledge proof [119] is to make the veriﬁer believe that the prover knows the proof without disclosing private
information. Currently, zero knowledge proof is applied to the privacy protection of convolutional neural network
model parameters, such as the number of convolutional layers and weights. That is to say, under the condition that
the veriﬁer can not obtain model parameters, zero knowledge proof is applied to ensure that the training results are
trustworthy and tamper-proof.
However, zero knowledge proof still faces a large amount of computation and does not support scenarios with
limited resource. Additionally, the system must generate public parameters for the prover and veriﬁer in advance
to complete the veriﬁcation. In the future, zero knowledge proof without bilinear mappings should be focused on.
Moreover, on the basis of not aﬀecting the availability of data, zero knowledge proof is applied to improve the privacy
of data.
6.5. Promotion of Global-Level Policy
Given the early stage development of low-carbon transportation, there is still necessary to design the top-level
policy and accelerate technology innovation. Firstly, the low-carbon manufacturing is realized based on the green
energy supply, and sequentially the energy consumption of EVs is promoted through clean energy. In the light of this, it
is necessary to continuously optimize the energy structure of urban transportation, and increase the proportion of green
energy source. Secondly, accelerating the application of emerging technologies such as vehicle-road coordination, 5G
is with potential to realize low cost transportation. Thirdly, strengthening the cooperation between EVs and charging
infrastructures realizes full and timely information interaction between EVs and roadside infrastructures. Therefore,
making full use of the emerging information technologies (such as the 5G, big data, artiﬁcial intelligence, SDN, EC and
blockchain)are indeed to promotethe integrationof EVs and transportationindustries. Finally,as several elements from
interdisciplinary areas are included, the low-carbon transportation system is vulnerable to known/unknown attacks.
Aiming to guarantee the security of low-carbon transportation, it is of great importance to well deploy security defense
systems and establish IDS.
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 29 of 34
Short Title of the Article
7. Concluding Remarks
Concerning the increasing attention on achieving low-carbon transportation and necessity to secure the system
through cyber security technologies, this review ﬁrstly introduces the concept and background of low-carbon trans-
portation. Then, based on identifying typical attacks within the ecosystem of low-carbon transportation system, this
review classiﬁes and reviews emerging defense technologies from the aspects of data security, network management
security and network application security, covering up-to-date technical advance that have been contributing to
communities. Finally, along with existing contribution, this review further highlighted several future directions
that cover the cyber secure low-carbon transportation system from evolution of vehicles, compatibility of defense
technologies integration and potential impact on unlocking the cyber security and system reliability.
The analysis of literature is objective summary and classiﬁcation into diﬀerent technical taxonomy, therefore there
is no issue about sources of error in analysis as all references are published at high quality international journals and
conferences. As the angle of review is from cyber security, the purpose of this survey is to attract attention from both
academic and industrial communities, thus persistent eﬀorts in promoting the literature are required.
References
[1] Intergovernmental
Panel
on
Climate
Change
(IPCC),
Climate
change
2022:
Mitigation
of
climate
change,
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg3/ 2022.
[2] K. Glitman, D. Farnsworth, J. Hildermeier, The role of electric vehicles in a decarbonized economy: Supporting a reliable, aﬀordable and
eﬃcient electric system, The Electricity Journal 32 (7) (2019) 106623.
[3] F. Mwasilu, J. J. Justo, E.-K. Kim, T. D. Do, J.-W. Jung, Electric vehicles and smart grid interaction: A review on vehicle to grid and renewable
energy sources integration, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 34 (2014) 501–516.
[4] D. Eltigani, S. Masri, Challenges of integrating renewable energy sources to smart grids: A review, Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews 52 (2015) 770–780.
[5] G.
O.
of
the
State
Council,
New
energy
automobile
industry
development
plan
(2021-2035),
[EB/OL],
http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2020-11/02/content_5556716.htm, Accessed Oct 20, 2020.
[6] J. Liu, Z. Zhao, J. Ji, M. Hu, Research and application of wireless sensor network technology in power transmission and distribution system,
Intelligent and Converged Networks 1 (2) (2020) 199–220. doi:10.23919/ICN.2020.0016.
[7] leiphone, After deepmind helped google save a lot of electricity bills, it now plans to use ai to balance the power supply in the uk,
https://baijiahao.baidu.com/s?id=1561714176427262&wfr=spider&for=pc 2017.
[8] G. Liang, S. R. Weller, J. Zhao, F. Luo, Z. Y. Dong, The 2015 ukraine blackout: Implications for false data injection attacks, IEEE Transactions
on Power Systems 32 (4) (2017) 3317–3318. doi:10.1109/TPWRS.2016.2631891.
[9] G. Hale, Utilities beneﬁt from a risk-based approach to cybersecurity., Control Engineering 67 (2) (2020) 12–13.
[10] S. He, Y. Zhou, X. Lv, W. Chen, Detection method for tolerable false data injection attack based on deep learning framework, in: 2020
Chinese Automation Congress (CAC), IEEE, 2020, pp. 6717–6721.
[11] A. Francillon, B. Danev, S. Capkun, Relay attacks on passive keyless entry and start systems in modern cars, in: Proceedings of the Network
and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS), Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule Zürich, Department of Computer Science,
2011.
[12] L. Wouters, E. Marin, T. Ashur, B. Gierlichs, B. Preneel, Fast, furious and insecure: Passive keyless entry and start systems in modern
supercars, The International Association for Cryptologic Research (IACR) Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems
2019 (3) (2019) 66–85.
[13] KEEN
Security
Lab,
Experimental
Security
Assessment
of
BMW
Cars:
A
Summary
Report,
[EB/OL],
https://keenlab.tencent.com/en/whitepapers/Experimental_Security_Assessment_of_BMW_Cars_by_KeenLab.pdf
Accessed March 22, 2022.
[14] KEEN Security Lab, Mercedes Benz MBUX Security Research Report, [EB/OL], https://keenlab.tencent.com/en/whitepapers/Mercedes_Be
Accessed March 22, 2022.
[15] D. Keuper, T. Alkemade, ‘The connected car ways to get unauthorized access and potential implications, Computest, Zoetermeer, The
Netherlands, Tech. Rep (2018).
[16] Cyber Attacks in Connected Cars: What Tesla Did Diﬀerently to Win, [EB/OL], https://www.appknox.com/blog/cyber-attacks-in-connected
2017.
[17] Y. D. Sen Nie, Ling Lu, Free-fall: hacking Tesla from wireless to CAN bus, [EB/OL], https://www.blackhat.com/docs/us-17/thursday/us-17-N
2017.
[18] Y. Cao, C. Xiao, D. Yang, J. Fang, R. Yang, M. Liu, B. Li, Adversarial objects against lidar-based autonomous driving systems, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.05418 (2019).
[19] KEEN Security Lab, Experimental Security Research of Tesla Autopilot, [EB/OL], https://keenlab.tencent.com/en/whitepapers/Experiment
Accessed March 22, 2022.
[20] J. Shen, J. Y. Won, Z. Chen, Q. A. Chen, Drift with Devil: Security of Multi-Sensor Fusion based Localization in High-Level Autonomous
Driving under GPS Spooﬁng, in: 29th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 20), 2020, pp. 931–948.
[21] Schneider-Electric, Schneider electric security notiﬁcation, https://download.schneider-electric.com/files?p_Doc_Ref=SEVD-2021-348-
2021.
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 30 of 34
Short Title of the Article
[22] Z. Li, J. Kang, R. Yu, D. Ye, Q. Deng, Y. Zhang, Bitcoin and beyond: A technical survey on decentralized digital currencies, IEEE transactions
on industrial informatics 14 (8) (2017) 3690–3700.
[23] F. Tschorsch, B. Scheuermann, Consortium blockchain for secure energy trading in industrial internet of things, IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials 18 (3) (2016) 2084–2123.
[24] K. Gai, Y. Wu, L. Zhu, M. Qiu, M. Shen, Privacy-preserving energy trading using consortium blockchain in smart grid, IEEE Transactions
on Industrial Informatics 15 (6) (2019) 3548–3558.
[25] Z. Zhou, B. Wang, Y. Guo, Y. Zhang, Blockchain and computational intelligence inspired incentive-compatible demand response in internet
of electric vehicles, IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence 3 (3) (2019) 205–216.
[26] A. Jindal, G. S. Aujla, N. Kumar, M. Villari, Guardian: Blockchain-based secure demand response management in smart grid system, IEEE
Transactions on Services Computing 13 (4) (2019) 613–624.
[27] F. Gao, L. Zhu, M. Shen, K. Sharif, Z. Wan, K. Ren, A blockchain-based privacy-preserving payment mechanism for vehicle-to-grid networks,
IEEE network 32 (6) (2018) 184–192.
[28] T. Dimitriou, A. Mohammed, Fair and privacy-respecting bitcoin payments for smart grid data, IEEE Internet of Things Journal 7 (10) (2020)
10401–10417.
[29] M. Gawas, H. Patil, S. S. Govekar, An integrative approach for secure data sharing in vehicular edge computing using blockchain, Peer-to-Peer
Networking and Applications 14 (5) (2021) 2840–2857.
[30] J. Cui, F. Ouyang, Z. Ying, L. Wei, H. Zhong, Secure and eﬃcient data sharing among vehicles based on consortium blockchain, IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems (2021).
[31] M. Li, L. Zhu, X. Lin, Eﬃcient and privacy-preserving carpooling using blockchain-assisted vehicular fog computing, IEEE Internet of
Things Journal 6 (3) (2018) 4573–4584.
[32] M. Baza, N. Lasla, M. M. Mahmoud, G. Srivastava, M. Abdallah, B-ride: Ride sharing with privacy-preservation, trust and fair payment atop
public blockchain, IEEE Transactions on Network Science and Engineering 8 (2) (2019) 1214–1229.
[33] Y. Lu, J. Zhang, Y. Qi, S. Qi, Y. Zheng, Y. Liu, H. Song, W. Wei, Accelerating at the edge: A storage-elastic blockchain for latency-sensitive
vehicular edge computing, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems (2021).
[34] L. Yuan, Q. He, F. Chen, J. Zhang, L. Qi, X. Xu, Y. Xiang, Y. Yang, Csedge: Enabling collaborative edge storage for multi-
access edge computing based on blockchain, IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems 33 (8) (2022) 1873–1887.
doi:10.1109/TPDS.2021.3131680.
[35] G. Bansal, V. Chamola, N. Kumar, M. Guizani, B. Sikdar, Lightweight mutual authentication protocol for v2g using physical unclonable
function, IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology PP (99) (2020).
[36] L. Hong, H. Ning, Z. Yan, L. T. Yang, Aggregated-proofs based privacy-preserving authentication for v2g networks in the smart grid, IEEE
Transactions on Smart Grid 3 (4) (2012) 1722–1733.
[37] J. Chen, Y. Zhang, W. Su, An anonymous authentication scheme for plug-in electric vehicles joining to charging/discharging station in
vehicle-to-grid (v2g) networks, China Communications (3) (2015) 11.
[38] N. Saxena, B. J. Choi, Authentication scheme for ﬂexible charging and discharging of mobile vehicles in the v2g networks, IEEE Transactions
on Information Forensics; Security 11 (7) (2016) 1438–1452.
[39] Y. Su, G. Shen, M. Zhang, A novel privacy-preserving authentication scheme for v2g networks, IEEE Systems Journal 14 (2) (2020) 1963–
1971.
[40] S. Ahmed, S. Shamshad, Z. Ghaﬀar, K. Mahmood, N. Kumar, R. M. Parizi, K.-K. R. Choo, Signcryption based authenticated and key exchange
protocol for ei-based v2g environment, IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 12 (6) (2021) 5290–5298. doi:10.1109/TSG.2021.3102156.
[41] V. Sureshkumar, S. Mugunthan, R. Amin, An enhanced mutually authenticated security protocol with key establishment for cloud enabled
smart vehicle to grid network, Peer-to-Peer Networking and Applications 15 (5) (2022) 2347–2363.
[42] B. Roberts, K. Akkaya, E. Bulut, M. Kisacikoglu, An authentication framework for electric vehicle-to-electric vehicle charging applications,
in: IEEE International Conference on Mobile Ad Hoc ; Sensor Systems, 2017.
[43] M. Baza, A. Sherif, M. M. E. A. Mahmoud, S. Bakiras, W. Alasmary, M. Abdallah, X. Lin, Privacy-preserving blockchain-
based energy trading schemes for electric vehicles, IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology 70 (9) (2021) 9369–9384.
doi:10.1109/TVT.2021.3098188.
[44] A. M. Almuhaideb, S. S. Algothami, Eﬃcient privacy-preserving and secure authentication for electric-vehicle-to-electric-vehicle-charging
system based on ecqv, Journal of Sensor and Actuator Networks 11 (2) (2022) 28.
[45] R. B. Ponnuru, G. R. Alavalapati, B. Palaniswamy, S. K. Kommuri, Ev-auth: Lightweight authentication protocol suite for
dynamic charging system of electric vehicles with seamless handover, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles (2022) 1–
1doi:10.1109/TIV.2022.3153658.
[46] P. R. Babu, R. Amin, A. G. Reddy, A. K. Das, W. Susilo, Y. Park, Robust authentication protocol for dynamic charging system of electric
vehicles, IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology 70 (11) (2021) 11338–11351. doi:10.1109/TVT.2021.3116279.
[47] H. Li, G. Dán, K. Nahrstedt, Portunes+: Privacy-preserving fast authentication for dynamic electric vehicle charging, IEEE Transactions on
Smart Grid 8 (5) (2017) 2305–2313. doi:10.1109/TSG.2016.2522379.
[48] L. Roman, P. Gondim, Authentication protocol in ctns for a cwd-wpt charging system in a cloud environment, Ad hoc networks 97 (Feb.)
(2020) 102004.1–102004.14.
[49] M. Pazos-Revilla, A. Alsharif, S. Gunukula, T. N. Guo, M. Mahmoud, X. Shen, Secure and privacy-preserving physical-layer-assisted scheme
for ev dynamic charging system, IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology (2017).
[50] A. Alshaeri, M. Younis, Lightweight authentication and authorization protocol for dynamic charging of electric vehicles, in: 2022 IEEE 19th
Annual Consumer Communications & Networking Conference (CCNC), IEEE, 2022, pp. 550–556.
[51] J. Chen, K. Li, P. S. Yu, Privacy-preserving deep learning model for decentralized vanets using fully homomorphic encryption and blockchain,
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems (2021) 1–10doi:10.1109/TITS.2021.3105682.
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 31 of 34
Short Title of the Article
[52] H. Karim, D. B. Rawat, Tollsonly please—homomorphic encryption for toll transponder privacy in internet of vehicles, IEEE Internet of
Things Journal 9 (4) (2022) 2627–2636. doi:10.1109/JIOT.2021.3056240.
[53] Q. Kong, R. Lu, M. Ma, H. Bao, A privacy-preserving sensory data sharing scheme in internet of vehicles, Future Generation Computer
Systems 92 (MAR.) (2017) 644–655.
[54] W. Han, Y. Xiao, Ip2dm: integrated privacy-preserving data management architecture for smart grid v2g networks, Wireless Communications
and Mobile Computing (2016).
[55] Y. Cui, S. Li, Y. Wang, B. Gao, The data protection of intelligent connected vehicles cloud control framework using fully homomorphic
encryption, in: 2020 4th CAA International Conference on Vehicular Control and Intelligence (CVCI), 2020.
[56] A. Boudguiga, O. Stan, A. Fazzat, H. Labiod, P.-E. Clet, Privacy preserving services for intelligent transportation systems with homomorphic
encryption., in: ICISSP, 2021, pp. 684–693.
[57] H. Zhong, S. Zhang, J. Cui, L. Wei, L. Liu, Broadcast encryption scheme for v2i communication in vanets, IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology 71 (3) (2022) 2749–2760. doi:10.1109/TVT.2021.3113660.
[58] E. E. Bunese, E. Todt, L. Albini, Vanet security through group broadcast encryption, Journal of Computer and Communications 08 (8) (2020)
22–35.
[59] J. Li, L. Chen, Y. Lu, Y. Zhang, Anonymous certiﬁcate-based broadcast encryption with constant decryption cost, Information Sciences
(2018) S0020025518303244.
[60] L. Chen, J. Li, Y. Zhang, Anonymous certiﬁcate-based broadcast encryption with personalized messages, IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting
PP (99) (2020) 1–15.
[61] C. Ge, L. Zhe, J. Xia, L. Fang, Revocable identity-based broadcast proxy re-encryption for data sharing in clouds, IEEE Transactions on
Dependable and Secure Computing PP (99) (2019) 1–1.
[62] S. Niu, L. Fang, M. Song, F. Yu, S. Han, An id-based broadcast encryption scheme for cloud-network integration in smart grid, KSII
Transactions on Internet and Information Systems (TIIS) 15 (9) (2021) 3365–3383.
[63] Y. Zhao, Y. Wang, Y. Liang, H. Yu, Y. Ren, Identity-based broadcast signcryption scheme for vehicular platoon communication, IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics (2022).
[64] W. Susilo, R. Chen, F. Guo, G. Yang, Y. Mu, Y. W. Chow, Recipient revocable identity-based broadcast encryption:how to revoke some
recipients in ibbe without knowledge of the plaintext, in: ACM, 2016.
[65] C. Feng, K. Yu, M. Aloqaily, M. Alazab, S. Mumtaz, Attribute-based encryption with parallel outsourced decryption for edge intelligent iov,
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology 69 (11) (2020) 13784–13795.
[66] L. Cheng, J. Liu, G. Xu, Z. Zhang, W. Wang, Sctsc: A semicentralized traﬃc signal control mode with attribute-based blockchain in iovs,
IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Systems 6 (6) (2019) 1373–1385.
[67] Y. Zhao, Y. Wang, X. Cheng, H. Chen, H. Yu, Y. Ren, Rfap: A revocable ﬁne-grained access control mechanism for autonomous vehicle
platoon, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems (2021) 1–12doi:10.1109/TITS.2021.3105458.
[68] J. Ma, T. Li, J. Cui, Z. Ying, J. Cheng, Attribute-based secure announcement sharing among vehicles using blockchain, IEEE Internet of
Things Journal 8 (13) (2021) 10873–10883.
[69] N. Eltayieb, R. Elhabob, A. Hassan, F. Li, An eﬃcient attribute-based online/oﬄine searchable encryption and its application in cloud-based reliable sma
J. Syst. Archit. 98 (2019) 165–172. doi:10.1016/j.sysarc.2019.07.005.
URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sysarc.2019.07.005
[70] R. Chaudhary, G. S. Aujla, S. Garg, N. Kumar, J. J. Rodrigues, Sdn-enabled multi-attribute-based secure communication for smart grid in
iiot environment, IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 14 (6) (2018) 2629–2640.
[71] A. T. P, S. M. A, R. Elavarasu, S. Shilpi, G. Shubha, A. Kumar, Blockchain based secure data transmission among internet of vehicles, in:
2022 2nd International Conference on Innovative Practices in Technology and Management (ICIPTM), Vol. 2, IEEE, 2022, pp. 765–769.
[72] S. Tan, X. Li, Q. Dong, A trust management system for securing data plane of ad-hoc networks, IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology
65 (9) (2015) 7579–7592.
[73] Y. Xiao, Y. Liu, BayesTrust and VehicleRank: Constructing an implicit Web of trust in VANET, IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology
68 (3) (2019) 2850–2864.
[74] Z. Huang, S. Ruj, M. A. Cavenaghi, M. Stojmenovic, A. Nayak, A social network approach to trust management in VANETs, Peer-to-peer
networking and applications 7 (3) (2014) 229–242.
[75] D. B. Rawat, G. Yan, B. B. Bista, M. C. Weigle, Trust On the Security of Wireless Vehicular Ad-hoc Networking., Ad Hoc Sens. Wirel.
Networks 24 (3-4) (2015) 283–305.
[76] W. Li, H. Song, ART: An attack-resistant trust management scheme for securing vehicular ad hoc networks, IEEE transactions on intelligent
transportation systems 17 (4) (2015) 960–969.
[77] F. Ahmad, F. Kurugollu, A. Adnane, R. Hussain, F. Hussain, MARINE: Man-in-the-middle attack resistant trust model in connected vehicles,
IEEE Internet of Things Journal 7 (4) (2020) 3310–3322.
[78] J. E. Fadul, K. M. Hopkinson, T. R. Andel, C. A. Sheﬃeld, A trust-management toolkit for smart-grid protection systems, IEEE Transactions
on Power Delivery 29 (4) (2014) 1768–1779.
[79] B. Gong, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, A remote attestation mechanism for the sensing layer nodes of the internet of things, Future Generation
Computer Systems 78 (2018) 867–886.
[80] A. Jaeger, N. Bißmeyer, H. Stübing, S. A. Huss, A novel framework for eﬃcient mobility data veriﬁcation in vehicular ad-hoc networks,
International Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems Research 10 (1) (2012) 11–21.
[81] A. Yang, J. Weng, N. Cheng, J. Ni, X. Lin, X. Shen, DeQoS attack: Degrading quality of service in VANETs and its mitigation, IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology 68 (5) (2019) 4834–4845.
[82] T. Alladi, B. Gera, A. Agrawal, V. Chamola, F. R. Yu, Deepadv: A deep neural network framework for anomaly detection in vanets, IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology 70 (11) (2021) 12013–12023.
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 32 of 34
Short Title of the Article
[83] K. Gu, X. Dong, X. Li, W. Jia, Cluster-Based Malicious Node Detection for False Downstream Data in Fog Computing-Based VANETs,
IEEE Transactions on Network Science and Engineering 9 (3) (2022) 1245–1263.
[84] J. A. Dias, J. J. Rodrigues, F. Xia, C. X. Mavromoustakis, A cooperative watchdog system to detect misbehavior nodes in vehicular delay-
tolerant networks, IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics 62 (12) (2015) 7929–7937.
[85] Q. Li, W. Gao, S. Zhu, G. Cao, To lie or to comply: Defending against ﬂood attacks in disruption tolerant networks, IEEE Transactions on
Dependable and Secure Computing 10 (3) (2012) 168–182.
[86] Y. Yao, B. Xiao, G. Wu, X. Liu, Z. Yu, K. Zhang, X. Zhou, Multi-channel based Sybil attack detection in vehicular ad hoc networks using
RSSI, IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing 18 (2) (2018) 362–375.
[87] P. Jokar, V. Leung, Intrusion detection and prevention for zigbee-based home area networks in smart grids, IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid
(2016) 1800–1811.
[88] M. Basnet, M. H. Ali, Deep learning-based intrusion detection system for electric vehicle charging station, in: 2020 2nd International
Conference on Smart Power & Internet Energy Systems, 2020.
[89] J. E. Rubio, C. Alcaraz, J. Lopez, Addressing security in ocpp: Protection against man-in-the-middle attacks, in: International Federation for
Information Processing (Iﬁp) International Conference on New Technologies, 2018.
[90] A. Navaz, V. Sangeetha, C. Prabhadevi, Entropy based anomaly detection system to prevent ddos attacks in cloud, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1308.6745 (2013).
[91] D. Stabili, M. Marchetti, M. Colajanni, Detecting attacks to internal vehicle networks through hamming distance, in: 2017 AEIT International
Annual Conference, IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–6.
[92] J. Antoun, M. E. Kabir, B. Moussa, R. Atallah, C. Assi, A detailed security assessment of the ev charging ecosystem, IEEE Network 34 (3)
(2020) 200–207. doi:10.1109/MNET.001.1900348.
[93] R. Gottumukkala, R. Merchant, A. Tauzin, K. Leon, A. Roche, P. Darby, Cyber-physical system security of vehicle charging stations, in:
2019 IEEE Green Technologies Conference(GreenTech), 2019, pp. 1–5. doi:10.1109/GreenTech.2019.8767141.
[94] A. G. Morosan, F. Pop, Ocpp security - neural network for detecting malicious traﬃc (2017).
[95] K.-T. Cho, K. G. Shin, Fingerprinting electronic control units for vehicle intrusion detection, in: 25th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX
Security 16), 2016, pp. 911–927.
[96] T. Koyama, T. Shibahara, K. Hasegawa, Y. Okano, M. Tanaka, Y. Oshima, Anomaly detection for mixed transmission can messages using
quantized intervals and absolute diﬀerence of payloads, in: Proceedings of the ACM Workshop on Automotive Cybersecurity, 2019, pp.
19–24.
[97] M.-J. Kang, J.-W. Kang, Intrusion detection system using deep neural network for in-vehicle network security, The Public Library of Science
(PloS) one 11 (6) (2016) e0155781.
[98] E. Seo, H. M. Song, H. K. Kim, Gids: Gan based intrusion detection system for in-vehicle network, in: 2018 16th Annual Conference on
Privacy, Security and Trust (PST), IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–6.
[99] V. S. Barletta, D. Caivano, A. Nannavecchia, M. Scalera, Intrusion detection for in-vehicle communication networks: An unsupervised
kohonen som approach, Future Internet 12 (7) (2020) 119.
[100] M. Hongzhe, Research on smart grid information security threat and protection key technologies, INFORMATION & COMMUNICA-
TIONS (12) (2017) 2.
[101] A. H. Khosroshahi, H. Shahinzadeh, Security technology by using ﬁrewall for smart grid, Bulletin of Electrical Engineering and Informatics
5 (3) (2016) 366–372.
[102] R. Diovu, J. Agee, A cloud-based openﬂow ﬁrewall for mitigation against ddos attacks in smart grid ami networks, in: 2017 IEEE PES
PowerAfrica, IEEE, 2017, pp. 28–33.
[103] Y. Liu, J. Wu, J. Li, W. Yang, H. Chen, G. Li, Isrf: interest semantic reasoning based fog ﬁrewall for information-centric internet of vehicles,
IET Intelligent Transport Systems 13 (6) (2019) 975–982.
[104] C. Alcaraz, J. Lopez, S. Wolthusen, Policy enforcement system for secure interoperable control in distributed smart grid systems, Journal of
Network and Computer Applications 59 (2016) 301–314.
[105] Z. El-Rewini, K. Sadatsharan, D. F. Selvaraj, S. J. Plathottam, P. Ranganathan, Cybersecurity challenges in vehicular communications,
Vehicular Communications 23 (2020) 100214. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vehcom.2019.100214.
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S221420961930261X
[106] S. Demirci, S. Sagiroglu, Software-deﬁned networking for improving security in smart grid systems, in: 2018 7th International Conference
on Renewable Energy Research and Applications (ICRERA), 2018, pp. 1021–1026. doi:10.1109/ICRERA.2018.8567005.
[107] D. Ibdah, M. Kanani, N. Lachtar, N. Allan, B. Al-Duwairi, On the security of sdn-enabled smartgrid systems, in: 2017 International
Conference on Electrical and Computing Technologies and Applications (ICECTA), 2017, pp. 1–5. doi:10.1109/ICECTA.2017.8251983.
[108] E. G. da Silva, A. S. da Silva, J. A. Wickboldt, P. Smith, L. Z. Granville, A. Schaeﬀer-Filho, A one-class nids for sdn-based scada systems,
in: 2016 IEEE 40th Annual Computer Software and Applications Conference (COMPSAC), Vol. 1, IEEE, 2016, pp. 303–312.
[109] A.
Di
Maio,
M.
R.
Palattella,
R.
Soua,
L.
Lamorte,
X.
Vilajosana,
J.
Alonso-Zarate,
T.
Engel,
Enabling sdn in vanets: What is the impact on security?, Sensors 16 (12) (2016). doi:10.3390/s16122077.
URL https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/16/12/2077
[110] Prajeesha, A. M, Edge computing application in smart grid-a review, in: 2021 Second International Conference on Electronics and Sustainable
Communication Systems (ICESC), 2021, pp. 1–6. doi:10.1109/ICESC51422.2021.9532792.
[111] W. Han, Y. Xiao, Edge computing enabled non-technical loss fraud detection for big data security analytic in smart grid, Journal of Ambient
Intelligence and Humanized Computing 11 (6) (2020).
[112] C. M. Chen, L. Chen, Y. Huang, S. Kumar, M. T. Wu, Lightweight authentication protocol in edge-based smart grid environment, The
European Association for Signal Processing (EURASIP) Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking 2021 (1) (2021).
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 33 of 34
Short Title of the Article
[113] S. Ahmad, S. Mehfuz, F. Mebarek-Oudina, J. Beg, Rsm analysis based cloud access security broker: a systematic literature review, Cluster
Computing 25 (5) (2022) 3733–3763.
[114] B. Huang, X. Cheng, W. Cheng, Meet-fog for accurate distribution of negative messages in vanet, in: the Workshop, 2017.
[115] Arwa, Alrawais, Abdulrahman, Alhothaily, Bo, Mei, Tianyi, Song, Xiaolu, Cheng, An eﬃcient revocation scheme for vehicular ad-hoc
networks, Procedia Computer Science (2018).
[116] S. Raza, S. Wang, M. Ahmed, M. R. Anwar, A survey on vehicular edge computing: Architecture, applications, technical issues, and future
directions, Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing 2019 (2019) 1–19.
[117] M. Chiang, T. Zhang, Fog and iot: An overview of research opportunities, IEEE Internet of Things Journal 3 (6) (2016) 854–864.
doi:10.1109/JIOT.2016.2584538.
[118] D. Gabay, K. Akkaya, M. Cebe, Privacy-preserving authentication scheme for connected electric vehicles using blockchain and zero
knowledge proofs, IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology PP (99) (2020) 1–1.
[119] M. Bellare, O. Goldreich, On deﬁning proofs of knowledge, Proc. of CRYPTO 1992 Santa Barbara, USA (1992) pp.390–420.
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 34 of 34
