Title: Risks and Compliance with the EU's Core Cyber Security Legislation
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2508.21386v1
--------------------------------------------------

Risks and Compliance with the EU’s Core Cyber Security Legislation
Jukka Ruohonena,∗, Jesper Løffler Nielsenb, Jakub Sk´orczynskia
aUniversity of Southern Denmark, Denmark
bFocus Advokater, Denmark
Abstract
Context: The European Union (EU) has long favored a risk-based approach to regulation. Such an approach is also
used in recent cyber security legislation enacted in the EU. Risks are also inherently related to compliance with the new
legislation. Objective: The paper investigates how risks are framed in the EU’s five core cyber security legislative acts,
whether the framings indicate convergence or divergence between the acts and their risk concepts, and what qualifying
words and terms are used when describing the legal notions of risks. Method: The paper’s methodology is based on
qualitative legal interpretation and taxonomy-building. Results: The five acts have an encompassing coverage of different
cyber security risks, including but not limited to risks related to technical, organizational, and human security as well as
those not originating from man-made actions. Both technical aspects and assets are used to frame the legal risk notions
in many of the legislative acts. A threat-centric viewpoint is also present in one of the acts. Notable gaps are related
to acceptable risks, non-probabilistic risks, and residual risks. Conclusion: The EU’s new cyber security legislation has
significantly extended the risk-based approach to regulations. At the same time, complexity and compliance burden
have increased. With this point in mind, the paper concludes with a few practical takeaways about means to deal with
compliance and research it.
Keywords:
risk analysis, requirements engineering, legal requirements, compliance, conformance, certification
1. Introduction
For a long time, the EU has favored a risk-based ap-
proach to both laws and lawmaking. In fact, it has been
argued that the risk-based governance is of significant im-
portance and currently is one of the prevailing approaches
in the EU and also elsewhere [71]. In Europe, the origins
of the approach trace to the EU’s product safety legisla-
tion from the circa 1980s onward [54]. The so-called “new
approach” initiated during that time later evolved into a
decision to consider safety risks when drafting new laws,
negotiating them, and approving them [16]. In essence:
whenever a risk is seen as high, more stringent require-
ments should be codified also into a law or multiple laws.
A similar approach has increasingly been used also for
the EU’s technology legislation, including but not lim-
ited to cyber security laws. When the Cybersecurity Act
(CSA) was approved in 2019, the European Union Agency
for Cybersecurity (ENISA) together with different coordi-
nation groups were tasked to consider cross-border risks,
contribute to European and international risk manage-
ment standards and frameworks, raise public awareness
about cyber security risks, and develop risk-based cyber
security certification schemes [19]. By now, in 2025, many
of these tasks have been either already completed or are
∗Corresponding author.
Email address: juk@mmmi.sdu.dk (Jukka Ruohonen)
well-underway of being completed.
New legislation has
also been enacted.
Yet, according to a recent systematic mapping study,
risk-based approaches and risk analysis itself have received
a very limited attention in existing software and require-
ments engineering research dealing with compliance [40].
This literature review result is surprising to say the least
because of the EU’s risk-based paradigm to lawmaking. To
this end, the paper operates within a notable research gap
and contributes to filling it. Furthermore, the risk-based
approach has frequently raised questions among both prac-
titioners and researchers. For instance, the General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) has often been considered
only in terms of compliance risks with it [42], not in terms
of risks to natural persons and their rights. Another re-
lated example would be about terminology. For instance,
practitioners have had difficulties to understand what sig-
nificant harms—and even fundamental rights—mean in
the EU’s new artificial intelligence regulation [32]. Such
contemplations and uncertainties motivate the paper’s first
research question (RQ.1) of interpreting how different risk
concepts are framed in the EU’s core cyber security laws?
Note that this RQ.1 already provides a framing for the pa-
per because of the plural form; there is not just a single risk
concept but multiple ones. Subsequently, it is investigated
through interpretation (RQ.2) whether the framings done
in the laws indicate convergence or divergence between the
laws? Finally, the previous point about significant harms
Preprint submitted to Elsevier
September 1, 2025
arXiv:2508.21386v1  [cs.CR]  29 Aug 2025
motivates the third and final research question (RQ.3):
what qualifying adjectives and other words are used in re-
lation to the risk concepts in the cyber security laws?
These RQs place the paper into a debated corner of
theoretical papers in software engineering. As has been
recently argued [31], conventional evaluation rubrics and
checkbox exercises cannot be used for such papers, which,
out of necessity, require flexibility and leeway in interpret-
ing materials and building theoretical arguments. Before
continuing, it can and should be remarked that the term
checkbox exercises is used intentionally in the previous
sentence because that is what compliance engineering has
long been criticized to be about [45, 47, 68]. In contrast to
such exercises, a holistic approach has been recommended
for interpreting laws, their requirements, and compliance
with them [29, 40, 62]. Although rigorous definitions are
lacking, a notion of holistic compliance seeks to approach
risks by covering multiple legal acts and avoiding a rigid
subject-by-subject viewpoint [29]. In terms of software en-
gineering, a holistic approach to compliance seeks to cover
a software product’s all life cycle stages in relation to the
purpose of the given product [40]. However, as soon clar-
ified in Subsection 2.2.2, this characterization cannot be
fully satisfied due to the theoretical nature of the paper.
Nevertheless, the holistic approach suits well to describe
also the paper’s methodology soon described in the next
Section 2. The analysis of the RQs is presented in Sec-
tion 3. As always in scientific papers, a conclusion and a
discussion ends the paper, in the final Section 4.
2. Approach
The answers to RQ.1 and RQ.2 are used to build a tax-
onomy. Although there are existing taxonomies for cyber
security risks [51, 76], including even taxonomies for tax-
onomies [49], to the best of the authors’ knowledge, not
much work has been done to relate them to laws, and no
work has been done to relate them particularly to the EU’s
cyber security legislation. Regarding taxonomies and their
building, an existing guideline was followed; henceforth, a
symbol B denotes the research activities enumerated in
the guideline [70, the third column in Table 13 on p. 54].
Thus, to begin with, the goal of the facet-based taxonomy
is to improve understanding of legal notions of cyber se-
curity risks, and to help researchers and practitioners for
navigating the risk-based aspects of the EU’s five core cy-
ber security laws (B2 and B4). With this goal in mind,
the subject matter (B3) is subsequently described.
2.1. Materials
The noun core in the paper’s title is open to an inter-
pretation because there are numerous cyber security leg-
islative acts in the EU, including many legislative acts spe-
cific to particular industry sectors and particular technolo-
gies [55]. The legislative act on the operational resilience
for the financial sector [23], abbreviated as DORA, would
be a good example of a sector-specific legislative act. Nev-
ertheless, the five laws enumerated in Table 1 can all be
reasonably interpreted to together form the core legal cy-
ber security arsenal of the EU at the time of writing (B6).
As a footnote-style clarifying comment, the legislative acts
shown in the table are ordered according to the presenta-
tion order in Section 3.
Table 1: The Five EU Laws Covered
Law
Abbreviation
Reference
Regulation (EU) 2019/881
CSA
[19]
Regulation (EU) 2016/679
GDPR
[18]
Regulation (EU) 2024/2847
CRA
[24]
Directive (EU) 2022/2557
CER
[21]
Directive (EU) 2022/2555
NIS2
[20]
Of the legislative acts listed, the CER and NIS2 direc-
tives, which are abbreviations for critical entities resilience
and network and information security, are primarily about
critical infrastructure protection, the Cyber Resilience Act
(CRA) concerns cyber security of network-connected prod-
ucts, including software products, the CSA’s main content
was already briefly summarized in the introduction, and
the GDPR concerns protection of personal data related to
natural persons. Although the GDPR is oftentimes inter-
preted as a privacy law [42, 66], data protection is more
than that, as manifested also by the GDPR’s cyber se-
curity requirements [56]. Thus, also the inclusion of the
GDPR to the analysis is well-justified.
2.2. Methodology
The paper is about law and legal requirements.
Al-
though computational law and legal technologies have
made advances, interpretation is still there both as a cor-
nerstone and as the primary methodology [34]. If inter-
preting laws, or legal reasoning, is defined to be about
studying legal conditions and legal effects [33, pp. 28–30],
the paper’s focus is on the legal conditions specific to risks.
These conditions will be analyzed by a semantic analy-
sis of selected provisions. Thus, a contextual interpreta-
tion, including case law, is excluded. Interdisciplinarity is
also increasingly shaping particularly research and prac-
tice of technology law [28]. The same applies to risk regu-
lation [65]. Interdisciplinarity has increasingly character-
ized also cyber security research [3]. While legal reasoning
provides the methodology, the framing is thus broader.
If cyber security is seen as a branch of computer science
and software security as a branch of software engineering,
which in itself can be seen as a branch of computer sci-
ence, the paper operates in the intersection of law, com-
puter science, and software engineering (B1). With this
interdisciplinary approach, the paper also seeks to con-
tribute to lessening of the many enduring problems hin-
dering, or sometimes even preventing, interdisciplinary re-
search in software engineering [36].
Regarding software
2
engineering, furthermore, the closest reference point is re-
quirements engineering in general and legal requirements
in particular (B1). The notion of legal requirements guide
also the methodology.
The research questions frame the legal interpretation to-
wards conceptual analysis, which is a common methodol-
ogy both in law and software engineering. Regarding the
latter, the paper can be characterized as operating in the-
orization for understanding, using qualitative interpreta-
tion, sense-making, and taxonomy-building (B5) as loose
methodological building blocks [50]. The previous point
about interdisciplinarity gives a context for the interpre-
tative sense-making of the laws and conceptual taxonomy-
building around them. Namely, the risk concepts are inter-
preted against a conventional terminology used in cyber se-
curity risk management and analysis literature, standards,
and frameworks (B9 and B10). To minimize redundancy
and to ensure feasibility (B8), only six dimensions are con-
sidered for the taxonomy. These risk dimensions and their
categories are subsequently elaborated.
2.2.1. Risks
Without a substantial divergence from existing frame-
works and guidelines, such as [1] and [13], Fig. 1 elaborates
and summarizes the basic but fundamental concepts used.
The figure serves also as a classifying framework regard-
ing the focal points toward which risk concepts are framed
in the legislative acts. By drawing on closely related ideas
presented in the literature [4, 69], the focal points are inter-
preted to signify (1a) a threat-centric, an (1b) asset-centric,
or a (1c) system-centric viewpoint to the risk concept.
Threat
Risk
entails
inreases
Threat 
actor
Asset
threatens
Impact
upon
Counter-
measure
Attack
surface
Security
requirement
inreases
decreases
specifies
Law
minimizes
has
elicited  from
Vulnerability
exposes
exploits
Constraint
Unconstraint
contains
tightens
loosens
(1)
(2)
(3)
Figure 1: The Risk and Requirements Engineering Concepts Used
While recognizing that most risks today are man-
made [73], including those related to grand challenges
such as the climate change, it is still sensible to evaluate
whether (2a) only man-made risks are present or whether
(2b) other risks too are considered in the legislation. As
signified already by Fig. 1, cyber security, like all security
concepts, are about man-made risks because all conven-
tionally considered threat actor types have distinct inten-
tions to carry out offensive attacks [12]. Although unin-
tentional accidents happen also in cyber security [8], they
too are man-made, and although cyber security attacks
can cause also safety incidents, intentionality is also com-
monly used to distinguish security from safety [45]. Thus,
in contrast, a natural disaster affecting important assets is
something that can be seen as belonging to the category
of other risks.
In addition, the analysis evaluates whether a (3a) prob-
abilistic or (3b) non-probabilistic understanding of a risk
is present.
Given the cyber security context, the for-
mer operates with the conventional formula:
“risk =
probability of occurrence of a threat × impact of a
threat” [11, 13, 64, 76].
Despite the noun formula and
due to various problems with quantification [45, 72], qual-
itative methods are typically used, often with a help of
risk matrices within which occurrence probabilities denote
rows and impacts columns [11]. If a probabilistic under-
standing is present also in a law, such matrices seem like
a good starting point also in practical risk analyses.1
The probabilistic understanding is theoretically impor-
tant because it entails also the further concepts of accept-
able and residual risks. The former refers to a “risk that
is understood and tolerated by a system’s user, operator,
owner, or accreditor”, whereas the latter is about a “por-
tion of an original risk or set of risks that remains after
countermeasures have been applied” [64]. Given these def-
initions, the analysis evaluates whether (4a) or not (4b) ei-
ther acceptable risks or residual risks are explicitly or im-
plicitly acknowledged in the legislative acts that fall within
the paper’s scope.
Regarding the system-centric viewpoint, a noun system
is used because particularly the CRA covers both hardware
and software. With this point in mind, a system-centric
viewpoint to risks is seen to operate closer to technical
details, dealing with attack surfaces, technical counter-
measures, and more or less concrete security requirements
originating from legislation. This characterization allows
to also distinguish (5a) technical security from (5b) orga-
nizational security, (5c) human security, and (5d) national
security.
Social engineering and insider threats are ex-
amples of human security, whereas risk analysis itself can
be seen as a core part of organizational security [10, 68].
These four security concepts provide additional taxonomy-
building material for answering to RQ.1.
1 It could be also argued that risk matrices are either non-
probabilistic or only crudely probabilistic. A related point is that
there is no universal definition for a non-probabilistic risk. Examples
include a crossing of a threshold value [5, 72], “the energy required
to change the system state from acceptable to faulty” [44, p. 11],
and the concept of imprecise probabilities [75]. Given these points,
a probabilistic understanding is seen to be present in case the for-
mula, or something closely related to it, appears in a law. Then, a
non-probabilistic understanding is interpreted simply as an antonym.
3
Of the concepts shown in Fig. 1, particularly an asset,
which may be tangible or intangible [49, 53], must be ac-
knowledged as a problematic concept; among other things,
it is a criticizable concept to describe natural persons.
Although also humans can be seen to have vulnerabili-
ties [52], the vulnerability concept refers only to technical
software or hardware vulnerabilities, and any negative im-
pacts upon natural persons, including any harm done or
caused, are conveyed through the impact dimension. A re-
lated point is that the asset as a concept is only considered
in terms of what the legislative acts are primarily seek-
ing to protect and for whom cyber security is—or should
be—designed and implemented. The GDPR serves well to
clarify the point: personal data breaches have often had
significant impacts upon companies, including their intan-
gible assets such as brands, but natural persons have still
almost always been the “real” victims [57]. Against these
backdrops, the concept is primarily used in order to main-
tain coherence with the risk management and risk analy-
sis body of knowledge. A further related point is that the
term countermeasure is interpreted broadly. If the goal is
to protect natural persons, for instance, also a notification
about a severe data breach delivered to them can be in-
terpreted as a countermeasure against identity thefts and
other threats.
2.2.2. Development and Operations
Compliance is difficult to deduce about without a con-
text and a real-world case. Among other things, a distinc-
tion between product-oriented and project-oriented soft-
ware companies [35] is relevant for compliance with the
EU’s cyber security laws. As the latter type of compa-
nies develop software and technologies in general for some
particular customers, a compliance strategy is easier to for-
mulate in a sense that it is known in advance what needs
to be complied with.
If a customer operates in a criti-
cal sector defined and referenced in the CER and NIS2
directives, for instance, it is known in advance that its se-
curity requirements for products are more stringent. In
contrast—and as was also pointed out during the CRA’s
policy consultation [55], product-oriented companies may
have difficulties to conduct risk analyses because a specific
context may be lacking. Such real or potential difficulties
also correlate with what was said about the asset concept
in the preceding Section 2.2.1.
Nevertheless, a further taxonomy building block can be
drawn analytically: whether a law’s risk concept is about
(6a) development, (6b) operations, or both. Given DevOps
and related practices, particularly many software services
are about both development-time software engineering and
operating of the services developed.
When considering
product-oriented companies, including those developing
hardware, the situation is often different. It is also worth
remarking that both organizational and human security
imply that a given risk concept is about operations.
2.2.3. Convergence and Divergence
The six taxonomy dimensions are used to evaluate
whether there is a convergence or divergence between the
risk concepts used in the legislation covered (B11). Anal-
ogously to mapping analyses commonly used to evaluate
standards and requirements [56], convergence is analyti-
cally understood to simply mean that many, or even most,
of the laws map to the same framings of the underlying
risk concepts. As the analysis operates with theoretical
taxonomy dimensions, the mappings are again based on
qualitative interpretation, as has also been the de facto
method to build taxonomies in software engineering [70].
Regarding theoretical validation (B13), each law is allowed
to map to multiple categories in the dimensions (1), (5),
and (6). This allowance of overlaps has sometimes been
discouraged [49], but it is necessary in the present context
because the categories for the three dimensions do overlap
in the laws. Overlaps are also something with which the
holistic approach to compliance is good at [29]. However,
only the categories are allowed to overlap via the laws.
Although most of the legislative acts reference each
other, no explicit mappings are done between the laws;
they only map to each other via the mentioned categories
in the six dimensions. A similar point applies to the cate-
gories and dimensions.
Theoretically, the convergence term is interesting be-
cause harmonization was a central goal already in the
EU’s original “new approach” to regulations [54]. It is also
an explicit goal in the newer guidelines [16]. Given these
goals and broader political objectives, convergence can be
interpreted to represent European integration and Euro-
peanization in general [48, p. 118]. Thus, on one hand,
it can be expected that some convergence should be also
present. Particularly the CRA was strongly motivated by
a horizontal harmonization goal, meaning that it is meant
to be a general-purpose cyber security regulation applica-
ble across multiple different industry sectors. This goal
signifies the CRA’s close relation to the rationale used in
the EU’s product safety legislation. As has been contem-
plated in the literature [9], on the other hand, some diver-
gence is often also a good and desirable goal. For instance,
the dimensions (1) and (5) imply different aspects of cy-
ber security, which may be difficult to embed into a single
unifying legislative act. These points provide a contextual
motivation for RQ.2.
2.2.4. Qualifying Words
With respect to RQ.3, the interest is on so-called qual-
ifying adjectives, such as the already noted adjective sig-
nificant for a harm. Although further semantics are some-
times used, including classifying adjectives [6], the term
qualifying adjectives is used without a particular loss of
specificity. Regarding other words, the interest is also on
all nouns and verbs giving a specific meaning to a given
term used in the laws (see Fig. 2). To simplify the ter-
minology and semantics, hereafter, the noun qualifying is
used to refer also to these contextualizing nouns and verbs.
4
Qualifying
Risk
Asset
to an
Law
describes 
in a given
Adjectives
Nouns
Verbs
with
Context
what is a
Unconstraints
Constraints
which describe
which describe
Figure 2: Risks and Legal Semantics
As also seen from Figs. 1 and 2, the qualifying words
are interpreted to either tighten or relax a legal require-
ment for a cyber security countermeasure. As such, the
constraints or unconstraints emerging from these contex-
tualized semantics are weaker and usually vaguer than ex-
plicit exemptions or other provisions often embedded to
laws. Thus, a so-called keyword trap [9] should be kept
in mind by avoiding too strong and definite interpreta-
tions. Such a trap also bespeaks against using a wording
about (quantitatively) extracting terms (B7) in the present
context. Nevertheless, particularly constraints are impor-
tant for requirements engineering and software develop-
ment.
As cyber security itself can be seen to constrain
software and other systems [30], the interest is particularly
on the semantic unconstraints that relax security obliga-
tions. When present, these also give flexibility to a design,
an implementation, and possibly operations too.
3. Analysis
In what follows, the analysis proceeds by considering
the CSA, GDPR, CRA, CER, and NIS2, in the order of
listing. As there are hundreds of recitals and articles to
cover, feasibility and brevity are maintained by only con-
sidering notable risk-based aspects related to the five tax-
onomy dimensions. Thus, it should be kept in mind that
not everything about the laws is covered—nor should be
covered. Before continuing to the analysis, a note about
presentation should be made too: when elaborating the
qualifying words identified, they are shown in italics—and
even in case of direct quotations.
3.1. The CSA
If the auxiliary risk-based tasks noted in the introduc-
tion are excluded, the CSA’s main focus is on the devel-
opment of European cyber security certification schemes.
These are specified in Article 52(2) to provide three lev-
els of assurance based on “the probability and impact of
an incident.”
Because the term asset remains implicit,
although it can be interpreted to refer broadly to some-
thing that a user of a product certified has, the concept
of impact is impossible to deduce about. An analogous
point has been raised regarding the EU’s artificial intelli-
gence regulation [2]. Also the probability concept is only
vaguely tied to hypothetical threat actors in the CSA.
As the name indicates, the lowest, “basic” level pro-
vides a basic assurance level; at minimum, a review of
technical documentation is required to attain a certificate
at this assurance level. According to Article 53, the “ba-
sic” level certification may be conducted also through a
self-assessment. The subsequent “substantial” level takes
threat actors into account, seeking to minimize risks re-
lated attacks “carried out by actors with limited skills and
resources”, to quote from Article 52(6). To attain a cer-
tificate at this level, at minimum, also the absence of pub-
licly known vulnerabilities and security testing must be
sufficiently demonstrated. According to Article 52(7), the
“high” level must further minimize “state-of-the-art” at-
tacks “carried out by actors with significant skills and re-
sources”. In addition to the previously mentioned require-
ments, a product seeking a certificate at this level must
withstand penetration testing conducted by “skilled at-
tackers”. All in all, in the certification context, the CSA’s
framing is firmly on technical security, development, and
the context is post-release security reviews and security
testing, including by third-parties. Given the certification
context, the technical security frame makes the CSA’s risk
concept system-centric, although the considerations about
attackers render the law’s risk concept threat-centric too.
3.2. The GDPR
Risk as a term appears numerous times in the GDPR.
In what follows, notable risk-based aspects of the law are
briefly analyzed separately, although they are all closely
related to each other.
3.2.1. Article 25
The first is the notion of data protection by design and
by default (henceforth, DPDD). As a guiding principle, the
DPDD concept is molded to various parts of the GDPR, in-
cluding the principles specified in Article 5 and the respon-
sibility of a data controlled outlined in Article 24 [7, 37].
It is also the title of Article 25, which contains a risk-
based guideline for complying with the DPDD principle.
In particular, “risks of varying likelihood and severity for
rights and freedoms of natural persons” should be consid-
ered. While keeping the terminological note in Section 2.2
in mind, natural persons are thus the “assets” to be pro-
tected in the parlance of risk analysis literature. To protect
natural persons, “appropriate technical and organisational
measures” should be designed and implemented.
Thus,
the framing is toward both technical and organizational
security. The qualifying adjective “appropriate” gives flex-
ibility for designing and implementing the measures based
on a context of specific activity and technology.
Then, the wording about “varying likelihoods” signifies
a presence of the conventional probabilistic understanding
5
of the risk concept. With a qualifying noun “severity”, the
impact should be considered in terms of the “rights and
freedoms of natural persons”, including their fundamen-
tal rights.2 While there is a debate whether the GDPR
is a rights-based regulation or a risk-based regulation, the
debate is arguably questionable as risks should be evalu-
ated in terms of the impacts to natural person’s rights,
meaning that the two notions are inherently related to
each other [27]. The DPDD concept entails also further
considerations.
As has been pointed out [37], there are six further qual-
ifying words present in the phrase about taking into ac-
count “the state of the art, the cost of implementation
and the nature, scope, context and purposes of processing”
personal data. Of these, the emphasis on purposes is rel-
evant because it signifies the GDPR’s important purpose
limitation requirement, which has been discussed in the
literature to a great extent [25, 59]. Like in the EU’s ar-
tificial intelligence regulation, there is thus a probabilistic
association between a purpose and a risk [2]. Regarding
the other qualifying words, particularly “nature”, “scope”,
and “context” pinpoint toward results from risk analyses,
which belong to a concept of impact assessments in the
GDPR’s terminology [7]. Although flexibility was noted
earlier regarding countermeasures, the wording about “the
state of the art” , even when coupled with the noun “cost”,
puts a constraint upon designing and implementing coun-
termeasures; they should not be outdated or otherwise in-
secure.
3.2.2. Article 32
The GDPR’s Article 32 specifies risk-based legal require-
ments to ensure the security of processing personal data.
As the wordings in Article 32 are very similar to those in
Article 25, the security requirements implied by the for-
mer article largely recapitulate what was said in the pre-
ceding section.
There is also a debate in the literature
whether the two articles can be even separated from each
other [37]. In any case, as the security requirements have
already been addressed in the literature [56], it suffices to
summarize these by remarking that the fundamental con-
fidentiality, integrity, and availability (CIA) triad should
be guaranteed—though, again with some qualifying terms,
including but not limited to “the state of the art”. Because
authorization, encryption, pseudonymization, and testing
are explicitly mentioned in Article 32, the GDPR can be
interpreted as an asset-centric and a system-centric law
dealing with both technical and organizational security.
Hence, it is also about both development and operations.
2 When considering the EU’s fundamental rights [17], particularly
the rights to data protection and respect of privacy life are often at
stake. Given the different philosophical notions of privacy [67], also
the rights to human dignity and integrity may be violated in some
cases. In some extreme cases it could be argued that even the right
to liberty and security is threatened.
3.2.3. Article 33 and Article 34
Data breach reporting obligations are described in Ar-
ticles 33 and 34. The former lays down the requirements
to notify data protection authorities about personal data
breaches. Regarding qualifying words, the requirement to
notify an authority within 72 hours after having become
aware of a breach is accompanied with a clause: “unless
the personal data breach is unlikely to result in a risk to
the rights and freedoms of natural persons”. Thus, a no-
tification is required only in case there actually is an im-
pact, which is again qualified with the two nouns “rights
and freedoms”. Regarding the impact concept itself, the
data breach notification requirements could be interpreted
against causal risk models; the initial impact would de-
note a compromise of personal data assets and the sub-
sequent impact would correlate with a harm to natural
persons [cf. 77]. In any case, Article 34 further requires
to notify also the natural persons affected but only when
there is “a high risk to the rights and freedoms” of them.
3.2.4. Article 35 and Article 36
Articles 35 and 36 are about data protection impact
assessments. Given that the GDPR does not set out spe-
cific requirements on how such assessments should be done
and documented, several options have been used and men-
tioned in the literature, among them scenario analyses and
quantitative or qualitative risk analyses, including risk ma-
trices [39, 46, 56, 74].
Then, Article 35 states that an
assessment must be done in particular when “using new
technologies” but only insofar there is a “a high risk to the
rights and freedoms of natural persons” when “the nature,
scope, context and purposes” of processing are taken into
account.
With the exception of “new technologies”, the qualifying
words are among those appearing in the DPDD semantics.
When a high risk is identified, Article 35(7)(d) requires
to document the “the measures envisaged to address the
risks, including safeguards, security measures and mech-
anisms to ensure the protection of personal data and to
demonstrate compliance”. Although multiple words in this
phrase could be seen as qualifying, the verb “demonstrate”
can be interpreted to represent all of them because it sig-
nifies what compliance is also about. In other words, the
measures designed and implemented together with docu-
mentation of these should prove that at least negligence
is not present. A somewhat similar rationale appears in
the EU’s product liability law [54]. In any case, when a
“high risk” is identified in an impact assessment, prior con-
sultation must be sought from a data protection author-
ity according to Article 36.
If risks were “insufficiently
identified or mitigated” according to the assessment, the
authority should then “provide written advice”. The qual-
ifying words in italics are used to emphasize the previous
point about demonstrating compliance (or a lack of neg-
ligence). For that task, there is also help available from
data protection authorities.
6
3.3. The CRA
The CRA is pronouncedly a risk-based law. Together
with a notion of criticality, Article 7(2) uses the concept
of risk to justify a classification of network-connected prod-
ucts into three groups: “normal”, important, and critical.
A compliance burden increases alongside this hierarchy, as
should also the cyber security guarantees for users.
As
with the previous analysis of the GDPR, in what follows,
the focus is on articles relevant to software engineering. It
should be further noted that the CRA’s alignment toward
the EU’s product safety legislation and the artificial in-
telligence regulation, including high-risk systems specified
therein, as specified in the CRA’s Articles 11 and 12, is
omitted on purpose and without major consequences for
regarding the RQs.3
3.3.1. Article 3
The CRA provides explicit definitions for risks in para-
graphs (37) and (38) of Article 3. The former paragraph
defines a cyber security risk in conventional probabilistic
terms; a likelihood of an incident should be evaluated in
conjunction with an impact characterized through a “mag-
nitude” of a “loss or disruption”. The second paragraph
provides also a definition for a significant risk, which is
characterized to originate from “technical characteristics”
and which causes “severe negative impact, including by
causing considerable material or non-material loss or dis-
ruption”. Although the qualifying adjectives remain unde-
fined and thus open to interpretation, already the notion
of “technical characteristics” frame the CRA’s risk con-
cept toward the system-centric viewpoint. This viewpoint
becomes clearer when delving a little deeper into the law.
3.3.2. Article 13
According to Article 13, manufacturers are obliged to
conduct risk analyses about their products. As specified
in the paragraph (22) of the article, market surveillance au-
thorities may also request risk analysis documents for eval-
uating compliance. As with the GDPR’s impact assess-
ments (see Subsection 3.2.4), the qualifying verb “demon-
strate” also appears in the paragraph.
Such a demon-
stration applies particularly to the CRA’s explicit require-
ments.
That is, with a few exemptions enumerated in
Article 2, the CRA defines a set of essential cyber security
requirements that practically all products with a network-
ing functionality must implement. These also overlap with
the GDPR’s security requirements for products processing
personal data [56]. Another point is that residual (and ac-
ceptable) risks remain unacknowledged in the CRA with
3 In addition, many lesser risk-based details are excluded. The
examples include risk considerations with CE markings or other vi-
sual labels used to declare conformity (Article 30(3)), risk-based joint
activities by market surveillance authorities (Article 59(1)), and an
obligation of so-called open source software stewards, including large
open source software foundations, to collaborate with market surveil-
lance for mitigating risks (Article 24(2)).
respect to its essential requirements [58], as they remain
also in the GDPR and the CSA’s certification scheme.
A risk analysis must evaluate step by step whether the
essential requirements are “applicable to the relevant prod-
uct”. If they are applicable, it must be evaluated “how
those requirements are implemented”.
To help at the
task, a risk analysis should consider a product’s “intended
purpose” and its “reasonably foreseeable use, as well as
the conditions of use”, including the “operational environ-
ment or the assets to be protected, taking into account
the length of time the product is expected to be in use”.
The wording about a “length of time” means that a risk
analysis should address a product’s whole support period.
The other qualifying words mean that product-oriented
companies (see Subsection 2.2.2) should consider also the
typical or “foreseeable use” of their products when doing
risk analyses—even when there is no explicit knowledge
about who uses a product, where, how, and why. The ear-
lier point about scenario analyses in Subsection 3.2.4 may
help at these risk analysis considerations.
3.3.3. Articles 14, 15, 16, 17, 19, and 20
There are six articles that imply different risk-based re-
porting obligations for various parties. When considering
only the paragraphs in which a risk concept appears ex-
plicitly, the following summary conveys the main points:
1. According to Article 15(1), manufacturers as well as
other natural or legal persons may voluntarily report
vulnerabilities affecting a product’s risk profile either
to a national authoritative computer security incident
response team (CSIRT) or ENISA.
2. According to Article 16, a common reporting platform
is established.
When there is “an imminent high”
risk according to a manufacture, ENISA will evaluate
whether there is also “a systemic risk” to the whole
internal market of the EU. If so, ENISA will noth-
ing other national authoritative CSIRTs. Regarding
the qualifying words, “imminent”, “high”, and “sys-
temic” are not actually defined in the regulation, in-
cluding in Article 3. Thus, the future will tell how the
interpretations shall be done in practice, and whether
standards will play a significant role in this aspect.
3. According to Article 17(3), ENISA will prepare a
technical report every other year about risks in prod-
ucts based on the notifications received.
4. When either an importer or distributor of products
recognizes a significant risk, including due to a vul-
nerability, it must notify the corresponding manufac-
turer and market surveillance authority according to
Articles 19 and 20.
However, it is Article 14 that is particularly relevant
with respect to reporting, although and oddly enough, the
risk concept does not explicitly appear in it. It specifies
mandatory reporting of “actively exploited vulnerabilities
and “severe incidents”. Definitions for these are given in
Article 3(42) and Article 14(5), respectively. While the
7
definitions and their qualifying words are interesting, a fur-
ther discussion can be omitted on the grounds that these
have already been discussed at length [60, 61]. For the
present purposes, it suffices to conclude that the various
reporting obligations further signify that the CRA is about
both technical and organizational security. The reporting
focus on incidents and vulnerabilities further reinforce the
CRA’s system-centric viewpoint to risks, although some
of the auxiliary tasks, including ENISA’s evaluations, ex-
emplify also a consideration of assets. In this regard, as
emphasized throughout the CRA’s recitals, the grand “as-
sets” to be protected are the EU’s internal market, in-
cluding particularly consumers, and the twenty-seven EU
member states themselves.
3.3.4. Article 54 and Article 56
There are two lengthy articles specifying various obli-
gations and procedures for dealing with significant cyber
security risks.
When a significant risk is detected by a
market surveillance authority, the authority, possibly in
collaboration with a relevant CSIRT, should conduct a
thorough evaluation of the given product according to Ar-
ticle 54(1). According to Article 54(2), also “non-technical
risk factors” should be taken into account in an evaluation
particularly regarding supply-chain security issues. When
such factors are present, further information and coordi-
nation should be done with the authorities specified in the
NIS2 directive. For mitigating significant risks, a market
surveillance authority should use corrective actions against
a manufacturer for mitigating the significant risk. In ex-
treme cases a given market surveillance authority may even
withdraw or recall a product placed on the internal mar-
ket. As with the EU’s product safety legislation [54], with-
drawals and recalls may be a stronger deterrent for manu-
facturers to comply than the financial sanctions specified
in Article 64.
Furthermore, Article 56 specifies that similar market
surveillance actions are done at the EU-level by the Com-
mission in cooperation with ENISA. These points, includ-
ing about “non-technical risk factors” and EU-level coor-
dination, further emphasize the asset-centric focal point in
addition to the more technical system-centric focal point.
Finally, together the risk-based essential requirements and
reporting obligations signify that the CRA is both about
development and operations—though again keeping the
points from Subsections 2.2.2 and 3.3.2 in mind.
3.4. The CER Directive
The CER and NIS2 directives too are pronouncedly risk-
based. The concept of risk, as defined in the directives’ Ar-
ticle 2(6) and Article 6(9), respectively, is the same used
in the CRA (see Subsection 3.3.1).
Thus, a probabilis-
tic understanding is again present. That said, the CER’s
framing of risks extends well-beyond cyber security.
3.4.1. Article 6 and Article 7
The authorities of each member state are obliged to
conduct comprehensive risk analyses. According to Arti-
cle 6(1), both “natural and man-made risks” must be as-
sessed, “including those of a cross-sectoral or cross-border
nature, accidents, natural disasters, public health emer-
gencies and hybrid threats or other antagonistic threats,
including terrorist offences”. This quotation frames the
CER toward national security. Although various threats
are mentioned, however, none of them pinpoint toward
some particular threat actors, and, hence, a threat-centric
viewpoint is a poor choice for describing the directive. The
inclusion of nature-based and healthcare risks mean that
the CER directive extends beyond security too.
Closer to cyber security, the national authorities must
also identify the so-called critical entities in their jurisdic-
tions according to Article 6. These are those who provide
“essential services” or operate critical infrastructures. Ar-
ticle 7(1) instructs the authorities to use a concept of “sig-
nificant disruptive effect”. The article lists six criteria for
evaluating such effects. The examples include users relying
on an entity’s service, an impact’s duration upon economic
and societal activities, and an entity’s market share. As
the concept of critical infrastructure is explicitly tied to
the concept of asset in Article 2(4), the CER directive
relies on an asset-centric viewpoint with its probabilistic
understanding of risks.
3.4.2. Articles 12 and 13
Once identified, the critical entities must then them-
selves do comprehensive risk analyses. According to Ar-
ticle 12(2), these risk assessments must address the same
aspects as the risk assessments done by the public author-
ities.
A particularly noteworthy aspect of the article is
a requirement to evaluate whether and to which extent a
critical entity depends on other critical entities or sectors
and the other way around. Given the earlier point about
risk analyses themselves belonging primarily to organiza-
tional security (see Subsection 2.2.1), the CER directive
can be interpreted to be about organizational security too.
The CER directive can be seen to be primarily about
operating of critical infrastructures by critical entities.
Though, Article 13(1) mandates the member states to
“ensure that critical entities take appropriate and propor-
tionate technical, security and organisational measures to
ensure their resilience”. Despite the qualifying adjective
“technical”, the CER directive does not explicitly state
what kind of technical resilience measures should be imple-
mented and how. Unlike with the CRA and GDPR [56], it
remains impossible to elicit any actual requirements from
the article.
Thus, the case also reiterates the notion of
keyword traps noted earlier in Subsection 2.2.4. That said,
things may change in the future as the Commission is em-
powered to develop “non-binding guidelines” and “techni-
cal and methodological specifications” according to para-
graphs (5) and (6) in Article 13.
8
Planning
Preparedness
Response
Recovery
Security incident, shock, disturbance, disaster, crisis, etc.
Situational awareness
from planning to recovery
Time
Impact
(damage)
Figure 3: A Fairly Conventional Elaboration of Resilience
Although the term resilience appears in the CRA’s name
itself, the CER directive’s rationale and goals are closer
to it.
The concept is defined in Article 2(2) to mean
the “ability to prevent, protect against, respond to, resist,
mitigate, absorb, accommodate and recover from an inci-
dent”. Many of the qualifying verbs frame the definition
toward incident management in the cyber security liter-
ature. More broadly, the resilience concept exemplifies a
broader trend of not only considering ex ante risks but also
responses to risks in legislation [71]. By using the further
concepts of planning, preparedness, response, and recov-
ery [14], an analytical illustration of the resilience concept
can be presented in the form of Fig. 3.4
3.4.3. Article 14
Finally, Article 14 obliges the member states to estab-
lish frameworks for doing background checks of natural
persons holding sensitive roles in the critical entities iden-
tified. Such checks reiterate the framing toward national
security. These are also an example about human security.
3.5. The NIS2 Directive
The NIS2 directive is the CER directive’s close cousin
and the other way around. Therefore, in what follows, the
analysis focuses only on those risk-specific aspects that do
not have a clear overlap with the CER directive.
3.5.1. Article 13 and Article 27
Among the non-overlapping characteristics are national
cyber security strategies the member states are obliged to
develop. According to Article 27, these strategies should
“identify relevant assets” and risks to these, synchronize
risk management procedures with the CER directive’s obli-
gations, and promote a development of risk management
frameworks and countermeasures, among other things. Al-
ready the qualifying noun “asset” reiterates what was said
4 In the resilience literature the term absorption is often used to
emphasize that an entity should have a capacity to absorb an impact
and recover to a normal state [41]. Although there are some hints in
related literature that the response phase has gathered most of the
attention [38], a rapid recovery requires planning, which, in turn,
increases a level of preparedness. Planning is necessary also for the
detection and analysis of incidents.
about the CRA and CER earlier in Subsections 3.3.3 and
3.4.1. That is, also the NIS2 directive’s viewpoint to risks
is asset-centric. The point about synchronization between
the CER and NIS2 directives appears also in Article 13 on
the cooperation at the national level. However and despite
the synchronization objective, NIS2 focuses only on man-
made cyber security risks. To this end, recital 72 clarifies
that other risks are considered in other laws and handled
through other governance mechanisms.
3.5.2. Articles 11, 12, and 13
The NIS2 directive strengthens the role of national au-
thoritative CSIRTs and increases their obligations.
Re-
garding risks specifically, they are instructed to also col-
lect and analyze “forensic data” and provide “dynamic
risk and incident analysis”. Although no details for spe-
cific requirements are mentioned, the earlier points about
the CER directive in Subsection 3.4.2 are not a good fit to
describe the NIS2 directive. The reason is that the NIS2
directive have already involved concrete technical develop-
ment; the European vulnerability database mandated by
Article 12 is already online [15]. With this point in mind,
NIS2 can be interpreted to be also about technical secu-
rity, having also a system-centric viewpoint to risks.
It
is also about both development and operations. The di-
rective’s many requirements for vulnerability coordination
and incident management signify the operational side.
3.5.3. Articles 15, 16, 17, and 22
The NIS2 directive further strengthens the European
and international network built around authoritative
CSIRTs. It also establishes a new coordination group as
well as a specific group for cyber security crisis manage-
ment. As specified in Article 22, the EU-level measures in-
clude also risk assessments of critical supply-chains. Given
that the cross-border and crisis management (as opposed
to incident management) aspects have already been dis-
cussed in previous research [60], it suffices to summarize
them by emphasizing that they too are strongly risk-based.
3.5.4. Article 21
Analogously to the CER directive, so-called essential
and important entities, as defined in the NIS2 directive’s
Article 3, must conduct comprehensive risk analyses. Ar-
ticle 21(2) defines ten aspects that must be taken into ac-
count “at minimum”.
To underline the comprehensive-
ness, the article uses a concept of “an all-hazards ap-
proach”. Such an approach is usually understood to in-
volve multiple risks that may be related to each other
through different cascading effects [63]. Thus, they also
align with the CER directive’s requirement to consider risk
dependencies (see Subsection 3.4.2). Interactions between
risks and cascading impacts further reiterate the earlier
point about causal risk models made in Subsection 3.2.3.
As for the ten aspects, these include everything from
training and “cyber hygiene” practices to supply-chain se-
curity and incident handling. The technical security focus
9
on the system-centric viewpoint are also present because
cryptography and encryption, multi-factor authentication,
continuous authentication, backups, and other technical
aspects are explicitly mentioned too. In addition to train-
ing and related measures, human security is also explicitly
mentioned, and thus the NIS2 directive can be interpreted
to be about technical, organizational, and human security
as well. The organizational security focus is further rein-
forced by the requirement to consider business continuity
in an “all-hazards” risk analysis. Given that business con-
tinuity is closely related to the resilience concept [43], the
planning, preparedness, response, and recovery concepts
in Fig. 3 apply also the NIS2 directive. The incident man-
agement requirements make the relation also explicit.
3.5.5. Article 32 and Article 33
Regarding enforcement, the essential and important en-
tities are subject to many supervisory tasks by public au-
thorities. As specified in Articles 32 and 33, these include
also evaluations of the risks analyses done by the enti-
ties. Furthermore, “on-site inspections and off-site super-
vision” are mentioned together with “regular and targeted
security audits” and “security scans based on objective,
non-discriminatory, fair and transparent risk assessment
criteria”. Again, many of the qualifying words, such as
non-discrimination, are not defined in the directive itself,
but can be still interpreted to represent unconstraints that
affect the many supervisory tasks. Particularly security
audits and scans again signify also the technical security
focus and a system-centric viewpoint to risks.
4. Conclusion and Discussion
The paper analyzed different risk notions and their fram-
ings in the EU’s five core cyber security legislative acts at
the time of writing. The goal was to build a taxonomy by
answering to the three RQs specified. The taxonomy de-
veloped through qualitative interpretation is summarized
in Table 2. In what follows, the taxonomy is first briefly
summarized by considering the answers reached. After-
wards, a few takeaways are discussed for practitioners and
research.
4.1. Answers and the Taxonomy
Regarding RQ.1, the framings done in the laws cover
all four security concepts considered.
If technical secu-
rity is present, a viewpoint to risks is also system-centric
though not only system-centric. All laws except the CSA
can be seen to have also an asset-centric viewpoint to
risks.
As also human security, organizational security,
and national security are present, an overall convergence
is present (RQ.2). In other words, together the five laws
have a highly encompassing coverage of different aspects
of cyber security risks. At the same time, complexity and
compliance burden have increased. Regarding divergence,
the laws cluster into three broad areas with respect to what
is being protected: natural persons (the GDPR), products
and their users (the CSA and CRA), and critical infras-
tructures (the CER and NIS2 directives). As seen from
Table 2, there are also two notable gaps. Because these
are about risk aspects none of the laws have addressed, the
gaps themselves can be also interpreted as convergence.
As was emphasized in Subsection 2.2.1, the concept of
asset is problematic and requires flexibility in interpreta-
tion. Thus, the “assets” considered in the laws correlate
with the three protection areas; these range from natural
persons and their rights (the GDPR) through the EU’s in-
ternal market and users of products (the CSA and CRA)
to critical infrastructures and essential services of Euro-
pean societies (the CER and NIS2 directives).
The CSA is also otherwise an exception because it cou-
ples a system-centric viewpoint to risks with a threat-
centric viewpoint. That is, the CSA’s certification scheme
involves rigorous technical security testing from a view-
point of attackers. This threat-centric viewpoint is also
related to residual and acceptable risks, which none of the
laws mention or otherwise discuss explicitly. As has been
contemplated previously [12], different threat actors, in-
cluding their skills and resources, could be seen as resid-
ual risks because threat-centric risk analyses are difficult
to do.
Given the certification context, the CSA is also
the only legislative act considered that does not involve
some operational considerations and requirements relating
to operations.
All laws rely on the conventional probabilistic under-
standing of the underlying risk concepts. This observa-
tion could provide also a motivation for the public au-
thorities and stakeholders involved to evaluate whether
non-probabilistic risk concepts could enhance and improve
existing risk analysis frameworks and standards.
Such
an evaluation might be particularly worthwhile regarding
other risks than the man-made ones. In this regard, only
the CER directive considers also risks emerging from nat-
ural disasters and related phenomena. The CER directive
is also the only legislative act considered that does not op-
erate with a system-centric viewpoint. Nor does it (yet)
entail clear-cut technical development.
That said, the allowance of implementing and delegating
acts in many of the laws, such as those briefly remarked
in Subsection 3.4.2 regarding the CER directive, imply
that the taxonomy may not be entirely static. If required,
it should be updated in the future by interpreting what
the supplementary acts may involve regarding risks (B12).
This point is important to underline also more generally.
New laws and changes to existing laws often cause ripple
effects to existing implementations and their designs [56].
A similar point applies to guidance from public authorities.
Ultimately, compliance questions as well as ambiguities
are resolved through enforcement actions, whether by pub-
lic authorities or by courts.
Regarding the ambiguities,
many of the legislative acts contain both explicit exemp-
tions and different qualifying words reflecting constraints
and unconstraints for those needing to comply (RQ.3).
10
Table 2: A Taxonomy on the Framing of Risks in the EU’s Five Core Cyber Security Acts
Law
Category
CSA
GDPR
CRA
CER
NIS2
P
Dimension (1)
(1a)
Threat-centric
✓
1
(1b)
Asset-centric
✓
✓
✓
✓
4
(1c)
System-centric
✓
✓
✓
✓
4
Dimension (2)
(2a)
Only man-made risks
✓
✓
✓
✓
4
(2b)
Other risks too
✓
1
Dimension (3)
(3a)
Probabilistic
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
5
(3b)
Non-probabilistic
0
Dimension (4)
(4a)
Acceptable or residual risks
0
(4b)
No acceptable or residual risks
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
5
Dimension (5)
(5a)
Technical security
✓
✓
✓
✓
4
(5b)
Organizational security
✓
✓
✓
✓
4
(5c)
Human security
✓
✓
2
(5d)
National security
✓
1
Dimension (6)
(6a)
Development
✓
✓
✓
✓
4
(6b)
Operations
✓
✓
✓
✓
4
P
7
9
9
8
10
–
The CRA’s exclusion of certain products is a good exam-
ple about explicit exemptions. Also qualifying words, such
as “appropriate” and “proportionate”, frequently appear
in most of the legislative acts analyzed. These hint that
compliance is not a clear-cut phenomenon but requires in-
terpretation and different balancing considerations. The
GDPR is a good example. The wording in Articles 25 and
32 about the “state-of-the-art” can be seen as a constraint
for technical design and implementation. Yet, it is bal-
anced with many qualifying words that represent relaxing
unconstraints, including but not limited to “costs”.
4.2. Takeaways
The primary and perhaps obvious takeaway for practi-
tioners would be that risks should be taken into account
when seeking to comply with the EU’s core cyber security
laws. In fact, most of the laws discussed oblige to carry
out risk analyses for different purposes. These obligations
lead to the second takeaway: when needing to comply with
multiple cyber security laws, it seems sensible to recom-
mend seeking synergies for compliance. Such synergies also
underline the term holistic [29]. If a network-connected
product processes personal data, for instance, it seems sen-
sible to consider the security requirements of the GDPR in
combination with the essential requirements of the CRA.
If further operating in a critical infrastructure sector or
developing products for such a sector, compliance burden
could be likely reduced by considering a single risk anal-
ysis covering the CRA’s, CER’s, and NIS2’s overlapping
requirements. The remaining requirements could be than
addressed on case-by-case basis.
Another example would be the CRA’s essential cyber
security requirements whose design and implementation
must be done based on a risk analysis.
A sensible ap-
proach might be to first evaluate whether all of them are
applicable and relevant, including with respect to the CIA
triad, keeping in mind the CRA’s definition of a risk in
mind. If a clear gap is present, a given requirement should
be likely implemented. Given the NIS2’s emphasis on busi-
ness continuity, it might make sense to also consider eco-
nomic and business aspects. That is: when considering a
distinction between value-adding requirements and resid-
ual requirements causing negative business value [26], the
CRA’s notions about an impact’s magnitudes and losses
or disruptions could be evaluated also in business terms.
A holistic approach is needed also when seeking compli-
ance with the GDPR because impacts should be evaluated
against the rights and freedoms of natural persons.
Given the numerous overlaps between different laws that
were pointed out by stakeholders during the CRA’s pol-
icy consultation [55], further research is also needed to
continue the mapping studies already done [56] for better
understanding overlapping legal requirements. There also
further overlaps present in terms of the risk concepts. For
instance, the EU’s Digital Services Act [22], or DSA in
short, also uses a concept of systemic risks but in a very
different context than what was noted in Subsection 3.3.3.
The AI regulation would be another good example.
However, these points about synergies and overlaps re-
quire understanding also about acceptable and residual
risks. These concepts too require further research also in
the context of the EU’s cyber security laws. Given the
NIS2’s all-hazards approach, it also remains unclear how
11
well existing frameworks and standards support encom-
passing risk analyses, including in relation to cascading
effects.
Different propagated risk analysis methods [76]
might help at modeling also larger hazards, disasters, and
crises. A further related area worth researching is related
to the points raised about product-oriented companies who
may not have a clear understanding about a context in
which their products are used. In this regard, theoretical
but adaptable scenarios, reusable patterns and templates
for scenarios and risk analysis matrices, better modeling
tools, and related topics might well be a research area with
practical value now and in the future.
References
[1] Alberts,
C.,
Wallen,
C.
M.,
Woody,
C.,
Bandor,
M.,
and
Merendino,
T.
(2023).
Security
Engineering
Frame-
work (SEF): Managing Security and Resilience Risks Across
the Systems Lifecycle.
CMU/SEI-2024-SR-022, Carnegie Mel-
lon
University,
Software
Engineering
Institute
(SEI),
avail-
able online in July: https://www.sei.cmu.edu/documents/6121/
security-engineering-framework-sef-24sr022_cGH1oyZ.pdf.
[2] Almada, M. and Petit, N. (2025).
The EU AI Act: Between
the Rock of Product Safety and the Hard Place of Fundamental
Rights. Common Market Law Review, 62:85–120.
[3] Anderson, R. and Moore, T. (2009).
Information Security:
Where Computer Science,
Economics and Psychology Meet.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathemati-
cal, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 367:2717–2727.
[4] Backman, S. (2023). Risk vs. Threat-Based Cybersecurity: The
Case of the EU. European Security, 32(1):85–103.
[5] Bernhard, J. and Knoll, A. (2021).
Risk-Constrained Interac-
tive Safety Under Behavior Uncertainty for Autonomous Driving.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV
2021), pages 63–70, Nagoya.
[6] Bertoldi, A. and Chishman, R. (2007).
Improving Legal On-
tologies Through Semantic Representation of Adjectives. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Semantic Computing
(ICSC 2007), pages 767–774, Irvine. IEEE.
[7] Bygrave, L. A. (2017). Data Protection by Design and by Default:
Deciphering the EU’s Legislative Requirements. Oslo Law Review,
4(2):105–120.
[8] Carroll, T. E., Greitzer, F. L., and Roberts, A. D. (2014).
Security Informatics Research Challenges for Mitigating Cyber
Friendly Fire. Security Informatics, 13:1–14.
[9] Chirico, F. and Larouche, P. (2013).
Convergence and Diver-
gence, in Law and Economics and Comparative Law. In Larouche,
P. and Cserne, P., editors, National Legal Systems and Globaliza-
tion: New Role, Continuing Relevance, pages 9–33. Asser Press,
Berlin.
[10] Chockalingam, S., Nystad, E., and Esnoul, C. (2023). Capa-
bility Maturity Models for Targeted Cyber Security Training. In
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on HCI for Cy-
bersecurity, Privacy and Trust (HCI-CPT 2023), pages 576–590,
Copenhagen. Springer.
[11] Crotty, J. and Daniel, E. (2022).
Cyber Threat: Its Origins
and Consequence and the Use of Qualitative and Quantitative
Methods in Cyber Risk Assessment. Applied Computing and In-
formatics, pages 1–12.
[12] de
Bruijne,
M.,
van
Eeten,
M.,
Ga˜n´an,
C.
H.,
and
Pieters,
W.
(2017).
Towards
a
New
Cyber
Threat
Ac-
tor
Typology:
A
Hybrid
Method
for
the
NCSC
Cyber
Security
Assessment.
TU
Delft,
available
online
in
July
2025: https://repository.wodc.nl/bitstream/handle/20.500.
12832/2299/2740_Volledige_Tekst_tcm28-273243.pdf.
[13] ENISA
(2023).
Interoperable
EU
Risk
Management
Toolbox.
The
European
Union
Agency
for
Cyberse-
curity
(ENISA),
available
online
in
July
2025:
https:
//www.enisa.europa.eu/sites/default/files/publications/
Interoperable%20EU%20RM%20Toolbox.pdf.
[14] ENISA (2024). Best Practices for Cyber Crisis Management.
The European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA), avail-
able online in January 2025: https://enisa.europa.eu/sites/
default/files/2024-11/ENISA%20Study%20Best%20Practices%
20Cyber%20Crisis%20Management.pdf.
[15] ENISA (2025). European Union Vulnerability Database. The
European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA). Available
online in March 2025: https://euvd.enisa.europa.eu/.
[16] EU (2008). Decision No 768/2008/EC of the European Parlia-
ment and of the Council of 9 July 2008 on a Common Framework
for the Marketing of Products, and Repealing Council Decision
93/465/EEC (Text With EEA Relevance). The European Union
(EU), available online in July 2025: https://eur-lex.europa.
eu/eli/dec/2008/768(1)/oj/eng.
[17] EU (2016a).
Charter of Fundamental Rights of the Eu-
ropean
Union.
The
European
Union,
available
online
in
July 2025: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/
?uri=celex%3A12016P%2FTXT.
[18] EU (2016b). Consolidated Text: Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of
the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on
the Protection of Natural Persons With Regard to the Process-
ing of Personal Data and on the Free Movement of Such Data,
and Repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Reg-
ulation) (Text With EEA Relevance).
The European Union
(EU), available online in July 2025: https://eur-lex.europa.
eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A02016R0679-20160504.
[19] EU (2019). Regulation (EU) 2019/881 of the European Par-
liament and of the Council of 17 April 2019 on ENISA (the Eu-
ropean Union Agency for Cybersecurity) and on Information and
Communications Technology Cybersecurity Certification and Re-
pealing Regulation (EU) No 526/2013 (Cybersecurity Act) (Text
With EEA Relevance). The European Union (EU), available on-
line in March 2025: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2019/
881/oj/eng.
[20] EU (2022a). Directive (EU) 2022/2555 of the European Parlia-
ment and of the Council of 14 December 2022 on Measures for a
High Common Level of Cybersecurity Across the Union, Amend-
ing Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 and Directive (EU) 2018/1972,
and Repealing Directive (EU) 2016/1148 (NIS 2 Directive) (Text
With EEA Relevance). The European Union (EU), available on-
line in March 2025: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/dir/2022/
2555/oj/eng.
[21] EU (2022b). Directive (EU) 2022/2557 of the European Parlia-
ment and of the Council of 14 December 2022 on the Resilience
of Critical Entities and Repealing Council Directive 2008/114/EC
(Text With EEA Relevance). The European Union (EU), avail-
able online in March 2025:
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/
dir/2022/2557/oj/eng.
[22] EU (2022c). Regulation (EU) 2022/2065 of the European Par-
liament and of the Council of 19 October 2022 on a Single Market
for Digital Services and Amending Directive 2000/31/ec (Digital
Services Act) (Text With EEA Relevance). The European Union
(EU), available online in March 2025: https://eur-lex.europa.
eu/eli/reg/2022/2065/oj/eng.
[23] EU (2022d). Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 of the European Par-
liament and of the Council of 14 December 2022 on Digital Oper-
ational Resilience for the Financial Sector and Amending Regula-
tions (EC) no 1060/2009, (EU) No 648/2012, (EU) No 600/2014,
(EU) No 909/2014 and (EU) 2016/1011 (Text With EEA Rel-
evance).
The European Union (EU), available online in March
2025: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2022/2554/oj/eng.
[24] EU (2024). Regulation (EU) 2024/2847 of the European Parlia-
ment and of the Council of 23 October 2024 on Horizontal Cyber-
security Requirements for Products With Digital Elements and
Amending Regulations (EU) No 168/2013 and (EU) 2019/1020
and Directive (EU) 2020/1828 (Cyber Resilience Act) (Text With
EEA Relevance). The European Union (EU), available online in
March 2025:
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/2847/
oj/eng.
12
[25] Faisal, K. (2023). Applying the Purpose Limitation Principle in
Smart-City Data-Processing Practices: A European Data Protec-
tion Law Perspective. Communication Law and Policy, 28(1):67–
97.
[26] Fridgen, G., Klier, J., Beer, M., and Wolf, T. (2014).
Im-
proving Business Value Assurance in Large-Scale IT Projects—
A Quantitative Method Based on Founded Requirements Assess-
ment. ACM Transactions on Management Information Systems,
5(3):1–17.
[27] Gellert,
R. (2016).
We Have Always Managed Risks in
Data Protection Law: Understanding the Similarities and Differ-
ences Between the Rights-Based and the Risk-Based Approaches
to Data Protection.
European Data Protection Law Review,
2(4):481–492.
[28] Guerra, G. (2018). An Interdisciplinary Approach for Compar-
ative Lawyers: Insights from the Fast-Moving Field of Law and
Technology. German Law Journal, 19(3):579–612.
[29] Haelterman, H. (2022). Breaking Silos of Legal and Regulatory
Risks to Outperform Traditional Compliance Approaches. Euro-
pean Journal on Criminal Policy and Research, 28:19–36.
[30] Haley, C. B., Moffett, J. D., Laney, R., and Nuseibeh, B. (2006).
A Framework for Security Requirements Engineering. In Proceed-
ings of the International Workshop on Software Engineering for
Secure Systems (SESS 2006), pages 35–42, Shanghai. ACM.
[31] Hall´e, S. (2024). Column: Is Theory (Still) Welcome in Software
Engineering Research?
ACM SIGSOFT Software Engineering
Notes, 49(2):19–21.
[32] Hanif, H., Constantino, J., Sekwenz, M.-T., van Eeten, M.,
Ubacht, J., Wagner, B., and Zhauniarovich, Y. (2024). Navigat-
ing the EU AI Act Maze Using a Decision-Tree Approach. ACM
Journal on Responsible Computing, 1(3):1–16.
[33] Hildebrandt, M. (2020).
Law for Computer Scientists and
Other Folk. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
[34] Hildebrandt, M. (2024). The Future of Computational Law in
the Context of the Rule of Law. Journal of Cross-Disciplinary
Research in Computational Law, 2(2):1–11.
[35] Hotomski, S., Charrada, E. B., and Glinz, M. (2016). An Ex-
ploratory Study on Handling Requirements and Acceptance Test
Documentation in Industry.
In Proceedings of the IEEE 24th
International Requirements Engineering Conference (RE 2016),
pages 116–125, Beijing. IEEE.
[36] Hyrynsalmi, S. M., Liebel, G., de Souza Santos, R., and Baltes,
S. (2025). Not Real or too Soft? On the Challenges of Publishing
Interdisciplinary Software Engineering Research. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/ACM 47th International Conference on Software En-
gineering: Software Engineering in Society (ICSE-SEIS 2025),
pages 106–117, Ottawa.
[37] Jasmontaite, L., Kamara, I., Zanfir-Fortuna, G., and Leucci,
S. (2018). Data Protection by Design and by Default: Framing
Guiding Principles into Legal Obligations in the GDPR. European
Data Protection Law Review, 4:168–189.
[38] Kalatpour, O. and Farhadi, S. (2017). The Content Analysis
of Emergency Scenarios: Thematic Survey of the Context in the
Process Industries. Safety Science, 92:257–261.
[39] Kloza, D., Van Dijk, N., Casiraghi, S., Maymir, S. V., and
Tanas, A. (2021). The Concept of Impact Assessment. In Burgess,
J. P. and Kloza, D., editors, Border Control and New Technolo-
gies: Addressing Integrated Impact Assessment, pages 31–48. ASP
Academic and Scientific Publishers, Brussels.
[40] Kosenkov, O., Elahidoost, P., Gorschek, T., Fischbach, J.,
Mendez, D., Unterkalmsteiner, M., Fucci, D., and Mohanani, R.
(2025). Systematic Mapping Study on Requirements Engineering
for Regulatory Compliance of Software Systems. Information and
Software Technology, 178:107622.
[41] Labaka, L., Hernantes, J., and Sarriegi, J. M. (2016). A Holistic
Framework for Building Critical Infrastructure Resilience. Tech-
nological Forecasting & Social Change, 103:21–33.
[42] Li, Z. S., Werner, C., Ernst, N., and Damian, D. (2022). To-
wards Privacy Compliance: A Design Science Study in a Small
Organization. Information and Software Technology, 146:106868.
[43] Meagher, H. and Dhirani, L. L. (2024). Cyber-Resilience, Prin-
ciples, and Practices. In Qureshi, K. N., Newe, T., Jeon, G., and
Chehri, A., editors, Cybersecurity Vigilance and Security Engi-
neering of Internet of Everything, pages 57–74. Springer, Cham.
[44] Mendes, J. P. (2023). Model-Based Risk Analysis for System
Design. Systems Engineering, 27(1):5–20.
[45] Michalec, O., Milyaeva, S., and Rashid, A. (2022). When the
Future Meets the Past: Can Safety and Cyber Security Coexist in
Modern Critical Infrastructures? Big Data & Society, 9(1):1–13.
[46] Mollaeefar, M. and Ranise, S. (2023). Identifying and Quantify-
ing Trade-Offs in Multi-Stakeholder Risk Evaluation With Appli-
cations to the Data Protection Impact Assessment of the GDPR.
Computers & Security, 129:103206.
[47] Onos´e, C. (2020).
Designing for Consumer Trust in a Data-
Powered World. IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine, 9(2):89–
93.
[48] Purnhagen, K. (2003).
The Politics of Systemization in EU
Product Safety Regulation: Market, States, Collectivity, and In-
tegration. Springer, Dordrecht.
[49] Rabitti, G., Chokami, A. K., Coyle, P., and Cohen, R. D. (2024).
A Taxonomy of Cyber Risk Taxonomies. Risk Analysis, 45(2):376–
386.
[50] Ralph, P. (2019). Toward Methodological Guidelines for Pro-
cess Theories and Taxonomies in Software Engineering.
IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering, 45(7):712–735.
[51] Rea-Guaman, A., Feliu, T. S., Calvo-Manzano, J., and Sanchez-
Garcia, I. (2017). Systematic Review: Cybersecurity Risk Taxon-
omy. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Soft-
ware Process Improvement (CIMPS 2017), pages 137–146, Za-
catecas. Springer.
[52] Rebrean, M.-L. and Malgieri, G. (2025). Vulnerability in the
EU AI Act: Building an Interpretation. In Proceedings of the 2025
ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency
(FAccT 2025), pages 1985–1997, Athens. ACM.
[53] Ruan, K. (2017). Introducing Cybernomics: A Unifying Eco-
nomic Framework for Measuring Cyber Risk. Computers & Secu-
rity, 65:77–89.
[54] Ruohonen, J. (2022). A Review of Product Safety Regulations
in the European Union. International Cybersecurity Law Review,
3:345–366.
[55] Ruohonen, J. (2025).
(Forthcoming) An Empirical Analysis
of Policy Consultations on the European Union’s Cyber Security
Laws. In Amoretti, F., Busetti, S., Righettini, M. S., and Vecchi,
G., editors, Cybersecurity Policy in the European Union. Palgrave
Macmillan, Cham.
[56] Ruohonen, J., Hjerppe, K., and Kang, E.-Y. (2025a). A Map-
ping Analysis of Requirements Between the CRA and the GDPR.
In (Forthcoming) Proceedings of the IEEE 33rd International Re-
quirements Engineering Conference Workshops (REW 2025), Va-
lencia. IEEE.
[57] Ruohonen, J., Hjerppe, K., and von Zastrow, M. (2024). An Ex-
ploratory Case Study on Data Breach Journalism. In Proceedings
of the 19th International Conference on Availability, Reliability
and Security (ARES 2024), pages 1–9, Vienna. ACM.
[58] Ruohonen, J., Kang, E.-Y., and Ramadan, Q. (2025b).
An
Alignment Between the CRA’s Essential Requirements and the
ATT&CK®’s Mitigations. In (Forthcoming) Proceedings of the
IEEE 33rd International Requirements Engineering Conference
Workshops (REW 2025), Valencia. IEEE.
[59] Ruohonen, J. and Mickelsson, S. (2023). Reflections on the Data
Governance Act. Digital Society, 2:1–10.
[60] Ruohonen, J., Rindell, K., and Busetti, S. (2025c). From Cy-
ber Security Incident Management to Cyber Security Crisis Man-
agement in the European Union. Archived manuscript, available
online: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2504.14220.
[61] Ruohonen, J. and Timmers, P. (2025). Vulnerability Coordi-
nation Under the Cyber Resilience Act.
Archived manuscript,
available online: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2412.06261.
[62] Ryan, I., Roedig, U., and Stol, K.-J. (2023). Measuring Secure
Coding Practice and Culture: A Finger Pointing at the Moon is
not the Moon. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 45th Interna-
tional Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE 2023), pages
1622–1634, Melbourne. IEEE.
13
[63] Sarmah, T., Ghosh, K., Chatterjee, R., and Shaw, R. (2024).
History of Risk Management Approach. In Izumi, T., Abe, M.,
Fujita, K., and Shaw, R., editors, All-Hazards Approach: Towards
Resilience Building, pages 29–41. Springer, Singapore.
[64] Shirey, R. W. (2007).
Internet Security Glossary, Version
2.
Request for Comments (RFC) 4949, the Internet Engineer-
ing Task Force (IETF), available online in July 2025:
https:
//datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4949.
[65] Sibony, A.-L. (2017). Returning to Risk Regulation After a Long
Journey. European Journal of Risk Regulation, 8(1):112–114.
[66] Sokolovska, A. and Kocarev, L. (2018). Integrating Technical
and Legal Concepts of Privacy. IEEE Access, 6:26543–26557.
[67] Solove, D. J. (2002). Conceptualizing Privacy. California Law
Review, 90(4):1087–1155.
[68] Suslov, T. (2025).
Rethinking Security: The Human Side of
Risk Management. Palgrave Macmillan, Cham.
[69] Tatam, M., Shanmugam, B., Azam, S., and Kannoorpatti, K.
(2021). A Review of Threat Modelling Approaches for APT-Style
Attacks. Heliyon, 7(1):e05969.
[70] Usman, M., Britto, R., B¨orstler, J., and Mendes, E. (2017). Tax-
onomies in Software Engineering: A Systematic Mapping Study
and a Revised Taxonomy Development Method. Information and
Software Technology, 85:43–59.
[71] van der Heijden, J. (201). Risk as an Approach to Regulatory
Governance: An Evidence Synthesis and Research Agenda. SAGE
Open, 11(3):1–12.
[72] Vielberth, M., Siepmann, R., Glas, M., and Pernul, G. (2025).
Securing the Road Ahead: Supporting Decision Making in Auto-
motive Cybersecurity Risk Treatment. In Proceedings of the 20th
International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security
(ARES 2025), pages 269–285, Ghent. Springer.
[73] Wagner, D. and Disparte, D. (2016). Global Risk Agility and
Decision Making: Organizational Resilience in the Era of Man-
Made Risk. Palgrave Macmillan, London.
[74] Wairmu, S., Iwaya, L. H., Fritsch, L., and Lindskog, S. (2024).
On the Evaluation of Privacy Impact Assessment and Privacy
Risk Assessment Methodologies: A Systematic Literature Review.
IEEE Access, 12:19625–19650.
[75] Walley, P. (1991). Statistical Reasoning With Imprecise Proba-
bilities. Chapman and Hall, London.
[76] Waqdan, M., Louafi, H., and Mouhoub, M. (2025).
Security
Risk Assessment in IoT Environments: A Taxonomy and Survey.
Computers & Security, 154:10446.
[77] Woods, D. W. and B¨ohme, R. (2016). SoK: Quantifying Cyber
Risk.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy (S&P), pages 211–228, San Francisco. IEEE.
14
