Title: ICS-SimLab: A Containerized Approach for Simulating Industrial Control Systems for Cyber Security Research
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2509.23305v1
--------------------------------------------------

ICS-SimLab: A Containerized Approach for
Simulating Industrial Control Systems for Cyber
Security Research
Jaxson Brown†, Duc-Son Pham†, Sie-Teng Soh†, Foad Motalebi‡, Sivaraman Eswaran‡, and Mahathir Almashor§
† School of Electrical Engineering, Computing and Mathematical Sciences, Curtin University, Western Australia
‡ Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Curtin University, Malaysia
§ Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) Energy, Perth, Western Australia
jokesene@outlook.com, dspham@ieee.org, s.soh@curtin.edu.au,
foad.m@curtin.edu.my, sivaraman.eswaran@curtin.edu.my, mahathir.almashor@csiro.au
©2025 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses,
including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, collecting new collected works
for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. The
final version of record will be available via IEEE Xplore®.
Abstract—Industrial Control Systems (ICSs) are complex inter-
connected systems used to manage process control within indus-
trial environments, such as chemical processing plants and water
treatment facilities. As the modern industrial environment moves
towards Internet-facing services, ICSs face an increased risk of
attacks that necessitates ICS-specific Intrusion Detection Systems
(IDS). The development of such IDS relies significantly on a
simulated testbed as it is unrealistic and sometimes hazardous to
utilize an operational control system. Whilst some testbeds have
been proposed, they often use a limited selection of virtual ICS
simulations to test and verify cyber security solutions. There
is a lack of investigation done on developing systems that can
efficiently simulate multiple ICS architectures. Currently, the
trend within research involves developing security solutions on
just one ICS simulation, which can result in bias to its specific
architecture.
We present ICS-SimLab, an end-to-end software suite that
utilizes Docker containerization technology to create a highly con-
figurable ICS simulation environment. This software framework
enables researchers to rapidly build and customize different ICS
environments, facilitating the development of security solutions
across different systems that adhere to the Purdue Enterprise
Reference Architecture. To demonstrate its capability, we present
three virtual ICS simulations: a solar panel smart grid, a water
bottle filling facility, and a system of intelligent electronic devices.
Furthermore, we run cyber-attacks on these simulations and
construct a dataset of recorded malicious and benign network
traffic to be used for IDS development.
Index Terms—Industrial control systems, virtual testbed, sim-
ulation, dataset, intrusion detection systems
I. Introduction
Industrial Control Systems (ICSs) are complex, highly in-
terconnected systems used to manage process control and
automation across industrial environments. It is a general term
that includes systems such as Supervisory Control and Data
Acquisition (SCADA) systems, Distributed Control Systems
(DCS), as well as components such as Programmable Logic
Controllers (PLC) and Remote Terminal Units (RTU) [1]. ICSs
are found in facilities such as water treatment plants, transport in-
frastructure, power generation systems and intelligent electronic
devices [2]. Systems that require real-time data monitoring and
control are typically implemented as an ICS.
With the convergence of Information Technology (IT) and
Operational Technology (OT), many ICS environments are
increasingly exposed to cyber threats. This is especially preva-
lent with the use of Internet-facing services, which introduces
remote attack vectors [3]. As such, there is growing demand
for innovative and effective cyber security solutions for ICS
technology. Furthermore, these solutions must be designed so
that they do not impact the availability of these systems. Such
a solution includes Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS), which
monitor network and/or host activity for malicious behavior.
IDS software is an example of technology that doesn’t limit the
availability of a system, making it suitable for ICS environments.
Historical examples of past ICS cyber attacks highlight the
importance of implementing innovative security solutions. A
commonly referenced example includes the Stuxnet attack.
Stuxnet was a highly sophisticated malware that was designed to
specifically target ICS environments [4], [5]. It’s known to be the
first malware constructed to cause physical harm, and has been
referred to as a “cyber warfare weapon” [6]. In 2010, Stuxnet
was responsible for an attack on Iranian uranium enrichment
facilities, which involved the physical destruction of centrifuges
used in the enrichment process.
BlackEnergy is another key malware example that demon-
strates the extreme consequences of ICS cyber attacks. In 2015,
the third iteration of the BlackEnergy malware was used in
a large-scale attack on Ukrainian power grids. This malware
abused exploits in outdated Microsoft Office documents to
establish remote backdoor access into power grid operations [7].
This attack caused power outages across Ukraine and resulted
in approximately 225000 citizens without power [8].
Considering the magnitude of past attacks, it’s clear that
cyber protection and solution development must be a priority
for the modern ICS landscape. To be able to develop and
evaluate such security solutions, researchers require testbeds
that replicate real-world control systems. However, testing on
live ICS infrastructure presents significant challenges due to
safety, availability, and confidentiality concerns. As a result,
ICS simulation environments are being used as an alternative.
arXiv:2509.23305v1  [cs.CR]  27 Sep 2025
These environments replicate ICS components and network
behavior to provide realistic testbeds for general ICS cyber
security research.
Within this field, researchers often use previously built
simulations from other works. This is common practice as it
allows researchers to avoid hardware related issues and other
technical problems involved with setting up a testbed [9].
Researchers investigating Machine Learning (ML)-based IDS
development can also leverage existing datasets specifically
designed for training. These datasets are typically produced
by running cyber-attacks on ICS simulations whilst recording
network activity. Through using these datasets, researchers can
avoid setting up a simulation entirely [10], [11]. However, there
are drawbacks to using existing simulations and datasets. There
is a lack of flexibility in defining custom test conditions, as well
as custom cyber-attacks [9]. Malware attacks are often evolving,
and previous datasets do not reflect that evolution [12]. There
is also the major issue of bias within developed solutions. For
instance, if a developed IDS software works well on one type
of ICS architecture, there is a high probability that the same
software won’t be effective on a different type of ICS.
We present ICS-SimLab, a software suite capable of simulat-
ing various types of ICS environments. This software utilizes
Docker containerization technology to realize the different com-
ponents of ICS and SCADA systems, specifically Programmable
Logic Controllers (PLCs), Human Machine Interfaces (HMIs),
sensors and actuators. We also implement Hardware-in-the-
Loop modules to replicate the physical processes involved in
these control systems. Due to the efficiency of containers, ICS-
SimLab can be run entirely on a single computer with relatively
minimal computational requirements. Previous works often use
other encapsulation technologies, such as virtual machines.
However it has been demonstrated that these technologies have
substantial computational requirements and may cause issues if
running on a single host [13].
Furthermore, ICS-SimLab employs a highly configurable
system that enables researchers to customize a wide range
of ICS architectures. This is achieved through a JSON-based
configuration format that defines all key ICS features, including
descriptions of devices, communications, and control logic.
ICS-SimLab uses these predefined JSON files to construct
Docker containers representing the various components of an
ICS, which are then deployed within a virtual network to form
the simulation. Several external tools are also used to virtualize
other aspects of an ICS environment.
This paper focuses on usability and reproducibility through-
out the design and implementation process. Reproducibility, as
highlighted in previous literature [14], reinforces the need for
accessible and user-friendly ICS simulation tools. Specifically,
the configuration system of ICS-SimLab has been designed to
be both intuitive and transparent, allowing researchers to use
the software with minimal training. Furthermore, abstraction
techniques have been employed to improve reliability and reduce
the overall complexity of the system.
This paper is organised as follows. In Section II we investigate
the literature of previous ICS simulation designs and comment
on certain design advantages and flaws. Section III explores
the structure of ICS, including the different components and
protocols used within ICS environments. Section IV describes
the design of ICS-SimLab and describes three preconfigured
simulations built with the framework. Section V highlights
a practical application of the simulation software through
investigating the effects of different cyber-attacks. In this
section we also present several datasets that can be used
for IDS developments. Finally, Section VI discusses areas of
improvement for future work and concludes the results of this
paper.
II. Related Work
In this section we review three categories of ICS testbeds
as defined in [15]: physical, virtual and hybrid. We examine the
strengths of the testbed designs and comment on any limitations.
Table I contains a summary of relevant literature.
A. Physical Testbeds
Physical ICS simulations are built using real ICS devices, such
as industry-grade Programmable Logic Controllers (PLCs) and
Intelligent Electronic Devices (IEDs). They are often designed
to be fully working, miniaturized control systems.
Teixeira et al. [12] have built an ICS testbed representing a
simple water tank facility. Their testbed involves a physical water
tank equipped with sensors, actuators and a PLC to control water
levels within the tank. The purpose of this testbed is to help
emulate “real-world industrial systems as closely as possible
without replicating an entire plant or assembly system” [12],
although the simplicity of the simulation has been criticized in
[13].
Mathur and Tippenhauer [16] introduced a small-scale water
purification ICS facility, designed specifically for cyber security
research. The testbed, named the SwaT testbed for “Secure Wa-
ter Treatment”, features a six-stage water purification process. Its
sophisticated design provides a highly realistic testbed platform,
however it also makes it impractical for independent replication.
Morris et al. [17] developed a physical testbed consisting
of seven miniaturized control systems, which incorporated
both serial and Ethernet communications. The systems using
serial communication include a water storage tank, a raised
water system, a gas pipeline, a conveyor belt setup, and an
industrial blower system. Two Ethernet-based systems were also
developed: a steel rolling operation setup and a hybrid smart grid
transmission control system.
Overall, physical ICS testbeds provide a valuable environment
for comprehensive cyber security research. However, to replicate
a physical testbed is very time consuming and often impractical
for researchers [9]. Therefore, it’s worth looking into alternative
approaches such as virtual or hybrid simulations.
B. Virtual Simulations
Virtual ICS simulations are built fully on virtualization
technology, such as virtual machines [14] or with Docker
containers [18]. As a result, these simulations can typically
run on a single computer, offering researchers a flexible and
TABLE I
Brief outline of popular ICS simulations and frameworks within
literature.
Category
Paper
Description
Physical Testbed
[12]
Created a physical water tank ICS and tested
classical ML for intrusion detection for re-
connaissance attacks.
Physical Testbed
[16]
A physical testbed that implements a 6 stage
water purification process.
Physical Testbed
[17]
A testbed with seven different physical pro-
cesses.
Virtual Testbed
[13]
VM-based nuclear power plant simulation.
Virtual Testbed
[18]
Builds a substation tested using Docker con-
tainers and Modbus-TCP.
Virtual Testbed
[19]
Builds a physical and virtual gas pipeline
testbed.
Virtual Testbed
[20]
An open-source ICS simulator that models
industrial communication.
Hybrid Testbed
[21]
Creates a hybrid simulation of the Tennessee
Eastman (TE) plant, along with ML modules
for IDS development.
Hybrid Testbed
[10]
Hybrid waste water simulation using real
PLCs and simulated analogue I/O.
Framework
[9]
Creates an OOP-based framework for simu-
lating ICS in Docker containers.
Framework
[14]
VM-based framework that uses open-source
software to virtualize different ICS compo-
nents.
Framework
[22]
A framework for visualizing ICS environ-
ments using the Unity game engine.
easily deployable testbed. In addition, cyber-attacks that would
typically cause environmental damage to a real system can be
safely investigated.
Dehlaghi-Ghadim et al. [9] developed a framework for
building virtual ICS simulations based on an Object-Oriented
Programming (OOP) approach using the Python programming
language. Their system utilities Docker containerization tech-
nology to replicate ICS components in a deployable environ-
ment. However, a prominent flaw within their framework is its
applicability for creating custom ICS simulations. Their OOP
approach makes it difficult to create custom simulations, as low-
level coding and class adjusting is required to do so.
Boakye-Boateng et al. [18] follow a similar approach as
they also utilize Docker containers and Python scripts to
construct an electrical substation testbed. Their use of Python
for implementing direct logical control introduces limitations
similar to those identified in the framework developed in [9],
mainly in terms of reduced flexibility for manual adjustment
and independent component implementation.
Another ICS simulation framework has been developed in
[14] that uses virtual machines to realize different ICS compo-
nents. The framework includes a suite of open-source software
tools that can be used to simulate different ICS device function-
alities, such as OpenPLC for PLC implementation, ScadaBR
for Human Machine Interface (HMI) devices, and Simulink
for modeling physical processes. These tools are deployed on
virtual machines to construct the simulation environment. A key
limitation of virtual machine-based approaches is computational
limits. Unlike containers, which share an Operating System (OS)
kernel, virtual machines virtualize an entire OS which results in
high computational requirements for larger simulations.
The authors of [19] also use virtual machines to construct
a virtual gas pipeline testbed. Similarly to the framework in
[14], Simulink is used to virtualize the physical process, which
involves modeling a pump, valve, pipeline and fluid flow.
de Brito and de Sousa Jr [13] present another virtual machine-
based testbed that simulates a much more complex control
system: a nuclear power plant. They utilize the Asherah Nuclear
Power Plant (NPP) simulator to implement the physical system
of a condenser cooling pump, which is a specific sub-system of
a nuclear power plant. Similarly to previous testbeds, they use
OpenPLC for PLC implementation and ScadaBR to construct a
HMI component.
TinyICS [20] is another open-source ICS simulator built on
NS-3 that models industrial communication using the Modbus
protocol and provides Python bindings for ease of use by control
system engineers. While TinyICS focuses on simulating process
behavior and capturing communication traffic in customizable
industrial scenarios, our ICS-SimLab platform extends beyond
single-system emulation to support the rapid deployment of
diverse, Docker-based ICS architectures aligned with the Purdue
Enterprise Reference Architecture, explicitly targeting cyber
security experimentation and intrusion detection system (IDS)
development.
The authors of [22] present a Graphical Realism Framework
for Industrial Control Systems (GRFICS), which is a frame-
work that utilizes the Unity game engine to visualize ICSs.
They simulate the Tennesse Eastman Process (TEP), a widely
recognized industrial process originally designed for evaluating
process control and monitoring methods [23]. Their simulation
development has been developed primarily as an educational
resource where researchers and student can explore difference
ICS attacks and defense mechanisms in the visual environment.
C. Hybrid Simulations
Physical testbeds and virtual testbeds both have their benefits
and drawbacks. Many researchers utilize the benefits of both
approaches through developing hybrid ICS testbed. Such a
testbed utilizes real industrial hardware, such as Schneider PLC
models, in conjunction with simulated physical processes to
gain high levels of simulation accuracy without having to fully
develop the physical control system.
The authors of [10] developed a hybrid waste water sim-
ulation using industrial components combined with process
simulation modules. They used a SIMATIC S7-1200 Siemens
PLC, SIMATIC Basic Panel HMI and an Ethernet switch to
implement the supervisory layers along with simulation modules
with analogue I/O for the physical waste water processes. Many
hybrid ICS testbeds follow a similar approach where only the
physical levels are simulated using software applications.
A hybrid simulation developed in [21] simulates the Ten-
nessee Eastman Process, similarly to [22]. In this testbed, the
TEP environment is simulated using software on a dedicated
PC with I/O modules connected to real PLCs. Their testbed
demonstrates how a complex and well-established industrial
process can be simulated in a hybrid setup while incorporating
actual industrial hardware.
CPS-DERMS [24] introduced a sophisticated multi-co-
simulation hardware-in-the-loop testbed that integrates OPAL-
RT for grid-side simulations, NS-3 for large-scale cyber sim-
ulations, and a custom Python-based DERMS platform to
study vulnerabilities in DER-DERMS communication. While
their focus was on demonstrating novel Man-in-the-Middle
(MITM) attack strategies within power distribution systems,
including payload manipulation and stealth techniques, our work
with ICS-SimLab is oriented toward simulating cyber-physical
threats in industrial control systems (ICS) within industrial plant
environments.
D. Limitations and Areas for Improvement
Most ICS testbeds in literature have been designed to simulate
one specific type of control system. There has been little work
directed towards developing a generalized system capable of
simulating a broad range of control systems architectures.
Furthermore, the current landscape of ICS testbeds offer
researchers limited flexibility when it comes to developing
custom components and extensions. In physical and hybrid
setups, this limitation is understandable as hardware must be
purchased and configured to match the testbed environment.
However for virtual simulations, having a system that allows
researchers to configure and customize their own testbeds would
be of great value to the research community. It would allow
for the development of cyber security solutions across diverse
control system architectures, leading to more accurate and
generalizable solutions.
The current virtualization technologies can also be improved
to increase the efficiency of simulation deployment. Most virtual
testbeds utilize virtual machines to implement different ICS
devices. Whilst virtual machines offer accurate encapsulation,
running many of them at the same time has significant computa-
tional cost. Containers are useful alternatives to virtual machines
as they instead virtualize at the OS level, meaning that they share
kernel resources and don’t virtualize the OS itself. They provide
the same level of abstraction that virtual machines provide, but
are far more lightweight and portable.
III. ICS Architecture Overview
Industrial Control Systems consist of various different com-
ponents. These components have unique purposes and roles
which vary between systems. A typical ICS setup involves a
network of these components communicating amongst each
other to perform overall process control. As explored previously,
the variety of ICS environments across industrial applications
differ significantly. Despite these differences, there are sev-
eral shared characteristics amongst all control systems. These
characteristics typically include common industrial devices,
communication protocols, and topology architectures such as
the Purdue Enterprise Reference Architecture [25].
A. Components
There exists many ICS devices that are used amongst all
control systems for similar operations. Common ICS compo-
nents and modules are described in the following sections. These
components can all be simulated within ICS-SimLab.
1) Programmable Logic Controllers (PLC): PLCs are re-
sponsible for handling logic and switching operations [1].
They manage field devices such as sensors and actuators, and
perform tasks related to process control and data acquisition. A
PLC operates by receiving input signals, executing predefined
logic based on those signals, and then transmitting output
signals to other devices. The IEC 61131-3 standard defines the
programming languages used for PLC development [26], with
Ladder Logic being the most common one.
2) Human Machine Interfaces (HMI): HMIs act as central-
ized control points within an ICS [27]. They act as clients to
PLCs, and are used to request data for visualization and send
commands for manual control.
3) Sensors and Actuators: These components are field de-
vices that monitor and handle physical interactions. Sensors are
devices that monitor process measurements, such as temperature
and pressure. Actuators are responsible for physical movements
in process control, and included devices such as valves and
conveyor belts.
4) Hardware-in-the-Loop (HIL) Modules: Whilst not found
in real-world ICS environments, HIL components are used
to simulate physical processes through complex mathematical
models. In industrial contexts, HIL modules emulate physical
interactions to enable testing of operational components such as
PLCs. While HIL components are not deployed in real systems,
they are used within ICS testing, and can also facilitate physical
processes for ICS testbeds.
B. Modbus Protocol
Modbus is the most widely used communication protocol
for Industrial Control Systems [28]. The Modbus protocol is
an open-source protocol used for communication amongst ICS
devices. The simplicity and applicability of Modbus has made
it a favored protocol within industry.
Modbus has a master/slave architecture. Modbus-compliant
devices can either act as a master or as a slave: master devices
send Modbus “requests” and slave devices reply with Modbus
“responses” [29]. There are three variants of the protocol: RTU,
ASCII and TCP. Modbus-RTU and ASCII both operate on serial
communication lines. The difference between these variants is
that RTU utilizes binary encoding whilst ASCII uses human-
readable characters. Modbus-RTU is preferred within industry
for serial communication due to higher efficiency and more
widespread support. As such this paper only addresses Modbus-
RTU for serial communication.
The Modbus-RTU frame consists of four fields as shown in
Figure 1: Address, function code, data, and a Cyclic Redundancy
Check (CRC) field as follows
1) Address: One byte used to assign unique addresses to
Modbus devices.
2) Function Code: One byte used to specify a predefined
function that dictates the purpose of a Modbus request.
3) Data: A variable-length field that contains parameters for
Modbus requests or return values for Modbus responses.
4) CRC: Two bytes for CRC error detection.
Address
Function Code
Data
CRC
1 byte
1 byte
N bytes
2 bytes
Fig. 1. Structure of the Modbus-RTU frame
Modbus-TCP is an encapsulation of the RTU variant into a
TCP/IP packet. It facilitates the use of the Modbus protocol
over networks operating on the TCP/IP stack [30]. Essentially,
it is the same as the RTU variant but with all the features of the
TCP/IP stack. There are some additional fields involved with the
TCP variant, but overall the key functionality remains the same.
Due to the mainstream popularity of the Modbus protocol, it
has been used to facilitate inter-device communication within
ICS-SimLab.
C. Purdue Enterprise Reference Architecture
Industrial Control Systems tend to follow an architecture
called the Purdue Enterprise Reference Architecture [25]. This
model describes an ICS in a layered approach, with each layer
representing a different level of component interaction. Lower
layers interact with the physical environment of the system, and
high layers handle logic and supervision. Figure 2 illustrates
the levels of this model and highlights where certain ICS
components belong in the architecture. ICS-SimLab follows the
Purdue model when constructing the architecture of configured
ICS simulations.
IV. ICS-SimLab Design and Implementation
In this section we describe the design and implementation
process of the ICS-SimLab simulation software. We elaborate
on the reasoning behind key design choices and highlight
innovations and features that can improve current ICS simu-
lation practices. Additionally, we present three preconfigured
simulations built using ICS-SimLab which can be readily used
as immediate ICS testbeds.
A. Device Implementation
ICS-SimLab is capable of simulating all modules described in
Table II. These components have been selected as they represent
common devices responsible for core functionality in most ICS
environments, with the exception of HIL modules which are
typically used only in simulation and testing scenarios.
To achieve device virtualization and isolation, Docker con-
tainers have been used. The framework dynamically constructs
containers for each component, enabling encapsulation and pre-
venting direct communication between devices. This isolation
is crucial for creating a realistic simulation environment, as
in practice these components would be physically separated.
Level 0
Physical Process Zone
Level 1
Intelligent Device Zone
Level 2
Control System Zone
Level 3
Manufactuing Opetations
Systems Zone
DMZ
Demilitarized Zone
Level 4
Enterprise Zone
Sensors
PLC
IT Servers
Corporate
Workstations
Customized OT 
Devices
Historian
RTU
Actuators
Engineering
Workstation
HMI
Firewalls
Proxies
Fig. 2. Levels of the Purdue Enterprise Reference Architecture
TABLE II
Components simulated by ICS-SimLab
Component
Description
Human Machine Inter-
faces (HMI)
Displays collected data and enables man-
ual control.
Programmable
Logic
Controllers (PLC)
Performs control logic for sensors and
actuators.
Sensors
Reads environmental data from the HIL
modules.
Actuators
Alters physical processes from the HIL
modules.
Hardware-in-the-Loop
(HIL) Modules
Simulates physical processes.
To assist with running multiple containers in parallel, Docker
Compose has been used.
Alternative virtualization methods, such as virtual machines,
can introduce drawbacks related to computational cost and
deployment complexity [13]. Unlike virtual machines, which
virtualize the entire physical computer, containers only virtu-
alize the application environment. They share kernel resources
whilst still providing process isolation.
B. Network Emulation
To ensure accurate ICS communication simulation, Modbus-
TCP and Modbus-RTU protocol variants have been imple-
mented into ICS-SimLab. Modbus-TCP utilizes the TCP/IP
stack, and so requires a network configuration. Modbus-RTU
uses serial port communication.
To virtualize a TCP/IP network, Docker Compose has been
used. Compose has in-built functionality that can+ create
networks for containers to use. ICS-SimLab uses this feature for
Modbus-TCP communication. For Modbus-RTU, the socat
utility has been used. socat has the ability to construct virtual
serial ports, which ICS-SimLab then uses as a means for
Modbus-RTU communication amongst containers. Note that
socat has been primarily built for Unix-specific systems, and
so will not work on native Windows.
Docker containers by default have network interfaces, which
allow them to communicate via IP. However, for serial commu-
nication, container volumes have been deployed as a means for
parsing virtual serial port input into the containers.
Sensors and actuators require a means of communicating with
the physical environment, which in ICS-SimLab is simulated
by the HIL modules. Similar to the hardware-aware layer
presented in [9], ICS-SimLab uses a shared SQLite database
among sensors, actuators, and HIL modules. Sensors read from
the database, while actuators write to it. The physical values
themselves are defined within a JSON configuration file, as
described in Section IV-C. The HIL modules modify these
physical values based on customized logic implemented in
Python.
C. Configuration System
ICS-SimLab uses a JSON configuration file to define all
components of a simulation. Only one JSON file is needed per
ICS type. For example, one file may define the components of
a water storage tank system, while another specifies the layout
of a gas pipeline simulation. Users can create their own JSON
files to specify the components and functionalities they wish
to incorporate. ICS-SimLab will then parse the JSON file and
deploy a simulation based on the provided configuration. This
configuration-based approach allows ICS-SimLab to efficiently
deploy a variety of ICS architectures, and more importantly
enables researchers to customize their own ICS testbed.
The JSON file includes parent-level properties that corre-
spond to the different devices defined in Table II. Within these
properties, further configurations are required to define how the
device works. Table III describes all of the key device-related
properties that can be defined.
TABLE III
Key property configurations in the JSON file
Attribute
Description
Components
name
Custom name for the compo-
nent.
All components
network
IP and relevant Docker net-
work interface.
All components
inbound
_connections
Modbus slaves/server configu-
rations.
PLC,
sensors,
actuators
outbound
_connections
Modbus master/client config-
urations.
HMI, PLC
registers
Defines used Modbus register
addresses.
HMI, PLC, sen-
sors, actuators
monitors
Defines inter-device reading
communication.
HMI, PLC
controllers
Defines inter-device writing
communication.
HMI, PLC
logic
Specifies a Python file for cus-
tom logic implementation.
PLC, HIL
physical
_values
Specifies environmental val-
ues.
HIL
Python has been used to develop the core configuration
software of ICS-SimLab, including the functionality involved
with booting up the various containers using the JSON file. The
pymodbus Python library has been utilized to implement all
Modbus communication. The containers themselves all run a
Python service script with different logic depending on what
device the container is simulating. For the components that
depend on some predefined logic, such as the PLCs, additional
Python scripts are created to provide a means of custom logic
implementation, which are referenced in the JSON configuration
file.
Furthermore, the Streamlit web framework has been used to
implement a dashboard for visualizing the entire simulation.
This dashboard serves a purely observational purpose and is not
considered an operational ICS component. Figure 3 shows an
example section of this dashboard interface.
Fig. 3. Section of the Streamlit dashboard displaying the addresses and values
of PLC registers
D. Preconfigured Simulations
To demonstrate the effectiveness of ICS-SimLab in generating
ICS simulations, three simulations have been preconfigured.
The first simulation represents a solar panel system with an
automatic transfer switch. It includes a single HIL module that
emulates solar power generation, along with a transfer switch
that can alternate the input power between mains and solar. The
setup consists of two power meter sensors: one for recording
solar power output and one for monitoring the total power input.
The transfer switch is the only actuator in this simulation. A
PLC has been configured to send control signals to the transfer
switch based on the solar power generation level. If the power
falls below a defined threshold, the PLC switches to mains power
and vice versa. Finally, a HMI device has been implemented for
data acquisition across the components. Figure 4 displays this
simulation setup.
Fig. 4. Solar power setup simulation
The second simulation models a water bottle filling facility,
shown in Figure 5, and has been replicated from the testbed
presented in [9]. This simulation is divided into two sections,
each controlled by a separate PLC. The first PLC manages a
water tank with an input valve, output valve, and a water level
sensor. The PLC ensures that the tank maintains an adequate
water level. The output valve leads to a conveyor belt system
that moves empty water bottles underneath it. The second PLC
controls this conveyor belt and sends command signals to the
first PLC when a bottle is in position and ready to be filled. This
simulation has been replicated in ICS-SimLab to demonstrate
the platform’s flexibility and compatibility with different ICS
architectures.
Fig. 5. Water bottle filling facility, inspired by the configuration in [9].
Figure 6 illustrates the third simulation, which models an
Intelligent Electronic Device (IED) setup. This simulation has
taken inspiration from the testbed presented in [18], which
involves the virtualization of an electrical substation. In this
testbed, a simulated transformer undergoes tap changes to alter
its output voltage at random intervals, either autonomously or via
a HMI device. If the output voltage falls outside an acceptable
range, the breaker trips until the voltage returns to a stable value.
All of this control logic has been implemented through a PLC.
The source code for ICS-SimLab is publicly available in
an online GitHub repository, along with the preconfigured
simulation environments. 1
1https://github.com/JaxsonBrownie/ICS-SimLab
Fig. 6. Intelligent Electronic Device setup, inspired by the testbed in [18].
V. ICS-SimLab Cyber Security Applications
This section outlines the applications of ICS-SimLab in the
context of cyber security research. Various ICS-specific cyber
attacks are executed on the three preconfigured simulations,
which are defined in Section IV-C, to investigate the effects on
these attacks. A network data collection system is introduced
to capture both benign and malicious activity. Finally, a data
labeling system is used to generate datasets that can support
the development of Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) using
Machine Learning (ML) techniques.
A. Cyber-Attacks and Vulnerabilities
ICS environments are vulnerable to attacks unique to their
architecture, especially when compared to other systems such as
traditional IT systems [1], [31]. For instance, the Modbus proto-
col used for ICS device communication lacks security controls
common to modern IT environments, such as encryption and
authorization mechanisms. The lack of encryption means that
an attacker can listen in on communications and perform Man-
in-the-Middle attacks [28], and since there are no authorization
checks attackers can easily send malicious requests given an
initial entry point into the ICS system.
Morris [32] presents a number of ICS cyber attacks. Table IV
displays all the attacks selected from [32] that have been used on
the simulations generated with ICS-SimLab. These attacks are
specific to ICS environments using the Modbus protocol, and are
general enough to be able to be used on any control system type.
Whilst it’s common for cyber security researchers to develop
cyber attacks tightly coupled to specific testbed architecture [9],
[13], [17], we chose to execute attacks that can be used across
multiple control systems.
These attacks have a clear and expected effect on each of
the simulations. As shown in Table IV, reconnaissance attacks
have the purpose of gathering device and network information.
Response and measurement injection attacks involve crafting
malicious Modbus packets for data manipulation. Command
injection attacks abuse unsafe standard Modbus function codes
to issue unauthorized commands. Finally, denial of service
attacks aim to overwhelm the system with excessive network
packets to mask genuine network activity. Figure 7 demonstrates
the influx of packets involved in a connection flood attack, as
indicated by the peaks in traffic activity.
TABLE IV
Implemented cyber attacks based on [32]
Attack Name
Classification
Description
Address Scan
Reconnaissance
An address scan to determine
Modbus-compliant device ad-
dresses.
Function
Code
Scan
Reconnaissance
Scans for valid Modbus func-
tion codes.
Device Identifica-
tion
Reconnaissance
Sends a Modbus request with
function code 0x2B, which can
return device-specific informa-
tion.
Naive
Sensor
Read
Response
and
Measurement
Injection
Scans over all Modbus registers
and relays and attempts to find
used addresses.
Sporadic
Sensor
Measurement In-
jection
Response
and
Measurement
Injection
Writes
random
values
to
coils/holding registers
Force
Listen
Mode
Command
Injection
Sends a Modbus request with
function code 0x08 and sub-
function code 0x0004 to force a
device into Force Listen Mode
Restart
Communications
Command
Injection
Sends a Modbus request with
function code 0x08 and sub-
function code 0x0001 to restart
the device.
Data Flood At-
tack
Denial of
Service
Floods the network with Mod-
bus packets
Connection Flood
Attack
Denial of
Service
Floods the network with TCP
connection requests.
Fig. 7. Packets during a connection flood attack.
B. Dataset Generation
An attacking module was created with Python that would
run random attacks from those listed in Table IV. This module
was deployed across all of the predefined ICS simulations, with
Wireshark being used to capture the resulting network activity.
After 30 minutes of simulating both benign and malicious
network activity, the captured traffic data was exported to PCAP
files for further processing.
A custom data processing script was used to extract relevant
features from the PCAP files and construct a CSV-formatted
dataset. Each packet was labeled as either malicious or benign,
along with its corresponding attack category. Table V describes
all the features extracted for the dataset. Certain protocols have
also been removed from the PCAP file that were unrelated to the
main ICS device activity. The PCAP files and generated CSV
files can be found in the GitHub repository for the source code
for ICS-SimLab, along with the custom data processing script.
TABLE V
Features of the generated dataset.
Feature
Description
time
Time of packet creation
src mac
Source MAC address
dest mac
Destination MAC address
src ip
Source IP address
dest ip
Destination IP address
protocol
The protocol of the packet.
length
Length of the Modbus Application Data
Unit (ADU)
unit id
Modbus unit ID
func code
Modbus function code
data
The Modbus data field
attack specific
The specific attack used (for malicious
packets)
attack category
Category of the attack (for malicious
packets)
attack binary
Defines if a packet is benign (0) or
malicious (1)
Since ICS-SimLab can simulate various ICS environments,
it enables the generation of multiple datasets representing
different architectures under attack. These datasets can be
used collectively to develop a generalized IDS capable of
detecting malicious activity across various systems. At the
least, having access to multiple ICS environments allows
researchers to evaluate the robustness of certain ML techniques
against varying network behavior. Additionally, training across
multiple datasets introduces the effect of data overfitting, which
while a challenging issue to face, can ultimately support the
development of more resilient IDS models by exposing their
generalization limits.
VI. Conclusion and Future Works
This paper has presented ICS-SimLab, a software framework
for generating ICS simulations through customizable configu-
rations. Containerization technology has been used to enable
entire simulations to run efficiently on a single host machine.
Furthermore, a JSON-based configuration system allows re-
searchers to construct custom ICS testbed environments, which
can facilitate more effective cyber security research by enabling
the development and evaluation of solutions across diverse ICS
architectures.
To demonstrate the capabilities of ICS-SimLab, three precon-
figured simulations have been developed: a solar panel smart
grid setup, a water bottle filling facility, and an Intelligent
Electronic Device (IED) configuration. In addition, ICS-specific
cyber attacks were designed and executed on all three simula-
tions, and their effects were observed. Datasets were generated
to represent network activity during both normal operations and
attack scenarios. These datasets can support the development
of network-based Intrusion Detection Systems using techniques
such as Machine Learning
For future work, we aim to develop a real-time IDS software
capable of detecting ICS-specific attacks. ICS-SimLab can
facilitate this development through providing various ICS
simulation environments for constructing and validating the
IDS system. The datasets generated in this work can be used
to train Machine Learning models used for building the IDS.
Furthermore, Deep Learning and Generative AI techniques can
be investigated to develop more explainable and interpretable
IDS models. We intend to thoroughly explore the uses of modern
AI approaches to advance beyond traditional machine learning
techniques in ICS security.
To enhance the ICS-SimLab framework, future work will
explore the use of more accurate tools for virtualizing specific
components. Currently, Python is used to simulate physical
processes. However, more specialized software such as Matlab
or Simulink may offer improved accuracy [14]. Investigating
alternative virtualization approaches may lead to more accurate
and realistic simulation results. In addition, since the core
functionality of the ICS components, such as the PLCs, is im-
plemented using Python libraries, device-specific attacks cannot
be accurately modeled in the current approach. Instead, the
containerized approach primarily targets network-level attacks,
such as those exploiting Modbus vulnerabilities. Device-specific
attacks, such as buffer overflow attacks and firmware-specific
exploits, are currently out of scope. In future work, we aim
to explore methods for simulating such device-specific attacks
while maintaining the benefits of containerized deployment.
Acknowledgment
This work is supported by a cross-campus cyber security seed
grant from Curtin University.
References
[1] Z. Drias, A. Serhrouchni, and O. Vogel, “Analysis of cyber security for
industrial control systems,” in 2015 international conference on cyber
security of smart cities, industrial control system and communications
(ssic), pp. 1–8, IEEE, 2015.
[2] U. P. D. Ani, J. M. Watson, B. Green, B. Craggs, and J. R. Nurse, “Design
considerations for building credible security testbeds: Perspectives from
industrial control system use cases,” Journal of Cyber Security Technol-
ogy, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 71–119, 2021.
[3] Y. Hu, A. Yang, H. Li, Y. Sun, and L. Sun, “A survey of intrusion detection
on industrial control systems,” International Journal of Distributed
Sensor Networks, vol. 14, no. 8, p. 1550147718794615, 2018.
[4] N. Falliere, L. O. Murchu, E. Chien, et al., “W32. stuxnet dossier,” White
paper, symantec corp., security response, vol. 5, no. 6, p. 29, 2011.
[5] T. M. Chen and S. Abu-Nimeh, “Lessons from stuxnet,” Computer, vol. 44,
no. 4, pp. 91–93, 2011.
[6] R. Langner, “Stuxnet: Dissecting a cyberwarfare weapon,” IEEE Security
& Privacy, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 49–51, 2011.
[7] D. U. Case, “Analysis of the cyber attack on the ukrainian power grid,”
Electricity Information Sharing and Analysis Center (E-ISAC), vol. 388,
no. 1-29, p. 3, 2016.
[8] D. Alert, “Cyber-attack against ukrainian critical infrastructure,” Cyber-
security Infrastruct. Secur. Agency, Washington, DC, USA, Tech. Rep.
ICS Alert (IR-ALERT-H-16-056-01), 2016.
[9] A. Dehlaghi-Ghadim, A. Balador, M. H. Moghadam, H. Hansson, and
M. Conti, “Icssim—a framework for building industrial control systems
security testbeds,” Computers in Industry, vol. 148, p. 103906, 2023.
[10] S. Mubarak, M. H. Habaebi, M. R. Islam, A. Balla, M. Tahir, A. Elsheikh,
and F. Suliman, “Industrial datasets with ics testbed and attack detection
using machine learning techniques,” Intell. Autom. Soft Comput, vol. 31,
no. 3, pp. 1345–1360, 2022.
[11] T. Morris and W. Gao, “Industrial control system traffic data sets for
intrusion detection research,” in Critical Infrastructure Protection VIII:
8th IFIP WG 11.10 International Conference, ICCIP 2014, Arlington,
VA, USA, March 17-19, 2014, Revised Selected Papers 8, pp. 65–78,
Springer, 2014.
[12] M. A. Teixeira, T. Salman, M. Zolanvari, R. Jain, N. Meskin, and
M. Samaka, “Scada system testbed for cybersecurity research using
machine learning approach,” Future Internet, vol. 10, no. 8, p. 76, 2018.
[13] I. B. de Brito and R. T. de Sousa Jr, “Development of an open-source
testbed based on the modbus protocol for cybersecurity analysis of nuclear
power plants,” Applied Sciences, vol. 12, no. 15, p. 7942, 2022.
[14] T. Alves, R. Das, A. Werth, and T. Morris, “Virtualization of scada testbeds
for cybersecurity research: A modular approach,” Computers & Security,
vol. 77, pp. 531–546, 2018.
[15] M. Conti, D. Donadel, and F. Turrin, “A survey on industrial control
system testbeds and datasets for security research,” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 2248–2294, 2021.
[16] A. P. Mathur and N. O. Tippenhauer, “Swat: A water treatment testbed for
research and training on ics security,” in 2016 international workshop on
cyber-physical systems for smart water networks (CySWater), pp. 31–36,
IEEE, 2016.
[17] T. Morris, A. Srivastava, B. Reaves, W. Gao, K. Pavurapu, and R. Reddi,
“A control system testbed to validate critical infrastructure protection
concepts,” International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection,
vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 88–103, 2011.
[18] K. Boakye-Boateng, A. A. Ghorbani, and A. H. Lashkari, “Securing sub-
stations with trust, risk posture, and multi-agent systems: A comprehensive
approach,” in 2023 20th Annual International Conference on Privacy,
Security and Trust (PST), pp. 1–12, IEEE, 2023.
[19] T. H. Morris, Z. Thornton, and I. Turnipseed, “Industrial control system
simulation and data logging for intrusion detection system research,” 7th
annual southeastern cyber security summit, pp. 3–4, 2015.
[20] A. Candia and C. Cappo, “Tinyics: An industrial control system simulator
based on ns-3,” in Proc. 43rd International Conference of the Chilean
Computer Science Society (SCCC), pp. 1–8, IEEE, 2024.
[21] M. Noorizadeh, M. Shakerpour, N. Meskin, D. Unal, and K. Khorasani, “A
cyber-security methodology for a cyber-physical industrial control system
testbed,” IEEe Access, vol. 9, pp. 16239–16253, 2021.
[22] D. Formby, M. Rad, and R. Beyah, “Lowering the barriers to industrial
control system security with {GRFICS},” in 2018 USENIX Workshop on
Advances in Security Education (ASE 18), 2018.
[23] A. Bathelt, N. L. Ricker, and M. Jelali, “Revision of the tennessee eastman
process model,” IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 48, no. 8, pp. 309–314, 2015.
[24] S. C. V. Kondu, G. Ravikumar, and S. N. Mohan, “Cps-derms: Cyber-
physical security and impact analysis of derms against mitm attacks,” in
Proc. IEEE Green Technologies Conference (GreenTech), pp. 1–5, IEEE,
2025.
[25] T. J. Williams, “The purdue enterprise reference architecture,” Computers
in industry, vol. 24, no. 2-3, pp. 141–158, 1994.
[26] E. R. Alphonsus and M. O. Abdullah, “A review on the applications
of programmable logic controllers (plcs),” Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews, vol. 60, pp. 1185–1205, 2016.
[27] V. M. Igure, S. A. Laughter, and R. D. Williams, “Security issues in scada
networks,” computers & security, vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 498–506, 2006.
[28] B. Chen, N. Pattanaik, A. Goulart, K. L. Butler-purry, and D. Kundur,
“Implementing attacks for modbus/tcp protocol in a real-time cyber
physical system test bed,” in 2015 IEEE International Workshop Technical
Committee on Communications Quality and Reliability (CQR), pp. 1–6,
2015.
[29] B. Dutertre, “Formal modeling and analysis of the modbus protocol,” in
International Conference on Critical Infrastructure Protection, pp. 189–
204, Springer, 2007.
[30] A. Swales et al., “Open modbus/tcp specification,” Schneider Electric,
vol. 29, no. 3, p. 19, 1999.
[31] K. Stouffer, J. Falco, K. Scarfone, et al., “Guide to industrial control
systems (ics) security,” NIST special publication, vol. 800, no. 82, pp. 16–
16, 2011.
[32] T. H. Morris and W. Gao, “Industrial control system cyber attacks,” in 1st
International Symposium for ICS & SCADA Cyber Security Research
2013 (ICS-CSR 2013), BCS Learning & Development, 2013.
