Title: Cybersecurity and Sustainable Development
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2105.13652v1
--------------------------------------------------

 
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com 
ScienceDirect 
Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000 
 
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia 
 
1877-0509 © 2021 Adam Sulich, Małgorzata Rutkowska, Agnieszka Krawczyk-Jezierska, Jarosław Jezierski, Tomasz Zema. 
Published by Elsevier B.V.  
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) 
Peer-review under responsibility of KES International.  
25th International Conference on Knowledge-Based and Intelligent Information & Engineering 
Systems  
Cybersecurity and Sustainable Development 
Adam Sulicha,♠, Małgorzata Rutkowskab, Agnieszka Krawczyk-Jezierskaa,c,d,  
Jarosław Jezierskib, Tomasz Zemaa 
a Wroclaw University of Economics and Business, Faculty of Management, Komandorska 118-120, Wroclaw 53-345, Poland 
b Wroclaw University of Science and Technology, Faculty of Computer Science and Management, Wyspianskiego 27, Wrocław 50-370, Poland  
c The Center of Banking Law and Information, ul. Kruczkowskiego 8, 00-380 Warsaw, Poland 
d The Warsaw Institute of Banking, ul. Solec 38/104; 00-394 Warsaw, Poland  
Abstract 
Growing interdependencies between organizations lead them towards the creation of inter-organizational networks where 
cybersecurity and sustainable development have become one of the most important issues. The Environmental Goods and Services 
Sector (EGSS) is one of the fastest developing sectors of economy fueled by the growing relationships between network entities 
based on the ICT usage. In this sector the Green Cybersecurity is an emerging issue because it secures processes related directly 
and indirectly to the environmental management and protection. In the future the multidimensional development of the EGSS can 
help European Union to overcome the upcoming crises. At the same time computer technologies and cybersecurity can contribute 
to the implementation of the concept of sustainable development. The development of environmental technologies along with their 
cybersecurity is one of the aims of the realization of sustainable production and domestic security concepts among the EU countries. 
Hence, the aim of this article is a theoretical discussion and research on the relationships between cybersecurity and sustainable 
development in the inter-organizational networks. Therefore, the article is an attempt to give an answer to the question about the 
current state of the implementation of cybersecurity in relation to the EGSS part of the economy in different EU countries. 
 
© 2021 Adam Sulich, Małgorzata Rutkowska, Agnieszka Krawczyk-Jezierska, Jarosław Jezierski, Tomasz Zema. Published by 
Elsevier B.V.   
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) 
Peer-review under responsibility of KES International. 
 
Keywords: cybersecurity, sustainable development, Environmental Goods and Services Sector (EGSS), Industry 4.0  
♠ corresponding author: 
E-mail address: adam.sulich@ue.wroc.pl  
 
2 
Adam Sulich et al./ Procedia Computer Science 00 (2021) 000–000 
1. Introduction 
The Environmental Goods and Services Sector (EGSS) is one of the fastest developing areas of economy in the 
European Union [1,2]. This development is caused by the implementation of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
in the organization strategies [3,4] and by the growing importance of the digital technologies [1,5]. The EGSS is 
related to the Information and Communications Technology (ICT) sector, which is an extensional term for Information 
Technology (IT). In both sectors there are multiple strategies to achieve more sustainable development goals in 
organizations and on the level of the EU countries [6,7]. Surprisingly, the innovations introduced by the ICT sector 
gain more and more attention in the EGSS [2,8] and the green sectors of economy. Researchers [2,9] have discussed 
several approaches to using ICT in the service of sustainability, which have emerged during the last two decades in 
the academic and industrial spheres [10]. The ongoing Fourth Industrial Revolution (Industry 4.0) helps to increase 
automation and to improve communication, self-monitoring and the development of smart machines that can analyze 
and diagnose potential issues [11]. Industry 4.0 when combined with the circular economy, represents a new industrial 
paradigm enabling new natural resource strategies [12]. These approaches were then most often discussed in the 
context of the Jevons paradox [13,14], an economic argument implying that technological efficiency alone will not 
produce sustainability [2,15]. Researchers’ consideration leads to the conclusion that a “combination of efficiency and 
sufficiency strategies is the most effective way to stimulate innovations which will unleash ICT’s potential to support 
sustainability” [2]. The growing interest in digitization in almost all areas of modern life, and its dynamic development, 
especially now in the era of the pandemic, brings along both benefits and threats. Therefore, the current challenge for 
every user of ICT system is ensuring security in cyberspace in the area of bio-security which is also related to the 
achieving the SDGs. In the European Union (EU) it is important to combine internal and external security and the 
need to develop policies, actors and instruments that are consistent in this security context [16]. Both cybersecurity 
and Sustainable Development (SD) are the worldwide issues [17]. The European Union countries established goals 
dedicated both to the SD and cybersecurity, and they cooperate in various inter-organizational networks where 
cybersecurity and sustainable development have become an important issue. Increasing investments in Renewable 
Energy Sources (RES) can contribute to the SDGs, but also more often are dependent on the ICT systems and 
cybersecurity. On the other hand, these investments rely also on the banking industry. These complex relations have 
not been explored so far in the EGSS related literature. Therefore, this paper is an attempt to give an answer to the 
question about the current condition of the implementation of cybersecurity in EGSS and the related areas of economy 
in different EU countries. 
The aim of this article is both a theoretical discussion and research on the relationship between cybersecurity and 
sustainable development in the inter-organizational networks. We understand the whole sector as an ecosystem whose 
relations can be measured by selected variables. The secondary data research presented the comparison between the 
EU countries on the level of the conditions created for such a unique combination visible in the EGSS. The purpose 
of this study is to analyze cyber threats in the aspect of environmental decision-making. Therefore, the decision-
making problem discussed in this paper is also related to cyber threats. 
The paper is organized as follows. After this brief introduction the literature review is provided and it covers the 
descriptive method followed by the statistical-analytical method. The descriptive method distinguishes and describes 
such specific phenomena as cybersecurity and sustainable development. The third part of this study is dedicated to the 
reference method description which backs the theoretical discussion. Then, a comparative analysis is used, which 
indicates the importance of the given issues when making decisions among the EU countries in the environmental 
aspect, including cybersecurity. 
2. Literature Review 
The Fourth Industrial Revolution [5], and thus the new emerging threats, have established new requirements for 
state security, such as control  and protection of information in cyberspace [18]. These activities allow to counteract 
attacks by criminal groups and to prevent penetration by hostile entities [19]. Therefore, cybersecurity covers a set of 
issues related to providing protection in the area of cyberspace. The concept of cybersecurity is related, inter alia, to 
the protection of the information processing space and the interactions taking place in ICT networks [20,21]. The level 
of cybersecurity depends both on the degree to which the government mobilizes private entities to participate in 
 
Adam Sulich et.al./ Procedia Computer Science 00 (2021) 000–000 
 3 
security initiatives against common threats, as well as on the flexibility in relation to the expectations of public and 
private entities [19]. The first factor is commonly known as “compliance requirements” which are the base for 
cybersecurity provision, eg, in the financial sector. However, in many cases, they are not sufficient to answer all the 
challenges of technological development and the new threats induced by it. The ICT can have both negative and 
positive impacts on the environment [10]. On the one hand, the use of ICT has direct impact on electricity 
consumption, but on the other hand ICT can reduce emissions by building smarter cities, transportation systems, 
electrical grids and industrial processes [10]. The green approach in ICT recognizes this sector activities as a possible 
solution to many environmental and social problems [5]. 
Consequently, the EU considers achieving SD through the use of renewable energy as a way to mitigate the 
negative effects of climate change and to generate indirect economic benefits [9]. The Industry 4.0 relies on digital 
technologies such as wireless connectivity and sensors connecting everything to everyone to gather data and to 
analyze, visualize the entire production system [11]. Therefore cybersecurity gives inevitable support to innovative 
life cycle management, communication and development of smarter systems reconceptualizing waste as intrinsically 
valuable [1,11]. There is much hope that ICT can be a major part of the solution in dealing with climate change and 
related environmental challenges [10]. There is also a never-ending battle between security and profitability [22]. In 
turn, cyberspace is "the space for processing and exchanging information created by ICT systems, specified in Art.3 
point 3 of the Act of February 17, 2005 on the computerization of the activities of entities performing public tasks 
along with the connections between them and relations with users"[23]. 
Technology helps us to save energy and resources, simultaneously, placing us at the front line in the war against 
growing in power cybercriminals. One of the important vectors of attack is cloud computing and widely used Data 
Sharing Networks (DNS). It is a convenient tool for low-cost data storage without heavy investment in infrastructure 
[24]. The major goal of cloud computing is to reduce the operating costs, increase both throughput and the reliability 
and availability [25].  However, cloud computing was ranked first among cybersecurity threats in 2020. To be effective 
in achieving goals business has to implement adequate security measures. This type of activity we call Green 
Cybersecurity, which also protects the processes related to the energy production, production of goods and services 
in EGSS. According to the Deloitte’s report [26] “the interconnected nature of Industry 4.0-driven operations and the 
pace of digital transformation mean that cyberattacks can have far more extensive effects than ever before”. 
Furthermore, the number of interconnected end-devices grows year by year and is forecast to reach 25.44 bln by 2030, 
as presented in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Number of Internet of Things (IoT) connected devices worldwide from 2019 to 2030 (in billions). 
Source: [27] 
 
The Report predicts that the year 2021 will present the growth of the IoT devices up till 10.07 bln, whereas the 
Global Digital Report 2020 estimated that there were already 10.94 bln IoT devices in 2020 [28], see the Table 1. The 
biggest opportunities for ICT are in smart motor systems, logistics, buildings, grids and dematerialization [10]. It is 
4 
Adam Sulich et al./ Procedia Computer Science 00 (2021) 000–000 
important to understand the net impact of ICT on environment. “However, the empirical evidence on how ICT 
contributes to environmental sustainability particularly at macroeconomic and global level is scarce” [10].  
 
Table 1. Connected Devices and the Internet of Things in bln 
Fixed phones 
Mobile phones 
PCS, laptops and tablets 
Short range IoT devices 
Wide area IoT devices 
1.36 
7.94 
1.57 
10.94 
1.88 
Source: Own elaboration based on [28] 
 
However, the back bone of the visible development is undoubtedly the financial industry. This sector is one of the 
most experienced by cyberattacks and the annual average cost of cybercrime was in 2017 the highest in this sector 
amounting to 18.28 mln USD annually per institution [29] and it was confirmed by Chris Thompson, Global Security 
and Resilience Lead – Financial Services in Accenture Security: “...the financial services industry continually has the 
highest cost of cybercrime” [30].  
According to Kasperky Lab the largest number of devices was also in the banking industry, which is in the 
vanguard of technological changes in the world [31]. “The opportunities provided by technological advancements in 
banking are changing the industry as we know it, from an in-person experience to a personalized, AI-powered digital 
experience” [32]. Chat bots or intelligent analytical tools became common marks on the landscape of financial 
institutions. Undoubtedly, this is the factor which makes financial services the sector most vulnerable to cyber threats. 
The Sixth Annual Bank Survey by the US Conference of State Bank Supervisors presented the results of a survey 
according to which 70 per cent of the surveyed community banks ranked cybersecurity as the top concern for their 
institution [33]. Also 70 per cent of financial institutions experienced a security incident in the past year, according to 
2019 “The Unknown Threat Report” by Clearswift [34]. Moreover, the UK Cybersecurity Company Carbon Black 
revealed the results of the survey among 25 CISOs (Chief Information Security Officers) in a report Modern Bank 
Heists 3.0 [35]. The results are presented in Table 2. It is worth noting that the COVID-19 pandemic has had an 
enormous impact on the cybersecurity of institutions and businesses bringing about the proliferation of cyberattacks 
on unprecedented scale. 
Table 2. The results of the survey performed by Black Carbon in May 2020 
The area surveyed 
Results in per cent 
The per cent of financial institutions that reported an increase 
in cyberattacks over the past 12 months 
80 
The per cent of attacks that targeted either the healthcare 
sector or financial sector 
27 
The per cent of the increase of cyberattacks against the 
financial sector from February to April 2020 during the 
COVID-19 surge 
238 
The per cent of the surveyed financial institutions that said 
that cybercriminals had become more sophisticated 
82 
The per cent of surveyed financial institutions that reported 
increased attempts of wire fraud transfer 
64 
Source: Own elaboration based on [35]. 
 
Furthermore, according to the same survey, the ransomware attacks against the financial sector increased by 9 
times from the beginning of February to the end of April 2020, indicating again the correlation of the pandemic’s 
surge and the growth of cyberattacks on financial institutions [35]. Financial industry is also ranked first when 
sensitive exposed files are concerned. According to the 2019 Data Risk Report by Varonis it had the highest number 
of exposed sensitive files from among all the examined industries, with 352,771 exposed sensitive files on average 
[36]. “In the face of technological advance and, as a result, the increasing threat of the loss of growing amount of data 
collected by financial institutions, it seems necessary to employ effective security measures in the process of 
information management” [37]. There is a growing number of financial institutions that implement ISMS (Information 
Security Management Systems) based on international standards such as i.a. ISO/EIC27001, not only to comply with 
regulatory requirements but also to make the security management more effective and, thus, saving costs of security 
breaches [38]. 
 
Adam Sulich et.al./ Procedia Computer Science 00 (2021) 000–000 
 5 
Financial institutions are becoming slowly part of the bigger business ecosystem and create inter-organizational 
networks due to digitalization process. This process is a derivative of the economic growth which indicates that a 
nation can produce more goods and services, and ICT enables goods and services to be produced more efficiently 
[10]. The extant research highlights the need for broadening the scope of the ICT value research beyond the established 
financial and economic frameworks. While there are regional studies on the potential of ICT for reducing emissions, 
this literature does not provide comparable empirical evidence on more international scale. There are reports which 
investigate the relationship between ICT (cybersecurity) and emissions for a sample of EU countries and “finds that 
ICT significantly decreases emissions per output in the energy supply sector” [10]. 
3. Method and Data Collection 
For the evaluation of the Green Cybersecurity (GC), from among the methods of measuring the effects of green 
management or pro-ecological strategies of countries and local government units or companies, the reference method 
[39] or its modification is often used in the literature [40]. The reference method, called also the Hellwig’s method 
[41], comes down to the determination of a synthetic variable being a function of the normalized features of the data 
input set. The method is also called the information capacity indicator method. The essence of this method lies in the 
procedure according to which, from the explanatory variables in the matrix, a combination of variables is selected. 
The so-called integral information capacity is the greatest. Moreover, this method allows to measure and compare 
variables of different sizes and dimensions with each other, because data standardization procedure is used [7,40]. 
The purpose of the method is to compare the level of the ICT usage and cybersecurity development described as 
the Green Cybersecurity (GC) at the international level and those creating a more sustainable economy in the EU [42]. 
The indicators were defined by Eurostat and their units are presented below (Table 1). The variables used in 
calculations were assigned by symbols x with the number lower index (xi). As result, the total number of 7 variables 
was determined in this way. 
Table 3. ICT usage in enterprises based on the Eurostat data 
Industry 4.0 area 
Measured characteristic 
Symbol 
E-commerce 
Enterprises having received orders online (at least 1%) - % of 
enterprises (tin00111) 
x1 
Share of enterprises' turnover in e-commerce - % (tin00110) 
x2 
Enterprises with broadband access (tin00090) 
 
x3 
Connection to the internet 
Enterprises giving portable devices for a mobile connection to the 
internet to their employees (tin00125) 
x4 
E-business 
Enterprises using radio frequency identification (RFID) 
instrument (tin00126) 
x5 
Enterprises whose business processes are automatically linked to 
those of their suppliers and/or customers (tin00115) 
x6 
Competitiveness and innovation 
Enterprises using software solutions, like CRM to analyse 
information about clients for marketing purposes (tin00116) 
x7 
Source: Own study based on [18]. 
 
Secondary data from the year 2019 collected by Eurostat [18] were used for the calculations, which ensures the 
comparability and reliability of the data. The raw source data for each EU-28 country are enclosed in the appendices 
section (table A). The rational reason for the choice of the taxonomic method, especially the zero unitarization method 
[39] is the development of an econometric model of the Green Cybersecurity (GC) and the indication of its 
determinants in the further part of this paper. Moreover, the application of the standard method allows for the 
verification of the obtained results in comparison with the countries with similar development described in the 
literature. Since the set of independent features contains variables that cannot be aggregated directly using appropriate 
standardization, normalization formulas were applied. Among the formulas, the method of zero unitarization was 
selected to standardize the process based on the interval of a normalized variable. Variables that positively influence 
the described phenomenon are called stimulants. Their opposites are de-stimulants. Indicators are selected to a 
standardization process based on the following formulas [7,41]:  
6 
Adam Sulich et al./ Procedia Computer Science 00 (2021) 000–000 
for stimulants:  𝑧𝑖𝑗=
𝑥𝑖𝑗 −min (𝑥𝑖𝑗)𝑖
max(𝑥𝑖𝑗)𝑖−𝑚𝑖𝑛(𝑥𝑖𝑗)𝑖  
 
(1) 
for de-stimulants: 𝑧𝑖𝑗=
m𝑎𝑥 (𝑥𝑖𝑗)𝑖−𝑥𝑖𝑗
max(𝑥𝑖𝑗)𝑖−𝑚𝑖𝑛(𝑥𝑖𝑗)𝑖  
 
(2) 
where: 
 𝑧𝑖𝑗 – is the normalized value of the j-th variable in the i-th country; 
 𝑥𝑖𝑗 – is the initial value of the j-th variable in the i-th country. 
 
Diagnostic features normalized in an above-mentioned way take the value from the interval [0;1]. The closer the 
value to unity, the better the situation in terms of the investigated feature, and the closer the value to zero, the worse 
the situation. 
In the next step, the normalized values of variables formed the basis for calculating the median and standard 
deviation for each of the countries studied. Median values were determined using the formula:  
for even number of observations: 
 
 𝑀𝑒𝑖=
𝑍 (𝑚
2 )𝑖+𝑍 (𝑚
2 +1)𝑖
2
  
 
(3) 
 
for odd number of observations: 
 
 𝑀𝑒𝑖= 𝑍(
𝑚
2 + 1)𝑖  
 
(4) 
where: 
 𝑧𝑖 (𝑗) – is the j-th statistical ordinal for the vector (𝑍𝑖1, 𝑍𝑖2, … , 𝑍𝑖𝑚), i = 1, 2, …, n; j = 1,2, …, m. 
In turn, the standard deviation was calculated according to the following formula: 
𝑆𝑑𝑖= √
1
𝑚∑
(𝑧𝑖𝑗−z̅)
𝑚
𝑗=1
 
 
(5) 
 
Based on the median and standard deviation, an aggregate measure 𝑤𝑖 of the green management towards the GIR 
was calculated for each country:  
 
𝑤𝑖= 𝑀𝑒𝑖(1 −𝑆𝑑𝑖); 𝑤𝑖< 1  
 
 
(6) 
 
Values of the measure close to one indicate a higher level of the greening of industrial parts of the economy in the 
specific member state, resulting in a higher rank. The aggregate measure prefers countries with a higher median of 
features describing the specific country and those with smaller differentiation between the values of features in the 
specific country expressed as standard deviation. The procedure chosen for evaluating the GIR provided a 
multidimensional comparative analysis. Such analysis allowed for a comparison between member states of the EU 
providing grounds for classifying them into uniform groups (Table 2). 
 
Table 4. Green Growth Indicators aggregate measure comparative analysis 
Group Mathematical characteristic Meaning 
I 
𝑤𝑖≥ 𝑤̅ + 𝑆 
high level 
II 
𝑤̅ + 𝑆> 𝑤𝑖≥𝑤̅  
medium-high level 
III 
𝑤̅ ≥𝑤𝑖≥𝑤̅ −𝑆 
medium-low level 
IV 
𝑤𝑖< 𝑤̅ −𝑆 
low level 
Where 𝑤̅ is the mean value of the synthetic measure; S is the standard deviation of the synthetic measure. 
4. Results and Discussion 
According to the 𝑤𝑖 values the EU countries were assigned to one of the groups concerning their level of evaluating 
the GC expressed in the greening economy.  
 
 
 
Adam Sulich et.al./ Procedia Computer Science 00 (2021) 000–000 
 7 
Table 5. Groups of the EU countries with a similar level of ICT development related to the EGSS 
Group 
Countries 
I 
Finland, Denmark, Sweden, Germany, Austria, Estonia, Latvia, United Kingdom, 
II 
Luxembourg, The Netherlands, Lithuania, Belgium, France, Czechia, Slovakia,  
Slovenia, Ireland 
III 
Poland, Hungary, Malta, Cyprus, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Greece 
IV 
Romania, Bulgaria, Croatia 
Source: Authors’ calculations 
 
The level of the GC was evaluated in the 28 EU countries based on 12 variables (Table 1) and the results of the 
analysis were presented in Table 3. The analysis shows that there are countries that operate in high-level management 
towards the GC and it presents countries with the best conditions for sustainable (green) development described at the 
international level. 
5. Conclusions 
The introduction of the ICT in every field, and the phenomena related to it such as the need for speed of operations 
and responsiveness, the need for more flexibility of organizations, the move to networking in the virtual domains, and 
reduction of wastes are the most important new developments that organizations have become familiar with. The 
literature shows multiple aspects of two main trends: cybersecurity and achieving SDGs. A recent literature review 
on Industry 4.0 presented that there is a connection between the SD and cybersecurity. 
Automation of processes based on the cooperation of interconnected devices using Internet results in the enhanced 
exposure to cyber threats that can become the greatest drag chain to both ICT’s development and EGSS. Hence, 
cybersecurity should be perceived as the indispensable element and should lie at the roots of the ongoing Green 
Technological Revolution. In the era of the development of new techniques and technologies, it should be noted that 
for investors, first of all, security is essential. Moreover, the development of information and communication 
technologies has, in practice, transformed every aspect of our lives today.  
It should also be emphasized that cyberattacks are evolving and that is why it is so important to have measures 
(legal, regulatory and organizational) to control cybersecurity. Today, cybersecurity, data regulation and sustainability 
will be key to the digital transformation processes in the coming years. The banking and financial systems should 
engage and create useful tools for Sustainable Development 
We have discussed several approaches to using ICT in the service of sustainability which have emerged during last 
decades. Therefore, the implementation of ICT in pro-ecological activities succeeds only when the enormous 
efficiency potential of these technologies is based on intelligent, informative, intensive and immaterial solutions and 
when it is the most important source of growth among the EU countries.  
The ex-post analysis used in the study allowed for enriching the theoretical knowledge presented in the discussion 
part. On the other hand, the use of ex-ante analysis made it possible to determine the expected economic processes. 
The decision-making processes concerned the Green Cybersecurity and the aspect of Sustainable Development. The 
research was conducted to assess cybersecurity in the EU countries. The research results are presented in tables, 
enriched with graphic forms. 
Acknowledgments  
The project is financed by the Ministry of Science and Higher Education in Poland under the program “Regional 
Initiative of Excellence” 2019–2022, project number 015/RID/2018/19, total funding amount 10,721,040.00 PLN. 
The project is financed by the National Science Centre in Poland under the programme "Business Ecosystem of the 
Environmental Goods and Services Sector in Poland" implemented in 2020-2022 project number 
2019/33/N/HS4/02957 total funding amount 120,900.00 PLN. 
 
8 
Adam Sulich et al./ Procedia Computer Science 00 (2021) 000–000 
References 
[1] Michalski, Grzegorz, Małgorzata Rutkowska, Adam Sulich, and Robert Rothe (2018) “The green jobs and the industry 4.0”, in Dziura Marek 
Andrzej Jaki Tomasz Rojek (eds) Enterprises and economies In the face of contemporary challenges: management - restructuring - 
innovation. Kraków, Fundacja Uniwersytetu Ekonomicznego w Krakowie  
[2] Hilty, Lorenz M;, Wolfgang; Lohmann, and Elaine M Huang (2011) “Sustainability and ICT – An overview of the field”, Not Polit. 27(104): 
13–28.  
[3] Sołoducho-Pelc, Letycja (2017) “The Importance of Trust Within the Organisation for the Implementation of the Strategic Management 
Process”, Int J Contemp Manag. 16(4): 237–61.  
[4] Sołoducho-Pelc, Letycja, and Adam Sulich (2020) “Between Sustainable and Temporary Competitive Advantages in the Unstable Business 
Environment”, Sustainability. 12(21).  
[5] Rutkowska, Malgorzata, and Adam Sulich (2020) “Green Jobs on the background of Industry 4.0”, in Procedia Computer Science.  
[6] Ferasso, M, T Beliaeva, S Kraus, T Clauss, and D Ribeiro-Soriano (2020) “Circular economy business models: The state of research and 
avenues ahead”, Bus Strateg Environ. 29(8): 3006–24.  
[7] Kasztelan, Armand (2016) “Green Competitiveness of the EU Countries”, in Kovářová Eva Lukáš Melecký Michaela Staníčková (eds) 
Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on European Integration 2016. Ostrava, VŠB - Technical University of Ostrava  
[8] Dimmock, Kay (1999) “Management style and competitive strategies among tourism firms in the Northern Rivers”, Tour Manag. 20(3): 323–
39.  
[9] Liczmańska-Kopcewicz, Katarzyna, Paula Pypłacz, and Agnieszka Wiśniewska (2020) “Resonance of Investments in Renewable Energy 
Sources in Industrial Enterprises in the Food Industry”, Energies. 13(17).  
[10] 
Añón Higón, Dolores, Roya Gholami, and Farid Shirazi (2017) “ICT and environmental sustainability: A global perspective”, Telemat 
Informatics. 34(4): 85–95.  
[11] 
Awan, Usama, Robert Sroufe, and Muhammad Shahbaz (2021) “Industry 4.0 and the circular economy: A literature review and 
recommendations for future research”, Bus Strateg Environ. 30(4): 2038–60.  
[12] 
Centobelli, Piera, Roberto Cerchione, Davide Chiaroni, Pasquale Del Vecchio, and Andrea Urbinati (2020) “Designing business 
models in circular economy: A systematic literature review and research agenda”, Bus Strateg Environ. 29(4): 1734–49.  
[13] 
Hovardas, Tasos (2016) “Two paradoxes with one stone: A critical reading of ecological modernization”, Ecol Econ.  
[14] 
York, Richard (2006) “Ecological paradoxes: William Stanley Jevons and the Paperless Office”, Vol. 13, Human Ecology Review.  
[15] 
Polimeni, John M, Kozo Mayumi, Mario Giampietro, and Blake Alcott (2015) “The myth of resource efficiency: The Jevons 
Paradox”, The Myth of Resource Efficiency: The Jevons Paradox.  
[16] 
Bossong, Raphael, and Mark Rhinard (2013) “The EU Internal Security Strategy : towards a more coherent approach to EU 
security?”, Stud Dipl. 66(2): 45–58.  
[17] 
Gercke, Marco (2014) “Cybersecurity Strategy”, Comput Law Rev Int. 14(5): 136–42.  
[18] 
Eurostat (2021) “ICT security in enterprises”, Database.  
[19] 
Górka, Marek (2018) “Cyberbezpieczeństwo jako wyzwanie dla współczesnego państwa i społeczeństwa [Cybersecurity as a 
challenge for modern society and country]”, in Dębowski T editor Cyberbezieczeństwo wyzwaniem XXI wieku [Cybersecurity as XXI century 
challenge] r. Łódź-Wrocław, Archaegraph Wydawnictwo Naukowe.  
[20] 
Sus, Aleksandra, and Michał Organa (2019) “Triangle of dynamics factors in inter-organizational networks”, in Skvarciany Viktorija 
editor International Scientific Conference Contemporary Issues In Business, Management and Economics Engineering’2019. Vilnius 
Gediminas Technical University.  
[21] 
Przysucha, Łukasz (2020) “Implementation of Crowdsourcing as an integral element of communication engineering in the Smart City 
concept”, RISTI - Rev Iber Sist e Tecnol Inf. (E30): 97–108.  
[22] 
Rodríguez, Carlos M (2005) “Emergence of a third culture: Shared leadership in international strategic alliances”, Int Mark Rev. 
22(1): 67–95.  
[23] 
Dziennik Ustaw [Journal of Law] (2005) “Ustawa z dnia 17 lutego 2005 r. o informatyzacji działalności podmiotów realizujących 
zadania publiczne [Act Of 17 February 2005 On The Computerization Of The Business Entities Pursuing Public Tasks]”, Poland 2005  
[24] 
Sulich, Adam, Tomasz Zema, and Piotr Zema (2020) “Schemes for Verification of Resources in the Cloud: Comparison of the Cloud 
Technology Providers”, in Hernes Marcin Artur Rot Dorota Jelonek (eds) Towards Industry 40 — Current Challenges in Information 
Systems. (Studies in Computational Intelligence).  
[25] 
Ali, Mazhar, Revathi Dhamotharan, Eraj Khan, Samee U Khan, Athanasios V. Vasilakos, Keqin Li, et al. (2017) “SeDaSC: Secure 
Data Sharing in Clouds”, IEEE Syst J. 11(2): 395–404.  
[26] 
Waslo, Rene, Tyler Lewis, Ramsey Hajj, and Robert Carton (2017) “Managing risk in an age of connected production”, Deloitte Univ 
Press. 1: 1–22.  
[27] 
Statista (2019) “Number of IoT connected devices worldwide 2019-2030 (in billions)”, Number of IoT connected devices worldwide 
2019-2030 
[28] 
We are social (2020) “Digital 2020 - We Are Social”, Report  
 
Adam Sulich et.al./ Procedia Computer Science 00 (2021) 000–000 
 9 
[29] 
Krawczyk-Jezierska, Agnieszka (2019) “Koszty instytucji finansowych w świetle zagrożeń cybernetycznych [Costs of financial 
institutions in the light of cyber threats]”, Przegląd Ustawodawstwa Gospod [Economic Legis Rev. 8(854): 23–31.  
[30] 
Thompson, Chris (2019) “What Will Cybercrime Cost Your Financial Firm?”, Accenture Financial Services.  
[31] 
Krawczyk-Jezierska, Agnieszka (2020) “Development of New Technologies and Their Impact on the Financial Sector in the Context 
of Cyber Threats”, in Rutkowska-Tomaszewska Edyta Beata Pachuca-Smulska Elisabetta Bani (eds) Public and Private Law and the 
Challenges of New Technologies and Digital Markets Volume II Legal Aspects of FinTech. Warszawa, C.H. Beck.  
[32] 
Adamoli, Ginevra (2019) “A deeper look into how technology is innovating the financial sector | CIO”  
[33] 
CSBS (2019) “Community Banker Concerns Shift to Funding”, Press Relaeses.  
[34] 
Clearswift (2020) “The Unknown Threat Report”, Report  
[35] 
Carbon Bank (2020) “Threat Research”, Modern Bank Heists 3.0  
[36] 
Varonis (2019) “2019 Global Data Risk Report”, Varonis Report  
[37] 
Krawczyk-Jezierska, Agnieszka, and Jarosław Jezierski (2018) “Zastosowanie normy ISO/EIC 27001 w sektorze finansowym - zakres 
i korzyści [Application of ISO/EIC 27001 in the financial sector - scope and benefits]”, Ekon - Wroclaw Econ Rev. 24(2): 107–21.  
[38] 
Przysucha, Łukasz (2020) “Effective Management of Information Processes with CMS in Smart City. The Concept of 
Crowdsourcing”, in Mercier-Laurent Eunika editor Artificial Intelligence for Knowledge Management 6th IFIP WG 126 International 
Workshop, AI4KM 2018 Held at IJCAI 2018 Stockholm, Sweden, July 15, 2018 Revised and Extended Selected Papers. (IFIP Advances in 
Information and Communication Technology; vol. 588).  
[39] 
Hellwig, Zdzisław (1968) “Application of the Taxonomic Method to the Countries Typology according to their Level of Development 
and the Structure of Resources and Qualified Staff”, Przegląd Stat. (4): 307–26.  
[40] 
Bartniczak, Bartosz, and Andrzej Raszkowski (2020) “Environmental education and ecological awareness – Polish experience”, in 
Pohulak-Żołędowska Elżbieta editor The Impact of Economic Actors’ Decision-making on Socio-economic Development.  
[41] 
Sulich, Adam, and Letycja Sołoducho-Pelc (2021) “Renewable Energy Producers’ Strategies in the Visegrád Group Countries”, 
Energies. 14(11): 1–21.  
[42] 
Eurostat (2015) “ICT security in enterprises - Statistics Explained”  
 
