Title: Cyber Security aboard Micro Aerial Vehicles: An OpenTitan-based Visual Communication Use Case
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2303.16554v1
--------------------------------------------------

This paper has been accepted for pubblication in the IEEE ISCAS2023 conference.
Cyber Security aboard Micro Aerial Vehicles: An
OpenTitan-based Visual Communication Use Case
Maicol Ciani∗, Stefano Bonato†, Rafail Psiakis‡, Angelo Garofalo∗, Luca Valente∗,
Suresh Sugumar‡, Alessandro Giusti†, Davide Rossi∗, Daniele Palossi†§
∗Department of Electrical, Electronic and Information Engineering - University of Bologna, Italy
† Dalle Molle Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence - USI-SUPSI, Switzerland
‡ Secure Systems Research Center - TII, United Arab Emirates
§ Integrated Systems Laboratory - ETH Z¨urich, Switzerland
Contact author: maicol.ciani@unibo.it
Abstract—Autonomous Micro Aerial Vehicles (MAVs), with a
form factor of 10 cm in diameter, are an emerging technology
thanks to the broad applicability enabled by their onboard
intelligence. However, these platforms are strongly limited in
the onboard power envelope for processing, i.e., less than a
few hundred mW, which conﬁnes the onboard processors to
the class of simple microcontroller units (MCUs). These MCUs
lack advanced security features opening the way to a wide
range of cyber-security vulnerabilities, from the communication
between agents of the same ﬂeet to the onboard execution of
malicious code. This work presents an open-source System-on-
Chip (SoC) design that integrates a 64-bit Linux capable host
processor accelerated by an 8-core 32-bit parallel programmable
accelerator. The heterogeneous system architecture is coupled with
a security enclave based on an open-source OpenTitan root of
trust. To demonstrate our design, we propose a use case where
OpenTitan detects a security breach on the SoC aboard the MAV
and drives its exclusive GPIOs to start a LED-blinking routine.
This procedure embodies an unconventional visual communication
between two palm-sized MAVs: the receiver MAV classiﬁes the
sender’s LED state (on or off) with an onboard convolutional
neural network running on the parallel accelerator; then, it
reconstructs a high-level message in 1.3 s, 2.3× faster than current
commercial solutions.
I. INTRODUCTION
Autonomous Micro Aerial Vehicles (MAVs) are progres-
sively gaining importance thanks to their ubiquitous sensing
capabilities. In the Internet of Things (IoT) ecosystem, nano-
drones, i.e., palm-sized MAVs, can acquire and process infor-
mation from different locations by ﬂying where their presence
is more important [1]. Therefore, they can exchange crucial
data with ﬁxed infrastructure or other drones, i.e., swarm
operations. Their miniaturized form factor enables a wide range
of applicability, for example, in narrow spaces [2] and human
surroundings [3], but it limits the class of processors they can
host aboard. This i) lower-bounds the computational/memory
complexity of the algorithms that can run aboard and ii) forces
the main drone’s mission computer to simple microcontroller
units (MCUs) that lack advanced cyber-security features.
In this emerging new era of connected and collaborating IoT
devices/nano-drones, reliable security and privacy mechanisms
are needed to protect assets and data collected or generated [4].
The security cornerstone of IoT devices is the Root of Trust
(RoT), where critical assets are kept isolated and protected, the
code executed is authenticated, and its integrity is veriﬁed [5].
Most modern IoT devices rely on hardware to ensure their
RoT and therefore build the whole security stack on top of it,
following the chain of trust principle [5]. Despite RoTs provide
a solid hardware/software security foundation, there are several
types of attacks potentially compromising the drones’ opera-
tions, such as man-in-the-middle, denial of service, spooﬁng,
jamming, rogue data injection, routing attack, etc. [6].
Current Commercial Off-The-Shelf (COTS) nano-drones
platforms, such as the Bitcraze Crazyﬂie typically host low-
power 32-bit MCUs such as the STM32F4 as main mission
computer [2]. This class of MCUs provides sufﬁcient comput-
ing power to guarantee basic functionalities such as low-level
control loops, state estimation, and cryptographic encoding.
Although they lack both a security enclave and RoT; therefore,
they can not guarantee hardware isolation of code execution
or support full-ﬂedged operating systems capable of software
isolation of different parts of the applications running on
them. Similarly, more computationally-capable SoCs for nano-
drones, such as the GWT GAP8 processors [7] available as a
companion board for the Crazyﬂie nano-drone, i.e., AI-deck,
still lacks RoT and security enclave able to take control of the
whole system in case of attacks. In this work, we present an
open-source SoC design of a mission computer for autonomous
nano-drones, which includes silicon secure enclave and RoT by
integrating the OpenTitan reference design 1.
The SoC is built around a 64-bit RISC-V CVA6 core featur-
ing full Linux support and an 8-core cluster of 32-bit RISC-V
cores acting as a software-programmable accelerator enabling
vision-based tasks. Our work uses and enhances OpenTitan,
the ﬁrst collaborative open-source RISC-V-based silicon RoT,
to support service request handling through an System Control
and Management Interface (SCMI) 2 mailbox, master on the
host domain, and secure GPIO handling connected to LEDs.
1https://opentitan.org/
2https://developer.arm.com/documentation/den0056/d/?lang=en
arXiv:2303.16554v1  [cs.CR]  29 Mar 2023
Fig. 1. A) The Bitcraze Crazyﬂie equipped with the GWT GAP8 SoC. B) The proposed SoC architecture envisioned as alternative MCU aboard the nano-drone.
We showcase our system design with a novel and ﬁeld-
proven use case of Unconventional Visual Communication
(UVC) between nano-drones exchanging messages by LED
blinking. In the context of visible light communication, ma-
chine learning techniques are used on the receiving end to
implement signal demodulation [8], to recover the modulated
signal from rolling-shutter images [9], [10], or to ﬁnd locations
of transmitters in images, before analyzing those regions of
interest separately [11]–[13]. In contrast, our approach feeds
raw images directly to a CNN to directly extract binary signal
information (LEDs on or off), independently of the relative
location of the drone transmitting the signal.
Once a cyber-attack compromises a nano-drone in the ﬂeet,
the radio channel cannot be trusted and the UVC is triggered,
which depends exclusively on the secure OpenTitan sub-module
and results in an SOS message emitted by the blinking LEDs.
We show how other nano-drones equipped with the same SoC
can reconstruct the SOS message by analyzing a video stream.
By running a convolutional neural network (CNN), we assess
the LED state of each input image. Then, a simple state
machine continuously analyzes the series produced by the CNN
and retrieve any custom message, such as the SOS one.
Our main contribution is the development of a novel SoC
for drones’ autonomous navigation providing cyber-security
features which are keys in the proposed UVC-based use case.
In detail: i) we integrate the OpenTitan secure subsystem into
the navigation controller SoC; ii) we develop and ﬁeld-test
a simple light-based communication between multiple nano-
drones in the swarm. With a power envelope of 250 mW and a
silicon footprint of 9 mm2, the proposed SoC can recognize an
SOS message in 1.3 s performing 2.3× faster than a Crazyﬂie
nano-drone equipped with an AI-deck, while offering support
for a security enclave and full-ﬂedged operating system.
II. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
This section presents the SoC architecture in Figure 1. It con-
sists of a heterogeneous system architecture composed of a 64-
bit application processor implementing ﬂight control functions
as well as auxiliary functions such as network stack, a parallel
programmable accelerator for mission control functions, and a
secure enclave based on OpenTitan IPs.
The SoC is built around the CVA6 core, a 6-stages, single-
issue, in-order, 64-bit RISC-V core supporting the RV64GC
ISA variant, virtual memory, three execution privilege levels,
physical memory protection (PMP), and is capable of booting
the Linux OS. CVA6 has 16KB of L1 I-cache and 32KB of
write-through L1 D-cache, which enable simple coherency with
other masters to the crossbar interconnect, which implements
high-bandwidth, low-latency 64-bit AXI4 protocol. The host
domain contains a scratchpad memory (L2SPM) and a complete
set of peripherals such as I2C, (Q)SPI, CPI, SDIO, UART,
CAN, PWM, I2S. Moreover, the host embeds also a standard
Platform Level Interrupt Controller (PLIC), a Core Local
Interrupt (CLINT), a controller for Cypress Semiconductor’s
external HyperRAM memories, and a Last Level Cache (LLC)
to ﬁlter accesses to the external HyperRAM memory improving
system performance. Peripheral data is transferred from/to the
scratchpad memory through a dedicated DMA, called µDMA.
The Programmable Multi-Core Accelerator (PMCA) of the
system is built around 8 CV32E-based processors which share
16×8KB SRAM banks (128KB L1SPM). The cores implement
RV32 extension with many ML and DSP features such as
hardware loops, MAC&Load operation, SIMD operations, and
post-increment LD/ST. With SIMD, the operands’ width can
be reduced to double or quadruple the number of operations
per cycle. The cluster also implements FPUs supporting FP32
and FP16 with SIMD support and features a two-level I-cache
(512B for each core and 4KB shared) to speed-up execution of
data-parallel tasks typical of drone mission control functions
and deep neural networks for objects and pattern recognition.
The architecture of the cluster is optimized for ML algorithms
in embedded applications: it exploits scratchpad memories with
DMA access, double buffering and custom ISA extensions to
optimize memory utilization and computation.
The third key component of the drone navigation SoC is the
secure enclave based on the OpenTitan architecture, acting as an
on-chip Root of Trust (RoT), providing security services. The
Ibex core is the main processor and is in charge to orchestrate
the secure boot and all the RoT functionalities. Ibex controls
four main components. The AON domain includes power, reset,
clock management and a timer. The secure memories module
includes One Time Programmable (OTP) memories which store
security keys and seeds. The crypto module includes specialized
accelerators such as Advanced Encryption Standard (AES),
Hashing (HMAC and KMAC) and Big Number Accelerator
(OTBN) for Rivest–Shamir–Adleman (RSA) and Elliptic Curve
Fig. 2. Performance on the testing set. A) ROC Curves for full-precision and
quantized models. B) Zoom-in of A. C) Confusion matrix.
Cryptography (ECC). The security module includes key man-
ager, life cycle controller and alert handler.
The host domain requires to exploit the hardware cryptogra-
phy accelerators of the secure subsystem but it must not access
directly its internal memory map for security reasons. Instead,
it can only encode commands writing into a dedicated mailbox
compliant with ARM System Control and Management Inter-
face (SCMI). The host domain populates the shared memory
of the mailbox and then it raises an interrupt to the secure
subsystem’s core through a dedicated memory mapped register.
The Ibex core reads the content of the mailbox and executes the
command encoded in it. At the end of the execution, the Ibex
core raises back another interrupt to the host domain’s core.
Moreover, OpenTitan has its own internal timer that can trigger
periodic interrupts. In this way the Ibex core can be periodically
waken up in order to perform anomaly detection checks by
analyzing the content of CVA6 and cluster’s memories as well
as external peripherals.
III. SECURITY USE CASE
Our use case envisions multiple nano-drones cooperatively
operating and exchanging periodic data (e.g., mission com-
mands, etc.) via radio (e.g., WiFi, BTLE, etc.). In this scenario,
we address the following two threat models.
Man-In-The-Middle. A man-in-the-middle attack enables
the attacker to intercept the communication and exchange
malicious data with the drones. Following the zero trust pol-
icy [14], where we always authenticate and never trust, the
drones periodically check that the received data are original
and transmitted by an authenticated ﬂeet member. If the au-
thenticity cannot be veriﬁed, OpenTitan assumes that both the
communication radio channel and the rest of the SoC are
potentially compromised. Therefore, to notify the rest of the
ﬂeet about this situation, it enables the UVC blinking procedure
by driving its secure GPIOs (exclusively connected to the
secure subsystem) to transmit an informative SOS message.
Other ﬂeet drones – in line-of-sight with the transmitter one
– can simultaneously or alternatively monitor peers’ activity,
distributing and time-interleaving the computational overhead
for the message decoding.
Anomaly/Intrusion Detection. For this use case, we assume
that there is a minimal anomaly/intrusion detection mecha-
nism [15], [16] running on the Ibex core of OpenTitan, which is
Fig. 3. Small dots denote individual CNN predictions of the transmitter LED
state (12 per bit), before averaging. Vertical shaded areas denote the bit clock.
Colors denote 2 start, 8 payload and 2 stop bits.
a secure region by construction. Since OpenTitan is the master
of the TLUL-to-AXI interface on the host AXI-4 crossbar,
it can monitor the activity of sensors (e.g., accelerometer,
cameras, etc.). Then, if OpenTitan detects an anomaly, it can
assume that the host domain, including the communication
links, is compromised and triggers the UVC procedure. The
speciﬁc implementation of a detection mechanism is out of
the scope of this paper. Instead, we focus our work on the
OpenTitan integration/isolation from the rest of the SoC and
the implementation of the attack response method, i.e., the
UVC exchanging SOS messages by demonstrating it with two
Crazyﬂie nano-drones equipped with the AI-deck.
IV. UNCONVENTIONAL VISUAL COMMUNICATION
CNN training. To decode the message transmitted by Open-
Titan of a compromised drone, we use a lightweight CNN with
the ﬁeld-proven architecture of PULP-Frontnet [17]. The model
input is a 160×96 pixels grayscale image; the output estimates
the state of the LEDs of a Crazyﬂie nano-drone that is assumed
to be visible in the image (either all on or all off), regardless
of the drone position in the frame. Datasets are acquired with a
monochrome QVGA camera from an observer drone facing a
transmitter drone, which toggles its four LEDs every ∼0.4 s.
The dataset is collected in a room equipped with a 18-camera
Optitrack motion capture system, which tracks both drones. The
transmitter drone ﬂies in the central part of the room, while the
observer records images while following a circular path around
the transmitter. In this way, we maximize the variability of the
images’ backgrounds. The transmitter drone is automatically
controlled in order to: i) always stay within the ﬁeld of view of
the observer; ii) move to random positions uniformly distributed
on the observer’s image plane; and iii) always lie at a distance
of 0.2 m to 1.8 m from the observer. The dataset is composed
of 36 ﬂights, where frames are split to build a training set (the
ﬁrst 72%), a testing set (the intermediate 19%), and a validation
set (the last 9%). A 10-frame gap is ignored between different
sets in the same ﬂight, to ensure that no similar frames appear
in different sets. This results in 37 k frames for training, 10 k
TABLE I
POWER CONSUMPTION AND AREA OCCUPATION
Area
Leakage
Dynamic
Max Freq
Max Power
(mm2)
(mW)
( uW
MHz )
(MHz)
(mW)
Top
7.28
4.23
214.7
450
100.53
CVA6
0.49
4.79
47.5
900
47.54
PMCA
1.56
5.78
206
400
88.18
Mem Ctrl.
0.27
0.14
2.3
450
1.16
Opentitan
0.86
4.53
16
350
10.13
Total
7.28
19.47
486.5
-
247.54
frames for testing and 5 k frames for validation; each frame is
labeled with the corresponding ground-truth LED state; the two
states are equally represented in all sets.
Message encoding and decoding. Messages with an 8-
bit payload are encoded to a simple self-clocking binary line
protocol [18] that produces 12-bit packets, including 2 start
bits and 2 stop bits. On our prototype, we employ the 8-cores
GAP8 SoC manufactured in TSMC 55 nm technology capable
of 22.65 GOp/s at 4.24 mW/GOp. With this SoC, the bit stream
is transmitted by modulating the LED state at a rate of 2.5 bits
per second; each 12-bit packet is therefore transmitted in 4.8 s.
The observer drone acquires images at 30 frames per second
(FPS). Each image is fed to the CNN, which estimates the
LED’s state in each frame. Each bit appears in 12 consecutive
frames. First, the bit clock is determined from this sequence,
then each bit in the bit stream is estimated by averaging the
corresponding 12 CNN outputs and thresholding the result.
Messages are decoded from the bit stream starting with a
reserved start ﬂag. If necessary, error detection and correction
codes [19] can be implemented on top of this approach.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Deployment on Crazyﬂie with AI-deck
Figure 2 reports the CNN performance on the testing set; the
full-precision model achieves an Area Under the ROC curve
score of 98.88%, with negligible performance loss (−0.09%)
after 8-bit integer quantization. After binarizing outputs at a
threshold of 0.5, the model achieves an accuracy of 95.1%.
The end-to-end message transmission is assessed with an
experiment in which the transmitter drone sends a sequence
of 256 messages with a payload values from 0x00 to 0xFF.
The observer drone, placed at a ﬁxed distance of 30 cm, is
always in line-of-sight with the transmitter one and decodes
the received messages, at 30 FPS, with the quantized CNN. All
256 messages are decoded correctly. Figure 3 reports a subse-
quence of the received messages and a supplementary video
demonstration is provided at https://youtu.be/TClcuUWJe0U.
B. Physical Implementation & Performance Evaluation
The proposed SoC has been implemented in the Global
Foundries 22 nm FDX technology, employing the Synopsys
Design Compiler for the logical synthesis and the place and
route with Cadence Innovus. For the SoC’s signoff we used
the Synopsys PrimeTime, considering the worst case operating
corner for a nominal supply voltage of 0.8 V (SS, 0.72 V,
125°C/-40°C), while power analysis was performed in typical
Fig. 4.
In the middle, the layout of the SoC. Around it, the layouts of the
PMCA, secure subsystem, HyperBus and CVA6.
operating conditions (TT, 0.8 V, 25°C) The layouts of the SoC
and the main subsystems composing it are shown in Figure 4,
while Table I summarizes the physical implementation.
To evaluate the performance of the proposed SoC on the
UVC use-case, we ﬁrst deploy our CNN on the PMCA of
GAP8 SoC hosted on the COTS Carzyﬂie nano-drone. The full
inference of the DNN on the proposed SoC takes 3.7 Mcycles,
meaning that each payload’s bit can be recognized by the
receiver drone in 126 ms and that a full message described in
Figure 3 can be recognized in 1.3 s by our proposed SoC. This
is 2.3× faster than the same application running on the GAP8
SoC (@175 MHz). By coupling a linux-capable application
core with a parallel programmable accelerator and a secure
enclave within the power budget of 250 mW and a footprint of
9 mm2, our SoC represents an appealing solution for secure and
high-performance mission computers for nano-drones, paving
the way for a wide range of new secure applications.
VI. CONCLUSION
We present an open-source SoC design for ultra-low power
mission computers compatible with the limited power envelope
of nano-UAVs. Our design provides sufﬁcient computational
resources to enable autonomous navigation tasks while enabling
advanced hardware security such as RoT. The SoC is built
around a 64-bit RISC-V CVA6 core featuring full support
for Linux accelerated by an 8-core cluster of 32-bit RISC-
V cores acting as a software-programmable accelerator for
mission control tasks.. We integrate a security enclave based
on an open-source RoT, enabling a multi-drone UVC use case.
In our scenario, OpenTitan detects a security breach on the
SoC and communicates an SOS message to a receiver drone by
sending it through LEDs blinking. The receiver nano-drone can
detect the message by running on the programmable accelerator
a visual CNN and a simple state machine that decodes it. With
a power envelope of 250 mW and a silicon footprint of 9 mm2,
the proposed SoC can recognize an SOS message in 1.3 s
performing 2.3× faster than a COTS baseline equipped with
the GAP8 SoC, while offering support for a security enclave
and full-ﬂedged operating system.
REFERENCES
[1] S. A. Lakshman and D. Ebenezer, “Integration of internet of things and
drones and its future applications,” Materials Today: Proceedings, vol. 47,
pp. 944–949, 2021.
[2] D. Palossi, J. Singh, M. Magno, and L. Benini, “Target following on
nano-scale unmanned aerial vehicles,” in 2017 7th IEEE international
workshop on advances in sensors and interfaces (IWASI).
IEEE, 2017,
pp. 170–175.
[3] D. Palossi, A. Gomez, S. Draskovic, A. Marongiu, L. Thiele, and
L. Benini, “Extending the lifetime of nano-blimps via dynamic motor
control,” Journal of Signal Processing Systems, vol. 91, no. 3, pp. 339–
361, 2019.
[4] Y. H. Hwang, “Iot security & privacy: threats and challenges,” in
Proceedings of the 1st ACM workshop on IoT privacy, trust, and security,
2015, pp. 1–1.
[5] V. Kamakoti and S. Burman, “Building root of trust,” in 2011 Interna-
tional Conference on Field-Programmable Technology, 2011, pp. 1–1.
[6] M. Yahuza, M. Y. I. Idris, I. B. Ahmedy, A. W. A. Wahab, T. Nandy,
N. M. Noor, and A. Bala, “Internet of drones security and privacy issues:
Taxonomy and open challenges,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 57 243–57 270,
2021.
[7] E. Flamand, D. Rossi, F. Conti, I. Loi, A. Pullini, F. Rotenberg, and
L. Benini, “Gap-8: A risc-v soc for ai at the edge of the iot,” in 2018
IEEE 29th International Conference on Application-speciﬁc Systems,
Architectures and Processors (ASAP), 2018, pp. 1–4.
[8] B. Lin, Q. Lai, Z. Ghassemlooy, and X. Tang, “A machine learning
based signal demodulator in noma-vlc,” Journal of Lightwave Technology,
vol. 39, no. 10, pp. 3081–3087, 2021.
[9] C. Danakis, M. Afgani, G. Povey, I. Underwood, and H. Haas, “Using
a cmos camera sensor for visible light communication,” in 2012 IEEE
Globecom Workshops, 2012, pp. 1244–1248.
[10] K.-L. Hsu, Y.-C. Wu, Y.-C. Chuang, C.-W. Chow, Y. Liu, X.-L. Liao, K.-
H. Lin, and Y.-Y. Chen, “Cmos camera based visible light communication
(vlc) using grayscale value distribution and machine learning algorithm,”
Opt. Express, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 2427–2432, Jan 2020.
[11] Y. Onodera, Y. Nakayama, H. Takano, and D. Hisano, “Drone positioning
for visible light communication with drone-mounted led and camera,”
in 2022 IEEE 19th Annual Consumer Communications & Networking
Conference (CCNC).
IEEE, 2022, pp. 357–362.
[12] H. Takano, M. Nakahara, K. Suzuoki, Y. Nakayama, and D. Hisano, “300-
meter long-range optical camera communication on rgb-led-equipped
drone and object-detecting camera,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 55 073–
55 080, 2022.
[13] B. Chhaglani, A. S. Anand, N. Garg, and A. Ashok, “Evaluating led-
camera communication for drones,” in Proceedings of the Workshop on
Light Up the IoT, ser. LIOT ’20.
New York, NY, USA: Association for
Computing Machinery, 2020, p. 18–23.
[14] S. Rose, O. Borchert, S. Mitchell, and S. Connelly, “Zero trust architec-
ture,” National Institute of Standards and Technology, Tech. Rep., 2020.
[15] J. Galvan, A. Raja, Y. Li, and J. Yuan, “Sensor data-driven uav anomaly
detection using deep learning approach,” in MILCOM 2021 - 2021 IEEE
Military Communications Conference (MILCOM), 2021, pp. 589–594.
[16] W. T. Lunardi, M. A. Lopez, and J.-P. Giacalone, “Arcade: Adversarially
regularized convolutional autoencoder for network anomaly detection,”
IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management, pp. 1–1, 2022.
[17] D. Palossi, N. Zimmerman, A. Burrello, F. Conti, H. M¨uller, L. M.
Gambardella, L. Benini, A. Giusti, and J. Guzzi, “Fully onboard ai-
powered human-drone pose estimation on ultralow-power autonomous
ﬂying nano-uavs,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 9, no. 3, pp.
1913–1929, 2022.
[18] F. Halsall, Data communications, computer networks and open systems.
Addison Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., 1995.
[19] R. W. Hamming, “Error detecting and error correcting codes,” The Bell
system technical journal, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 147–160, 1950.
