Title: Railway cyber-security in the era of interconnected systems: a survey
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2207.13412v2
--------------------------------------------------

1
Railway cyber-security in the era of interconnected
systems: a survey
Simone Soderi , Daniele Masti , Yuriy Zacchia Lun
Abstract—Technological advances in the telecommu-
nications industry have brought signiﬁcant advantages
in the management and performance of communication
networks. The railway industry is among the ones that
have beneﬁted the most. These interconnected systems,
however, have a wide area exposed to cyberattacks.
This survey examines the cybersecurity aspects of
railway systems by considering the standards, guide-
lines, frameworks, and technologies used in the industry
to assess and mitigate cybersecurity risks, particularly
regarding the relationship between safety and security.
To do so, we dedicate speciﬁc attention to signaling,
which fundamental reliance on computer and commu-
nication technologies allows us to explore better the
multifaceted nature of the security of modern hyper-
connected railway systems.
With this in mind, we then move on to analyzing
the approaches and tools that practitioners can use
to facilitate the cyber security process. In detail, we
present a view on cyber ranges as an enabling tech-
nology to model and emulate computer networks and
attack-defense scenarios, study vulnerabilities’ impact,
and ﬁnally devise countermeasures. We also discuss
several possible use cases strongly connected to the
railway industry reality.
Index Terms—Railway systems, Network security,
Railway signaling, Cyber ranges, Cybersecurity assess-
ment
Please cite this version of the paper:
S. Soderi, D. Masti and Y. Z. Lun, ”Railway Cyber-
Security in the Era of Interconnected Systems: A Survey,”
in
IEEE
Transactions
on
Intelligent
Transportation
Systems, doi: 10.1109/TITS.2023.3254442.
You may use the following bibtex entry:
@ARTICLE{Soderi2023RailwaySurvey,
author={Soderi, Simone and Masti,
Daniele and Lun, Yuriy Zacchia},
journal={IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Transportation Systems},
title={Railway Cyber-Security in the
Era of Interconnected Systems: A Survey},
year={2023},
doi={10.1109/TITS.2023.3254442}}
This work was supported in part by Consorzio Interuniversitario
Nazionale per l’Informatica (CINI) through Research Project under
Grant CA 01/2021 a.i. 2.
Simone Soderi and Daniele Masti are with Scuola IMT Alti
Studi Lucca. email: {simone.soderi,daniele.masti}@imtlucca.it.
Yuriy Zacchia Lun is with Universit`a degli Studi dell’Aquila.
email:yuriy.zacchialun@univaq.it
I. Introduction
Railways have been one of the main commodities to
move passengers and freight since at least the late 19th
century. Nevertheless, operators have faced mounting pres-
sure to meet ever-increasing performance and safety de-
mands from the public [1]. On top of such targets, the
awareness of cybersecurity themes has also changed. For
these reasons, securing railway systems from cyber attacks
has lately become a central issue for practitioners and the
public, especially after recent news stories such as [2].
The cause for this abrupt need for answers is simple:
while, in the past, railway systems often depended on
speciﬁcally purposed electromechanical devices that oper-
ated in an air-gapped environment, newer infrastructures
are often based on commercial-oﬀ-the-shelf systems that
operate in a fully networked setting. This means that such
new installations oﬀer both a much larger attack surface
and that attacks can be carried out with shallower knowl-
edge than before. The reliance on shared infrastructures
for the operations of multiple subsystems (e.g., both VOIP
and signaling might use the same network infrastructure
to carry information) ampliﬁes this problem, making the
possibility of lateral movements extremely relevant. This
possibility is problematic because railway companies may
operate (through the same shared infrastructure) Infor-
mation and Communication Technology (ICT) services,
which have also been hit by various attacks [3]. This
scenario is not unique to the railway sector: many public
infrastructures have become victims of cyber attacks in
recent years.
Many proposals have arisen to address this issue. For
example, in 2008, the “European Programme for Critical
Infrastructure Protection” [4] was established to improve
the security of critical infrastructures, which are deﬁned
as all those systems considered essential to maintaining
the vital functions of society. Recently [5], debates for
updating this Directive have restarted to deal with the
present threat landscape. The target has been to in-
clude a much broader landscape of systems, including the
transportation industry and the railway sector, and to
champion a novel approach more focused on the resilience
of overall integrated infrastructures rather than on the
security of individual assets.
Indeed, considering that a successful attack on railway
systems can result in the loss of the safety guarantees
of the network [6], the rail transportation sector cannot
ignore cybersecurity anymore and must start considering
arXiv:2207.13412v2  [cs.CR]  15 May 2023
2
cybersecurity, physical security, and safety as intertwined
aspects that cannot be dealt with separately. For these rea-
sons, developing a new generation of methods for verifying
and hardening rail systems has become of great practical
and theoretical importance.
In this survey, we investigate how the industry has
responded to such a challenge by:
• collecting the standards governing the many safety-
critical subsystems that make up a complete railway
network;
• recalling some of the most signiﬁcant cyberattacks
carried out in recent years on railways systems;
• investigating the cybersecurity projects involving rail-
way signaling systems
• investigating an approach based on cyber ranges to
emulate and verify the security of networking systems
similar to those used in the railway industry.
The paper is organized as follows: in Section II, we recall
the main components of a railway system; in Section III,
we introduce the facet of security in the railway sector
in general and, in Section III-C, we discuss the relation-
ship between safety and security. Section IV concludes
with a novel methodology for performing cybersecurity
assessments. In Section V, we report how cyber ranges
can be valuable in performing cybersecurity assessments
and propose some railway-centered scenarios that might
be of interest for discussion and future work. In Section VI,
we ﬁnally draw some ﬁnal remarks and discuss further
developments.
II. Railways as an integrated system
In a broad sense, railways can be deﬁned as a collection
of diﬀerent systems whose purpose is to transfer passengers
and goods on wheeled vehicles running on rails located
on tracks. Such subsystems can be broadly collected into
three families:
• Railway infrastructure comprises all the tracks
(sometimes referred to as the permanent way), all
the civil works, and the systems and premises that
ensure the regular traﬃc ﬂow. In literature, this latter
component is often further divided to distinguish
between the so-called “facilities and premises,” which
encompass stations, depots, and other similar facili-
ties and wayside systems that operate along the lines,
which encompass signaling systems, electriﬁcation fa-
cilities (which hardening is deeply interlaced with the
security of the electrical grid as a whole [7]) and level
crossings.
• Rolling stocks comprise powered vehicles (locomo-
tives, single rail cars, shunters, etc.), engineering ve-
hicles, and trailer vehicles.
• Railway operations encompass the technical duties
performed to ensure trains circulate and the com-
mercial operations that railway companies perform to
ensure revenue [1].
Most tasks carried out in a railway company involve all
those three subsystems simultaneously. This suggests that
“holistic” approaches that favor securing the system as a
whole [8] should be preferred to approaches that focus on
securing a single component of the system without caring
for its overall capability to accomplish its many tasks.
A. The dualism between safety and security
Safety is deeply ingrained into modern industry, and
railway makes no exception. Indeed, railways and other
transportation systems are classiﬁed as safety-critical since
their failure may result in loss of human life or disasters of
another sort. The design of this kind of system has tradi-
tionally followed a “safety above all” paradigm, meaning
that, to be considered ﬁt to be used, each component (and
the system as a whole) must achieve a minimum Safety In-
tegrity Level (SIL) [9], [10]. This means that speciﬁc design
rules and test procedures must be implemented following
a speciﬁc set of standards and norms, guaranteeing that
the system continues to fulﬁll its safety requirements even
in case of random failure.
Nevertheless, despite the observation that an insecure
system has much fewer chances to behave in a safe man-
ner, many widely adopted safety standards do not con-
sider cybersecurity explicitly or, at most, only generically
mention that implementers should include cybersecurity
mechanisms [11], [12], [13] in their design1.
This lack of guidance in such an otherwise pervasive
recommendations framework, coupled with the high cost
and the relative inapplicability of otherwise commonly
adopted security frameworks in railway scenarios, however,
has often pushed companies to consider security as an
after-thought of the overall design process of new railways
systems, an after-thought often delayed due to business
and cost reasons [14], [15]. Such a “lazy” approach is
perhaps even more surprising considering that the relative
simplicity of accessing the infrastructure [16], coupled
with the vast eﬀect that successful attacks on railway
infrastructures may cause on the public at large, makes
the railway infrastructure a juicy target for all kinds of
attackers, from state-sponsored actors down to “script
kiddies.” This strategy may even end up causing more
problems in the long term since security specialists may
have to work on infrastructures composed of a complicated
landscape of systems whose overall functioning is linked
to insecure-by-design architectures, possibly too old to be
coupled with modern security solutions.
Indeed, railway infrastructure has been the subject of
numerous attacks in recent years. In Table I, we sum-
marize a few signiﬁcant conﬁrmed cybersecurity incidents
that have aﬀected or had the potential to compromise
transportation operation safety. Looking at the Table, it
is easy to see that while the operations and safety systems
were the primary targets in the earliest incidents, the
attackers’ focus has shifted mainly toward ITC-related
systems in recent times. Nonetheless, many recent attacks
still signiﬁcantly disturbed the transportation services as
1We will come back to this issue later in the paper.
3
Table I
Timeline of cybersecurity incidents in the railway sector with their description.
Date
Description
August 2003
A computer virus disabled the CSX Transportation headquarters in Florida, aﬀecting signaling in thousands of km of
railway line. This incident has also been referred to as the “Sobig” incident [17], [18].
January 2008
A teenager derailed four tram vehicles causing injuries to twelve people after hacking a train network of Lodz,
Poland [2].
December 2012
A cyberattack on a Northwestern US rail company’s computers disrupted railway signals for two days [19].
March 2015
The HoneyTrain Project recorded over two millions logins attempts with four successful illegal accesses to the Human-
Machine Interface (HMI) of a virtual train control system in the space of six weeks [20], [21].
Febraury 2016
BlackEnergy and KillDisk malware infected the systems of a prominent Ukrainian rail company. In December 2015
the Ukraine power grid cyberattack was also attaked using the same malwares [22].
July 2016
A study reported that the UK Network Rail had been hit by at least four signiﬁcant cyberattacks over 12 months,
including intrusion in rail infrastructure itself. According to such a study, these attacks seemed to be exploratory [23].
November 2016
A ransomware attack took ticket machines of the San Francisco light rail transit system (SF Muni) oﬄine for a day,
There was no impact on transit service, the safety systems, or customers’ personal information [24], [25].
May 2017
Deutsche Bahn, suﬀered a ransomware attack on its data systems [26]. The same computer virus also hit the national
railway systems in Russia [27] and China [28].
October 2017
Sweden’s transportation Administration was targeted by a DDoS attack on the IT systems that monitor railway traﬃc.
Two DDoS attacks hit the public transportation operator V¨asttraﬁk the next day [29].
May 2018
The Danish operator DSB came under a DDoS attack, making it impossible to purchase tickets. Internal mail and
telephone systems used by the DSB staﬀwere also aﬀected [30].
March 2019
An Israeli cyber threat intelligence company identiﬁed an actor operating on a top-tier dark web forum selling access
to an administrative panel of a Chinese rail control system [31].
October 2020
A ransomware attack hit the Soci´et´e de transport de Montr´eal (STM) compromising 624 operationally sensitive servers.
The outage also aﬀected STM for over a week [32], [33].
December 2020
A ransomware attack hit OmniTRAX. It was the ﬁrst publicly disclosed case of a so-called double-exhortation
ransomware attack against a US freight rail operator [34].
December 2020
The Egregor ransomware attack hit TransLink, forcing the company to shut down several IT services including part
of payment systems [35]. No transit safety systems were aﬀected, but the IT problems impacted GPS functions on
buses [36] and information regarding personal banking social insurance information may have been compromised [37]
July 2021
A cyberattack on Iran’s railroad system caused chaos across the whole country [38].
October 2021
The Toronto Transit Commission (TTC) became a victim of a ransomware attack, losing access to systems used
to communicate with vehicle operators, online booking, etc. [39]. Subsequently, the TTC announced that personal
information of (former) employees, may have been stolen [40].
March 2022
Italian Railway Operator Trenitalia and National infrastructure holder were aﬀected by a “cryptolocker infection”,
causing disruption of service [41].
April 2022
Linked to events in the Russian-Ukranian conﬂict, “a clandestine network of railway workers, hackers and dissident
security forces went into action to disable or disrupt the railway links connecting Russia to Ukraine through
Belarus” [42].
a whole, possibly due to undisclosed (or possibly even the
simple fear of) lateral movement by the attackers.
B. Security landscape in the railway industry
The importance of the target and the relative lack of
existing approaches to railway security has pushed many
authors to propose analysis for various kinds of attacks
and their possible mitigations, also within the academic
community. We refer to Appendix B for a brief list of
methodologies that can be used to analyze cybernetics
attacks and to [14], [43] for an extensive analysis of many
works centered around railway-speciﬁc scenarios.
Nevertheless, as Wang et al. [14] and Kour et al. [43]
also report, the analyses done to this day are too often
concerned with particular aspects of a single system. In
other words, they work without caring for the overall
picture and context in which they are inserted, thus not
considering how interactions between coupled systems may
amplify or negate some threats. In this era where railway
systems are made of tens of separate interconnected safety
and security-critical systems, this approach may result in
analysis and countermeasures of limited applicability and
eﬀect.
This problem cumulates with the already mentioned
lack of cybersecurity awareness in the often legally-binding
standards used in the railway sector. To give some ex-
amples, the CENELEC EN 50159 [44], which is used to
design communication between safety-related equipment,
addresses topics such as message authenticity and in-
tegrity. However, it does not cover general cybersecurity
issues like preventing overloading transmission systems or
ensuring the conﬁdentiality of safety-related information.
Another example is the IEC 61508 [10], which can be
considered the general standard for achieving the safety
of electronic devices and is extensively used in the railway
industry, which does not cover security issues [13]. Indeed
both standards only mention that intentional malicious
human actions must be considered and generically refer
to the ISA/IEC 62443 [45] standard. A similar landscape
can also be found concerning the technical norms govern-
ing control platforms doors and wayside control systems.
For the former, the primary reference is the GB 50157-
4
2003 [46], which again does not tackle security issues [13].
Authors and governing bodies tried to address this situ-
ation, yet before analyzing their proposal, it is meaningful
to analyze the unique requirements of railway systems
compared to ICT systems. Nowadays, railway projects
heavily rely on classical Industrial Control Systems (ICS)
to control electromechanical systems and automate indus-
trial processes and operations in various applications. Such
systems often include programmable logic controllers, data
communication systems, and supervisory control and data
acquisition. Securing IC systems poses diﬀerent challenges
than securing pure ICT systems. Consider, for instance,
the Conﬁdentiality, Integrity, and Availability triad, a
well-known model that deﬁnes the security requirements
to support organizations in specifying the core security
objectives of their systems [47]. As shown in Figure 1,
while ICT security focuses on conﬁdentiality to prevent
stealing private information, ICSs are more concerned with
data integrity and avoiding unplanned system outages that
can disrupt production availability and proﬁtability.
Communication between subsystems also plays a central
role and is usually achieved through a transportation
network managed via a central Operation Control Center
(OCC), where many operational tasks are merged. Cur-
rently, there is no consensus about how to design such
control centers [13], and many diﬀerent OCC conﬁgura-
tions have been designed following possibly incompatible
standards. Among them, the APTA RT-OP-S-005-03 [48]
is among the most used ones, yet it considers only phys-
ical security and provides no guidelines for cybersecurity.
Moreover, compared to classical ICSs, the transportation
sector poses even more importance to the concept of
resilience [49] since the availability of each subsystem has
a paramount priority.
There is also the question about how connectivity should
be oﬀered to each one of such components: in theory,
railway communications could build on many diﬀerent
technological options. Nevertheless, while the use of ded-
icated technology was practically mandatory in the past,
in recent times, there has been a solid push for the use
of non-dedicated backbones and oﬀ-the-shelf technolo-
gies to reduce setup and recurring costs and speed up
deployment [16]. Indeed, although modern connectivity
technologies like the 5G oﬀers many security features, it is
yet to be understood if (and how) they can be adapted to
the railway’s needs. In the next Section, we will analyze
some of these aspects in more detail.
Figure 2 depicts the interconnected nature of modern
railway systems. In there, we can see how the functioning
of railway subsystems is assured by a vast number of
devices positioned along the line, all reporting to operators
and central systems located in central control rooms. The
same picture also shows how the connectivity between all
these devices is potentially oﬀered by means of a net-
work infrastructure whose fundamental principles are not
necessarily much diﬀerent from the ones used in classical
enterprise ICT settings. Such a network backbone is also
possibly shared with other railway or ICT subsystems. In
ICT
ICS
Conﬁdentiality
Integrity
Availability
Figure 1.
The diﬀerent meanings of the Conﬁdentiality, Integrity,
and Availability triad in ICT and IC systems.
such a case, logical separations between the data ﬂuxes can
be assured by the use of Virtual Private Network (VPN)
technology.
C. A deeper look on signaling systems
One of the systems where the role of connectivity is
the most pervasive is signaling. For this reason, we will
take this primary function, and European Rail Traﬃc
Management System (ERTMS) in particular, as the case
study for the rest of the paper.
Signaling comprises all the machinery necessary to
ensure the safe movements of rolling stocks on railway
infrastructure [50] and is part of the so-called wayside
systems. In detail, signaling systems are comprised of a
few main components tasked to:
• check the clearance of track sections using either track
circuits or axle counters;
• lock movable track elements such as switches and
crossings in a proper position;
• prevent conﬂicting train movements through the ac-
tion of an interlocking system. This system is respon-
sible for granting a train exclusive access to a route,
which is a sequence of track elements exclusively
assigned for train movement through a station or a
junction [51];
• controlling railway vehicles to keep them safely apart
and within speed limits through Automatic Train
Control (ATC) systems.
ATC systems can be further divided into three sub-
systems: Automatic Train Protection (ATP), Automatic
Train Supervision (ATS), and Automatic Train Operation
(ATO) [52]. ATP is a vital subsystem that continuously
ensures compliance with the maximum safe speed and
minimum safe distance limits. ATS often acts upon the
signals generated by the interlocking system to monitor
and adjust the performance of individual trains to ensure
smooth railway service. The ATO subsystem performs
those functions otherwise assigned to the train operator
and meets all operating conditions and limits set by the
ATC, following the requirements of the railway system to
5
CENTRAL CONTROL ROOM 
IXL
SAFE HUMAN
MACHINE
INTERFACE
SUPPORT
SYSTEM 
DIAGNOSTIC
DATA COMMUNICATION SYSTEM 
CONTROLLER AREA 1
SWITCH
LAYER 2
GATEWAY
SAFETY I/O
MANAGER
DIAGNOSTIC
SYSTEM
ETHERNET BUS 1
ETHERNET BUS 2
TRACKSIDE
DEVICES
(1...n1)
Local Area Network (LAN)
DATA SOURCE
ROUTER
LAYER 3
SWITCH
LAYER 2
GATEWAY
INTERFACE (I.0)
DATA SOURCE
INTERFACE (I.1)
CONTROLLER AREA N
SWITCH
LAYER 2
GATEWAY
TRACKSIDE
DEVICES
(1...nN)
DATA SOURCE
INTERFACE (I.N)
SAFETY I/O
MANAGER
DIAGNOSTIC
SYSTEM
Wide Area Network (WAN)
Figure 2. Wayside network scenario. The central control room connects the safe HMI with support system diagnostic and interlocking in
LAN and controller areas via WAN. Each LAN comprises networking devices such as gateways, routers, and switches. The control areas link
trackside devices to their safety input/output manager and diagnostic system.
ensure passenger comfort by establishing policies for safe
operations
[51]. All modern railway signaling systems,
such as the European Train Control System (ETCS) and
Communications-based train control, include ATP func-
tions [52].
Speaking about ETCS, such a system is used as the
signaling and control component of the ERTMS, which
is the de facto global standard [53] in the high speed
and mainline railway market segment (please refer to
Appendix A for an overview of the railway market).
The ERTMS standard has been designed to be an
almost universal traﬃc management solution and specify
several service levels, each of which enables more and more
tasks to be accomplished by the system. The functions
oﬀered by diﬀerent ERTMS range from none (in the
case of a “Level 0”) to a complete virtual train coupling
system [54], which is the main subject of the possible
future ERTMS/ETCS “Level 4”.
This potential, however, has a cost in terms of the
complexity and required capabilities of the employed com-
munication channel. This, in turn, determines the type of
equipment to be used [50]. At Level 1, for instance, the
system relies on intermittent ATP architecture that uses
controlled transponders (“balises”2 or loops) positioned
along the tracks. Such devices relay information received
via a traditional signaling system via a Line-side Elec-
tronic Unit (LEU). At Levels 2 and 3, instead, the ETCS
works as a continuous ATP system, which requires bidi-
rectional Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V2I) communication.
In this case, railway cabs receive information from balises,
short loop antennas, or digital radio3.
2Eurobalise Transmission System is a safe spot transmission-based
system conveying safety-related information between the wayside
infrastructure and the train [55]
3Interestingly, thanks to the strong push on commonality, all
ETCS levels use the same onboard equipment.
To this date, the technology used as digital radio is the
GSM-R system, which has been built on top of 2G GSM
cellular technology. However, the GSM-R technology is
starting to show its limits as it cannot provide enough
support for growing ERTMS demands for autonomous
train operation capabilities. For this reason, there has
been a push to move to more advanced (possibly packed-
switched) technologies. In this sense, a natural candidate
would have been the LTE-R [56] (based on 4G cellular
infrastructure), which has found successful applications in
the Asian markets. However, as trains move faster and
the quantity of data to transmit grows, it is easy to
imagine scenarios in which even the current 4G technol-
ogy would fall short. The novel “Future Railway Mobile
Communication System” (FRMCS) [57], which relies on
5G technology, will probably be able to solve these issues.
Nevertheless, in the meantime, the already mentioned
LTE-R or the Finnish national “terrestrial trunked radio
standard” (TETRA) [58], [59] are being adopted, even if
only as stop-gap solutions.
D. Security aspects of ERTMS
The central role of ERTMS (and signaling systems in
a broad sense) in guaranteeing a safe circulation of trains
has sparked the academic community to assess its security
properties.
For instance, in [60], the Authors highlight weaknesses
of GSM-R and EURORADIO protocols that would allow
an attacker to forge train control messages. Although the
Authors recognize that it would be challenging to carry
out this kind of attack in an environment where only small
segments of data are exchanged, their hypothetical attack
will become a more pressing possibility in a context where
the quantity of exchanged data will grow.
Another example is the attack proposed in [61], in which
the authors exploit the fail-safe behavior of ERTMS to
6
Figure 3.
A schematic representation of the many communication channel used by railways systems. Dashed boxes list possible technological
solutions. Each one of those links can be be potentially used to to carry out attacks to the connected subsystems.
engineer a Denial-of-Service attack that causes a train to
halt. Although the authors also argue that causing an
accident might be possible, as shown in [14], also causing
a delay for a single train can be enough to cause severe
repercussions on the overall railway schedule and service.
More theoretical approaches have also been used to
test the protocol’s security (and safety). In [62], a formal
analysis of the train-to-trackside communication protocols
used in the EURORADIO protocol is carried out using
pi-calculus and the ProVerif tool. In there, the Authors
found out that the protocol is not secure against forging
of emergency messages in all those cases in which the
underlying carrier network is compromised (such as by an
IMSI catching in the case of GSM-R), and it is also weak
against message deletion, and downgrading attacks.
Many authors have also proposed possible mitigation of
known problems of these protocols. For instance, the very
Authors of [62] make several recommendations further
to enhance the security of ERTMS in the same paper.
In [63], another approach to improve the protocol in
EURORADIO is proposed by the Authors, accompanied
by theoretical consideration employing Colored Petri Net-
works to verify the superior performance (both in safety
and security terms) of their proposal.
Cryptographic considerations on the EURORADIO pro-
tocol and its coupling with various digital radio technolo-
gies have also been performed. In [16], for instance, it has
been argued that the 3DES-based approach of EURORA-
DIO is not secure enough given the nowadays available
computational power. Attacks of this kind, however, often
rely heavily on intrinsic properties of the GSM-R carrier
and are thus heavily countered by the use of more modern
carriers. We refer the interested reader to [16] for more
in-depth considerations regarding the improved security
primitives oﬀered by LTE-R, 5G, and FRMC.
E. The limits of an atomistic approach
As already noted, all these analyses rarely take into
account the overall placement of the analyzed system
into the “operational pipeline” of a railway system. For
this reason, they fall short of identifying the eﬀects of a
given attack on the railway system as a whole. Although
acceptable in an academic setting, this approach is very
myopic from a risk management point of view.
In Figure 3, we show a schematic representation of a
railway system. Each component and each V2I, vehicle-to-
vehicle, and spot communication channel can be subject to
security threats. Wireless communication oﬀers new pos-
sibilities for support and new services and also increases
complexity during development as it exposes a broader
attack surface. This picture is helpful to see how securing
a single subsystem without regard for its placement in a
general scheme may not achieve desirable overall security
characteristics.
In an enterprise, there is also the urge to quantitatively
investigate the eﬀect of a given event. In systems as
complex as railway signaling infrastructure, however, this
feat is well beyond the possibility of a pencil-and-paper-
based approach. Indeed, as noted in [14], simulators and
veriﬁers have become invaluable tools for such a feat. Later
in the paper, we will explore how cyber-ranges can be
used to investigate how network conditions can propagate
through a communication backbone and possibly disrupt
the services which rely on it to accomplish their function.
III. Security assessment methodologies for
railway systems
Although we cited only a few examples of possible
attacks on a particular subsystem and cited just a few news
events regarding successful attacks, it should be clear by
now that railway players cannot simply ignore the security
facets of the systems they operate.
As also mentioned, compared to a purely academic
setting, the concept of governance (i.e., procedures, man-
agement, and certiﬁcations) assumes a more prominent
role in an enterprise setting compared to the sheer dis-
covery of novel vulnerabilities. This is even more true for
companies operating in a setting where safety management
has always played a primary role.
Given this premise, it should be no surprise that in re-
cent times there has been a strong push also for developing
cybersecurity risk management procedures.
In the remaining of this Section, we report some of the
most relevant industry standards that one can apply in the
rail industry and then introduce the general ideas behind
these industrial schemes4. Later we will also introduce an
original approach to achieve such a feat.
A.
Standards for cybersecurity assessments
Currently, procedures for security assessment of railway
systems are mostly framed within the ISA/IEC 62443
4Nevertheless, it must be noted that recently also Academia has
started answering to this call as well. See, for instance, [14].
7
standard [45], which is the global standard for network
security of industrial control systems. Such a document
guides ICS operators through a pipeline that establishes
all the requirements, controls, and best practices necessary
for securing industrial networks.
Other generally applicable norms and frameworks re-
garding cybersecurity are:
• the Common Criteria for Information Technology Se-
curity Evaluation, also known as ISO/IEC 15408 [64].
This standard introduces security speciﬁcations, im-
plementation, and evaluation procedures tailored for
the designated use environment;
• the ISO/IEC 27001 [65] standard, which speciﬁes re-
quirements for establishing, implementing, and main-
taining information security management systems;
• the Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) [66]. CSF con-
sists of standards, guidelines, and best practices re-
lated to cybersecurity risk management. It also pro-
vides a common language for communicating cyberse-
curity expectations and awareness within and across
organizations.
• the Open Source Security Testing Methodology Man-
ual [67] (OSSTMM), which is the de facto standard
for vulnerability assessment thanks to an auditing
methodology aimed to satisfy regulatory and industry
requirements.
All those standards and frameworks, however, are rather
generic and not tailored to the needs of railway systems.
To address this issue, the European Networks and Infor-
mation Systems Agency has established a series of speciﬁc
security requirements and measures for the operators of
essential services that can be recast in the frameworks
mentioned above [68].
B. Guidelines to enhance the security of railway systems
Players like the UK Department for Transport, the
International Union of Railways, etc., have also produced
some guidelines especially centered on the security facets
of railway systems [69], [70], [71]. Bloomﬁeld et al. [72] also
provided a high-level cybersecurity risk assessment proce-
dure for generic ERTMS-based railway infrastructures and
ETCS onboard systems. Several projects have also tried
to address the rail sector cybersecurity challenges under
the Shift2Rail [73] initiative, a European public-private
joint undertaking for rail research. In particular, the two
arguably most signiﬁcant projects under this umbrella
have been:
• 4SECURail [74], a project that addresses the call
for formal methods in the railway environment and
supports implementing a computer security incident
response team for railways;
• CYRail, which has produced various guidelines to
enhance the security of railway systems [75];
but also X2Rail-1 [76], Roll2Rail [77], and Safe4RAIL [78],
[79] projects are worth to be mentioned.
Moreover, we cannot not mention the NIST Special
Publications Series 800, particularly the NIST SP 800-
53 [80], which includes the NIST CSF security controls. We
also cite the NIST SP 800-82 [81] deals with ICSs security
controls often used for security in railways.
C. The issue of safety certiﬁcation
Given the complicated and hyper-connected nature of
modern railways systems, it is no surprise that companies
have adopted a landscape of solutions relying on standards
both from ITC and Operation Technology (OT) domains
to secure their systems. Although this approach follows a
trend already in use in other sectors, such as avionics and
automotive, it also poses clear challenges in integrating all
the prescribed guidelines in the same design.
In Table II, we summarize some of the principal design-
oriented guidelines currently in use in the railway industry.
There, as anticipated, we can see a landscape of safety
and security standards, which in some cases also have
to coexist at a very intimate level. This need arises, for
example, in the devices involved in signaling subsystems.
In there, for instance, the object controller of a trackside
device (see Figure 2) will necessarily have to work both in
a fail-safe but also very secure manner.
Moreover, the issue of safety certiﬁcation still stands:
since no standard guidelines to certify the safety of secu-
rity modules exist, certifying and including security hard-
ware/software in actual railway projects is far from trivial.
To address this problem, some Authors [13] suggested
that manufacturers should physically separate the security
modules from the safety modules.The novel CENELEC
TS 50701 “Railway Applications – Cybersecurity” [82] is
possibly the ﬁrst attempt from a standardization body to
solve such an integration issue. This technical speciﬁcation
is based on ISA/IEC 62443 and provides a tailored solution
for the railway industry, including rolling stock, signaling,
and infrastructure. CENELEC will assess this document in
three years and possibly transform it into a standard [83].
Given the complexity of the safety process deﬁned by
EN 50126 [9] and of the cybersecurity process described
by TS 50701, however, it is imaginable that the syn-
chronization between safety and security will be pretty
complicated, especially considering that the two processes
certainly have diﬀerent duration and that cybersecurity
management is also a practically never-ending process.
In addition, the system under consideration deﬁned by
TS 50701 might have a perimeter of application concerning
the safety process.
These facts call for a radical shift into the working
pipeline usually adopted by the railway industry as they
make it basically mandatory to consider the security re-
quirements of the ﬁnal product from the very beginning
of the design process.
A possible architecture that may be used to meet these
requirements is shown in Figure 4. In such a design,
a security shell protects the safety function [84]. This
leaves the designer free to apply any relevant standard
(possibly from Table II) to design each internal component
but imposes that all communications must go through a
8
Table II
Remarks on the applicability of standards, frameworks and
guidelines in the railway industry.
Standards
and guidelines
Application
area
Security
Safety
ISO/IEC 15408 [64]
IT

ISO/IEC 27001 [65]
IT

ISO/IEC 62443 [45]
OT

CLC/TS 50701 [82]
OT


NIST CSF [66]
IT, OT

NIST 800-82 [81]
OT

OSSTMM [67]
IT

CYRail [75]
OT

4SECURail [74]
OT

IEC 61508 [10]
OT

EN 50126 [9]
OT

EN 50159 [44]
OT

Figure 4.
Example of a possible design architecture integrating
both Safety and Security facets. In this approach, the security facets
functions as external shell protecting safety function.
security controller, which will also function as the only
interface to its safety counterpart. Such an architecture is
implicitly resistant, for instance, to a DoS attack because,
even in the worst case, only the functioning of the security
controller can be compromised, thus leaving any internal
fail-safe mechanism intact. In addition, this architecture
allows one to combine safety and security in a very stream-
lined way since the designers only have to worry about
maintaining the (reciprocal) compatibility between the I1
and I2 interfaces that connect the two controllers.
IV. An enterprise-oriented approach to
security risk management
We have discussed how designers can make their design
more secure, but what can a railway operator do to make
its systems as a whole more secure? In other words, how
can operators manage the overall cybersecurity risk?
It is obvious that this task involves both a governance
and a technical part, in which the former is tasked to
decide the high-level targets involving the security posture
of the company and to decide the internal organization and
scope of the cybersecurity teams. The kind of organization
usually adopted often follows a hierarchical structure and
is tasked to convert the high level decision imposed by
higher management into a series of requirements regarding
both the materiel and the operating procedure of the
company. In turn, these requirements will be usually met
by applying the relevant standards, such as the ones we
discussed in the previous Sections.
From a technical point of view, the ﬁrst steps of this
process involve performing a security analysis of the exist-
ing systems to identify weaknesses in the system [82]. This
step will encompass identifying risk scenarios, computing
the unmitigated risk, and ﬁnally mitigating it. To do so,
the cybersecurity assessors rely on standards and their
experience to gauge the strength and eﬀectiveness of the
company’s security posture.
There are diﬀerent types of these assessments [85]. For
instance, when an organization’s internal teams perform
such an evaluation, we speak about cybersecurity assess-
ment. Its main goal is to understand the sources of threats,
threat events, and possible vulnerabilities on diﬀerent
levels. This process will encompass almost all aspects of
a company, spanning from security policies to network ar-
chitecture and each device’s intrinsic characteristics. When
external experts conduct the analysis, instead, the focus
is to measure the compliance of an organization’s systems
and processes against speciﬁc cybersecurity standards and
criteria. In such a case, we call this analysis a security
audit.
In both cases, Cybersecurity Risk Assessments (CRA)
will be produced. CRAs categorize cyber risks by likeli-
hood and impact and will be included in a ﬁnal report
directed to the company’s management. Such a report
will also be used as a base to write recommendations to
improve the security posture of the company [85].
It is important to note that, regardless of the actor
who performs the investigations, these kinds of processes
tend to be highly disruptive to the normal workﬂow of a
company. Consider, for instance, the process of assessing
the vulnerability of a given subsystem. This feat will
involve automated scans that create considerable traﬃc
load and abnormal interactions in the target systems and
probably trigger any system security management tool
already present. This reasoning is even more actual for
penetration tests: this technical methodology extends vul-
nerability assessments with sanctioned attempts to exploit
the discovered vulnerabilities to show their potential real-
world impact. In other words, a successful penetration test
on live equipment can cause all the negative eﬀects of a
real successful attack.
It is then easy to see that security assessments of any
kind must be seen as a project themselves: clear goals
and scope must be established, and operative constraints
must be taken into account. A clear communication and
cooperation strategy between all parties must also be
established to ensure that the overall processes cause no
more disservices than absolutely necessary.
9
DESCRIPTION
INFORNATION GATHERING:
DOCUMENTS
NETWORK DESCRIPTION
USE CASES
INPUT
VALIDATION
ANALYSIS
OUTPUT
REPEAT
ARCHITECTURE MODELING:
UML
ENUMERATION
RISK SCENARIOS ANALYSIS:
SET UP  SCENARIOS
CYBER RANGES
THREATS EXAMINATION:
THREATS EVALUATION
DOCUMENTATION:
FINAL REPORT
MITIGATIONS PROPOSAL
IDENTIFYING
THREATS
FINDING
 VULNERABILITIES
CLASSIFYING
RISKS
Figure 5. Graphical depiction of the general cybersecurity assessment process detailed in Section IV-A. The core stage is highlighted in gray.
A. An applicative procedure for cybersecurity assessments
In this Section, we detail how a security analysis can
be carried out. To do so, we take as a test case the
network security analysis of a wayside systems5 like the
one shown in Figure 2. This procedure can be seen as
a summarization of the rules in the standards/guidelines
mentioned in Section III-A.
The ﬁrst step of the procedure is the so-called in-
formation gathering phase. At this stage, one collects
information regarding the system under concern, such as
requirements, technological assumptions, network charac-
teristics, etc. These data will be used to extract a list
of all network components and all interfaces that allow
communication between them. Such analysis is the main
object of the architecture modeling phase.
With such a scheme, one can further proceed with the
risk scenarios analysis. Depending on the speciﬁc case, this
step may involve auditing network device conﬁgurations,
inspecting the policies already in place and real traﬃc,
identifying protocol weaknesses, etc. The analysis of secu-
rity requirements also takes place at this stage.
The subsequent step is the threat examination phase.
At this stage, the auditor tries to identify the threats
that might aﬀect the network under test, namely all those
circumstances that might disclose, manipulate, or destroy
information, together with all those events that might
result in a loss of network availability. This stage, in turn,
comprises performing three steps, namely:
• identifying threats in software, protocols, and archi-
tecture is preliminary for determining the associated
risks in the last step;
• ﬁnding vulnerabilities in software, protocols, and ar-
chitecture. Specialized literature, such as the papers
mentioned in the previous Section, and public repos-
itories of Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures
(CVE) [86] list, such as the one overseen by MITRE
Corporation, are the most important sources at this
stage.
5The scheme we present can also extend to onboard networks.
• Identifying the associated risk that derives from the
threat event’s likelihood and the impact it might have
on the network;
The cybersecurity assessment ends with a report.
An overall scheme of this procedure is shown in Figure 5.
In the upper part, the main phases of the assessment are
shown with a brief explanation of the involved step. In the
bottom part, we instead detail the three subphases that
comprise the Analysis step.
It is worth mentioning that the threat examination stage
resembles the hazard analysis involving hazard identiﬁca-
tion and related risk analysis and evaluation in the safety
assessment process (see [87] and the references therein).
However, as described in Section II-A, the safety and
security analyses diﬀer in their focus.
It is also important to remark that, despite being based
on the current literature, the procedure we presented in
this Section is novel in the sense that it does not draw
any speciﬁc elements from any other existing standard or
scientiﬁc literature except for its general reasoning and
principles. In other words, this is but one among the many
possible choices to accomplish a cybersecurity assessment.
V. Cyber ranges as assessment tools
We mentioned how studying security threats is highly
disruptive to do on live systems and possibly very chal-
lenging to carry out in a laboratory due to the sheer
nature of the required equipment. This is especially true
for network-centered subsystems.
With the term Cyber ranges [88], we indicate all those
interactive platforms that allow one to create possibly
entirely virtual representations (called scenarios) of ex-
isting ICT infrastructures and to emulate their operations
by exploiting virtualization and digital twin technologies.
Compared to a classical pure experimental laboratory
setup, the heavy use of such technology cuts setup and
running costs and allows one to operate scenarios also in
a totally remote manner.
Scenarios represent a particular combination of active
elements, conﬁgurations, selected interconnections, and
any other speciﬁc information required to fully emulate a
10
system. It is obvious that to faithfully reproduce complex
systems, just like in the case of physical reproductions, a
critical challenge is obtaining highly detailed knowledge
from the system owners about their systems. This means
that, almost ironically, the ﬁrst beneﬁt one gets when
building such virtual scenarios is thus not technological
since it forces both owner/operator and security asses-
sors to detail the internal functioning of the original
system [89].
A. The landscape of cyber ranges
Many solutions have been proposed to create cyber
ranges, depending on the complexity, typology, and pur-
pose of use. To better assess the technological landscape,
an idea is to distinguish between cyber ranges based
on simulation-based architectures from those based on
emulation-based architectures. The diﬀerence is that a
simulation environment mimes the essential characteristics
of the physical system but neglects low-level implementa-
tion details. Such details, however, may be crucial for a
thorough network security analysis. Instead, an emulation
environment reproduces most physical system peculiarities
on a virtual platform.
When all the scenario components in a theater adopt
virtualization solutions to emulate physical devices, some
authors classify them as virtual. Physical theaters provide
a replica of the target infrastructure in an isolated and
secure environment. Hybrid cyber ranges adopt solutions
relying on a combination of hardware, virtualized, and
simulated elements.
The development and execution of experiments in cy-
ber ranges involve labor-intensive and error-prone opera-
tions. For this reason, most cyber ranges platform heavily
rely upon automation [90], [91]. However, many com-
monly used oﬀ-the-shelf theater automation (also called
orchestration) frameworks, and, in turn, the cyber ranges
that exploit them, do not provide a complete set of
network-related functionalities. Luckily, various examples
of network-centered cyber ranges also exist. They, how-
ever, widely diﬀer in performance and implementation
methods. In Table III, we present a brief schematic com-
parison between some well-known network emulators6.
Among the essential features that one would like to
have in a cyber range, the capability of interacting with
components that live outside the emulated scenario is
of paramount importance. Although this might sound
counter-intuitive since the isolation guarantees are one
of the biggest selling points of cyber ranges, this feature
is also crucial to test the interactions with non-emulable
components (such as industrial supervisory control sys-
tems). This allows specialists to assess the eﬀect of various
otherwise non-easily testable vulnerabilities. We refer the
interested reader to [92], [93] for further reading on the
topic and to the PAIDEUSIS [94] project for an example of
6A complete systematic review of cyber ranges landscape would
be outside this work’s scope.
ORCHESTRATION TOOL
SPECS
TRANSALTOR
SCRIPT
NETWORK SECURITY
VULNERABILITIES
MODEL
ANSIBLE
CYBER RANGE
Figure 6.
Graphical depiction of the working pipeline adopted to
perform vulnerability assessments using a cyber range.
successful integration between a virtual environment and
physical machinery.
B. The role of cyber ranges for network security
A use-case in which cyber ranges shine is enabling
security testing of complex systems. For interconnected
systems, for instance, they allow one to study how malware
propagates on its network or to emulate the eﬀect of an
attack at L2 on a given link.
Cyber ranges naturally ﬁt in the workﬂow presented in
Figure 5. Following the proposed procedure, the “descrip-
tion phase” entails enumerating the system components
and modeling them in a cyber range-friendly way, i.e., in
a way that conﬁguration management and orchestration
tools can immediately process (e.g., an speciﬁcally crafted
YAML conﬁguration ﬁle in the case of a cyber range
orchestrated using Ansible [95]). If done right, this allows
one to create scenarios and straightforwardly analyze the
system vulnerabilities.
Security threats can have many faces: ﬂawed network
architecture, erroneous device conﬁgurations, weak proto-
cols, etc. A signiﬁcant advantage of cyber ranges is that,
thanks to their high ﬁdelity simulation capabilities enabled
by virtualization technology, they allow practitioners to
study how threats combine their eﬀects in a way that
would be practically infeasible for other approaches.
Conforming to the cyber kill chain approach (please
refer to Appendix C for details), the workﬂow for using a
cyber range to evaluate network security broadly considers
the following steps:
1) emulate the network (or a part of it) using the actual
conﬁgurations and operating systems of the involved
devices;
2) research the vulnerabilities through automatic tools
and scripts created for the speciﬁc case;
3) enumerate the vulnerabilities and measure their im-
pact on the system under test.
Once one has found a vulnerability using the cyber
range, the security analyst can proceed in developing a
countermeasure and give evidence of it using the very same
tools used for assessing the presence of vulnerabilities in
the ﬁrst place. This process will result in new scenarios
that no longer contain the vulnerability and can be used
for further analysis. The procedure can be repeated until
the analysis has covered all the network segments.
Figure 6 depicts the methodology presented in this
Section in a ﬂow chart. In there, we stressed the often
overlooked importance that orchestration tools assume in
making ranges an actual practical instrument.
11
Table III
A schematic comparison between some well known cyber-ranges solutions: Cisco Modeling Labs (CML) [96], Common Open
Research Emulator (CORE) [97], Emulated Virtual Environment - Next Generation (EVE-NG) [98], Graphical Network
Simulator 3 (GNS3) [99], and Mininet [100]. All these emulators provide means for connecting external nodes, but only
CML, EVE-NG, and GNS3 support device operating system virtualization.
CORE
Mininet
EVE-NG
GNS3
CML
Network conﬁguration
Python, Labs
Python, CLI
API, Labs
API, Labs
API, Labs
Network emulation level
L3,
(L1/L2 EMANE)
L2
L2
L2
L2
Connection to external nodes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Nodes operating system emulation
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Licensing
BSD
BSD
GPL, Commercial
GPL
Commercial
C. Building cyber ranges: an applicative example for rail-
wyas and signaling
As a practical example of the proposed procedure, in
this Section, we show how EVE-NG can be used to
investigate an imaginary IP/MPLS7 backbone like the one
shown in Figure 7.
This kind of network is a realistic representation of what
a railway operator may use to interconnect equipment
in diﬀerent stations and is inspired by [102], [103]. In
the picture, we can distinguish a central core network
representing the core routers of the backbone, possibly
connected by high-speed ﬁber optic links that may span a
country. The core is tasked to oﬀer connectivity to, among
others, signaling boxes along the rail lines. Connections
related to diﬀerent services (signaling, alarms, etc.) are
segregated using MPLS VPN technology, which ensures
separation between the traﬃc generated by the diﬀerent
local area networks inside the signaling boxes. In each
local network, we can recognize a customer edge router
connected to the core and a ﬁrewall. This latter device
guards the traﬃc ﬂowing into each local area. This scheme
describes, for instance, a situation in which many signaling
boxes (the clients) are connected to a central OCC (not
shown but conceptually identical) using VPN technology
using a railway holder own infrastructure.
In the scenario, conﬁgurations for each device are man-
aged via Ansible, meaning that conﬁgurations can be
easily modiﬁed and applied to stress diﬀerent aspects of
the network, facilitating the discovery and assessment of
vulnerabilities.
We remark that in this shown scenario, the devices are
virtualized. Although this may cause more diﬃculties for
the ﬁrst setup, it also means that each component will
actually behave like the real one instead of being a mere
reproduction whose functioning may diﬀer due to slightly
diﬀerent implementation details.
Reproducing this scenario in a cyber-range allows one
to test the following cases:
Scenario 1 What would happen if an attacker could make
one of the links in the core unavailable? Would
7A proper treatment of MPLS networks is outside the scope of this
document. We refer the interested reader to [101] for further readings
on the topic.
the internal routing protocol of the core con-
verge again fast enough to guarantee the con-
tinuous operation of the overlying systems?
Scenario 2 Would the same conclusion also hold in the
case of a ﬂapping link? Would the core be able
to react fast enough, or would its transient
behavior hinder the overlying applications?
Scenario 3 How does a given OT protocol works in case of
a congested network? Does the degradation of
the links cause violations of timing constraints,
loss of information, etc.?
Scenario 4 How many resources can be consumed by DoS
attacks on IT applications running on a sepa-
rate VPN but sharing the same infrastructure?
Would the necessary separation be maintained,
or should QoS policies be implemented to en-
sure the functioning of OT applications?
Scenario 5 Would manipulating a given link by some
means allow one to establish a side-channel
information transfer? Would this possibly com-
promise the separation between VPNs?
Scenario 6 What would happen if an infrastructure key
device is replaced by one from a corrupted
node, as in [104]? Are other nodes governed
by a given protocol capable of circumventing
the problem?
Scenario 7 Does the overall employed control structure
suﬀer from Zeno behavior [105] following some
kind of momentous Denial-of-Service?
Scenario 8 Is the network conﬁguration subject to a given
CVE, or is the architecture able to prevent the
eﬀect of the exploit?
Scenario 9 What kind of application-level performance
degradation would a given kind of electromag-
netic interference on a device/link cause?
Obviously, not every cyber range is the right tool to
test all those attacks. To test Scenario 9, for instance,
one would require either a strict integration with FEM
tools or the ability for the cyber range to work in a
hardware-in-the-loop conﬁguration. Similar considerations
also arise from scenarios linked to emulating the physical
layers, which would be required to practically evaluate
solutions like the one in [106]: very few tools can do so.
12
This should not sound discouraging: most cyber range
suites are remarkably ﬂexible and allow a great degree of
customization of the scenario details. To give an example,
a tool like EVE-NG can easily handle all the ﬁrst eight
scenarios with little diﬃculty.
A related thought must be brought up concerning
performance considerations. It would be foolish, for in-
stance, to expect a simulated environment to match the
actual throughput of a couple of enterprise-grade routers
connected via an actual ﬁber optic link. Nevertheless,
this does not mean that performance-related investigation
cannot be performed using this kind of tool. Indeed, even
leaving aside the practical possibility of empirical “con-
version rules” between simulated and real-world scenarios,
there is no reason to believe that relative changes would
not be realistically represented. This observation implies,
for instance, the cyber ranges’ ability to quantitatively
estimate the eﬀect of ampliﬁcation attacks: if one discovers
in a scenario that an attack has a given ampliﬁcation
factor, it should be pretty straightforward to scale the
quantities involved to discover the actual resources (such
as bandwidth) that an attacker would need to use to cause
problems in the physical world. Similar considerations can
be drawn for all those scenarios (such as Scenario 1 and
Scenario 2) where protocol delays or other algorithmic
considerations dominate the behavior of the system. In
such a case, the hardware mismatch would cause minimal
issues.
The same reasoning also holds when it is needed to
establish the feasibility of some countermeasures. Suppose,
for instance, that we would like to test if solutions like pub-
lic key infrastructures (such as X.509, although arguably
ill-suited for OT applications [107]) or the proposal like
the one [108] are too computationally heavy to be imple-
mented within real-time constraints. Even if the actual
run time of the cryptographic primitives may be distorted
by modern CPU hardware acceleration, the number of
packets exchanged due to the intrinsic functioning of pro-
tocols (such as handshakes) will be faithfully represented
in the virtualized scenario. This allows, for instance, to
establish if such handshakes are too time-consuming by
simply considering the transport delay of a real country-
spanning link and the number of packets exchanged.
Although all the aforementioned considerations could
also be drawn using physical equipment, on a practical
level, cyber ranges are the most cost-eﬀective tool to
enable companies to deploy internal cybersecurity teams
(with both “blue” and “red” teams roles), thus allowing
a proactive approach toward security. This capability en-
ables organizations to train cybersecurity response teams
to respond to attacks [109] carried out by diﬀerent kinds
of attackers (is the attack source internal or external to
the network? Is it a one-person job or coordinated state-
sponsored action?) in a relatively eﬀortless manner [110],
[111]. Indeed, the cyber ranges have already shown their
potential as invaluable tools for training purposes [112],
[94]: events such as the CyberChallenge.IT [113], which
have become possible thanks to such tools, are witnesses
to this fact.
VI. Future challenges and conclusions
In this survey, we have reviewed the current landscape
regarding the cybersecurity of railway systems, with a
special focus on signaling systems and noting how they
strongly rely on complex communication networks.
To do so, we ﬁrst analyzed the origin of the ever-
increasing interest in new tools and methodologies for
cybersecurity rapid risk assessment for safety-critical in-
frastructure and reviewed the guidelines that can be ap-
plied to rail signaling scenarios. We then proposed a novel
cybersecurity assessment procedure and showed how one
can heavily exploit cyber ranges as an enabling technology
to create virtual scenarios in which each vulnerability can
be tested and its impact/risk assessed. As a result, our
assessment procedure can help improve the cybersecurity
posture of railway systems by understanding and mitigat-
ing cyber threats and vulnerabilities.
Many questions remain open. The most pressing one
is how to better integrate cyber ranges with digital twins.
This would allow for an unprecedented level of ﬁdelity and
allow for simultaneously studying the safety and security
aspects of the systems under concern. To this end, we will
also need to address the computational requirements of
high-ﬁdelity simulation environments. Indeed, as the ﬁnal
goal would be to emulate a railway system in its entirety,
it is easy to see how the required computational resources
might be beyond the current state-of-the-art capability.
Another challenge is deﬁnitely on the cultural level: how
can we train tomorrow’s technicians? Gamiﬁcation has
been used in cybersecurity for many years as an analysis
tool, but can it be used for proper training purposes?
Cyber ranges can be powerful tools also to this end, so
it will be interesting to see if and how railway companies
will adapt to such tools.
Appendix A
An overview of railway market
In order to better understand the scenarios that a
company may have to face when assessing the security
proﬁle of a railway system, it is helpful to introduce
the way railway systems are often classiﬁed based on
the intended task they are meant to achieve. The ﬁrst
distinction to be made is between passenger and freight
rail services. Among the former, we can further distinguish
based on the distance traveled and the kind of territory
served (e.g., urban, inter-regional, etc.) Railway networks
are often organized around mainline rails that serve as a
route between major urban centers and to which branches,
yards, sidings, and spurs are connected. Mainline is used
to provide both High-Speed Rail8 (HSR) services and
conventional speed rail services. Regional traﬃc may or
may not share the infrastructure with mainline traﬃc [116]
and provides conventional medium/short-based services.
8An HSR service is deﬁned as a service that achieves a speed [114]
of at least 200 km/h, regardless of the distance covered [115].
13
Figure 7.
Example of using cyber-range to used to emulate an IP/MPLS network. The picture represents the network described in
Section V-C.
Finally, an urban/sub-urban segment may share the tracks
with ordinary road traﬃc and is often separated from the
mainline rail traﬃc. Examples of such traﬃc are metros,
tramways, and light rails.
Appendix B
Incidents and their modeling
Many authors have formally proposed approaches to
analyze such cyber attacks to understand better the attack
patterns used. We cite here attack graphs [117], trees [118],
[119], vectors [120], surfaces [121], over and above diamond
model [122], OWASP threat model [123], and the so-called
“kill chain” approach. See, e.g., [124], [43] for an overview
of some of these models and [125], [126] for applications
of attack-fault trees to analyze some cybersecurity-related
incidents in the rail industry. We also cite [127], [128], [129]
for a reviewer on the security of cyber-physical systems
from a control-theoretical prospective.
Appendix C
The cyber kill chain approach
The Kill Chain is a classic military concept that can be
used to analyze the structure of an attack. More recently,
Locked Martin introduced the same concept in the cyber
domain context [130] to better model attacks involving
network intrusions. It involves seven phases, each of which
has a preferred mitigation approach.
According to the kill chain approach to modeling
threats [131], cyber reconnaissance is the ﬁrst step an
attacker performs when trying to breach a system. There
are two types of reconnaissance: passive and active. Pas-
sive reconnaissance is when the attacker gathers infor-
mation about a target without direct interaction. Active
reconnaissance is when an attacker directly interfaces with
a target system to gather speciﬁc details that are later
helpful in delivering a malicious payload. The subsequent
phases are [132]: weaponization, in which the intruder
creates remote access malware “weapons” tailored to one
or more vulnerabilities; delivery of the weapon to the
target; exploitation, which happens when the “weapon” is
triggered; installation, which refers to the phase in which
the weapon installs backdoors of various kind; command
and control, in which the malware enables an intruder
to have access to the target network. The last phase is
referred to as actions on objective. Here the attackers take
action to achieve their goals.
We refer the reader to [126], [131], [133] for a more
detailed presentation of this topic and how kill chains can
be used to analyze cybersecurity-related incidents, also in
the rail industry.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Maurice H. ter Beek
and Rocco De Nicola for their insightful comments.
References
[1] C. N. Pyrgidis, Railway transportation systems: design, con-
struction and operation. CRC press, 2016.
[2] J. Leyden, “Polish teen derails tram after hacking train net-
work,” The Register, Jan. 11 2008. https://www.theregister.
com/2008/01/11/tram
hack/.
[3] H. Jo, G. Kim, J. Baek, K. Lee, D. Shin, Y. Shin, and J. Lee, “A
study on the on-board centered train control system through
ICT convergence,” in International Conference on Control,
Automation and Systems (ICCAS), pp. 1206–1210, Oct. 2012.
[4] Council of the EU, “Council Directive 2008/114/EC of 8
December 2008 on the identiﬁcation and designation of Eu-
ropean critical infrastructures and the assessment of the need
to improve their protection,” Oﬃcial Journal of the European
Union (OJ) - Legislation series (L), vol. 51, no. 345, pp. 75–82,
2008.
14
[5] European Commission, “Proposal for a directive of the euro-
pean parliament and of the council on the resilience of critical
entities,” (COM (2020) 829 ﬁnal), 2020.
[6] D. Milligan, “Securing a railway control system,” in Interna-
tional Conference on System Safety and Cyber Security, pp. 1–
6, IET, Oct. 2014.
[7] S. M. M. Gazafrudi, A. T. Langerudy, E. F. Fuchs, and K. Al-
Haddad, “Power quality issues in railway electriﬁcation: A
comprehensive perspective,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Electronics, vol. 62, no. 5, pp. 3081–3090, 2014.
[8] A. Thaduri, M. Aljumaili, R. Kour, and R. Karim, “Cyber-
security for eMaintenance in railway infrastructure: risks and
consequences,” International Journal of System Assurance En-
gineering and Management, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 149–159, 2019.
[9] CENELEC, “EN 50126 Railway applications - The speciﬁca-
tion and demonstration of Reliability, Availability, Maintain-
ability and Safety (RAMS,” standard, European Committee
for Electrotechnical Standardization, 2018.
[10] IEC,
“IEC
61508
Functional
safety
of
electri-
cal/electronic/programmable
electronic
safety-related
systems,”
standard,
International
Electrotechnical
Commission, Apr. 2010.
[11] K. Hansen, “Security attack analysis of safety systems,” in
Emerging Technologies & Factory Automation (ETFA), pp. 1–
4, IEEE, 2009.
[12] J. Grønbæk, T. K. Madsen, and H. P. Schwefel, “Safe wire-
less communication solution for driver machine interface for
train control systems,” in International Conference on Systems
(ICONS), pp. 208–213, IEEE, Apr. 2008.
[13] L. J. Valdivia, I. Adin, S. Arrizabalaga, J. A˜norga, and J. Men-
dizabal, “Cybersecurity – the forgotten issue in railways: se-
curity can be woven into safety designs,” IEEE Vehicular
Technology Magazine, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 48–55, 2018.
[14] Z. Wang and X. Liu, “Cyber security of railway cyber-physical
system (cps)–a risk management methodology,” Communica-
tions in Transportation Research, vol. 2, p. 100078, 2022.
[15] H. Habibzadeh, B. H. Nussbaum, F. Anjomshoa, B. Kantarci,
and T. Soyata, “A survey on cybersecurity, data privacy, and
policy issues in cyber-physical system deployments in smart
cities,” Sustainable Cities and Society, vol. 50, p. 101660, 2019.
[16] M. Kiviharju, C. Lassfolk, S. Rikkonen, and H. Kari, “A
cryptographic and key management glance at cybersecurity
challenges of the future european railway system,” in 2022
14th International Conference on Cyber Conﬂict: Keep Mov-
ing!(CyCon), vol. 700, pp. 265–284, IEEE, 2022.
[17] M. Niland, “Virus disrupts train signals,” CBS News, Aug. 21
2003.
https://www.cbsnews.com/news/virus-disrupts-train-
signals/.
[18] W. G. Temple, Y. Li, B. A. N. Tran, Y. Liu, and B. Chen,
“Railway system failure scenario analysis,” in International
Conference on Critical Information Infrastructures Security,
pp. 213–225, Springer, 2016.
[19] K. Zetter, “Hackers breached railway network, disrupted ser-
vice,” WIRED, Jan. 24 2012. https://www.wired.com/2012/
01/railyway-hack/.
[20] Koramis GmbH, “Projekt HoneyTrain: Aufbau, Durchf¨uhrung
und Ergebnisse [in German],” whitepaper, Koramis GmbH,
2015.
[21] F. A. Scherschel, “Simuliertes Zug-Steuersystem HoneyTrain:
2,7 Millionen Angriﬀe in sechs Wochen,” heise online, Sep. 11
2015.
https://www.heise.de/security/meldung/Simuliertes-
Zug-Steuersystem-HoneyTrain-2-7-Millionen-Angriﬀe-in-
sechs-Wochen-2810967.html.
[22] K.
Wilhoit,
“KillDisk
and
BlackEnergy
go
beyond
energy
sector,”
Trend
Micro,
Feb.
11
2016.
https:
//www.trendmicro.com/en
us/research/16/b/killdisk-
and-blackenergy-are-not-just-energy-sector-threats.html.
[23] T. Cheshir, “Four cyber attacks on UK railways in a year,” Sky
News, Jul. 12 2016.
https://news.sky.com/story/four-cyber-
attacks-on-uk-railways-in-a-year-10498558.
[24] A. Thomas, “Germany’s Deutsche Bahn rail operator targeted
in global cyberattack,” The Wall Street Journal, May 13 2007.
https://www.wsj.com/articles/germanys-deutsche-bahn-rail-
operator-targeted-in-global-cyberattack-1494658493.
[25] S. Gibbs, “Ransomware attack on San Francisco public tran-
sit gives everyone a free ride,” The Guardian, Nov. 28
2016.
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/
28/passengers-free-ride-san-francisco-muni-ransomeware.
[26] AFP and The Local, “International cyber attacks put ran-
soms on German rail station screens,” The Local, May 13
2017. https://www.thelocal.de/20170513/international-cyber-
attacks-put-ransoms-on-german-train-departure-boards.
[27] TASS, “Virus attack targeting Russian Railways localized,”
TASS, May 13 2017. https://tass.com/world/945717.
[28] AP, “The Latest: 29,000 Chinese institutions hit by cyberat-
tack,” The Associated Press, May 15 2017.
https://apnews.
com/article/f3bc9c0749624febb3770aa362555317.
[29] The
Local,
“Swedish
transport
agencies
targeted
in
cyber
attack,”
The
Local,
Oct.
,12
2017.
https:
//www.thelocal.se/20171012/swedish-transport-agencies-
targeted-in-cyber-attack.
[30] Ritzau/The Local, “Cyber attack hits Danish rail network,”
The Local, May 14 2018. https://www.thelocal.dk/20180514/
cyber-attack-hits-danish-rail-network/amp.
[31] Sixgill Report, “Hacked Chinese rail control system,” Sixgill,
Mar.
3
2019.
https://www.hackread.com/wp-content/
uploads/2019/03/Hacked-Chinese-Rail-Control-System.pdf.
[32] CBC, “STM says it refused hackers’ $2.8M demand in
ransomware
attack,”
Canadian
Broadcasting
Corporation
News, Oct. 29 2020.
https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/
montreal/stm-refused-to-pay-2-8-million-ransomware-attack-
1.5782838.
[33] L. Abrams, “Montreal’s STM public transport system hit by
ransomware attack,” Bleeping Computer, Oct. 21 2020. https:
//www.bleepingcomputer.com/news/security/montreals-stm-
public-transport-system-hit-by-ransomware-attack/.
[34] N.
Tabak,
“Ransomware
attack
hits
short
line
rail
operator
OmniTRAX,”
FreightWaves,
Jan.
9
2021.
https://www.freightwaves.com/news/ransomware-attack-
hits-short-line-rail-operator-omnitrax.
[35] C.
Cimpanu,
“Ransomware
attack
cripples
Vancouver
public
transportation
agency,”
ZDNet,
Dec.
4
2020.
https://www.zdnet.com/article/ransomware-attack-cripples-
vancouver-public-transportation-agency/.
[36] M. Macmahon, P. James, and K. Tindale, “TransLink CEO
conﬁrms ransomware hack, says payment info not compro-
mised,” News 1130, Dec. 3 2020. https://www.citynews1130.
com/2020/12/03/translink-suspicious-activity-response/.
[37] S. Boynton and J. Armstrong, “TransLink warns staﬀhackers
accessed personal banking information in cyberattack,” Global
News, Dec. 30 2020.
https://globalnews.ca/news/7548761/
translink-cyberattack-personal-info/.
[38] Reuters, “Hackers breach Iran rail network, disrupt service,”
Reuters, Jul. 9 2021. https://www.reuters.com/world/middle-
east/hackers-breach-iran-rail-network-disrupt-service-2021-
07-09/.
[39] R. Rocca, “TTC says investigation underway amid ransomware
attack,” Global News, Oct. 29 2021.
https://globalnews.ca/
news/8337090/ttc-ransomware-attack/.
[40] J. Patton, “TTC cyberattack may have stolen information
from up to 25K employees, former employees,” Global News,
Nov. 8 2021. https://globalnews.ca/news/8358094/ttc-cyber-
attack-investigation-employee-information/.
[41] Reuters,
“Italy’s
state
railway
may
have
been
target
of
cyber
attack,”
Reuters,
March
2022.
https://www.reuters.com/world/us/italys-state-railway-
may-have-been-target-cyber-attack-2022-03-23/.
[42] L. Sly, “The Belarusian railway workers who helped thwart
Russia’s attack on Kyiv,” Washington Post, March 2022.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2022/04/23/
ukraine-belarus-railway-saboteurs-russia/.
[43] R. Kour, A. Patwardhan, A. Thaduri, and R. Karim, “A review
on cybersecurity in railways,” Proceedings of the Institution
of Mechanical Engineers, Part F: Journal of Rail and Rapid
Transit, 2022.
[44] CENELEC, “EN 50159 Railway applications - Communica-
tion, signalling and processing systems - Safety-related commu-
nication in transmission systems,” standard, European Com-
mittee for Electrotechnical Standardization, 2010.
[45] ISA/IEC, “ISA/IEC 62443 -Security for Industrial Automa-
tion and Control Systems,” standard, International Society of
Automation & International Electrotechnical Commission, Jul.
2009.
15
[46] GB 50157-2003, “GB 50157-2003 - Code for Design of Subway,”
national standard, Ministry of Construction, People’s Republic
of China, May 2003.
[47] R. J. Anderson, Security engineering: a guide to building
dependable distributed systems. John Wiley & Sons, 2nd ed.,
2008.
[48] APTA RT-OP-S-005-03, “Operations Control Centers,” stan-
dard, American Public Transportation Association, Jul. 2018.
3rd revision.
[49] C. L´evy-Bencheton and E. Darra, “Cyber security and re-
silience of intelligent public transport: good practices and
recommendations,” tech. rep., European Union Agency for
Cybersecurity (ENISA), Attiki, Greece, Dec. 2015.
[50] J. Pachl, Railway Signalling Principles. Braunschweig, 2.0 ed.,
October 2021.
[51] A. Fantechi, “Connected or autonomous trains?,” in 3rd In-
ternational Conference on Reliability, Safety, and Security
of Railway Systems: Modelling, Analysis, Veriﬁcation, and
Certiﬁcation (RSSRail), (Cham), pp. 3–19, Springer, 2019.
[52] IEEE, “IEEE 1474.1 Standard for Communications-Based
Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Require-
ments,” standard, The Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers, Feb. 2005.
[53] M. Ghazel, “A control scheme for automatic level crossings
under the ERTMS/ETCS level 2/3 operation,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 18, no. 10,
pp. 2667–2680, 2017.
[54] M. Schenker, “S2R Innovation Days Presentation X2R3-TD2. 8
Virtually Coupled Train Sets,” in Shift2Rail Innovation Days,
2020.
[55] UNISIG, “FFFIS for Eurobalise - SUBSET-036,” Standard,
UNISIG, 2012.
[56] J. Mikulski, Management Perspective for Transport Telemat-
ics: 18th International Conference on Transport System Telem-
atics, TST 2018, Krakow, Poland, March 20-23, 2018, Selected
Papers, vol. 897. Springer, 2018.
[57] UIC - Rail System Department, FRMCS and 5G for rail: chal-
lenges, achievements and opportunities. International Union
of Railways (UIC), Paris, France, Dec. 2020.
[58] ETSI, “TErrestrial Trunked RAdio (TETRA),” 2011.
[59] J. Moreno, J. M. Riera, L. De Haro, and C. Rodriguez, “A
survey on future railway radio communications services: chal-
lenges and opportunities,” IEEE Communications Magazine,
vol. 53, no. 10, pp. 62–68, 2015.
[60] T. Chothia, M. Ordean, J. De Ruiter, and R. J. Thomas, “An
attack against message authentication in the ERTMS train to
trackside communication protocols,” in Proceedings of the 2017
ACM on Asia Conference on Computer and Communications
Security, pp. 743–756, 2017.
[61] R. Bloomﬁeld, R. Bloomﬁeld, I. Gashi, and R. Stroud, “How
secure is ERTMS?,” in International Conference on Computer
Safety, Reliability, and Security, pp. 247–258, Springer, 2012.
[62] J. de Ruiter, R. J. Thomas, and T. Chothia, “A formal se-
curity analysis of ERTMS train to trackside protocols,” in
International Conference on Reliability, Safety, and Security
of Railway Systems, pp. 53–68, Springer, 2016.
[63] L.-j. Chen, Z.-y. Shan, T. Tang, and H.-j. Liu, “Performance
analysis and veriﬁcation of safety communication protocol
in train control system,” Computer Standards & Interfaces,
vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 505–518, 2011.
[64] ISO/IEC, “ISO/IEC 15408-1:2009 - Information technology –
Security techniques – Evaluation criteria for IT security – Part
1: Introduction and general model,” standard, International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) & International Elec-
trotechnical Commission, Dec. 2009.
[65] ISO/IEC, “ISO/IEC 27001 - Information technology – Secu-
rity techniques – Information security management systems –
Requirements,” standard, International Organization for Stan-
dardization, Oct. 2013.
[66] M. Barrett, “Framework for improving critical infrastructure
cybersecurity,” NIST Cybersecurity Framework, National In-
stitute of Standards and Technology, Apr. 2018. ver. 1.1.
[67] P. Herzog, “The open-source security testing methodology
manual,” tech. rep., Institute for Security and Open Method-
ologies (ISECOM), Dec. 2010.
[68] ENISA, “Mapping of OES security requirements to speciﬁc
sectors.” European Union Agency for Cybersecurity, Dec. 2017.
[69] UK DfT, Rail cyber security: guidance to industry. UK De-
partment for Transport (DfT), London, UK, 2016.
[70] UIC - Rail System Department, Guidelines for cyber-security
in railway.
International Union of Railways (UIC), Paris,
France, 2018.
[71] M. Antoni and N. Ammad, “Argus project-harnessing asset
management to do cyber security to an uic guideline for
railways,” in Congr`es Lambda Mu 21 ≪Maˆıtrise des risques et
transformation num´erique: opportunit´es et menaces≫, 2018.
[72] R. Bloomﬁeld, M. Bendele, P. Bishop, R. Stroud, and S. Tonks,
“The risk assessment of ERTMS-based railway systems from a
cyber security perspective: Methodology and lessons learned,”
in International Conference on Reliability, Safety, and Security
of Railway Systems (RSSRail), pp. 3–19, Springer, 2016.
[73] ´E. Masson and C. Gransart, “Cyber security for railways
– a huge challenge – Shift2Rail perspective,” in Interna-
tional workshop on communication technologies for vehi-
cles (Nets4Cars / Nets4Trains / Nets4Aircraft), pp. 97–104,
Springer, 2017.
[74] “4SECURail.” https://www.4securail.eu/.
[75] L.
Alexe,
H.
Pereira,
P.
Ribeiro,
M.-H.
Bonneau,
and
F. Marqu´es, “Safety and security requirements of rail transport
system in multi-stakeholder environments,” deliverable d2.1,
CYbersecurity in the RAILway sector (CYRai) EU Project
730843, 2017.
[76] “X2Rail.” https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/730640.
[77] “Roll2Rail.” http://www.roll2rail.eu/.
[78] “Safe4RAIL.” https://safe4rail-1.safe4rail.eu/.
[79] M. Rekik, C. Gransart, and M. Berbineau, “Cyber-physical
security risk assessment for train control and monitoring sys-
tems,” in Conference on Communications and Network Secu-
rity (CNS), pp. 1–9, IEEE, 2018.
[80] NIST Joint Task Force, “Security and privacy controls for
information systems and organizations,” NIST Special Publi-
cation 800-53, National Institute of Standards and Technology,
Sep. 2020. Rev. 5.
[81] K. Stouﬀer, V. Pillitteri, S. Lightman, M. Abrams, and
A. Hahn, “Guide to industrial control systems (ICS) security,”
NIST Special Publication 800-82, National Institute of Stan-
dards and Technology, May 2015. Rev. 2.
[82] CENELEC, “TS 50701:2021 Railway applications – Cyberse-
curity,” technical speciﬁcation, European Committee for Elec-
trotechnical Standardization, Jul. 2021.
[83] C. Schlehuber and S. Benoliel, “CENELEC prTS 50701 (Rail-
way applications – CyberSecurity),” in Cybersecurity in Rail-
ways, pp. 1–18, ENISA-ERA, 2021.
[84] C. Schlehuber, M. Heinrich, T. Vateva-Gurova, S. Katzen-
beisser, and N. Suri, “Challenges and approaches in securing
safety-relevant railway signalling,” in 2017 IEEE European
Symposium on Security and Privacy Workshops (EuroS&PW),
pp. 139–145, 2017.
[85] J. Warsinske, M. Graﬀ, K. Henry, C. Hoover, B. Malisow,
S. Murphy, C. P. Oakes, G. Pajari, J. T. Parker, D. Seidl, and
M. Vasquez, The Oﬃcial (ISC)2 Guide to the CISSP CBK
Reference. John Wiley & Sons, ﬁfth ed., May 2019.
[86] “Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE).” https://cve.
mitre.org/.
[87] D. Basile, M. H. ter Beek, and V. Ciancia, “Statistical model
checking of a moving block railway signalling scenario with
Uppaal SMC,” in Leveraging Applications of Formal Methods,
Veriﬁcation and Validation (ISoLA) (T. Margaria and B. Stef-
fen, eds.), vol. 11245 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
(Cham), pp. 372–391, Springer, 2018.
[88] E. Russo, G. Costa, and A. Armando, “Scenario design and
validation for next generation cyber ranges,” in International
Symposium on Network Computing and Applications (NCA),
pp. 1–4, IEEE, 2018.
[89] H. Winter, “System security assessment using a cyber range,”
in International Conference on System Safety, incorporating
the Cyber Security Conference, pp. 1–5, IET, 2012.
[90] T. Gustafsson and J. Almroth, “Cyber range automation
overview with a case study of CRATE,” in Nordic Conference
on Secure IT Systems, pp. 192–209, Springer, 2020.
[91] E. Russo, G. Costa, and A. Armando, “Building next gener-
ation Cyber Ranges with CRACK,” Computers & Security,
vol. 95, p. 101837, 2020.
16
[92] G. Costa, E. Russo, and A. Armando, “Automating the gen-
eration of cyber range virtual scenarios with VSDL,” Journal
of Wireless Mobile Networks, Ubiquitous Computing, and De-
pendable Applications, vol. 13, pp. 61–80, December 2022.
[93] D. Kreutz, F. M. V. Ramos, P. E. Ver´ıssimo, C. E. Rothenberg,
S. Azodolmolky, and S. Uhlig, “Software-deﬁned networking:
A comprehensive survey,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 103,
no. 1, pp. 14–76, 2015.
[94] G. Berra, G. Ferraro, M. Fornero, N. Maunero, P. Prinetto,
and G. Roascio, “PAIDEUSIS: A remote hybrid cyber range
for hardware, network, and IoT security training,” in Italian
Conference on Cybersecurity (ITASEC), pp. 284–297, 2021.
[95] “Ansible.” https://www.ansible.com/.
[96] “Cisco Modeling Labs (CML).” https://developer.cisco.com/
modeling-labs/.
[97] “Common
Open
Research
Emulator
(CORE).”
https://www.nrl.navy.mil/Our-Work/Areas-of-Research/
Information-Technology/NCS/CORE/.
[98] “Emulated Virtual Environment - Next Generation (EVE-
NG).” https://www.eve-ng.net/.
[99] “Graphical Network Simulator 3 (GNS3).” https://www.gns3.
com/.
[100] “Mininet.” http://mininet.org/.
[101] L. D. Ghein, MPLS Fundamentals. Cisco Press, 2016.
[102] Cisco
Systems,
“MPLS
in
the
DCN,”
2007.
https:
//www.cisco.com/c/en/us/td/docs/ios/solutions
docs/
telco
dcn/Book/telco5.html.
[103] Cisco Systems, “Conﬁguring a Basic MPLS VPN,” 2020. https:
//www.cisco.com/c/en/us/support/docs/multiprotocol-label-
switching-mpls/mpls/13733-mpls-vpn-basic.html.
[104] S.-Y. Chang, S. Cai, H. Seo, and Y.-C. Hu, “Key update at
train stations: Two-layer dynamic key update scheme for secure
train communications,” International Conference on Security
and Privacy in Communication Systems, pp. 125–143, 2016.
[105] V. Dolk, D. P. Borgers, and W. Heemels, “Output-based and
decentralized dynamic event-triggered control with guaranteed
Lp-gain performance and Zeno-freeness,” IEEE Transactions
on automatic control, vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 34–49, 2016.
[106] B. Gao, B. Bu, W. Zhang, and X. Li, “An intrusion detection
method based on machine learning and state observer for
train-ground communication systems,” IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2021.
[107] R. J. Thomas, M. Ordean, T. Chothia, and J. De Ruiter,
“TRAKS: A universal key management scheme for ERTMS,”
in Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Computer Security Applica-
tions Conference, pp. 327–338, 2017.
[108] L. Zhu, H. Liang, H. Wang, B. Ning, and T. Tang, “Joint secu-
rity and train control design in blockchain-empowered CBTC
system,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 9, no. 11,
pp. 8119–8129, 2021.
[109] K. B. Vekaria, P. Calyam, S. Wang, R. Payyavula, M. Rockey,
and N. Ahmed, “Cyber range for research-inspired learning
of “attack defense by pretense” principle and practice,” IEEE
Transactions on Learning Technologies, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 322–
337, 2021.
[110] M. H. ter Beek, A. Legay, A. Lluch Lafuente, and A. Vandin,
“Quantitative
security
risk
modeling
and
analysis
with
RisQFLan,” Computers & Security, vol. 109, p. 102381, 2021.
[111] M. E. Kuhl, M. Sudit, J. Kistner, and K. Costantini, “Cyber
attack modeling and simulation for network security analysis,”
in Winter Simulation Conference, pp. 1180–1188, 2007.
[112] M. M. Yamin, B. Katt, and V. Gkioulos, “Cyber ranges and
security testbeds: Scenarios, functions, tools and architecture,”
Computers & Security, vol. 88, p. 101636, 2020.
[113] “CyberChallenge.IT.” https://cyberchallenge.it/.
[114] UIC - Passenger Department, High Speed Rail – Fast Track to
Sustainable Mobility. International Union of Railways (UIC),
Paris, France, May 2018.
[115] M. Garmendia, C. Ribalaygua, and J. M. Ure˜na, “High speed
rail: implication for cities,” Cities, vol. 29, pp. S26–S31, 2012.
[116] UIC - Communication Department, A global vision for railway
development.
International Union of Railways (UIC), Paris,
France, Nov. 2015.
[117] C. Phillips and L. P. Swiler, “A graph-based system for
network-vulnerability analysis,” in New Security Paradigms
Workshop (NSPW), pp. 71–79, 1998.
[118] B. Schneier, “Attack trees,” Dr. Dobb’s journal, vol. 24, no. 12,
pp. 21–29, 1999.
[119] S. Mauw and M. Oostdijk, “Foundations of attack trees,” in
International Conference on Information Security and Cryp-
tology (ICISC), pp. 186–198, Springer, 2005.
[120] M. Mulazzani, S. Schrittwieser, M. Leithner, M. Huber, and
E. Weippl, “Dark clouds on the horizon: using cloud storage
as attack vector and online slack space,” in USENIX Security
Symposium, pp. 1–11, 2011.
[121] P. K. Manadhata and J. M. Wing, “An attack surface metric,”
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 37, no. 3,
pp. 371–386, 2010.
[122] S. Caltagirone, A. Pendergast, and C. Betz, “The diamond
model of intrusion analysis,” Tech. Rep. ADA586960, DTIC,
2013.
[123] V. Drake, “Threat Modeling.”
https://owasp.org/www-
community/Threat
Modeling.
[124] H. Al-Mohannadi, Q. Mirza, A. Namanya, I. Awan, A. Cullen,
and J. Disso, “Cyber-attack modeling analysis techniques: An
overview,” in International Conference on Future Internet of
Things and Cloud Workshops (FiCloudW), pp. 69–76, IEEE,
2016.
[125] G. Pizzi, “Cybersecurity and its integration with safety for
transport systems: not a formal fulﬁllment but an actual com-
mitment,” Transportation research procedia, vol. 45, pp. 250–
257, 2020.
[126] R. Kour, A. Thaduri, and R. Karim, “Railway defender kill
chain to predict and detect cyber-attacks,” Journal of Cyber
Security and Mobility, pp. 47–90, 2020.
[127] D. Zhang, G. Feng, Y. Shi, and D. Srinivasan, “Physical safety
and cyber security analysis of multi-agent systems: A survey
of recent advances,” IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica,
vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 319–333, 2021.
[128] W. Duo, M. Zhou, and A. Abusorrah, “A survey of cyber
attacks on cyber physical systems: Recent advances and chal-
lenges,” IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica, vol. 9,
no. 5, pp. 784–800, 2022.
[129] Y. Zacchia Lun, A. D’Innocenzo, F. Smarra, I. Malavolta,
and M. D. Di Benedetto, “State of the art of cyber-physical
systems security: An automatic control perspective,” Journal
of Systems and Software, vol. 149, pp. 174–216, 2019.
[130] K.
J.
Higgins,
“How
lockheed
martin’s
“kill
chain”
stopped
securid
attack,”
Dark
Reading,
2013.
https://www.darkreading.com/attacks-breaches/how-
lockheed-martin-s-kill-chain-stopped-securid-attack.
[131] M. J. Assante and R. M. Lee, “The industrial control system
cyber kill chain,” white paper, SANS Institute, October 2015.
[132] R. Albach, P. Didier, and H. Dahir, “IoT and Industrial
Security
Deep
Dive.
Recommendations
and
Best
Practices,”
in
Cisco
live!
(#CLUS),
Cisco,
2019.
https://www.ciscolive.com/c/dam/r/ciscolive/us/docs/
2019/pdf/5eU6DfQV/TECIOT-2300.pdf.
[133] E. M. Hutchins, M. J. Cloppert, and R. M. Amin, “Intelligence-
driven computer network defense informed by analysis of ad-
versary campaigns and intrusion kill chains,” in Leading Issues
in Information Warfare and Security Research (J. Ryan, ed.),
vol. 1, pp. 80–106, Academic Publishing International Limited,
2011.
