Title: Towards a Contemporary Definition of Cybersecurity
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2302.02274v1
--------------------------------------------------

 
1 
Towards a Contemporary Definition of 
Cybersecurity 
 
Francesco Schiliro’ 1, 2 
f.schiliro@adfa.edu.au  
 
1Australian Defence Force Academy, University of New South Wales, Canberra 
2Macquarie University 
 
21 November 2022 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
 
The report provides an intricate analysis of cyber security defined in contemporary 
operational digital environments. An extensive literature review is formed to determine 
how the construct is reviewed in modern scholarly contexts. The article seeks to offer a 
comprehensive definition of the term "cybersecurity" to accentuate its multidisciplinary 
perspectives. A meaningful concise, and inclusive dimension will be provided to assist in 
designing scholarly discourse on the subject. The report will offer a unified framework for 
examining activities that constitute the concept resulting in a new definition; "Cybersecurity 
is the collection and concerting of resources including personnel and infrastructure, 
structures, and processes to protect networks and cyber- enabled computer systems from 
events that compromise the integrity and interfere with property rights, resulting in some 
extent of loss." The encapsulation of the interdisciplinary domains will be critical in 
improving understanding and response to emerging challenges in the cyberspace. 
 
Key terms: Cybersecurity, prevention detection, incident, response, interdisciplinary, 
malicious actor, computer systems, infrastructure, protection, interference, property rights 
 
 
 
2 
Defining Cybersecurity/Cybercrime 
 
The term "cybersecurity" is commonly used to refer to a set of circumstances or events 
related to improving the integrity of a given information management system or 
infrastructure and addressing present and emerging challenges associated with the exercise. 
The concept is often broadly invoked to refer to any steps taken to ensure the security of 
information technology resources. The regulation is often inadequate as it fails to capture 
the entire expanse of the fore and background activities commonly involved in the 
adventures. A comprehensive and intimate analysis of the term is not often provided in 
existing literature, further perpetuating the misapplication of the concept in contemporary 
information management settings. A more unified definition should entail the collection and 
organization of resources, personnel, and processes to prevent, detect, isolate and resolve 
potential threats to the continued well-being of information technology infrastructure. 
 
The contemporary digital environment is increasingly integrating the internet of things to 
improve connectivity and interaction between different sectors of people's lives. The 
concept has become commonplace due to its inherent benefits, including error reduction 
and improvement of efficiency by minimizing continued human involvement. Increased 
connectivity has effectively eliminated traditional challenges associated with manual input, 
thus, exhibiting increased performance. The expansive integration of information 
technology in virtually every aspect of existence has greatly impacted conventional 
processes, including increased efficiency and enhanced productivity. Concepts such as data 
analytics and other information management strategies have been consequential in defining 
policy discourse and expanding understanding of potential quality improvement areas in 
every industry. However, the increased interconnectivity continues to present a major risk 
to the well-being of the data processing and management superstructure on which 
industries have grown exceedingly reliant. Cybersecurity is a major concern in the 
information technology (IT) environment and is one of the most important aspects of 
implementing any IT infrastructure. The concept involves identifying potential vulnerabilities 
and instituting effective strategies to minimize the effect of possible threats. Cybersecurity 
is a quality improvement initiative adopted by organizations to monitor and ensure the 
integrity of their systems against unauthorized entry (Wong, 2007). 
 
However, while the term is often invoked in many information technology and data 
management settings including by its explicit definition and underpinning principles are 
rarely discussed. The report will provide an in-depth examination of the concept, including 
exploring its origin and historical application and reviewing its evolution over the past 
decades and adoption during the digital era. The construct's implications in the 
contemporary information technology environment will also be explicitly discussed, along 
with its underpinning best practices. 
 
Literature Review 
 
Prevention, Detection, and Response 
 
Cybersecurity has been extensively examined in existing literature, with the different facets 
of the concept being reconstructed and analysed in light of the evolving contextual factors 
 
3 
in the contemporary operational environment. A review of the literature by the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) reveals that construct can be analysed by 
categorizing it into its constituent elements, including the internet of things, cloud, network, 
application, and critical infrastructure security (Cybersecurity, Critical Infrastructure, 2018). 
The internet of things is an emerging practice involving the interconnectivity of different 
systems to optimize their operations and management. NIST posits that the concept 
presents a significant integrity challenge due to malicious actors' numerous potential points 
of access and the huge adverse impact of such activity (Cybersecurity, Critical Infrastructure, 
2018). The definition of cybersecurity is also increasingly involved in cloud capabilities due 
to the evolving user behaviour and the expanded preference for offshore storage and 
computation competencies. 
 
The benefits of cloud computing and its integration into contemporary practice have 
increased the preference for off-site systems. Beqiri (Beqiri, 2018) explain that networks are 
a critical aspect of any computer infrastructure and form the basis of its operability. The 
author supposes that securing a given architecture often requires an advanced 
understanding of each constituent system, its users, potential vulnerabilities, and other 
elements that may impact its sustained use. Application is another core categorization of 
cybersecurity that entails scrutinizing the software functions and their potential to be 
exploited by malicious actors or impacted by irresponsible use on the client end. The 
programs may be in-house or vendor-supplied and may present unique challenges in 
ensuring the integrity and sustaining of organizational operations, especially if 
compromised. According to Maglaras, et al. (Maglaras, et al., 2018), an analysis of 
cybersecurity also envelopes reviewing critical infrastructure. The physical integrity of the 
premises is one of the foremost considerations before implementing any computer system. 
 
Maglaras et al. (Maglaras, et al., 2018) assert that critical infrastructure must often be 
secured to eliminate the prospect of unauthorized intrusion. A review of the literature also 
provides in-depth insight regarding the core elements of information security, disaster 
recovery, planning, network, and end-user (Srinivasan & Simna, 2017). The multidisciplinary 
nature of cybersecurity analysis includes a review of its major constituent aspect, including 
end-user activity and other machine-human interactions that improve its discernment. The 
derivation of a more unified definition of the concept is predicated on a discussion of the 
dominant themes distinguishing its core aspects. Enriched focus is placed on deconstructing 
cybersecurity as a multifaceted construct rather than an abstract concept. The term is 
analysed holistically using a multidisciplinary outlook. A dialectical approach must always be 
assumed in reviewing cybersecurity as it applies in the contemporary operational 
environment. 
 
Theoretical Framework 
 
An analysis of cybersecurity requires an intimate understanding of the key factors 
underpinning the practice. Exploring the concept often requires an intimate analysis of the 
core contextual factors that define its application within the given environment. There has 
been a sustained attempt by scholars and experts to develop a unified understanding of 
cybersecurity due to the wide diversity of context-specific nature of the pertinent issues. 
Several theories have been developed to improve understanding of the concept and to 
 
4 
define scholarly discussions regarding cybersecurity amongst government, law enforcement, 
and industry. The frameworks have been integral to analysing the different facets 
underpinning the practice. Many of the concepts are often centred on discussing 
vulnerabilities and motivations of malicious actors, which are largely responsible for the 
sustained expression of information technology insecurity. The concepts include social 
cognitive theory, grounded theory, general deterrence theory, distributed cognition theory, 
activity theory, and social-technical systems theory. The frameworks have been integral to 
demystifying the various facets that contribute to the implications of cybersecurity in the 
conventional business environment. 
 
Tamrin et al. (Tamrin, Norman, & Hamid, 2021) explain that the social cognitive theory 
posits that users' buyer inclination to willingly share information is determined by a plethora 
of factors, including their expectations, beliefs, and subjective norms. The widespread 
adoption of social media and the liberalization of personal data sharing has amplified 
cybersecurity concerns due to the laissez-faire attitude of individuals towards potential 
concerns presented by their digital conduct. The distribution cognition theory is also 
instrumental in understanding the concept as it defines how information is transferred and 
disbursed amongst individuals in a given social setting. The concept is integral to redefining 
the evolution of best practices and the tendency of people to react to emerging threats. 
Social organization dictates that define people's perception towards the construct of data 
security are also explicitly analysed. 
 
Data security is a core aspect of the distribution cognition theory detailing the increased 
utilization of artificial intelligence technologies to pattern human thought processes, thus, 
preventing, predicting, detecting, reporting, and resolving potential threats two digital 
systems and information technology infrastructure. Existing literature has also explicitly 
analysed sociotechnical systems theory which posits that the performance and design of a 
given organizational framework can only be optimized if the human and machine aspects 
are adeptly integrated and perceived as codependently. The construct is integral to 
understanding the definition of cybersecurity in the contemporary environment as it 
discusses emerging best practices in the field and the continuous adoption of information 
technology as a best practice. The theory maintains that an intricate interaction must occur 
between the operators and the system, with the mannerisms of each being considered in 
the implementation and subsequent quality improvement practices. Understanding the 
concept of cybersecurity is contingent on deconstructing it by analysing the contextual 
factors underpinning its implementation. The core elements of the construct include the 
internet of things (IoT), cloud, network, application, and critical infrastructure (Beqiri, 2018). 
IGI Global defines the term "cyber" as a construct explaining the culture of computers, 
electronic communication, and virtual networks interacting to accomplish a given digital 
task (What is Cybersecurity?, n.d.). The concept has been expanded to integrate activities 
occurring within cyberspace or involving internet use and associated hardware and 
software. Interactions through computer frameworks and other activities involving the 
manipulation of information technology infrastructure have also been utilized to define the 
construct. The term "security" in literature ensures the integrity of a given tangible and 
intangible system. The concept entails investment in infrastructure and the concerting of 
resources to isolate and diffuse potential threats that may interfere with the conventional 
 
5 
operations of the framework. A review of the literature has resulted in the isolation of 
several potential definitions for cybersecurity. 
 
1. " The process of securing data networks, electronic systems, mobile devices, 
servers, and computers from malicious actors" Kaspersky Lab (What is Cyber 
Security?, n.d.). 
 
2. " The techniques defined by published materials defend and protect a given cyber 
environment of an organization or a user from a potential attacker" (Seemma, 
Nandhini, & Sowmiya, 2018). 
 
3. “Cybersecurity is the process of securing programs, networks and systems against 
digital attacks. The exercise prevents malicious activity aimed at destroying charging 
while accessing sensitive data, misusing user information, or interrupting everyday 
operations” Cisco (What is Cybersecurity?, n.d.). 
 
4. “Cybersecurity is a practice of preventing possible threats or malicious attacks 
seeking to unlawfully access data, damage information or disrupt digital processes. 
The concept is defined by the type of activities instituted by the attacker” (7 Types 
of Cyber Security Threats, n.d.) 
 
5. “Cybersecurity is the process of defending data networks, electronic systems, 
mobile devices, servers, and computers from malicious attacks” Gartner (What is 
Cybersecurity?, n.d.). 
 
6. “Cybersecurity is the protection of networks and other internet-enabled and 
connected systems, including software, and hardware, from cyber threats. 
Organizations and individuals engage in the practice to minimize the impact of 
potential attackers in disrupting normal operations” (Shea, Gills, & Clark, n.d.). 
 
7. “Cybersecurity is the process of deploying technologies, best practices, policies, and 
people to protect sensitive infrastructure and critical systems of individuals and 
organizations” (Reddy & Reddy, 2014). 
 
8. “Cybersecurity is a collection of best practices, including infrastructural changes 
critical in ensuring the integrity of a computer system. The concept entails 
protecting critical installations and sensitive information from potential digital 
attacks. The measures are developed to combat threats from malicious attackers 
targeting the networks and applications originating from without or within the 
organization” (Abomhara & Koien, 2015). 
 
9. “Cybersecurity is the organization and collection of resources, processes, and 
structures used to protect the cyberspace and cyber-space enabled systems from 
occurrences that misalign de jure from de facto property rights” (Craigen, Diakub-
Thibault, & Purse, 2014). 
 
 
6 
Data security is a core aspect of organizational well-being and continuity, as minimal 
interruptions to its operations from unauthorized entry are averted. Cyber breaches cost an 
average of $3.8 million annually, including expenses associated with detecting, responding 
to, and resolving the events (IBM: Consumers Pay the Price as Data Breach Costs Reach All-
Time High, 2022). Losses from organizational reputation damage are also often significant n 
additional to legal ramifications of the attacks, such as lawsuit settlements (Legal 
consequences of a cyber attack, 2022). Regulatory fines and other punishments may also be 
imposed, further diminishing the organization’s financial prospects. The criminals commonly 
target unique user information to perpetrate identity theft or sell the data in underground 
marketplaces. An understanding of the ramifications of digital attacks is critical in 
developing an intimate explanation of the concept of cybersecurity. The implications of 
human behaviour and machine tendencies and how they are exploited are central to 
defining the construct and examining its constituent elements. 
 
Prevent 
 
Prevention is one of the core responsibilities of cyber security. The process entails 
instituting measures to discourage potential attackers from accessing the system. 
Investment in specialized infrastructure, including personnel, software, and hardware, is 
often necessary to achieve this outcome. Protection can be accomplished by implementing 
physical barriers and controlling network or computer system access. Placing some form of 
geographical deterrent often results in improved security outcomes due to the reduced 
potential of unauthorized entry. Improving hardware and software capabilities also has a 
major impact on addressing existing vulnerabilities and mitigating the effect of potential 
attacks. Digital facilities such as firewalls and antiviruses examine potential vulnerabilities 
that can be exploited by malicious actors and resolve them. 
 
Detect 
 
Detecting is a critical element of cybersecurity, involving examining for and identifying 
potential threats. Isolating a threat is integral to terminating the extent of its actions on the 
system and instituting appropriate measures to mitigate its effects. Detection is an integral 
aspect of incident response that entails highlighting the organization of a potential and 
authorized entry or use. The process also protects sensitive infrastructure and isolates part 
of the entity's operations to prevent a more widespread intrusion. The entire securities 
ecosystem is reviewed for potential malicious activity that may compromise the network. 
 
Respond 
 
Incident response is an essential element of cybersecurity that involves invoking substantive 
steps to mitigate the effects of malicious activity in a computer system or network. 
Configuration is a response process that defines specific activities to be instituted by an 
organization innovation in the event of a suspected intrusion. Responding to threats also 
involves analysis of the characteristics or behaviours of the malicious actor. Substantive 
approaches are often assumed to contain and resolve the attack. Key activities may include 
isolating other parts of the system and deploying countermeasures to diffuse the threat. 
 
 
7 
During the process of response, it is also important that data is identified and collected for 
investigation by law enforcement officials and be presented in a manner that will be 
accepted to support a prosecution in court. 
 
Major Cybersecurity Domains 
 
Implementing a cybersecurity quality improvement initiative always entails integrating 
several layers of protection to minimize the potential impacts of malicious attacks. 
An analysis of the concept involves understanding basic attacker behaviour, including 
accessing, changing or destroying data. Examining cybersecurity must entail discussing why 
and how accessing the system or user data may have an impact and why it is often 
necessary to prevent it. 
 
Defining cybersecurity requires an intimate analysis of primary domains, all major themes 
constituting the concept. There is an overarching understanding that the construct 
comprises five main aspects, including the internet of things, cloud, network, application, 
and critical infrastructure security (Liu, et al., 2019). The underpinning elements of 
cybersecurity are critical to developing a wholesome comprehension of the concept and 
creating a new definition acceptable among scholars and digital practitioners. The themes 
not only improve understanding of the interdisciplinary nature of cyber integrity but are 
also essential to providing context critical to the definition process. 
 
Critical Infrastructure Security 
 
Critical infrastructure security is the fundamental cybersecurity practice. The concept 
involves establishing ethical and behavioural codes to prevent and resolve potential 
vulnerabilities in a given computer system (Abouzakhar, 2013). Critical infrastructure 
security involves instituting measures that minimize unauthorized access to networks by 
adopting a multi-layered approach in implementing the framework. The concept involves 
applying physical security measures such as a perimeter mall, identity verification, access 
control, and other exercises that may impede or detract potential attackers (Cobb, 2021). 
Isolation of sensitive networks is also commonly invoked as a countermeasure to potential 
cybersecurity incidences. 
 
Application Security 
 
 Application security is an intricate element of cybersecurity as it involves developing and 
continuously testing features intended to improve the integrity of software and eliminate 
vulnerability against known and unknown threats (Yadav, Gupta, Singh, Kumar, & Sharma, 
2018). The construct entails examining applications for potential weaknesses that can be 
exploited by malicious actors and creating substantive patches that prevent unauthorized 
entry. The concept involves integrating codes that identify potential attacks and institute 
pre-set resolution measures. Application security details the precise activities to be 
accomplished by the software and defines the limits of their deployment to prevent changes 
or repurposing by external parties (Mohammed, Alkhathami, Alsuwat, & Alsuwat, 2021). 
The process entails regular testing to ensure that the protocols function as intended and 
that no malicious embedded codes endanger the integrity of the system. 
 
8 
Network Security 
 
Network security is a core domain of cybersecurity as it involves eliminating systems and 
abilities that potential attackers can exploit to disrupt organizational operations (What is 
Network Security?, n.d.). Protecting the integrity and usability of data during transmission 
involves instituting processes that prevent, detect, and monitor unauthorized access 
(Cybersecurity vs Network Security vs Information Security, 2022). Malicious attackers are 
stopped from entering the system or misusing and modifying information exchanged within 
it. The construct is integral to understanding the concept of cybersecurity as it explores 
vulnerabilities present in the transmission of data between terminals. 
 
Cloud Security 
 
Cloud security is an essential aspect of cybersecurity due to its increased adoption in the 
modern digital environment. Cloud computing is increasingly becoming integrated into 
conventional information management frameworks. Offshore storage capabilities provide 
immense benefits, including minimal spatial or technical requirements by the user. The 
process involves using third-party services available over the internet for critical information 
or managing key digital services and facilities such as databases, servers, and storage 
(Frankenfield, Mansa, & Schmitt, 2022). Vendors also availed off-site intelligence, analytics, 
and networking, significantly increasing flexibility and fostering innovation. The additional 
access terminals present potential vulnerabilities that malicious attackers can exploit. 
 
 The Internet of Things Security (IoT) 
 
 Understanding IoT is integral to redefining cybersecurity due to its expanding use and 
integration into contemporary organizational operations. The internet of things is an 
emerging construct involving the interconnection of different devices and networks to 
increase efficiency by eliminating or minimizing the number of processes involved in 
accomplishing given tasks (Gillis, n.d.). The concept entails facilitating communication 
amongst systems by integrating cloud competency and remote management capabilities. 
The devices can interact among themselves and share information based on input provided 
by the user. The concept is increasingly becoming commonplace in the contemporary 
operational environment. Companies are actively exploring integrating the internet of things 
into everyday activities such as transportation, wellness, and home security. However, the 
interconnected nature of the IoT presents a major integrity challenge making the integration 
of cybersecurity concepts necessary (Gillis, n.d.). The practice presents an ideal opportunity 
for malicious attackers to collect uniquely identifying information on users, including the 
habits, physical location, interests, and identity from the different terminals connected to 
the systems. Therefore, exploring the internet of things is integral to developing a basic 
understanding of cybersecurity and its constituent practices. Elements such as awareness 
and digital habits essential in securing systems are explicitly defined. 
 
Defining Elements of Cybersecurity/Prevent, Detect, Respond 
 
The multifaceted nature of cybersecurity warrants an intricate examination of the key 
themes critical in its definition. Several distinguishing aspects have been developed to 
 
9 
provide a more profound comprehension of the construct. A multidisciplinary approach 
should be assumed to explore the principal elements of cybersecurity as applied in 
contemporary practice environments, including: 
 1. High level of interconnectedness, change, and extent of interaction 
 2. Interdisciplinary aspect, including human-machine interaction 
 3. Network actor capability similarities. 
 
A literature review indicated that there existed consensus regarding the interdisciplinary 
nature of computer systems and the efforts required to secure them. Interaction between 
different elements of cybersecurity, including the human and machine perspective, is 
necessary for a more comprehensive analysis to apply (Craigen, Diakub-Thibault, & Purse, 
2014). Cyber-attack scenarios are often similar in their execution and intention and entail 
exploiting vulnerabilities presented by the networks and utilizing facilities available such as 
connectivity, to accomplish a given malicious agenda. Existing definitions of cybersecurity 
exhibit a technical bias in that they are predominantly focused on discussing the 
shortcomings of human-machine interaction that not only enable but encourage their 
attacks. According to Craigen et al. (Craigen, Diakub-Thibault, & Purse, 2014), minimal effort 
is placed into understanding the overarching motivations of the attackers. A blanket 
assumption is made that monetary gains or the desire to disrupt systems for political 
reasons often underpin the incidences. A broader discussion on the subject is necessary 
amongst practitioners in scholarly settings and among government, law enforcement, and 
industry for an improved understanding and evidence-based approach to be adopted in the 
study of cyber integrity (Craigen, Diakub-Thibault, & Purse, 2014). Contemporary definitions 
can often be critiqued or faulted by analysing the underpinning variables, including context, 
human behaviour, response capabilities, and other factors that skew an object of policies of 
the causative factors of cybersecurity. 
 
Developing a New Definition 
 
A review of literature reviews varying definitions of the concept of cybersecurity. The reality 
precipitates the situation that the application of the concept is contextual, with 
environmental factors playing a major role in the varied understanding of the construct. The 
definition of cybersecurity is often subjective and dependent on the dominant themes 
within a given setting. Consequently, a more unified understanding is necessary to further 
scholarly discourse and encourage expanded scope of practice. Current definitions and 
curricula of cybersecurity are centred on intrusion detection and resolution as opposed to 
understanding the actor's intentions, which is often more pertinent (Education sector is 
leaving Australians vulnerable to cyber attacks, n.d.). Determining the motivations of the 
hacker is essential to securing the infrastructure. A multidisciplinary approach is necessary 
to deconstruct and promote expanded discussion and exploration of cybersecurity. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
Contemporary Definitions of Cybersecurity 
 
A review of existing literature developed from multidisciplinary sources indicates a 
significantly varied outlook on the concept of cybersecurity. The modern definition of the 
construct is predominantly based on professional competencies, employee skills, 
environmental factors, and other key elements unique to the professionals’ circumstances 
(Petersen, Santso, Wetzel, Smith, & Witte, 2020). The table below summarizes the authors' 
perspectives based on their professional understanding and competency inclinations. The 
weaknesses of the definitions are also provided. 
 
Definition 
Weakness/Critique 
Cybersecurity involves protecting assets, 
services, data, and networks 
from unauthorized access preventing 
potential compromise, loss, or 
corruption. 
A limited socio-technical perspective is 
provided. A basic understanding of the 
construct of cybersecurity is presented, 
including an elementary discussion of 
multidisciplinary facets of system integrity. 
The motivations of potential attacks are not 
explicitly defined. A restrictive listing of the 
elements being protected is provided. 
Cybersecurity involves the interaction of 
several processes intended to improve 
overall system integrity and protect 
cyberspace by preventing unauthorized 
entry and preserving the property rights 
of the users 
The definition highlighted the underpinning 
of intentional cybersecurity as applied in 
most contexts. However, minimal attention 
was placed on discussing the 
multidisciplinary nature of the concept. 
Cybersecurity constitutes a collection of 
practices intended to improve a given 
cyber environment's security, safety, and 
integrity. Practitioners acquire the 
necessary prerequisite infrastructure and 
install software to control access and 
minimize the prospect of an authorized 
entry. 
The definition appreciates the 
interdisciplinary nature of cybersecurity and 
acknowledges multiple parties' efforts to 
ensure the integrity of the cyber 
environment. However, the introduction of a 
construct of safety further dilutes the 
underpinned argument. 
Cybersecurity is a discipline dedicated to 
studying and analyzing threats to 
computer systems and networks and 
strategies for mitigating them. The 
domain also discusses the protection of 
digital assets download the introduction 
of authorization to preserve users' 
property rights and safeguard the 
infrastructure's integrity. 
The definition is apt but inadequate in 
providing a comprehensive analysis of the 
interdisciplinary nature of cybersecurity. 
The introduction of the concept of property 
rights shifted the discussion to human actors 
and expanded on the potential motivations 
of hackers. However, the machine 
perspective was not discussed, with the 
definition of inferring that only malicious 
persons are involved in the practice. 
However, presenting cybersecurity as a field 
of study, not an isolated abstract concept, is 
significant in promoting further educational 
discourse. 
Cybersecurity is defined as the state of 
ensuring authority over computer 
The concepts of control and authority and 
explicitly defined, providing a more 
 
11 
systems and information management is 
retained by permitted parties made by 
malicious actors. 
profound analysis of the underpinning 
principles of cybersecurity. The 
characterization of cybersecurity as a state 
was its only drawback. 
 
 
Table 1: summarizes the authors' perspectives based on their professional understanding and competency 
inclinations. 
 
New Definition 
 
The functional model presented by Craigen et al. (Craigen, Diakub-Thibault, & Purse, 2014) 
suffices and ought to be adopted as a standard definition of cybersecurity. However, it fails 
to clearly articulate the extent of property rights loss that may be incurred by the victim. 
Craigen et al. (Craigen, Diakub-Thibault, & Purse, 2014) provide a profound analysis of the 
concept. However, it can be further improved to encapsulate the major elements defining 
cybercrime and related digital and psychosocial behaviour. After a comprehensive analysis 
of existing literature, I propose the following definition, which includes all the core aspects 
of cybersecurity, including the commonly overlooked multidisciplinary approach. 
 
"Cybersecurity is the collection and concerting of resources including personnel 
and infrastructure, structures, and processes to protect networks and cyber- 
enabled computer systems from events that compromise the integrity and 
interfere with property rights, resulting in some extent of loss." 
 
The definition is examined as follows: 
... The collection and concerting of resources, including personnel and infrastructure 
structures and processes... 
 
The aspect explores the numerous interrelated perspectives and dimensions defining the 
complex nature of cybersecurity and its core elements. The section also acknowledges the 
socio-technical interactions that commonly occur between human beings and the systems 
and amongst the networks, which present potential vulnerability and integrity concerns. An 
intentional effort is placed towards obscuring the exact resources, infrastructure, or 
processes in appreciation of the dynamic nature of cybersecurity. 
 
.... To protect networks in cyber-enabled computer systems... 
 
This domain discusses the protection of the systems against all types of threats from within 
and without the organization. Natural, accidental, and intentional occurrences that may 
disrupt conventional operational processes are included in the discussion. The implications 
of human-machine interaction and how they apply in our wider cyber-security context are 
also enveloped in the discussion through the aforementioned statement. The protection 
elements apply to all digital and human assets critical to the information exchange process. 
Redundancies are also developed to mitigate any adverse effects resulting from 
irresponsible user behaviour that may jeopardize the integrity of the system. The process 
operates outwards from the computer network for the entire cyberspace around it. 
 
 
12 
...from events... 
 
The statement recognizes that the computer system and cyberspace are protected from a 
wide range of characters and events, from human-made to natural, that may jeopardize the 
integrity of the framework. Defining the range of the circumstances is critical to ensuring 
that cybersecurity challenges are not only perpetrated by malicious actors as is commonly 
assumed but may also occur as a result of accidental exposure of sensitive information by 
users or destruction of the system by natural occurrences. 
 
...compromise the integrity and interfere with property rights, resulting in some 
extent of loss... 
 
The elements of control, ownership, and consequences are highlighted in the statement. 
The adverse implications of cyber insecurity are outlined to justify the significant investment 
in guaranteeing the framework's integrity. The statement presents the need for 
implementing the quality improvement initiative, allowing for a more protracted review and 
analysis based on specific contextual factors. The term "property rights" is used to 
encapsulate all types of unauthorized entry and common activities perpetrated by malicious 
actors, including changing, destroying, or manipulating the functioning of computer 
systems. Key activities may include exclusion, management, extraction, and removal of any 
programs, files, or any digital property of the target. Any activity that jeopardizes the 
continued shamelessness of an organization's operations is regarded as a cybersecurity 
incident and requires appropriate responses specific to the event and its circumstances. The 
primary intention of providing a multidisciplinary approach in the definition is to align it with 
emerging best practices in the field. Cybersecurity is increasingly integrating the input of 
experts from other fields and appreciating their role in ensuring overall digital integrity. 
 
Justification Implications and Rationale 
 
The principal motivation for deriving the new definition is engendering collaborative and 
interdisciplinary perspectives into cybersecurity. The report endeavours to highlight the 
need for a broader analysis of the concept and encourage a departure from traditional 
perspectives, which only focus on system integrity. The paper aims to unify the core 
elements of cybersecurity and provide a modern outlook in light of the changing behaviour 
of users and attackers and advances in the sector. 
 
 A more robust approach to ensuring system and network security will be provided with the 
primary intention of address in traditionally overlooked areas, including malicious-actor 
motivation and potential disincentivizing strategies. The proposed definition will be 
substantive if it accomplishes certain core objectives, including: 
1. The unification and inclusion of interdisciplinarity in the deconstruction of 
cybersecurity. 
2. The collection and mapping of core concepts defining cybersecurity from 
existing literature. 
 
The review and analysis of definitions are largely aided by existing literature and an 
examination of existing best practices. Protracted approach sports adopted in unifying the 
 
13 
different elements of cybersecurity and integrating an interdisciplinary perspective to offer 
a more response. The terms explained in table 2 are mostly drawn from an online repository 
referred to as the Chambers Thesaurus. The definitions are expected to be as profound as 
possible to provide a basic understanding of their meaning. The terms have been exploring 
the cybersecurity context. 
 
Term 
Definition 
Malicious actor 
- an individual or party interested in 
achieving a given insidious objective, 
including gaining unauthorized entry, 
manipulating, deleting, or destroying a 
given digital record to disable another party 
or disrupt its operations. 
 
Collection 
- the process of accumulating or 
compounding a given resource to achieve a 
predefined objective. Securing existing 
infrastructure involves grouping personnel, 
hardware, and software and allocating 
functions to address a specific quality 
improvement opportunity. 
 
Concerting 
- involves combining, arranging, or 
organizing resources in a coordinated effort 
to achieve a mutual outcome. Well-defined 
responsibilities are apportioned to every 
element, with specific targets being 
outlined. Consulting in the cybersecurity 
context involved adding and organizing 
specific resources, experts, and facilities to 
ensure network integrity. 
Resources 
- an organization's supply of tangible and 
intangible materials and assets to increase 
functional efficiency. Resources such as 
personnel, hardware, and software are 
critical to effectively responding to threats 
from unauthorized access to networks and 
other digital infrastructure. 
 
Personnel 
- human resources required to achieve a 
given operational objective. Personnel is 
essential to implementing initiatives as they 
are responsible for developing automated 
systems that detect, mitigate, and effectively 
respond to perceived threats. Personnel is 
also critical to understanding the extent of 
loss or damage to property rights, thus, 
providing a profound and accurate review of 
expected consequences. 
 
14 
Infrastructure 
- physical facilities and organizational 
structures in accomplishing a given 
organizational agenda. Infrastructure is 
essential to cybersecurity because it 
provides geographical deterrence and 
accommodates the necessary hardware and 
software to sufficiently secure the system. 
The concept is at the core of ensuring the 
functional integrity of the digital property of 
an organization. 
Protection 
- the process of identifying, eliminating, 
resolving, and mitigating the impacts of 
perceived threats. Protection involves 
isolating the system from the actions of 
malicious actors and instituting effective 
countermeasures to prevent further assaults 
from the attacker. The concept is the most 
important attribute of cybersecurity and is 
the underpinning objective for adopting the 
construct in conventional cyberspace. 
Networks 
- a set of interconnected computer systems 
intended to achieve an overarching 
objective. A network consists of electronic 
devices exchanging data and sharing 
physical resources required to accomplish 
organizational tasks. 
Integrity 
- the state of being unimpaired or 
compromised by external or internal 
influences. Human, software, and hardware 
elements of a computer network should 
always exhibit integrity to ensure 
seamlessness in organizational operations. 
Interference 
- disruption of a given entity's conventional 
activities or operations through the denial of 
service or introduction of an impediment 
with the intention of causing loss. 
Cybersecurity incidents commonly result in 
interference with normal operations. 
 
Property Rights 
- the legal and theoretical ownership of core 
tangible and intangible resources by an 
organization or private individuals. 
Disruption or manipulation of property 
rights is one of the core objectives and 
exercises constituting a cybersecurity 
incident 
 
Table 2: terms explained drawn from an online repository referred to as ‘The Chambers Thesaurus’. 
 
 
 
15 
Conclusion 
 
Cybersecurity is often defined as the practice of allocating resources to safeguard the 
integrity of systems from unauthorized entry or manipulation by malicious actors to ensure 
minimal disruption of organizational operations. The process involves instituting substantive 
steps to ensure that any vulnerability exhibited by a computer system or network is 
sufficiently averted or identified and resolved. Cybersecurity is constituted of several core 
aspects, including critical infrastructure, applications, networks, the cloud, and the Internet 
of Things. Critical infrastructure security entails safeguarding unauthorized physical or digital 
access into protected systems. Punitive legal provisions are outlined on the platform to 
deter potential attackers and to alert them of consistent monitoring and potential for the 
activities to be detected and resolved. Physical safeguards may also be integrated, including 
the isolation of the facilities in remote areas and employing of deterrents such as armed 
personnel and rigorous access control. Application security is also a major aspect of 
cybersecurity in evolving end-user software used to manipulate computer systems and 
networks. The concept presents a unique concern as it exhibits significant vulnerabilities 
that attackers may exploit. The discussion of cybersecurity also includes network analysis 
and integrity. A computer system is constituted of several interconnected devices 
continuously interacting with each other and manipulating data to accomplish a given 
objective. The terminals present ideal access points for malicious actors who may use them 
to gain entry to accomplish their objectives. Another emerging practice in contemporary 
cyberspace is cloud computing. The process entails using off-site storage, database, server, 
and intelligence capabilities to optimize productivity and gain access to a wide array of 
third-party software and services. Cloud computing is increasingly adopted in the 
contemporary digital environment due to conveniences such as the reduced need for 
physical space and enhanced security. Other elements, such as the internet of things 
corruption, are often commonly ignored in the contemporary definitions of cybersecurity. 
The emerging practice entails the interconnection of different devices to increase efficiency 
and eliminate the need for additional physical infrastructure. Therefore, cybersecurity is 
interdisciplinary and consists of different aspects and elements involving multiple 
professional competencies. 
 
The concept has been contested as event-specific and multidisciplinary, thus, warranting a 
new definition encapsulating the different elements that constitute a security incident. 
Reinventing the construct is necessary for providing a more uniform interpretation of 
events, circumstances, and resources critical to understanding it. This report provides a 
concise, inclusive, and unifying definition of cybersecurity to enhance and enrich research 
discourse on the topic. Core dielectrics are discussed with the express intention of 
influencing further analysis by key decision-makers and other special interest groups in the 
discipline including government, law enforcement, and industry. The approach adopted by 
scholars, organizations, researchers, and digital security agencies, among others, will be 
influenced by the broader discussion of the concept provided by this paper. Academia can 
play a major role in expanding the definition of cybersecurity by ensuring the inclusion of 
the subjects stated below. 
 
 
 
 
16 
 Several salubrious features can be derived from the proposed definition, including: 
1. Integrating an element of property rights, loss, and consequence emanating 
from alienation, exclusion, manipulation, destruction, theft, or unauthorized 
access to a given system. The perspective is critical as it shifts the discussion 
beyond traditional interpretations of the concepts such as assets and 
information security to include a perspective of tangible and intangible value. 
2. Including protection is essential to define the wide array of activities 
encapsulated by cybersecurity. The threats presented by natural, intentional, 
and unintentional system compromise are also explicitly explained. 
 
Existing literature does not provide a concise and universally profound definition of 
cybersecurity and its multispectral perspective. The concept is often applied contextually 
and expanded to include all events and circumstances within a given environment 
constituting the breach of the integrity of a system. The proposed definition is critical to 
embracing the multidimensionality of cybersecurity and appreciating its different 
constituent disciplines. Different elements constituting the contemporary perspectives of 
systems and network integrity are also included along with the socio-technical dimensions. 
The author believes that the proposed definition of cybersecurity will be accepted and 
integrated into contemporary research discourse. Readers will develop an improved 
understanding of the concept and expand their intellectual Horizons and the openness to 
collaborate in addressing the increasingly complex threats in modern cyberspace. 
 
 
 
17 
Bibliography 
 
7 Types of Cyber Security Threats. (n.d.). (University of North Dakota) Retrieved October 
2022, from University of North Dakota: https://onlinedegrees.und.edu/blog/types-
of-cyber-security-threats/ 
Abomhara, M., & Koien, G. M. (2015). Cyber security and the internet of things: 
vulnerabilities, threats, intruders and attacks. Journal of Cyber Security and Mobility, 
65-88. 
Abouzakhar, N. (2013). Critical infrastructure cybersecurity: a review of recent threats and 
violations. 
Beqiri, E. (2018). The implications of information networking at the pace of business 
development. International Journal of Knowledge, 27, 17-22. 
Craigen, D., Diakub-Thibault, N., & Purse, R. (2014). Defining cybersecurity. Technology 
Innovation Management Review, 4(10). 
Cybersecurity vs Network Security vs Information Security. (2022, April 6). Retrieved from 
GeeksforGeeks: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/cybersecurity-vs-network-security-
vs-information-security/ 
Cybersecurity, Critical Infrastructure. (2018). Framework for improving critical infrastructure 
cybersecurity. URL: https://nvlpubs. nist. gov/nistpubs/CSWP/NIST. CSWP, 4162018. 
Education sector is leaving Australians vulnerable to cyber attacks. (n.d.). Retrieved October 
2022, from AISA: 
https://www.aisa.org.au/public/News_and_Media/Media_Releases/Australians_vul
nerable_to_cyber_attacks.aspx 
Frankenfield, J., Mansa, J., & Schmitt, K. R. (2022, June 23). What is Cloud Computing? Pros 
and Cons of Different Types of Services. (Investopedia) Retrieved October 2022, from 
Investopedia: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/cloud-computing.asp 
Gillis, A. S. (n.d.). What is the internet of things (IoT)? (TechTarget) Retrieved October 2022, 
from TechTarget: https://www.techtarget.com/iotagenda/definition/Internet-of-
Things-IoT 
IBM: Consumers Pay the Price as Data Breach Costs Reach All-Time High. (2022, July 27). 
Retrieved October 2022, from IBM: https://newsroom.ibm.com/2022-07-27-IBM-
Report-Consumers-Pay-the-Price-as-Data-Breach-Costs-Reach-All-Time-High 
Legal consequences of a cyber attack. (2022, March 9). Retrieved October 2022, from 
Harper James: https://harperjames.co.uk/article/legal-consequences-of-a-cyber-
attack/ 
Liu, X., Qian, C., Hatcher, W. G., Xu, H., Liao, W., & Yu, W. (2019). Secure internet of things 
(iot)-based smart-world critical infrastructures: Survey, case study and research 
opportunities. IEEE Access, 7, 79523-79544. 
Maglaras, L. A., Kim, K.-H., Janicke , H., Ferrag, M. A., Rallis, S., Fragkou, P., . . . Cruz, T. J. 
(2018). Cyber security of critical infrastructures. Ict Express, 4(1), 42-45. 
Mohammed, A., Alkhathami, J., Alsuwat, H., & Alsuwat, E. (2021). Security of Web 
Applications: Threats, Vulnerabilities, and Protection Methods. International Journal 
of Computer Science & Network Security, 21(8), 167-176. 
Petersen, R., Santso, D., Wetzel, K., Smith, M., & Witte, G. (2020). Workforce framework for 
cybersecurity (NICE framework). 
Reddy, G. N., & Reddy, G. J. (2014). A study of cyber security challenges and its emerging 
trends on latest technologies. arXiv preprint arXiv:1402.1842. 
 
18 
Seemma, P. S., Nandhini, S., & Sowmiya, M. (2018). Overview of cyber security. International 
Journal of Advanced Research in Computer and Communication Engineering, 7(11), 
125-128. 
Shea, S., Gills, A. S., & Clark, C. (n.d.). What is cybersecurity? (TechTarget) Retrieved October 
2022, from TechTarget: 
https://www.techtarget.com/searchsecurity/definition/cybersecurity 
Srinivasan, J., & Simna, S. (2017). Disaster Recovery, An Element of Cyber Security-A Flick 
Through. International Journal of Management (IJM), 8(4). 
Tamrin, S. I., Norman, A. A., & Hamid, S. (2021). Intention to share: the relationship between 
cybersecurity behaviour and sharing specific content in Facebook. 
What is Cyber Security? (n.d.). (Kaspersky Lab) Retrieved November 2022, from Kaspersky: 
https://www.kaspersky.com/resource-center/definitions/what-is-cyber-security 
What is Cybersecurity? (n.d.). (Gartner, Inc.) Retrieved November 2022, from Gartner: 
https://www.gartner.com/en/topics/cybersecurity 
What is Cybersecurity? (n.d.). (Cisco Systems, Inc.) Retrieved October 2022, from CISCO: 
https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/products/security/what-is-cybersecurity.html 
What is Network Security? (n.d.). (Check Point Software technologies) Retrieved October 
2022, from Check Point: https://www.checkpoint.com/cyber-hub/network-
security/what-is-network-security/ 
Wong, M. W. (2007). Cyber-trespass and ‘unauthorized access’ as legal mechanisms of 
access control: Lessons from the US experience. International Journal of Law and 
Information Technology, 15(1), 90-128. 
Yadav, D., Gupta, D., Singh, D., Kumar, D., & Sharma, U. (2018). Vulnerabilities and security 
of web applications. 2018 4th International Conference on Computing 
Communication and Automation (ICCCA) (pp. 1-5). IEEE. 
 
 
