
TITLE:
Methane production by ruminants:its contribution to global warming

ABSTRACT:
The aim of this paper is to review the role of methane in the global warming scenario and to examine the contribution to atmospheric methane made by enteric fermentation, mainly by ruminants. Agricultural emissions of methane in the EU-15 have recently been estimated at 10.2 million tonnes per year and represent the greatest source. Of these, approximately two-thirds come from enteric fermentation and one-third from livestock manure. Fermentation of feeds in the rumen is the largest source of methane from enteric fermentation and this paper considers in detail the reasons for, and the consequences of, the fact that the molar percentage of the different volatile fatty acids produced during fermentation influences the production of methane in the rumen. Acetate and butyrate promote methane production while propionate formation can be considered as a competitive pathway for hydrogen use in the rumen. The many alternative approaches to reducing methane are considered, both in terms of reduction per animal and reduction per unit of animal product. It was concluded that the most promising areas for future research for reducing methanogenesis are the development of new products/delivery systems for anti-methanogenic compounds or alternative electron acceptors in the rumen and reduction in protozoal numbers in the rumen. It is also stressed that the reason ruminants are so important to mankind is that much of the world's biomass is rich in fibre. They can convert this into high quality protein sources (i.e. meat and milk) for human consumption and this will need to be balanced against the concomitant production of methane. methane / ruminants / global warning / reduction strategies Rsum -Production de mthane par les ruminants : sa contribution au rchauffement de la plante. Cet article examine le rle du mthane dans le processus de rchauffement de la plante et value la contribution au mthane atmosphrique des gaz d'origine digestive issus principalement des ruminants. Les missions annuelles de mthane d'origine agricole dans l'Europe des quinze ont t estimes rcemment 10,2 millions de tonnes et reprsentent la principale source des entres
