Title: Language Tasks and Language Games: On Methodology in Current Natural Language Processing Research
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1908.10747v1
--------------------------------------------------

Language Tasks and Language Games: On Methodology
in Current Natural Language Processing Research
David Schlangen
Computational Linguistics / Department of Linguistics
University of Potsdam, Germany
david.schlangen@uni-potsdam.de
Abstract
“This paper introduces a new task and a new
dataset”, “we improve the state of the art in
X by Y” – it is rare to ﬁnd a current natural
language processing paper (or AI paper more
generally) that does not contain such state-
ments. What is mostly left implicit, however,
is the assumption that this necessarily consti-
tutes progress, and what it constitutes progress
towards. Here, we make more precise the nor-
mally impressionistically used notions of lan-
guage task and language game and ask how a
research programme built on these might make
progress towards the goal of modelling general
language competence.
1
Introduction
Recently, seemingly ever other natural language
processing paper introduces a new task and a new
dataset.1 We join some other recent papers (e.g.
Yogatama et al., 2019) in asking whether there
is any coherence to this research approach, under
which conditions it can lead to progress, and to-
wards what. What we do differently, however, is
to look at the fundamental assumptions behind this
approach. We try to deﬁne central notions, in order
to be able to discuss the structure of the typically
only implicit formulated approach more clearly.
In our argumentation, we distinguish between
language tasks, such as for example “describe
this image”, or “translate this sentence”—that is,
single-step tasks that involve in an essential way
natural language material, but not necessarily only
language material—; micro worlds, which are en-
vironments that produce disinterested responses to
actions, thereby possibly simulating the behaviour
of independently existing systems; and dialogue
1Not quite, but not very far. Looking at the 2018 long
and short paper proceedings of ACL and EMNLP, we get 94
hits for “introduce new dataset”, 20 hits for “introduce new
corpus”, and 101 hits for “introduce new task”.
games as repeated and connected language tasks,
which these environments enable. We deﬁne these
notions ﬁrst and think about general ways of eval-
uating their relevance. We close with some tenta-
tive recommendations for how to connect individ-
ual modelling contributions with the larger enter-
prise of modelling language processing.
2
Tasks, Worlds, and Games
2.1
Tasks
A language task is a mapping between an input
space and an output or action space, at least one
of which contains natural language expressions.2
The mapping has to conform to a task description,
which is typically given only informally, mak-
ing reference to theoretical or pre-theoretical con-
structs external to the deﬁnition, such as “transla-
tion” or “is true of”. We call this an intensional
description. Often, a task is also speciﬁed exten-
sionally through the provision of a dataset of ex-
amples of the mapping (that is, pairs of state and
action), X = {(x1, y1), . . . , (xm, ym)}, where the
assumption is that (x, y) ∈X
→y = L(x) (L
being the task mapping).
This very general deﬁnition essentially covers
much, if not all of natural language processing.
For example, translation can be seen as a language
task where the state space consists of expressions
in one language, the action space of expressions in
another language, and the task description is that
in each pair in the mapping, the second element
be a translation of the ﬁrst. We can further dis-
tinguish understanding tasks, where the mapping
requires demonstration of sensitivity to language
meaning (however that is to be further deﬁned); in-
terpretation tasks, where the input space contains
language expressions that are to be “understood”;
2A formal deﬁnition of this and the other notions is given
in the Appendix.
arXiv:1908.10747v1  [cs.CL]  28 Aug 2019
Set CL of capabilites of 
competent language user
Task T 
• task 
description
Dataset D 
• collection 
instructions
Model M 
• architecture
Cognitive 
Capability C
Cognitive 
Capability C’
Cognitive 
Capability C’’
optimized for
exempliﬁes
involves
involves
Task T’ 
• (task 
description)
Environment E 
• micro-world descr.
Model M’ 
• architecture
provides non-linguistic 
input, rewards, etc. for
involves
Game G 
• game descr.
Dataset D’ 
• collection 
instructions
exempliﬁes
optimized  
for
involves
…
Figure 1: The structure of relations between the research objects model, dataset, task, game, environment, cognitive
capability.
generation tasks, where the output does (with a
given task potentially being both an interpretation
and a generation task); reference tasks, where the
understanding is shown by relating linguistic and
non-linguistic material, and inference tasks, where
linguistic material is related.
2.2
Worlds
The language competence of humans plays out in
repeated task, not single-step ones as described
in the previous section, and it plays out in con-
texts where language use is embedded in a non-
linguistic context. To study such repeated, situ-
ated games, much recent work has made use of
environment simulators that compute reactions to
actions performed within them, in accordance to
the assumed (or actual) rules of the domain they
represent.3 Such environments can again be de-
scribed as mappings, in this case from an action to
an environmental response (a state), where again
the mapping conforms to a description of which
real-world counterpart it is intended to model, and
how.4
3See for example (Savva et al., 2019; Adams et al., 2012;
Johnson et al., 2016; Urbanek et al., 2019; Baroni et al.,
2017a; Xia et al., 2018; Yan et al., 2018; Misra et al., 2018;
Cˆot´e et al., 2018; Bennett and Shatkhin, 2018; Anderson
et al., 2018; Savva et al., 2017; Gordon et al., 2017; Brodeur
et al., 2017; Chang et al., 2017; Janarthanam and Lemon,
2011; Baroni et al., 2017b; Byron et al., 2007; Yamauchi
et al., 2013).
4In this desire to model the relevant aspects of a domain,
and in the assumption that from dealing with a simulated
environment transferable knowledge about dealing with the
original enviroment can be achieved, this approach is remi-
niscent of the AI microworlds of the 1970s—“we see solv-
ing a problem often as getting to know one’s way around a
2.3
Games
An interaction game is a setting where players
can produce actions (a special kind of which can
be messages), possibly regulated by some regime
on when they can do this and who can observe
them. A priviledged, but disinterested player Na-
ture can respond to those actions, by providing
game-relevant information (and interfacing with
the environment in which the game is embedded).
Again, we assume that there is an informal game
description which speciﬁes which, if any, other-
wise existing activity the game is meant to model.
A language game is an interaction game that em-
beds language tasks which govern the actions of
the players. For example, one player asking and
the other player answering questions would be a
language game that poses repeated language tasks
to the players.
Summarising this section, Figure 1 shows the
structure of relations between the notions intro-
duced here: Models relate to Tasks, via Datasets,
Games are realised in Environments. Capabilities
will be discussed below.
3
What makes a good task, world, game?
Let’s now assume we encounter a paper that pro-
poses a new dataset, language task, microworld, or
language game. How can we evaluate the contri-
bution that is made?
‘micro-world’ in which the problem exists.” (Minsky and
Papert, 1972)—and perhaps susceptible to similar kinds of
critiques as these attempts (Dreyfus, 1981; Marr, 1982).
3.1
Tasks
... and datasets
As mentioned, tasks are often
exempliﬁed by the provision of a dataset of ex-
amples of the task being executed by agents that
are assumed to be capable of doing so—typically,
human participants in experiments or data collec-
tion efforts. Evaluating such datasets in itself is
relatively straightforward. First, it should be ver-
iﬁed, which is to check whether the provided in-
put/output pairs can indeed be judged correct rel-
ative to the task (in its intensional description). If
the examples are collected speciﬁcally for the pur-
pose of exemplifying the task, this is the process
of controlling annotation, and standard method-
ologies exists (Artstein and Poesio, 2008).
Validating a dataset is a less formalised process.
It comprises arguing that the dataset indeed exem-
pliﬁes the task intension well. For example, pairs
only of images of giraffes and sentences describ-
ing them would arguably not exemplify the gen-
eral task of image description very well (even if
the descriptions are accurate), while perhaps ex-
emplifying the task of giraffe image description.
Another way to evaluate datasets is by provid-
ing a model of the task learned on parts of it,
and testing it on the remaining part (for which a
comparison, or loss, function on input/output pairs
must be provided as well). If a model can “solve”
the dataset even when not given information that
for theoretical or pre-theoretical reasons is seen to
be crucial, the dataset can be considered an un-
satisfactory exempliﬁcation of the task. E.g., in
a visual (polar) question answering setting (Antol
et al., 2015), if in a dataset all and only the expres-
sions that mention giraffes are true, a model would
not need to take the images into account at all to
perform well (as it would just need to detect the
presence of giraffe-related words), which would
be evidence that the dataset is deﬁcient relative to
the task description.
... in themselves
How can a task in itself be mo-
tivated and evaluated? This is easy, if it has a direct
value to a consumer (such as translation presum-
ably has), which can be measured. If the consumer
is a computer system that processes the output of
the task further, the burden of evaluation is sim-
ply shifted to the system as a whole. If the inter-
est is in replicating with a theoretically motivated
model performance characteristics of humans at-
tempting the task, the task can be evaluated for its
power helping distinguish between different mod-
elling choices.
A recent trend, however, has been to motivate
tasks in a different way, neither via their inher-
ent practical use, nor as answering questions about
language processing as implemented in humans.
The argument roughly goes as follows (even if typ-
ically only made implicitly): To be good at task
T, an agent must possess a set CT of capabilities
(of representational or computational nature). If
the c ∈CT are capabilities that competent lan-
guage users can be shown or argued to possess and
make use of in using language—let’s call the set
of these capabilities of a competent language user
CL, so that CT ⊆CL— then being able to model
these capabilities (via modelling the task) results
in progress towards the ultimate goal, which is to
model competent language use. And hence, any
task T that comes with an interesting set CT is a
good task.5
Under what conditions does this argument
work? First of all, the assumed connection to the
set of capability must indeed be there. We have
already seen a way to challenge a claimed con-
nection, namely through providing a model that
can “solve” a given task (via a dataset) while not
having access to information that should be in-
volved in the capability. (Although this challenge
5To give some examples of informal versions of this ar-
gument, and chosing papers more or less randomly, here are
some quotes (typically from the introduction sections of their
respective papers):
From the paper that introduced the visual question answer-
ing task (Antol et al., 2015): “What makes for a compelling
AI-complete task? We believe that in order to spawn the next
generation of AI algorithms, an ideal task should (i) require
multi-modal knowledge beyond a single sub-domain (such as
CV) and (ii) have a well-deﬁned quantitative evaluation met-
ric to track progress. [. . . ] Open-ended questions require a
potentially vast set of AI capabilities to answer – ﬁne-grained
recognition (e.g., What kind of cheese is on the pizza?), ob-
ject detection (e.g., How many bikes are there?), activity
recognition (e.g., Is this man crying?), knowledge based rea-
soning (e.g., Is this a vegetarian pizza?), and commonsense
reasoning (e.g., Does this person have 20/20 vision?, Is this
person expecting company?).”
About the natural language inference problem, and at-
tempting at least an implicit structuring of the space of ca-
pabilities, Condoravdi et al. (2003) write: “The ability to rec-
ognize such semantic relations is clearly not a sufﬁcient cri-
terion for language understanding: there is more to language
understanding than just being able to tell that one sentence
follows from another. But we would argue that it is a mini-
mal, necessary criterion.”
Williams et al. (2018), on the modern version of this task:
“The task of natural language inference (NLI) is well posi-
tioned to serve as a benchmark task for research on NLU.
[. . . ]
In particular, a model must handle phenomena like
lexical entailment, quantiﬁcation, coreference, tense, belief,
modality, and lexical and syntactic ambiguity.”
in the ﬁrst instance only targets the dataset and not
the task itself.) Secondly, following usual scien-
tiﬁc methodology (Popper, 1934), we can rank the
worth of an instantiation of this argument by how
precisely the capability is speciﬁed, from the triv-
ially correct “task T involves the capability to do
task T” to a statement that could be wrong (and
hence involves other theoretical constructs), e.g.
“task T involves the capability to compute the syn-
tactic structure of a natural language sentence”.
Furthermore, we can rank the motivation given
for a task by how explicit it is in delineating the set
of capabilities it involves, along two dimensions.
In the one dimension (separability), in the most
extreme form, the claim would be that the set of
capabilities CT is fully separated from CL \ CT ,
and hence there is no danger of overﬁtting solu-
tions to CT in such a way as would be detrimental
for the remaining capabilities.6 In the other di-
mension (exhaustivity), the strongest claim would
be that T brings out all there is to c ∈CT , and that
another task T ′, insofar as it requires c as well,
could be handled by a model of c built with only
T in mind. In the other extreme, we only have
“c as required by T”, which does less to indicate
progress beyond T.
As this discussion suggests, it seems difﬁcult to
properly motivate a task without relying, at least
implicitly, on assumptions about how CL decom-
poses.
3.2
Worlds
We have introduced “worlds” (or environments, or
simulators) above as the settings that enable re-
peated tasks (games), and in parts their evaluation
is connected to those. However, as the providers
of inputs to a task in reaction to its outputs, where
this mapping must also conﬁrm to a description,
we can also evaluate them qua environment.
First, the notions of validation and veriﬁcation
apply as well: An environment should match, as
well as possible, its stated description of its re-
lation to a real-world counterpart, and should be
veriﬁed to be correct according to its speciﬁca-
tion. Environments like those needed for games
like Chess and Go (e.g. Silver et al., 2017), or Set-
tlers of Catan (e.g. Afantenos et al., 2012), can
fully model their intended real-world counterpart,
whereas others can only be modelled aproximately
6That is, unless the claim is that CT = CL; the use of
“AI-complete” in the quote above from Antol et al. (2015)
suggest that is something that not everyone shies away from.
(e.g., “the interior of a house, through which an
agent moves, from the perspective of that agent”
— as the body of the agent and the agent’s aware-
ness of it, arguably, is a part of the environment,
this would entail modelling this as well).
A detailed list of desiderata for such “artiﬁ-
cial general intelligence” environments is given
by Adams et al. (2012) (see also Baroni et al.
(2017b)): “C1. The environment is complex, with
diverse, interacting and richly structured objects.
C2. The environment is dynamic and open. C3.
Task-relevant regularities exist at multiple time
scales. C4. Other agents impact performance. C5.
Tasks can be complex, diverse and novel. C6. In-
teractions between agent, environment and tasks
are complex and limited. C7. Computational re-
sources of the agent are limited. C8. Agent exis-
tence is long-term and continual.” While this list
mixes what we separate as demands on environ-
ments and on games set in them, it should be use-
ful to evaluate proposed environments.
In analogy to what we observed for tasks, it
seems that trying to make progress through mod-
elling tasks in simulated worlds entails making an-
other separability hypothesis, which assumes that
the natural competence of handling the world as a
whole is separable into handling various parts of it,
which can be “knit” together to form the whole.7
3.3
Games
What makes for an interesting language game?
First we note that games seem to be less well ex-
empliﬁed by datasets than (non-game) tasks are, as
for them the relation between an input and an out-
put is much less constrained, and the output can be
a sequence of actions rather than a simple one. To
give an example, in the language-navigation task
(e.g. Anderson et al., 2018; Ma et al., 2019), while
the input is a single datum (a verbal description of
a goal location), the output is a sequence of navi-
gation actions.8
As the site for repeated and connected language
7“[W]e feel [the micro-worlds] are so important that we
plan to assign a large portion of our effort to developing a col-
lection of these micro-worlds and ﬁnding how to embed their
suggestive and predictive powers in larger systems without
being misled by their incompatibility with literal truth. [. . . ]
In order to study such problems, we would like to have collec-
tions of knowledge for several ‘micro-worlds’, ultimately to
learn how to knit them together.” (Minsky and Papert, 1972).
8On the role of environments/games vis-`a-vis datasets,
Savva et al. (2019) state their belief that “simulators will as-
sume the role played previously by datasets”; no further ar-
gumentation is given to support this belief, however.
tasks, we can evaluate a game again for how it
connects to language capabilities, and for how the
game setting improves over a (non-repeated) task
setting.
For example, some previous work has
shown that language production under (interac-
tive) task constraints is different from null-context
language production (Ilinykh et al., 2018; da Silva
Rocha and Paraboni, 2016).
Finally, it seems that for language games there
is a natural supremum, which would be “unre-
stricted situated language interaction”.
We can
then also evaluate proposed tasks for how close
they come to this ultimate form, for some deﬁni-
tion of “closeness”.
4
Making Progress
¨Uberhaupt hat der Fortschritt das an
sich, daß er viel gr¨oßer ausschaut als
er wirklich ist.
(It is in the nature of
progress that it appears much greater
than it actually is.)
NESTROY, via
Wittgenstein (1953/84)
Research is an incremental enterprise, and new
tasks, datasets, models, environments, and games
are introduced in a context of existing ones. We
can now distinguish several modes of making
progress in the general project, by relating new
proposals to existing ones.
4.1
Better Models
This is the mode of progress for most of the cur-
rent work in NLP / AI, and it is also the one that
needs the least argumentative support: If a model
trained on a given dataset performs better, in terms
of the same pre-deﬁned metrics, than a previous
model, then progress has been made. Or would
that it were so simple: Even in this setting, con-
siderations of computing power spent should ar-
guably also factor, and how to account for use of
larger datasets (for example in pre-training), when
judging models that achieve better results.9 And
ultimately, the worth of progress in modelling a
particular task rests only on the worth of the task
itself.
A different way in which models can improve
over others is in how well they are suited for trans-
fer to other tasks (see Ruder (2019) for a recent
overview of such transfer-learning).
9See
e.g.
the
recent
discussion
on
https://
hackingsemantics.xyz/2019/leaderboards/.
4.2
Better Datasets
We have discussed the relation between tasks and
datasets above. If a dataset can be shown to be
successfully modelled even in the absence of in-
formation that is deemed criticially involved in the
capability of interest, it can be considered invalid
relative to the task description, and, if the interest
in the task is kept, a new dataset must be found.
The task of visual question answering provides
an interesting example case of such a develop-
ment. After Antol et al. (2015) introduced the ﬁrst
large scale dataset for this task, it quickly became
clear that this dataset could be handled competi-
tively by models that were deprived of visual in-
put (“language bias”, as noted e.g. by Jabri et al.,
2016). This problem was then addressed by Goyal
et al. (2017) with the construction of a less biased
(and hence more valid) corpus. Targetting the set
of capabilities involved in the task, Andreas et al.
(2016) noted that “questions in most existing nat-
ural image datasets are quite simple, for the most
part requiring that only one or two pieces of infor-
mation be extracted from an image in order to an-
swer it successfully”, which makes it not challeng-
ing enough in terms of “[c]ompositionality, and
the corresponding ability to answer questions with
arbitrarily complex structure”. To improve on that,
they introduced the SHAPES dataset which pairs
synthetic images with synthetic, programmatically
generated sentences that contain spatial relations.
Two more datasets explored this direction (John-
son et al., 2017; Suhr et al., 2017), until another
dataset (Suhr et al., 2018) progressed beyond the
use of synthetic images, in effect claiming that nat-
ural images are more valid for the task described
as “visual question answering”.
4.3
Better Tasks and Games
We see a movement towards involvement of ca-
pabilities already in the previous two sections.
Where a model can be judged to be better than an-
other one (trained on the same data) simply by the
linear order imposed by the evaluation metric, a
dataset must be argued to be more representative
of a task by taking recourse to the capabilities of
interest (e.g., in the example discussed just above,
that of handling compositionality).
As shown in Figure 1, tasks are only grounded
(to their left in the diagram) by capabilities (and
games by tasks), and hence an argumentation for
a task T ′ in relation to a previous task T should
Task T 
• task 
description
Dataset D 
• collection 
instructions
Model M 
• architecture
optimized for
exempliﬁes
Set CL of capabilites of 
competent language user
Cognitive 
Capability C
Cognitive 
Capability C’
Cognitive 
Capability C’’
involves
involves
…
Model M’ 
• architecture
better optimized 
for
Dataset D’ 
• collection 
instructions
exempliﬁes
exempliﬁes 
T better as
Task T’ 
• task 
description
involves
is more  
challenging than
involves
improved model
improved dataset
improved task
Figure 2: Three ways of making progress: improving models, improving datasets, improving tasks. (Not shown:
devising models that handle more than one dataset.)
ideally make mention of how CT ′ and CT relate.
(Similarly for games.)
Figure 2 again summarises this discussion in a di-
agramm.
4.4
From Models to Capabilities
An interesting additional avenue of research has
been explored in recent years (see for example the
paper by Hewitt and Manning, 2019, and refer-
ences therein), where models trained on datasets
(representing tasks or games) are explored for how
they decomposed their (representational) task. For
example, the question might be, as in the cited pa-
per, whether a particular model trained on a par-
ticular task creates “internally” something akin to
syntax trees. Again, why this might be interesting
is typically not spelled out in these papers, but one
can assume that the intended underlying argument
goes something like this: “If the theoretical con-
struct is to be found, this shows that postulating
it is empirically validated (and it can be learned
simply through exposure to data); if it is not there,
then the task can be done without it, to the extent
that the model can do it, and it need not be postu-
lated”.
5
Conclusions: Making it Explicit
The discussion above has mixed normative (how
it could, or should be) and descriptive (how it is)
aspects. I will close by commenting more directly
on what I think could be improved.
As discussed above, the most frequent way of
contributing to the project is by improving mod-
els, for which established methods of evaluation
exist. Next frequent is providing new or improved
datasets.
Here already we ﬁnd a much larger
variety of how the contribution is motivated and
framed, and often it is taken as self-evident that a
new dataset will drive progress. Here, more ex-
plicitness about the assumed advantages, and how
they connect to the goal of modelling language
competence, would be helpful.10
This holds even more when introducing new
tasks or games. As the discussion above hopefully
has made plausible, motivating those in them-
selves, and relating them to existing ones, requires
making claims about language capabilities.
To
make these in a convincing way, it seems advan-
tageous to strive for a renewed, stronger connec-
tion to the sciences that study them: linguistics
and cognitive psychology. Those ﬁelds provide
the theoretical terms and constructs that would al-
low us to make the, as discussed above, typically
implicit arguments more explicit (and hence con-
testable).
Acknowledgements
I thank Raquel Fern´andez, Manfred Stede, and Sina Zarrieß
for interesting discussions about topics related to this paper,
while reserving the exclusive right to be blamed for any mis-
understandings it might betray.
10The recent initiative of formulating “Data Sheets” (Ge-
bru et al., 2018), although developed for different purposes,
would be a good step also in this direction.
References
Sam Adams,
Itmar Arel,
Joscha Bach,
Robert
Coop, Rod Furlan, Ben Goertzel, J. Storrs Hall,
Alexei Samsonovich, Matthias Scheutz, Matthew
Schlesinger, Stuart C. Shapiro, and John Sowa.
2012.
Mapping the Landscape of Human-Level
Artiﬁcial General Intelligence.
AI Magazine,
33(1):25–42.
Stefanos Afantenos, Nicholas Asher, Farah Benamara,
Anais Cadilhac, Cedric Degremont, Pascal De-
nis, Markus Guhe, Simon Keizer, Alex Lascarides,
Oliver Lemon, Philippe Muller, Soumya Paul, Ver-
ena Rieser, and Laure Vieu. 2012. Developing a cor-
pus of strategic conversation in the settlers of catan.
In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Games and
NLP, Kanazawa, Japan.
Peter Anderson, Qi Wu, Damien Teney, Jake Bruce,
Mark Johnson, Niko S¨underhauf, Ian Reid, Stephen
Gould, and Anton van den Hengel. 2018. Vision-
and-Language Navigation:
Interpreting visually-
grounded navigation instructions in real environ-
ments. In CVPR 2018.
Jacob Andreas, Marcus Rohrbach, Trevor Darrell, and
Dan Klein. 2016. Neural Module Networks. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2016 Conference on Computer Vi-
sion and Pattern Recognition (CVPR 2016).
Stanislaw Antol, Aishwarya Agrawal, Jiasen Lu, Mar-
garet Mitchell, Dhruv Batra, C. Lawrence Zitnick,
and Devi Parikh. 2015. Vqa: Visual question an-
swering. In International Conference on Computer
Vision (ICCV).
Ron Artstein and Massimo Poesio. 2008. Inter-Coder
Agreement for Computational Linguistics. Compu-
tational Linguistic, 34(4):555–596.
Marco Baroni, Armand Joulin, Allan Jabri, Germ`an
Kruszewski, Angeliki Lazaridou, Klemen Simonic,
and Tomas Mikolov. 2017a. CommAI: Evaluating
the ﬁrst steps towards a useful general AI. arXiv,
pages 1–9.
Marco Baroni, Claes Stranneg˚ard, David L. Dowe,
Katja Hofmann, Kristinn R. Th´orisson, Jordi Bieger,
Nader Chmait, Fernando Mart´ınez-Plumed, and Jos´e
H´ernandez-Orallo. 2017b.
A New AI Evaluation
Cosmos: Ready to Play the Game?
AI Magazine,
38(3):66.
Andrew Bennett and Max Shatkhin. 2018. Mapping
Instructions to Actions in 3D Environments with Vi-
sual Goal Prediction. In EMNLP 2018, pages 2667–
2678.
Simon Brodeur, Ethan Perez, Ankesh Anand, Flo-
rian Golemo, Luca Celotti, Florian Strub, Jean
Rouat, Hugo Larochelle, and Aaron Courville.
2017.
HoME: a Household Multimodal Environ-
ment. ArXiv.
Donna Byron, Alexander Koller, Jon Oberlander, Laura
Stoia, and Kristina Striegnitz. 2007. Generating In-
structions in Virtual Environments ( GIVE ): A Chal-
lenge and an Evaluation Testbed for NLG. In Pro-
ceedings of the Workshop on Shared Tasks and Com-
parative Evaluation in Natural Language Genera-
tion.
Angel Chang, Angela Dai, Thomas Funkhouser, Mano-
lis Savva, and Shuran Song. 2017.
Matterport3D
: Learning from RGB-D Data in Indoor Environ-
ments. ArXiv.
Cleo Condoravdi, Richard Crouch, Valeria de Paiva,
Reinhard Stolle, and Daniel G Bobrow. 2003. En-
tailment, intensionality and text understanding. In
Proc. of the HLT-NAACL 2003 Workshop on Text
Meaning, pages 38–45.
Marc-Alexandre Cˆot´e, ´Akos K´ad´ar, Xingdi Yuan, Ben
Kybartas, Tavian Barnes, Emery Fine, James Moore,
Matthew Hausknecht, Layla El Asri, Mahmoud
Adada, Wendy Tay, and Adam Trischler. 2018.
TextWorld: A Learning Environment for Text-based
Games. ArXiv.
Danillo da Silva Rocha and Ivandr´e Paraboni. 2016.
Reference production in human-computer interac-
tion : Issues for Corpus-based Referring Expression
Generation. In LREC, pages 2994–2998.
Hubert L. Dreyfus. 1981.
From micro-worlds to
knowledge: AI at an impasse. In John Haugeland,
editor, Mind Design. MIT Press.
Timnit
Gebru,
Jamie
Morgenstern,
Briana
Vec-
chione, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, Hanna M. Wal-
lach, Hal Daum´e III, and Kate Crawford. 2018.
Datasheets for datasets. CoRR, abs/1803.09010.
Daniel Gordon, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Mohammad
Rastegari, Joseph Redmon, Dieter Fox, and Ali
Farhadi. 2017. IQA: Visual Question Answering in
Interactive Environments. ArXiv.
Yash Goyal, Tejas Khot, Douglas Summers-Stay,
Dhruv Batra, and Devi Parikh. 2017. Making the V
in VQA Matter: Elevating the Role of Image Under-
standing in Visual Question Answering. In CVPR
2017.
John Hewitt and Christopher D Manning. 2019.
A
Structural Probe for Finding Syntax in Word Rep-
resentations. In NAACL-HLT 2019.
Nikolai Ilinykh, Sina Zarrieß, and David Schlangen.
2018. The Task Matters. Comparing Image Caption-
ing and Task-Based Dialogical Image Description.
In Proceedings of 11th International Conference on
Natural Language Generation (INLG 2018).
Allan Jabri, Armand Joulin, and Laurens van der
Maaten. 2016. Revisiting Visual Question Answer-
ing Baselines.
In European Conference on Com-
puter Vision (ECCV).
Srini Janarthanam and Oliver Lemon. 2011.
The
GRUVE Challenge : Generating Routes under Un-
certainty in Virtual Environments.
In ENLG ’11
Proceedings of the 13th European Workshop on Nat-
ural Language Generation, pages 208–211.
Justin Johnson, Bharath Hariharan, Laurens van der
Maaten, Li Fei-Fei, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and Ross
Girshick. 2017.
CLEVR: A Diagnostic Dataset
for Compositional Language and Elementary Visual
Reasoning. In CVPR 2017, pages 1988—-1997.
Matthew Johnson, Katja Hofmann, Tim Hutton, and
David Bignell. 2016. The malmo platform for ar-
tiﬁcial intelligence experimentation.
IJCAI Inter-
national Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
2016-Janua:4246–4247.
Chih-Yao Ma, Jiasen Lu, Zuxuan Wu, Ghassan Al-
Regib, Zsolt Kira, Richard Socher, and Caiming
Xiong. 2019. Self-Monitoring Navigation Agent via
Auxiliary Progress Estimation. ArXiv, pages 1–18.
David Marr. 1982. Vision: A Computational Investi-
gation into the Human Representation and Process-
ing of Visual Information. W.H. Freeman, San Fran-
cisco, USA.
Marvin Minsky and Seymour Papert. 1972. Progress
Report on Artiﬁcial intelligence. Technical report,
MIT Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory, Cambridge,
Mass., USA.
Dipendra Misra, Andrew Bennett, Valts Blukis, Eyvind
Niklasson, Max Shatkhin, and Yoav Artzi. 2018.
Mapping Instructions to Actions in 3D Environ-
ments with Visual Goal Prediction. ArXiv.
Karl Popper. 1934.
Logik der Forschung.
Mohr
Siebeck.
Sebastian Ruder. 2019. Neural Transfer Learning for
Natural Language Processing.
Ph.D. thesis, Na-
tional University of Ireland, Galway.
Manolis Savva, Angel X. Chang, Alexey Dosovitskiy,
Thomas Funkhouser, and Vladlen Koltun. 2017.
MINOS: Multimodal Indoor Simulator for Naviga-
tion in Complex Environments. ArXiv, pages 1–14.
Manolis
Savva,
Abhishek
Kadian,
Oleksandr
Maksymets,
Yili
Zhao,
Erik
Wijmans,
Bha-
vana Jain, Julian Straub, Jia Liu, Vladlen Koltun,
Jitendra Malik, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. 2019.
Habitat: A Platform for Embodied AI Research.
ArXiv.
David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan,
Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez,
Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian
Bolton, Yutian Chen, Timothy Lillicrap, Fan Hui,
Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche, Thore
Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. 2017. Mastering the
game of Go without human knowledge.
Nature,
550(7676):354–359.
Alane Suhr, Mike Lewis, James Yeh, and Yoav Artzi.
2017.
A Corpus of Natural Language for Visual
Reasoning. In Proceedings of the 2017 meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL
2017).
Alane Suhr, Stephanie Zhou, Iris Zhang, Huajun Bai,
and Yoav Artzi. 2018.
A Corpus for Reasoning
About Natural Language Grounded in Photographs.
In Proceedings of NIPS 2018, Montreal, Canada.
Bernard Suits. 1978. The Grasshopper: Games, Life,
and Utopia.
The University of Toronto Press,
Toronto, Canada.
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. 1998. Rein-
forcement Learning. MIT Press, Cambridge, USA.
Jack Urbanek, Angela Fan, Siddharth Karamcheti,
Saachi Jain, Samuel Humeau, Emily Dinan, Tim
Rockt¨aschel, Douwe Kiela, Arthur Szlam, and Ja-
son Weston. 2019. Learning to Speak and Act in a
Fantasy Text Adventure Game. ArXiv.
Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel R. Bow-
man. 2018. A Broad-Coverage Challenge Corpus
for Sentence Understanding through Inference. In
Proceedings of the Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (NAACL).
Ludwig Wittgenstein. 1953/84.
Tractatus Logicus
Philosophicus und Philosophische Untersuchungen,
volume 1 of Werkausgabe. Suhrkamp, Frankfurt am
Main.
Fei Xia, Amir Zamir, Zhi-Yang He, Alexander Sax,
Jitendra Malik, and Silvio Savarese. 2018. Gibson
Env: Real-World Perception for Embodied Agents.
In CVPR 2018.
Takashi Yamauchi, Mikio Nakano, and Kotaro Fu-
nakoshi. 2013. A Robotic Agent in a Virtual En-
vironment that Performs Situated Incremental Un-
derstanding of Navigational Utterances. In SIGdial
2013, August, pages 369–371.
Claudia Yan, Dipendra Misra, Andrew Bennett, Aaron
Walsman, Yonatan Bisk, and Yoav Artzi. 2018.
CHALET : Cornell House Agent Learning Environ-
ment. ArXiv.
Dani Yogatama,
Cyprien de Masson D’Autume,
Jerome Connor, Tomas Kocisky, Mike Chrzanowski,
Lingpeng Kong, Angeliki Lazaridou, Wang Ling,
Lei Yu, Chris Dyer, and Phil Blunsom. 2019. Learn-
ing and Evaluating General Linguistic Intelligence.
ArXiv, pages 1–14.
A
Formalising the Notions
A.1
Tasks
Deﬁnition 1 A
Language
Task
is
a
tuple
(S, A, L, DT ), where:
• S is a (possibly inﬁnite) set of states,
• A is a (possibly inﬁnite) set of actions,
• with either the states in S or the actions in
A (or both) having as part natural language
expressions, and
• L : S →A is a function that maps a state
s ∈S to an action a ∈A, where
• the mapping L conforms to task description
DT .
A.2
Worlds
Deﬁnition 2 A Micro-World or Environment is a
tuple (S, A, E, R, DW ), where function E : S ×
A →S×R maps an action a, taken in state s, to a
state s′ and a reward r, and the mapping conforms
to the world description DW .
A.3
Games
We approach the deﬁnition of a language game via
the more general notion of interaction game:11
Deﬁnition 3 An Interaction Game is a tuple
(P, A, o, T, E, DG), where:
• P = {p1, . . . , pn, N} is the set of n regular
players p, together with one additional player
N (for Nature).
N has a special status in that it does not
have a strategic interest in the outcome of the
game.
• A = {A1, . . . , An, AN} is the set of action
spaces, with one space per player.
Action
types
can
be
complex:
e.g.,
(nav, s),
for “navigation action,
south”,
or (utt, “I don’t know”) for “utterance of
I don’t know”. If deﬁned in the right way
(for example by a recursive grammar), the
set of action types can be inﬁnite. Players
chose actions from their space of available
actions; the resulting action tokens aj are
associated with their originator through a
11Pace Wittgenstein (1953/84), we get to deﬁne what a
game is. Or we could go with Suits (1978), who is happy
to deﬁne games as rule-guided activities of voluntary attempt
to overcome unnecessary obstacles. His concepts of prelu-
sory goal, which can be stated independently of the game
(e.g., in football (soccer), “make the ball be in the opponent
team’s goal”); constitutive rules, which make reaching that
goal more difﬁcult than necessary (e.g., by disallowing to
just grab the ball and carry it to the goal); and lusory atti-
tude, which is to accept the complications posed by the con-
stitutive rules, can inform the design of games that work via
crowdsourcing.
function a : Ai →P, and with a position in
the sequence of actions that have been per-
formed since the beginning of the interaction
through a function t : Ai →N.
• o : Pi × Ai →P(P) (for Pi ∈P, Ai ∈
A) is the observability function that speciﬁes
which types of actions by which player can be
observed by which subset of the players.
In normal cases, one would assume that play-
ers can observe their own actions, and that
Nature observes all actions; but this allows
for the speciﬁcation of deviant cases.
• T : ∅∪(P × A) →P(P) is the turn taking
rule that speciﬁes who can act next, depend-
ing on who did what last. It also speciﬁes
who can start the game.
In a free initiative setting, any player can act
at any time; in a strict turn based setting,
the current player would always be excluded
from the set of next players.
• E : S →V is the evaluation rule that maps a
sequence of action tokens ⟨a1, . . . , am⟩into
an evaluation, where the set of possible eval-
uations V includes at least one positive one
(e.g., success) and one negative one (e.g.,
failure).
The evaluation is made known to the players
when a positive or negative outcome has been
reached. If it is not, or if it is does not contain
outcomes denoted as positive or negative, we
call the resulting structure an interaction set-
ting, rather than an interaction game.
• DG ﬁnally is the game description which
speciﬁes which, if any, otherwise existing ac-
tivity the game is meant to approximate.
The well-known Gridworld game (see e.g. Sut-
ton and Barto (1998)) for example can be repre-
sented in these terms as being an interaction game
with one regular player (the agent) interacting with
Nature, P = {p1, N}. The agent can only per-
form navigation actions: A1 = {(nav, n), . . . },
Nature informs on the resulting available naviga-
tion options, AN = {(inform, (n, w)), . . . }, with
the information that Nature relays coming from a
microworld that simulates the grid and the move-
ment on it.
Gridworld does not involve language, and
hence is not an example of a language interaction
game. As an example of a language interaction
setting that is not a game, we can deﬁne free chat
interaction in our terms as involving two players
and an inert Nature that does not intervene: P =
{p1, p2, N}, A1 = A2 = {(utt, α)}, AN = ∅, T
is a constant function into P (free initiative), all
actions are observed by all, E is a constant func-
tion into {undecided}.
