Title: Generative User-Experience Research for Developing Domain-specific Natural Language Processing Applications
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2306.16143v5
--------------------------------------------------

Generative User-Experience Research for
Developing Domain-specific Natural Language
Processing Applications
Anastasia Zhukova1*, Lukas von Sperl2†,
Christian E. Matt2†,
Bela Gipp1
1Georg-August University of G¨ottingen, Germany.
2Eschbach GmbH, Germany.
*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s):
anastasia.zhukova@uni-goettingen.de;
Contributing authors: lukas.vonsperl@eschbach.com;
christian.matt@eschbach.com; gipp@uni-goettingen.de;
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
User experience (UX) is a part of human-computer interaction (HCI) research
and focuses on increasing intuitiveness, transparency, simplicity, and trust for the
system users. Most UX research for machine learning (ML) or natural language
processing (NLP) focuses on a data-driven methodology. It engages domain users
mainly for usability evaluation. Moreover, more typical UX methods tailor the
systems towards user usability, unlike learning about the user needs first. This
paper proposes a new methodology for integrating generative UX research into
developing domain NLP applications. Generative UX research employs domain
users at the initial stages of prototype development, i.e., ideation and concept
evaluation, and the last stage for evaluating system usefulness and user utility.
The methodology emerged from and is evaluated on a case study about the
full-cycle prototype development of a domain-specific semantic search for daily
operations in the process industry. A key finding of our case study is that involving
domain experts increases their interest and trust in the final NLP application.
The combined UX+NLP research of the proposed method efficiently considers
data- and user-driven opportunities and constraints, which can be crucial for
developing NLP applications.
Keywords: generative research, natural language processing, human-computer
interaction, user experience, domain-specific applications
1
arXiv:2306.16143v5  [cs.CL]  5 Aug 2024
1 Introduction
Natural Language Processing (NLP) has been recently extensively incorporated into
industrial and domain applications. For example, NLP is used for speeding up pro-
cesses, e.g., automation classification of types of customer feedback or filtering out
spam emails, information extraction, e.g., named entity recognition to extract symp-
toms, diagnoses, and treatments from medical records, or auto-completing input forms
with language models. Despite the broad integration, domain-specific NLP applica-
tions may require practicing more user-driven methodologies to address user needs
with these applications.
Often, the data-driven approach falls short in exploring the needs of the domain
users (Yang, 2018). On the one hand, domain users are often integrated into develop-
ment at the late test phase to evaluate the usability of ML/NLP applications (Carney,
2019). Unlike user-driven software development, the development of NLP applica-
tions depends mainly on data availability or experimenting with machine learning
(ML)/NLP trends and thus is a major driver of application development. On the
other hand, the user-driven development of a domain-specific ML/NLP application in
medicine showed that close collaboration with the domain users in the earlier stages
increases the effectiveness of the final product (Yang, 2017). Therefore, integrating
user experience (UX) and human-computer interaction (HCI) research into ML/NLP
research addresses users’ needs, fuses their expertise, and increases intuitiveness, trans-
parency, simplicity, and trust for the system users (Boukhelifa et al, 2018; Paleyes
et al, 2022).
This paper reports on developing a real-world domain NLP application for improv-
ing effectiveness and efficiency in daily plant operations in the process industry. A
major project goal was to achieve high user acceptance for the final application, which
required involving users from the initial design phase. That resulted in the proposed
methodology for integrating generative research into a development cycle of domain
NLP applications by combining data- and user-driven concept creation, prototype
development, and prototype evaluation. Widely applied in design and software devel-
opment, generative UX research is a methodology that aims to learn about domain
users and their stories (Hanington, 2007; Anderson, 2022). To increase the credibility
and utility of the final application, generative research engages the users in the early
stage of development.
The proposed methodology combines data- and user-driven approaches to full-cycle
UX-driven prototype development for NLP applications. Prototyping or developing the
first minimal viable products (MVPs) most benefits from the methodology. The pro-
posed methodology consists of the following phases. First, the methodology describes
generative UX research steps to explore opportunities for ideas and application con-
cepts. This phase relies on exploratory data analysis and contextual inquiries, i.e., user
interviews and on-site observations, as a source of idea generation. Furthermore, the
domain users validate a proposed concept and help define the most important features
for prototype implementation. Second, the prototyping addresses the most important
identified research challenges crucial for usability assessment. Lastly, the prototype
evaluation measures user utility via contextual inquiries before and after interacting
with the prototype.
2
Our team comprises UX researchers, data scientists, software developers, and a
project leader because such a team composition facilitates a deeper understanding of
the capabilities and limitations of the domain NLP application (Dove et al, 2017).
Therefore, the paper may have specific interest for the individual practitioners with
the above-mentioned roles or similar teams. Moreover, practitioners of user-driven
research, e.g., customer research departments and quality assurance officers, could
benefit from the proposed methodology and reported results.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews previous efforts and
UX methodologies in creating ML applications. Section 3 describes a methodology of
generative UX research, in which we propose to optimize user experience in the usually
data-driven development of domain NLP applications. Our case study’s methodology
covers a full-cycle NLP prototype development from generative research for concept
ideation to user-driven prototype evaluation. Section 4 reports a case study about
implementing the proposed methodology to prototype an industrial NLP applica-
tion for the process industry. Section 5 discusses the impact of the generative UX
research on developing our NLP prototype and summarizes the findings into a reusable
methodology for applying generative research to increase the quality of NLP domain
applications.
2 Related Work
Domain-driven design (DDD) is a software development methodology that under-
stands, conceptualizes, and models complex domains into applications closely aligned
with business needs (Evans, 2004). The core of DDD lies in close interaction between
developers, stakeholders, and users to study and implement the business logic of the
underlying processes. According to DDD, the building blocks of software should reflect
the physical world as closely as possible in terms of both functionality and naming
(e.g., (Millett and Tune, 2015; Khononov, 2021; Vernon, 2013; Hippchen et al, 2017,
2019)). The methodology emphasizes understanding a domain by understanding and
utilizing its ubiquitous language by all development participants in all planning, devel-
opment, and refinement stages. Moreover, DDD enables dynamic adjustments of a
domain model to changes in real life through an iterative process of collecting feedback
from domain users.
User experience research has become a requirement for practical and effective soft-
ware development in addition to the domain understanding (Fronemann and Peissner,
2014; Law and van Schaik, 2010). UX puts perspective onto users, thus defining func-
tionality and look of new products or features and ensuring a need in new products
(Goodman et al, 2012). UX research methods analyze how users interact with a system
of interest and explore what users miss or find inconvenient. Quantitative (e.g., ques-
tionnaires) and qualitative (e.g., interviews) methods are used to collect and analyze
user feedback (Rohrer, 2014). Structured interviews with domain-specific probe ques-
tions help UX elicit knowledge about the domain essential for better understanding
system requirements (Hoffman et al, 1995).
3
The rapid growth of ML applications evolved from automating routine processes
(e.g., spam filtering) to user-centered applications (i.e., automatic information extrac-
tion based on a specific user request). Although ML applications put users into the
loop to ensure the usability of the application (Yang, 2017; Dove et al, 2017), most
of the ML user-oriented development is product-focused, i.e., the rather later stages
engage users to evaluate product usability (Visser et al, 2005). UX-driven research
embeds user perspective evenly during the development of ML-powered applications,
i.e., at the stages of requirement understanding (Carmona et al, 2018), data collection
(Park et al, 2021), implementation (Carney, 2020), and evaluation (Cambo and Ger-
gle, 2018). The UX research explores multiple user interaction and engagement aspects
in the development process. UX research increases the effectiveness and communica-
bility of ML applications according to the user’s mental maps (Agner et al, 2020),
creates workflows to enable effective joint creativity process of users and ML models
(Kayacik et al, 2019), ensures the best user experience from the services (Dove et al,
2017), incorporates expert knowledge into improving the ML applications (Amershi
et al, 2014; Dudley and Kristensson, 2018), and engages users into accuracy evaluation
(Cambo and Gergle, 2018; Boukhelifa et al, 2018).
Although users participate in multiple steps of the development process, a deeper
user-centered perspective is required to distill users’ real needs (Dove et al, 2017). Most
UX studies for ML applications follow a one- or two-step product-centered process
(Visser et al, 2005; Yang, 2018): (1) interact with the users to learn about a domain,
(2) perform usability evaluation of an ML application. Very little research integrates
the domain users into the first step to explore their perspectives for idea generation
and concept analysis. Exploring user perspectives would include learning about the
domain users, their roles in this domain, how they use a currently existing system (if
any), and what needs and pain points the users may have. Analysis of this information
could evolve the ML development into a user-centered viewpoint.
Generative research, often applied in design and software development, aims to
learn domain user stories and personal experiences through exploratory, generative,
and evaluative methods (Hanington, 2007). Generative research targets a deeper
understanding of user needs and develops product concepts based on the discovered
user goals, utility, and underlying reasons for their actions (Anderson, 2022). Gen-
erative research is conceptually close to the practical design thinking methodology
often applied in industry Brown et al (2008); Lindberg et al (2011); Dell’Era et al
(2020). Although the ideation process in both methodologies is user-centered, genera-
tive research focuses more on exploring domain users in their environment and deriving
prototype ideas based on immersive domain learning.
3 Methodology
In this section, we propose a methodology of generative UX research for optimizing
a data-driven domain-specific NLP application toward higher user satisfaction. Gen-
erative research encourages user-focused development by getting to know the users
better and explores opportunities for an ML/NLP application by learning users’ sto-
ries, pain points, and needs (Visser et al, 2005; Anderson, 2022). The methodology
4
is grounded on a domain-driven design (DDD) (Evans, 2004) of deep domain under-
standing through close collaboration between developers and domain experts. The
iterative knowledge exchange about domain know-how, problem-solving requirements,
and implementation constraints leads to effective domain modeling, i.e., a concep-
tual representation of the domain at consideration. An effective and knowledge-rich
domain model reflects internal and external business processes most fully. Moreover, a
model should be clear to both domain experts to provide feedback and developers to
act as a foundation for implementation. The generative research puts domain experts
even more into perspective by switching from business processes to domain experts’
workflows and their daily routines.
Although generative research has already been employed in design and software
development, it lacks coverage of full-cycle development of ML/NLP applications. For
example, Anderson (2022) focused on how to learn about user needs and experiences.
Hanington (2007) explored how to create a product concept based on the learned infor-
mation from users and employed the users to evaluate this concept. Similarly, design
thinking proposes a user-centered process of iterative ideating and prototyping (Brown
et al, 2008; Lindberg et al, 2011; Dell’Era et al, 2020). Carney (2019) employed users
to evaluate a prototype before developing a product for the production-ready state.
Moreover, these methodologies do not consider an aspect of data-driven research that
should be considered when creating an NLP application. The proposed methodology
combines these previous efforts on generative research, design thinking, and domain
understanding through exploratory data analysis required in ML/NLP applications.
The methodology for full-cycle prototype development through generative research
combines UX+ML/NLP to (1) explore ideas for an NLP application based on the
stories of domain users, (2) collect feedback on a concept of a proposed NLP solution
to their identified needs or pain points, (3) conduct a user-driven evaluation of a
prototype from perspectives of user experience with a new NLP solution and accuracy
estimation. Figure 1 depicts our proposed methodology to develop and evaluate a
domain-specific NLP application. The methodology consists of three steps:
1. Exploration, i.e., design ideas for a prototype through exploratory data analysis,
interviews, and observation of the domain users in their environment.
2. Prototyping to develop a fully working prototype with back- and front-end.
3. Prototype evaluation, i.e., evaluation of the change in user experience and prototype
accuracy assessment.
Exploring ideas for an NLP prototype through generative UX research aims to
collect the necessary information to understand a domain in general, get familiar with
the domain data, and learn about the user’s needs. We tailor a methodology for concept
creation via generative research proposed by Hanington (2007) to a more specific
use-case of concept ideation for a domain-specific industry application. A proposed
generative research for NLP consists of three steps:
1. Exploratory data analysis: Learn about the domain system and data and create
hypotheses we could probe during user interviews.
5
Fig. 1 A timeline for the proposed methodology of generative UX research for prototyping domain
NLP applications used in our case study. The methodology consists of three stages: exploration
(data exploration and generative research), prototyping (development of the prototype and evaluation
(assessment of accuracy and user utility). The phases show the approximate share of the workload of
the UX and NLP teams. For the majority of the phases, both teams need to be involved. Especially
during the generative research phase, an equal involvement of the two teams enables deep domain
understanding.
2. Contextual inquiries: (1) Conduct user interviews in a focus group to learn about
their daily routines and systematize user interviews to identify patterns, and (2)
Generate ideas to propose a concept for an NLP application or feature.
3. Concept evaluation: Perform moderated concept evaluation of a click-dummy, i.e.,
enable supervised interaction with a “click-dummy” prototype to test the usability
and usefulness of the proposed concept.
The user-driven prototype evaluation aims to assess prototype accuracy and how
user utility changes after interacting with the prototype. Unlike concept evaluation at
the stage of generative UX research, the prototype is evaluated in an open environment.
The combination of the two perspectives (i.e., accuracy and user utility) determines
6
the success level of the prototype in the first step toward a system for shared domain
knowledge. The evaluation consists of three steps (Carney, 2019):
1. Control: Use questionnaires and user interviews to identify an initial state of
user experience, i.e., how users search for the information before independently
interacting with the prototype;
2. Experimental: Provide the prototype to interact with it through provided tasks and
openly throughout daily tasks as they feel fit;
3. Reflection: Reuse the same questionnaire and interview scripts to identify how the
user experience changes and learn if the system works as expected or surprises them
and provides insights.
The methodology combines data- and user-driven approaches that correspondingly
originate from ML/NLP and UX research. A team of UX designers, data scientists,
and developers ensures diverse and effective collaboration for each stage in the pro-
posed pipeline (Yang et al, 2018). Discussing prototype ideas requires a balanced view
of project aspects such as technical capabilities of NLP approaches and models, pos-
sible limitations (e.g., data or computation power limitations), and benefit to domain
users (Yang, 2018; Carmona et al, 2018). The ultimate goal of the methodology is to
increase user involvement and interest in an industrial application and increase system
usefulness (Paleyes et al, 2022; Boukhelifa et al, 2018).
4 Case study
This case study describes implementing a domain-specific NLP application into a digi-
tal tool for capturing shift logs and managing plant operations in the chemical process
industry. Shift logs usually contain problems and solutions arising during produc-
tion, performed tasks, instructions from supervisors, reports about production goals,
changes on production lines, and much more information about daily operations. As
the system installed for a study participant plant had been used for several years, a
large collection of text logs was available as a data source for NLP applications.
We consulted a user subgroup that closely interacts with the system daily to ideate
how an NLP feature or application would look and evaluate which solution would be
most effective for the domain system users. The main challenge was that the way the
users intended to use the NLP application within the overall scope of tasks did not
coincide with the data shape or form. Therefore, the goal of the case study was to
devise a pilot idea based on the user perspective and derive an application that will
assist domain users’ daily tasks based on the data at hand. For this, we employed
and implemented our proposed methodology of generative UX research for full-cycle
prototyping domain NLP applications.
7
4.1 Exploration
4.1.1 Exploratory data analysis
A goal of domain understanding and exploratory data analysis is to learn about the
area for the prototype and investigate data caveats that can either support or limit var-
ious stages of development. Our domain exploration steps included qualitative analysis,
i.e., examining text data and workflows of domain experts, and quantitative analysis,
i.e., statistical analysis of the text records and composition of domain vocabulary.
Qualitative analysis
We implemented an NLP feature for an existing system of electronic shift books, which
is used for logging information about daily operations in the process industry, e.g.,
chemical or pharmaceutical production. Integrating a feature into an existing system
involves conceptualizing difficulties, such as adhering to certain workflows and users’
mind maps (Yang, 2018). We conducted a case study with one plant in the chemical
domain that operates in the German language. A database with the plant’s daily
operations logs is used for data analysis and prototype development.
Records in shift books differ from regular text documents by their semi-structured
nature, i.e., one record in a logging system contains both unstructured text fields and
structured fields, which act as record attributes. Figure 2 depicts a simplified mock-
up of the log structure. The assigned attributes can either complement the text data,
e.g., text can report about an assigned functional location, or duplicate information
in the text, e.g., a functional location is both mentioned in the text and is attached as
an attribute. In some cases, the attributes remain empty, although they are mentioned
in the text.
Fig. 2 A simplified example of a record in a logging system for the daily operations in the process
industry. A record is semi-structured, i.e., it has structured attributes of the records and unstruc-
tured text descriptions. The domain language contains professional terms, abbreviations, shortenings,
chemical formulas, various IDs (e.g., order IDs), and plant machinery and equipment inventory codes.
The example is in English for better readability.
We observed two significant signs of a domain language. First, records contain
quite a diverse writing style. While some records contained complete sentences, some
looked like handwritten notes about statuses and a list of tasks to address later. Sec-
ond, the text contains numeric data, abbreviations, product names, special symbols,
8
Fig. 3 Quantitative analysis of the domain text records of a logging system. Left: A histogram of
the length of text records shows that most records are very short, i.e., smaller than 200 chars. Right:
The domain vocabulary includes words and many codes of functional locations (i.e., machinery) that
act like nouns. Additionally, the vocabulary contains a lot of digit-containing terms that refer to IDs
or numerical values, e.g., measurements.
terminology related to chemistry, and encoded terms that act like words. For example,
Figure 2 shows that the terms “P5002” and “R105.12” act as nouns that correspond-
ingly refer to a pump and a reactor. But outside of this domain, knowing the meaning
of these terms is impossible. Moreover, the abbreviation TSR, which stands for tech-
nical safety review, and “maint,” which stands for “maintenance,” illustrate the short
word forms used in this domain.
Quantitative analysis
We performed quantitative data analysis to explore the qualitative analysis findings
further and compare a general domain with the production-specific domain termi-
nology. The analysis included the following tasks: (a) evaluate the length of the text
records, (b) inspect text composition, and (c) explore the difference between the
domain language and the general domain.
Figure 3 shows a histogram of the text lengths, where most records do not exceed
200 chars, i.e., the size of Twitter posts. A pie chart depicts the proportion of the types
of terms based on the overall number of terms in a dataset for analysis. We observed
a significant impact of the numeric values (10%) and encoded terms of the local
domain (16%), i.e., abbreviations for the functional locations used in the production.
Such terms require local dictionaries to enable decoding the terms for out-of-domain
understanding.
To explore the prevalence of the domain terminology, we visualized terms from the
local domain and general use in a scatter plot. For the local domain, we extracted
1000 most frequent nouns from 20,000 randomly selected text records. For the gen-
eral domain, we used a dump of German Wikipedia 1 and extracted the 1000 most
frequent nouns from the randomly selected 20,000 sentences. We focused on nouns as
1https://github.com/GermanT5/wikipedia2corpus
9
Fig. 4 Analysis of the domain language shows a significant difference to a general domain
(Wikipedia): t-SNE projection of the vectorized domain and general vocabulary clearly shows spots
with no overlap between the most frequent terms. Left plot: 1000 general and domain most frequent
terms. Right plot: 1000 general and 200 domain most frequent terms. In the list of frequent domain
terms, “Product #” is an anonymized version of the real product names.
the most content-bearing terms. Figure 4 depicts a t-SNE projection of all extracted
terms vectorized with fastText word embeddings (Mikolov et al, 2018) and shows that
domain and general terms lean towards different parts of the plot. Moreover, on the
right plot, we see that some frequent terms are unique and do not overlap with the
general domain. For example, the terms “Trennschichtsonde,” “Einstiegsbereit,” and
“Laderohr” do not occur in Wikipedia.
Findings and hypotheses
Our qualitative and quantitative analyses led to the following findings: (1) Text quality
was quite uneven compared to the regular text, i.e., short texts of Twitter size often
have the format of handwritten notes with incomplete sentences. (2) The text data
contained many domain terms, i.e., specific terminology for the process and chemical
industry, domain abbreviations, product names, and codes of functional locations that
act like nouns. We hypothesized that text records with such uneven structure and
writing style most likely have a short lifetime and are mainly used to keep track of the
current processes and production state rather than as a source of knowledge collected
over the long term.
4.1.2 Workshop: Generative research
The objective of generative research is to learn how domain users use the system
daily and elicit ideas for an NLP-based solution to improve the effectiveness of their
existing processes. We performed contextual inquiries, i.e., one-to-one interviews with
representative domain users in their environment (Beyer and Holtzblatt, 1997). We
10
organized a week-long workshop at a plant to ensure an immersed environment for
the research team (Soini et al, 2005; Beyer and Holtzblatt, 1997). The workshop’s goal
was to better understand experts’ processes and workflows through observation and
interaction with them (Evans, 2004). The observed processes were to be organized into
explanatory models to be later distilled into ideas for the prototype implementation.
Contextual inquiries: User interviews
The guided interviews consisted of open-ended questions to learn about the stories of
the interviewees’ daily routines. Interviewees in a focus group have expert knowledge
of the logging system and represent most of the roles interacting with it, thus ensuring
different perspectives of the contextual inquiries. The focus group consisted of seven
persons with multiple roles in production: a plant coordinator, three shift leaders, a
laboratory manager, a production assistant, and a second plant manager.
The interviews followed two objectives: first, to learn how the interviewees use the
logging system during their shifts, and second, to observe if they challenge our hypothe-
ses derived after the exploratory data analysis. The personal interviews contained the
following questions and inquiries:
1. Please tell us about your shift. Which events do you usually have during your
average work day?
2. How do you use the logging system in your daily tasks? On which occasions? What
information would you be interested in there?
3. How would you describe the quality of the logged text? Is there any information
that you may lack?
We summarized the interviews as follows: (1) a timeline of a shift that generalizes
three stories of the shift leaders, (2) an overview of answers to the last two questions
from all interviewees. These forms of summarization followed two different goals. First,
we need to find the patterns in the user stories and identify which challenges or
problems the interviewees mention at each step that we can turn into ideas for an
NLP application. Second, to get an overview of the diverse opinions that can enable
a broader picture for generating ideas.
Figure 5 generalizes an average shift of a shift leader. We identify three phases of a
shift, i.e., beginning, middle, and end of the shift, which determine which tasks a shift
leader needs to perform. For the steps in the phases, we indicated a motivation for a
step and which mentioned aspects we could turn into opportunities. For example, at
the beginning of a shift, a shift leader reads through the logs of the past 24 hours to
collect an overview of what happened when they were not on duty. We learned that
if not enough information was logged, they talked to their colleagues, and the infor-
mation from the oral communication remained unrecorded. We noted that recording
the additional information from communication was an opportunity to improve data
completeness in the logging system. We identified multiple cases throughout a shift,
which indicated that more data could be logged to assist in more informed daily oper-
ations. Additionally, we learned that shift leaders rarely use the system to research
a solution for solving incidents. The most common way to find information of inter-
est is to read through the recent records or use a string-match search to find specific
11
Fig. 5 A generalization of a shift from a shift leader resulting from our interviews that acts as a
domain model for our user study. The context inquiries identified three phases of a shift and the
main tasks and events that may occur during the day. We provide a short description and outline the
challenges of the steps in all phases, which we can turn into opportunities for an NLP application.
keywords, e.g., product names or order IDs. This aspect would be an opportunity to
facilitate knowledge sharing in the logging system.
12
Fig. 6 An overview of the user replies for the questions from two rounds of interviews: to help create
an idea for an NLP prototype and evaluate a proposed prototype concept. From the interviewees
with different roles, we learned about the diversity of use cases of the logging system. Although the
interviewees described a few cases of data incompleteness, they agreed that using the information
from the logged records as shared knowledge can support them daily.
13
Figure 6 overviews how the interviewees use the logging system and their feedback
about the data quality. On the one hand, the interviewees indicated a diverse spec-
trum of information they use from the system, e.g., acquiring more context to the
information from other systems running in the production, staying informed about
deviation cases, reading about results of specific experiments, or learning only about
critical events over the past 30 days. On the other hand, the interviewees agreed on
the problems in the data quality and described it as semi-complete. For example, the
interviewees revealed that they often require oral communication to clarify unclear
logged information. Additionally, they may have needed to refer to external sources of
information to understand the full picture (e.g., emails, work chats, or attached files).
Moreover, the reporting style was person-dependent and sometimes lacked a report-
ing standard for specific events. The diverse writing styles may have depended on the
type of reported event, i.e., reporting about some events required a higher level of
detail, whereas reporting about others required only short messages due to using other
systems for these events.
The interviews confirmed our hypotheses about the high data quality variation
and the logged information’s short lifespan. We learned from the interviewees that
some records contained very detailed information, and some were scarce. We also
learned that depending on the criticality of the events, interest in the records varies
on average between 24 hours and 30 days. If the interviewees needed to find any
information, they applied available filters to the logged records and read through a
filtered list. Occasionally, they use a string-match search to find records containing
specific keywords they have previously seen in the text.
Concept development with a click-dummy prototype
Our goal for the NLP application was to improve the exchange of information, i.e.,
logging and retrieving crucial information. We expected the effective and efficient
information exchange to yield higher production efficiency and shorter plant downtime.
From the interviews, we learned about the common problems of data completeness,
varying text quality, and the short life span of the records. To align with this goal
and address the identified problems, we proposed turning the logging system of daily
operations into a source of shared domain knowledge (Figure 7). As of the current
state, only the most recent logged information is important for the users. We assumed
that an NLP-driven domain knowledge processing system would enable leveraging the
collected knowledge over the long run. Ultimately, users should be encouraged to log
more information and improve their domain expertise by learning from the logged
experience.
As a first stage, we proposed a semantic search to enable efficient and effective
access to the full history of daily operations. Our hypothesis was an efficient search
engine for records should motivate users to log more complete and structured informa-
tion. If the unstructured records were retrieved effectively, the new records with clear
and complete information would have more confidence to be found later on demand.
Figure 7 depicts a goal of improving the data completeness in the system by logging
more information, e.g., from personal oral and written communication. If the dis-
cussions’ key points can be later retrieved on demand, users get more motivated to
14
Fig. 7 The historical data of the plant operation contains a lot of know-how information on daily
operations, but the use of it is quite limited due to the inefficient search. By implementing efficient
semantic search and allowing users to find more complex records, the project aims to motivate the
logging of more detailed descriptions of daily operations, thus improving the completeness and quality
of input data.
transfer this information into the logging system. Representation of the domain lan-
guage was a core challenge for this domain NLP application. For the prototype phase,
we required a feasible solution to design, implement, and test within a short period
but also efficient and robust to perform user studies for the prototype evaluation.
Section 4.2 reports more detail on this consideration.
To evaluate our concept, we performed Wizard of Oz prototyping (Browne, 2019;
Carney, 2019), i.e., developed a “click-dummy” prototype, which mimics the function-
ality of the front-end of a semantic search engine. We adhere to the UX principle of
“fail fast” and collect feedback on the proposed concept in the earliest possible stages
of development.
A click-dummy prototype aims to follow two users’ mental models: the logging
system and commonly used search engines, e.g., Google. Figure 8 shows that the
prototype contains the visual attributes of a search field, a list of the resulting records,
and such additional features as highlighting the matching excerpts and a similarity
score. Moreover, its overall visual design is familiar to the users by resembling the
overall design of the logging system.
Fig. 8 Based on the opportunities learned from the user interviews, we created a “click-dummy”
prototype for a moderated concept evaluation through user interviews (Wizard of Oz prototyping).
We demonstrated this prototype to the interviewees and inquired if and how they would use it.
15
Moderated concept evaluation
We conducted a second round of interviews where we presented the click-dummy
prototype and evaluated our concept via guided interviews and moderated usability
sessions. In the one-to-one interviews, we aimed to learn if providing efficient access
to historical data would allow performing daily tasks in a more informed and effective
manner:
1. Would an effective search engine assist you daily? If yes, how and when? Which
queries would you devise?
2. Imagine that you have a system that could provide effective access to the exper-
tise and shared knowledge about plant operations. Such a system could answer
domain questions, extract information, and identify patterns in the text data.
Which inquiries would you have for this system?
All interviewees agreed that efficient search would enable them to access the pre-
viously logged knowledge, e.g., solutions to problems. Moreover, they highlighted that
a search application would provide additional assistance on a night shift and could
assist in planning product launches. The shared ideas for the queries helped us to cre-
ate lists of queries for the later prototype evaluation (see Section 4.3). Figure 6, the
last column, overviews the interviewees’ replies on how they would use a system of
shared domain knowledge. For example, they highlighted a need to access solutions
to previously occurring problems. Moreover, they are expected to retrieve information
with a deep understanding. For example, for a query “quality state of product A on
Monday,” they would expect to see information about the batch level on that day.
Additionally, they would explore information in an aggregating way, e.g., assemble
problems that occurred to a specific product.
4.2 Prototyping
The exploration phase resulted in a decision to develop a semantic search engine
prototype for documents with uneven text structure and domain-specific language.
The prototype’s main challenge is handling the domain-specific language, including
professional terms, abbreviations, shortenings, chemical formulas, various IDs, and
plant machinery and equipment inventory codes. For the prototype development, we
followed a UX principle “fail fast, fail often” (Dove et al, 2017) and implemented
simpler approaches that require less time and resources.
4.2.1 Planning
MVP requirements for the prototype development
From the exploration phase and workshop, we deduct the following main requirements
for the prototype: The search engine of the prototype shall be designed in a typical IR
process architecture: (1) indexing of text records from a SQL database, (2) retrieving
relevant records to a given query2. The most challenging requirement for the MVP is to
tackle the problem described in the domain-specific language and technical style of the
text records. It should use context expansion (i.e., adding definitions and descriptions
2We use the terms “documents” to refer to the records of the logging system, i.e., short documents.
16
of technical codes to the documents) and encoding documents vector word representa-
tion capable of handling out-of-vocabulary domain words, e.g., fastText. Furthermore,
the MVP is supposed to be seamlessly integrated into the main software application.
Fig. 9 Indexing text data from a SQL database is a process that includes data reading, preprocessing,
data transformation through vectorization of words and documents, and saving the vectors into a
search index.
4.2.2 Development - Backend & Frontend
Indexing
Indexing starts with accessing an SQL database and reading values from string
columns (Figure 9). We concatenate all text fields of each record into one text docu-
ment. Preprocessing performs context expansion to add semantic descriptors to some
domain terminology. We transform documents into multiple vector spaces: (1) vec-
torization into boolean and term frequency-inverse document frequency (TF-IDF)
representations that require full-text collection, (2) per-document vectorization into
semantic representation, which employs word embedding service to represent words
into fastText word vectors and computes TF-IDF weighted-mean word vectors to rep-
resent documents. Finally, we save boolean and semantic document representations
into a search index. Document retrieval uses the same word embedding service and
represents a query as an average of word vectors. First, candidate retrieval retrieves
documents that contain terms to be mandatory present in the documents (depending
on if a query contains terms in quotes). Second, it filters the documents by seman-
tic similarity (Section 4.2.2). Lastly, we rank the top M most semantically similar
documents by combined semantic similarity on the document and term levels.
17
Fig. 10 Record retrieval preprocesses a search query, transforms it into a vector representation,
retrieves documents based on binary retrieval and semantic similarity, and ranks the documents based
on a combined document and term similarity.
Preprocessing
Preprocessing focuses on (1) providing additional context for some domain-specific
terms, i.e., dictionary-based context expansion, and (2) normalizing text for semantic
search that employs static word embeddings, e.g., lowercasing, stopword removal, and
lemmatization.
To enable context expansion, we create a dictionary about functional locations,
i.e., production machinery and equipment installed in a plant. The dictionary contains
information about long IDs, their short equivalents, and descriptions. We created this
dictionary based on a graph structure of the machinery from the logging system.
We use the domain dictionary to extract descriptions of a mentioned machinery,
e.g., in Figure 2, a description of “R105.12” is “reactor.” The dictionary serves to
“translate” machinery codes. Descriptions of the codes are added to the text before
their occurrence. This approach is similar to automatic query expansion when query
formulation is improved with additional information (Carpineto and Romano, 2012).
Such context expansion enables retrieving records by containing either specific codes
of functional locations or their descriptions.
Representation of the domain-specific language
Our semantic search is based on fastText word vectors, i.e., a skip-gram model for
distributed representation on the char n-gram level (Mikolov et al, 2018; Bojanowski
et al, 2017; Grave et al, 2018). Most of the word embedding models, such as word2vec
(Mikolov et al, 2013) and GloVe Pennington et al (2014), contain only vectors for
the words that were in a training corpus. Out-of-vocabulary (OOV) words pose a
big problem when word embeddings are applied to specific domains, e.g., biology or
chemistry (Galea et al, 2018). Some models propose training word embeddings from
18
scratch on a domain-specific corpus (cf. (Efstathiou et al, 2018)) or using subword
information to learn the representation of the words’ parts to be able to represent later
OOV words of this domain (cf. (Zhang et al, 2019)). But we used a pre-trained fastText
model because the vectorization on the n-gram level was sufficient to represent German
compound terms of this domain3. We use the TF-IDF-weighted average of the word
vectors to highlight the impact of the semantically most important tokens. Weighting
word embeddings with IDF has successfully been applied for IR tasks (De Boom et al,
2016; Galke et al, 2017; Schmidt, 2019; Jalilifard et al, 2021; Arroyo-Fern´andez et al,
2019; Agarwal et al, 2019).
We did not use contextualized word embeddings, e.g., language models, because
word representation may suffer from incomplete grammar or syntax of the domain
short texts in our dataset. Therefore, we used simpler static word embeddings, which
can more robustly represent the writing style of hand-written notes and do not require
word sense disambiguation within the same narrow domain. Later prototype improve-
ments will be based on the domain adaptation of the dense passage retrieval based on
sentence transformers (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019; Wang et al, 2022; Guo and Yu,
2022; Thakur et al, 2021; Wang et al, 2021).
Retrieval and ranking
Document retrieval consists of two parts: semantic search for regular words and exact
match for any digit-containing terms (or on demand). While semantic search accommo-
dates synonyms and modification of word forms, exact match enforces specific criteria.
Such an approach defines how specific search results should be. For example, a user
can search for temperature deviation in general or an inventory code of a functional
location.
From the candidate documents, we retrieve documents that are the most semanti-
cally related to a query. Candidate retrieval computes document similarity as cosine
similarity between a vector representation of a query and vector representations of all
candidate documents. A linear search is not time-efficient, but in the current proto-
type phase, higher accuracy of the approach is more important than execution time.
Search in the domain of daily operation is similar to Web search, i.e., only a few of
the most relevant records are important for the users. Therefore, we retain the top
K = 200 most similar documents and proceed with ranking.
Our ranking is based on a harmonic mean of document and term similarities.
Term similarity prioritizes documents containing the query’s terms as-is and ranks
the documents containing synonyms higher than the query’s terms. Term similarity is
computed as a mean of the maximal similarities of the query’s terms to the document’s
terms (Figure 11):
3For example, the vocabulary of a trained fastText model does not contain the word “Temper-
aturschwankungen” (i.e., “temperature fluctuations”). However, a fastText model can still represent this
word so that it is semantically close to the words “Temperatur” and “Schwankungen.” Moreover, a shorten-
ing such as “Temp.Schwank.” will be vectorized and be semantically similar to “Temperaturschwankungen.”
19
Fig. 11 Term-level similarity identifies the most semantically similar terms between a document
and query.
TSj =
X
qt∈QT
max
dt∈Dj cossim(qt, dt)
|QT|
(1)
where QT is query terms, |QT| is a number of query terms, qt is a vector representation
of a query term, D is a document, and dt is a document term. A harmonic mean
balances general semantic relevance on the document level and precise similarity on a
term level that allows synonyms or shortenings of the terms to gain a high rank. If an
exception situation occurs that a query contains only terms for an exact match, then
the documents are ranked by their timestamp.
Fig. 12 User interface of the prototype resembles the proposed concept (Figure 8). The prototype
contains functionality for the relevance feedback for each record but does not contain previously
proposed visual elements that indicate computed relevance. This is made to prevent bias in the user
assessment during user studies.
20
User interface
The user interface of our prototype resembles a click-dummy prototype proposed for
the concept evaluation. Figure 12 depicts an interface of the prototype that contains
the text of the record, enables sorting by relevance and timestamp, and contains
functionality to collect user feedback for the prototype evaluation. Additionally, the
prototype provides a detailed view by clicking on a record of interest. For the first
version of the prototype, we excluded the functionality of highlighting and visualization
of the relevance score to prevent judgment bias during the user-based evaluation of
the prototype accuracy (see Section 4.3.2).
4.3 Evaluation
Our user-driven prototype evaluation aims to assess how users utilize the prototype
in their work routine, i.e., how the effectiveness of their daily tasks changes after
the unmoderated interaction with the prototype, and how accurately the prototype
performs. We recruited a focus group of seventeen domain experts and advanced users
of the logging system from one plant for the prototype evaluation with a diverse
set of roles to ensure opinion variance in the user studies (Table 1). Some study
participants were previously recruited for the exploratory generative UX research (see
Section 4.1.2). The users were asked to perform two types of interaction: (1) freely use
the system as they see fit during their work tasks (user-driven prototype evaluation),
(2) perform a set of tasks to assess the relevance of search results (accuracy evaluation).
Table 1 Demographics of the user study participants for the prototype evaluation. All
participants are domain experts and advanced users of the logging system.
Role
Invited to the
prototype evaluation
Performed relevance
assessment &
Questionnaires
Participated
in interviews
Shift leader
10
7
4
Second plant manager
2
2
1
Production assistant
2
2
1
Production & Maintenance
2
2
1
Laboratory manager
1
1
1
Total
17
14
8
The section is structured as follows. Section 4.3.2 reports the relevance assessment
and evaluation according to the information retrieval (IR) methodology. Section 4.3.1
summarizes questionnaires and user interviews that measure differences in the user
experience before and after interacting with the prototype.
4.3.1 User-driven prototype evaluation
UX evaluation estimated how user utility and effectiveness change before and after
using the prototype, e.g. if users found the information more efficiently and effec-
tively. The users were asked to complete a questionnaire and were interviewed before
the unmoderated interaction with the prototype (i.e., control point). After several
21
Table 2 Summary of the questions from the user interviews before and after using the prototype
about the tool preference to search for the information. Although the interviewees continued
using list view for specific tasks, semantic search became a preferred method of finding
information of interest.
List view
Search functionality
Before prototype
- The search is not efficient
enough
- Got used to the list view (x2)
- Need to perform comparison of
multiple entries and/or specific
fields (x2)
- Don’t know any other way
- The fastest solution
(Keyword search)
- Use a search to filter out a lot of non-
relevant entries
- A habit of googling
- Know terms for searching
- Determine redundancy in the records
- Find solutions
After prototype
- Search for specific information,
e.g., data of old analysis
- Faster for some tasks
(Semantic search)
- Faster and easier, especially when
looking for the older entries
- Easy to use
- Look for specific solutions, problems, or
completed tasks
- Find the results faster (x2)
weeks of free use of the prototype, we repeated the questionnaires and interviews
to reflect on how their pattern of acquiring information has changed. Additionally,
through interviews, we collected free-form feedback on using the prototype and ideas
for improvements from a user perspective. Below, we report quantitative analysis on
the questionnaires and qualitative analysis of the interviews.
Questionnaires: Control point and reflection
The questionnaires aimed to compare two “snapshots” of the user experience before
and after the prototype use. We wanted to see how the study participants obtained
information by using the prototype compared to old methods of the logging system
when only the default search had been available.
Figure 13 reports the aggregated results of the questionnaires. For each question
in Figure 13, the answers are sorted from the worst to the best option. After using
the prototype, we observed a shift in the answers towards higher values for all eight
questions. We summarized the improvements made by the prototype as follows. (Q1)
Before the participants accessed the prototype, they read through a list of logs over the
past 24-72 hours instead of using the simple search functionality. (Q2-Q3) We observed
that the frequency of search functionality also increased, probably due to the speed-up
and better search results of finding answers to their questions. (Q4) The functionality
of the context expansion facilitated more efficient search and, consequently, frequent
searching for information about them. (Q5) The ultimate goal of the project was
to increase the effective lifespan of the logged information (see Figure 7). The chart
depicts that after the introduction of the semantic search, the study participants
showed more interest in the historical data over one month. (Q6) Performing daily
operations became more informed due to the increased number of cases when search
results helped answer the questions. (Q7) The study participants indicated they needed
to rephrase their queries more rarely than before to obtain expected results. (Q8)
22
Fig. 13 Comparison of the user experience in searching for information in the system. The prototype
showed a positive effectiveness and user utility trend using historical data to assist their daily work.
23
Although we saw a marginal increase in the complexity of the search queries, the
quality of the search results improved (see other questions). We expect the numbers
to be more pronounced if operators use semantic search in a production system and
create more semantically complex queries.
User interviews: Control point and reflection
User interviews with open-ended questions helped in reflecting on the developed pro-
totype. We collected feedback from interacting with the prototype and ideas for
improvements in the next version:
1. How was the experience with the semantic search? How helpful was it? Did it
increase your performance?
2. How did you feel about using the prototype? Excited? Curious? Disappointed?
3. Did you search with your search queries? Were there any search queries for which
you would have liked to have found more? Was there a search query for which
you were particularly impressed by the results or for which you found interesting
information?
4. Imagine the prototype is deployed into the productive system. Which functionality
would make a difference in using the semantic search regularly? What could be
improved?
Table 2 reports summaries of the eight interviews and compares finding information
by reading records in a list view to using search functionality, i.e., keyword vs. semantic
search. Before the prototype evaluation, most interviewees preferred using a list view
as it was a fast method that complemented the inefficient old keyword search. Despite
low functionality, the old search was still used to find records by keywords. According
to some interviewees, using any search engine felt natural due to regular interaction
with the Google search engine. After the pilot, on the one hand, a list view was
still preferable for specific tasks, i.e., data comparison. On the other hand, semantic
search enabled more effective and efficient access to historical data. According to some
interviewees, semantic search was a helpful tool to find solutions to similar problems
accounted for in the past.
4.3.2 Accuracy evaluation
The accuracy evaluation focused on the precision-oriented IR evaluation and estimated
the relevance of the N top-ranked results. Although such “shallow” evaluation could
be incomplete, it is consistent if users are interested only in top-ranked documents
in the domain application (Liu and ¨Ozsu, 2009). Therefore, the relevance assessment
enabled the estimation of the prototype’s accuracy for daily use.
Collecting a test dataset
For the user evaluation, we prepared a list of 100 query topics. We obtained ideas for
the query topics during the concept evaluation phase (see Section 4.1.2) and created
the queries based on the plant’s logging system records. By following the methodol-
ogy of Clough and Sanderson (2013), we collected diverse queries, phrases of which
occurred in the system database at least once. The queries differ by length of query
24
Fig. 14 Study participants needed to perform a set of tasks in the prototype. The tasks included
assessing document relevance on two levels: term and phrase match. The difference between the tasks
is in the proximity of the relevant terms in a document.
topics, i.e., a query contains 1-4 search terms. Moreover, the queries contain diverse
domain terms such as machinery IDs, processes, statuses, and repair steps.
Controlled task execution
Each of the fourteen participants received 20 queries for evaluation and needed to
assess the relevance of the search results on two levels: term and phrase (Figure 14).
We distributed a list of query topics among the participants so that at least two
participants evaluated one query topic. The same queries needed to be executed twice
to assess the relevance of each of the 20 top-ranked results on the two levels. For a
term level, a document was to be labeled as relevant if all query terms occurred in a
document as-is or as a synonym independently from their word order or location within
the text. For a phrase level, a document was relevant if a query phrase or its meaning
occurred in close proximity, i.e., in a narrow context. For example, for a query topic
“problem with a pump,” the documents that described a problem without explicitly
mentioning the word “problem,” e.g., “a leakage in a pump,” were to be annotated as
relevant.
We calculated inter-rater agreement between the assessors who had evaluated doc-
ument relevance for the same queries to ensure the experiment’s validity. The assessors
evaluated approximately half of the distributed queries, i.e., 44 queries for the first
task and 16 queries for the second task were assessed at least twice. We calculated
Cohen’s kappa for each task (McHugh, 2012) to measure inter-rater agreement. On
the term level, Table 3 reports κterm = 0.856, a near-perfect agreement between the
study participants. On the phrase level, κphrase = 0.673, i.e., the study participants
reached a substantial agreement. We assume that lower inter-rater agreement on the
phrase-level document relevance depends on two factors: (1) an insufficient number
of assessed queries for the second task yielded less reliable kappa computation, (2)
assessing phrase-level relevance remains a harder task due to ambiguity in the task
25
description, i.e., what is close proximity. For example, a relevant term of a functional
location’s code was at the beginning of a record, whereas the remaining relevant terms
occurred later in the document. Therefore, a setup could be unclear on how to assess.
Table 3 Inter-rater agreement of Cohen’s
kappa for two tasks: term and phrase level
similarity. The level of agreement for both tasks
is substantial.
Document relevance level
# queries
κ
term level
44
.856
phrase level
16
.673
To create a test dataset, we combined the assessors’ relevance votes for the query
topics assessed more than two times. For each query, we took a list of search results.
We summed up votes across assessors and tasks and assigned the results as document
relevance scores. For example, if two assessors indicated that a document was relevant
on both term and phrase levels, then a document got a relevance score of 4.
Computing accuracy metrics
We evaluated the prototype and the baselines against the documents collected during
the expert assessment of the prototype. We acknowledge that such evaluation may
cause certain biases favoring the prototype over baselines. But for the precision eval-
uation of the prototype, we consider such accuracy approximation sufficient to show
how user utility improved by using the prototype. In our evaluation setup of a few
user study participants, A/B testing would have been inappropriate and could have
caused statistically irrelevant results (Gilotte et al, 2018).
After implementing the prototype, we provided two baselines to evaluate how user
utility changed: a keyword search (i.e., exact term match) and BM25. The keyword
search is a default SQL-based search from the logging system with which the domain
users are familiar. BM25 represents a standard baseline used in IR. We implemented
a more flexible version of the keyword search for the experiments. A document was
retrieved if at least one term from a query was found. The documents were ranked by
the decreasing number of overlapping terms and then by a timestamp of the records.
For BM25, we normalized German text records and accommodated local domain setup
with lemmatizing and removing stopwords. We retrieved documents if cosine similarity
was higher than 0.15 and ranked them using it and a document’s timestamp. We
implemented an optional context expansion in both baselines to evaluate its impact
on handling the domain-specific language (see Section 4.2.2).
We evaluated the accuracy of the prototype at top N records with precision-
oriented metrics, i.e., precision P@N, and metrics for ranking quality, i.e., mean
average precision mAP@N (Liu and ¨Ozsu, 2009), mean reciprocal rank MRR (Radev
et al, 2002) and normalized discounted cumulative gain nDCG@N (J¨arvelin and
Kek¨al¨ainen, 2002). The metrics were calculated for the top 5 and 20 records in our
experiments. The combined relevance scores in the test dataset were used to compute
nDCG@N.
26
Table 4 Results of the relevance assessment. The proposed prototype of semantic search
significantly outperforms all baselines.
Search
method
Context
expans.
Avg. #
retr.
docs
MRR
P @5
mAP
@5
nDCG
@5
P @20
mAP
@20
nDCG
@20
keyword
search
-
3300
.153
.068
.125
.076
.063
.112
.096
+
5944
.132
.180
.077
.152
.101
.066
.100
BM25
-
736
.582
.294
.548
.322
.178
.479
.291
+
657
.572
.302
.523
.337
.182
.459
.291
prototype:
semantic
search
+
90
.888
.749
.880
.725
.668
.805
.772
Table 4 reports the proposed prototype’s evaluation results and baselines. Our
prototype outperformed all baselines, but even BM25 showed significant performance
improvement compared to the original search method in the logging system. Compared
to the keyword search, BM25 showed 3-4 times higher values in all metrics, whereas
the semantic search improved evaluation by 5-10 times.
Using context expansion improved precision P@5 and P@20 of both baselines.
Figure 15 depicts the influence of context expansion. The ranking values measured
by MRR, mAP@5, and mAP@20 that ignore the annotated relevance score of
the documents have slightly dropped. On the contrary, nDCG@5 and nDCG@20
have increased. The results show that context expansion assisted in retrieving more
candidate documents and ranking relevant documents higher.
Fig. 15 An example of the positive influence of context expansion on all search methods in the
domain language of daily operations in the process industry.
5 Discussion
The paper reports a case study for which we devised and implemented a method-
ology of making generative UX research a part of a pipeline for prototyping NLP
applications. The case study showed that learning directly from users or target audi-
ences enabled the identification of their problems and needs, which consequently led to
effective and efficient prototyping with positive user feedback in the evaluation phase.
Therefore, instead of evaluating hypothetical ideas for an NLP application, the con-
cept generation phase addressed these specific needs in a problem-solving way. Our
27
case study took approximately 30 weeks to perform a full cycle to develop and collect
extensive feedback on the MVP (4 weeks for exploration, 16 weeks for prototyping,
and 10 weeks for evaluation). This period is rather short in terms of full-scale project
development but yields better products tailored to the needs of domain experts.
We expect the proposed methodology of combining UX and NLP methodologies to
positively impact domain-specific NLP application development. Understanding and
evaluating data quality and availability must come in a tight combination with under-
standing the domain users and their stories. A timeline depicted in Figure 1 can serve
as a step-by-step guideline for the generative-driven prototyping of NLP domain appli-
cations. The pipeline describes specific tasks for UX researchers, data scientists, and
project managers at each stage. Combining the steps in each type of UX research and
the questions from the user studies (Section 4.1 and Section 4.3) expands the guideline
and equips the UX practitioners with applied examples. Section 4.1.1, Section 4.1.2,
and Section 4.2 exemplify data scientists how we performed exploratory data analysis,
assessed and solved the challenges for a domain NLP prototype application.
We encourage NLP and UX researchers and practitioners to join in evaluating this
methodology and reporting their results. Currently, we are testing the methodology in
a second case study in which we prototype an NLP application for supporting domain
users in logging information. There, we observe and explore how the domain users log
information, which steps are hard for them, and which information they enter wrongly
or incompletely. Although it is too early to present the results of the case study in
full detail, they support our conclusion that using generative UX research for NLP
applications strongly improves user acceptance.
Impact of generative UX research on the domain NLP applications
Generative UX research focuses on contextual inquiries to learn about the daily rou-
tines of domain users and how they use an existing product (if any). Observing
and exploring which challenges, concerns, and needs they have enables opportunities
for a new NLP application/feature. To facilitate immersed domain understanding,
contextual inquiries include interviews with the domain users and observations in
their environment. Generative research engages domain users from the first step of
the development process and targets the identified pain points. This problem-solving
methodology increases interest in the final product and trust in the final application.
In our case study, we applied generative UX research to learn how the interviewees
use the logging system in their daily operations in the process industry domain. The
interviews highlighted two problems: (1) the logged text information has an uneven
reporting style and suffers from partial incompleteness, and (2) users mostly used only
recently logged information and used inefficient ways to access historical data. The
identified problems establish a ground for concept generation.
Exploratory data analysis is essential for ML/NLP applications to understand data
availability and quality. In generative research, the preliminary data analysis enables
learning about the data constraints that must be considered during the concept gener-
ation phase. Moreover, the data analysis facilitates forming hypotheses about patterns
of special usage of a domain system, which can be later tested during user interviews.
Our exploratory data analysis revealed multiple challenges of the domain text data:
28
(1) semi-structured data records included structured attributes and unstructured text
fields, (2) writing style in the records varied from large structured reports to notes
quickly taken down with incomplete grammar and syntax, (3) domain language con-
tained rare and domain special terminology, e.g., abbreviations, term shortenings,
chemical formulas, numerical values, and codes of the machinery that act as domain
terms.
Generated ideas and concepts from UX research help define the scale of a project.
Selecting small ideas for a prototype phase speeds up evaluating the credibility of a
bigger concept. Based on our UX research, we created an idea for a big-scale system for
domain knowledge sharing, e.g., a solution recommendation system that is based on
the experience of plant operation, collected and extracted from the historical records
(see Figure 7). We selected a small part from this idea for prototyping and proposed
a semantic search to provide effective access to the historical data. The prototype
provided us with quick feedback from the domain users and suggested steps for further
development.
Prototyping for UX+NLP research: quick and effective
Prototyping for NLP applications should aim at the UX principle “fail fast, fail often.”
It means that a primary goal is to evaluate prototype credibility, which leads to a
prototype containing only basic or simplified functionality sufficient for estimating the
user utility. Moreover, industrial or domain NLP applications may not contain top-
tier research because real-world applications need to deal with more constraints than
academic research. Simpler methods do not always mean less effective but more robust
and suitable to a specific domain or low-resource language. In our case study, we used a
combination of two solutions to handle the domain-specific language in the prototype:
(1) fastText word embeddings that reliably represent domain compound German terms
and (2) context expansion that adds descriptions to the mentioned machinery codes.
Although these solutions are not from the cutting-edge research of language models
and their domain adaptation, the prototype enabled reliable evaluation of the user
utility and usefulness of the proposed NLP application.
Prototype evaluation: effectiveness of the daily task completion
Prototype usefulness and user satisfaction in domain-specific NLP applications are
often bound to the personal effectiveness of completing the tasks for which the pro-
totype was intended. Depending on the application, effectiveness can be replaced or
extended with efficiency. Since the effectiveness of completing tasks and user utility
often depend on the accuracy of an NLP application, the evaluation needs to address
a combination of prototype accuracy evaluation when the system is in use and user
satisfaction in assisting in their tasks. Quantitative and qualitative analysis of accu-
racy metrics, questionnaires, and interviews can yield the most complete arguments
to decide about the prototype’s success or failure and points for its improvement.
In our case study, user utility in the process industry depends on the effective and
efficient acting on occurring problems, which yields safety and quality of the techno-
logical processes. The evaluation methodology employs domain assessors to estimate
the accuracy of the prototype and its impact on their daily routine. First, we perform
29
a precision-oriented evaluation of the prototype and ask domain users from a focus
group to assess the top search results of a given list of queries. Second, we analyze user
utility with questionnaires and personal interviews. Analysis of the questionnaire dif-
ference before and after the prototype evaluation showed a positive trend in improving
user experience working with historical logged data.
6 Conclusion
The paper reports on a case study of developing a domain-specific NLP application
prototype in the process industry. To develop a prototype, we proposed a methodology
for integrating generative UX research into the data-driven methodology of developing
NLP applications by reinforcing domain understanding through data analysis and user
interviews. Generative UX research focuses on domain users and employs them at the
initial stages of prototype development, i.e., ideation and concept evaluation and the
last stage of the prototype evaluation. The core idea of generative research is that
involving domain users increases user utility, interest, and trust in the final application
since it targets their needs.
The case study reports a full prototype development cycle of a domain-specific NLP
application for daily operations in the process industry. In the generative UX research,
we learn about a complicated domain of the German language, varying writing styles,
partial data incompleteness in the logging system, and the short lifetime of the text
records. We propose a semantic search to enable effective access to the historical
knowledge of plant operations and motivate users to improve data completeness by
logging more information. The user-oriented prototype evaluation focuses on assessing
the accuracy and user utility when interacting with the prototype with a set of provided
tasks or openly as they see fit. The prototype evaluation demonstrates more informed,
effective, and efficient task completion in daily operations.
The paper shows that generative research for NLP application development com-
bines the strengths of both UX and NLP research. The methodology is a promising
direction for broad use in the development of NLP applications. The UX+NLP com-
bination reveals opportunities and constraints of the data- and user-driven nature
through exploratory data analysis and contextual inquiries, which enables a more
informed and effective development process. We encourage UX+NLP teams to work
in close collaboration to test the proposed methodology and report their results.
Acknowledgements
This project is supported by the ZIM program (Zentrales Innovationsprogramm Mit-
telstand) run by the German Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Action
(BMWK) on the basis of a decision by the German Bundestag.
References
Agarwal L, Thakral K, Bhatt G, et al (2019) Authorship clustering using tf-idf
weighted word-embeddings. In: Proceedings of the 11th Annual Meeting of the
30
Forum for Information Retrieval Evaluation. Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, FIRE ’19, p 24–29, https://doi.org/10.1145/3368567.3368572,
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3368567.3368572
Agner L, Necyk B, Renzi A (2020) Recommendation systems and machine learning:
Mapping the user experience. In: Design, User Experience, and Usability. Design
for Contemporary Interactive Environments: 9th International Conference, DUXU
2020, Held as Part of the 22nd HCI International Conference, HCII 2020, Copen-
hagen, Denmark, July 19–24, 2020, Proceedings, Part II. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
Heidelberg, p 3–17, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49760-6 1, URL https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-49760-6 1
Amershi S, Cakmak M, Knox WB, et al (2014) Power to the people: The role
of humans in interactive machine learning. AI Magazine 35(4):105–120. https:
//doi.org/10.1609/aimag.v35i4.2513, URL https://ojs.aaai.org/aimagazine/index.
php/aimagazine/article/view/2513
Anderson N (2022) Generative research: A complete guide to running a successful
study. URL https://dscout.com/people-nerds/generative-research-complete-guide
Arroyo-Fern´andez I, M´endez-Cruz CF, Sierra G, et al (2019) Unsupervised sentence
representations as word information series: Revisiting tf–idf. Computer Speech
& Language 56:107–129. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csl.2019.01.005,
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0885230817302887
Beyer H, Holtzblatt K (1997) Contextual Design: Defining Customer-Centered Sys-
tems. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA
Bojanowski P, Grave E, Joulin A, et al (2017) Enriching word vectors with sub-
word information. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics
5:135–146. https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl a 00051, URL https://aclanthology.org/
Q17-1010
Boukhelifa N, Bezerianos A, Lutton E (2018) Evaluation of Interactive Machine
Learning Systems. In: Zhou J, Chen F (eds) Human and Machine LearningVisi-
ble, Explainable, Trustworthy and Transparent. Springer, p 341–360, URL https:
//hal.inria.fr/hal-01845018/file/evaluation-interactive-machine.pdf
Brown T, et al (2008) Design thinking. Harvard business review 86(6):84
Browne JT (2019) Wizard of oz prototyping for machine learning experiences. In:
Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Comput-
ing Systems. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, CHI
EA ’19, p 1–6, https://doi.org/10.1145/3290607.3312877, URL https://doi.org/10.
1145/3290607.3312877
31
Cambo SA, Gergle D (2018) User-Centred Evaluation for Machine Learning,
Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 315–339. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-319-90403-0 16, URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-90403-0 16
Carmona K, Finley E, Li M (2018) The relationship between user experience and
machine learning. Available at SSRN 3173932 https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/
10.2139/ssrn.3173932, URL https://ssrn.com/abstract=3173932
Carney
M
(2019)
User
Research
for
Machine
Learning
Systems:
A
Case
Study
Walkthrough
—
dscout.com.
https://dscout.com/people-nerds/
user-research-for-machine-learning
Carney M (2020) What is Machine Learning + UX? URL https://medium.com/
ml-ux/what-is-ml-ux-71d5e6d6ce9
Carpineto C, Romano G (2012) A survey of automatic query expansion in information
retrieval. ACM Comput Surv 44(1). https://doi.org/10.1145/2071389.2071390, URL
https://doi.org/10.1145/2071389.2071390
Clough P, Sanderson M (2013) Evaluating the performance of information retrieval
systems using test collections. Information Research 18(2). URL https://eprints.
whiterose.ac.uk/78886/, © Year The Author(s). This is an Open Access arti-
cle distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Licence
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0), which permits unrestricted use, dis-
tribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly
cited.
De Boom C, Van Canneyt S, Demeester T, et al (2016) Representation learning for
very short texts using weighted word embedding aggregation. Pattern Recogni-
tion Letters 80:150–156. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patrec.2016.06.
012, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167865516301362
Dell’Era
C,
Magistretti
S,
Cautela
C,
et
al
(2020)
Four
kinds
of
design
thinking:
From
ideating
to
making,
engaging,
and
criticizing.
Creativ-
ity and Innovation Management 29(2):324–344. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/
10.1111/caim.12353, URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/caim.
12353, https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/caim.12353
Dove G, Halskov K, Forlizzi J, et al (2017) Ux design innovation: Challenges for
working with machine learning as a design material. In: Proceedings of the 2017 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, CHI ’17, p 278–288, https://doi.org/10.1145/
3025453.3025739, URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025739
Dudley JJ, Kristensson PO (2018) A review of user interface design for interactive
machine learning. ACM Trans Interact Intell Syst 8(2). https://doi.org/10.1145/
3185517, URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3185517
32
Efstathiou V, Chatzilenas C, Spinellis D (2018) Word embeddings for the software
engineering domain. In: Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Mining
Software Repositories. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
MSR ’18, p 38–41, https://doi.org/10.1145/3196398.3196448, URL https://doi.org/
10.1145/3196398.3196448
Evans E (2004) Domain-driven design: tackling complexity in the heart of software.
Addison-Wesley, Boston
Fronemann N, Peissner M (2014) User experience concept exploration: User needs
as a source for innovation. In: Proceedings of the 8th Nordic Conference on
Human-Computer Interaction: Fun, Fast, Foundational. Association for Comput-
ing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, NordiCHI ’14, p 727–736, https://doi.org/10.
1145/2639189.2641203, URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2639189.2641203
Galea D, Laponogov I, Veselkov K (2018) Sub-word information in pre-trained
biomedical word representations: evaluation and hyper-parameter optimization. In:
Proceedings of the BioNLP 2018 workshop. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, Melbourne, Australia, pp 56–66, https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W18-2307, URL
https://aclanthology.org/W18-2307
Galke L, Saleh A, Scherp A (2017) Word embeddings for practical information
retrieval. In: Eibl M, Gaedke M (eds) INFORMATIK 2017. Gesellschaft f¨ur
Informatik, Bonn, pp 2155–2167, https://doi.org/10.18420/in2017 215
Gilotte A, Calauz`enes C, Nedelec T, et al (2018) Offline a/b testing for recommender
systems. In: Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM International Conference on Web
Search and Data Mining. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, WSDM ’18, p 198–206, https://doi.org/10.1145/3159652.3159687, URL https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3159652.3159687
Goodman E, Kuniavsky M, Moed A (2012) Observing the User Experience (Second
Edition), second edition edn. Morgan Kaufmann, Boston, https://doi.org/https:
//doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-384869-7.18001-5, URL https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/B9780123848697180015
Grave E, Bojanowski P, Gupta P, et al (2018) Learning word vectors for 157 languages.
In: Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC 2018). European Language Resources Association (ELRA),
Miyazaki, Japan, URL https://aclanthology.org/L18-1550
Guo X, Yu H (2022) On the domain adaptation and generalization of pretrained
language models: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:221103154
Hanington BM (2007) Generative research in design education. International Associ-
ation of Societies of Design Research2007: Emerging Trends in Design Research pp
12–15
33
Hippchen B, Giessler P, Steinegger R, et al (2017) Designing microservice-based
applications by using a domain-driven design approach. International Journal on
Advances in Software 10(3 & 4):432–445
Hippchen B, Schneider M, Giessler P, et al (2019) Systematic application of domain-
driven design for a business-driven microservice architecture. International Journal
on Advances in Software 12(3 & 4):343–355
Hoffman RR, Shadbolt NR, Burton A, et al (1995) Eliciting knowledge from
experts: A methodological analysis. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes 62(2):129–158. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1006/obhd.1995.1039,
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0749597885710394
Jalilifard A, Carid´a VF, Mansano AF, et al (2021) Semantic sensitive tf-idf to deter-
mine word relevance in documents. In: Thampi SM, Gelenbe E, Atiquzzaman
M, et al (eds) Advances in Computing and Network Communications. Springer
Singapore, Singapore, pp 327–337
J¨arvelin K, Kek¨al¨ainen J (2002) Cumulated gain-based evaluation of ir techniques.
ACM Trans Inf Syst 20(4):422–446. https://doi.org/10.1145/582415.582418, URL
https://doi.org/10.1145/582415.582418
Kayacik C, Chen S, Noerly S, et al (2019) Identifying the intersections: User experi-
ence + research scientist collaboration in a generative machine learning interface.
In: Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, CHI
EA ’19, p 1–8, https://doi.org/10.1145/3290607.3299059, URL https://doi.org/10.
1145/3290607.3299059
Khononov V (2021) Learning Domain-driven Design: Aligning Software Architecture
and Business Strategy. O’Reilly Media, Incorporated
Law ELC, van Schaik P (2010) Modelling user experience – An agenda for
research and practice. Interacting with Computers 22(5):313–322. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.intcom.2010.04.006, URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intcom.2010.04.006,
https://academic.oup.com/iwc/article-pdf/22/5/313/1988154/iwc22-0313.pdf
Lindberg T, Meinel C, Wagner R (2011) Design Thinking: A Fruitful Concept
for IT Development?, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp 3–
18. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-13757-0 1, URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-642-13757-0 1
Liu L, ¨Ozsu MT (eds) (2009) Encyclopedia of Database Systems. Springer Reference,
Springer, New York, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-39940-9
McHugh ML (2012) Interrater reliability: the kappa statistic. Biochemia medica
22(3):276–282
34
Mikolov T, Sutskever I, Chen K, et al (2013) Distributed representations of words and
phrases and their compositionality. In: Proceedings of the 26th International Con-
ference on Neural Information Processing Systems - Volume 2. Curran Associates
Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA, NIPS’13, p 3111–3119
Mikolov T, Grave E, Bojanowski P, et al (2018) Advances in pre-training distributed
word representations. In: Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018). European Language Resources
Association (ELRA), Miyazaki, Japan, URL https://aclanthology.org/L18-1008
Millett S, Tune N (2015) Patterns, Principles, and Practices of Domain-Driven Design.
Wiley
Paleyes A, Urma RG, Lawrence ND (2022) Challenges in deploying machine learn-
ing: A survey of case studies. ACM Comput Surv 55(6). https://doi.org/10.1145/
3533378, URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3533378
Park S, Wang AY, Kawas B, et al (2021) Facilitating Knowledge Sharing from Domain
Experts to Data Scientists for Building NLP Models, Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, p 585–596. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3397481.
3450637
Pennington J, Socher R, Manning C (2014) GloVe: Global vectors for word rep-
resentation. In: Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP). Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, Doha, Qatar, pp 1532–1543, https://doi.org/10.3115/v1/D14-1162, URL https:
//aclanthology.org/D14-1162
Radev DR, Qi H, Wu H, et al (2002) Evaluating web-based question answering sys-
tems. In: Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC’02). European Language Resources Association (ELRA),
Las Palmas, Canary Islands - Spain, URL http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/
lrec2002/pdf/301.pdf
Reimers N, Gurevych I (2019) Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using Siamese
BERT-networks. In: Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP). Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, Hong Kong, China, pp 3982–3992, https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D19-1410,
URL https://aclanthology.org/D19-1410
Rohrer C (2014) When to use which user-experience research methods. Nielsen
Norman Group 12:21
Schmidt CW (2019) Improving a tf-idf weighted document vector embedding. 1902.
09875
35
Soini K, Pirinen A, Suominen J (2005) Workshops-collaborative arena for generative
research. In: Proceedings of DPPI. Eindhoven University of Technology
Thakur N, Reimers N, R¨uckl´e A, et al (2021) Beir: A heterogenous benchmark for
zero-shot evaluation of information retrieval models. In: Thirty-fifth Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021) - Datasets and Benchmarks
Track (Round 2), URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.08663
Vernon V (2013) Implementing Domain-Driven Design. Addison-Wesley
Visser
FS,
Stappers
PJ,
van
der
Lugt
R,
et
al
(2005)
Contextmapping:
experiences
from
practice.
CoDesign
1(2):119–149.
https://doi.org/10.1080/
15710880500135987, URL https://doi.org/10.1080/15710880500135987
Wang K, Reimers N, Gurevych I (2021) TSDAE: Using transformer-based sequential
denoising auto-encoderfor unsupervised sentence embedding learning. In: Findings
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2021. Association for
Computational Linguistics, Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, pp 671–688, https://
doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.findings-emnlp.59, URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.
findings-emnlp.59
Wang K, Thakur N, Reimers N, et al (2022) GPL: Generative pseudo labeling for
unsupervised domain adaptation of dense retrieval. In: Proceedings of the 2022
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, Seattle, United States, pp 2345–2360, https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2022.
naacl-main.168, URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.naacl-main.168
Yang Q (2017) The role of design in creating machine-learning-enhanced user
experience. In: 2017 AAAI spring symposium series
Yang Q (2018) Machine learning as a ux design material: how can we imagine beyond
automation, recommenders, and reminders? In: AAAI Spring Symposia, pp 2–6
Yang Q, Scuito A, Zimmerman J, et al (2018) Investigating how experienced ux
designers effectively work with machine learning. In: Proceedings of the 2018 Design-
ing Interactive Systems Conference. Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, DIS ’18, p 585–596, https://doi.org/10.1145/3196709.3196730,
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3196709.3196730
Zhang Y, Chen Q, Yang Z, et al (2019) Biowordvec, improving biomedical word embed-
dings with subword information and mesh. Scientific Data 6(1):52. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41597-019-0055-0, URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-019-0055-0
36
