Title: Brand Celebrity Matching Model Based on Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2208.08887v1
--------------------------------------------------

BRAND CELEBRITY MATCHING MODEL BASED ON NATURAL
LANGUAGE PROCESSING
Heming Yang1,2 , Ke Yang 3, Erhan Zhang 4
1College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, China
2School of Media and Communication, Shenzhen University, China
3College of Management, Shenzhen University, China
4School of Software & Microelectronics, Peking University, China
{yangheming2017, yangke2018} @email.szu.edu.cn
zhangeh-ss@stu.pku.edu.cn
Abstract
Celebrity Endorsement is one of the most
signiﬁcant strategies in brand communication.
Nowadays, more and more companies try to
build a vivid characteristic for themselves.
Therefore, their brand identity communica-
tions should accord with some characteristics
as human and regulations. However, the pre-
vious works mostly stop by assumptions, in-
stead of proposing a speciﬁc way to perform
matching between brands and celebrities. In
this paper, we propose a brand celebrity match-
ing model (BCM) based on Natural Language
Processing (NLP) techniques. Given a brand
and a celebrity, we ﬁrstly obtain some descrip-
tive documents of them from the Internet, then
summarize these documents, and ﬁnally cal-
culate a matching degree between the brand
and the celebrity to determine whether they are
matched. According to the experimental result,
our proposed model outperforms the best base-
lines with a 0.362 F1 score and 6.3% of accu-
racy, which indicates the effectiveness and ap-
plication value of our model in the real-world
scene. What’s more, to our best knowledge,
the proposed BCM model is the ﬁrst work
on using NLP to solve endorsement issue, so
it can provide some novel research ideas and
methodologies for the following works.
Index Term:
Celebrity Endorsement; Text
Summarization; Matching Model
1
Introduction
With the development of the Internet and the trans-
formation of traditional business models, brand
building and communication have met new de-
veloping opportunities. The platforms of we me-
dia provide rich resources and web trafﬁc for in-
creasing brand exposure. Aside from media, there
was a spectacle of ‘Good writings make people
copy them’ in ancient China, which means that
something is popular and widely purchased by peo-
ple. Today, this phenomenon appears and spreads
rapidly in the form of news. At the beginning of
2021, the e-commerce live streaming presided over
by Dilraba (a popular actress in China) achieved
sales of more than 10 million in ten minutes. More
than this, HUAWEI honor 9 endorsed by Hugo (a
veteran actor in China) sold 1 million units within
28 days after the press conference. All these reveal
the huge dividends brought by the rise of the fan
economy and celebrity effect. More and more com-
panies begin to pay attention to inviting celebrities
with high trafﬁc and high brand ﬁt to endorse their
products as well as create a brand image with per-
sonality characteristics. It makes us think about
the relationship between brand image and celebrity
characteristics, to make effective brand construc-
tion and improve product sales.
Early studies found that the endorsement effect
will change with the product. For example, the
difference of endorsement in the research was ex-
plained by using the concept of ‘ﬁtness’ . The
matching degree between celebrities and brands de-
pends on the ﬁtness between brands and celebrity
images perceived by consumers. This study also
shows that when celebrities have a high consistency
image with products, they can improve the relia-
bility of advertisers and celebrities (1) Itpointed
out that brands and celebrities are nodes that are
connected through advertising. When the ﬁtness
is high, it is helpful to establish and recall this
connection; Instead, if there is no obvious speciﬁc
connection between celebrities and brands, there
will be a ‘vampire effect’, that is, consumers only
arXiv:2208.08887v1  [cs.CL]  18 Aug 2022
remember celebrities, not the products or services
they endorse, and celebrities will suck up the vi-
tality of the products (2). However, most of the
previous studies stayed at the level of conjecture
and demonstration, it is no in-depth exploration
of how to match celebrities with brands. Only a
small sample composing of 100 participants was
used and limited to a speciﬁc brand. The study
showed that successful brand promotion needs to
keep the uniformity between brand personality and
celebrity, but relevant mechanisms and methods
on how to match the two have not been proposed
(3). Based on previous studies and existing prob-
lems, we further explored the selection and strategy
of celebrities by using Big Data and matching al-
gorithms to better apply celebrity endorsement to
brand communication.
Because of long texts and noise, we proposed a
text summary module to obtain descriptive texts.
Given these, we further proposed a matching
module to calculate the matching degree between
brands and celebrities, and then give a reason-
able celebrity endorsement scheme. A substan-
tial amount of research in celebrity endorsement
used questionnaires to collect data related to artiﬁ-
cial characteristics, such as brand consistency and
celebrity consistency. For example, 7-point seman-
tic difference scales were used to measure the con-
sistency among consumers, celebrities, and brands
(44). When studying the inﬂuence of celebrity con-
sistency preference on voting intention, in addition
to displaying the webpages of celebrities who sup-
port politicians on Facebook, the participants were
also required to answer the consistency preference
of celebrities and politicians with a 7-point seman-
tic difference scale (5). Based on NLP technology,
we creatively proposed an algorithm for analyzing
descriptive texts. At the same time, considering
the limitations of the questionnaire, we use the
multi-dimensional experimental method to analyze
experimental results. The BCM model in this pa-
per exceeded all the baseline models and proved
its effectiveness, which can provide some novel
research ideas and methodologies for the following
works.
First, we introduced the research background,
theoretical and practical signiﬁcance of matching
celebrities and brands. Based on this topic, we
investigated some related work including text sum-
mary algorithm, word vector model, and matching
algorithm, and analyzes the characteristics of these
algorithms. Then, we proposed the BCM algorithm
based on NLP and collected experimental data to
verify the effectiveness of the algorithm. In the end,
we brieﬂy summarized the work of this paper and
looked forward to furthering research in the future.
The structure of the paper is as follows. The ﬁrst
Section mainly introduces the related work in the
ﬁelds of text summarization algorithm, word vector
model, and matching algorithm; the next Section is
the structure and principle of the BCM mode; para-
graph 3 carries out the experiment and introduces
the experimental dataset, experimental setting, and
experimental result; The last Section summarizes
the main work of this paper and prospects the work
in the future.
2
RELATED WORKS
2.1
Text Summary
Text summary algorithms can be roughly divided
into two types: Extractive Summarization and Ab-
stractive Summarization. By calculating the im-
portance of words or sentences in the text, the ex-
tracted text summarization algorithm selects a se-
ries of or the most important words and sentences
to form the text summary. As early as 1958, Luhn
(6) proposed an extraction text summarization al-
gorithm. Firstly, after removing the meaningless
stop word, calculate the word frequency of each
word as the importance of the word, and then select
the ﬁrst four sentences containing the most high-
frequency words as the abstract of an academic
paper or magazine article. BLEI (7) et al. Pro-
posed a late Dirichlet allocation (LDA) document
topic generation model composed of a three-layer
Bayesian probability model, calculated the topic
probability distribution of the document and its sen-
tences, and selected the most consistent sentences
as the summary of the document. Cheng (8) et
al. Proposed a data-driven method, which uses a
neural network and attention mechanism to extract
abstracts based on sentence extraction or word ex-
traction. The experiments of Cheng (8) et al. Show
that sentence-based extraction is better than word-
based extraction. In recent years, the emergence
of BERT (9) has set off an upsurge of pre-training
models in the ﬁeld of natural language processing.
Zhang (10)and others also use rules to generate
some pseudo labeled data based on the pre-training
model and then carry out weakly supervised learn-
ing, to achieve the effect of state of art. Although
the model of Ruth et al. (12) did not achieve good
results better than the extraction text summariza-
tion algorithm, such seq2seq model aroused the
research interest of researchers, and the model de-
feated many traditional text summarization algo-
rithms, proving the feasibility of deep learning in
the ﬁeld of text summarization. The following year,
Chopra (14) and others improved their algorithm,
using recurrent neural networks (RNNs) with at-
tention mechanism as decoder, and achieved better
results. Li (15) et al. Made a linguistic analysis
of the artiﬁcial summary of CNN news and found
that there are some ﬁxed formats in the summary,
which inspired them to design the module to inte-
grate the potential structural information into the
summary model. To achieve this goal, they added
a latent structure model to the work of Chopra
(14) and others and used variational autoencoders
(VAEs) (20) as the generated framework. Since
VAEs are not an end-to-end model, they propose
a drug model (deep recurrent generative decoder)
for text summary generation. Gehrmann (17) et
al. Proposed a bottom-up text summarization algo-
rithm to decouple the text summarization into two
steps: the ﬁrst step is to mark the text sequence and
select candidate words, and the second step is to use
these candidate words to generate the text. Thus,
the model can generate a more accurate summary.
Liu (18) and others proposed the bet sum model
based on the pre-training language model BERT
(9), which defeated the existing extraction text sum-
mary model and generative text summary model
at that time and achieved the best results. This
paper also uses the generative text summary algo-
rithm to generate text summaries for the descriptive
documents corresponding to celebrity brands.
2.2
Word Vector
Different from images, natural language is discrete.
How to represent natural language is a key problem.
One-hot embedding is one of the most common
word expressions. However, there are different de-
grees of similarity between words, such as ”happy”
and ”happy”, ”sunshine” and ”dark”. It is obvi-
ous that one-hot embedding cannot express such
properties in natural language. Mikolov (19) et al.
Proposed word2vec word vector model. Unsuper-
vised training was conducted on the corpus-based
on the skip-gram model and a continuous bag of
word model, and then the distributed representation
of words was obtained as the input of the down-
stream task model. Experiments show that after
pre-training, the word2vec model learns the rele-
vant information of words. However, the word2vec
word vector is static, that is, each word corresponds
to only a one-word vector. Such a word vector can-
not represent polysemy. Therefore, McCann (20) et
al. Proposed the CoVe word vector model, with the
help of machine translation task, let the model com-
plete the machine translation task, learn the contex-
tualized word vector based on context, and generate
the corresponding word vector according to differ-
ent contexts. Peters (21) et al. Proposed the Elmo
word vector model composed of deep bidirectional
long, short-term memory (LSTM), which can un-
supervised learn the contextualized word vector of
words through a more general language model than
machine translation. With the help of a language
model, large-scale training is possible. In recent
years, the proposal of transformer (22) makes it pos-
sible for a large-scale pre-training language model.
GPT (23) and BERT (9) are both transformer-based
models. GPT carries out pre-training on large-scale
data sets through a one-way language model, and
ﬁnally obtains the representation of contextualized
word vector. While BERT cleverly designed a
masked language model (MLM) and next sense
prediction (NSP), two pre-training tasks. After pre-
training on a large corpus, the pre-training model
was applied to downstream tasks, and the best per-
formance of more than 10 tasks was obtained at
that time. Due to the universality of the pre-training
word vector model and its great help to the im-
provement of downstream tasks, more and more
researchers are constantly improving the existing
word vector model and putting forward new model
architecture and new pre-training tasks (24; 25; 26).
Baidu’s Ernie (27) recently broke glue (the bench-
mark for evaluating common language understand-
ing) [ https://gluebenchmark.com/] The total score
of emotional sentence classiﬁcation (SST-2) and
natural language inference task (WNLI) reached
the ﬁrst in the world. Therefore, a good word vector
model is of great signiﬁcance for natural language
processing tasks. This paper also uses the word vec-
tor model to encode the input text for further pro-
cessing. When matching the generated abstracts,
this paper also uses a word vector model to encode
the abstracts and then carries out subsequent text
matching.
2.3
Text Matching
Text matching algorithms are used in many ﬁelds,
including text similarity calculation (28), question
and answer matching (29), text implication (30),
information retrieval (31), etc. When matching two
texts, a natural idea is to calculate the cosine simi-
larity between their representations. As the pioneer-
ing work of text matching, DSSM (31) proposed a
text-matching framework based on representation
batted twin networks. Firstly, multi-layer percep-
tron (MLP) is used to extract the vector representa-
tion of a query and document respectively. Then,
the cosine similarity of the vectors of the query
and other documents are calculated respectively,
which is sorted according to the similarity, and the
document results corresponding to the query are
provided to the user. Feng (32) et al. Introduced
CNN into the encoder so that the representation not
only contains the global information of the text but
also extracts its local information.
Different from the representation-based text
matching framework of DSSM, Pang (33) et al.
Proposed a pyramid text matching model Match-
pyramid, which simulates the process of image
recognition and uses multi-layer CNN to carry out
matching interaction hierarchically, to complete
text matching. Chen (34) et al. Proposed an ESIM
model based on LSTM. To capture more detailed
text information, Chen (34) and others designed a
ﬁne sequential inference structure based on LSTM,
realized local natural language inference through
inter-sentence attention mechanism, and then fur-
ther realized global inference. Because of its ex-
cellent performance in short text matching tasks,
ESIM is often integrated into its text-matching
model by contestants in many later competitions.
As a representation-based text matching model,
DSSM has the advantage that it can pre-calculate
the text, obtain the corresponding representation
of the text, and realize the subsequent rapid text
matching. It has great application signiﬁcance in
the ﬁeld of information retrieval.
However, due to the lack of interaction with the
target sentence, it cannot capture the features that
are more conducive to matching. Interaction-based
models such as Matchpyramid and ESIM can just
make up for the shortcomings of the representation-
based text matching model. However, too ﬁne and
complex interaction modules will also make the
inference speed unsatisfactory and cannot be well
applied in practice. Nie (35) et al. Proposed that
DC-BERT considers the advantages of both and
makes great use of the representation ability of
the pre-training language model. DC-BERT uses
BERT (9) to encode documents and queries at the
bottom and then uses a layer of transformer (22) to
interact with the encoded representation, to realize
text.
Because this paper will ﬁrst generate the sum-
mary of the document and then match it, that is,
short text matching, this paper uses an interactive
method for text matching.
3
CELEBRITY AND BRAND
MATCHING ALGORITHM
In this chapter, we propose a celebrity brand en-
dorsement matching algorithm combining text sum-
marization and a word vector matching algorithm.
In the following content, the theory and implemen-
tation details of each module in the algorithm will
be introduced step by step.
3.1
Problem Deﬁnition
For a celebrity and a brand brain, use crawlers
to crawl descriptive documents related to them
on the Internet.
We need to design a model
g(D(Celebrity), D(Brand)) to calculate the similar-
ity between celebrities and brands according to a
given document. These documents are shown in
equations (1) and (2).
D(Celebrity) =
n
D(Celebrity)
1
, D(Celebrity)
2
, ..., D(Celebrity)
k
o
(1)
D(Brand) =
n
D(Brand)
1
, D(Brand)
2
, ..., D(Brand)
k
o
(2)
3.2
Matching Model Between Celebrities and
Brands
Figure 1 is the pipeline architecture of the celebrity
and brand matching algorithm proposed in this pa-
per. The celebrity brand matching algorithm pro-
posed in this paper is divided into the following
parts. The ﬁrst part is the crawler module. For the
input celebrities and brands, the crawler is used
to crawl the corresponding entry introduction and
news text on the network as the descriptive docu-
ments of celebrities and brands. The second part
is the text summary module. For each long doc-
ument crawled, the text summary module is used
Figure 1: Model Structure of Celebrity Brand Matching Algorithm. The model proposed in this paper is mainly
divided into three parts. The ﬁrst part is the crawler module, which receives the input celebrity and brand names
and crawls the relevant encyclopedia and news on the Internet; The second part is the text summary module, which
generates the corresponding text summary for the obtained descriptive document; The third part is the matching
module, which calculates the matching score between celebrities and brands according to the text summary of
the descriptive documents corresponding to celebrities and brands, to judge whether a given celebrity and brand
match.
to summarize the long document into one or sev-
eral sentences to condense semantics and reduce
noise for subsequent modules. The third part is the
matching module. According to the summary of
celebrities and brands generated in the text sum-
mary module, the similarity between them, that is,
the so-called matching score is calculated to judge
whether the celebrities and brands match.
3.2.1
Crawler Module
For the description of celebrities and brands, we
can crawl the descriptive entries in Baidu Ency-
clopedia. In addition, celebrities and brands often
appear in entertainment news and other news, so
we also crawl the news related to celebrities and
brands. A series of descriptive documents related
to celebrities and brands are obtained. To simplify
the description of the algorithm, in the subsequent
modules, we assume that only one descriptive doc-
ument is crawled for each celebrity and brand, that
is, celebrity and brand brain correspond to each
celebrity, as shown in equations (3) and (4).
D(Celebrity) =
n
w(Celebrity)
1
, w(Celebrity)
2
, ..., w(Celebrity)
n
o (3)
D(Brand) =
n
w(Brand)
1
, w(Brand)
2
, ..., w(Brand)
m
o
(4)
Among them, wi represents the i-the word in
the document, n here represents the number of
words in the document corresponding to celebrities,
and m here represents the number of words in the
document corresponding to brands.
After obtaining the corresponding descriptive
document, we send it to the subsequent modules.
Since the subsequent processing of celebrity doc-
uments and brand documents is the same, we
will generally represent the document as D =
{w1, w2, · · ·, wn}.
3.2.2
Text Summary Module
Abstract text is widely used in industry and
academia because of its stability and controlla-
bility, but it only extracts the original sentences
in the document, resulting in insufﬁcient diver-
sity. The generative text summary model can gen-
erate a variety of text summaries according to a
given document. Therefore, this paper proposes
a generative text summary model as the text sum-
mary module of the celebrity brand endorsement
matching model. As the input of the text sum-
marization module, this paper uses the word2ve
word vector model to represent a text as several
word vectors. Remember that the lookup Table of
word2ve word vector model is, then for document
D = {w1, w2, · · ·, wn}, we get its correspond-
ing word vector matrix E = {e1, e2, · · ·, en} as
the input of text summary module.
This paper adopts the most common seq2seq
model in Generative text summarization (also
known as encoder-decoder structure) (11).
As
shown in Figure 2, the encoder part accepts an
input sequence and encodes it. After encoding it
into a hidden layer vector, the decoder generates
the ﬁnal output sequence one by one according to
the information of this vector. To comprehensively
consider each word in the input sequence when
generating each word, attention is often used in
some improved seq2seq models to calculate the
weighted average of the previous words at each
step for decoding.
Since 2015, a lot of research work has used recur-
Figure 2: Seq2seq Model
rent neural networks (RNN) to process sequence
data. However, in recent years, more and more
research work began to use transformer (22) as the
backbone model of seq2seq (36; 10; 37). This arti-
cle also takes transformer as the basic component
of our text summary module. Figure 3 is the struc-
tural diagram of the transformer. It consists of an
n-layer encoder and decoder. For each layer of the
encoder, it includes a multi-head attention module
and a feed-forward neural network. The multi-head
attention module is composed of multiple scaled
dot product attention. Figure 4 shows the calcula-
tion method of multiplicative attention.
For input q, k, v, ﬁrst perform linear transforma-
Figure 3: transformer (22).
tion on them respectively, Wq, Wk, Wv is three
trainable matrices, as shown in equation (5), equa-
tion (6) and equation (7):
Q = Wqq
(5)
K = Wkk
(6)
V = WV v
(7)
Calculate their multiplicative attention, as shown
in equation (8).
ScaledDot−ProductAttention(Q, K, V )
= softmax( QKT
sqrtdk
)
(8)
Where dk is the dimension of K.
Figure 4: Seq2seq ModelScaled Dot-Product Attention
(22).
Therefore, for the word vector matrix E =
e1, e2, · · · , en of the document we input, we can
also calculate its corresponding multiplicative at-
tention, as shown in equation (9).
attE = ScaledDotProductAttention(E, E, E)
= softmax( EET
sqrtdE
)E
(9)
Among them, due to the input q = k = v = E,
such an attention mechanism is also called the self-
attention mechanism. Through this attention mech-
anism, the model can calculate the part that should
be paid attention to according to the characteristics
of the word vector, and then calculate a weighted
average of the input to get a better representation.
After the new representation is obtained, the resid-
ual connection is introduced and standardized, as
shown in equation (10).
ˆ
attE = Norm(E + attE)
(10)
After the self-attention representation is ob-
tained, it is input into the feedforward neural net-
work, where W is the trainable matrix and b is the
trainable bias vector, as shown in equation (11).
FeedForward( ˆ
attE) = W ˆ
attE + b
(11)
Finally, after a residual connection and standard-
ization, the output of the transformer encoder is
obtained, and then the next decoding steps can be
carried out, as shown in equation (12).
Encoder(E) =
Norm(FeedForward(( ˆ
attE) + ˆ
attE)
(12)
The transformer decoder receives the output of
the encoder and the corresponding decoder input.
In this paper, we input the special character [CLS]
into the decoder as the symbol for decoding and use
y0 = E[CLS], yi as each output character, then the
transformer decoder ﬁrst calculates multiplicative
self-attention, as shown in equation (13).
attyi = ScaledDot −ProductAttention
(yi, (yi, (yi) = softmax(
p
dyi
yiyT
i
)
(13)
Then, the input of the encoder is introduced to
calculate an interactive multiplicative attention, as
shown in equation (14).
att yi+1 = Scaled Dot-Product Attention
(E, y0:i, y0:i) = softmax
 y7
0:i
√dE

y0:i
(14)
Finally, the ﬁnal output is obtained through the
feedforward neural network and standardization
layer, and then the probability of each character
is obtained through a SoftMax layer. In the train-
ing process, according to the output summary, we
can compare with the real summary, calculate a
cross-entropy error as the error of the whole neural
network, and then back-propagation to update the
parameters of each layer of the network. In the
reasoning stage, we adopt the greedy strategy and
take the character corresponding to the maximum
output probability as the current output character
for each step until the output terminator [SEP] or
the maximum output sequence length is reached.
3.2.3
Matching Module
Based on the text summary module, we can get
the summary Si = {s1, s2, · · ·, sn} of the doc-
ument set corresponding to the celebrity or brand,
where Si = {i = 1, 2, · · ·, 3} is the word in the
summary. If there are multiple descriptive docu-
ments for each celebrity or brand entity, multiple
document summaries will also be generated. For
multiple abstracts, we splice these abstracts and
then match them later. To speed up the calculation,
we use a word2vec word vector to encode the words
of the abstract, so as to obtain the corresponding
word vector matrix Es. For the word vector matrix
of celebrity and brand abstract, we use E(Celebrity )
S
and E(Brand )
S
respectively.
Like the Matchpyramid model [33], we ﬁrst cal-
culate dot product for the word vector matrix of
celebrity and brand abstracts, N representing dot
product operation, as shown in equation (15).
M = E(Celebrity )
S
⊗E(Brand )
S
(15)
In this way, mij represents the dot product simi-
larity between the word S(Celebrity )
i
in the celebrity
corresponding descriptive summary and the word
S(Brand )
i
in the brand corresponding descriptive
summary.
In the ﬁeld of image recognition, CNN is usu-
ally used as a feature extractor to extract different
ﬁne-grained information in the image (38; 39; 40).
Similarly, we can also implement CNN on the sim-
ilarity matrix Z(0) = M to extract local matching
information between texts, as shown in equation
(16).
z(1,k)
i,j
= σ
 rk−1
X
s=0
rk−1
X
t=0
w(1,k)
i,j
· z(0)
i+s,j+t + b(1,k)
!
.
(16)
Among them, z(i,k) is the k-th feature map ex-
tracted by CNN on the ﬁrst layer, and σ represents
the nonlinear activation function. In this paper,
we use the ReLU (41) function as the nonlinear
activation function.
Then, each feature map will go through a pooling
layer to further extract the local features in the
feature map. Here, we select max pooling as our
pooling layer to extract the maximum energy in the
matching information, as shown in equation (17).
z(2,k)
i,j
= max
0≤s≤dk
max
0≤t≤d′
k
z(1,k)
i·dk+s,j·d′
k+t
(17)
z(2,k) is the K −th feature map extracted from
the pooling layer on the second layer. Similarly, we
can stack more CNN layers and pooling layers and
ﬁnally get a highly generalized matching feature
map. Then we ﬂatten it and input it into the multi-
layer perception (MLP) to get the ﬁnal prediction
result, as shown in equation (18).
o = W2σ (W1z + b1) + b2
(18)
Among them, p is the probability of celebrity and
brand matching predicted by the model, W1W2 is
the trainable matrix, b1b2 is the trainable bias vec-
tor, σ represents the activation function, and ReLU
is used as the activation function in this paper. Here
is a 2-layer MLP model.
Because the celebrity and brand matching in this
paper belongs to the two-classiﬁcation task, and
then through the sigmoid function, the ﬁnal nor-
malized celebrity and brand matching probability
is obtained, as shown in equation (19).
p = sigmoid(o) =
1
1 + e−o
(19)
In the training process, the binary cross-entropy
loss function is used as the loss function of the
matching model, and is the label of the -th training
sample, as shown in equation (20).
loss = −
N
X
i=1
[yi log (pi) + (1 −yi) log (1 −pi)]
(20)
4
EXPERIMENTAL
DEMONSTRATIONS
4.1
Data Sets
At present, there is no public data set related to
celebrity brand endorsement, and there is no de-
scriptive document data set specially designed for
celebrities and brands, so all the data involved are
crawled from the network. This paper selects 63
famous celebrities and 35 well-known brands for
experiments. These celebrities and brands are more
active, and the relevant descriptive documents will
be relatively rich, so taking them as the research
object can make our experiment more credible. We
label all celebrity brands. If the celebrity has en-
dorsed this brand within 5 years, the label is 1,
otherwise, it is 0.
For the descriptive documents of celebrities and
brands, we crawl their relevant descriptive docu-
ments and relevant news from Baidu Encyclopedia
and today’s headlines. Baidu Encyclopedia docu-
ments can describe the impression and information
of a celebrity or brand, while Baidu news column
documents can describe the impression and infor-
mation of a celebrity or brand recently. Using these
descriptive documents, we can not only comprehen-
sively describe a celebrity or brand entity, but also
consider its recent risk evaluation and image, to
make the matching more reasonable and real-time.
For each celebrity and brand entity, we crawl the
corresponding Baidu Encyclopedia entry and 10
news documents.
For the crawled documents, we clean their data,
including denoising, stop words, etc. The docu-
ment statistics after preprocessing are shown in
Table 1 below. The average number of words in
celebrity-related documents is 1728, ranging from
28 to 16667; The average number of words in
brand-related documents is 1572, ranging from 38
to 7841.
For each celebrity and brand entity, we randomly
selected 1 Baidu Encyclopedia and 3 news docu-
ments for matching. To verify the effectiveness
of the model, the star and brand texts are spliced,
and the matching task can be regarded as a simple
binary classiﬁcation task. This paper selects a clas-
sical text classiﬁcation model TextCNN to compare
with this model.
TextCNN was ﬁrst proposed by Kim (42).
TextCNN obtains the feature representation of n-
gram in sentences through one-dimensional convo-
lution, which makes TextCNN have excellent
performance in text classiﬁcation. TextCNN used
in this paper is divided into four layers: embed-
ding layer, convolution layer, pooling layer, and
full connection layer. The input text vocabulary is
converted into a 128-dimensional word vector and
then processed by three types of 3 ∗128 convo-
lution cores with sizes of 3, 4, and 5 respectively.
The dropout probability in the network is set to 0.5.
After 1200 rounds of training, the accuracy of the
ﬁnal training model is 59.6%, F1 score: 0.485.
4.2
Evaluation Criteria
4.2.1
Classiﬁcation and Evaluation Criteria
The precision rate P (precision) and recall rate R
were used in this experiment, F1 score and accuracy
are used as evaluation criteria.
Precision =
TP
TP + EP
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
F1 −Score = 2 × Precision × Recall
Precision + Recall
TP:true positive
TN:true negative
FP:false positive
FN:false negative
Table 1: Statistics of Crawled Documents
Baidu Wikipedia
Baidu News
Number
Average
Minimum
Maximum
Number
Average
Minimum
Maximum
Celebrity
63
4383
1061
16667
630
1413
28
9049
Brand
35
3105
1007
7841
350
1419
38
6409
Total
98
3926
1007
16667
980
1415
28
9049
4.2.2
ROUGE
The ﬁeld of text summary usually adopts Rouge
(recall-oriented understudy for getting evaluation)
as the evaluation standard (47). It mainly counts
the recall rate of the generated text summary, that
is, the real summary and the generated summary
are divided into several words, and then calculates
how many of the generated summary is included in
the real summary. The larger the size, the higher
the quality of the generated text summary. The
calculation formula is shown in equation (21)
ROUGE −N =
P
SE
P
N−gramES Countmatch(N −gram)
P
SE
P
N−gramES Countmatch(N −gram)
(21)
This paper mainly calculates the ROUGE-1 and
ROUGE-2 indexes of the text summary module to
judge whether the pre-trained text summary model
works well. If the quality of the summary is poor,
it will affect the matching effect of the subsequent
matching model.
To evaluate the celebrity brand matching algo-
rithm proposed in this paper, we learn from the ex-
perimental indicators of previous matching model
research work, including precision P (precision),
recall R (recall), F1 score (F1 score), and accuracy.
4.3
Experimental Parameter Setting
For the text summary module, this paper uses a
12-layer transformer as the backbone model, the
maximum length of the position vector is 512, the
hidden layer dimension of the encoder is 768, the
maximum text length output by the decoder is 100,
the number of multiple attention headers is 12, and
the interlayer activation function is Gelu (? ).
When training the text summary module, Adam
optimizer (49) is used to optimize the model pa-
rameters. The learning rate is set to 5× 10−5. Each
batch of training data contains 32 samples, and a
total of 3 epochs are trained. To accelerate the
convergence process, BERT (9) is used to initial-
ize the parameters of the transformer layer in the
experiment.
For the matching module, this paper uses
word2vec as the input word vector model. The
matching network includes two layers of the con-
volutional neural network, two layers of pooling
layer, and two layers of full connection layer. The
convolution kernel size of the convolution neural
network layer is 5 ∗5 ∗8 and 3 ∗3 ∗10 respec-
tively. Except for the pooling layer, other layers
take ReLU (41) as the activation function.
Like the training text summary module, when
training the matching module, the Adam optimizer
is also applicable to optimize the model parameters.
The learning rate is set to 1 ∗10−3. Each batch of
training data contains 2 samples. After training
100 epochs, convergence is achieved. To evaluate
the performance of the matching model, this paper
divides the data set into 70% and 30% as training
set and test set respectively.
4.4
Experimental Results and Analysis
4.4.1
Text Summary Module
After training on the training set in LCSTS and
CLTS data sets, model evaluation is carried out
on the pre-divided test set. The evaluation results
are shown in Table 2. The value of ROUGE-1 is
0.5994 and the value of ROUGE-2 is 0.4259, which
indicates that the text summary performs well. To
Table 2: Evaluation Indicators of Text Summary Mod-
ule
ROUGE-l
ROUGE-2
0.5994
0.4259
check the effect of text summary generation, Table
3 shows some text summary examples in the test
set.
4.4.2
Matching Module
After the training of the text summary module, in-
put the crawled documents to summarize them. In
Document
Summary
今年《政府工作报告》中指出，2019 年高职院校将扩招
100 万人，扩招工作如何推进？昨天(8 日)，教育部介绍
《高职扩招专项工作实施方案》的有关情况，这100 万招
生计划将重点布局在优质高职院校、发展急需和民生领域
紧缺专业、贫困地区。取消高职招收中职毕业生比例限制
本文图片央视网《方案》明确，分省确定招生计划。改革
考试招生办法，取消高职招收中职毕业生比例限制，允许
符合高考报名条件的往届中职毕业生参加高职院校单独考
试招生。同时向中西部倾斜，发挥支援中西部地区招生协
作计划作用，将2019 年高职协作计划扩大至20 万。
教育部介绍《高职扩招
专项工作实施方案》的
有关情况，这100 万招
生计划将重点布局在优
质高职院校、发展急需
和民生领域紧缺专业、
贫困地区。
完美日记成立于2017 年，是广州逸仙电子商务有限公司
旗下品牌。2020 年8 月4 日，《苏州高区.2020 胡润
全球独角兽榜》发布，完美日记排名第351 位。完美日
记致力于探索欧美时尚趋势，同时结合亚洲人群的面部和
肌肤特点，用心为新生代女性研发一系列高品质、精设计、
易上手的彩妆产品。肤特支持中国时尚产业，立志于打造
有国际影响力Chinese beauty icon。完美日记的品牌
含义是unlimited beauty, 美不设限。完美日记品牌理
念倡导年轻一代不被外界标签束缚，而是努力地突破自我，
积极地探索人生更多的可能性，遇见更优秀的自己。
完美日记致力于探索欧
美时尚趋势，同时结合
亚洲人群的面部和肌肤
特点，用心为新生代女
性研发一系列高品质、
精设计、易上手的彩妆
产品。
Figure 5: Sample Text Summary
this experiment, each celebrity or brand entity has
one Baidu Encyclopedia introduction and three cor-
responding headline news documents, so for each
celebrity and brand entity, four abstracts of a cer-
tain length can be obtained.
In this experiment, the four abstracts are spliced
into a long sentence for the training and testing of
the matching model. Because the data set collected
in this paper is unbalanced, and the proportion of
positive examples is about 5.5%, two benchmark
models are designed to compare with the model
proposed in this paper. One is random guess 0,
which means that the consistent prediction is not
matched during prediction; The other is random
guess 1, which means that the consistent prediction
is a match during prediction. The experimental
results are shown in Table 3.
Table 3: Evaluation Index of Matching Module
Model
Precision
Recall
F1 score
Accuracy
Random
Guess 0
0
0
0
0.945
Random
Guess l
0.055
1
0.105
0.055
Text
0.925
0.511
0.530
0.926
CNN
Our
Model
0.990
0.811
0.892
0.989
It can be seen from the results in Table 4 that
the model proposed in this paper greatly exceeds
the other two benchmark models, and the precision
rate reaches 99%, which is much higher than other
benchmark models; The recall rate reached 81.1%,
30% higher than TextCNN; F1 score is 0.892; The
accuracy rate is 98.9%, 4.4% higher than random
guess 0, which has the highest accuracy rate in the
benchmark model, and 6.3% higher than TextCNN,
which is enough to illustrate the effectiveness of
the model proposed in this paper.
In TextCNN, the way to splice and label two
documents (Star+brand) to generate data requires
that the algorithm itself can recognize the context
structure between the two documents. TextCNN
only carries out understanding and classiﬁcation
according to the topic of the text summary and
cannot recognize the long-span context within the
text. Therefore, the performance in performing
different text mosaic classiﬁcation tasks will be
signiﬁcantly worse than the model proposed in this
paper.
As described in Section 3.3.1, the F1 score can
comprehensively consider the precision rate and
recall rate of the model. According to the results in
Table 4 above, the F1 score of the model proposed
in this paper is 0.892, which shows that the effect
of the model proposed in this paper is very good.
Its accuracy is 98.9%, which also shows that its
effect is very good.
4.4.3
Analysis and Experiment
For a celebrity or brand entity, the more descriptive
documents corresponding, the more comprehensive
and sufﬁcient the relevant information. Various
information can be considered in the matching, to
improve the effectiveness of the model. Therefore,
to explore the impact of the number of descriptive
documents on the model effect, we evaluate the
model effect when the number of documents is
{1, 2, 3, 4, 5}. Figure 5 shows the effect of the
number of descriptive documents on the model
effect.
Figure 6: Effect of the number of descriptive docu-
ments on the model effect
The increase in the number of descriptive doc-
uments can indeed improve the effectiveness of
the model. If only the summary of Baidu Ency-
clopedia is used as a match, the accuracy is only
23.44% and the accuracy is only 82.13%. How-
ever, if three related news articles are introduced
and then matched, the accuracy rate is increased to
100% and the accuracy rate is increased to 98.96%.
Although the recall rate dropped from 98.36% to
81.15%, the F1 score increased from 0.3785 to
0.8959, which shows that increasing the number of
descriptive documents improves the overall effect
of the model.
In addition, the model effect when the number
of documents is 5 is consistent with that when the
number of documents is 4, which indicates that in-
creasing the number of documents after the number
of descriptive documents reaches a certain value
does not signiﬁcantly help the matching.
5
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
This study veriﬁed the better performance of the
BCM model by comparing it with the benchmark
models, and it can well identify whether a given
celebrity and brand match.
Combined with Table 3, The BCM algorithm in
this study will ﬁrst generate a summary of a given
descriptive text, which helps us better understand
the intermediate variables of the model during text
matching, observe how the model extracts effective
information from long texts, and then complete
the matching tasks. At the same time, if there
is a problem in the text matching process, we can
check the generated summary to ﬁnd the source and
cause of the problem. Compared with the previous
matching methods, our algorithm ﬂow effectively
avoids the problem of fuzzy intermediate variables
in the model and improves the interpretability of
the model.
From the experimental analysis, we can see that
the more descriptive documents and data about
celebrities and brands, the more information that
the BCM model can consider in the matching pro-
cess, to effectively improve the accuracy of the
algorithm. However, we need to note that the num-
ber of documents is not the more the better. When
the number of documents reaches a certain value,
adding documents will not signiﬁcantly help the
matching effect, and more computing resources
will be required. Therefore, blindly increasing de-
scriptive documents will just increase the calcula-
tion amount and operation time of the model.
We will consider using entertainment news to
pre-train the model and improve the accuracy of
the text summary model in the next. Besides, we
collected a limited number of datasets due to the
dispersion of celebrity endorsement information.
In the future, we will continue to seek the services
of entertainment companies, collect more celebrity
brand endorsement data, and enhance the robust-
ness and reliability of our algorithm.
References
[1] Kanungo R N, Pang S. Effects of human models on
perceived product quality[J]. Journal of Applied Psy-
chology, 1973, 57(2): 172-178.
[2] Till B D, Busler M. Matching products with en-
dorsers: attractiveness versus expertise[J]. Journal
of Consumer Marketing, 1998, 15(6): 576-586.
[3] Farhat R, Khan B M. An exploratory study
of celebrity endorsements[J].International Confer-
ence on Economics and Finance Research, 2011,
2011(2011): 463-466.
[4] Malhotra N K. A scale to measure self-concepts, per-
son concepts, and product concepts[J]. Journal of
marketing research, 1981, 18(4): 456-464.
[5] Dalbey S B. Celebrity Endorsements and Voting In-
tentions: The Role of Liking and Preference for
Consistency[M]. California State University, Long
Beach, 2017: 11-14.
[6] Luhn H P. The automatic creation of literature ab-
stracts[J]. IBM Journal of Research and Develop-
ment, 1958, 2(2): 159-165.
[7] Blei D M, Ng A Y, Jordan M I. Latent dirichlet allo-
cation[J]. the Journal of Machine Learning Research,
2003, 3(2003): 993-1022.
[8] Cheng J, Lapata M. Neural summarization by ex-
tracting sentences and words[J]. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1603.07252, 2016.
[9] Devlin J, Chang M W, Lee K, et al. BERT:
Pre-training
of
deep
bidirectional
transformers
for
language
understanding[J].
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
[10] Zhang X, Wei F, Zhou M. HIBERT: Docu-
ment level pre-training of hierarchical bidirectional
transformers for document summarization[J]. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1905.06566, 2019.
[11] Sutskever I, Vinyals O, Le Q V. Sequence to se-
quence learning with neural networks[C]//Advances
in neural information processing systems. 2014:
3104-3112.
[12] Rush A M, Chopra S, Weston J. A neural at-
tention model for abstractive sentence summariza-
tion[J]. arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.00685, 2015.
[13] Bengio Y, Ducharme R, Vincent P, et al. A neural
probabilistic language model[J]. The journal of ma-
chine learning research, 2003, 3: 1137-1155.
[14] Chopra S, Auli M, Rush A M. Abstractive sentence
summarization with attentive recurrent neural net-
works[C]//Proceedings of the 2016 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, 2016: 93-98.
[15] Li P, Lam W, Bing L, et al. Deep recurrent gener-
ative decoder for abstractive text summarization[J].
arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.00625, 2017.
[16] Kingma D P, Welling M. Auto-encoding vari-
ational bayes[J]. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114,
2013.
[17] Gehrmann S, Deng Y, Rush A M. Bottom-
up abstractive summarization[J]. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1808.10792, 2018.
[18] Liu
Y,
Lapata
M.
Text
summarization
with
pretrained
encoders[J].
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:1908.08345, 2019.
[19] Mikolov T, Sutskever I, Chen K, et al. Distributed
representations of words and phrases and their
compositionality[C]//Advances in neural informa-
tion processing systems, 2013: 3111-3119.
[20] McCann B, Bradbury J, Xiong C, et al. Learned
in translation: Contextualized word vectors[J]. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1708.00107, 2017.
[21] Peters M E, Neumann M, Iyyer M, et al. Deep con-
textualized word representations[J]. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1802.05365, 2018.
[22] Vaswani A, Shazeer N, Parmar N, et al. Attention
is all you need[C]//Advances in neural information
processing systems: MIT Press, 2017: 5998-6008.
[23] Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans,
and Ilya Sutskever. Improving language under-
standing by generative pre-training[J]. https://s3-
us-west-2.
amazonaws.com/openaiassets/research-
covers/languageunsupervised/language understand-
ing paper. pdf, 2018.
[24] Clark K, Luong M T, Le Q V, et al. Electra:
Pre-training text encoders as discriminators rather
than generators[J]. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.10555,
2020.
[25] Liu Y, Ott M, Goyal N, et al. Roberta:
A ro-
bustly optimized bert pretraining approach[J]. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019.
[26] Yang Z, Dai Z, Yang Y, et al. Xlnet: Generalized
autoregressive pretraining for language understand-
ing[J]. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.08237, 2019.
[27] Sun Y, Wang S, Li Y, et al. Ernie: Enhanced rep-
resentation through knowledge integration[J]. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1904.09223, 2019.
[28] Agirre E, Cer D, Diab M, et al. Semeval-2012 task
6: A pilot on semantic textual similarity[C]//* SEM
2012: The First Joint Conference on Lexical and
Computational Semantics–Volume 1: Proceedings
of the main conference and the shared task, and Vol-
ume 2: Proceedings of the Sixth International Work-
shop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2012), 2012:
385-393.
[29] Wang A, Singh A, Michael J, et al. GLUE: A
multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for
natural language understanding[J]. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1804.07461, 2018.
[30] Bowman S R, Angeli G, Potts C, et al. A large an-
notated corpus for learning natural language infer-
ence[J]. arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.05326, 2015.
[31] Huang P S, He X, Gao J, et al. Learning deep struc-
tured semantic models for web search using click-
through data[C]//Proceedings of the 22nd ACM in-
ternational conference on Information Knowledge
Management, 2013: 2333-2338.
[32] Feng M, Xiang B, Glass M R, et al. Applying
deep learning to answer selection: A study and an
open task[C]//2015 IEEE Workshop on Automatic
Speech Recognition and Understanding (ASRU):
IEEE, 2015: 813-820.
[33] Pang L, Lan Y, Guo J, et al. Text matching as image
recognition[C]//Proceedings of the AAAI Confer-
ence on Artiﬁcial Intelligence: AAAI, 2016: 2793-
2799.
[34] Chen Q, Zhu X, Ling Z, et al. Enhanced lstm
for natural language inference[J]. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1609.06038, 2016.
[35] Zhang Y, Nie P, Geng X, et al. DC-BERT: Decou-
pling Question and Document for Efﬁcient Contex-
tual Encoding[J]. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.12591,
2020.
[36] Khandelwal U, Clark K, Jurafsky D, et al.
Sample
efﬁcient
text
summarization
using
a
single pre-trained transformer[J]. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.08836, 2019.
[37] Zou Y, Zhang X, Lu W, et al. STEP: Sequence-
to-Sequence Transformer Pre-training for Document
Summarization[J]. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.01853,
2020.
[38] Girshick R, Donahue J, Darrell T, et al. Rich fea-
ture hierarchies for accurate object detection and se-
mantic segmentation[C]//Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-
tion: IEEE, 2014: 580-587.
[39] LeCun Y, Bottou L, Bengio Y, et al. Gradient-based
learning applied to document recognition[J]. Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE, 1998, 86(11): 2278-2324.
[40] Simard P Y, Steinkraus D, Platt J C. Best practices
for convolutional neural networks applied to visual
document analysis[C]// International Conference on
Document Analysis and Recognition :IEEE, 2003:
958-962
[41] Nair V, Hinton G E. Rectiﬁed linear units im-
prove restricted boltzmann machines[C]// Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning:
ICPS,
2010:807-814.
[42] Kim
Y
.
Convolutional
Neural
Networks
for
Sentence
Classiﬁcation[J].
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:1508.06615, 2015.
[43] Hu B, Chen Q, Zhu F. Lcsts: A large scale chinese
short text summarization dataset[J]. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1506.05865, 2015.
[44] [44]Ma S, Sun X, Xu J, et al. Improving seman-
tic relevance for sequence-to-sequence learning of
chinese social media text summarization[J]. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1706.02459, 2017.
[45] Ma S, Sun X, Lin J, et al. Autoencoder as assis-
tant supervisor: Improving text representation for
chinese social media text summarization[J]. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1805.04869, 2018.
[46] Liu X, Zhang C, Chen X, et al. CLTS: A New
Chinese Long Text Summarization Dataset[C]//CCF
International Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing and Chinese Computing: Springer, Cham,
2020: 531-542.
[47] Lin C Y. Rouge: A package for automatic evalua-
tion of summaries[C]//Text summarization branches
out:
Association for Computational Linguistics;
East Stroudsburg, USA, 2004: 74-81.
[48] Hendrycks D, Gimpel K. Gaussian error linear
units (gelus)[J]. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.08415,
2016.
[49] Kingma D P, Ba J. Adam: A method for stochas-
tic optimization[J]. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980,
2014.
