Title: Looking Through Glass: Knowledge Discovery from Materials Science Literature using Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2101.01508v1
--------------------------------------------------

1 
 
Looking Through Glass: Knowledge Discovery from Materials Science 
Literature using Natural Language Processing 
 
Vineeth Venugopal1,*, Sourav Sahoo2, Mohd Zaki1, Manish Agarwal3, Nitya Nand Gosvami2, N. 
M. Anoop Krishnan1,2,* 
 
1Department of Civil Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Hauz Khas, New Delhi 110016, 
India 
2Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Hauz Khas, 
New Delhi 110016, India 
3Computer Services Center, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Hauz Khas, New Delhi 110016, India 
 
*Corresponding authors: V. Venugopal (vinven7@gmail.com), N. M. A. Krishnan (krishnan@iitd.ac.in) 
 
 
Most of the knowledge in materials science literature is in the form of unstructured data such 
as text and images. Here, we present a framework employing natural language processing, 
which automates text and image comprehension and precision knowledge extraction from 
inorganic glasses’ literature. The abstracts are automatically categorized using latent 
Dirichlet allocation (LDA), providing a way to classify and search semantically linked 
publications. Similarly, a comprehensive summary of images and plots are presented using 
the ‘Caption Cluster Plot’ (CCP), which provides direct access to the images buried in the 
papers. Finally, we combine the LDA and CCP with the chemical elements occurring in the 
manuscript to present an ‘Elemental map’, a topical and image-wise distribution of chemical 
elements in the literature. Overall, the framework presented here can be a generic and 
powerful tool to extract and disseminate material-specific information on composition–
structure–processing–property dataspaces, allowing insights into fundamental problems 
relevant to the materials science community and accelerated materials discovery. 
2 
 
Introduction 
Overwhelmingly large amount of knowledge generated through scientific enquiry is stored as 
unstructured data in the form of texts and images. These range from expository archives such as 
books, journals, and dissertations to condensed representations such as handbooks and manuals.  
Materials science, being a highly interdisciplinary area, commands a large repository of scientific 
publications. However, only a limited fraction of this knowledge is collected and curated in the 
form of structured data, for example, a database of composition–structure–property relationships.  
The information on material science is increasingly siloed and simply too large for the efficient 
utilization of any one individual or group. Just as in all other branches of science, the materials 
community is afflicted by the curse of knowledge incommensurate with the available 
information1,2. Thus, the accessibility to the vast majority of knowledge in the literature is limited, 
as it: (i) is time consuming to manually read and analyze the texts and images, and (ii) requires a 
domain expert to understand, interpret, and summarize the information. 
 
Recent advancements in natural language processing (NLP) provide a promising solution to this 
problem through the automation of text comprehension, querying, and knowledge extraction from 
scientific texts. NLP has been applied extensively to scientific literature specifically in biological 
sciences for more than two decades3-5. A biomedical-specific language model, namely, BioBERT4, 
which is used extensively for biomedical text mining stands as a testimony to the advances and 
contributions of NLP in biological sciences. In contrast, the applications of NLP to materials 
science remain sparse6,7. Similar to biological sciences, the study of materials present some unique 
challenges to the direct application of NLP to mine text data due to the domain-specific jargons 
and lack of uniform conventions in scientific writing7,8. Despite these challenges, recent studies 
have shown that NLP can indeed be used to address some open challenges in materials science 
such as novel materials discovery6, unraveling synthesis pathways9, and extracting composition–
property databases10.  
 
Cole et al11-13 have demonstrated the automated generation of databases for magnetic14 and battery 
materials10 using ChemDataExtractor15, which has also been used in predicting phase diagrams16. 
Olivetti et al7,9,17 have used NLP together with artificial neural networks to predict synthesis 
parameters of inorganic oxides9,18,19 and in extracting the properties of zeolites20 and cementitious 
materials21. Jain et al6 have demonstrated the use of word vectors in converting semantic queries 
to vector algebra and extended the method to the prediction of thermoelectrics. Ceder et al9 have 
shown the extraction of automated synthesis recipes of inorganic oxides through a semi-supervised 
approach. Recently, Matscholar8 has been introduced as a comprehensive material science search 
and discovery engine that is able to automatically identify materials, properties, characterization 
methods, phase descriptors, synthesis methods and applications from a given text through a custom 
built named entity recognition (NER) system. These developments suggest that artificial 
intelligence approaches using NLP can be a promising route to condense and represent knowledge 
in materials science leading to novel materials discovery and development.  
 
Very few studies have, however, focused on extracting information related to images and plots in 
literature. The adage, “a picture is worth a thousand words”, is even more relevant to scientific 
literature as images hold the most crucial information related to scientific hypothesis and theories. 
Till date, there has been no framework that allows direct search or compilation of images presented 
in scientific literature. Further, the images of a manuscript should be read in conjunction with the 
3 
 
text to understand the context. While many of the applications of NLP in material science have 
focused on extraction and processing of textual information, no effort has been made thus far to 
connect these textual information with the images and plots to allow knowledge dissemination in 
a holistic manner.  
 
Here, we demonstrate a comprehensive NLP framework that extracts information from a large 
corpus of text and images to provide highly specific, nuanced, and automated exploration of 
materials science literature. Specifically, we analyze the texts and images from around 100,000 
research articles in the area of glasses, an archetypical disordered material. Glasses are one of the 
most common and widely used among engineering materials with uses spanning architectural, 
functional, and biomedical applications22,23. Recently, machine learning (ML) approaches have 
been used to develop predictive models for optical, electronic, and mechanical properties of 
glasses22,24-34. Several recent works have shared composition–property databases along with the 
trained ML models29,30,33,35. For instance, the software package, Python for Glass Genomics 
(PyGGi), has a large composition–property database, ML models for predicting nine key 
properties and an optimization framework for targeted glass discovery36. These models, however, 
have relied on existing databases for their training and analysis37, and hence have been restricted 
to parameter predictions through regression models. It is well known that the properties of glasses, 
a non-equilibrium state, are not just a function of composition, but are also fundamentally 
influenced by the processing history and testing conditions23,38-40.  
 
Through a combination of NLP algorithms, chemical entity extraction protocols, and visualization 
tools, we show that the answers to very specific questions on glass literature can be answered. 
These include material/property specific questions as well as broader community issues such as: 
1. What are the common synthesis methods for a given glass? Eg: What is the most common 
synthesis method for optical glasses? 
2. What chemical elements have been used in LEDs? 
3. Where is Americium used in glasses?  
4. What glass compositions have been studied with an AFM? 
5. Are more of the papers published in glass science theoretical as opposed to experimental? 
6. What glass compositions have been studied for a given property? Eg: What glasses are 
known to be fluorescent in the ultra violet?  
 
Overall, the generic framework developed here allow highly specific exploration of scientific 
literature using the abstracts, text and image captions of publications.  
 
Methods 
The CrossRef metadata API was used to query existing literature databases using keywords 
specific to the glass community. These include (1) descriptive application identifiers such as 
‘chalcogenide glasses’, ‘bioactive glasses’, ‘laser glasses’, ‘optical glasses,’ etc (2) 
property/processing terms such as ‘glass transition temperature’, ‘oxide glasses’, ‘optical 
luminescence’, etc, and (3) conjugated keywords such as ‘glass mechanical properties’, ‘glass-
dissolution’, ‘glass AND fracture’ etc. This query returned an initial list of over 6 million DOIs 
out of which the full texts of 600,000 articles were downloaded using the Elsevier Science Direct 
API. A custom XML parser was written to extract specific sections of the article including the 
metadata, abstract, images, image captions, and individual sections identified by their headings.  
4 
 
 
To understand the distribution of topics in the downloaded database, a natural language processing 
(NLP) algorithm called the Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) was used to identify the number of 
distinct ‘topics’ in the corpus where a topic is defined as the set of words with the highest 
probability of occurrence in a document belonging to the topic.  The LDA plot is presented in the 
supplementary data. It is seen that while some topics are relevant to the scientific literature on 
glass, many are from the intersection of glasses with peripheral topics such as women’s health, 
economy, and environment. In fact, one topic only includes non-English articles identified by the 
European vowels ‘un’, ‘es’, ‘le’ etc. The full texts of articles belonging to topics of little relevance 
to the materials science literature on glasses were removed, along with editorial notes, 
commentaries, book reviews, retractions, and conference proceedings. The use of LDA is thus 
demonstrated to greatly aid the curation of topic specific text databases – a non-trivial effort by 
any other means.  
 
The remaining database was further refined by the use of a machine learning classifier model that 
performed a binary classification of the article abstracts into ‘relevant’ and ‘non-relevant’. For this, 
3000 randomly selected abstracts were manually tagged as being ‘glass’ and ‘not-glass’. Using the 
Python SciKit library, a logistic regression classifier model was found to have an accuracy of 86 
% and a recall of 76 % on the classification task. The regression model was found to outperform 
other text classification algorithms such as Naïve Bayes and Random Forests. The details are the 
models are given in the supplementary materials. Finally, the binary classifier categorized 94,207 
articles as being relevant to the material science study of glasses. All further natural language 
processing driven analyses were done only on this text corpus. The DOIs, Titles, Journals and 
Authors of these articles are given in additional data. 
 
 
Caption Cluster Plot 
The final corpus contains a total of 106,238 figures and their captions. With the help of the Stanford 
NLTK package the caption texts were tokenized after removal of punctuations, numerals, and stop 
words. These tokens, which include words of the English language, chemical symbols and 
abbreviations, form the corpus dictionary of size (N) which determine the number of dimensions 
of the vector space for the Caption cluster plot. Each caption is mapped to a unique vector in this 
vector space by calculating the Term Frequency - Inverse Document Frequency (TFIDF) of every 
word in the caption. TFIDF is a statistical count that reflects the relevance of a word in a document 
and is a common vectorization technique for text mining and information retrieval. For a term “t” 
appearing in “d” documents within a collection D: 
TFIDF =   𝑡𝑓𝑖𝑑𝑓 (𝑡, 𝑑, 𝐷) =  𝑡𝑓 (𝑡, 𝑑) ×  𝑖𝑑𝑓 (𝑡, 𝐷) 
where 
𝑡𝑓(𝑡, 𝑑) = 01 𝑖𝑓 𝑡 𝑖𝑠 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑖𝑛 𝐷
0, 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒
 
 
𝑖𝑑𝑓 (𝑡, 𝐷) = 𝑙𝑜𝑔
𝑁
𝑑[𝐷: 𝑡[𝑑] 
 
The cosine distance of all the captions from each other is calculated and used as the metric for T-
Stochastic Nearest Neighbor Embedding (TSNE), which projects the vectors into a two 
5 
 
dimensional plane so that vectors with the highest cosine similarities group together. Finally, each 
caption is assigned a unique label corresponding to the type of image it represents, such as SEM, 
XRD, TEM, Luminescence, Fracture, etc. through rule based string search. The color of the pixel 
in the TSNE plot is determined by its label. The TFIDF vectorization and the cosine metric ensure 
that the geometric distance between pixels on the 2D plot correlate with the semantic similarity of 
captions, and therefore that identical images cluster together.  
 
LDA Plot 
The 94207 abstracts are further categorized using LDA. The optimum number of topics was found 
by the coherence plot which was found to converge after 15 topics. After 500 passes, the LDA 
algorithm identified the topics listed in Fig 1(c). Similar to the caption cluster plot, each abstract 
was tokenized, vectorized, and plotted in 2D using TSNE. The coloring of the pixels is based on 
the topic number identified by the LDA. Once again, the pixels are seen to cluster strongly based 
on color, indicating that abstracts with similar lexical content have been grouped together by the 
algorithm.  
 
Extraction of Chemical species 
ChemDataExtractor was used to identify and extract the individual chemical species from every 
abstract. This includes individual chemical elements and compounds identified by their symbols, 
names and chemical formulae. A custom python script is used to extract the individual chemical 
elements from the most frequent of these compounds.  
 
Elemental maps 
If an element X is identified as being present in an abstract, the pixel corresponding to the abstract 
in the LDA plot is given a different color. This allows the mapping of elemental compositions as 
identified in the step above to the information content present in the LDA plot. Similarly, the 
elemental information and captions are correlated by merging the caption cluster plot and the LDA. 
A caption pixel is given a different color if the abstract of the text that the caption belongs to 
contains the element.   
 
Results 
To demonstrate the proposed approach, we downloaded more than 600,000 research articles, full 
texts and images, related to the keyword “oxide glasses” and “materials science” using the 
CrossRef metadata query API41 and the Elsevier Science Direct API42. Following this, supervised 
learning was performed on the abstracts of the manuscripts to filter the relevant manuscripts. (see 
Methods for details). Abstracts are the most information dense organ of a scientific paper, 
containing information on the material under study, property being explored, and 
characterization/synthesis methods being employed in service of the investigation. As such, they 
are unlikely to contain spurious information or refer to materials or properties not mentioned in 
the text. This specificity makes an abstract the most useful part of a text, and it is therefore not 
surprising that many NLP studies on materials have only taken paper abstracts as the input6. Based 
on the supervised learning, we obtained approximately 100,000 research articles relevant to the 
topic. While not an exhaustive list, the total number of articles downloaded are in the same range 
as the number of texts identified in other comprehensive literature surveys on glass43,44. 
 
6 
 
An unsupervised NLP algorithm called latent Dirichlet allocation45 (LDA) was used to 
automatically classify the corpus into fifteen ‘topics’, where each topic is defined by the set of 
words that have the highest probability of occurrence within the topic. LDA allows a rapid and 
efficient organization of the text corpus with minimal human supervision—a capability provided 
by no other automated tool available today.  The categories generated by LDA is visualized in the 
LDA plot in Fig 1(a). Each abstract in the corpus is vectorized using Term Frequency–Inverse 
Document Frequency46 (TFIDF) which maps each document in the corpus to a unique vector in a 
higher dimensional space. t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) projects these 
vectors to a 2D plane such that vectors with the highest cosine similarity group together. The color 
of a pixel is determined by the topic number assigned to it by LDA.  
 
It is seen immediately from Fig. 1(a) that the pixels group together by color, which demonstrates 
the agreement between two different organizational paradigms—vectorization followed by 
clustering, and LDA. The LDA plot is a graphical representation of the entire field of glass 
literature and succinctly summarizes the details mentioned earlier. Note that the descriptive label 
is assigned to these topics by a human expert that maps the automatically generated lexical 
probability distribution to established categories in glass literature. For example, the words with 
the highest probability of occurrence in Topic 11 are ‘er’, ‘yb’, ‘emission’, ‘doped’, 
‘luminescence’, ‘nd’, and ‘tm’. This suggests that the topic is related to the luminescence of glasses 
doped with rare earth ions and hence is labelled as ‘Rare Earth glasses’. The distribution of 
abstracts into the identified topics is shown schematically in the histogram in Fig. 1(b). The 
descriptive labels for all the other topics are similarly identified and listed in Fig. 1(c).  
 
A mere visual inspection confirms that Topic 5–thin films–is the single largest group followed by 
topics 13 and 6. The most common set of articles related to ‘Thin films’ includes both the 
luminescence properties of oxides such as ZnO on glass substrates as well as the studies of 
transparent glasses on a thin film geometry. This is followed by ‘glass ceramics’, ‘methodological 
studies’ of glasses (including both theoretical and modeling studies), and ‘non-linear optical 
properties of glasses’. In general, the list is found to be comprehensive covering all facets of glass 
literature in terms of applications, properties, and ingredients including bioactive glasses, dielectric 
glasses, nanomaterials, chemical and electromagnetic properties. Other categories such as 
mechanical and failure studies of glasses are seen to be subsumed within these broad topics. Note 
that a more detailed classification can be further performed to obtain the subtopics by performing 
LDA recursively on each of the topics separately (see Supplementary materials). 
7 
 
 
Figure 1. LDA plot of the abstracts. (a)The latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) plot present the 
clusters of vectorized abstracts colored based on topics identified by LDA. (b)The number of 
abstracts on each topic as identified by LDA. (c) The descriptive label assigned to LDA topics by 
a human expert. 
 
The corpus also contains a collection of 106,238 figures and their captions. It is well known that 
the information content of scientific articles is expressed mostly through graphics. These images 
and their corresponding captions therefore provide a technical summary of the documents that they 
belong to. The Caption Cluster Plot47 (CCP) shown in Fig. 2(a) is a graphical representation of the 
information contained in all the captions, grouped by their semantic similarity using NLP. The 
captions are tokenized and vectorized using TFIDF and t-SNE, as explained earlier for the LDA 
plot. The pixels are colored based on categorical keywords identified by a human expert as 
explained in the methods section. Finally, these labels are positioned at the median (x,y) positions 
of the corresponding pixels, with the size of the label proportional to the number of images in that 
category.  
 
8 
 
 
Figure 2. Caption cluster plot. (a) The caption cluster plot presents the clusters of vectorized 
captions colored by preselected keywords. (b) The labels with the highest number of counts in 
the caption database. (c) A grayscale image of the plot showing the four ontological axes. 
 
Fig. 2(b) shows the distribution of captions with respect to the topics for each image type identified 
in the CCP. We observe that ‘Anneal’, Xray Diffraction (XRD), ‘Crystal’, ‘Emission’ and 
‘Crystallization temp’ (Tc) are the most common types of images in glass literature, underlining 
the importance of thermal synthesis routines, microstructure and optical characterization methods 
in glass science. Captions representing similar types of images are found to cluster next to each 
other. For example, microstructure measurements such as Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), 
XRD, Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM), Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDX), and 
Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) all cluster at the lower half of the caption cluster plot 
while optical properties such as emission, absorption, fluorescence, and luminescence are found 
at the very top. The use of TFIDF as the vectorization algorithm ensure that labels, and hence the 
captions representing images, are found to group together organically, based on their semantic 
similarity.  
 
Interestingly, the CCP is found to have 4 distinct axes that capture complementary information on 
glass literature. These are the Optical, Mechanical, Microstructural and Thermodynamic axes as 
shown in Fig. 2(c). Optical axes is represented by images related to ‘emission’, ‘luminescence’, 
‘fluorescence’ to name a few. Images that study mechanical properties such as ‘crack’, ‘stress-
strain’, ‘strength’ and ‘compressibility’ are found closest to the Mechanical axes, while 
thermodynamic properties such as glass transition temperature, activation energy, specific heat, 
Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC), and Differential Thermal Analysis (DTA), to name a 
9 
 
few, lie along the Thermodynamic axis. Finally, the images related to ‘XRD’, ‘EDX’, ‘anneal’ and 
‘Crystal’ fall along the microstructure axis. This observation can be formalized by computing the 
Euclidean distance between caption labels and the four axes. The thermodynamic properties are 
closest to the Thermodynamic axes, while the optical properties are most proximate to Optical 
axes etc. This observation is a direct result of using the TSNE algorithm based on the cosine 
similarity of caption vectors, which ensures that the Euclidean distance between pixels is a measure 
of the semantic similarity of the underlying captions.  
 
Certain captions do not belong to any one axes but are found to be equally spaced from two or 
more of them. For example, ‘Fracture’ and ‘Interface’ are located at nearly equal distances from 
the ‘Mechanical axis’ and ‘Microstructure axis’. These terms represent microstructural features 
that are critical determiners of mechanical properties. The captions likely contain terms that relate 
equally to both axis categories, justifying their position in the CCP. The position of cluster labels 
is an indicator of their relative co-occurrence frequency, thereby showing that ‘anneal’ is strongly 
related to ‘Crystal’ (and variations thereof including ‘crystalline’ and ‘crystal structure’) while 
‘PLE’ is more related to ‘absorption’ than to ‘emission’. At the same time, the proximity of 
‘bioactive’ to the mechanical axis suggests that many experiments on bioactive materials pertain 
to the measurement of strength and hardness thereby bringing the captions into semantic 
convergence. Overall, we observe that the CCP provides invaluable insights into the contents of 
these figures, which when combined with a predefined ontology solve many of the problems stated 
earlier. In particular, the analysis of captions through CCP provides a visual tool that rapidly 
summarizes the entire field of glass literature, allowing a user to quickly comprehend the trends, 
themes, and common characterization methods in the community. 
 
Next, the python library, ChemDataExtractor, was used to automatically extracts chemical 
species—including names of compounds, chemical formulae and symbols—from the abstracts. 
The chemicals that occur with the highest frequency in the database are given in the Supplementary 
material. The chemical names and symbols were standardized following which the chemical 
elements present in each compound was separately identified. This creates a binary marker for 
each element such that if the element is mentioned in the abstract, the marker assumes the value 1 
and 0 otherwise. The LDA plot is redrawn such that only if the abstract contains the marker for an 
element is the corresponding pixel colored. Similarly, if a caption is drawn from a text wherein the 
element is contained in the abstract, the pixel is marked with a color in the CCP. The results are 
the Elemental maps given in Fig. 3, where the images at the top are elements mapped to the caption 
cluster plot and the images at the bottom are maps of LDA. The elemental maps provide a direct 
visual representation of the distribution of elements in glass literature. The juxtaposition of these 
maps with the caption plot and the LDA provides a highly specific graphic tool to analyze the 
intersection of selected chemistries with a topic in glass science or a specific 
property/characterization technique.  
 
10 
 
 
Figure 3. Elemental maps. The elemental maps of (a) Si, (c) Ca and Er, and (e) Am and In 
superimposed on the CCP showing the presence of the respective elements in the abstracts of the 
manuscripts from which the images are taken. The elemental maps of (b) Si, (d) Ca and Er, and 
(f) Am and In superimposed on the LDA plot showing the abstracts where the elements have 
been identified to be present.  
 
As a validation of this concept, it is seen easily from Fig. 3(a) and (b) that silicon is abundantly 
distributed among all topics, properties, and characterization methods in glass literature. A similar 
result can be seen for oxygen (see Supplementary material). This is hardly a surprise as silicate 
glasses are one of the most common family of inorganic glasses. The map for calcium and erbium 
in Fig. 3(c) and (d) is more illustrative. Calcium is found to be less uniformly distributed than 
silicon, with high concentration in the clusters identified as bioactive by LDA. This is a 
representation of the fact that calcium is one of the major constituents of bioactive glasses. The 
overlapping data for erbium in Fig. 3(c) and (d) shows that this element is mostly present in the 
LDA topic ‘rare earth glasses’ and in the caption clusters ‘emission’, ‘PLE’, ‘band structure’ and 
‘energy diagrams’. The Elemental map therefore provides a visual diagram of the presence of an 
element in glass literature. Rare earth elements such as erbium, dysprosium and ytterbium are used 
largely for LEDs and laser applications which is confirmed by the region of the LDA plot that is 
highlighted by these elements (‘Rare earth glasses’ and ‘LEDs and Phosphors’) as well as by the 
image categories where they predominate.  
 
One of the questions raised in the introduction ‘Where is Americium used in glasses’ is answered 
in Figs. 3 (e) and (f). Only 25 articles were found with Americium mentioned in the abstract. They 
are seen to fall over regions identified as ‘glass ceramic’ and ‘glass irradiation studies’ from the 
11 
 
LDA plot. Upon inspection, it is indeed found that most of these abstracts relate to studies of 
nuclear exposure and radiation on glass ceramics – demonstrating a practical use of the concepts 
developed so far in answering a question that is otherwise not reachable through any other 
approach today. Similarly, Indium is found to be distributed in Figs. 3(e) and (f) mostly in the 
section identified as ‘Thin films’ relating to the large body of work that has been carried out on 
the transparent conducting Indium Tin Oxide (ITO) electrodes on glass substrates and glass 
ceramics. The elemental maps for all the 120 known elements overlapping with the LDA and CCPs 
are presented in the Supplementary material.  
 
Discussion 
The LDA and CCPs provide a highly specific, detailed, and succinct graphical summary of the 
available corpus of glass literature. They provide answers to some of the questions raised in the 
introduction. For example, the caption cluster plot visually conveys the fact that the most studied 
aspects of glasses in literature relate to their annealing behavior and microstructure, and that 
studies on optical emission are slightly more common than that of absorption. The database 
generated through the caption cluster plot provides a useful source of specialized images—say 
SEM microstructural images or AFM images of glasses—which can then be used for learning 
images through AI and ML algorithms such as convolutional neural networks. These can be used 
to answer some of the pressing problems in the field today such as identifying the causes of fracture 
or dissolution by linking to other structure—processing parameters.  
 
Similarly, the LDA plot provides insights on the broad themes within glass ontology into which 
the text is divided. It is seen immediately through visual inspection that the amount of work done 
on bioactive glasses is less than that on glass ceramics or that irradiation studies on glasses occupy 
the bottom of glass hierarchy in terms of the sheer number of publications. The LDA plot is a 
topological map of glass literature, where each text is assigned a unique position next to other 
works of similar nature, content, and theme. This provides a way to efficiently search for 
publications that are similar to a given paper—once the position of the publication in the vector 
space is determined, the nearest neighbors are by default the ones that are the most semantically 
similar. There are currently no other tools, even in established scientific databases and search 
engines, that allow the detailed exploration, analysis, and easy visual analysis offered by the CCPs 
and the LDA plots. At the same time, combining the caption cluster, LDA, and Elemental plots 
results in the creation of a tool that can query, explore, and analyze the information content in glass 
literature with unprecedented detail and specificity.  
 
An example toward such an attempt for knowledge extraction and dissemination combining CCP, 
LDA and Elemental map is presented in Fig. 4. The LDA plot identifies abstracts in the database 
that belong to the category of ‘bioactive glasses’. The elemental maps allow the selection of only 
those abstracts among these that have been marked with the presence of fluorine and chlorine. This 
is shown in Fig. 4(b) where the red pixels corresponding to the F and Cl containing abstracts are 
found to overlap with the green pixels corresponding to abstracts on bioactive glasses. The region 
of the greatest overlap is seen to be the three islands on the LDA plot that are marked as bioactive 
glasses, thereby confirming that among all fields of glass science, F and Cl most commonly find 
their application within this topic. This in itself is a remarkable capability—the identification of 
only those scientific publications subject to the dual constraints of topical category and chemistry. 
It bears repeating that there is no other method currently available that can do this.  
12 
 
 
Figure 4. Knowledge extraction combining CCP, LDA and Elemental maps. (a) The 
bioactive glass cluster is identified from the LDA plot. (b) The abstracts that contain F and Cl are 
marked on the plot in red. The area of overlap are abstracts on bioactive glasses that contain F 
and Cl. (c) The SEM, EDX, XRD, and PLE images from journal articles belonging only to this 
parameter space are marked by colored pixels in the CCP. Inset images [i-viii] are arbitrarily 
selected examples of these images as identified by the plot27,35,48-52. 
 
Adding the caption cluster plot to this information allows even deeper exploration of literature by 
extracting a processing, characterization, or property image from this parameter space. For 
example, Fig. 4(c) show the SEM, EDX, XRD, and PLE captions of figures from abstracts that 
contain F and Cl on the topic of bioactive glasses. Arbitrarily selected images from this parameter 
space are displayed for reference in the inset of Fig. 4(c) [i-viii]. The captions of these images 
confirm that the figures do correspond to the selected image type, while their abstracts span a broad 
topic range include apetites, glass microparticles, mesospheres, and bioactive scaffolds—all of 
which relate broadly to the subset of bioactive glasses under consideration. Thus, this method 
allows the rapid exploration of scientific data to access extremely nuanced and specific information 
sets. Such a method might be very useful for a researcher who wishes to access the microstructure 
of chloride or fluoride glasses without conducting an extensive literature survey—the only 
alternative available today. Elemental tagging adds a chemical marker to images for computer 
vision tasks, as in the training of predictive algorithms that link microstructure or property to 
composition.  
 
The methods of systematic scientific exploration of literature that has been developed so far can 
be generalized by querying the abstract database for arbitrary search terms. Figure 5 presents an 
13 
 
example where the application strings ‘optical glass’ and ‘LED’, as well as the synthesis string 
‘solid state’ has been used to identify all the abstracts in the document space that contain the 
respective strings. This allows us to categorize the abstracts based on specific applications, 
synthesis methods, characterizations, or properties. In Fig. 5(a), all the abstracts relating to optical 
glasses are identified from corpus and are visually represented as green pixels in the LDA plot, 
where they are seen to overlap with the topics identified as ‘LEDs and Phosphors’, ‘spectroscopic 
studies’ and ‘rare earth glasses’. Similarly, Fig. 5(b) shows all the abstracts that contain the search 
string ‘solid state synthesis’ which is a common method for fabricating oxides and oxide glasses. 
The overlap of the two sets of complementary information are the set of abstracts on optical glasses 
synthesized through solid state synthesis. This analysis can be carried further by combining this 
data with the caption cluster plot, through which specific image types such as the DTA or XRD of 
optical glasses made through solid state synthesis can be extracted. While the level of specificity 
offered by this approach is in itself useful to a researcher who wishes to learn more about the solid 
state synthesis of optical glasses, the method allows the use of any number of search strings—
allowing for a detailed multidimensional extraction of information from literature.  
 
Figure 5. Knowledge extraction framework. (a) The LDA plot. (b) Abstracts with ‘optical 
glasses’ in the text. (c) Abstracts with ‘solid state synthesis’ in the text overlapping with optical 
glasses. (d) Abstracts with ‘LED’ in the text (e) Abstracts with rare earths. 
 
Similarly, the green points in Fig. 5(c) represent abstracts with the string ‘LED’ in it. By mapping 
this data to the elemental maps, the presence of abstracts with specific chemical compositions can 
be marked, such as in Fig. 5(d) that highlights the elements europium, cerium, and samarium. 
These are therefore LEDs that contain any of these elements or any combination of them. This 
data allows the user to read through these abstracts, and only these abstracts, to learn more about 
the subject. He or she is then able to look through microstructural, luminescence, or 
thermodynamic data that is linked to this dataset through the caption cluster plot. 
 
14 
 
Conclusion 
Altogether, we demonstrate that the application of NLP to glass literature enables the curation and 
selection of data sources sorted by specific applications, properties, characterization methods, and 
chemistries. In turn, this allows for custom composition–processing–property databases to be 
compiled automatically, and in linking together parts of the information space in a way that has so 
far not been possible. When used together, text vectorization, LDA, and elemental maps solve 
many of the challenging questions impeding the accelerated discovery of glasses, some which are 
stated in the Introduction. However, the major contribution of the present study is that it opens a 
way to ask deeper and broader questions of glass literature, that can ultimately enrich the field by 
solving outstanding problems – old and new. In particular, the development of a glass specific 
ontology, a curated image repository, and a named entity recognition tool tailored for this 
community can go a long way in enhancing the methods demonstrated for the first time in this 
paper. Further, by combining these tools with a natural language model—such as a ‘GlassBert’—
can open the field to many more advances in Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning by 
making available rapid, efficient, and tailored composition–processing–property databases. The 
scalable methods demonstrated in this study are broadly applicable to any scientific field and 
consequently is of universal relevance in accelerating the scientific enquiry.  
 
Acknowledgements 
N.M.A.K. acknowledges the financial support for this research provided by the Department of Science and 
Technology, India under the INSPIRE faculty scheme (DST/INSPIRE/04/2016/002774) and DST SERB 
Early Career Award (ECR/2018/002228). The authors thank the IIT Delhi HPC facility for providing the 
computational and storage resources. 
 
References 
1 
De Guire, E. et al. Data-driven glass/ceramic science research: Insights from the glass and ceramic 
and data science/informatics communities. Journal of the American Ceramic Society 102, 6385-
6406, doi:10.1111/jace.16677 (2019). 
2 
Rajan, K. Materials Informatics: The Materials “Gene” and Big Data. Annual Review of Materials 
Research 45, 153-169, doi:10.1146/annurev-matsci-070214-021132 (2015). 
3 
Friedman, C., Kra, P., Yu, H., Krauthammer, M. & Rzhetsky, A. GENIES: a natural-language 
processing system for the extraction of molecular pathways from journal articles. Bioinformatics 
17, S74-S82, doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/17.suppl_1.S74 (2001). 
4 
Lee, J. et al. BioBERT: a pre-trained biomedical language representation model for biomedical text 
mining. Bioinformatics 36, 1234-1240, doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btz682 (2020). 
5 
Yandell, M. D. & Majoros, W. H. Genomics and natural language processing. Nature Reviews 
Genetics 3, 601-610, doi:10.1038/nrg861 (2002). 
6 
Tshitoyan, V. et al. Unsupervised word embeddings capture latent knowledge from materials 
science literature. Nature 571, 95-98, doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1335-8 (2019). 
7 
Kim, E., Huang, K., Kononova, O., Ceder, G. & Olivetti, E. Distilling a Materials Synthesis Ontology. 
Matter 1, 8-12, doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matt.2019.05.011 (2019). 
8 
Weston, L. et al. Named Entity Recognition and Normalization Applied to Large-Scale Information 
Extraction from the Materials Science Literature. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 
59, 3692-3702, doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00470 (2019). 
9 
Kim, E. et al. Inorganic Materials Synthesis Planning with Literature-Trained Neural Networks. J 
Chem Inf Model 60, 1194-1201, doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00995 (2020). 
15 
 
10 
Huang, S. & Cole, J. M. A database of battery materials auto-generated using ChemDataExtractor. 
Scientific Data 7, 260, doi:10.1038/s41597-020-00602-2 (2020). 
11 
Cole, J. M. A Design-to-Device Pipeline for Data-Driven Materials Discovery. Accounts of Chemical 
Research 53, 599-610, doi:10.1021/acs.accounts.9b00470 (2020). 
12 
Beard, E. J. & Cole, J. M. ChemSchematicResolver: A Toolkit to Decode 2D Chemical Diagrams with 
Labels and R-Groups into Annotated Chemical Named Entities. Journal of Chemical Information 
and Modeling 60, 2059-2072, doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.0c00042 (2020). 
13 
Court, C. J., Yildirim, B., Jain, A. & Cole, J. M. 3-D Inorganic Crystal Structure Generation and 
Property Prediction via Representation Learning. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 
60, 4518-4535, doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.0c00464 (2020). 
14 
Court, C. J. & Cole, J. M. Auto-generated materials database of Curie and Néel temperatures via 
semi-supervised relationship extraction. Scientific Data 5, 180111, doi:10.1038/sdata.2018.111 
(2018). 
15 
Swain, M. C. & Cole, J. M. ChemDataExtractor: A Toolkit for Automated Extraction of Chemical 
Information from the Scientific Literature. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 56, 
1894-1904, doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.6b00207 (2016). 
16 
Court, C. J. & Cole, J. M. Magnetic and superconducting phase diagrams and transition 
temperatures predicted using text mining and machine learning. npj Computational Materials 6, 
18, doi:10.1038/s41524-020-0287-8 (2020). 
17 
Mahbub, R. et al. Text mining for processing conditions of solid-state battery electrolyte. 
Electrochemistry 
Communications 
121, 
106860, 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.elecom.2020.106860 (2020). 
18 
Kim, E., Huang, K., Jegelka, S. & Olivetti, E. Virtual screening of inorganic materials synthesis 
parameters with deep learning. npj Computational Materials 3, 53, doi:10.1038/s41524-017-
0055-6 (2017). 
19 
Kim, E. et al. Machine-learned and codified synthesis parameters of oxide materials. Scientific 
Data 4, 170127, doi:10.1038/sdata.2017.127 (2017). 
20 
Jensen, Z. et al. A Machine Learning Approach to Zeolite Synthesis Enabled by Automatic 
Literature Data Extraction. ACS Cent Sci 5, 892-899, doi:10.1021/acscentsci.9b00193 (2019). 
21 
Traynor, B., Uvegi, H., Olivetti, E., Lothenbach, B. & Myers, R. J. Methodology for pH measurement 
in high alkali cementitious systems. Cement and Concrete Research 135, 106122, 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cemconres.2020.106122 (2020). 
22 
Bhaskar, P. et al. Cooling rate effects on the structure of 45S5 bioglass: Insights from experiments 
and 
simulations. 
Journal 
of 
Non-Crystalline 
Solids 
534, 
119952, 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnoncrysol.2020.119952 (2020). 
23 
Mauro, A. V. J. Fundamentals of Inorganic Glasses. Third edn,  (Elsevier, 2019). 
24 
Mauro, J. C., Tandia, A., Vargheese, K. D., Mauro, Y. Z. & Smedskjaer, M. M. Accelerating the 
Design of Functional Glasses through Modeling. Chemistry of Materials 28, 4267-4277, 
doi:10.1021/acs.chemmater.6b01054 (2016). 
25 
Anoop Krishnan, N. M. et al. Predicting the dissolution kinetics of silicate glasses using machine 
learning. 
Journal 
of 
Non-Crystalline 
Solids 
487, 
37-45, 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnoncrysol.2018.02.023 (2018). 
26 
Cassar, D. R., de Carvalho, A. C. P. L. F. & Zanotto, E. D. Predicting glass transition temperatures 
using 
neural 
networks. 
Acta 
Materialia 
159, 
249-256, 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2018.08.022 (2018). 
27 
Covarrubias, C. et al. In situ preparation and osteogenic properties of bionanocomposite scaffolds 
based on aliphatic polyurethane and bioactive glass nanoparticles. Materials Science and 
Engineering: C 96, 642-653, doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msec.2018.11.085 (2019). 
16 
 
28 
Yang, K. et al. Predicting the Young’s Modulus of Silicate Glasses using High-Throughput Molecular 
Dynamics Simulations and Machine Learning. Scientific Reports 9, 8739, doi:10.1038/s41598-019-
45344-3 (2019). 
29 
Ravinder, R. et al. Deep learning aided rational design of oxide glasses. Materials Horizons 7, 1819-
1827, doi:10.1039/D0MH00162G (2020). 
30 
Alcobaça, E. et al. Explainable Machine Learning Algorithms For Predicting Glass Transition 
Temperatures. Acta Materialia 188, 92-100, doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2020.01.047 
(2020). 
31 
Han, T., Stone-Weiss, N., Huang, J., Goel, A. & Kumar, A. Machine learning as a tool to design 
glasses with controlled dissolution for healthcare applications. Acta Biomaterialia 107, 286-298, 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2020.02.037 (2020). 
32 
Montazerian, M., Zanotto, E. D. & Mauro, J. C. Model-driven design of bioactive glasses: from 
molecular dynamics through machine learning. International Materials Reviews 65, 297-321, 
doi:10.1080/09506608.2019.1694779 (2020). 
33 
Bishnoi, S., Ravinder, R., Grover, H. S., Kodamana, H. & Krishnan, N. M. A. Scalable Gaussian 
Processes for Predicting the Optical, Physical, Thermal, and Mechanical Properties of Inorganic 
Glasses with Large Datasets. Materials Advances, doi:10.1039/D0MA00764A (2021). 
34 
Mauro, A. T. M. C. O. J. C. in Springer Handbook of Glass   (ed J David Musgraves; Juejun Hu; 
Laurent Calvez)  1157-1192 (Springer). 
35 
Nabian, N., Jahanshahi, M. & Rabiee, S. M. Synthesis of nano-bioactive glass–ceramic powders 
and its in vitro bioactivity study in bovine serum albumin protein. Journal of Molecular Structure 
998, 37-41, doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molstruc.2011.05.002 (2011). 
36 
Ravinder, 
R. 
Python 
for 
Glass 
Genomics 
(PyGGi), 
<https://pypi.org/project/glasspy/https://pyggi.iitd.ac.in> (2020). 
37 
Priven, A. I. & Mazurin, O. V. Glass Property Databases: Their History, Present State, and Prospects 
for 
Further 
Development. 
Advanced 
Materials 
Research 
39-40, 
147-152, 
doi:10.4028/www.scientific.net/AMR.39-40.147 (2008). 
38 
Kasimuthumaniyan, S., Reddy, A. A., Krishnan, N. M. A. & Gosvami, N. N. Understanding the role 
of post-indentation recovery on the hardness of glasses: Case of silica, borate, and borosilicate 
glasses. 
Journal 
of 
Non-Crystalline 
Solids 
534, 
119955, 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnoncrysol.2020.119955 (2020). 
39 
Through the Glass Lightly. Science 267, 1609-1618 (1995). 
40 
Li, X. et al. Cooling rate effects in sodium silicate glasses: Bridging the gap between molecular 
dynamics simulations and experiments. The Journal of Chemical Physics 147, 074501, 
doi:10.1063/1.4998611 (2017). 
41 
Crossref, C. M.  (2020). 
42 
Developers., E. E.  (2020). 
43 
Zanotto, J. C. M. E. D. Two Centuries of Glass Research: Historical Trends, Current Status, and 
Grand Challenges for the Future. The International Journal of Applied Glass Science 5, 313-327 
(2014). 
44 
Pambianchi, J. C. M. C. S. P. D. J. V. M. S. Glass Science in the United States: Current Status and 
Future Directions. The International Journal of Applied Glass Science 5, 2-15 (2014). 
45 
Jordan, D. M. B. A. Y. N. M. I. Latent Dirichlet Allocation. Journal of Machine Learning Research 3, 
993-1022 (2003). 
46 
Spärck Jones, K. A Statistical Interpretation of Term Specificity and Its Application in Retrieval. 
Journal of Documentation. 28, 11-21. 
17 
 
47 
Venugopal, V., Broderick, S. R. & Rajan, K. A picture is worth a thousand words: applying natural 
language processing tools for creating a quantum materials database map. MRS Communications 
9, 1134-1141, doi:10.1557/mrc.2019.136 (2019). 
48 
Araújo, M. et al. On the mechanism of apatite-induced precipitation on 45S5 glass pellets coated 
with 
a 
natural-derived 
polymer. 
Applied 
Surface 
Science 
353, 
137-149, 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2015.06.088 (2015). 
49 
Ibrahim, N. F., Mohamad, H., Mohd Noor, S. N. F. & Ahmad, N. Apatite formation on melt-derived 
bioactive glass powder based on SiO2-CaO-Na2O-P2O5 system. Ceramics International 43, 11676-
11685, doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceramint.2017.05.356 (2017). 
50 
Miao, G. et al. Preparation, characterization, in vitro bioactivity and protein loading/release 
property of mesoporous bioactive glass microspheres with different compositions. Advanced 
Powder Technology 30, 1848-1857, doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apt.2019.06.002 (2019). 
51 
Yao, F., LeGeros, J. P. & LeGeros, R. Z. Simultaneous incorporation of carbonate and fluoride in 
synthetic apatites: Effect on crystallographic and physico-chemical properties. Acta Biomaterialia 
5, 2169-2177, doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2009.02.007 (2009). 
52 
Zhou, H., Nabiyouni, M., Lin, B. & Bhaduri, S. B. Fabrication of novel poly(lactic acid)/amorphous 
magnesium phosphate bionanocomposite fibers for tissue engineering applications via 
electrospinning. 
Materials 
Science 
and 
Engineering: 
C 
33, 
2302-2310, 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msec.2013.01.058 (2013). 
 
