Title: The Application of Active Query K-Means in Text Classification
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2107.07682v1
--------------------------------------------------

 
The Application of Active Query K-Means in Text 
Classification 
 
Yukun Jiang 
Department of Computer Science 
New York University 
New York, 10003, United States 
jy2363@nyu.edu 
 
Abstract—Active learning is a state-of-art machine learning 
approach to deal with an abundance of unlabeled data. In the 
field of Natural Language Processing, typically it is costly and 
time-consuming to have all the data annotated. This inefficiency 
inspires out application of active learning in text classification. 
Traditional unsupervised k-means clustering is first modified 
into a semi-supervised version in this research. Then, a novel 
attempt is applied to extend the algorithm into active learning 
scenario with Penalized Min-Max-selection, so as to make 
limited queries that yield more stable initial centroids. This 
method utilizes both the interactive query results from users and 
the underlying distance representation. After tested on a Chinese 
news dataset, it shows a consistent increase in accuracy while 
lowering the cost in training. 
Keywords—natural language processing, text classification, 
query oracle 
I. INTRODUCTION 
As a state-of-art approach to interactively querying a small 
amount of labeled data in combination with a large amount of 
unlabeled data during training process, active learning has 
been applied in many fields, but a couple of shortcomings have 
also gradually been uncovered, particularly in Natural 
Language Processing with the ignorance of massive unlabeled 
data, which inspires us to reconsider the possibility of applying 
active learning approach in Text Classification by using 
experiment data collected from China News.  
The K-means clustering algorithm is one of the most 
fundamental unsupervised machine learning algorithms, which 
can split documents into pre-determined number of clusters, 
whose structures, however, may not live up to human’s 
primary expectation. In addition, due to the intrinsic 
randomness, it could take quite a long time for the algorithm to 
converge. These situations motivate this study first to 
implement semi-supervised k-means and then transform it into 
active 
query 
k-means 
to 
solve 
the 
two 
problems 
aforementioned. In particular, this study plans to modify the 
pure distance-based Min-Max selection strategy into a 
penalized form by active learning to fully utilize the query. 
Some related algorithms have already been investigated 
including Fuzzy-CMeans [1], seed-based K-means [2] and 
semi-supervised Density-Based Clustering [3]. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
The inherent defect of unsupervised clustering algorithms 
is in their structures: they are found to possibly contradict or 
miss the desired structure suitable for the underlying 
applications [4], which is a common problem for NLP text 
classification or topic modeling applications when using 
clustering or Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA). For 
improvement, Sahoo indicates that relatively high accuracy 
can be achieved with the assistance of 10% labeled 
information in medical document classification.  
The use of an excessive amount of RAM memory by K-
means related algorithm presents a practical problem to many 
practitioners. Senuma [5] proposed to adopt a hash function 
for dimension reduction, because hashing is likely to provide 
an efficient way of processing high dimensional vectors, which 
can make a huge difference for this study’ algorithms in 
training processes, given the diversity and thus high 
dimensional vectors of Chinese words and phrases.  
Viet-Vu Vu and his teams [6] proposed a pioneering active 
learning variant of K-means clustering. Specifically, in usual 
semi supervised K-means, the initial centroids are computed 
by using a small portion of labeled data provided. But the 
performance may vary depending on whether the labeled data 
provided is balanced or close to the real centroids. The 
proposed active learning variant of K-means seeks to pick the 
portion of labeled data that favor the coverage of the whole 
dataset. Their pure distance-based Min-Max Selection 
algorithm purposed is inspiring and is the prototype of our 
study.  
III. PREPARATION 
A. Dataset 
The dataset for this study is collected from China News, 
which covers 7 classes of news: “Domestic”, “HK- Taiwan”, 
“International”, 
“Economics”, 
“Art”, 
“Celebrity” 
and 
“Sports”. The dataset contains 1.3 million entries of short 
news for training and 0.11 million for testing, both with 
answer keys and are roughly well-balanced, with each class 
accounting for about 14%. Owning to training time 
constraints, 4000 news and 500 news for train and test 
respectively are applied respectively. Furthermore, the trainset 
is splitted into 80% for training and 20% for validation.  
 
B. Data Preprocessing 
Since the dataset is in Chinese, there are no spaces 
between words as a token splitter. Therefore, this study 
performs the following preprocessing steps: 
1) tokenization: the python package “jieba” is applied 
with common stop-word list and punctuation lists for Chinese 
word to tokenize each news piece. 
2) lemmatization: some traditional Chinese characters 
present in the datset are transformed into simplified Chinese 
characters for consistency and lower complexity. 
3) vectorization: after TF-IDF vectorization, each news 
piece’s feature dimension is 15283 long, which would for 
sure present computational difficulty in the training process. 
Thus, dimension reduction is necessary.  
4) dimension-reduction: feature Hashing technique as 
suggested by Hajime Senuma’s article using hashing function 
[5] was first applied. However, the result is found not 
satisfactory since many unrelated words are hashed into the 
same entry, making it impossible for the system to tell apart 
the two news pieces. For example, given the following two 
sentences: 
1. Monkeys love banana. (Animal category) 
2. Virus breaks out. (Pandemic category) 
Then the vector would be 6-long, corresponding to 
index1: monkey, index2: love, index3: banana, index4: virus, 
index5: break and index6: out. 
The vector for Sentence 1 is [1,1,1,0,0,0], for Sentence 2 
[0,0,0,1,1,1]. If we were to reduce dimension by 50%, namely 
making the vector to be 3-long, we would do “modulus 3” 
operation. After taking the modulus, both vectors for Sentence 
1 and Sentence 2 are [1,1,1]. Clearly any system could not tell 
these two news pieces apart because of the same vectorization. 
Therefore, the principal component analysis (PCA) is 
applied to effectively reduce the dimension. The statistical 
explained variation measures the proportion to which a model 
accounts for the dispersion of the given data set. To balance 
between dimensionality and information retainment, this 
study chooses to adopt a 5% PCA level with an explained 
variance 41%. 
TABLE I. 
PCA STATISTICS 
PCA level  
1% 
5% 
10% 
20% 
Explained variation  19% 
41% 
56% 
68% 
IV. EVALUATION MEASURE 
A. Performance Measure 
Since this is a text classification task, the length of system 
output is always consistent with the length of answer keys. 
Therefore, accuracy is used as the evaluation metric, namely 
𝒄𝒄𝒖𝒓𝒂𝒄𝒚=
𝒄𝒐𝒓𝒓𝒆𝒄𝒕 𝒄𝒍𝒂𝒔𝒔𝒊𝒇𝒊𝒄𝒂𝒕𝒊𝒐𝒏𝒔
𝒕𝒐𝒕𝒂𝒍 𝒏𝒖𝒎 𝒐𝒇 𝒏𝒆𝒘𝒔
 . 
B. Uniformity Measure 
In order to find out how “uniformly distributed” the 
initialization of the dataset picked is, we use Gini-Index as 
measure. The higher the Gini-Index is, the more uniform the 
dataset is. The definition is as follows: 
Definition 1. For a dataset containing k different classes 
with each class i appearing with probability pi such that 
∑
𝑝𝑖
𝑘
𝑖=1
= 1 , and the Gini-Index is ∑
𝑝𝑖(1 −𝑝𝑖)
𝑘
𝑖=1
= 1 −
∑
𝑝𝑖
2
𝑘
𝑖=1
 
 
Theorem 1. For a dataset containing k different classes 
with each class i appearing with probability pi, the Gini-Index 
is maximized when 𝑝𝑖=
1
𝑘, ∀𝑖∈{1, ⋯, 𝑘} 
 
Thus, in our dataset which contains 7 categories of news, 
the theoretical upper bound is when each class appears with 
probability 
1
7  , yielding ideal Gini-Index = 1 −∑
ቀ1
7ቁ
2
7
𝑖=1
=
0.857. 
C. Baselines & Upper Bound 
Two baselines and a single upper bound are adopted to be 
compared with two systems (semi-supervised k-means & 
active query k-means) 
Baseline1:  Baseline1 is designed for semi-supervised k-
means with random initialization. The intuitive strategy in 
text classification is to predict the most frequent class. As our 
dataset is almost uniformly distributed and well-balanced, the 
baseline in this case would be 
1
7 ≈ 14 % . Therefore, the 
algorithm should achieve more than 14% accuracy. 
Baseline2: Baseline2 is designed for active query k-means 
with Penalized Min-Max-selection. Since this algorithm 
makes queries on the most uncertain cases during 
initialization stage, it is expected to outperform the randomly 
initialized version semi-k-means since it should enjoy a more 
“uniformly distribution” thus getting more reliable initial 
clusters of centriods. 
Upperbound: Given that both semi-supervised learning 
and active learning strategies are not utilizing all the 
information given by the training dataset, it’s natural that the 
performance would be inferior to some fully-supervised 
learning algorithms. We propose to use multiclass Support 
Vector Machine (SVM) to be the upper bound for 
performance since SVM is one of the most traditional and 
widely used ML algorithms in text classification. After tuning 
the hyperparameters, the best setting of SVM algorithm with 
hinge loss function and linear basis gives 70.42% accuracy on 
the test dataset. 
V. 
ALGORITHMS 
A. Metric 
The metric used is Euclidean Distance. Specifically, let 𝑝⃗ 
and 𝑞⃗  be two vectors of dimension n, then the Euclidean 
Distance between them is 𝑑(𝑝⃗, 𝑞⃗) = ඥ∑
(𝑝𝑖−𝑞𝑖)2
𝑛
𝑖=1
. And in 
active query scenarios, this metric is modified into a 
penalized form. 
 
B. Unsupervised K-means 
The starting algorithm is built upon the traditional 
unsupervised k-means, also referred to as Lloyd’s algorithm 
[8]. Given a dataset D and a predetermined cluster number k, 
the algorithm seeks to partition the dataset into k clusters in 
which each datapoint belongs to the cluster with the nearest 
mean (the so-called centroid), serving as a prototype of this 
cluster. The training process mainly involves continuously 
updating the centriods and reassigning datapoints to their 
nearest clusters with updated centriods. The time complexity 
for this algorithm is O(n2). A detailed algorithm and a small 
demo are given as follows: 
 
ALGORITHM 1: Unsupervised K-means 
Input: Dataset D, number of clusters k 
Output: D partitioned into k clusters 
1: arbitrarily choose k datapoints from D as initial 
centriods 
2: repeat 
3: reassign each datapoint to nearest clusters 
4: compute mean of datapoints in each cluster 
5: update each cluster’s centriod using the mean 
6: until cluster convergence 
 
The small demo below indicates the procedure of the 
unsupervised K-means. There are 3 cluster of Gaussian 
random samples generated and unlabeled. After applying the 
algorithm till convergence, they are correctly partitioned into 3 
clusters with each one’s centriod highlighted (by red star) in 
the graph. 
 
(a) before clustering 
 
(b) after convergence 
Fig. 1.  Visualization of unsupervised K-means. 
C. Semi K-Means 
The main difference between the semi K-Means clustering 
and the traditional unsupervised K-means clustering lies in the 
initialization stage. Instead of just randomly picking some 
points as the centriod for each cluster, semi K-Means 
algorithm explore the small portion of labeled data and use 
that additional information to build the initial clusters of 
centriods. In the ideal scenarios, if each actual cluster has 
some datapoints prelabelled, then the initial centriods would 
already be roughly correct in the location distribution in 
Euclidean space. Of course, there could be bad cases that the 
distribution of initially labeled dataset is skewed. A detailed 
algorithm and a demo of initialization stage are given as 
follows:  
ALGORITHM 2: Semi K-means 
Input: Dataset U(unlabeled), L(labeled), number of 
clusters k 
Output: D∪L partitioned into k clusters 
1: build initial centriod for each cluster using L 
2: repeat 
3: reassign each datapoint to nearest clusters 
4: compute mean of datapoints in each cluster 
5: update each cluster’s centriod using the mean 
6: until cluster convergence 
 
The small demo below presents how the algorithm uses the 
initially labeled data to do initialization. In the demo there are 
8 points labeled, 2 from class0, 4 from class1 and the rest 2 
from class2. The algorithm uses them to compute the initial 
centroids (the red stars in the graph) by taking the mean and 
then start the updating iteration until convergence. 
 
(a) initial 8 points labeled 
 
(b) compute initial centriods 
Fig. 2. Sample initialization of semi K-Means. 
D. Active Query K-means 
Active Query K-means is a variant of semi K-Means used 
to interact with expert annotators in selecting the initial seeds. 
In order to make the best use of queries, it no longer randomly 
picks a proportion of labeled data. The query strategy this 
study implements is Penalized Min-Max Selection. The basic 
underlying assumption behind this strategy is that, the more 
 
scattered the seeds are, the more likely they uniformly cover 
the whole dataset. Besides, the label queried should be fully 
exploited to pick datapoint from low-frequency classes. 
Mathematically, given the whole trainset X and selected seeds 
set Y containing 𝑦𝚤ሬሬ⃗ , 𝑖∈{1,2, ⋯, 𝑛}, the next point   𝑦𝑛+1
ሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬ⃗  to 
pick is decided as follows:  
 
(
)
(
)
penalized
1
arg max min
,
i
n
i
y
Y
x X
y
d
y x
+
∈
∈
=





 
(1) 
and 
 
(
)
(
) (
)
penalized
,
,
i
i
y
i
d
y x
k
d y x
= Φ

 
(2) 
where kyi is the number of datapoint already picked in Y 
having the same label as yi and Φ() is the penalize function 
such that it is a non-negative and decreasing function. In 
interpretation, the next point  𝑦𝑛+1
ሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬ⃗   should be picked far 
away from each already-picked point  𝑦𝚤ሬሬ⃗ , 𝑖∈{1,2, ⋯, 𝑛}, so 
that it’s likely that the label of  𝑦𝑛+1
ሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬሬ⃗   could be in a class that 
has not previously been selected or is currently under-
represented. A detailed algorithm and a demo of initial 
queries are as follows:  
ALGORITHM 3: Active Query K-means 
Input: Data set X, number of queries k 
Output: set of seeds Y 
1: Y = ∅ 
2: randomly pick a point 
1y
 into Y from X 
3: query about the label of 
1y
 
4: UnSelected = X\ 
1y
 
5: while Y .size < k do 
6: next

= Penalized Min-Max(Y ,UnSelected) 
7: query about the label of next

 
8: Y = Y∪next

 
9: UnSelected = UnSelected \ next

 
10: end while 
11: return Y 
 
ALGORITHM 4: Penalized Min-Max Selection 
Input: Y, UnSelected 
Output: next

 
1: for all 
ix ∈UnSelected do 
2: 
(
)
penalized
penalized
min
,
ix
y Y
i
d
d
y x
∈
=




 
3: end for 
4: 
(
)
penalized
arg max
i
i
x
next
d
=


 
5: return next

 
The small demo below illustrates how the Penalized Min-
Max Selection strategy picks the initial seeds. There are 200 
points from three different cluster. Allowing 10 queries, the 
initial seeds are quite scattered and uniform over the whole 
dataset. 
 
Fig. 3. Initial 10 queries using active query. 
VI. EXPERIMENTS 
A. Semi K-Means 
Experiments are conducted to evaluate the performance of 
semi K-Means algorithm on the test set. First a small portion 
of data are labeled and fed into the model to compute the 
initial centriods. And then the algorithm runs on the training 
set to finalize each cluster’s position until convergence. 
Afterwards, it is applied to the test dataset to evaluate the 
performance. The experiments are conducted in a 10-fold 
manner to take the average, in order to overcome the effect of 
randomness from initialization. The portion of initial labeled 
data ranges from 1 percent to 10 percent to observe the 
scalability and stability of the algorithm. 
 
Fig. 4. Experiment result of semi K-Means. 
TABLE II. 
GINI-INDEX 
Labeled 
proportion 
1% 
2% 
3% 
4% 
5% 
7.5% 
10% 
Accuracy 20.87% 28.28% 36.34% 37.71% 39.22% 46.41% 50.16% 
Gini-
Index 
0.8105 0.8320 0.8010 0.7850 0.8425 0.8350 0.8225 
 
From the graph and table, clearly Semi K-means 
algorithm beats this study’s baseline1(14%) of choosing the 
most likely class and is bounded above by SVM 
upperbound(70.42%). The highest accuracy when using 10% 
 
label proportion is 50.16%, with a 20.26% gap compared to 
SVM. As the labeled proportion increases, the accuracy first 
increases dra- matically and then gradually slow down 
approaching asymp- totic horizontal line, which indicates that 
even higher label proportion might not lead to higher 
accuracy.  
Also the Gini-Index reveals the intrinsic randomness of 
this algorithm. The Gini-Index does not necessarily increase 
and actually fluctuates heavily, even if the experiments use 
10-fold validation and the proportion of labeled data in- 
creases. Based on the above analysis, it is conjectured that a 
more uniform initial seeds with higher Gini-Index could lead 
to better performance and accuracy. Active Query K-means 
plays an important role to answer the question.  
B. Active Query K-means 
Similar Experiments are conducted by using Active Query 
K-means on the test dataset using penalized min-max 
selection. In the experiments, we tried different penalize 
functions includingΦ(𝑥) =  
1
𝑒𝑥,
1
𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑥,
1
𝑥,
1
𝑥2 ,
1
√𝑥. Among these 
penalize functions, Φ(𝑥) =
1
√𝑥  has the best performance and 
thus we adopt it in the following experiment. Given an initial 
query ratio, a small subset of train dataset is selected and their 
labelled are provided. Using this subset as initial seeds, the 
algorithm runs on the whole train dataset and then is tested on 
the test dataset. Since first point in the query sequence is 
taken randomly, the experiment is conducted 10-fold for each 
query ratio with the average which can minimize the effects 
of randomness. The query ratio ranges from 1 percent to 10 
percent to observe if adequate queries yield more uniform 
initial seeds and thus a better performance.   
 
Fig. 5.  Experiment of active query K-means. 
TABLE III. 
GINI INDEX 
Labeled 
proportion 
1% 
2% 
3% 
4% 
5% 
7.5% 10% 
Accuracy 
15.48
% 
29.21
% 
34.24
% 
41.96
% 
45.08
% 
52.46
% 
56.09
% 
Gini-Index 
0.800
4 
0.838
6 
0.840
6 
0.844
4 
0.848
7 
0.850
0 
0.852
7 
 
From the table and plot, Active Query K-means does beat 
baseline1(14%) of choosing the most likely class and also is 
bounded above by SVM Upperbound (70.42%). The highest 
accuracy using 10% query ratio is 56.09%, having a 14.33% 
gap compared with SVM. What’s more, unlike semi k-means 
whose graph approaches asymptotic horizontal line, it is 
observed that the accuracy graph for active query k-means is 
slightly concave down, meaning that if higher query ratio 
provided, accuracy could continue to increase substantially.  
C. Comparison 
By using Penalized Min-Max 
Selection in seeds 
initialization, initial seeds are more uniformly covering all the 
classes in the dataset. Consequently, the initial centriods 
would be closer to the “real” centriods for each class 
according to probability distribution.  
In the graph, the barplot is the accuracy on Test Set and 
the lineplot is the Gini Index for the initial seeds. After 3% 
labeled/query ratio, Active Query K-means always surpasses 
Semi K-means quite significantly. With 10% query ratio, the 
accuracy gap between them is 6%. 
 
Fig. 6. Comparison between semi and active query K-means. 
GIni Index plot provides insights into the reasons behind. 
By Theorem, in our case of 7 classes, the highest theoretical 
upper bound for Gini Index is 0.857 (the black horizontal 
line). The Gini Index for Active Query increases steadily as 
the query ratio increases, while the Gini Index for Semi 
fluctuates. In another word, the more queries allowed, the 
more accurate initial centroids would be in Active Query 
algorithm, whereas in Semi algorithm the initial centroids 
could still be skewed. This could not only explain the 
difference in accuracy performance, but also interpret 
scalability that if higher labeled/query ratio allowed, we 
expect the performance for active query algorithm to increase 
more sharply than of the semi algorithm.  
VII. 
ANALYSIS 
A. Error Statistic 
 
Fig. 7. Confusion matrix for test. 
 
The confusion matrix and table statistics clarify how and 
where classification error occurs. Two of the most frequent 
mis-classifications are to classify a piece of Domestic news as 
Economics and a piece of Art news as Celebrity. Further 
inspection of dataset reveals that some news is inherently mix-
classed and thus hard to distinguish. There are two typical 
examples to support this point:  
 
Fig. 8. Error Example. 
The two pieces of news are difficult to classify even for 
human annotators, since either the true label or predicted label 
seems quite reasonable. Thus, the existence of such “mixed” 
news in dataset would certainly decrease the system’s 
performance.  
B. Information Loss 
There are two major sources of information loss in our 
system that might result in performance decrease. 
1) During the data preprocessing stage, all the traditional 
Chinese characters that appear in our dataset are transformed 
into their simplified form of chinese. However, thanks to our 
other colleagues, we notice that some characters might carry 
different meanings in traditional and simplified chinese 
context. And even when they do carry the same meanings, 
they might be used in different contexts according to whether 
in traditional or simplified chinese. Such difference might be 
too subtle to be spotted one by one. Possible solutions to this 
subtlety are discussed in details in David’s articles [7]. 
2) In the PCA dimension reduction stage, we shrink the 
TF-IDF vectors’ dimension to 5% of the original ones with 
explained variation 41%. Some information is lost in 
exchange of smaller dimensionality [8], but a faster training 
process is delivered. Instead of shrinking the dimension from 
the beginning, a model that generates sparsity might be 
considered. The 𝐿1 -regularized lasso variants give a large 
class of such sparse models [9]. 
TABLE IV. 
PERFORMANCE 
Class Domesti
c  
HK-
Taiwan 
Internati
onal 
Econom
ics  
Art Celebrit
y 
Sports  Average 
Precisio
n 
44.23 63.23 60.31 40.66 48.88 52.45 64.91 51.16 
Recall  37.70 63.23 60.31 58.72 32.35 61.54 59.68 54.30 
F1  
40.47 63.23 60.31 48.05 39.93 56.63 62.19 52.68 
VIII. FUTURE WORK 
For future explorations, with sufficient time and access to 
more powerful machines, we intend to train and test the system 
on the whole dataset which is 1.3 million entries large instead 
of a fraction of it as studied now. By feeding the system with 
more training data, we expect the performance could increase 
even more. Also, more penalize functions could be 
experimented on. 
Besides, we also plan to improve the way of computing 
distance and taking Min-Max, because under current algorithm 
the time complexity is nonlinear and as dataset gets larger, the 
time needed to compute distance and take Min-Max would 
increase sharply. By the theory of convex optimization, by 
solving the duality problem [10], we expect to enjoy the cost 
and time for training to decrease. 
Furthermore, the study should also include a couple of 
skewed and imbalanced dataset to explore the comprehensive 
robustness of the algorithms. And following Castro and 
Nowak’s article [11], the convergence and error bounds of this 
algorithm could be explored in more details mathematically 
IX. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This study introduces a novel active query strategy — 
Penalized Min-Max Selection — in the active K-means 
clustering algorithm. As a modification of pure distance-based 
Min-Max-Selection and other label-based active learning 
strategies, this query strategy seeks to exploit the query labels 
and the distance representation simultaneously. As shown in 
the experimental result, the new strategy surpasses the random 
seed-based K-means algorithm by 6% if allowing 10% queries; 
and the curvature of accuracy plots show that a higher 
accuracy would be attainable if a higher query ratio is allowed. 
In future studies the algorithm should be experimented on 
larger and imbalanced dataset, so as to test its robustness and 
full strength.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Bensaid Amine M, Hall Lawrence O, Bezdek James C, and Clarke 
Laurence P. 1996. “Partially Supervised Clustering for Image 
Segmentation”, Pattern Recognition. 
[2] Basu Sugato, Banerjee Arindam and Mooney Raymood J. 2002. 
“Semisupervised Clustering by Seeding”, Proceedings of the Nineteenth 
International Conference 
[3] Lelis Levi, and Sander Joerg. 2010. “Semi-Supervised Density-Based 
Clustering”, Ninth IEEE International Conference on Data Mining 
[4] Sahoo Pracheta, Ekbal Asif, Saha Sriparna, Mollá Diego,and Nandan, 
Kaushik. 2016. Semi-supervised Clustering of Medical Text. 
Proceedings of the Clinical Natural Language Processing Workshop. 
[5] Senuma Hajime. 2011. K-means Clustering with Feature Hashing. 
Proceedings of the ACL 2011 Student Session. 
[6] Vu Viet-Vu, Labroche Nicolas, and Bouchon-Meunier Bernadette. 2010. 
“Active Learning for Semi-Supervised K-Means Clustering”, 22nd 
IEEE International Conference 
[7] Lowell David, Lipton Zachary C, and Wallace Byron C. 2019. 
“Practical Obstacles to Deploying Active Learning”, the 9th 
International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing 
[8] Lloyd, Stuart P. 1982, “Least squares quantization in PCM”, IEEE 
Transactions on Information Theory, 28(2): pp.129-139 
[9] Tibshirani, Robert. 1996, “Regression shrinkage and selection via the 
lasso”, 
Journal 
of 
the 
Royal 
Statistical 
Society. 
Series 
B(Methodological) 58, 267-288. 
[10] Boyd, S.; Vandenberghe, L., Convex Optimization; Cambridge 
University Press: 2014 
[11] Castro, R.; Nowak, R.; “Upper and Lower Error Bounds for Active 
Learning”, (2006). 
 
