Title: Syntactic Enhancement to VSIMM for Roadmap Based Anomalous Trajectory Detection: A Natural Language Processing Approach
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1611.03466v3
--------------------------------------------------

1
Syntactic Enhancement to VSIMM for Roadmap
Based Anomalous Trajectory Detection: A Natural
Language Processing Approach
Vikram Krishnamurthy, Fellow, IEEE and Sijia Gao
AbstractŌĆöSyntactic tracking aims to classify a targetŌĆÖs spatio-
temporal trajectory by using natural language processing models.
This paper proposes constrained stochastic context free grammar
(CSCFG) models for target trajectories con’¼üned to a roadmap.
We present a particle ’¼ültering algorithm that exploits the CSCFG
model structure to estimate the targetŌĆÖs trajectory. This meta-
level algorithm operates in conjunction with a base-level target
tracking algorithm. Extensive numerical results using simulated
ground moving target indicator (GMTI) radar measurements
show useful improvement in both trajectory classi’¼ücation and
target state (both coordinates and velocity) estimation.
KeywordsŌĆösyntactic tracking, constrained stochastic context
free grammar (CSCFG), particle ’¼ülter, Earley Stolcke parser
I. INTRODUCTION
Consider a moving target con’¼üned to the road network
illustrated in Fig. 1. Assume that the target is being tracked
by a ground moving target indicator (GMTI) radar system.
At each discrete time k, let xk denote targetŌĆÖs kinematic
state vector comprising position and velocity of the target
as it moves in a two dimensional space. Let zk denote the
noisy measurement of xk obtained from a GMTI radar. How
can the constraints of a digital roadmap be exploited for
tracking a target con’¼üned to a road network? Classical (base-
level) target tracking algorithms have been well studied in the
literature [1]ŌĆō[5]. These include the variable structure inter-
acting multiple model (VSIMM) tracker [4] [5]. Let dk and
lk denote, respectively, the direction of motion and location
(road or intersection names) of the target. In a VSIMM tracker,
the direction sequence d1:k = (d1, . . . , dk) is modeled as
a Markov chain with state space dependent on the location
sequence l1:k = (l1, . . . , lk). These direction and location
sequences are chosen so that the target is con’¼üned to roads
and intersections in a roadmap. Also [6] uses a jump Markov
process to model vehicular mobility on an urban roadmap.
At a higher level of abstraction (lower degree of spatial
resolution and slower time scale), a moving target con’¼üned
to a roadmap can be characterized by the string of symbols
Vikram Krishnamurthy and S. Gao are with the School of Electrical
Engineering and Cornell Tech, Cornell University, N.Y., USA. Vikram Krish-
namurthy (vikramk@cornell.edu) is the corresponding author. Both authors
contributed equally to the technical aspects of the paper. This research was
funded by an Airforce Of’¼üce of Scienti’¼üc Research grant FA9550-18-1-0007
through the Dynamic Data Driven Application Systems Program.
This
paper
has
supplementary
downloadable
material
available
at
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org, provided by the authors. The material includes the
Matlab code that generates all the simulation results. The code is also available
from https://vikram.ece.cornell.edu/
v21
v22
v23
v24
v25
v16
v17
v18
v19
v20
v11
v12
v13
v14
v15
v6
v7
v8
v9
v10
v1
v2
v3
v4
v5
East
West
North
South
Figure 1: Example of a roadmap. V
= {v1, v2, . . . , v25}
denotes the set of road intersections. E = {eij|vi, vj ŌłłV }
denotes the set of directed roads where eij denotes the road
from vi to vj. Grey squares denote blocks. The red and green
lines are examples of roadmap based anomalous trajectories
discussed in this paper. We construct generative models for
these trajectories using constrained stochastic context free
grammars (CSCFG).
denoting the roads it traverses. For example, the trajectory
(red and green dotted lines) illustrated in Fig. 1 describes
a target performing anomalous (suspicious) patrol activities
on two crosshatched blocks: circling the crosshatched blocks
(red line) followed by circling the same blocks in the reverse
order (green line). Given noisy radar observations, how can an
automated system1 detect such an anomalous trajectory [8]ŌĆō
[12]? The main idea in this paper is to model such anomalous
trajectories as symbols from a natural language generated by
a constrained stochastic context free grammar (CSCFG). Put
simply, the target trajectory speaks a language about its intent.
This paper provides a method for maximum likelihood
classi’¼ücation of anomalous trajectories via a ŌĆ£syntacticŌĆØ en-
hancement to the baseline VSIMM tracker. The syntactic
enhancement operates at a higher (meta) level and models
anomalous trajectories. Our aim is to compute the maximum
likelihood estimate of the targetŌĆÖs trajectory:
argmax
GŌłłG
p(G|z1:k),
k = 1, 2, . . .
(1)
1Traditionally, given track information, a radar (human) operator examines
target trajectories to determine anomalous behavior. This paper develops
natural language models and meta-level signal processing algorithms for
estimating anomalous trajectories. Such ŌĆ£middlewareŌĆØ forms the interface
between the physical signal processing layer and the radar operator; see
also [7] for alternative models for intent using bridging distributions.
arXiv:1611.03466v3  [cs.CL]  4 Aug 2018
2
Figure 2: The architecture of a syntactic tracker. Anomalous
trajectories are pre-de’¼üned by the radar operator and indicate
the intent of a target.
Here, z1:k = (z1, z2, . . . , zk) denotes the noisy observation
sequence recorded by a GMTI radar. G denotes a class of
trajectories (such as all strings that result in trajectories are
rectangles) which is a ’¼ünite set of strings. G denotes the set
of different classes of trajectories that a radar operator is in-
terested in. The posterior probability mass function p(G|z1:k)
in (1) takes into account the roadmap statistics (e.g., turning
ratio from one road to another) obtained from traf’¼üc data.
A. CSCFG as a Generative Model
The syntactic tracker we propose in this paper consists of
two parts: a meta-level tracker and a base-level tracker. The
meta-level tracker uses tracklets generated by the base-level
tracker to model higher level trajectories. The architecture of
a syntactic tracker is illustrated in Fig. 2.
Our key idea is that for each trajectory class G ŌłłG in (1),
we propose a generative model using a constrained stochastic
context free grammar (CSCFG) [13] [14] on a weighted,
directed graph. By a generative model for trajectory class G,
we mean the following necessary and suf’¼ücient condition:
1) Each string generated by the CSCFG with speci’¼üed
grammatical rules belongs to class G.
2) Each string in class G can be generated by the CSCFG.
(2)
Therefore, the class G of anomalous trajectories is equivalent
to the corresponding CSCFG grammatical rules. So to classify
a trajectory, we only need to classify the grammar within the
family of CSCFGs. This is done in Sec.V via a particle ’¼ülter
algorithm that combines the functionalities of CSCFG and
VSIMM.
B. Organization and Main Results
The organization and main results of this paper are:
1. Sec. II describes syntactic tracker architectures and gives
more insight into the natural language models used in this
paper. Speci’¼ücally, the differences between CSCFGs, SCFGs
and template matching are discussed.
2. Sec. III describes the construction of a natural language
driven model for the roadmap based syntactic tracking problem
in (1). The main idea is that we facilitate CSCFGs as gener-
ative models for target trajectories on a directed, weighted
graph formulated from the roadmap. This CSCFG model
operates in conjunction with the baseline VSIMM which has
measurements from a GMTI radar2.
3. Sec. IV details the construction of CSCFG generative
models for the roadmap con’¼üned target trajectories. Several
important examples of anomalous trajectories are modeled.
4. Sec. V presents a particle ’¼ültering algorithm to classify
the target trajectory given noisy radar observations. The nov-
elty of this algorithm is that it exploits a modi’¼üed Earley
Stolcke parser (arising in natural language parsing of CSCFGs)
to compute the one step prediction and likelihood of the target
trajectory.
5. Sec. VI presents numerical studies of the CSCFG syn-
tactic tracker. Compared to the baseline VSIMM tracker,
the CSCFG syntactic tracker enables anomalous trajectory
detection and has smaller state estimate error.
II. SYNTACTIC TRACKER ARCHITECTURES AND CSCFGS
A. Syntactic Tracker Architectures
To give context into the main ideas of this paper, we
describe two architectures for syntactic trackers, namely (i)
CSCFG syntactic tracker proposed in this paper and (ii)
stochastic context free grammar (SCFG) syntactic tracker
proposed in earlier works [15] [16].
The SCFG syntactic tracker in previous works [17]ŌĆō[19]
was used to classify shapes (lines, arcs or m-rectangles) of
trajectories. In such a tracker, the direction sequence d1:k is
modeled via a stochastic context free grammar (SCFG) at the
meta-level. The architecture of the SCFG syntactic tracker is
illustrated in Fig. 3(a); see also [20] for an excellent review.
The key new idea in this paper is to combine a Markov
chain and a SCFG which results in a constrained stochastic
context free grammar (CSCFG). A CSCFG forms a generative
model for the distinct roads that the target traverses, namely
u(q1:k) where q1:k = (q1, q2, . . . , qk)
(3)
In (3), qk denotes the road the target moves on at time k.
u(.) denotes a function on a string that removes repetitions in
the string, e.g., u(ŌĆ£122343ŌĆØ) = ŌĆ£12343ŌĆØ. The trajectory (red
and green lines) in Fig. 1 can be described by the following
directed road sequence:
e12,17e17,18e18,13e13,12
|
{z
}
patrol block 10
. . .
|{z}
move from block 10 to 4
e9,10e10,5e5,4e4,9
|
{z
}
patrol block 4
e9,10e10,5e5,4e4,9
|
{z
}
patrol block 4
. . .
|{z}
move from block 4 to 10
e13,12e12,17e17,18e18,13
|
{z
}
patrol block 10
(4)
The transition from one road to another is modeled as a
Markov chain based on the traf’¼üc statistics. The blocks that
the target traverses are modeled via a SCFG. Hence, the road
2The GMTI radar assumption is only to make the problem concrete. The
methods proposed in this paper apply to other types of radar/sensor models.
3
zk
Base-level
VSIMM tracker
Meta-level
SCFG tracker
xk
Gshape
(trajectories of different shapes)
╦ådk
p(G| ╦åd1:k), ŌłĆG ŌłłGshape
radar operator
SCFG syntactic tracker (previous works [15] [16])
(a)
zk
Base-level
VSIMM tracker
Meta-level
CSCFG tracker
G
(roadmap based anomalous trajectories)
qk
p(qk|q1:kŌłÆ1) radar operator
xk
p(G|z1:k), ŌłĆG ŌłłG
CSCFG syntactic tracker (this paper)
(b)
Figure 3: Architectures of (a) the SCFG syntactic tracker and (b) the CSCFG syntactic tracker to assist radar operator in
detecting anomalous trajectories. zk denotes the noisy observation recorded by a GMTI radar at time k and xk denotes the
targetŌĆÖs state vector. Gshape and G denote two different classes of trajectories. ╦åd1:k = ( ╦åd1, ╦åd2, . . . , ╦ådk) denotes the estimated
(soft or hard) moving direction sequence. q1:kŌłÆ1 de’¼üned in (3) is the sequence of roads the target travels until time k. The
posterior probability p(G|z1:k) of anomalous trajectories is fed to the radar operator.
sequence in (3) is a combination of a Markov chain and
a SCFG which is equivalent to a CSCFG: see [13] [14].
The structure of the CSCFG syntactic tracker is illustrated
in Fig. 3(b).
In contrast, it is important to note that the SCFG is not
a generative model for the directed road sequence in (4). Di-
rected road sequences modeled via a SCFG include physically
impossible trajectories of the target such as, for example
e6,11 e12,17 e18,19 e20,15 e14,9
(5)
The sequence in (5) describes a target moving from e6,11 to
e12,17 which is physically impossible because e6,11 and e12,17
are not connected via an intersection on the roadmap in Fig. 1.
To summarize, a CSCFG is essential as a generative model for
spatial trajectories that are physically realizable. The syntactic
tracker architecture can be viewed as ŌĆ£middlewareŌĆØ which
interfaces the physical signal processing layer with the radar
operator (human decision maker).
B. Context. CSCFG vs SCFG vs Markov Chain vs Template
Matching: A Toy Example
To give further insight into the key ideas of this paper,
we give a toy example to illustrate the difference between
trajectories generated by a Markov chain, SCFG and CSCFG.
The Chomsky hierarchy of natural languages [21] says
Markov Chain ŌŖéSCFG ŌŖéCSCFG
(6)
implying that CSCFGs generate trajectories with much more
complex dependency structures than a Markov chain can.
Markov Chain (serial dependency). Consider a ’¼ürst-order
Markov chain with trajectory a1, . . . , am for some ’¼üxed time
m. The dependency structure is a chain graph as shown in
Fig. 4(a).
SCFG Arc Trajectory (tree dependency). An arc is a simple
example of trajectory with a SCFG generative model.
1) Generate positive random integers m, n.
2) Then generate the following three iid ’¼ünite state se-
quences a1, . . . , am, b1, . . . , bn and c1, . . . , cm with spec-
i’¼üed probabilities. Concatenate these into a single string.
The directed road sequence modeled in (5), with a1:m =
e6,11e12,17, b1:n = e18,19, c1:m = e20,15e14,9 is an example of
a SCFG generated arc trajectory: the number of road segments
directed northwards that the target traverses equals the number
of road segments that the target traverses southwards. The
dependency structure of a SCFG has a tree type graphical
representation as shown in Fig. 4(b). It can be proved via a
pumping lemma [21] that a Markov chain is not a generative
model for an arc trajectory since the arbitrary integer m needs
to be remembered.
CSCFG (serial-tree dependency). A CSCFG trajectory (used
in this paper) allows more general dependencies than a SCFG
as follows:
1) Generate positive random integers m, n.
2) Then generate the following three Markovian ’¼ünite state
sequences a1, . . . , am, b1, . . . , bn and c1, . . . , cm with
speci’¼üed transition probabilities. Concatenate these into
a single string.
e6,11e11,16e16,17e17,12e12,7 is an example of an arc trajectory
(number of roads directed to north equals that directed to
south) generated by the CSCFG with a1:m = e6,11e11,16,
b1:n = e16,17, c1:m = e17,12e12,7. The Markovian property
constrains the road directions from a vertex to ensure that
physically unrealizable trajectories such as (5) do not occur.
The dependency structure of a CSCFG is a tree-chain graph
as shown in Fig. 4(c). The main point is that a CSCFG model
facilitates both serial and tree dependencies.
Template Matching vs CSCFG. Apart from being generative
models for several classes of complex spatial trajectories,
CSCFGs also offer the advantage of having computationally
ef’¼ücient Bayesian estimation algorithms compared to classical
template matching. For example, consider a target trajectory
represented by the string M = a1:mb1:nc1:p of length N =
m + n + p where m, n, p are unknown nonnegative integers.
Suppose a1:m, b1:n, c1:p are ’¼ünite state Markov sequences with
state spaces {a1, a2}, {b1, b2}, {c1, c2}. How can we detect
whether the string M contains same number of alphabets a1
and c1? A naive template matching approach requires an expo-
4
a1
a2
. . .
am
(a)
S
A
a1
X
A
a2
X
...
X
A
am
B
b1
B
b2
B
...
B
bnŌłÆ1
B
bn
C
c1
C
cmŌłÆ1
C
cm
(b)
S
A
a1
X
A
a2
X
...
X
A
am
B
b1
B
b2
B
...
B
bnŌłÆ1
B
bn
C
c1
C
cmŌłÆ1
C
cm
...
...
...
(c)
Figure 4: Comparison of dependency structures of (a) Markov
chain, (b) SCFG model and (c) CSCFG model. A CSCFG
model is a combination of a Markov chain and a SCFG model.
Black edges represent tree dependencies and red arrows indi-
cate serial dependencies. X, A, B and C denote nonterminals
(hidden states). Tree dependencies are described in Sec. II-B.
nential number PN
m=1
PNŌłÆm
p=1
Pmin(m,p)
k=1
m
k
p
k

2NŌłÆmŌłÆp
of templates. To consider arbitrary length dependencies, a
Markov chain needs an exponential number PN
k=1 6k of states.
By comparison, a CSCFG only requires polynomial O(N 3)
computational cost. Of course, in this paper, we consider
the further modeling complexity that the string M itself is
observed in noise due to errors in the classical target tracking
algorithm-nevertheless the computational cost is O(N 3).
III. ROADMAP BASED SYNTACTIC TRACKING: A 3-LEVEL
MODEL
In this section, we construct a model for the roadmap based
syntactic tracking problem. Our model operates at three levels
of abstraction. At the highest level of abstraction, we have the
roadmap which is modeled as a directed, weighted graph. At
the second level, we model the targetŌĆÖs trajectory constrained
to a roadmap as a string generated from a CSCFG. Finally
at the lowest level (physical sensor layer), the directed road
sequence u(q1:k) de’¼üned in (3) drives a baseline VSIMM state
space model which has measurements from a GMTI radar.
A. Level 1: Roadmap as a Directed, Weighted Graph
Here, we model the roadmap as a directed, weighted graph
G with vertices V , directed edges E and weights ╬Ė
G = {V, E, ╬Ė}
(7)
The set of vertices V = {v1, v2, . . . , vn} denotes intersec-
tions. The set of directed edges E = {eij|vi, vj
ŌłłV }
denotes directed roads. The set of weights ╬Ė = {╬Ė(eij) Ōłł
{north, south, east, west}, ŌłĆeij ŌłłE} denotes directions of
v21
v22
v23
v24
v25
v16
v17
v18
v19
v20
v11
v12
v13
v14
v15
v6
v7
v8
v9
v10
v1
v2
v3
v4
v5
Figure 5: Formulation of the roadmap in Fig. 1 as a directed,
weighted graph G = {V, E, ╬Ė}. The vertices v1, . . . , v25 denote
road intersections and edges denote directed roads. The weight
of each edge denotes the direction (north, south, east or west)
of the edge.
roads with respect to a reference coordinate. The directed,
weighted graph for the roadmap in Fig. 1 is presented in Fig. 5.
Denote the vertex (road intersection)
vi = from(eij) and vj = into(eij)
(8)
Note that the road network directed graph model described
above does not require the road map to be a rectangular
(Manhattan) grid.
B. Level 2: Trajectories and CSCFG Modeling on Directed,
Weighted Graph
The second level of our 3-level model is a CSCFG that
serves as a generative model for the targetŌĆÖs trajectories. These
trajectories determine the targetŌĆÖs directed road sequence:
u(q1:N),
where q1:N = (q1, q2, . . . , qN) with
qk ŌłłE, k = 1, 2, . . . , N and
qkŌłÆ1 = qk or into(qkŌłÆ1) = from(qk), k = 2, 3, . . . , N
(9)
Here, u(.), E are de’¼üned in (3) and (7). into(.) and from(.)
are de’¼üned in (8). Recall qk denotes the road the target moves
on at time k.
A
CSCFG
is
a
5-tuple
of
the
form3
CSCFG
=
{N, T , S, R, P} where N is a ’¼ünite set of nonterminals
(hidden states) and T is a ’¼ünite set of terminals (observations)
such that N Ōł®T = Ōłģ. S ŌłłN is chosen to be the start symbol.
R is a set of production rules of the form
X ŌåÆ╬╗|a where X ŌłłN Ōł¬S, a ŌłłT
╬╗ : a string of nonterminals and terminals
which indicates the nonterminal X can be replaced with ╬╗ if
the previous terminal is a. P : R ŌåÆ[0, 1] is a probability
function over production rules in R such that P
nXa P(X ŌåÆ
╬╗|a) = 1. nXa denotes the number of production rules in R
associated with the nonterminal X and terminal a. Starting
from S, repetitively replace the leftmost nonterminal (such
deviations can be represented as a parse tree [22]) according
to the production rules in R and probabilities in P until the
resulting string only comprises terminals.
3For the readerŌĆÖs convenience, in Appendix A, we give a short description of
a SCFG and additional examples. Mathematically speaking, CSCFGs belong
to the class of multi-type Galton Watson branching random processes.
5
A stochastic parsing algorithm in natural language process-
ing computes the one-step conditional probabilities
p(ak+1|a1:k, CSCFG), k = 1, 2, . . . , N
and the pre’¼üx conditional probabilities
p(a1:k|CSCFG), k = 1, 2, . . . , N
Here, a1:k = (a1, a2, . . . , ak) denotes a string of terminals.
The parsing algorithm for CSCFGs is a generalization of the
well known forward ’¼ültering algorithm for HMMs. It operates
over a parse tree via a top-down and then bottom-up manner.
Appendix A gives a short description of SCFGs and CSCFGs.
C. Level 3: VSIMM Base-Level Model
Here, we describe the third and ’¼ünal component of our 3-
level roadmap constrained target model. The model is almost
identical to the classical VSIMM except that the variable qk
below couples the model with the targetŌĆÖs trajectory (modeled
as a CSCFG in Level 2). We construct a VSIMM for the
baseline targetŌĆÖs kinematics4 which are measured by a GMTI
radar system.
The targetŌĆÖs kinematic state evolves as
xk = F(xkŌłÆ1, dk) + ╦£wk(dk)
dk = ╬Ė(qk), B(xk) Ōłł{qk, from(qk)}
(10)
Here, xk = [xk, yk, ╦Öxk, ╦Öyk]ŌĆ▓ is the 4-dimensional state vector
of the target at time k that comprises position and velocity
components in the x and y directions. dk denotes the targetŌĆÖs
moving direction. qk, ╬Ė(.), from(.) are de’¼üned in (9), (7)
and (8). B(.) denotes the targetŌĆÖs meta-level location (road
or intersection name at time k), that is B(.) maps the targetŌĆÖs
state vector to an edge (road) or a vertex (road intersection) in
the graph G de’¼üned in (7). F in (10) is a nonlinear function
and models the targetŌĆÖs state process:
F(xkŌłÆ1, dk) =
’Ż«
’Ż»’Ż»’Ż»’Ż»’Ż░
xkŌłÆ1 + T ╦ÖxkŌłÆ1
ykŌłÆ1 + T ╦ÖykŌłÆ1
q
╦Öx2
kŌłÆ1 + ╦Öy2
kŌłÆ1 cos(dk)
q
╦Öx2
kŌłÆ1 + ╦Öy2
kŌłÆ1 sin(dk)
’Ż╣
’Ż║’Ż║’Ż║’Ż║’Ż╗
(11)
Here, T is the sampling interval between GMTI measurements.
The state noise ╦£wk(dk) in (10) is a zero-mean iid Gaussian
process with covariance matrix ╦£Qk(dk) computed as
╦£Qk(dk) = AQk(dk)AŌĆ▓
A =
’Ż«
’Ż»’Ż»’Ż░
T 2
2
0
0
T 2
2
T
0
0
T
’Ż╣
’Ż║’Ż║’Ż╗,
Qk(dk) = Žüdk

Žā2
o
0
0
Žā2
a

ŽüŌĆ▓
dk
with
Žüdk =

sin(dk)
cos(dk)
ŌłÆcos(dk)
sin(dk)

(12)
4Our setup assumes a single target with no missing measurements or data
association errors. Actually, missing measurements are easily handled at both
the syntactic and base-level trackers. Data association is handled by the
baseline tracking algorithm and not the meta-level tracker.
Here, ŌĆ▓ denotes transpose, Žā2
a is the variance along the direction
of motion indicated by dk and Žā2
o is the variance along the
direction of motion orthogonal to dk.
The observation equation speci’¼ües the GMTI radar mea-
surements:
zk = H(xk, ck) + vk
where
H(xk, ck) =
’Ż«
’Ż»’Ż»’Ż»’Ż»’Ż»’Ż░
p
(xk ŌłÆxc
k)2 + (yk ŌłÆyc
k)2 + (zc
k)2
( ╦ÖxkŌłÆ╦Öxc
k)(xkŌłÆxc
k)+( ╦ÖykŌłÆ╦Öyc
k)(ykŌłÆyc
k)
ŌłÜ
(xkŌłÆxc
k)2+(ykŌłÆyc
k)2+(zc
k)2
180
ŽĆ atan2(yk ŌłÆyc
k, xk ŌłÆxc
k)
’Ż╣
’Ż║’Ż║’Ż║’Ż║’Ż║’Ż╗
(13)
Here, zk = [rk, ╦Örk, ak]ŌĆ▓ denotes the 3-dimensional noisy
observation vector recorded by a GMTI radar at time k. rk,
╦Örk, ak denote, respectively, the range, range rate and azimuth
(in degrees, (ŌłÆ180ŌŚ”, 180ŌŚ”]). ck = [xc
k, yc
k, ╦Öxc
k, ╦Öyc
k]ŌĆ▓ is the 4-
dimensional state vector for the phase center of the GMTI
radarŌĆÖs antenna on the aircraft it is mounted on. The vector
ck comprises position and velocity components in the x and y
directions. We assume that zc
k is the (constant) altitude of the
aircraft and the (constant) altitude of the target is zero. atan2
denotes the four-quadrant inverse tangent (in radians).
The observation noise vk in (13) is assumed to be a zero-
mean white Gaussian process with covariance matrix
R =
’Ż«
’Ż░
Žā2
rk
0
0
0
Žā2
╦Örk
0
0
0
Žā2
╬Ėk
’Ż╣
’Ż╗
(14)
where Žārk, Žā ╦Örk and Žā╬Ėk are standard deviations for range,
range rate and azimuth, respectively. Note that R is a diagonal
matrix re’¼éecting the assumption that the errors in the range,
range rate and azimuth are uncorrelated.
To summarize, the VSIMM model above is a CSCFG
modulated stochastic state space model; where the CSCFG
is a generative model for the complex spatial trajectory of the
target. In comparison, classical VSIMM deals with a Markov
modulated model.
IV. TRAJECTORIES AND CSCFG MODELING
Given the 3-level model of Sec. III, we now elaborate on
Level 2 of the model, namely spatial trajectories and CSCFG
generative models described in Sec. III-B. In particular, we
discuss three important anomalous trajectories: (i) Equal effort
search (ii) Asymmetric search and (iii) Patrol. These trajectory
classes exhibit a tree-chain dependency (recall Sec. II-B) and
CSCFG forms generative models for these classes. That is, the
necessary and suf’¼ücient condition (2) holds. Markov chains
and SCFGs are not generative models for these examples.
A. Example 1: Equal Effort Search Trajectory Class
How can an intent inference algorithm determine if a target
has spent equal effort patrolling two distinct sites? The aim is
to characterize targets whose intent is to spend equal amount
of resources patrolling two distinct sites. As shown below, the
resulting equal effort search trajectory class is an CSCFG.
In the equal effort search trajectory class Gequal, a target
(searcher) spends equal effort searching two rows of blocks
6
v21
v22
v23
v24
v25
v16
v17
v18
v19
v20
v11
v12
v13
v14
v15
v6
v7
v8
v9
v10
v1
v2
v3
v4
v5
East
West
North
South
Figure 6: Example of an equal effort search trajectory class.
The target selects two block rows and searches equal number
of blocks located at each of them.
(blocks are de’¼üned in Fig. 1) The trajectory for searching
each block is characterized by a string of 4 roads that
surround the block. For example, searching the northwest
crosshatched block in Fig. 6 is described by any string from
the set {e12,17 e17,18 e18,13 e13,12, e17,18 e18,13 e13,12 e12,17,
e18,13 e13,12 e12,17 e17,18, e13,12 e12,17 e17,18 e18,13}.
More
generally, Gequal is de’¼üned by the class of strings (spatial
trajectories)
Gequal = a1a2 . . . aNb1b2 . . . bmc1c2 . . . cN
a b : into(a) = from(b)
ak = search block (ik, j), i1 < i2 < . . . < iN
ck = search block (mk, n), m1 > m2 > . . . > mN
j ╠Ė= n
(15)
Here, block (i, j) represents the block located at ith column,
jth row, e.g. , block (2,3) indicates the northwest crosshatched
block in Fig. 6. b1b2 . . . bm denotes a string of edges directing
from block (iN, j) to block (m1, n). into(.) and from(.) are
de’¼üned in (8).
The key two points to note in (15) are: (i) the length
of the strings a1a2 . . . aN and c1c2 . . . cN are equal (tree
dependency) (ii) current edge directs from the vertex that its
previous edge directs into (red arrows, chain dependency).
Therefore, the class of spatial trajectories Gequal exhibits a tree-
chain dependency. The CSCFG production rules that yield a
generative model for Gequal are given in Appendix C.
B. Example 2: Asymmetric Search Trajectory Class
Here we characterize a target that searches one site more
times than another site. Moreover, we incorporate the prece-
dence constraint that the target ’¼ürst searches the low priority
region and then the high priority region. Such asymmetric
search trajectories5 with precedence constraints re’¼éect that the
target poses a higher threat to the second site, and that search
of the ’¼ürst site, causally affects search of the second site. The
5Although tangential to our tracking problem, there is a signi’¼ücant body of
research [23]ŌĆō[25] dealing with why human perception is asymmetric; [26]
shows that white subjects were able to detect the presence of a face of another
race among white faces faster than they were to detect a white face among
cross-race faces. Also, humans require signi’¼ücantly more time to search for
some features compared to others. In terms of intent, these translate to the
driver of a vehicle searching one site with more effort than another site.
v21
v22
v23
v24
v25
v16
v17
v18
v19
v20
v11
v12
v13
v14
v15
v6
v7
v8
v9
v10
v1
v2
v3
v4
v5
East
West
North
South
Figure 7: Example of an asymmetric effort search tra-
jectory class. The target makes two round trips of the
west crosshatched block and three round trips of the east
crosshatched block.
corresponding asymmetric search trajectory class Gasym is as
follows: a target makes N round trips of block (i, j) followed
by N + Ōłåround trips of another block (m, n). Both N and
Ōłåare random positive integers. An example of the trajectory
Gasym is illustrated in Fig. 7. In general, Gasym is de’¼üned by
the class of strings
Gasym = a1a2 . . . aNb1b2 . . . bmc1c2 . . . cN+Ōłå
a b : into(a) = from(b)
ak = search block (i, j), k = 1, 2, . . . , N
ck = search block (m, n), k = 1, 2, . . . , N + Ōłå
(i, j) ╠Ė= (m, n)
(16)
In (16), b1b2 . . . bm denotes a string of edges directing from
block (i, j) to block (m, n). In Gasym: (i) the length of
substring containing c is longer than that containing a (tree
dependency) (ii) current edge directs from the vertex that its
previous edge directs into (red arrows, chain dependency).
Therefore, the class of spatial trajectories Gasym exhibits a tree-
chain dependency. The CSCFG production rules that serve as
a generative model for Gasym are provided in Appendix C.
C. Example 3: Patrol Trajectory Class
The patrol trajectory class G patrol speci’¼ües a target pa-
trolling several blocks followed by patrolling the same blocks
in the reverse order. Gpatrol signi’¼ües a routine patrol behavior:
in the morning, the target moves to some other edge while
patrolling speci’¼üc blocks in a pre-designed order; in the
afternoon, it patrols the same blocks in the reverse order and
returns to its origin. An example of the trajectory class Gpatrol
is illustrated by the red and green lines in Fig. 1. In general,
Gpatrol is de’¼üned by the class of strings (spatial trajectories)
Gpatrol = a1a2 . . . aNcNcNŌłÆ1 . . . c1(N Ōēź2) with
a b : into(a) = from(b)
ak, ck = search block (ik, jk), k = 1, 2, . . . , N
(ikŌłÆ1, jkŌłÆ1) ╠Ė= (ik, jk), k = 2, 3, . . . , N
(17)
In (17), Gpatrol is a palindrome (tree dependency) with chain
constraints (red arrows). Therefore, the class of spatial trajec-
tories Gpatrol exhibits a tree-chain dependency. The CSCFG
7
production rules that constitute a generative model for Gpatrol
are provided in Appendix C.
D. Anomalous Trajectories Involving Interacting Targets
Apart from the 3 examples above, the CSCFG formalism
also serves as a generative model for several other important
classes of anomalous spatial trajectories. Here we brie’¼éy
outline two examples that consist of two interacting targets (To
save space the production rules that generate these trajectories
and numerical studies are omitted).
Example 4. Accompany Rectangle: The accompany rect-
angle trajectory class Gar consists of two interacting targets.
The trajectory of
target A is a rectangle which indicates
surveillance activities. Target B accompanies A and moves
within one block away from A to do auxiliary work, e.g.,
clear safety threats around A. An example of Gar is illustrated
in Fig. 8. Gar is de’¼üned by the class of spatial trajectories
Gar = q1:M, qk = (qA
k ; qB
k ), k = 1, 2, . . . , M
Target A : qA
1:M = qA
1 , qA
2 , . . . , qA
M = a1:mb1:n1c1:md1:n2 where
╬Ė(ak) = north, ╬Ė(ck) = south, k = 1, 2, . . . , m
╬Ė(bk) = east, k = 1, 2, . . . , n1
╬Ė(dk) = west, k = 1, 2, . . . , n2
from(a1) = into(dn2)
Target B : qB
1:M = (qB
1 , qB
2 , . . . , qB
M) where
qB
k is within 1 block away from qA
k , k = 1, 2, . . . , M
Here qA
k denotes the road target A is on at time k and ╬Ė(.)
is de’¼üned in (7). For target A, the length of a1:m and c1:m
(m is a random positive integer) are equal which shows the
tree dependency. The trajectory of target B is a Markov chain.
Hence, the class of spatial trajectories Gar exhibits a tree-chain
dependency and a CSCFG is a generative model.
Example 5. Following Palindrome:
In the palindrome
anomalous trajectory class Gfp, target A starts from road eij,
moves to road emn and then retraces its path to eji. The
trajectory of target A is a palindrome illustrated in Fig. 8.
Target A can be a person that goes from home to of’¼üce and
then retraces his path to back home. Target B intentionally
follows target A by moving on either the same road as A or
the previous road A travelled (so B can constantly monitor
A). Gfp is de’¼üned by the class of spatial trajectories
Gfp = q1:M, qk = (qA
k ; qB
k ), k = 1, 2, . . . , M
Target A : qA
1:M = qA
1 , qA
2 , . . . , qA
M = a1:mcm:1 where
from(ak) = into(ck), into(ak) = from(ck), k = 1, 2, . . . , M
Target B : qB
1:M = (qB
1 , qB
2 , . . . , qB
M) where
qB
k = qA
k or qB
k = qA
kŌłÆ1, k = 1, 2, . . . , M
Here, m is a random positive integer. The trajectory of target
A is a palindrome which represents the tree dependency
[17]. The trajectory of target B is a Markov chain which
indicates the chain dependency. Therefore, the class Gfp which
combines the trajectories of targets A and B exhibits a tree-
chain dependency and a CSCFG forms a generative model.
v21
v22
v23
v24
v25
v16
v17
v18
v19
v20
v11
v12
v13
v14
v15
v6
v7
v8
v9
v10
v1
v2
v3
v4
v5
embassy
East
West
North
South
Figure 8: Red (target A) and green (target B) lines illustrate
an example of the accompany rectangle trajectory class Gar.
Orange lines depict an example of a palindrome trajectory.
E. Summary
We summarize the main ideas in this section with the
following theorem and then describe some extensions.
Theorem 1. For the spatial trajectories in Examples 1 to 5:
1) A CSCFG constitutes a generative model, i.e., the nec-
essary and suf’¼ücient condition (2) holds. Markov chains
are not generative models and naive template matching
(Sec.II-B) requires an exponential number of templates.
2) The CSCFG models are consistent: they generate ’¼ünite
length strings with probability one (proof in Appendix C).
Velocity Tracklets. A targetŌĆÖs velocity pro’¼üle can also in-
dicate anomalous activities. In Fig. 8, the target moves slowly
on the road (densely dotted black dots) close to the embassy
(orange ’¼ülled rectangle) and then speeds up (loosely dotted
black dots) after it turns into another road. This velocity
pro’¼üle can indicate suspicious surveillance of the embassy.
To incorporate the targetŌĆÖs velocity into syntactic tracking, we
simply augment the position tracklet (road name eij) with the
quantized speed, e.g.,: [eij, slow] or [eij, fast] which denotes
the target moving on road eij at a low or high speed. The
base-level tracker estimates the targetŌĆÖs speed on an individual
road, maps it to the augmented tracklet and then the meta-level
tracker uses these tracklets for inferring intent.
Other Examples of Anomalous Trajectories. In general
anomalous trajectories are de’¼üned by radar operators and can
be codi’¼üed into production rules. [17] has several additional
examples of trajectories that have SCFG generative models
including move-stop-move, two targets meeting at a speci’¼üc
region and then departing, trajectories that are constrained to
visit speci’¼üc regions such as checkpoints, etc.
V. CSCFG-DRIVEN PARTICLE FILTER TRACKER
Thus far, we have discussed a 3-level model for the roadmap
syntactic tracking problem. Sec. IV gave several examples of
anomalous trajectories. In this section, given GMTI radar
observations z1:k of the target, we exploit the 3-level model to
develop a syntactic enhanced VSIMM algorithm for real time
8
estimation of the posterior of the target trajectory as6
p(G|z1:k) =
X
q1:k
p(G| u(q1:k))p(q1:k|z1:k), ŌłĆG ŌłłG
(18)
Recall (9) that u(q1:k) is the sequence of distinct roads
traversed from time 1 to k. G denotes the set of trajectory
models discussed in Sec. IV. Evaluating p(G|z1:k) in (18)
requires computing the posterior distributions p(G| u(q1:k))
and p(q1:k|z1:k). These are discussed below.
A. Context
Given the architecture of CSCFG syntactic tracker in
Fig. 3(b) and (18), the computation of the posterior p(G|z1:k)
of trajectory class G proceeds in three steps:
(1) The meta-level tracker computes the one step prediction
p(qk|q1:kŌłÆ1) and feeds it to the base-level tracker. These
probabilities depend on the road traf’¼üc statistics and are
computed in (22) below (via the Earley Stolcke parser).
(2) The base-level tracker receives the one step prediction,
computes the posterior p(q1:k|z1:k) in (18) given radar obser-
vations z1:k and returns qk to the meta-level tracker.
(3) The meta-level tracker receives qk and computes the
posterior p(G| u(q1:k)) in (18) as
p(G| u(q1:k)) =
p(u(q1:k)|G)p(G)
P
GŌłłG
p(u(q1:k)|G)p(G)
(19)
Here, p(G), ŌłĆG ŌłłG is the pre-de’¼üned prior distribution
of different classes of trajectories. p(u(q1:k)|G) denotes the
likelihood of the road sequence given the grammatical model.
The particle ’¼ültering algorithm described in Sec. V-B is
based on the above 3 steps to estimate the posterior distribution
p(G|z1:k) in (18). The novelty of this algorithm is that it
exploits the CSCFG natural language model for the target
trajectory class as follows: a modi’¼üed Earley Stolcke parser7
for CSCFGs (see Appendix B) is used to compute the one
step prediction p(qk|q1:kŌłÆ1) in step (1) and target trajectory
likelihood p(u(q1:k)|G) in step (3).
B. CSCFG-driven Particle Filter Algorithm
For the 3-level model proposed in Sec. III and Sec. IV,
direct computation of the posterior distribution p(q1:k|z1:k) is
intractable.8 Therefore, given the noisy observation sequence
z1:k, we estimate the posterior distribution
p(q1:k, x1:k, m1:k+1|z1:k)
6We constrain p(G|q1:k) = p(G| u(q1:k)) by setting p(G|q1:k) to zero if
q1:k is not a feasible tracklet (road name) sequence, e.g., the probability of
jumping to a non adjacent road is zero.
7The Earley Stolcke parser is used for forward parsing of SCFGs [22].
In Appendix B we show how it can be modi’¼üed to parse CSCFGs. The
novelty of this modi’¼üed parser is that it adds serial constraints to the top-down
control structure in the Earley Stolcke parser while maintaining polynomial
computation cost.
8Note that (10) is a CSCFG-driven dynamical system. Even for simpler
case of a jump Markov linear system, exact computation of the posterior
is intractable since the posterior at time k is a mixture distribution with an
exponential number of components in k. Also see [27] for adaptive systems
of particle ’¼ülters.
Here, m1:k+1 = (m1, m2, . . . , mk+1) and mk denotes the
length of the directed road sequence u(q1:k) in (9). That is,
mk is the number of distinct roads the target has traversed
until time k. Recall qk is the road the target is on at time k.
The particle ’¼ülter algorithm below uses the approximation
p(q1:k, x1:k, m1:k+1|z1:k)
Ōēł
Np
X
i=1
1(qi
1:k = q1:k, xi
1:k = x1:k, mi
1:k+1 = m1:k+1)wi
k
where Np is the number of particles. Then the real time
posterior probability mass function of trajectory G given radar
observations in (18) is computed as
p(G|z1:k) =
Np
X
i=1
p(G| u(qi
1:k))wi
k
(20)
The particle weights wi
k are computed recursively as
wi
k = p(qi
1:k, xi
1:k, mi
1:k+1|z1:k)
ŽĆ(qi
1:k, xi
1:k, mi
1:k+1|z1:k)
ŌłØp(qi
k, xi
k, mi
k+1|qi
1:kŌłÆ1, xi
1:kŌłÆ1, mi
1:k)p(zk|xi
k)
ŽĆ(qi
k, xi
k, mi
k+1|qi
1:kŌłÆ1, xi
1:kŌłÆ1, mi
1:k, z1:k)
wi
kŌłÆ1
We choose the bootstrap proposal distribution
ŽĆ(qi
k, xi
k, mi
k+1|qi
1:kŌłÆ1, xi
1:kŌłÆ1, mi
1:k, z1:k)
= p(qi
k, xi
k, mi
k+1|qi
1:kŌłÆ1, xi
1:kŌłÆ1, mi
1:k)
= p(qi
k|qi
1:kŌłÆ1)p(xi
k|xi
kŌłÆ1, qi
k)p(mi
k+1|mi
k, xi
k, qi
k)
(21)
The ’¼ürst term in (21) is computed as9
p(qi
k|qi
1:kŌłÆ1) =
’Ż▒
’Ż▓
’Ż│
P
ŌłĆGŌłłG
p(qi
k| u(qi
1:kŌłÆ1), G)p(G| u(qi
1:kŌłÆ1))
if mi
k = mi
kŌłÆ1 + 1
1(qi
k = qi
kŌłÆ1)
if mi
k = mi
kŌłÆ1
(22)
In (22), p(qi
k| u(qi
1:kŌłÆ1), G) is computed by the modi’¼üed
Earley Stolcke parser for CSCFGs as described in Appendix B;
see (31). The event mi
k = mi
kŌłÆ1 + 1 indicates that the target
enters an intersection and needs to decide the next road to
move onto. p(G| u(qi
1:kŌłÆ1)) is the posterior distribution of
trajectory in (19).
Using the dynamics in (10), the second term in (21) is
p(xi
k|xi
kŌłÆ1, qi
k) = N(F(xi
kŌłÆ1, di
k), ╦£Qk(di
k))
(23)
Here, di
k is speci’¼üed in (10). F(.) and ╦£Qk(di
k) are de’¼üned in
(11), (12). The third term in (21) is updated as
mi
k+1 =
(
mi
k + 1
B(Fxi
k) = into(qi
k)
mi
k
B(Fxi
k) = qi
k
with F =
’Ż«
’Ż»’Ż»’Ż░
1
0
T
0
0
1
0
T
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
’Ż╣
’Ż║’Ż║’Ż╗
(24)
Here, B(.) is de’¼üned in (10) and T is the sampling interval
in (11). (24) says that mi
k is incremented by 1 if Fxi
k is
9The particles qi
k, i = 1, . . . , Np are sampled to ensure that they are
consistent with the speci’¼üc CSCFG trajectory model.
9
located at the intersection into(qi
k). Recursive computation of
the particle weights wi
k before normalization is
wi
k = wi
kŌłÆ1p(zk|xi
k) = wi
kŌłÆ1N(H(xi
k, ck), R)
(25)
where H(.), ck are de’¼üned in (13) and R is de’¼üned in (14).
With the above de’¼ünitions, the CSCFG-driven particle ’¼ül-
tering algorithm is presented in Algorithm 1. The output
of Algorithm 1 is the real time estimate of the posterior
of each trajectory model given radar observations, namely
p(G|z1:k), ŌłĆG ŌłłG in (18). Algorithm 1 also computes the
targetŌĆÖs state estimate (denoted as ╦åxk) to compare with the
VSIMM tracker in Sec. VI.
CSCFG-Particle Filter
Input {xi
1:kŌłÆ1, qi
1:kŌłÆ1, mi
1:k, wi
kŌłÆ1, zk}
for i = 1 to Np do
Sample qi
k using (22)
qi
1:k = (qi
1:kŌłÆ1, qi
k)
Sample xi
k using (23)
Compute mi
k+1 using (24)
Compute wi
k using (25)
end for
Normalize wi
k = wi
k/ PNp
i=1 wi
k, ŌłĆi = 1, 2, ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę , Np
if 1/ PNp
i=1(wi
k)2 < threshold then
RESAMPLE
end if
TargetŌĆÖs state estimate ╦åxk = PNp
i=1 xi
kwi
k
Compute the real time trajectory posterior p(G|z1:k) us-
ing (20)
return {xi
1:k, qi
1:k, mi
1:k+1, wi
k, p(G|z1:k), ŌłĆG ŌłłG}
Algorithm 1: Syntactic Target Tracking Algorithm using
CSCFG-Driven Particle Filter
VI. NUMERICAL EXAMPLES
This section presents three numerical examples for detecting
roadmap based anomalous trajectories of a target. The CSCFG
syntactic tracker (Algorithm 1) proposed in Sec. V provides
real time classi’¼ücation of the trajectory of a target as it moves
on a roadmap given GMTI radar observations. Recall that
Algorithm 1 combines the Earley Stolcke parser (detailed in
Appendix B) with a base-level particle ’¼ülter to compute the
posterior probabilities of trajectory models.
A. Simulation Setup
The prior probabilities of the anomalous trajectories of inter-
est are assumed to be uniformly distributed. The initialization
of the ith particle si
1 = (xi
1; qi
1) is speci’¼üed as
xi
1 Ōł╝N(x1, diag(25, 25, 5, 5)), qi
1 = B(xi
1)
Here, x1 is the targetŌĆÖs true state vector at the initial time and
B(.) de’¼üned in (10) denotes the targetŌĆÖs meta-level position
(road or intersection name).
The empirical performance of the CSCFG syntactic tracker
is evaluated by simulating measurements from a GMTI radar
for a target moving on a 6├Ś6 (number of blocks) roadmap; see
B(1000,-500)
C(1000,1000)
(-500,1000)D
(-500,-500)A
O
x/m
y/m
O
Figure 9: Trajectory of the aircraft that deploys the GMTI
radar. The aircraft starts from A (-500 m, -500 m) and moves
along the perimeter of the 6├Ś 6 roadmap. O denotes the origin
point. Grey squares denote blocks. The crosshatched block is
denoted as ŌĆ£block (4, 3)ŌĆØ since it is located at the 4th column,
3rd row in the roadmap.
Fig. 9. The length and width of each directed road is assumed
to be 100 m and 5 m, respectively. The aircraft (on which a
GMTI radar is mounted) starts from (-500 m, -500 m), and
then moves along the perimeter of the roadmap with (constant)
altitude 3000 m and constant speed 100 m/s; see Fig. 9. Table I
speci’¼ües the kinematic parameters used in the particle ’¼ülter.
Table I: Parameters used in numerical examples
T
0.2s
number of particles
1000
Žārk
5 Ōł╝9 m
Žā ╦Örk
0.3 Ōł╝0.7 m/s
Žā╬Ėk
0.5ŌŚ”Ōł╝0.9ŌŚ”
Žāa
0.5 m/s2
Žāo
0.05 m/s2
Žārk, Žā ╦Örk and Žā╬Ėk are the standard deviations of the range, range rate
and azimuth in (14). T is the sampling interval in (11). Žāa and Žāo are
the standard deviations along and orthogonal to the direction of motion
in (12).
Our results below involve 20 independent simulation trials
for each trajectory model over a sweep of increasing observa-
tion noise variances. In each trial: (i) The targetŌĆÖs trajectory
that follows either Gequal, Gpatrol or Gasym discussed in Sec. IV
is simulated. The targetŌĆÖs speed is initialized to 10 m/s. (ii) A
GMTI measurement sequence is simulated. (iii) The CSCFG
syntactic tracker is run to compute the real time trajectory
posterior p(G|z1:k) and the state estimate ╦åxk in Algorithm 1.
Finally, these state estimates are compared to that of the
classical VSIMM tracker.
The performance of our CSCFG syntactic tracker (Algo-
rithm 1) is evaluated using two criteria:
1) Normalized detection delay de’¼üned as
time instant when anomalous trajectory is detected
total time instants of GMTI observations
(26)
We consider an anomalous trajectory to be detected when the
posterior probability of the trajectory exceeds 0.9 for a period.
10
2) State estimate improvement which is computed as
improvement = error(VSIMM) ŌłÆerror(CSCFG)
error(VSIMM)
%
where error = average((╦åxi
k ŌłÆxi
k)ŌĆ▓(╦åxi
k ŌłÆxi
k))
for i = 1, 2, . . . , M and k = 1, 2, . . . , Ni
(27)
Here, ╦åxi
k, xi
k denote the estimated and true state vector of the
target in the ith trial at time k. In (27), M = (20├Ś3) denotes
the total number of simulation trials over all trajectory models.
Ni is the total time instants of the ith simulation trial.
B. Equal Effort Search Trajectory Model
The trajectory model Gequal was discussed in Sec. IV-A and
Fig. 6. We generated 20 independent simulation trials where
the target follows the Gequal trajectory model. In each trial, we
select two rows in the roadmap randomly and choose N to be
either 2, 3 or 4 with probability 1/3. Recall N is the number
of blocks to be searched in each row by the target in (15).
Then we compute the normalized detection delay (26).
Results. Gequal has the largest average (over 20 simulation
trials) normalized detection delay (=80%) compared with
Gpatrol(= 43%) and Gasym(= 42%); see Fig. 10(a). This is
because it takes more time to distinguish between Gequal
and Gpatrol. Speci’¼ücally, the difference between the posteriors
p(Gequal|z1:k) and p(Gpatrol|z1:k) becomes suf’¼üciently large
only after the target searches 4 blocks.
Fig. 10(b) illustrates how the posteriors of the three tra-
jectory classes, namely, p(Gequal|z1:k), p(Gpatrol|z1:k) and
p(Gasym|z1:k) evolve vs time k. The posteriors are computed
by the CSCFG syntactic tracker (Algorithm 1). Fig. 10(b)
shows that the posterior p(Gasym|z1:k) becomes negligible
when the target does not perform consecutive searches of block
B. The difference between the posteriors p(Gequal|z1:k) and
p(Gpatrol|z1:k) remains suf’¼üciently large after blocks A, B, C,
D are searched.
C. Asymmetric Effort Search Trajectory Model
The asymmetric effort search trajectory model is described
in Sec. IV-B and Fig. 7. We generated 20 independent sim-
ulation trials where the target follows the Gasym trajectory
model. In each trial, we choose N to be either 1, 2 or 3 with
probability 1/3 and Ōłåto be either 1 or 2 with probability 1/2.
N, Ōłåare the number of searches of block A and number of
additional searches of block B in (16). Then we compute the
normalized detection delay (26).
Results. The average (over 20 simulation trials) normalized
detection delay of Gasym is 42%; see Fig. 10(a). We present
simulation results based on N(= 1, 2, 3) and Ōłå(= 1, 2).
1) N = 1; Ōłå= 1; normalized detection delay=100%
Fig. 10(c) shows an example of Gasym detection where the
targetŌĆÖs trajectory consists of N = 1 search of block A
followed by N + Ōłå= 2 searches of block B. p(Gpatrol|z1:k)
drops to zero because the target stops its movement (no GMTI
radar input) rather than searching block A.
2) N = 2, 3; Ōłå= 1, 2; normalized detection delayŌēł10%
Fig. 10(d) displays the posterior probability of trajectory class
Gasym where the target makes successive searches (Ōēź2) of
block A. Based on the posterior probabilities, Gasym is detected
during the targetŌĆÖs 2nd search of block A. The value of the
posteriors p(Gequal|z1:k) and p(Gpatrol|z1:k) drop rapidly with
k because consecutive searches of block A are not permitted
in the trajectory classes Gequal and Gpatrol.
D. Patrol Trajectory Model
The patrol trajectory model was presented in Sec. IV-C and
Fig. 1. We generated 20 independent simulation trials where
the target follows the Gpatrol trajectory model. In each trial,
we choose N to be either 2, 3 or 4 with probability 1/3 where
N is the number of different blocks searched by the target in
(17). Then we compute the normalized detection delay (26).
Results. The average (over 20 simulation trials) normalized
detection delay of Gpatrol is 43%; see Fig. 10(a).
1) N = 2; normalized detection delayŌēł70%
Fig. 10(e) illustrates an example of Gpatrol detection where
two different blocks (blocks A, B) are patrolled and re-
patrolled in the reverse order by the target. In Fig. 10(e), the
posterior p(Gequal|z1:k) becomes insigni’¼ücantly small during
the targetŌĆÖs 2nd search of block B. This is because the
trajectory class Gequal does not allow consecutive searches of
the same block. Given the targetŌĆÖs partial trajectory (which
consists of 1 search of block A followed by 2 searches of
block B), the difference between the posterior probabilities
p(Gpatrol|z1:k) and p(Gasym|z1:k) is small. As a result, the
radar operator cannot determine the targetŌĆÖs trajectory model.
Subsequently, the target moves from block B to block A and
its trajectory is classi’¼üed to be Gpatrol.
2) N = 3, 4; normalized detection delayŌēł30%
In Fig. 10(f), 3 different blocks (blocks A, B, C) are repet-
itively patrolled by the target. During the targetŌĆÖs movement
from block B to C, p(Gpatrol|z1:k) increases monotonically
whereas p(Gequal|z1:k) and p(Gasym|z1:k) decline to negligible
values. The reason is that the trajectory family Gequal only
permits search in two block rows; while blocks A, B, C
are located at three different rows; see Fig. 10(f). Also, the
target does not make extra searches of block B; therefore the
posterior p(Gasym|z1:k) decreases to zero as k increases.
E. Syntactic Tracker Improves State Estimate Accuracy
Fig. 11 shows that for the trajectory classes of Gequal, Gasym
and Gpatrol, the CSCFG syntactic tracker improves the state
estimate accuracy (de’¼üned in (27)) by 19% compared with the
classical VSIMM tracker. The reason is that, in the VSIMM
tracker, trajectories from qk to qk+n consist of all possible
trajectories on the roadmap. By comparison, in the CSCFG
syntactic tracker, trajectories from qk to qk+n are constrained
by the meta-level trajectory estimates which is a subset of
those considered by the VSIMM tracker. To illustrate this,
consider Fig. 10(d) where a target follows Gasym trajectory
class. In the CSCFG syntactic tracker, once Gasym is detected
(based on its posterior probability exceeding 0.9), qi
k predicted
by the meta-level tracker for each particle equals its right-
handed road at an intersection. As a result, particles tend to
explore right turns at intersections to search the second region.
11
(a)
A:block(1,5)
B:block(2,5)
C:block(6,5)
D:block(6,3)
E:block(2,3)
F:block(1,3)
(b)
A:block(3,3) B:block(1,1)
(c)
A:block(3,6) B:block(6,3)
(d)
A:block(3,5) B:block(1,1)
(e)
A:block(2,2) B:block(3,6) C:block(3,3)
(f)
Figure 10: (a) Average normalized detection delay computed by averaging the normalized detection delay in (26) over 20
simulation trials. Žārk, Žā ╦Örk and Žā╬Ėk are de’¼üned in (14). Žā = [5, 0.3, 0.5]ŌĆ▓ and Ōłå= [1, 0.1, 0.1]ŌĆ▓. (b)-(f) Examples of the
posterior probability (vertical axis) of each trajectory class computed by the CSCFG syntactic tracker when tracking a target
with (b) Gequal trajectory model, (c)(d) Gasym trajectory model and (e)(f) Gpatrol trajectory model. ŌĆ£A: block(i, j)ŌĆØ indicates A
is the block located at the ith column, jth row in the roadmap; see Fig. 9. ŌĆ£|A|ŌĆØ in brown represents a search of block A (a
string of roads that surround block A); see Sec. IV-A. The discrete time interval is in units of 0.2 seconds.
12
Figure 11: State estimate improvement in (27) of CSCFG
syntactic tracker compared with the classical VSIMM tracker.
Žārk, Žā ╦Örk and Žā╬Ėk are de’¼üned in (14). Žā = [5, 0.3, 0.5]ŌĆ▓ and
Ōłå= [1, 0.1, 0.1]ŌĆ▓.
By comparison, particles in the VSIMM tracker try all possible
trajectories and thus have larger state estimate errors.
F. Syntactic Tracker vs Template Matching
Here we illustrate via numerical examples the performance
of template matching for detecting anomalous trajectories. Let
M, N denote the number of block rows and columns of the
roadmap; see Fig. 9. The number of possible templates for
each trajectory model (Gequal, Gpatrol and Gasym) proposed in
Sec. IV grows exponentially with M ├ŚN. By comparison, the
number of production rules of a CSCFG only grows linearly
with M├ŚN. In other words, CSCFG serves as a more ef’¼ücient
generative model for these anomalous trajectories.
We conducted 50 independent simulation trials. In each
trial: (1) 5 templates for each anomalous trajectory model
were stochastically generated. (2) Template matching was run
on each of the simulated 60 anomalous targets in Sec. VI-B,
Sec. VI-C and Sec. VI-D. The targetŌĆÖs trajectory is classi’¼üed
to the anomalous trajectory model which has the template
with the least edit distance. The edit distance is de’¼üned as
the minimal number of replacements, insertions and deletions
required to change from one string to another [11].
Results. The performance of template matching is measured
by the successful classi’¼ücation rate (SCR): number of success-
ful classi’¼ücations of anomalous targets divided by the number
of anomalous targets. The average SCR for template matching
over 50 independent trials is 45.20%. In comparison using the
CSCFG based syntactic tracker, the SCR is 90%. The reason
for the poor performance of template matching is that we only
used 5 templates for each anomalous trajectory model; this
cannot cover all trajectories that belong to a speci’¼üc trajectory
class. (Recall from Sec.II-B that we would need an exponential
number of templates to cover all possible trajectories.)
G. Syntactic Tracker Performance with Missing Tracklets
Here we illustrate the performance of the CSCFG syntactic
tracker when some tracklets are missing due to missed radar
observations. The performance is evaluated using 60 inde-
pendent trials (20 trials for each of the anomalous trajectory
models Gequal, Gpatrol and Gasym) over a sweep of increasing
percentage tracklets loss.
First we consider randomly missing measurements from the
entire measurement sequence. In this case the average normal-
ized detection delay of CSCFG syntactic tracker remains vir-
tually unchanged. The reason for this insensitivity to tracklet
loss is that with high probability most of the missing tracklets
are not at/around intersections - it is at these intersections
where most uncertainty occurs. Therefore, we now focus on
missing tracklets at road intersections. We simulated two types
of radar observation processes with missing tracklets:
1) Case 1. Missing tracklets appear at 10% to 50% inter-
sections. 20 tracklets at and after an intersection are uniformly
chosen to be missing.
2) Case 2. Missing tracklets appear in bursts at 10% to 50%
intersections. Intersection tracklets and 20 road tracklets after
an intersection are chosen to be missing.
Results. The performance of CSCFG syntactic tracker with
missing tracklets is shown in Fig. 12(a)(b). The performance
metric is the increase in the average detection delay de’¼üned
in (26) compared to the case without tracklet loss. For Case 1,
increasing tracklets loss from 10% to 50% results in negligible
changes in the average detection delay; see Fig. 12(a). For Case
2, see Fig. 12(b), the average detection delay increases with
increasing tracklet loss. The reason for the difference between
Case 1 and 2 is as follows: Consider a sequence of tracklets
a, a, a, a, b, b, b, b. The detection delay is ╦åt ŌłÆ4 where 4 is the
position of the ’¼ürst b in the actual tracklet sequence and ╦åt is
the position of the ’¼ürst b in the missing tracklet sequence. In
Case 1, it is very unlikely that consecutive bŌĆ▓s starting from
position 4 onwards are omitted, In comparison, Case 2 omits
the ’¼ürst several bŌĆÖs by construction (bursty missing tracklets).
H. Syntactic Tracker with Perturbed Anomalous Trajectory
Here we evaluate the performance of the syntactic tracker
when the targetŌĆÖs anomalous trajectory is a small perturbation
from the speci’¼üed families G Ōłł{Gequal, Gpatrol, Gasym}; see
Fig. 13. We conducted simulations on 60 independent trials
(20 trials for each anomalous trajectory model: Gequal, Gpatrol,
Gasym). In each trial: Step 1. One unique directed sequence
u(q1:N) ŌłłG was generated. Recall, u(q1:N) is a sequence of
alphabets (road names). Step 2. Randomly select one segment
(3Ōł╝5 alphabets) in u(q1:N) and replace this segment with
a different trajectory. Note that this new inserted segment is
constrained to make the resulting trajectory physically feasible,
e.g., jump from a road to a non adjacent road is not allowed.
Step 3. The CSCFG meta-level parser was run to parse u(q1:N)
until the parser stopped; denote this stopping time as tforward.
Step 4. The reverse CSCFG meta-level parser10was run to
parse the reverse string of u(q1:N) until the parser stopped,
denote this stopping time as treverse. The target is classi’¼üed to
the trajectory model that has maximal tforward + treverse11. We
also ran template matching for comparison.
Results. The performance is evaluated in terms of the SCR
de’¼üned in Sec. VI-F. SCRs for CSCFG syntactic tracker and
10A reverse CSCFG meta-level tracker models the reverse string of the
anomalous trajectory.
11The reason is that we seek to ’¼ünd the maximum possible trajectory length
that is consistent with the model.
13
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 12: Performance of CSCFG syntactic tracker when (a) radar observations have Case 1 missing tracklets, (b) radar
observations have Case 2 missing tracklets, (c) road length and width insensitivity. The increased average detection delay is
computed by averaging the detection delay in (26) over 20 independent simulation trials for each anomalous trajectory model:
Gequal, Gpatrol and Gasym. In (a)(b), the horizontal axis 10% Ōł╝50% represents the percentage of tracklets loss; see Sec. VI-G.
In (c), l=[100, 5] denote, respectively, the road length and width (in meters) and Ōłå=[10, 1].
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Figure 13: Perturbed anomalous trajectory. Circles and squares
indicate alphabets (road names). The circle sequence con-
nected by the blue arrows represents an anomalous trajectory
that belongs to G Ōłł{Gequal, Gpatrol, Gasym}. One segment
(circles connected by the dashed blue arrows) of the circle
sequence is replaced with a square string which makes the
entire trajectory (circles and squares connected by solid ar-
rows) slightly different from the original anomalous trajectory
class G. Note also that the number of squares and the replaced
circles may not be equal; i.e., the perturbed trajectory can have
a different length.
template matching are 85.00%, 45.07%, respectively. This
shows that the proposed CSCFG syntactic tracker makes
signi’¼ücant improvement in classifying anomalous trajectories
with small perturbations compared with template matching.
I. Insensitivity to Road Length and Width
Fig. 12(c) shows that increasing road length and width re-
sults in negligible changes in the average normalized detection
delay. The average normalized detection delay for Gequal,
Gpatrol, Gasym remains at 81%, 43%, 42%; see Fig. 12(c).
VII. CONCLUSION
We constructed a 3-level model for the roadmap based syn-
tactic tracking problem using a natural language model called
the constrained stochastic context free grammar (CSCFG). At
the highest level of abstraction, the roadmap was modeled as a
weighted, directed graph; at the second level, trajectories were
modeled via a CSCFG; ’¼ünally the base level kinematics of the
target (physical sensor level) were modeled by a VSIMM.
The key idea is that the CSCFG is a generative model for a
variety of complex anomalous trajectories. The CSCFG model
substantially generalizes earlier work [15]ŌĆō[18] in syntactic
tracking and allows us to incorporate realistic continuity con-
straints imposed by roadmaps. We also presented a CSCFG-
driven particle ’¼ültering algorithm to compute the posterior
probability of each trajectory model ŌĆō the algorithm combines
the functionalities of IMM and the Earley Stolcke parser
(from natural language processing). In numerical examples,
the CSCFG syntactic tracker enables anomalous trajectory
detection and improves the state estimate accuracy by up to
19% compared to the classical VSIMM tracker.
Acknowledgement: We acknowledge Dr. Muralidhar Ran-
gaswamy of Air Force Research Laboratory and Dr. Martie
Goulding of MacDonald Dettwiler Associates for disucssions.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Ulmke and W. Koch, ŌĆ£Road-map assisted ground moving target
tracking,ŌĆØ IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems,
vol. 42, pp. 1264ŌĆō1274, October 2006.
[2] D. Streller, ŌĆ£Road map assisted ground target tracking,ŌĆØ in 2008 11th
International Conference on Information Fusion, pp. 1ŌĆō7, June 2008.
[3] Y. Cheng and T. Singh, ŌĆ£Ef’¼ücient particle ’¼ültering for road-constrained
target tracking,ŌĆØ IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Sys-
tems, vol. 43, pp. 1454ŌĆō1469, October 2007.
[4] T. Kirubarajan, Y. Bar-Shalom, K. R. Pattipati, and I. Kadar, ŌĆ£Ground
target tracking with variable structure IMM estimator,ŌĆØ IEEE Transac-
tions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, vol. 36, pp. 26ŌĆō46, Jan 2000.
[5] H. A. P. Blom and Y. Bar-Shalom, ŌĆ£The interacting multiple model
algorithm for systems with markovian switching coef’¼ücients,ŌĆØ IEEE
Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 33, pp. 780ŌĆō783, Aug 1988.
[6] Y. Li, D. Jin, Z. Wang, P. Hui, L. Zeng, and S. Chen, ŌĆ£A markov jump
process model for urban vehicular mobility: Modeling and applications,ŌĆØ
IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 13, pp. 1911ŌĆō1926, Sept
2014.
[7] B. I. Ahmad, J. K. Murphy, P. M. Langdon, and S. J. Godsill, ŌĆ£Bayesian
intent prediction in object tracking using bridging distributions,ŌĆØ IEEE
transactions on cybernetics, 2016.
[8] R. Fraile and S. Maybank, ŌĆ£Vehicle trajectory approximation and
classi’¼ücation,ŌĆØ in British Machine Vision Conference, 1998.
[9] X. Li, J. Han, S. Kim, and H. Gonzalez, ŌĆ£Roam: Rule- and motif-based
anomaly detection in massive moving object data sets*,ŌĆØ (Philadelphia),
pp. 273ŌĆō284, Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2007.
[10] S. Srivastava, K. K. Ng, and E. J. Delp, ŌĆ£Co-ordinate mapping and
analysis of vehicle trajectory for anomaly detection,ŌĆØ in 2011 IEEE
International Conference on Multimedia and Expo, pp. 1ŌĆō6, July 2011.
[11] H. Oh, S. Kim, H.-S. Shin, A. Tsourdos, and B. A. White, ŌĆ£Behaviour
recognition of ground vehicle using airborne monitoring of unmanned
aerial vehicles,ŌĆØ International Journal of Systems Science, vol. 45,
no. 12, pp. 2499ŌĆō2514, 2014.
[12] S. Gao, ŌĆ£Roadmap enhanced improvement to the VSIMM tracker
via a Constrained Stochastic Context Free Grammar,ŌĆØ MasterŌĆÖs thesis,
University of British Columbia, 2017.
[13] K. E. Mark, M. I. Miller, and U. Grenander, ŌĆ£Constrained stochastic
language models,ŌĆØ in Image Models (and Their Speech Model cousins),
pp. 131ŌĆō140, Springer, 1996.
14
[14] K. Mark, M. Miller, U. Grenander, and S. Abney, ŌĆ£Parameter estimation
for constrained context-free language models,ŌĆØ in Proceedings of the
Workshop on Speech and Natural Language, HLT ŌĆÖ91, (Stroudsburg, PA,
USA), pp. 146ŌĆō149, Association for Computational Linguistics, 1992.
[15] A. Wang, V. Krishnamurthy, and B. Balaji, ŌĆ£Intent inference and
syntactic tracking with GMTI measurements,ŌĆØ IEEE Transactions on
Aerospace and Electronic Systems, vol. 47, pp. 2824ŌĆō2843, Oct 2011.
[16] M. Fanaswala and V. Krishnamurthy, ŌĆ£Syntactic models for trajectory
constrained track-before-detect,ŌĆØ IEEE Transactions on Signal Process-
ing, vol. 62, pp. 6130ŌĆō6142, Dec 2014.
[17] M. Fanaswala and V. Krishnamurthy, ŌĆ£Spatiotemporal trajectory models
for metalevel target tracking,ŌĆØ IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems
Magazine, vol. 30, pp. 16ŌĆō31, Jan 2015.
[18] M. Fanaswala and V. Krishnamurthy, ŌĆ£Detection of anomalous trajectory
patterns in target tracking via stochastic context-free grammars and
reciprocal process models,ŌĆØ IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal
Processing, vol. 7, pp. 76ŌĆō90, Feb 2013.
[19] B. Balaji, ŌĆ£Consistency of stochastic context-free grammars and appli-
cation to stochastic parsing of GMTI tracker data,ŌĆØ in SPIE Defense,
Security, and Sensing, pp. 83920SŌĆō83920S, International Society for
Optics and Photonics, 2012.
[20] E. Blasch, ┬┤E. Boss┬┤e, and D. A. Lambert, High-level information fusion
management and systems design. Artech House, 2012.
[21] A. V. Aho and J. D. Ullman, The theory of parsing, translation and
compiling. Englewood Cliffs, NJ,USA: Prentice-Hall, 1972.
[22] A. Stolcke, ŌĆ£An ef’¼ücient probabilistic context-free parsing algorithm that
computes pre’¼üx probabilities,ŌĆØ Computational linguistics, vol. 21, no. 2,
pp. 165ŌĆō201, 1995.
[23] J. M. Wolfe and T. S. Horowitz, ŌĆ£Opinion: What attributes guide the
deployment of visual attention and how do they do it?.,ŌĆØ Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 495 ŌĆō 501, 2004.
[24] A. Borji and L. Itti, ŌĆ£State-of-the-art in visual attention modeling,ŌĆØ IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 35,
pp. 185ŌĆō207, Jan 2013.
[25] M. M. Cheng, N. J. Mitra, X. Huang, P. H. S. Torr, and S. M. Hu,
ŌĆ£Global contrast based salient region detection,ŌĆØ IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 37, pp. 569ŌĆō582, March
2015.
[26] D. T. Levin, ŌĆ£Classifying faces by race: The structure of face cate-
gories.,ŌĆØ Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 1364 ŌĆō 1382, 1996.
[27] P. M. Djuri┬┤c and M. F. Bugallo, ŌĆ£Adaptive systems of particle ’¼ülters,ŌĆØ in
Forty Fourth Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers
(ASILOMAR), 2010, pp. 59ŌĆō63, IEEE, 2010.
[28] J. E. Hopcroft, R. Motwani, and J. D. Ullman, Introduction to automata
theory, languages, and computation. Boston, MA;Toronto, ON;: Pear-
son/Addison Wesley, 3rd ed., 2007.
[29] R. Gecse and A. Kovcs, ŌĆ£Consistency of stochastic context-free gram-
mars,ŌĆØ Mathematical and Computer Modelling, vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 490
ŌĆō 500, 2010.
APPENDIX A
WHAT IS SYNTACTIC TRACKING?
Since readers in target tracking may not be familiar with
natural language models, we present a short description of
stochastic context free grammars here; see [28] [17] for details.
The aim of syntactic tracking is to classify a targetŌĆÖs
trajectory using natural language processing based generative
models. We view the spatial-temporal trajectory of a target as
a sequence (string) of noisy symbols (alphabets).
Both
SCFG
and
CSCFG
are
5-tuples
of
the
form
{N, T , S, R, P}. Here, N is a ’¼ünite set of nonterminals and
T is a ’¼ünite set of terminals. S ŌłłN denotes the starting
symbol. R is a ’¼ünite set of production rules and P denotes a
probability function over production rules in R. In a SCFG,
the production rule is of the form
X ŌåÆ╬╗, X ŌłłN with probability p
╬╗ : a string of nonterminals and terminals
(28)
N = {S, A, B},T = {a, b}
R, P : S ŌåÆAB[1],A ŌåÆa[0.8]
A ŌåÆb[0.2],B ŌåÆb[1]
(a)
S
A
a
B
b
(b)
1
0.8
1
Figure 14: (a) Example of a SCFG. Numbers in brackets de-
note probabilities of production rules. (b) Example of a SCFG
parse tree. Numbers in red denote probabilities of production
rules. The probability of this parse tree is 1 ├Ś 1 ├Ś 0.8 = 0.8.
The production rule in (28) says we can replace the nonter-
minal X with the string ╬╗ with probability p. For example,
in Fig. 14(a), the production rule A ŌåÆa[0.8] represents we
replace the nonterminal A with terminal a with probability
0.8. The derivation of a SCFG is illustrated via a parse tree
(see Fig. 14(b)) and its output is a string of terminals. The
probability of a parse tree is the product of probabilities of
production rules applied to it; see Fig. 14(b).
APPENDIX B
A PARSING ALGORITHM FOR THE CONSTRAINED
STOCHASTIC CONTEXT FREE GRAMMAR (CSCFG)
Here,
we
present
a
Bayesian
parsing
algorithm
(with
polynomial
time
computation
cost)
for
the
CSCFG={N, T , S, R, P} de’¼üned in Sec. III-B. The aim
of this parsing algorithm is to compute the one step
prediction p(qk+1|╦åq1:k, CSCFG) and the pre’¼üx probability
p(╦åq1:k|CSCFG) for the CSCFG. qk ŌłłT denotes the clean
terminal at time k and ╦åq1:k = (╦åq1, ╦åq2, . . . , ╦åqk) denotes a string
of noisy symbols (alphabets). These two probabilities are
used in the particle ’¼ültering algorithm in Sec. V. The parsing
algorithm for CSCFGs is a modi’¼üed version of the classic
Earley Stolcke parser, and to the best of our knowledge, new.
The classic Earley Stolcke parser is used to compute the
one step prediction probability and the pre’¼üx probability for
the stochastic context free grammar (SCFG) [22]. The Earley
state is de’¼üned as
k
kŌĆ▓X ŌåÆ╬╗.╬▓┬Ą[╬▒, ╬│]
(29)
where X ŌłłN and ╬╗, ╬▓, ┬Ą denote strings of nonterminals and
terminals. k is the current epoch and kŌĆ▓ is the back pointer to
the epoch when this Earley state is generated by the prediction
operation. The dot ŌĆÖ.ŌĆÖ marks that the portion on its left handed
side that has been parsed or recognized by the parser. ╬▒ and
╬│ are called the forward probability and the inner probability,
respectively [22]. We expand the Earley state so that it can
record its associated terminals
k
kŌĆ▓X ŌåÆ╬╗.╬▓┬Ą[s, f][╬▒, ╬│]
(30)
In (30), k, kŌĆ▓, X, ╬╗, ╬▓, ┬Ą, ╬▒, ╬│ are de’¼üned in (29). s is
called the start symbol and denotes the previous terminal
when X is rewritten by ╬╗╬▓┬Ą in epoch kŌĆ▓. f is called the
’¼ünish symbol and denotes the ’¼ünal terminal that has been
parsed before the dot. The probabilistic left corner relation
is computed as p(X
LŌåÆY |a) =
P
XŌåÆY ╬╗|aŌłłR
p(X ŌåÆY ╬╗|a)
15
X, Y , ╬ō ŌłłN, ╬╗, ┬Ą, ╬▓, ╬Ę Ōłł(N Ōł¬T )ŌłŚ, ╬Ę /ŌłłN, a ŌłłT . n is a general denotation
for an Earley state and uk is the set of all Earley states at epoch k. ╦åqk is the hard or
soft estimate at time k.
1. Scanning
for kŌłÆ1
kŌĆ▓
X ŌåÆ╬╗.a┬Ą[s, f][╬▒, ╬│] ŌłłukŌłÆ1 do
Add k
kŌĆ▓X ŌåÆ╬╗a.┬Ą[sŌĆ▓, f ŌĆ▓][╬▒ŌĆ▓, ╬│ŌĆ▓] to uk if p( ╦å
qk|a) > 0
╬▒ŌĆ▓ = ╬▒p( ╦å
qk|a)
╬│ŌĆ▓ = ╬│p( ╦å
qk|a)
sŌĆ▓ = s
f ŌĆ▓ = a
end for
╬Čk =
P
nŌłłuk
╬▒(k
kŌĆ▓X ŌåÆ╬╗a.┬Ą)
ŌłĆn Ōłłuk, normalize ╬▒, ╬│ using ╬Čk
2. Completion
for k
kŌĆ▓╬ō ŌåÆ╬Ę.[s, f][╬▒, ╬│] Ōłłuk do
for kŌĆ▓
kŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓X ŌåÆ╬╗.Y ┬Ą[sŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓, s][╬▒ŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓, ╬│ŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓] ŌłłukŌĆ▓ do
if Ru(Y, ╬ō|s) ╠Ė= 0 then
Add k
kŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓X ŌåÆ╬╗Y.┬Ą[sŌĆ▓, f ŌĆ▓][╬▒ŌĆ▓, ╬│ŌĆ▓] to uk
╬▒ŌĆ▓+ = ╬▒ŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓╬│Ru(Y, ╬ō|s)
╬│ŌĆ▓+ = ╬│ŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓╬│Ru(Y, ╬ō|s)
sŌĆ▓ = sŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓
f ŌĆ▓ = f
end if
end for
end for
3. Prediction
for k
kŌĆ▓X ŌåÆ╬╗.Y ┬Ą[s, f][╬▒, ╬│] Ōłłuk do
Add k
k╬ō ŌåÆ.╬▓[sŌĆ▓, f ŌĆ▓][╬▒ŌĆ▓, ╬│ŌĆ▓] to uk if Rl(Y, ╬ō|f) ╠Ė= 0
╬▒ŌĆ▓+ = ╬▒Rl(Y, ╬ō|f)p(╬ō ŌåÆ╬▓|f)
╬│ŌĆ▓ = p(╬ō ŌåÆ╬▓|f)
sŌĆ▓ = f
f ŌĆ▓ = f
end for
Algorithm 2: Earley Stolcke Parsing Algorithm for CSCFG). Compared with the
Earley Stolcke Parser for the SCFG, Algorithm 2 accounts for the serial constraints in
scanning, completion and prediction steps.
where X, Y ŌłłN, a ŌłłT and ╬╗ is a string of nonterminals
and terminals. The probabilistic unit relation is computed as
p(X
UŌåÆY |a) = p(X ŌåÆY |a). After computing the left
corner and unit relations between nonterminals, we can get
the re’¼éexive, transitive left corner matrix Rl and the unit
production relation matrix Ru. See [22] for details.
The parsing algorithm for the CSCFGs is shown in Algo-
rithm 2. The one step prediction probability is computed as
p(qk|╦åq1:kŌłÆ1, CSCFG) =
P
a=qk,nŌłłukŌłÆ1
╬▒(kŌłÆ1
kŌĆ▓
X ŌåÆ╬╗.a┬Ą[s, f])
P
nŌłłukŌłÆ1
╬▒(kŌłÆ1
kŌĆ▓
X ŌåÆ╬╗.a┬Ą[s, f])
(31)
n is a general denotation for the Earley state and ukŌłÆ1 is the
set of all Earley states at epoch k ŌłÆ1. The pre’¼üx probability
is computed as
p(╦åq1:k|CSCFG) =
k
Y
t=1
╬Čt
(32)
APPENDIX C
CSCFGS FOR META-LEVEL MODELING AND CONSISTENCY
Fig. 15 presents the CSCFG production rules that constitute
generative models for the 3 anomalous trajectory classes
discussed in Sec. IV, namely, Gequal, Gpatrol and Gasym.
Next, we show that the generative models for these trajec-
tory classes are well posed. i.e., the CSCFG models generate
’¼ünite length strings (trajectories). In natural language process-
ing, such models are said to be consistent; mathematically, the
Galton Watson branching process is sub-critical.
(1)S ŌåÆAXC, X ŌåÆAXC, X ŌåÆEN, X ŌåÆES, X ŌåÆW N, X ŌåÆW S
(2)eij ╠Ė
clockwise
ŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌåÆejk : A ŌåÆejkA2
C ŌåÆejkC2
(3)eij
clockwise
ŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌåÆejk : A2(C2) ŌåÆejkA3(C3), A3(C3) ŌåÆejkA4(C4)
A4 ŌåÆejkE, A4 ŌåÆejk, C4 ŌåÆejkW, C4 ŌåÆejk
(4)╬Ė(ejk) Ōłł{north,east} : T NE ŌåÆejkT NE
T NE ŌåÆejk
eij
clockwise
ŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌåÆejk : NE ŌåÆejkNE
eij ╠Ė
clockwise
ŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌåÆejk : NE ŌåÆejk
(5)╬Ė(ejk) Ōłł{north,west} : T NW ŌåÆejkT NW
T NW ŌåÆejk
eij
clockwise
ŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌåÆejk : NW ŌåÆejkNW
eij ╠Ė
clockwise
ŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌåÆejk : NW ŌåÆejk
(6)╬Ė(ejk) Ōłł{south,east} : T SE ŌåÆejkT SE
T SE ŌåÆejk
eij
clockwise
ŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌåÆejk : SE ŌåÆejkSE
eij ╠Ė
clockwise
ŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌåÆejk : SE ŌåÆejk
(7)╬Ė(ejk) Ōłł{south,west} : T SW ŌåÆejkT SW
T SW ŌåÆejk
eij
clockwise
ŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌåÆejk : SW ŌåÆejkSW
eij ╠Ė
clockwise
ŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌåÆejk : SW ŌåÆejk
(8)╬Ė(ejk) = east : E ŌåÆejkE, E ŌåÆejk
(9)╬Ė(ejk) = west : W ŌåÆejkW, W ŌåÆejk
Gequal
(1)eij /Ōłłsearch block(m, n), Ōłāejk Ōłłsearch block(m, n) :
S ŌåÆBmnXBmn, X ŌåÆBmnXBmn, X ŌåÆBmnBmn, Bmn ŌåÆejkW2
(2)eij
clockwise
ŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌåÆejk : W2 ŌåÆejkW3, W3 ŌåÆejkW4, W4 ŌåÆejk
W4 ŌåÆejkNE, W4 ŌåÆejkNW, W4 ŌåÆejkSE, W4 ŌåÆejkSW
(3)╬Ė(ejk) Ōłł{north, east} : NE ŌåÆejkNE, NE ŌåÆejk
(4)╬Ė(ejk) Ōłł{north, west} : NW ŌåÆejkNS, NW ŌåÆejk
(5)╬Ė(ejk) Ōłł{south, east} : SE ŌåÆejkSE, SE ŌåÆejk
(6)╬Ė(ejk) Ōłł{south, west} : SW ŌåÆejkSW, SW ŌåÆejk
Gpatrol
(1)S ŌåÆBXBD, X ŌåÆBXB, X ŌåÆNE, X ŌåÆNW
X ŌåÆSE, X ŌåÆSW, D ŌåÆBD, D ŌåÆB
(2)eij
clockwise
ŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌåÆejk : B ŌåÆejkW2, W2 ŌåÆejkW3, W3 ŌåÆejkW4, W4 ŌåÆejk
(3)╬Ė(ejk) Ōłł{north, east} : NE ŌåÆejkNE, NE ŌåÆejk
(4)╬Ė(ejk) Ōłł{north, west} : NW ŌåÆejkNW, NW ŌåÆejk
(5)╬Ė(ejk) Ōłł{south, east} : SE ŌåÆejkSE, SE ŌåÆejk
(6)╬Ė(ejk) Ōłł{south, west} : SW ŌåÆejkSW, SW ŌåÆejk
Gasym
Figure 15: CSCFG generative models for Gequal, Gpatrol and Gasym. eij ŌłłE
denotes the previous terminal. ╬Ė(.) is de’¼üned in (7). search block(m, n) is described
in Sec. IV-A. eij
clockwise
ŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌåÆejk represents ejk can be reached from eij by moving in
the clockwise direction, e.g., e2,7
clockwise
ŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌåÆe7,8 in Fig. 1.
We
now
prove
that
the
production
rules
for
Gasym
in Fig. 15 are consistent. The proofs of consistency of
Gequal
and Gpatrol
are similar and omitted. For Gasym,
the stochastic mean matrix [29] is given by (33) where
(X, B) denotes the expected number of variables B result-
ing from rewriting X. It can be veri’¼üed that the abso-
lute value of the largest eigenvalue of the matrix (33) is
max((X, X), (D, D), (NE, NE), (NW, NW), (SE, SE),
(SW, SW)) and each diagonal element is less than one in
magnitude. For example, given any terminal eij, (X, X)
equals the probability of the production rule X ŌåÆBXB|eij
which is less than one. Hence the absolute value of the largest
eigenvalue of (33) is less than one and therefore the CSCFG
for modeling Gasym is consistent. Proofs of the consistency of
CSCFGs for modeling Gequal and Gpatrol are similar.
’Ż«
’Ż»’Ż»’Ż»’Ż»’Ż»’Ż»’Ż»’Ż»’Ż»’Ż░
0
1
2
1
0 0 0
0
0
0
0
0 (X,X) (X,B)
0
0 0 0
(X,NE)
(X,NW )
(X,SE)
(X,SW )
0
0
0
0
1 0 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
(D,D) 0 0 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 1 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 0 1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 0 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 0 0 (NE,NE)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 0 0
0
(NW,NW )
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 0 0
0
0
(SE,SE)
0
0
0
0
0
0 0 0
0
0
0
(SW,SW )
’Ż╣
’Ż║’Ż║’Ż║’Ż║’Ż║’Ż║’Ż║’Ż║’Ż║’Ż╗
(33)
16
Vikram Krishnamurthy (FŌĆÖ05) received the Ph.D.
degree from the Australian National University in
1992. He is currently a professor at Cornell Tech and
the School of Electrical & Computer Engineering,
Cornell University. From 2002-2016 he was a Pro-
fessor and Canada Research Chair at the University
of British Columbia, Canada. His research interests
include statistical signal processing and stochastic
control in social networks and adaptive sensing. He
served as Distinguished Lecturer for the IEEE Signal
Processing Society and Editor-in-Chief of the IEEE
Journal on Selected Topics in Signal Processing. In 2013, he was awarded
an Honorary Doctorate from KTH (Royal Institute of Technology), Sweden.
He is author of the books Partially Observed Markov Decision Processes and
Dynamics of Engineered Arti’¼ücial Membranes and Biosensors published by
Cambridge University Press in 2016 and 2018, respectively.
Sijia Gao is currently pursuing a Ph.D. degree
in the Department of Electrical and Computer En-
gineering, Cornell Tech, Cornell University. She
received MAsc degree from University of British
Columbia, Canada in 2017 and B.S. degree from
Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
China in 2014, both from Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering. Her current research
interests include target tracking and applying signal
processing to neuroscience.
