Title: Constructing Financial Sentimental Factors in Chinese Market Using Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1809.08390v1
--------------------------------------------------

Constructing Financial Sentimental Factors in
Chinese Market Using Natural Language Processing
Junfeng Jiang ∗†,Jiahao Li∗†
∗Likelihood Technology
†Sun Yat-sen University
{Jiangjf6, lijh76}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
Abstract—In this paper, we design an integrated algorithm
to evaluate the sentiment of Chinese market. Firstly, with
the help of the web browser automation, we crawl a lot of
news and comments from several inﬂuential ﬁnancial websites
automatically. Secondly, we use techniques of Natural Language
Processing(NLP) under Chinese context, including tokenization,
Word2vec word embedding and semantic database WordNet, to
compute Senti-scores of these news and comments, and then
construct the sentimental factor. Here, we build a ﬁnance-speciﬁc
sentimental lexicon so that the sentimental factor can reﬂect the
sentiment of ﬁnancial market but not the general sentiments
as happiness, sadness, etc. Thirdly, we also implement an ad-
justment of the standard sentimental factor. Our experimental
performance shows that there is a signiﬁcant correlation between
our standard sentimental factor and the Chinese market, and
the adjusted factor is even more informative, having a stronger
correlation with the Chinese market. Therefore, our sentimental
factors can be important references when making investment
decisions. Especially during the Chinese market crash in 2015,
the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient of adjusted sentimental factor
with SSE is 0.5844, which suggests that our model can provide a
solid guidance, especially in the special period when the market
is inﬂuenced greatly by public sentiment.
Index
Terms—Natural
Language
Processing;
Word2Vec;
WordNet; Sentiment Analysis;
I. INTRODUCTION
Natural language processing, as one of the most promising
ﬁelds in machine learning, has achieved great development
recently and has been used in lots of aspects in the society.
Many researches also implemented the technique of NLP in
ﬁnancial market. The difﬁculty when applying NLP is that the
natural language is not a kind of structural data. Finding a way
to process such kind of non-structural data is the main focus
of NLP. A lot of models have been demonstrated to do well
in turning natural language data into numerical data, which is
more tractable. With the implementation of these models, it
becomes possible and easier to make use of natural language
data.
Some models are based on the idea of Naive Bayesian[1].
The logic behind these models is: words that show the same
kind of sentiment will appear simultaneously more frequently.
These models usually select some words as the label words.
By analyzing the words appeared in a large amount of texts
and researching on the relationship between the frequency of
these label words and the frequency of other words, it becomes
possible to cluster words. For any given texts, it is able to
use these words to evaluate the sentiment behind. Researches
have proved this kind of methods can successfully evaluate the
sentiment of texts like twitter or news. By taking advantage
of the sentiment, investors can make appropriate investment
decisions.
However, this kind of methods have their own limitations.
The main is that they just focus on a few words. Some new
words that show the similar sentiment but do not appear
frequently will be ignored. Sometimes unfortunately, these
words do play a signiﬁcant role when analyzing the sentiment
of a text. The lost of information can have great damage to
the accuracy of the evaluation.
This study is aiming to put eyes as many words as possible
to analyze sentiment. The speciﬁc steps of this study are as
followed:
• Download news from several inﬂuential ﬁnancial web-
sites automatically.
• Make a pre-treatment on the news we crawl from the
Internet.
• Find a way or some algorithms to analyse this per-treated
text data, and ﬁnally compute the sentimental factor of
each day with the news at that day.
• Choose a proper criterion to analyze the correlation
between the sentimental factor and the market trend, and
judge whether our factor is useful in ﬁnancial investment.
The code we use are open source in Github.1
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section
2 describes the research background and related works of
Jieba, Word2vec and WordNet. Section 3 shows the method-
ology and the data we use in analysis. Section 4 contains the
experimental result and discussion. Finally, in Section 5, we
proposed our conclusions.
II. RELATED WORKS
A. Jieba
The tokenization of Chinese is much more complicated than
English. To tokenize English words, we just need to split words
in sentence by blank or punctuation. Chinese doesn’t have
blank between words. An additional step of tokenization is,
therefore, needed.
1https://github.com/Coldog2333/Financial-NLP
arXiv:1809.08390v1  [q-fin.CP]  22 Sep 2018
Jieba(Chinese for ”to shutter”) Chinese text tokenization is
a Chinese word tokenization module. The algorithm of Jieba is
probability language modeling. It generates a trie tree based on
a dictionary transcendentally and also calculate the frequency
of words in the dictionary. When dealing with the sentence
that is needed to be tokenized, it generates a DAG(Directed
Acyclic Graph) to record every possible tokenization.A DAG
is a dictionary, where the keys are the starting position of a
word in the sentence and the values are lists of possible ending
position.
For every possible words in the DAG, Jieba calculates their
probability based on the transcendental dictionary. Then it ﬁnd
the path with the largest probability from the right side of the
sentence to the left side. This largest probability path gives us
the most possible tokenization.
In the case where the sentence includes words that are not
in the dictionary, Jieba uses HMM(Hidden Markov Model)
and Viterbi algorithm to tokenize. Every character has four
conditions based on its possible condition in a word: B(Begin),
M(Middle), E(End) and S(Single). The process of tokenizing
words not in the dictionary is based on their conditions
mainly. With three probability tables from the training of a
large amount of texts, Jiaba then applies Viterbi algorithm to
calculate the most possible condition of a word and uses the
conditions chain to tokenize.
B. Word2vec
In
2013,
Google
published
a
powerful
tool
named
word2vec[2]. It contains two models, one is the Skip-gram, an-
other is Continuous bag of words(CBOW). With the word2vec
model, we can turn a speciﬁc word into a calculable numeric
vector. To speak of, moreover, it can well express the degree
of similarity and analogy between two different words.
Since word2vec have been published, it is widely applied
in Natural Language Processing, and its original models and
training methods also enlighten many word embedding models
and algorithms on the following days. Now, we introduce the
word2vec model with an English example.
1) Skip-gram: In Skip-gram, we focus on one word, and
use it to predict which words will appear around it.
For example,”the boy adores that girl”, we can achieve ﬁve
background words like ”the”, ”boy”, ”adores”, ”that”, ”girl”
easily because we have blanks between every two words. Let
”adores” be the center word, and set window size equals to 2,
then, in Skip-gram, what we are interested in is the conditional
probabilities of each background word under the given center
word, where the background words is apart from the center
word in two words. That is the mainly idea of Skip-gram.
Let’s describe the Skip-gram model in a strict mathematical
language.
Assume that size of the set of dictionary index D is
D
,
and denoted as D={1,2,...,
D
}. Given a text sequence with the
length of T, and the tth word denoted as w(t).When window
size equals to m, Skip-gram requires that we should maximize
the total of all conditional probabilities of each background
word that is apart from the center word in m words under
arbitrary center word.
T
Y
t=1
Y
−m≤j≤m,j̸=0,1≤t+j≤
T

P(w(t+j)w(t))
(1)
So, the likelihood function is,
T
X
t=1
X
−m≤j≤m,j̸=0,1≤t+j≤
T

logP(w(t+j)w(t))
(2)
Maximizing the likelihood function above minimize the
following loss function,
−1
T
T
X
t=1
X
−m≤j≤m,j̸=0,1≤t+j≤
T

logP(w(t+j)w(t))
(3)
Denote the vectors of center words and background words
with v and u, that is, as for a word with index i, vi and ui are
the vectors when it is as center word and background word.
And the parameters of model we want to train are the two
kinds of vectors of every words.
In order to implement the model parameters into loss
function, we should express the conditional probabilities of
background word under given center word with model pa-
rameters. Assume that generating each background words is
independent mutually when center word is given, then as for
the center word wc and the background word wb, b, c are the
indexes of them in the dictionary. Such that, the probability of
generating background word wb under the given center word
wc can be deﬁned by softmax function, as
P(wb
wc) =
exp(uT
b vc)
P
i∈D exp(uT
i vc)
(4)
With derivation, we achieve the gradient of the conditional
probability above,
∂logP(wb
wc)
∂vc
= ub −
X
j∈D
exp(uT
j vc)
P
i∈D exp(uT
i vc)uj
(5)
Namely,
∂logP(wb
wc)
∂vc
= ub −
X
j∈D
P(wj
wc)uj
(6)
Then, we can solve this by Gradient Descent or Stochastic
Gradient Descent iteratively, and ﬁnally achieve the word
vectors vi and ui, i = 1, 2, ...,
D
 of every single words
when it is as center word and background word, when the
loss function reaches to minimum.
If the length of text sequence T is too long, we can sample
a rather short subsequence randomly to calculate the loss
about this subsequence in each epoch, in order to ﬁnd out
an approximate solution.
In general, we will use the central word vector of Skip-gram
as the word vector of each word in natural language processing
application.
2) Continuous Bag of Words: CBOW is similar to Skip-
gram, this model predicts the central word with the background
words around it in a text sequence. For example, ”the boy
adores that girl”, we can achieve ﬁve background words
like ”the”, ”boy”, ”adores”, ”that”, ”girl”. Let ”adores” be
the central word again, and set window size equals to 2,
then, in CBOW, what we are interested in is the conditional
probabilities of generating the given central word under all the
background words which are apart from the central word in
two words. That is the mainly idea of CBOW.
Assume that size of the set of dictionary index D is
D
,
and denoted as D={1,2,...,
D
}. Given a text sequence with
the length of T, and the tth word denoted as w(t).When
window size equals to m, CBOW requires that we should
maximize the total of all conditional probabilities of generating
the arbitrarily given central word under all the background
words which are apart from the central word in m words.
T
Y
t=1
P(w(t)w(t−m), ..., w(t−1), w(t+1), ..., w(t+m))
(7)
where m is the window size, and we should insure that (t-
m+j)∈[1,
T
],j∈[0,2m].
Therefore, the likelihood function is,
T
X
t=1
logP(w(t)w(t−m), ..., w(t−1), w(t+1), ..., w(t+m))
(8)
Maximizing the likelihood function above minimize the
following loss function,
−
T
X
t=1
logP(w(t)w(t−m), ..., w(t−1), w(t+1), ..., w(t+m)) (9)
We still use the notation when we discuss Skip-gram model.
Now, as for the central word vc and its background words
wb0,wb1,...,wb·2m, such that, the probability of generating
the given central word wb under all the background words
wb1,wb2,...,wb·2m can be deﬁned by softmax function as,
P(wc
wb0, wb1, ..., wb·2m)
=
exp( vT
c (ub0+ub1+...+ub·2m)
2m
)
P
i∈D exp( vT
i (ub0+ub1+...+ub·2m)
2m
)
(10)
With derivation, we achieve the gradient of the conditional
probability above,
∂logP(wc
wb0, wb1, ..., wb·2m)
∂ubi
=
1
2m(vc −
X
j∈D
exp( vT
c (ub0+ub1+...+ub·2m)
2m
)
P
i∈D exp( vT
i (ub0+ub1+...+ub·2m)
2m
)
· vj)
(11)
Namely,
∂logP(wc
wb0, wb1, ..., wb·2m)
∂ubi
=
1
2m(vc −
X
j∈D
P(wc
wb0, wb1, ..., wb·2m) · vj)
(12)
As the same of Skip-gram, we can also solve this by
Gradient Descent or Stochastic Gradient Descent iteratively,
and ﬁnally achieve the word vectors vi and ui (i=1,2,...,
D
) of
every single words when it is as center word and background
word, when the loss function reaches to minimum.
If the length of text sequence T is too long, we can sample
a rather short subsequence randomly to calculate the loss
about this subsequence in each epoch, in order to ﬁnd out
an approximate solution.
In general, we will use the background word vector of
CBOW as the word vector of each word in natural language
processing application.
C. WordNet
WordNet is a large lexical database of English. In WordNet,
synsets are interlinked by means of conceptual-semantic and
lexical relations. The main relation between words in WordNet
is synonym[3]. By using a network to show the relation
between words, WordNet helps us ﬁnd synonym of words and
also shows how two much words are similar with each other
in the perspective of meanings.
Fig. 1. An Example of the Structure of WordNet[4]
Having the properties above makes WordNet more reliable
to analyze the sentiment. However, when using NLP under
Chinese context, we should also translate Chinese to English
at ﬁrst. Thanks to the contributors of Chinese Open Wordnet
(COW), as for a Chinese word, we can conveniently ﬁnd the
corresponding meaning in English, namely, we can ﬁnd the
corresponding node of this Chinese word in WordNet. COW is
a large scale, freely available, semantic dictionary of Mandarin
Chinese inspired by WordNet[5]. It has the same structure
and principles as WordNet but based on Chinese. It contains
42,315 synsets, 79,812 senses and 61,536 unique words and
the construction is still ongoing. Our research mainly uses
COW to compute the Senti-score of each single words.
III. METHODOLOGY
A. Data Mining
In order to gain plenty of ﬁnancial news, we use selenium2
to crawl the news from network. We collect the historical data
automatically and use them to compute historical Senti-scores.
At ﬁrst we crawl from Xueqiu, bjzq (Beijing Securities
website) and Chinastock. But later we ﬁnd that Chinastock
contains articles from a much longer time and broader areas.
The sources of Chinastock already include many ﬁnancial
websites. As a result, we choose Chinastock to do text data
crawling.
In order to do back testing more conveniently, we sort the
text data by date.
B. Pre-treatment
Chinese is one of typical isolated languages. Instead of
using inﬂections, Chinese uses isolated function words and
various word order to express grammar. Compared with En-
glish, Chinese has its uniqueness. Unlike English, Chinese
does not use blank to tokenize words. Therefore, before doing
natural language processing over Chinese, we need to have
one more tokenization step, which turns an article into a bag
of words. It is a signiﬁcant difference between Chinese and
English natural language processing. For any given piece of
news or article, we use Jieba for pre-treatment. Besides turning
the whole article into a bag of words, we also need to eliminate
the stop words which are not important and will affect our
analysis.
However, when we train our model with the corpus, we do
not remove the stop words from the corpus because the lost
of stop words in such a case will affect the generation of the
proper word vector. We will make a concrete analysis of this
question in Text Analysis below.
Besides, we also need to deﬁne some symbols like numbers
and punctuation that needed to be removed in order to lessen
the amount of calculation and noise.
C. Text Analysis
1) Morphological Similarity: At the beginning, we should
train our word2vec model achieving more word vectors as
much as possible (Theoretically we can achieve word vectors
of all words as long as we train word2vec with a large enough
corpus, but in fact, we cannot always have such a corpus). For
the generality, we choose zh-wiki as our training corpus.
It should be noted that we cannot remove stop words
on training corpus because stop words can be signiﬁcant
describing a speciﬁed central word.
Set an appropriate large length of word vector in order to
make words linearly separable in the hyper plane as far as
possible. And we can set a proper threshold of frequency to
omit some unfamiliar words, saving memory without losing
any vital information.
2https://www.seleniumhq.org/
After training, we achieve a word2vec model, meanwhile we
get to know the word vectors of all words. We should just look
up a word vector of a word in the model(like a dictionary).
Now, we can calculate the morphological similarity of two
words with their cosine distance. For example, let’s consider
two words w1 and w2, and normalize as w
′
1 and w
′
2, so
distance =
w1 · w2
∥w1∥∥w2∥= w
′
1 · w
′
2
(13)
which indicates the morphological similarity of two words
w1 and w2.
Note: Though now we can estimate the similarity of two
words with word2vec, what we achieve above is only the
similarity morphologically. That is to say, we can just ﬁnd
out which words are similar with a speciﬁed word morpho-
logically, but do not know their meanings. Let’s take an easy
example, consider two words ’increase’ and ’decrease’, we can
often read such a sentence ’The .DJI increases by 5 percent
today’ on the ﬁnancial news, and you will ﬁnd it certainly
possible to exchange ’increase’ into ’decrease’ in this sentence
without any difﬁculty. As known in 2.2, the word vectors of
this two words will approximately be the same, which may
make us confused in determine their respective Senti-scores.
But, what deserves to be mentioned is that word2vec does
help us to ﬁnd out some words familiar with a given word in
a manner.
Facing this embarrassing situation, we propose a relatively
well method in D.Senti-score of Words.
2) Semantics Similarity: As mentioned in 2.3, WordNet
uses trees to record words. The structure of trees deﬁnes
distances naturally. When computing the semantic similarity of
words using WordNet, we use the shortest path linking the two
nodes representing the words to compute. Take the reciprocal
of the shortest path of the two nodes as the similarity. The
similarity between a word and itself is 1. We also deﬁne
the similarity between two words is 0 if there is no path
linking them. With deﬁnitions above, the semantics similarity
we compute will be a value between 0 and 1. The larger the
value is, the more similar the two words are semantically.
D. Senti-score Computation
1) Sentiment Lexicon: Generally in sentiment analysis, we
will build a sentiment lexicon to tell our model that which
words are positive or negative. It inspires us to deﬁne our
speciﬁc sentiment lexicon so that our model can output the
sentiment which reﬂects ﬁnancial market.
Then, we deﬁne a sentiment lexicon as a small tally set to
evaluate the sentiment of a single word. The idea is that it
is possible to reﬂect the sentiment of a word by calculating
the similarity of this word with the word in sentiment lexicon,
which we initialize its sentiment. We choose 100 words that
appear in ﬁnancial news frequently and also have speciﬁc
sentiment as our label words. On the other hand, in order
to make the computation more fair, we choose 50 words that
have positive attitude toward the market (positive words) and
the other 50 have the opposite sentiment (negative words).
Before computing the Senti-score of a piece of new, we ﬁrstly
compute both the morphological similarity and the semantics
similarity with the label words of every single word.
Table 1 provides some words in our sentiment lexicon as an
example. The whole sentiment lexicon displays in our codes
on our GitHub.3
Positive
Negative
bullish
bearish
climb
fall
surge
slump
...
...
hortation
sanction
TABLE I
SENTIMENT LEXICON
2) Senti-score of Words: With the computation above, we
will have a vector of 200 dimensions for every word. The ﬁrst
100 dimensions are the Word2vec similarities with the 100
words in the sentiment lexicon. They show the morphological
similarity with the label words in sentiment lexicon. The
last 100 dimensions, on the other hand, are the WordNet
similarities with the 100 words in the sentiment lexicon, which
represent the semantic similarity with the label words. Since
the words in the sentiment lexicon show attitudes toward the
market, based on the similarities above, we can evaluate the
attitude of a speciﬁc word, namely the sentiment of it. To
represent the sentiment quantitatively, we deﬁne a value called
Senti-score.
In our research, we use the similarity vector to compute the
Senti-score of every word. In speciﬁc, the process includes
the following steps: (1)Use the Word2vec similarity and the
WordNet similarity respectively. Then use collaborative ﬁlter-
ing to classify it as positive word or negative word. (2)Use
Word2vec similarity to compute the Senti-score. The speciﬁc
process and the reasons behind are as followed.
For a word, when we consider the similarities of it with
those words in the sentiment lexicon, there are two kinds
of similarities we should think about. The ﬁrst one is the
morphological similarity. The second one is the semantic
similarity. Collaborative ﬁltering can help us to ﬁnd the several
most similar words morphologically and semantically. First of
all, we use the ﬁrst 100 dimensions, which are the Word2vec
similarities, to ﬁnd the top n similar words. We ﬁnd them
by picking up these n words that have the largest value in
the ﬁrst 100 dimensions. The words we ﬁnd in this way will
be the n words that are the most morphologically similar to
the target word we need to compute. Then we compare the
WordNet similarities of these n words, which are in the last
100 dimensions. From these n words, we pick up topm of them
that have the largest WordNet similarities. These m words will
be the top m similar to the target word both morphologically
and semantically.
With these m words we can judge whether the target word
is positive or negative. However, it is not enough if we just
label it as +1 or -1. The reason is that the degree of positive
3https://github.com/Coldog2333/Financial-NLP
or negative can be different for the same kind of words. A
positive word can be more positive than another positive word.
Therefore, we need to deﬁne a score to measure how positive
or negative the word is. The method is, we ﬁrstly deﬁne
the scores of positive words and negative words in sentiment
lexicon are +1 and -1. Then we use Word2vec similarities of
the m words with a target word as the weights, and calculate
the weighted average to be the Senti-score of a target word.
A problem we have to face is that the words included in the
COW is far less than words in the Word2vec model we trained.
In some cases, the last 100 dimensions of the word cannot be
computed. In these cases, we use the Word2vec similarity only
to evaluate. For these words, in the second step of collaborative
ﬁltering, we cannot ﬁnd the top m Semantically similar words
from the top n morphologically similar words. Therefore, we
can just ﬁnd the topm morphologically similar words from top
n morphologically similar words. For the same reason, we still
compute the Senti-score of every word weighted by Word2vec
similarity.
Up to now, we can compute the Senti-score of every single
word.
3) Senti-score of Articles and Sentimental Factor: Use the
Senti-scores of words above, we can compute the Senti-score
of every piece of news. By adding up all the Senti-score of
news in a day, we will get the sentimental factor we need.
Details are as follows.
After the pretreatment, we will get a word bag. It is straight-
forward to compute the similarity vector of each word in the
word bag and use these vectors to compute the Senti-scores.
However, it is not efﬁcient and not necessary. Too many words
will be computed for many times. The fact is, if we compute
the Senti-socres of the most commonly used words in advance,
we can get the Senti-score of an article much quicker and much
more efﬁcient.
We use over 50,000 common words in The Common Vo-
cabulary of Modern Chinese published by Commercial Press
and pick up words that are not in these over 50,000 words
in 3,000 pieces of news. Collect these words and we get a
common word set of around 100,000 words. We compute the
Senti-scores of words in common word set in advance.So that
when we compute the Senti-score of an article, we will just
need to look up the common word set. Some words may be
ignored if we use this method, but our experiment results show
that words not in the common word set will only be around
5% of words in an article. The inﬂuence of ignoring the 5%
is just a drop in the bucket.
Use the method above we can compute Senti-score of news.
We compute the average Senti-score of a day and use it as the
sentimental factor that day. The sentimental factor computed
in this way can show the sentiment of the market effectively.
4) Adjustment of model: Until now, we have computed
the Senti-score of every single day. When we make a time
series analysis with the Senti-score and the market index
on the same day, we ﬁnd that though market index change
smoothly, the Senti-score come to a violent ﬂuctuations, which
is inconsistent with reality. Therefore, we have to adjust the
model before applying it. Then we smooth the Senti-score,
that is, when evaluating the Sentiment scores of one day does
not mean we should use the Senti-score of that day directly,
but taking the average of the Senti-score of a period of time.
It’s reasonable because of the timeliness of information. As we
know, the public sentiment of a day will not only inﬂuence
the market at the same day, but also inﬂuence the market in
the following days. Next, we will compare the adjusted model
with the original model in the following experiment.
E. Correlation Analysis
We need a criterion to evaluate the efﬁciency of the senti-
mental factor. The main criterion is to do a linear regression
using the sentimental factor and the market trend[7]. Assume
that the market sentiment has positive correlation with the
market trend, then the signiﬁcance of the regression result
will be able to show the efﬁciency of the sentimental factor.
What’s more, we can also evaluate their correlation of them
with Pearson correlation coefﬁcient below.
ρX,Y = E[X ˙Y ] −E[X]E[Y ]
σX ˙σY
(14)
IV. BASELINE
Random. We randomly create some series of real numbers
as a random factor to compare with our sentimental factor. The
one is generated by uniform distribution, which scales from the
minimum to the maximum of our sentimental factor. Another
is generated by normal distribution, which has the mean and
the standard deviation same as our sentimental factor.
Temperature. Edward M. Saunders Jr.[8] proposed that
weather can also inﬂuent the ﬁnancial market. To see whether
our complex sentimental factor can outperform than the simply
found factor, we compare it with our sentimental factor as a
baseline. We download climatic data from NNDC.4 We espe-
cially choose the climatic data in Shanghai and Guangzhou.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
We calculate the standard sentimental factor of 1379 market
days from 2012/11/6 to now, and make a correlation analysis
about the standard sentimental factor and some market indexes
like SSE and SZSE.
Linear regression is carried out with them, and we can see
that all of the coefﬁcients successfully pass signiﬁcance test
in Table 2 and Table 3.
TABLE II
THE REGRESSION RESULT OF THE STANDARD SENTIMENTAL FACTOR
WITH SSE
standard sentimental factor
11138.27 ***
p
(3.48e-12)
This time the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient is 0.18731
(with SSE), which states the standard sentimental factor has
a weak dependence with the market index. However, when
4https://www7.ncdc.noaa.gov/CDO/cdoselect.cmd
TABLE III
THE REGRESSION RESULT OF THE STANDARD SENTIMENTAL FACTOR
WITH SZSE
standard sentimental factor
39796.6 ***
p
(<2e-16)
we adopt the adjusted sentiment factor and apply a similar
analysis, we can ﬁnd that the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient
is 0.26119, which is improved a lots.
Especially, we do another experiment during the period of
the China stock market crash, from 2015/02/11 to 2015/09/11.
We compute the sentimental factor of 139 market days of
this year, and similarly make a correlation analysis about the
sentimental factor with SSE and SZSE.
This time the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient is 0.36284,
which states the Sentiment factor has a medium dependence
with the market index. Moreover, when we adopt the adjusted
Sentiment factor and apply a similar analysis, we can ﬁnd that
the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient is 0.58815, which shows a
higher dependence. What’s more, when we make a time series
analysis, we can see that especially during the period of the
stock market crash, the sentimental factor moves almost the
same as the market index.
Fig. 2. Time Series of 7 Days Average Senti-score and SSE during the crash
Meanwhile, we apply the similar correlation analysis about
the random factor and temperature with SSE and SZSE, and
the complete result displayed on Table 4 and Table 5. For
reducing random errors, when we applying correlation analysis
on random factor, we create 1000 series of real numbers
and compute the average of these 1000 Pearson correlation
coefﬁcient as the ﬁnal result.
Pearson correlation coefﬁcient
SSE
SZSE
random from uniform
-0.00049399
-0.0005597
random from normal
0.00017451
0.00016782
temperature
-0.025135
-0.063723
standard sentimental factor
0.18731
0.22595
adjusted sentimental factor
0.26119
0.28472
TABLE IV
PEARSON CORRELATION COEFFICIENT FROM 2012/11/6 TO 2018/8/17
From then on, we see that our model can provide a satisﬁed
guide meaning, especially in the special period, namely the
period which is inﬂuenced greatly by public sentiment.
What’s more, we label 2781 of these common words, and
just label them as 1(positive) or -1(negative) or 0(indetermi-
Pearson correlation coefﬁcient
SSE
SZSE
random from uniform
0.0011922
0.0010882
random from normal
0.00055439
0.00050227
temperature
0.10125
0.064122
standard sentimental factor
0.36284
0.37204
adjusted sentimental factor
0.58815
0.58042
TABLE V
PEARSON CORRELATION COEFFICIENT FROM 2015/2/11 TO 2015/9/11
nate). After eliminating the words which have computed Senti-
score lower than 0.1 and the words with indeterminate senti-
ment, we ﬁnd that our model has an accuracy of 73.0088%
on 452 words which has determinate sentiment.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper we develop an algorithm to compute a
sentimental factor of Chinese markets and demonstrate that
this factor has signiﬁcant correlation with Chinese market.
This factor provides us with a new way to make investment
decisions.
The method to compute a sentimental factor is the main
contribution of this paper. It will help us even more if we are
able to compute sentimental factors for every ﬁnancial product.
Also, a combination of this sentimental factor and traditional
ﬁnancial factors may help us to make even better investment
decisions. Looking forward to seeing related research.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to say thanks to MingWen Liu from Shin-
ingMidas Private Fund for his generous help throughout the
research. We are also grateful to Xingyu Fu from Sun Yat-
sen University for his guidance and help. With their help, this
research has been completed successfully.
REFERENCES
[1] Alec Go, Richa Bhayani, Lei Huang, 2009 [R]. Twitter Sentiment
Classiﬁcation Using Distant Supervision.
[2] Mikolov T, Chen K, Corrado G, et al. Efﬁcient Estimation of Word
Representations in Vector Space[J]. Computer Science, 2013.
[3] George A. Miller (1995). WordNet: A Lexical Database for English.
Communications of the ACM Vol. 38, No. 11: 39-41.
[4] Bird S, Klein E, Loper E. Natural language processing with Python:
analyzing text with the natural language toolkit[M]. ” O’Reilly Media,
Inc.”, 2009.
[5] Building the Chinese Wordnet (COW): Starting from Core Synsets. In
Proceedings of the 11th Workshop on Asian Language Resources: ALR-
2013 a Workshop of The 6th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (IJCNLP-6). Nagoya. pp.10-18.
[6] Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G. S., & Dean, J. (2013).
Distributed representations of words and phrases and their composition-
ality. In Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 3111-
3119).
[7] Rao T, Srivastava S. Analyzing Stock Market Movements Using Twitter
Sentiment Analysis[C]// International Conference on Advances in Social
Networks Analysis and Mining. IEEE Computer Society, 2012:119-123.
[8] Jr E M S. Stock prices and the Wall Street weather[J]. American
Economic Review, 1993, 83(3):pgs. 1337-1345.
VII. APPENDIX
A. Figure
Fig. 3. Correlation Between Sentimental Factor an SSE
Fig. 4. Correlation Between Sentimental Factor an SZSE
Fig. 5. Time Series of 7 Days Average Senti-score and SSE
Fig. 6. Time Series of 7 Days Average Senti-score and SZSE
