Title: Deep Learning Based Natural Language Processing for End to End Speech Translation
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1808.04459v1
--------------------------------------------------

 
Deep Learning Based Natural Language Processing 
 
Sarvesh Patil  
Dept. Of Electronics and Telecommunication 
Vivekanand Education Society's Institute of Technology 
Chembur, India 
2015sarvesh.patil@ves.ac.in 
 
Abstract— Deep Learning methods employ multiple 
processing layers to learn hierarchial representations of 
data. They have already been deployed in a humongous 
number of applications and have produced state-of-the-art 
results. Recently with the growth in processing power of 
computers to be able to do high dimensional tensor 
calculations, 
Natural 
Language 
Processing 
(NLP) 
applications have been given a significant boost in terms of 
efficiency as well as accuracy. In this paper, we will take a 
look at various signal processing techniques and then 
application of them to produce a speech-to-text system 
using Deep Recurrent Neural Networks.  
Keywords—Deep Neural Network, Recurrent Neural 
Networks, 
Natural 
Language 
Processing, 
Speech 
Recognition. 
I. INTRODUCTION  
Natural Language Processing is a method for analysis and 
representation of human language. NLP methods are heavily 
theoretical and require a lot of in-depth knowledge of the way 
signals behave when mathematical modulations are applied to 
them. NLP in older times used to take up a huge amount of 
time just to get simple language processing done. Punch Cards 
and batch processing would take up to 7 minutes to get a 
simple task done. With the advent of highly efficient 
algorithms and massive computational power, we can do the 
same tasks in a matter of seconds. In fact, the Google search 
engine can scrape up to a million webpages in a matter of 
milliseconds. NLP enables computers to perform a variety of 
natural language related tasks at all levels, ranging from 
parsing and part-of-speech (POS) tagging, to machine 
translation and dialog systems, to speech recognition. 
Deep Learning algorithms are already highly scalable 
and produce highly accurate results. In fields like Computer 
Vision or data analytics, they have even surpassed the "Human 
Level Performance". But we are not quite there yet to make 
such claims about speech processing and recognition. A very 
crucial aspect of the research going on in the NLP department 
is the focus on speech recognition and translation. We can 
easily make Hidden Markov Models connected in Recurrent 
fashion work for us in this domain, but they can only achieve 
so much and can't beat Deep Neural Networks.   
The main reason why we choose Deep Networks is 
that, "end-to-end" tasks can be accomplished by using proper 
algorithms and training intuitions. End-to-end Neural 
Networks are the ones which require almost none to very less 
preprocessing. They learn the entire mapping by themselves 
provided the network is robust enough. In speech recognition 
tasks too, such a method can be applied to achieve end-to-end 
results which are far more accurate than the traditional 
machine learning approach. Recent work by (Alex Graves 
et al., 2014) have been the inspiration behind this paper and 
the Deep Learning techniques behind it.   
In section II, we will discuss the mathematical 
preprocessing required for audio signal processing. In section 
III, we will take a look at various architectures that RNNs can 
be composed by and choose the one we will go ahead with. In 
section IV, we will look at the precautionary steps required 
before training our network. In section V, we will provide a 
basic abstract for the training of the network. As this work 
hasn't been already being done by me, comparative graphs and 
statistics can't be provided. But in section VI, we will look at 
the applications this project may help in and finally section 
VII, will summarize the paper and concluding remarks will be 
given.  
 
II. FOURIER ANALYSIS OF SIGNALS  
Probably the most important applications of Fourier 
transforms are pertaining to signal processing. We will cover 
this topic with an example. Suppose a dilettante plays a piano. 
When they play a single note on the piano, we hear a certain 
type of sound. When another note is played, a different type of 
sound is perceived. Similarly, when a myriad of notes is being 
played by the pianist, a myriad of sounds is heard by the 
human ear. Our brains can decipher, with certain training of 
course, the constituent notes in the symphony being played. 
But what about computers? A computer, when needs to be 
shown data of some kind, must be shown digitally. For this 
purpose, we use a very crucial mathematical tool, invented 
by Joseph Fourier, the Fourier transform. Fourier Analysis of a 
signal gives us very important insights about the signal, the 
constituent frequencies with respect to their amplitudes in the 
frequency domain.   
Let us consider the following example: six different 
sinusoidal signals with different frequencies are superimposed 
to form the following signal:  
 
A signal composed of various sinusoidal waves added together 
 
If we take the Fourier transform of this signal, and 
plot the amplitude of the output variable across various 
frequencies, we get a graph like this: 
 
 
 
We can now easily conclude that frequencies 50Hz, 
100Hz, 150Hz, 200Hz, 250Hz and 300Hz were combined to 
form the original signal. This process includes 3 steps.   
1. Define the constituent signals and add them or use 
any audio clip and feed it as the input layer.  
2. Sample the signal with sampling frequency at least 
twice that of the maximum frequency in the input signal. 
In this case, maximum frequency was 300Hz, so a 
sampling signal with frequency 600Hz and above can be 
used to convert the continuous signal into discrete form.   
3. Apply fast Fourier transform on the discrete signal to 
generate a function with variable as 'f' which can take 
values from 0Hz to 500Hz.   
Any signal that needs to be pre-processed can be 
done so, with the aforementioned steps. Once we have a list of 
all the constituent frequencies in the input signal, for speech 
recognition, frequencies greater than 4kHz can be neglected as 
human speech frequencies lie within that range.  
 
III. RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORKS 
RNNs have been in use for quite some time now and 
in this paper, we are sticking with RNNs because of their 
dependence on the previous computations and results. This 
makes sequences in a language intuitive for the Neural 
Network. There are two most prominent RNN frameworks 
which provide the best sequence modelling:  
1. Long Short-term Memories (LSTMs) (Hochreiter and 
Schmidhuber, 1997; Gers et al., 1999)  
2. Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs) (Cho et al., 2014)  
A simple recurrent neural network is shown in Fig. 3.1.  
 
Fig 3.1 (Tom Young et al., 2017)  
 
Each LSTM cell works as shown in Fig 3.2. 
 
Fig 3.2 LSTM cell (Alex Graves et al., 2014) 
In GRUs, each cell 's' looks as shown in Fig 3.3. 
 
Fig 3.3 GRU gate (Chung et al., 2014)  
Output of each LSTM unit can be calculated as:  
it = σ (Wxixt + Whiht−1 + Wcict−1 + bi)  
ft = σ (Wxfxt + Whfht−1 + Wcfct−1 + bf)   
ct = ftct−1 + it * tanh(Wxcxt + Whcht−1 + bc)  
ot = σ (Wxoxt + Whoht−1 + Wcoct + bo)  
ht = ot * tanh(ct)   
where σ is the logistic sigmoid function, and i, f, o and c are 
respectively the input gate, forget gate, output gate and cell 
activation vectors, all of which are the same size as the hidden 
vector h. For our analysis, only LSTMs will be considered 
because of their high complexity, with sequences with large 
number of words.  
Its unique mechanism enables it to overcome both the 
vanishing and exploding gradient problem.   
For providing input to the first layer for every epoch, we 
use a Continuous Bag of Words (CBOW). By preprocessing 
the input, we get sample values at every discrete step 
in our network. We can use these values by considering 20ms 
versions of the total information. This will yield a fixed length 
input of 20ms chunks of data that will be trained upon by the 
RNN. An example will make the concept clear. Suppose the 
voice input by a person is "Welcome" and it spans a duration 
of 700ms. Thus, we will have 30 windows of input data to our 
RNN. Suppose the network outputs its 30 characters as: 
<space>__WWWWEEEELLLL_CCCCAAAA__AAAMMM
M__<space>. We process the output in the following steps:  
1. Separate all the words between the spaces: 
__WWWWEEEELLLL_CCCCAAAA__AAAMMMM__
  
2. Replace multiple characters by single characters: 
__WEL_CA_AM__  
3. Remove the blanks: WELCAAM 
 
Now, as humans we understand ‘welcaam’ must not be the 
correct spelling of ‘welcome’. To make the kernel understand 
this, an RNN transducer is used. Generally, a transducer is a 
device which converts one form of energy into another. 
Talking digitally, our transducer will convert the acoustically 
generated output into a linguistically accurate one.  
Thus, for detecting entire transcriptions like "She could not 
be more right", the network may predict "She curd net be more 
right". Such errors are to be removed only by increasing the 
training set by feeding the network with more books and news 
articles. Out of all the predicted transcriptions, we throw 
out the ones that seem least likely and keep the ones that are 
more realistic. A possible case of training on a highly 
morphologically complex language, this character wise 
embedding becomes exponentially better at prediction than 
CBOW. Context Specific Vectors from the paper on Character 
wise embeddings by (Xiaoqing Zheng et al., 2012) have 
proved to be much more efficient than most other embedding 
types. CVSs can generate the context representation of a 
word/character and learn the word/character vector carrying 
the meaning inferred by that context.  
 
IV. TRAINING THE NEURAL NETWORK 
A. Connectionist Temporal Classiﬁcation  
LSTMs provide much of the necessary regularization by 
themselves. They help prevent both, the vanishing as well as 
the exploding gradient problems. Hence, they're more popular 
even though they may be computationally greedy than GRUs 
or CNNs. Connectionist Temporal Classiﬁcation 
(CTC) (A. Graves et al., 2006; A. graves et al., 
2012) uses a SoftMax layer to deﬁne a separate output 
distribution Pr(k|t) at every step t along the input sequence. 
The distribution contains K phonemes and two extra symbols, 
<blank> and <space>. For English, 44 phonemes are defined 
but can be manipulated to accommodate the phonemes from 
any other language by changing the value of K.   
B. Bidirectional Recurrent Neural Networks  
Bidirectional RNNs are different from conventional RNNs 
in the aspect that, they calculate the summed output over the 
previously computed results as well as take into consideration 
the characters that follow the current node. Fig 4.1 shows the 
block diagram of a BRNN.  
 
Fig 4.1 BRNN (Alex Graves et al., 2014) 
C. RNN Transducers  
CTC deﬁnes a distribution over phoneme sequences that 
depends only on the acoustic input sequence x. It is therefore 
an acoustic-only model. A recent augmentation, known as an 
RNN transducer (A. Graves et al., 2012) combines a CTC-like 
network with a separate RNN that predicts each phoneme 
given the previous ones, thereby yielding a jointly trained 
acoustic and language model. The fundamental idea is that, 
CTCs generate sequences of phonemes 
producing an acoustic definition of the input and the RNN 
transducers will produce a linguistic definition of the word 
based on the characters. Both the outputs are multiplied to 
form a common generated text transcription, that will produce 
a much more accurate result. In particular, Alex Graves et al. 
Found that the number of deletion errors during decoding is 
drastically reduced. 
D. Decoding 
RNN transducers can be decoded to yield an n-best list of 
candidate transcriptions. We simply sort the list by their 
probability values instead of normalized values, as log(Pr)/|Pr| 
is useful in the case of more deletions than insertions. With 
deletions reduced to a very small scale, only sorting by Pr will 
suffice our needs.  
E. Regularization 
Regularization techniques help prevent overfitting of the 
data to the training set. Many methods have been devised to 
tackle this issue. We find that using dropouts in RNNs is really 
useful to give a superior performance, provided it is correctly 
applied. Dropouts in recurrent sections can prove to be fatal to 
the RNN. 
 Hence, it's better to be circumspective while applying 
dropouts to RNNs.   
Another very useful regularization technique is addition of 
weight noise (noise induced in the network weights during 
training). Weight noise tends to ‘simplify’ neural networks, in 
the sense of reducing the amount of information required to 
send the parameters which improves generalization.  
 
V. APPLICATIONS 
The most promising applications of RNNs remain to 
be Part of Speech tagging (POS), word level classification, 
sentence level classification, etc. But what this paper aims at 
is, speech recognition is very shallow if the computer doesn't 
understand the context in which the transcription is meant to 
be. A very critical focus now-a-days is on sentiment analysis, 
tone analysis and sarcasm detection. Every application 
requires a new dataset with thousands of examples of real 
human speech. This is one of the fundamental reasons why the 
progress has been slow in NLP. Ultimately, end-to-end speech 
translation is the benchmark that we are yet to conquer, but it 
won't take us long enough with TPUs coming into play in the 
near future.  
VI. CONCLUSION 
Deep 
Recurrent 
Neural 
Networks 
coupled 
with 
bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory cells have achieved 
astonishingly good results on various tests around the globe. 
CTCs are very useful for acoustic modelling of sound and RNN 
transducers coupled with CTCs can produce semantic 
relationships with ease while keeping the syntactic relations 
alive. An obvious step forward would be to actually apply these 
concepts into such a neural network and then step upon the 
myriad of pedestals that we are yet to conquer.  
References  
[1] Alex Graves, Abdel-rahman Mohamed and Geoffrey 
Hinton, SPEECH 
RECOGNITION 
WITH 
DEEP 
RECURRENT 
NEURAL 
NETWORKS, arXiv:1308.0850 [cs.NE]  
[2] A.Graves,S.Fern´andez,F.Gomez,andJ.Schmidhuber, 
“Connectionist 
Temporal 
Classiﬁcation: 
Labelling 
Unsegmented Sequence Data with Recurrent Neural 
Networks,” in ICML, Pittsburgh, USA, 2006.   
[3] A.Graves, Supervised 
sequence 
labelling 
with 
recurrent neural networks, vol. 385, Springer, 2012.    
[4] A. Graves, “Sequence transduction with recurrent neural 
networks,” in ICML Representation Learning Worksop, 
2012.  
[5] Junyoung Chung, Caglar Gulcehre, KyungHyun Cho, Yos
hua Bengio, Empirical Evaluation of Gated Recurrent 
Neural 
Networks 
on 
Sequence 
Modeling, arXiv:1412.3555 [cs.NE]  
[6] Kyunghyun Cho, Bart 
van Merrienboer, Caglar Gulcehre, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Fe
thi Bougares, Holger Schwenk, Yoshua Bengio, Learning 
Phrase Representations using RNN Encoder-Decoder for 
Statistical 
Machine 
Translation, arXiv:1406.1078 [cs.CL]  
[7] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term 
memory,” Neural computation, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–
1780, 1997.  
[8] Tom Young, Devamanyu Hazarika, Soujanya Poria, Erik 
Cambria, Recent Trends in Deep Learning Based Natural 
Language Processing, arXiv:1708.02709 [cs.CL]  
[9] Xiaoqing Zheng, Jiangtao Feng, Yi Chen, Haoyuan Peng, 
Wenqing 
Zhang, Learning 
Context-Specific 
Word/Character 
Embeddings, Shanghai 
Municipal 
Natural Science Foundation (No. 15511104303).  
 
