Title: Interpretation of NLP models through input marginalization
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2010.13984v1
--------------------------------------------------

Interpretation of NLP models through input marginalization
Siwon Kim
Jihun Yi
Eunji Kim
Sungroh Yoon∗
Data Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory
ECE, Interdisciplinary Program in AI, and Institute of Engineering Research
Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, South Korea
{tuslkkk, t080205, kce407, sryoon}@snu.ac.kr
Abstract
To demystify the “black box” property of deep
neural networks for natural language process-
ing (NLP), several methods have been pro-
posed to interpret their predictions by measur-
ing the change in prediction probability after
erasing each token of an input. Since existing
methods replace each token with a predeﬁned
value (i.e., zero), the resulting sentence lies out
of the training data distribution, yielding mis-
leading interpretations. In this study, we raise
the out-of-distribution problem induced by the
existing interpretation methods and present a
remedy; we propose to marginalize each token
out. We interpret various NLP models trained
for sentiment analysis and natural language in-
ference using the proposed method.
1
Introduction
The advent of deep learning has greatly improved
the performances of natural language processing
(NLP) models. Consequently, the models are be-
coming more complex (Yang et al., 2019; Liu et al.,
2019), rendering it difﬁcult to understand the ratio-
nale behind their predictions. To use deep neural
networks (DNNs) for making high-stakes decisions,
the interpretability must be guaranteed to instill the
trust in the public. Hence, various attempts have
been undertaken to provide an interpretation along
with a prediction (Gilpin et al., 2018).
Research in computer vision aims to interpret a
target model by measuring attribution scores, i.e.,
how much each pixel in an input image contributes
to the ﬁnal prediction (Simonyan et al., 2013; Arras
et al., 2017; Zeiler and Fergus, 2014; Lundberg and
Lee, 2017). Since a pixel of an image corresponds
to a token in a sentence, the attribution score of
each token can provide an insight into the NLP
model’s internal reasoning process. A straightfor-
ward approach is to ask, “How would the model
reaction change if each token was not there?” and
*Correspondence to: Sungroh Yoon (sryoon@snu.ac.kr)
(a) Original sentence
(b) Existing erasure scheme
(c) Input marginalization (Ours)
 
Prediction
0.979
_
_
It’s also, clearly, great fun.
It’s also, clearly [PAD] great fun.
Likelihood
0.890
0.978
It’s also, clearly             great fun.
,
It’s also, clearly              great fun.
a
It’s also, clearly             great fun.
not
...
It’s also, clearly             great fun.
0.979
0.977
0.457
...
0.009
0.002
...
Figure 1: Given the original sentence (a), the existing
erasure scheme (b) replaces each token with zero, i.e.,
[PAD] token. Our method (c) marginalizes each token
out considering the likelihoods of candidate tokens.
the change can be measured by the difference in
softmax probabilities after erasing each token. Li
et al. (2016) proposed to erase each token by re-
placing it with a predeﬁned value, i.e., zero. This
became a representative method for interpreting
NLP models, followed by several papers using the
similar erasure scheme (Feng et al., 2018; Prab-
hakaran et al., 2019; Jin et al., 2019).
However, such an erasure scheme can cause
out-of-distribution (OOD) problem, where the
erased sentence deviates from the target model’s
training data distribution. DNNs tend to assign a
lower prediction probability to OOD samples than
in-distribution samples (Hendrycks and Gimpel,
2016), as shown in Fig. 1, which results in over-
estimated contribution of an unimportant token.
The OOD problem induced by the existing erasure
scheme makes it difﬁcult to identify whether high-
scoring tokens actually contribute signiﬁcantly to
the prediction. In computer vision, several studies
have highlighted the problem and attempted to ad-
dress it (Zintgraf et al., 2017; Chang et al., 2018;
Yi et al., 2020). To the best of our knowledge, the
OOD problem has not been raised in the ﬁeld of
NLP, hence no solution has been suggested yet.
In this study, we ask instead; “How would the
model react differently if there were other tokens
arXiv:2010.13984v1  [cs.CL]  27 Oct 2020
instead of each token?”, as proposed by Chang et al.
(2018); Yi et al. (2020). We propose to marginalize
each token out to mitigate the OOD problem of
the existing erasure scheme. During the marginal-
ization, our method measures the contribution of
all probable candidate tokens considering their
likelihoods. To calculate the likelihoods, we use
the masked language modeling (MLM) of bidirec-
tional encoder representations from transformers
(BERT) (Devlin et al., 2019).
Our contributions are as follows:
i) To the best of our knowledge, we ﬁrst raise the
OOD problem that can arise when interpret-
ing NLP models through the existing erasure
schemes.
ii) To avoid the OOD problem, we propose a new
interpretation method, i.e., input marginaliza-
tion using MLM for likelihood modeling.
iii) We apply the proposed method to interpret
various NLP models and quantitatively verify
the correctness of the resulting interpretation.
2
Related Works
2.1
Interpretation of NLP models
Model-aware interpretation methods for DNNs use
model information such as gradients. Saliency map
(Simonyan et al., 2013) interprets an image classi-
ﬁer by computing the gradient of a target class logit
score with respect to each input pixel. Since a token
index is not ordinal as an image pixel, the gradient
with respect to a token is meaningless. Hence, Li
et al. (2016) computed the gradient in an embed-
ding space and Arras et al. (2017) distributed the
class score to input embedding dimensions through
layer-wise relevance propagation. Both methods
sum up the scores of each embedding dimension to
provide the attribution score of a token. Because the
score can have a negative or positive sign, the sum
may offset each other, so the contribution of the
token may become zero even if it does contribute
to the prediction.
Recently, the attention mechanism has been
widely adopted to various NLP tasks (Bahdanau
et al., 2014; Vaswani et al., 2017; Zhang et al.,
2018) and there have been attempts to use the at-
tention score as an interpretation. (Jain and Wal-
lace, 2019). However, its validity is still controver-
sial (Wiegreffe and Pinter, 2019).
Model-agnostic approaches aim to interpret any
types of model with no information other than its
feed-forward outputs. They observe how much the
prediction changes after erasing each unit of in-
put. If it differs signiﬁcantly, then the unit obtains
a high attribution score. In computer vision, the
measurement of prediction difference varies from
the subtraction of probabilities (Zeiler and Fergus,
2014) to a log-odds probability difference (Zintgraf
et al., 2017). In the ﬁeld of NLP, Li et al. (2016)
interpreted NLP models by erasing each dimension
of the embedding vector or the token itself, where
the erasure was implemented by simply setting the
value to a predeﬁned value, i.e., zero. Such an era-
sure scheme can push the embedding vector or the
input out of the training data distribution, thereby
resulting in an inaccurate interpretation.
2.2
Interpretation without OOD problem
Several interpretation methods to mitigate the OOD
problem have been proposed in computer vision.
Zintgraf et al. (2017) proposed to marginalize each
pixel out by assuming that the pixel value follows a
Gaussian distribution. It had limitations in that the
Gaussian distribution differed from the real pixel
distribution. Chang et al. (2018) improved it by
replacing an image segment with a plausible values
generated from a deep generative model. Yi et al.
(2020) proposed to adopt an additional DNN to
model the pixel distribution, which motivated our
work the most.
The method recently proposed by Jin et al.
(2019) may appear similar to ours as it marginal-
izes context words out to obtain the context-free
attribution of a token. However, it still cannot over-
come the OOD problem because it replaces the
token with zero, similar to the existing methods. To
the best of our knowledge, no attempt has been un-
dertaken to raise and overcome the OOD problem
that arises when interpreting NLP models.
2.3
MLM of BERT
BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), one of the state-of-the-
art natural language representations, is trained with
two pre-training tasks: MLM and next sentence pre-
diction. The MLM aims to infer the probability of a
token to appear in the masked position of an input.
As BERT is deeply bidirectional, it can consider
the entire context of the sentence which enables the
exact likelihood modeling. The likelihoods of the
candidate tokens for marginalization are easily and
accurately attainable using the MLM of BERT.
3
Methods
We propose input marginalization to mitigate the
OOD issue. In the following subsections, we mea-
sure the attribution score using the weight of evi-
dence and marginalize over all possible candidate
tokens using the MLM of BERT. We extend the
method to multi-token cases and introduce adap-
tively truncated marginalization for an efﬁcient
computation. Finally, we propose a new metric,
AUCrep, to evaluate the proposed method faithfully.
The overall algorithm is provided in Algorithm 1.
3.1
Measurement of model output difference
To measure the changes in the model output, we
adopt the widely used weight of evidence (WoE)
(Robnik-ˇSikonja and Kononenko, 2008), which is a
log odds difference of prediction probabilities. We
deﬁne θ as the target model parameter, yc as a target
class to be explained, and x as an input sentence.
We introduce x−i, i.e., x without i-th token xi,
to quantify the contribution of xi to predicting yc.
WoE is formulated as follows:
WoEθ,i(yc|x) = log2(oddsθ(yc|x))
−log2(oddsθ(yc|x−i)),
(1)
where oddsθ(yc|x) = pθ(yc|x)/(1 −pθ(yc|x)).
pθ(yc|x−i) captures the notion of the model re-
sponse without the i-th token. The ﬁrst term of
Eq. 1 can be easily obtained as it is the original
prediction probability, while the second term is
computed by input marginalization.
3.2
Input marginalization
We rewrite the term p(yc|x−i) of Eq. 1 using
marginalization as follows:
p(yc|x−i) =
X
˜xi∈V
p(yc, ˜xi|x−i)
=
X
˜xi∈V
p(yc|˜xi, x−i) · p(˜xi|x−i).
(2)
Here, ˜xi is a candidate token that can appear instead
of xi, and V is a set of vocabulary. p(yc|˜xi, x−i)
can be easily obtained by a single feed forward
to the target model with the i-th token replaced
with ˜xi. We compute p(˜xi|x−i), the likelihood of
˜xi appearing in the i-th position, by substituting the
xi with the “[MASK]” token and feed forwarding it
to BERT. The process of computing the attribution
score of a token is repeated for all tokens in the
sentence.
Algorithm 1 Input marginalization
Input Target model θ, input x, vocabulary V,
likelihood threshold σ, and target class yc
Output Attribution score a
for i = 0 to length(x) do
m ←0
▷Initialize attribution score
s ←copy x
si ←“[MASK]” token
for all ˜si in V do
p(˜si|s−i) ←BERTMLM(s)
if p(˜si|s−i) > σ then
si ←˜si
m ←m + p(˜si|s−i) · pθ(yc|s)
end if
end for
ai = logoddsθ(yc|x) −logoddsθ(m)
▷Prediction difference measurement
end for
3.3
Multi-token marginalization
We can compute the attribution score for multiple
tokens similarly. Let us assume that we wish to
measure the joint contribution of two tokens xi and
xj. Eq. 2 then becomes
p(yc|x−i,j) =
X
˜xj∈V
X
˜xi∈V
p(yc, ˜xi, ˜xj|x−i,j). (3)
Applying Bayes’ theorem, p(yc, ˜xi, ˜xj|x−i,j) be-
comes p(yc|˜xi, ˜xj, x−i,j) · p(˜xi, ˜xj|x−i,j). The
latter term of the multiplication can be decom-
posed into the multiplication of p(˜xi|x−i, ˜xj) and
p(˜xj|x−i,j). Each term can be easily obtained
by masking the corresponding position and feed-
forwarding it to BERT even when xi and xj are
distant. For more than two tokens, the attribution
scores can be obtained in the similar way.
3.4
Adaptively truncated marginalization
The computational complexity for obtaining an at-
tribution score of one token is O(|V|), where |V| is
the size of a vocabulary set. For the tokenizer used
in BERT, |V| is greater than 30,000, and the same
number of marginalization is required, which is
computationally burdensome. For the efﬁcient com-
putation, we propose adaptively truncated marginal-
ization. If the magnitude of p(˜xi|x−i) is insignif-
icantly small, the contribution of p(yc|˜xi, x−i) to
the summation in Eq. 2 becomes negligible. There-
fore, we marginalize only over candidates whose
likelihoods are greater than a likelihood threshold
(a3)
SST-2
SNLI
+
-
LSTM
-
BERT
pre:
hypo:
(a2) 
(a4)
(a5)
(a6)
(a7)
(a8)
(a9)
(b1)
(b2)
(b3)
(b4)
(b5)
(b6)
 a  couple  holding  hands  walks  down  a  street  . 
 people  are  holding  hands  and  walking  . 
 a  woman  is  walking  across  the  street  eating  a  banana  ,  while  a  man  is  following  with  his  briefcase  . 
 the  woman  is  outside 
 a  big  brown  dog  swims  towards  the  camera  . 
 a  dog  swims  towards  the  camera  . 
 an  elderly  man  is  drinking  orange  juice  at  a  cafe  . 
 an  elderly  man  is  drinking  apple  juice  at  a  bar  . 
 a  couple  holding  hands  walks  down  a  street  . 
 there  are  people  sitting  on  the  side  of  the  road  . 
 people  on  bicycles  waiting  at  an  intersection  . 
 the  people  are  sleeping  . 
pre:
hypo:
pre:
hypo:
pre:
hypo:
pre:
hypo:
pre:
hypo:
+
-
CNN
(a1) 
 pacino  is  brilliant  as  the  sleep  -  deprived  dormer  ,  his  increasing  weariness  as  much  existential  as  it  is  physical .
 an  important  movie  ,  a  reminder  of  the  power  of  film  to  move  us  and  to  make  us  examine  our  values  . 
 unflinchingly  bleak  and  desperate 
 i  am  sorry  that  i  was  unable  to  get  the  full  brunt  of  the  comedy  . 
+
 it  '  s  a  lovely  film  with  lovely  performances  by  buy  and  accorsi  . 
 more  romantic  ,  more  emotional  and  ultimately  more  satisfying  than  the  teary  -  eyed  original  . 
 it  '  s  a  bit  disappointing  that  it  only  manages  to  be  decent  instead  of  dead  brilliant  . 
 suffers  from  the  lack  of  a  compelling  or  comprehensible  narrative  . 
 .  .  .  very  funny  ,  very  enjoyable  .  .  . 
 lookin  '  for  sin  ,  american  -  style  ? 
(a10)
(a)
(b)
Entailment
Contradiction
LSTM
Figure 2: Interpretation results of the proposed method. “+” and “-” in (a) denote the positive and negative classes
of the depicted sentences. “pre” and “hypo” in (b) denote premise and hypothesis of SNLI, respectively. Red and
blue colors denote positive and negative contributions to the denoted classes, respectively.
(σ) and normalize the score. Adaptively truncated
marginalization approximates Eq. 2 as follows:
p(yc|x−i) ≈
P
˜xi∈˜V p(yc|˜xi, x−i) · p(˜xi|x−i)
P
˜xi∈˜V p(˜xi|x−i)
,
(4)
where ˜V = { ˜xi ∈V | p( ˜xi|x−i) > σ }.
Since the likelihood distributions depend on
a token’s position in the sentence, the number
of marginalization varies for every i. We will
demonstrate the efﬁciency of adaptively truncated
marginalization and ﬁnd an optimal σ in Section 4.
3.5
Evaluation of interpretation
Inspired by Petsiuk et al. (2018) and Chang et al.
(2018), we propose a metric AUCrep to evaluate
interpretation methods for NLP models. Given the
attribution scores of a sentence, Petsiuk et al. (2018)
plotted a prediction probability curve as pixels
ﬁlled with zero in the order of importance. If the
interpretation is faithful, then the curve will drop
rapidly, resulting in a small area under a curve
(AUC). However, replacing the token with zero or
removing it from a sentence can cause the OOD
problem again. Instead, we replace it with a token
sampled from the distribution inferred by BERT
MLM, as Chang et al. (2018) gradually replaced
image segments with a generated sample. As MLM
is trained by masking only a part of the input sen-
tence, replacing too many tokens can degrade its
modeling performance. Therefore, we calculate the
AUC until 20% of the tokens are replaced, and refer
to it as AUCrep.
4
Experimental Results
4.1
Experimental setup
To show the model-agnostic and task-agnostic prop-
erty of our method, we present interpretations of
several types of DNNs trained for two tasks: senti-
ment analysis and natural language inference.
SST-2 For sentiment analysis, we used the Stan-
ford Sentiment Treebank binary classiﬁcation cor-
pus (SST-2) (Socher et al., 2013), which is a set of
movie reviews labeled as positive or negative. We
trained an 1-dimensional convolutional neural net-
works (CNNs) and a bidirectional long short-term
memory (LSTM) with attention mechanism, and
ﬁne-tuned BERT (Devlin et al., 2019).
SNLI For natural language inference, we used
the Stanford natural language inference (SNLI) cor-
pus (Young et al., 2014), a collection of pairs of two
sentences, premise and hypothesis, annotated with
three relationships between them: entailment, con-
tradiction, and neutral. We trained the bidirectional
LSTM for SNLI.
The ﬁnal test accuracy of the target models is
provided in Table 1. Note that the architectures
of LSTM used for SST-2 and SNLI are distinct.
Please refer to the Appendix for the detailed de-
scriptions. Throughout the experiments, we used
the same tokenizer as BERT, where the zero-th to-
ken is “[PAD]”. After training the target models,
we interpreted their predictions through the pro-
posed input marginalization. We used pre-trained
BERT (Wolf et al., 2019) for likelihood modeling
and σ was set to 10−5.
Table 1: Test accuracy of the target models
Corpus
Model
LSTM
BERT
CNN
SST-2
0.7753
0.8578
0.7300
SNLI
0.6314
4.2
Interpretation results
The interpretation results of the proposed method
are shown in Fig. 2. The color indicates the contri-
bution of each token to the ﬁnal prediction, with
blue and red representing a negative and positive
contribution, respectively. Its intensity represents
the magnitude of the attribution score. More exam-
ples are provided in Appendix.
Fig. 2 (a) shows the interpretations of correct pre-
dictions for SST-2. The labels are shown in front
of the sentences. For predicting the positive class,
afﬁrmative tokens such as “brilliant” and “funny”
were attributed highly (a1, a9); if they are replaced
with other tokens, the prediction probability will
decrease signiﬁcantly. Likewise, negative tokens
such as “disappointing” and “suffers” were high-
lighted for predicting the negative class (a7, a8). If
positive and negative tokens appear in one sentence
simultaneously, our method successfully assigned
the opposite scores to those tokens: positive score
to “disappointing” and negative score to “dead bril-
liant” for predicting negative class (a7).
The interpretations of the LSTM for SNLI are
shown in Fig. 2 (b). The sentences were correctly
classiﬁed to the denoted class. For predicting a
class entailment, the token with a similar mean-
ing were assigned high attribution score, such as
“swim” (b3). In contrast, tokens that makes two
sentences contradicting were highlighted for pre-
dicting contradiction, such as “cafe” vs. “bar” (b4).
4.3
Comparison to the existing erasing
scheme
In this section, we compare our method with the ex-
isting method proposed by Li et al. (2015) through
interpretations of models for SST-2. We refer to
the existing method as zero erasure throughout the
experiments as it replaces tokens with zero.
Qualitative comparison Interpretation results
using input marginalization (Marg) and zero era-
sure (Zero) are depicted in Fig. 3 (a). Fig. 3 (a1-a6)
and (a7-a8) were classiﬁed to positive and neg-
ative class, respectively. As shown in the ﬁgure,
zero erasure often completely failed to interpret
the prediction (a1). Zero erasure also assigned high
attribution scores to uninformative tokens such as
punctuation and “to” (a3-a6). Our method showed
clearer interpretations where unimportant tokens
were given low attribution scores, while correctly
highlighting the important ones. Moreover, the neg-
ative attribution was captured better than zero era-
sure. For example, in Fig. 3 (a7-a8), the token “bit”
reduces the degree of negativity of “disappointing”.
Compared to potentially more assertive tokens (e.g.
“very”), the speciﬁc token diluted the negative senti-
ment of the sentence. The negative contribution of
“bit” to predicting the class “negative” was captured
only with our method.
Quantitative comparison using AUCrep We
quantitatively compared our method with zero era-
sure using the AUCrep proposed in Section 3. An-
other baseline using “[UNK]” token instead of
zero was tested to verify that the OOD problem
occurs no matter what predeﬁned value is used.
We would like to clarify that we did not consider
the “[MASK]” token because it is a special token
dedicated for the pre-training of BERT. It will ob-
viously cause the OOD problem because it never
appears during the training of target classiﬁers.
The deletion curves in Fig. 3 (b) shows the
change in prediction probabilities as tokens with
high attribution score are gradually replaced. The
Marg:
(a)
(b)
  
Zero:
(a1) 
 a  good  piece  of  work  more  often  than  not  . 
(a2) 
 a  good  piece  of  work  more  often  than  not  . 
Marg:
(a3)
 it  '  s  also  ,  clearly  ,  great  fun  . 
Zero:
 it  '  s  also  ,  clearly  ,  great  fun .
(a4)
(a6)
 the  best  film  about  baseball  to  hit  theaters  since  field  of  dreams . 
Marg:
(a5)
 the  best  film  about  baseball  to  hit  theaters  since  field  of  dreams  . 
Zero:
Marg:
Prediction probability
Number of erased tokens
Marg
Zero
Unk
(a8)
 it  '  s  a  bit  disappointing  that  it  only  manages  to  be  decent  instead  of  dead  brilliant .
(a7)
Zero:  it  '  s  a  bit  disappointing  that  it  only  manages  to  be  decent  instead  of  dead  brilliant .
Figure 3: (a) shows examples of interpretations obtained by zero erasure and input marginalization (ours). Red and
blue colors denote positive and negative contributions to the predicted classes, respectively. (a1-a6) are correctly
classiﬁed as positive, and (a7-a8) are correctly classiﬁed to negative. (b) shows deletion curves of input marginal-
ization, zero erasure, and “[UNK]” erasure, which are abbreviated as “Marg”, “Zero”, and “Unk”, respectively.
curves show that the deletion curve drawn using
our method dropped more rapidly compared to the
zero and “[UNK]” erasures. The average AUCrep
values for 700 SST-2 sentences are provided in Ta-
ble 2, and the proposed method showed the lowest
AUCrep. This result demonstrates that our method
more accurately captures the importance of tokens
than the existing erasure scheme.
Table 2: Comparison of AUCrep with the existing era-
sure scheme (the lower the better).
Interpretation method
Zero
Unk
Ours
AUCrep
0.5284
0.5170
0.4972
Quantitative comparison using SST-2 tags
The SST-2 corpus provides not only sentence-level
labels, but also ﬁve-class word-level sentiment tags
ranging from very negative to very positive. We
can verify the validity of the attribution scores by
comparing them with the word-level tags. For sim-
plicity, we merged very positive and positive, very
negative and negative into positive (pos) and neg-
ative (neg), respectively, such that each token is
given one tag among three. If a sentence is cor-
rectly classiﬁed to positive, then three cases exist:
i) pos-tagged word: contributes positively and
signiﬁcantly to the prediction
ii) neut-tagged word: does not contribute much
to the prediction
iii) neg-tagged word: contributes negatively to
the prediction,
where neut denotes neutral.
To assess if our method can assign high score
to case i), we measured the intersection of to-
kens (IoT) between pos-tagged tokens and highly
attributed tokens in one sentence, motivated by
intersection of union (IoU) which is a widely
used interpretation evaluation metric in the vi-
sion ﬁeld (Chang et al., 2018). IoT is deﬁned as
|P ∩T| / |P|, where P denotes a set of + tagged
tokens, and T denotes a set of top-10 highly at-
tributed tokens. The average IoT for 100 sentences
was 0.72 and 0.64 for our method and zero erasure,
respectively. This demonstrates that the tokens as-
signed with the highest attribution scores by our
methods are likely to have a signiﬁcant impact on
the sentiment annotation.
A faithful interpretation method is expected to
assign a small attribution score for the tokens be-
longing to ii). For 500 interpretations, the average
attribution score of the neutral words was 0.053
and 0.175 with our method and zero erasure, re-
spectively. With our method, the candidate tokens
inducing the OOD problem like zero have an in-
signiﬁcant effect on the ﬁnal attribution score be-
cause they are assigned relatively low likelihoods.
4.4
Additional analysis using input
marginalization
The experimental results above demonstrates that
our method can provide faithful interpretations. It
thus can be used to analyze DNNs. First, we can
compare the rationale of various models by analyz-
ing their interpretations. Fig. 4 (a1-a4) show the in-
terpretations of SST-2 samples correctly classiﬁed
to positive by both BERT and LSTM. BERT tended
to focus more on afﬁrmative tokens such as “full”
and “memorable” (a2) and successfully identiﬁed
the role of the token “but” (a4) where the sentiment
is reversed after it from negative to positive. Fig. 4
(a5-a8) show the interpretations of samples that are
labeled as positive but misclassiﬁed as negative by
(a)
(b)
 a  man  with  wild  hair  rocks  a  show  playing  a  guitar  center  stage  . 
 the  bald  man  played  the  drums  . 
 a  man  with  wild  hair  rocks  a  show  playing  a  guitar  center  stage  . 
 a  guy  stands  on  stage  with  his  guitar  . 
 a  man  with  wild  hair  rocks  a  show  playing  a  guitar  center  stage  . 
 one  crazy  looking  man  plays  in  a  show  . 
Premise
Hypothesis
(Entailment)
(Contradiction)
(Neutral)
Label
(c)
(b1)
(b2)
(b3)
(c1)
(c2)
(c3)
(a6)
BERT:  the  band  '  s  courage  in  the  face  of  official  repression  is  inspiring  ,  especially  for  aging  hippies  (  this  one  included  )  .
(a5)
LSTM:  the  band  '  s  courage  in  the  face  of  official  repression  is  inspiring  ,  especially  for  aging  hippies  (  this  one  included  )  .
(a7)
LSTM:  add  yet  another  hat  to  a  talented  head  ,  clooney  '  s  a  good  director  . 
(a8)
BERT:  add  yet  another  hat  to  a  talented  head  ,  clooney  '  s  a  good  director  .
BERT (-):  if  steven  soderbergh  '  s  `   solaris  '  is  a  failure  it  is  a  glorious  failure  . 
 if  steven  soderbergh  '  s  `   solaris  '  is  a  failure  it  is  a  glorious  failure  .
LSTM (-):
 if  steven  soderbergh  '  s  `   solaris  '  is  a  failure  it  is  a  glorious  failure 
Original (+):
 (a1)
LSTM:  leigh  '  s  film  is  full  of  memorable  performances  from  top  to  bottom  . 
(a2)
BERT:  leigh  '  s  film  is  full  of  memorable  performances  from  top  to  bottom  . 
(a3)
 the  very  definition  of  the  `   small  '  movie  ,  but  it  is  a  good  stepping  stone  for  director  sprecher  . 
LSTM:
(a4)
 
 the  very  definition  of  the  `   small  '  movie  ,  but  it  is  a  good  stepping  stone  for  director  sprecher  . 
BERT:
Figure 4: Interpretation results using input marginalization. Red and blue colors denote positive and negative
contributions to the predicted classes. (a) shows interpretations of SST-2 predictions. (a1-a6) are correctly classiﬁed
to positive, and (a7-a8) are correctly classiﬁed to negative. (b) shows positive sentences which are misclassiﬁed to
negative by both LSTM and BERT. (c) shows the interpretations of SNLI predictions.
LSTM. The decisions of LSTM were signiﬁcantly
inﬂuenced by the word “included” and “add” (a5,
a7). In contrast, BERT correctly classiﬁed them as
positive by focusing on “inspiring” and “good”.
Our method enables debugging the model by an-
alyzing the misclassiﬁcation case. Fig. 4 (b) shows
the sentences whose true labels are positive but in-
correctly classiﬁed as negative by both models. We
measured the attribution score with respect to the
negative class. For both models, the word “failure”
was assigned signiﬁcantly high attribution score
indicating that both models failed to recognize the
overall positive sentiment of the sentence by focus-
ing on the negativity inherent in the word.
Fig. 4 (c) shows different attribution scores as-
signed to the same premise when the hypothesis
changes. It is shown that the tokens in the hy-
potheses received higher scores than those in the
premises. In fact, they obtained attribution scores
twice as high as those in the premises for 500 in-
terpretations. We can potentially conclude that the
model was trained to pay more attention to hypoth-
esis, since the SNLI corpus consists of repetitive
premises and varying hypotheses. Moreover, (c1)
shows that even if there are two contradictory word
pairs, “wild hair”-“bald” and “guitar”-“drum”, the
model focused more on the the former. Our method
allows potential model debugging when the inter-
pretation turns out to be counterintuitive.
4.5
Effect of language modeling
In Eq. 2, an exact modeling of the likelihood
p(˜xi|x−i) is important for the accurate calculation
of the attribution scores. Hence, the high agreement
between the modeled and the real-world distribu-
tions will result in a more accurate interpretation.
We analyzed the effect of the likelihood modeling
capability on the accuracy of interpretation results.
We tested three additional likelihood modeling: uni-
form distribution, prior probability, and ﬁne-tuned
BERT MLM.
Uniform p(˜xi|x−i) = 1/ |V| = 1/30522 in the
case of BERT tokenizer.
Prior p(˜xi|x−i) = p(˜xi), deﬁned by counting
the frequency of each token in the training data.
Fine-tuned MLM We ﬁne-tuned the MLM of
BERT with the SST-2 dataset for two epochs
(MLMﬁne).
Using each likelihood distribution modeling, we
interpreted the BERT classiﬁer trained for the SST-
2 corpus. The results are shown in Fig. 5. The uni-
form distribution failed to provide an accurate inter-
pretation. The result with prior probability model-
ing appeared slightly clearer, but was still mislead-
ing. MLMpre successfully highlighted important
tokens, but it assigned high scores to tokens that
were not expected to contribute signiﬁcantly to pre-
dicting the sentiment of a movie review (e.g., “ﬁlm”
and “movie” marked with box). MLMﬁne yielded
(a)
(b)
Uniform  a  deep  and  meaningful  film  . 
Prior
 a  deep  and  meaningful  film  . 
MLMpre  a  deep  and  meaningful  film  . 
MLMfine  a  deep  and  meaningful  film  . 
Uniform  the  performances  take  the  movie  to  a  higher  level  . 
Prior
 the  performances  take  the  movie  to  a  higher  level  . 
MLMpre  the  performances  take  the  movie  to  a  higher  level  . 
MLMfine  the  performances  take  the  movie  to  a  higher  level  . 
Figure 5: Interpretation results using different likeli-
hood modelings. Each sentence is correctly classiﬁed
to positive. Red and blue colors denote positive and
negative contributions to the predicted classes.
the most reasonable interpretation, where the attri-
bution score of “ﬁlm” and “movie” was reduced
from 0.256 and 0.631 to 0.007 and 0.321, respec-
tively, compared to MLMpre. We can expect the
interpretation results to become more plausible as
the likelihood modeling improves.
4.6
Ablation study on adaptively truncated
marginalization
We introduced adaptively truncated marginaliza-
tion in Section 3.4 for a faster computation. The full
marginalization over all possible tokens yields the
most exact attribution scores. Thus, we searched
for an optimal threshold σ of adaptively truncated
marginalization that reduces the computational
complexity while maintaining a high correlation to
the scores from full marginalization. We measured
the correlation using the Pearson correlation coef-
ﬁcients. Furthermore, we tested ﬁxed truncation,
which calculates top-n likely candidates without
considering the varying likelihoods depending on
the position.
Table 3 shows the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient
and the average number of marginalization under
various thresholds. σ = 10−5 and 10−6 showed
very similar interpretations to the full marginal-
ization while the average marginalization number
reduced to 2.5% and 10.4%, respectively, com-
pared to 30,522 of the full marginalization. We
regarded σ = 10−5, which showed a lower number
of marginalization under a similar correlation, as
the optimal value. The ﬁxed truncation showed a
lower correlation under the similar average number
of marginalization. The computational complexity
can be further reduced by accepting a slight loss in
the accuracy.
Table 3: The Pearson correlation with full marginaliza-
tion and the average number of marginalization under
various thresholds. σ: likelihood threshold, n: marginal-
ization number threshold for ﬁxed truncation.
Corr
Avg #
Threshold
σ = 10−6
0.9999
3,186
σ = 10−5
0.9999
791
σ = 10−4
0.9988
171
σ = 10−3
0.9928
33
n = 103
0.9958
1,000
n = 102
0.9823
100
5
Conclusion
Interpretability is becoming more important ow-
ing to the increase in deep learning in NLP. Hence,
several interpretation methods have been proposed,
and we reviewed their limitations throughout the pa-
per. Among them, we focused on the OOD problem
arising from the widely used zero erasure scheme,
which results in misleading interpretation. To the
best of our knowledge, neither the OOD problem
has been raised in interpreting NLP models nor the
attempt to resolve it has been undertaken. Our pro-
posed input marginalization, which can mitigate
the OOD problem, can result in a faithful inter-
pretation, thereby enabling better understanding of
“black box” DNNs.
The scope of this study was primarily fo-
cused on interpreting DNNs for sentiment anal-
ysis and natural language inference. Regarding the
model-agnostic and task-agnostic properties of our
method, they are applicable to any types of NLP
model for various tasks, such as neural machine
translation and visual question answering. It will
be meaningful to interpret the state-of-the-art mod-
els such as XLNet (Yang et al., 2019) and ELEC-
TRA (Clark et al., 2019). In addition, as experi-
mentally analyzed, the interpretation result of our
method is affected by the likelihood modeling per-
formance. We can expect even more faithful inter-
pretation if the modeling performance improves.
Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the National Research
Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the
Korea government (Ministry of Science and ICT)
[2018R1A2B3001628], the Brain Korea 21 Plus
Project in 2020, and Hyundai Motor Company.
References
Leila Arras, Gr´egoire Montavon, Klaus-Robert M¨uller,
and Wojciech Samek. 2017.
Explaining recurrent
neural network predictions in sentiment analysis.
EMNLP 2017, page 159.
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. 2014.
Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.0473.
Chun-Hao Chang, Elliot Creager, Anna Goldenberg,
and David Duvenaud. 2018. Explaining image clas-
siﬁers by counterfactual generation.
Kevin Clark, Minh-Thang Luong, Quoc V Le, and
Christopher D Manning. 2019. Electra: Pre-training
text encoders as discriminators rather than genera-
tors. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understand-
ing.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages
4171–4186.
Shi Feng, Eric Wallace, Alvin Grissom II, Mohit Iyyer,
Pedro Rodriguez, and Jordan Boyd-Graber. 2018.
Pathologies of neural models make interpretations
difﬁcult. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 3719–3728.
Leilani H Gilpin, David Bau, Ben Z Yuan, Ayesha Ba-
jwa, Michael Specter, and Lalana Kagal. 2018. Ex-
plaining explanations: An overview of interpretabil-
ity of machine learning. In 2018 IEEE 5th Interna-
tional Conference on data science and advanced an-
alytics (DSAA), pages 80–89. IEEE.
Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel. 2016. A baseline
for detecting misclassiﬁed and out-of-distribution
examples in neural networks.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1610.02136.
Sarthak Jain and Byron C Wallace. 2019. Attention is
not explanation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.10186.
Xisen Jin, Junyi Du, Zhongyu Wei, Xiangyang Xue,
and Xiang Ren. 2019. Towards hierarchical impor-
tance attribution: Explaining compositional seman-
tics for neural sequence models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1911.06194.
Jiwei Li, Xinlei Chen, Eduard Hovy, and Dan Jurafsky.
2015. Visualizing and understanding neural models
in nlp. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.01066.
Jiwei Li, Will Monroe, and Dan Jurafsky. 2016. Un-
derstanding neural networks through representation
erasure. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.08220.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-
dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining ap-
proach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692.
Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. 2017.
A uniﬁed
approach to interpreting model predictions. In Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems,
pages 4765–4774.
Vitali Petsiuk, Abir Das, and Kate Saenko. 2018.
Rise: Randomized input sampling for explana-
tion
of
black-box
models.
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:1806.07421.
Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Ben Hutchinson, and Mar-
garet Mitchell. 2019. Perturbation sensitivity anal-
ysis to detect unintended model biases.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:1910.04210.
Marko Robnik-ˇSikonja and Igor Kononenko. 2008.
Explaining classiﬁcations for individual instances.
IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engi-
neering, 20(5):589–600.
Karen Simonyan, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisser-
man. 2013. Deep inside convolutional networks: Vi-
sualising image classiﬁcation models and saliency
maps. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6034.
Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Wu, Jason
Chuang, Christopher D Manning, Andrew Y Ng,
and Christopher Potts. 2013. Recursive deep mod-
els for semantic compositionality over a sentiment
treebank. In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on
empirical methods in natural language processing,
pages 1631–1642.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems, pages 5998–6008.
Sarah Wiegreffe and Yuval Pinter. 2019.
Atten-
tion is not not explanation.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.04626.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien
Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pier-
ric Cistac, Tim Rault, R’emi Louf, Morgan Funtow-
icz, and Jamie Brew. 2019.
Huggingface’s trans-
formers: State-of-the-art natural language process-
ing. ArXiv, abs/1910.03771.
Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime Car-
bonell, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Quoc V Le.
2019.
Xlnet: Generalized autoregressive pretrain-
ing for language understanding.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.08237.
Jihun Yi, Eunji Kim, Siwon Kim, and Sungroh Yoon.
2020. Information-theoretic visual explanation for
black-box classiﬁers.
Peter Young, Alice Lai, Micah Hodosh, and Julia Hock-
enmaier. 2014. From image descriptions to visual
denotations: New similarity metrics for semantic in-
ference over event descriptions. Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2:67–78.
Matthew D Zeiler and Rob Fergus. 2014. Visualizing
and understanding convolutional networks. In Euro-
pean conference on computer vision, pages 818–833.
Springer.
Lei Zhang, Shuai Wang, and Bing Liu. 2018.
Deep
learning for sentiment analysis: A survey.
Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowl-
edge Discovery, 8(4):e1253.
Luisa M Zintgraf, Taco S Cohen, Tameem Adel,
and Max Welling. 2017.
Visualizing deep neu-
ral network decisions: Prediction difference analysis.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.04595.
