Title: Automatic Text Summarization of Legal Cases: A Hybrid Approach
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1908.09119v1
--------------------------------------------------

AUTOMATIC TEXT SUMMARIZATION OF LEGAL 
CASES: A HYBRID APPROACH 
Varun Pandya 
*Department of Computer Science and Engineering, School of Technology, 
Pandit Deendayal Petroleum University, India 
varunpandya2004@gmail.com 
 
ABSTRACT 
Manual summarization of large bodies of text involves a lot of human effort and time, especially in the 
legal domain. Lawyers spend a lot of time preparing legal briefs of their clients’ case files. Automatic 
Text summarization is a constantly evolving field of Natural Language Processing(NLP), which is a 
subdiscipline of the Artificial Intelligence Field.. In this paper a hybrid method for automatic text 
summarization of legal cases using k-means clustering technique and tf-idf(term frequency-inverse 
document frequency) word vectorizer is proposed. The summary generated by the proposed method is 
compared using ROGUE evaluation parameters with the case summary as prepared by the lawyer for 
appeal in court. Further, suggestions for improving the proposed method are also presented.  
KEYWORDS 
Automatic Text Summarization, Legal domain, k-means clustering, tf-idf word vectors 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The amount of information and data has increased tremendously in every field over the years. 
With the limited human capacity of consuming information, it becomes paramount to extract 
only useful information out of the vast amount of unstructured data available. Thus, text 
summarization plays an important role in extracting useful pieces of information from possibly 
large bodies of text. Automatic Text Summarization is the process of producing textual 
summaries as output, given a certain textual document as an input, using the computational 
power of machine. It involves reducing a text document into a short set of words or paragraph 
that conveys the main meaning of the text[1]. The need for automatic text summarization in the 
field of Legal cases is continuously increasing with the number of cases piling up in the 
courtroom. Currently, a lot of effort goes into the manual drafting of case headnotes, synopses 
and summaries[2]. Legal systems across the world generate massive amounts of unstructured 
text every day; judges, lawyers, and case workers process and review millions of cases each 
year in the United States alone[3]. Preparing a legal case summary is a difficult task since the 
summary must contain relevant facts and precedents necessary to persuade the court in the 
favour of the plaintiff. Lawyers often spend many hours preparing legal briefs, which can be 
done by a computer in a few minutes. Thus, automatic text summarization is a necessity to 
overcome these challenges. 
In this paper a novel hybrid approach of automatic text summarization in legal domain using 
clustering technique is proposed. The paper is organised as follows: Section 2 contains the 
overview and description of the terms associated with text summarization, Section 3 contains 
the overview of the existing approaches which are currently being used for text summarization, 
Section 4 contains the description of the proposed method, Section 5 consists of the information 
of data used for implementation and in Section 6 the approach is compared with the existing 
tech 
*Bachelor Student 
techniques of text summarization to get an insight in the performance of the proposed method. 
Section 7 contains the proposal for future work and Section 8 consists of the conclusion. 
 
2. BACKGROUND 
Summarization is a challenging sub-task of the broader text-to-text generation field of natural 
language processing (NLP)[3].  
Automatic text summarization is broadly of two types: 
 
1. Extractive Summarization: 
     This method involves selecting the most useful and relevant sentences from the document to 
provide a summary. Here the sentences originally present in the document are used to form the 
summary, with no new sentences being formed. Extractive summaries produce a set of the most 
significant sentences from a document, exactly as they appear[4].   
2. Abstractive Summarization: 
     In this type of summarization, new sentences are formed which are relevant to the document. 
Here the gist of the document is represented using computer generated sentences, having close 
resemblance to the summary as produced by humans. Abstractive text summarization captures 
the salient features of the text corpus and summary is generated by words/sentence that 
may/may not be in the input text corpus[5]. A lot of research is ongoing in this domain. 
 
Depending upon the number of documents given as input, there are broadly two types: 
(a) Single Document Summarization: 
           Here a single document is given as an input to the text summarization model, and a 
summary of the document is produced as an output. The most useful and relevant sentences 
from the entire document are extracted and used to form a summary. 
(b) Multi Document Summarization: 
          Multi-document text summarization can be defined as a process of extracting relevant 
data and creating a short version of multiple source documents[6]. Here more than one 
document is given as input, and the sentences best representing the documents as a unit, are 
given as output.  
 
The hybrid method proposed in this paper is based on extractive summarization of single 
document. A legal case is given as an input and a legal brief, best representing the useful and 
relevant facts, is produced as an output. The legal brief produced serves as an important tool for 
lawyers to present their case in the courtroom. They contain important information relevant to 
the case including all the facts and events which are necessary to win the case. It is as important 
to be economical to the time spent on the actual reading of the case as it is to be economical in 
the writing of the brief itself[7].  
 
3. EXISTING APPROACHES 
Different kinds of methods have been proposed for text summarization in the legal domain. The 
earliest of works in this area include the “Fast Legal EXpert CONsultant” (FLEXICON) system 
developed by Gelbart and Smith (Gelbartand Smith, 1991a). FLEXICON is keyword-based, 
referencing against a large database of terms to find important regions of text (Gelbart and 
Smith, 1991b). It served as a starting point for the text summarization approaches in legal 
domain. SALOMON, based on cosine similarity, proposed by Moens(Moens el al, 1999), 
served as an alternative to FLEXICON. Later the SUM and the Letsum(based on the thematic 
structure) projects served as an improvement on the previously proposed systems, to provide a 
structured representation of the legal briefs. Later a novel approach, LEXA, was proposed based 
on citation analysis. LEXA includes an interface for continued system learning using Ripple-
down Rules (RDR), which allows domain experts to evaluate sentence selections live and agree 
or disagree with the selections[3].  
A lot of systems for automatic text summarization have been proposed till date. These include 
CaseSummarizer, SUMMARIST, SMMRY and a lot of other proposed methods and algorithms. 
However, summarizing legal cases remains a challenging and daunting task because of the 
complexity of cases as well as the sheer size of legal cases. Many text summarization tools fail 
to produce summaries of large documents because of the complexity of algorithm used for 
summarizing the document. Thus, it is important to devise a method which not only gives 
optimal results but also gives them within a certain time limit. Also, it is important to 
specifically develop methods for text summarization of legal cases because of the size of legal 
cases, sometimes having more than 200 pages, which might result in system failure or an 
indefinite waiting period for complete execution. The system proposed in this paper is perfect 
for legal cases since it performs optimally and gives summary of required length, even when the 
case file has hundreds of pages.  
 
4. THE PROPOSED SYSTEM 
The implementation is carried out in three different steps: pre-processing, clustering of similar 
sentences, extracting top ranked sentences from each cluster 
 
4.1. Pre-processing 
Pre-processing of the document is a vital part of any text summarization approach. It is the 
foremost step of the proposed approach which includes removing of the unnecessary 
punctuations, merging the acronyms of a given sentences(example: F.C.A->FCA), removing 
extra periods(…..) which are often present in case files. Along with this the rich NLTK library 
of python has been used to remove stop words, tokenize the sentences and words and lemmatize 
them. After pre-processing, a clean document ready for clustering is produced. 
4.2. Clustering 
After pre-processing the case file, clustering of similar sentences is carried out. The clustering 
algorithm used in this approach is the k-means clustering algorithm. It is an iterative algorithm 
that executes many times with different centroids until it converges. Given K > 0 (where K is 
the number of clusters) and a set of N d-dimensional objects to be clustered: 
o 
Clustering is the process of grouping a set of N d-dimensional (2-dimensional, 3-
dimensional, etc.) objects into K clusters of similar objects. 
o 
Objects should be like one another within the same cluster and dissimilar to those in 
other clusters. 
In the proposed method, the rich sklearn library of python is used to vectorize the sentences. 
The tf-idf vectorizer of sklearn library is used to convert words to their vector representations. 
The tf-idf(term frequency-inverse document frequency) value of a word is given by:  
 
 
Here clustering of sentences is performed at the document level meaning that similar sentences 
within the document will form clusters, such that intra-cluster distances are minimum and inter-
cluster distances are maximum. The number of optimum clusters required for efficiency can be 
calculated using various algorithms like Elbow method, Information Criterion Approach, 
Silhouette width etc[8]. These clusters represent the similar types of sentences and hence certain 
number of sentences can be extracted from each cluster, depending upon their rank, such that 
the summary contains sentences obtained from different clusters, thus ensuring that the 
summary formed has less redundancy and contains sentences which can provide an overview of 
the entire legal case file. After the formation of clusters, the next step is to extract the top ranked 
sentences from each cluster. 
 
4.3. Extraction of sentences from each cluster 
For every sentence in each cluster, a rank is associated based on two features: 
 
1. Tf-idf score of each sentence: 
The sum of tf-idf value of all words of the sentence is divided by the sum of tf-idf value 
for all the words present in the document. 
 
sent_values = [sum(tf-idf of all words of sentence) / sum(tf-idf of all words of 
document)] 
 
2. Sentence similarity to title: 
The sentences similar to the title of the case generally present the important facts related 
to the case, thus aiding in generating a useful and relevant summary. The similarity 
score to the title is calculated as: 
 
Title_score =( (length of similar words) * 0.1 ) / length of words in title) 
 
Here only the noun form words ['NN', 'NNS', 'NNP', 'NNPS' (Penn Tree Bank)] of the sentences 
and title are compared. The sentences belonging to a cluster are ranked based on the sum of 
these two scores (tf-idf and similarity of sentence to the title). The sentences having a higher 
score are ranked higher than the ones with lower score. Equal number of top ranked sentences 
are selected from each cluster for easier calculations. Thus, we get the optimal summary with 
the required number of sentences.  
 Legal Case 
Document 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pre-Processing 
Tokenizing sentences 
Lematizing words 
Removing unnecessary 
stop words and 
punctuations 
 
 
 
 
 
Clustering 
Forming tf-idf value 
vectors for words 
Clustering sentences 
using k-means algorithm
 
 
 
 
 
Extraction of Sentences 
Calculating tf-idf and ‘title 
similarity’ score for each 
sentence
Extracting top ranking 
sentences from each cluster 
Case 
Summary 
 
Figure 1.  Framework of the proposed system 
ROGUE MEASURES
PRECISION RECALL
F-MEASURE PRECISION
RECALL
F-MEASURE PRECISION RECALL
F-MEASURE PRECISION
RECALL
F-MEASURE
ROGUE-1
27.62
28.16
27.88
12.2
9.71
10.81
21.51
19.42
20.41
21.78
21.36
21.57
ROGUE-2
5.77
5.88
5.83
1.23
0.98
1.09
2.17
1.96
2.06
4
3.92
3.96
ROGUE-L
33.24
33.78
33.5
17.32
14.32
15.68
25.45
23.37
24.37
27.01
26.58
26.79
ROGUE-W
14.81
9.23
11.38
8.51
4.15
5.58
12.13
6.7
8.63
11.66
6.99
8.74
PROPOSED SYSTEM
TEXTSUMMARIZER
SPLITBRAIN
ESUMMERIZER
5. IMPLEMENTATION 
For implementation, Auslii (http://austlii.edu.au) was used which consists of a database of 
Australian legal cases. The legal cases consist of the headnotes and summary within the case 
file. The legal cases downloaded in pdf format are given as input and the legal summary is 
produced as output by the system. The system was tested with a randomly selected legal 
case(Rush v Nationwide News Pty Ltd (No 7) [2019] FCA 496 (11 April 2019)) from the 
database. The case file consists of more than 200 pages, containing the facts and sequence of 
events required for convincing the jury. The summary provided with the case file consisted of 
20 pages (approximately 150 sentences). This legal case was given as an input to the system and 
approximately 150 sentence summary was generated, in under 3 minutes, to match its length 
with the provided summary for better comparison.  
 
6. EVALUATION 
Summaries are difficult to evaluate because of their subjective nature. The relevance and 
usefulness of each sentence in the summary changes with the person evaluating them. Hence 
Lin et al. introduced a set of metrics called the ROUGE package in (Lin, 2004) that provide a 
pairwise comparison method for evaluating candidate summaries against human-provided 
ones[3]. ROUGE stands for Recall-Oriented Understudy for Gisting Evaluation and it counts 
the number of overlapping units such as n-gram, word sequences, and word pairs between the 
computer-generated summary to be evaluated and the ideal summaries created by humans [9]. 
The ROUGE metric has multiple variants(ROGUE N for N=1,2,3; ROGUE W; ROGUE L) and 
may be applied at the word, phrase, or sentence level. Here ROGUE 1, ROGUE 2, ROGUE L, 
ROGUE W are used as evaluation measures for comparing the proposed system with other 
existing systems. The Python Rogue library was used for it. Three automated tools were chosen 
for comparison TextSummarizer(http://textsummarization.net/text-summarizer), SplitBrain 
(https://www.splitbrain.org/services/ots), and ESummarizer(http://esummarizer.com/). Along 
with this the Text Rank algorithm was also used to summarize the legal case file, however it 
resulted in memory error due to computational complexity.  
 
The ROGUE scores are as shown in the table 1  
 
The proposed method in this paper performs favourably well against other existing methods. 
Since the proposed method is an unsupervised approach and is computationally favourably, it 
does not require training any data or creating corpus like it is required in some recently 
proposed approaches[10].  
The reason why the proposed system performs favourably well is due to the extraction of 
sentences having the highest tf-idf scores and similarity to the title of the case, not just from the 
entire case file, but from each cluster of sentences obtained, thus ensuring least redundancy and 
similarity between the sentences generated in the final summary so that the final summary that 
gets generated contains sentences which help in representing the entire case file with least 
redundancy.  
TABLE 1: ROGUE Scores Comparison 
7. FUTURE WORK 
 
The preliminary results of the proposed system serve as a promising means of providing legal 
summaries of case files. However, the proposed approach can be further improved by making 
the following addition: 
 
For determining the optimal number of clusters for k-means, certain algorithms can be 
added as an extension to the system for optimal results[8]. 
 
For ranking the sentences after clustering, other than tf-idf and title similarity scores, 
parameters like position of sentence in the document and others can be used along with 
integration of other algorithms like Latent Dirichlet Algorithm or Graphical based 
approaches to generate sentences which have a higher overall rank.  
 
As an addition to the proposed system Thematic roles and Rhetorical Roles can be 
implemented to provide a structure to the document like it is required for legal case 
briefs. 
 
8. CONCLUSIONS 
The proposed method works favorably well against existing approaches. The summary 
generated closely resembles to the original summary as generated by the attorney of the case 
and can possibly be used in the court of law after further improvements. The summary 
generated by the proposed system after further revisions and structuring can possibly be used by 
attorneys for real time cases in the near future, after carrying out real world tests with attorneys 
which have not been conducted as of now. Since it is an unsupervised approach, consisting of 
clustering using k-means and extracting top ranked sentences from each cluster, and is 
computationally favorable, it provides a promising start towards developing a fully functional 
Legal Case Summarizer.  
9. REFERENCES 
[1] 
 Al-Hashemi, R.: “Text Summarization Extraction System (TSES) Using Extracted Keywords.” 
International Arab Journal of e-Technology 1(4) (June 2010)  
[2] 
 Marie-Francine Moens: “Summarizing court decisions” Information Processing and 
Management: an International Journal Volume 43 Issue 6, November, 2007   Pages:1748-1764 
[3]  
Polsley, Seth, Pooja Jhunjhunwala and Ruihong Huang. “CaseSummarizer: A System for 
Automated Summarization of Legal Texts.” (COLING (2016)). 
[4]  
RafaelFerreiraa, Lucianode Souza Cabrala, Rafael DueireLins, Gabriel Pereira e Silvaa, Fred 
Freitas, George D.C. Cavalcantia, Rinaldo Lima, Steven J. Simske, Luciano Favaroc : 
“Assessing sentence scoring techniques for extractive text summarization” Expert Systems with 
Applications Volume 40, Issue 14, 15 October 2013, Pages 5755-5764  
[5]  
Nithin Raphal ; Hemanta Duwarah ; Philemon Daniel: “Survey on Abstractive Text 
Summarization” 2018 International Conference on Communication and Signal Processing 
(ICCSP)  
[6]  
Amol Tandel ; Brijesh Modi ; Priyasha Gupta ; Shreya Wagle ; Sujata Khedkar: “Multi-
document text summarization - a survey” (2016 International Conference on Data Mining and 
Advanced Computing (SAPIENCE)) 
[7]  
Casenote Legal Briefs for Torts, Keyed to Prosser, Wade Schwartz Kelly and Partlett 
[8]  
Trupti M. Kodinariya Dr. Prashant R. Makwana: “Review on determining number of Cluster in 
K-Means Clustering” (2013, IJARCSMS) 
[9] 
Lin, Chin-Yew. “ROUGE: a Package for Automatic Evaluation of Summaries.” In Proceedings 
of the Workshop on Text Summarization Branches Out (WAS 2004), Barcelona, Spain, July 25 - 
26, 2004. 
[10] 
Yogan, Jaya Kumar and Goh, Ong Sing and Halizah, Basiron and Ngo, Hea 
Choon and Puspalata, C Suppiah “A Review On Automatic Text Summarization 
Approaches.” Journal Of Computer Science(2016), 12 (4). pp. 178-190. ISSN 1549-3636  
[11] 
 Mieczyslaw A. Klopotek and Slawomir T. Wierzchon: Modern Algorithms of Cluster Analysis 
[12] 
 Steven Bird, Ewan Klein and Edward Loper: Natural Language Processing with Python 
[13] 
 Data Algorithms by Mahmoud Parsian 
[14] 
 M. Saravanan • B. Ravindran : “Identification of Rhetorical Roles for Segmentation and 
Summarization of a Legal Judgment”(B. Artif Intell Law (2010) ) 
 
Authors 
VARUN PANDYA is currently in third year, pursuing  B.Tech in Computer 
 Engineering from Pandit Deendayal Petroleum University. 
