Title: Leveraging Code Clones and Natural Language Processing for Log Statement Prediction
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2109.03859v1
--------------------------------------------------

Leveraging Code Clones and Natural Language Processing for
Log Statement Prediction
Sina Gholamian
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, Canada
sgholamian@uwaterloo.ca
Abstract—Software developers embed logging statements in-
side the source code as an imperative duty in modern software
development as log ﬁles are necessary for tracking down runtime
system issues and troubleshooting system management tasks.
Prior research has emphasized the importance of logging state-
ments in the operation and debugging of software systems. How-
ever, the current logging process is mostly manual and ad hoc, and
thus, proper placement and content of logging statements remain
as challenges. To overcome these challenges, methods that aim to
automate log placement and log content, i.e., ‘where, what, and
how to log’, are of high interest. Thus, we propose to accomplish
the goal of this research, that is “to predict the log statements
by utilizing source code clones and natural language processing
(NLP)”, as these approaches provide additional context and ad-
vantage for log prediction. We pursue the following four research
objectives: (RO1) investigate whether source code clones can be
leveraged for log statement location prediction, (RO2) propose a
clone-based approach for log statement prediction, (RO3) predict
log statement’s description with code-clone and NLP models, and
(RO4) examine approaches to automatically predict additional
details of the log statement, such as its verbosity level and
variables. For this purpose, we perform an experimental analysis
on seven open-source java projects, extract their method-level
code clones, investigate their attributes, and utilize them for log
location and description prediction. Our work demonstrates the
effectiveness of log-aware clone detection for automated log loca-
tion and description prediction and outperforms the prior work.
Index Terms—software systems, software automation, logging
statement, logging prediction, source code, natural language
processing, NLP, deep learning
I. INTRODUCTION
To gather feedback about computer systems’ running state,
it is a common practice for developers to insert logging
statements inside the source code to have running programs’
internal state and variables written to log ﬁles. This logging
process enables developers and system administrators to ana-
lyze log ﬁles for a variety of purposes [1], such as anomaly
and problem detection [2, 3], log message clustering [4, 5],
system proﬁle building [6], code quality assessment [7], and
compression of log ﬁles [4, 8]. Additionally, the wealth of
information in the logs has also generated signiﬁcant industrial
interest and thus has initiated the development of commercial-
ized log processing platforms such as Splunk [9] and Elastic
Stack [10].
Due to the free-form text format of log statements and lack
of a general guideline, adding proper logging statements to the
source code remains a manual, inconsistent, and error-prone
task [11]. As such, methods to automate logging location and
predict the details, i.e., the ‘static text’ and verbosity level of
the logging statement, are well sought after. For example, the
log print statement (LPS): log.warn(“Cannot ﬁnd BPService for
bpid=” + id), contains a textual part indicating the context of
the log, i.e., description, “Cannot ﬁnd BPService for bpid=”, a
variable part, ‘id’, and a log verbosity level,‘warn’, indicating
the importance of the logging statement and how the level
represents the state of the program [12].
For practical concerns such as I/O and development costs,
the quantity, location, and description of logging statements
should be decided efﬁciently [13]. Logging too little may result
in missing important runtime information that can negatively
impact the postmortem dependability analysis [14], and exces-
sive logging can consume extra system resources at runtime
and impair the system’s performance as logging is an I/O
intensive task [15, 16]. In addition, due to the current ad hoc
logging practices, developers often make mistakes in log state-
ments or even forget to insert a log statement at all [17, 18].
Therefore, prior studies have aimed to automate the logging
process and predict whether a code snippet requires a logging
statement by utilizing machine learning methods to train a
model on a set of logged code snippets, and then test it on
a new set of unlogged code snippets [19, 20] (supervised
learning). A recent work [21] has shown similar code snippets
are useful for log statement description (LSD) suggestions by
evaluating their BLEU [22] and ROUGE [23] scores, similar
to Precision and Recall, respectively. Thus, in our research, we
speciﬁcally seek to utilize source code clones for log statement
prediction and suggestion.
Our goal in this research is to utilize code clones as a
paradigm to improve the log statement automation task.
This will ensure consistency and a higher quality of logging
compared to the current developers’ ad hoc logging efforts.
To summarize, the objectives of this research are to ﬁrst inves-
tigate the suitableness of source code clones for log statement
prediction, uncover their shortcomings, and then leverage
them for automated log location and description prediction
based on selecting appropriate source code features [24]. In
addition, we utilize deep learning NLP approaches along with
code clones to also predict the log statement’s description.
Through an empirical study of seven open-source software
projects, we demonstrate the applicability of similar code
snippets for log prediction, and further analysis suggests
that log-aware clone detection can achieve high BLEU and
arXiv:2109.03859v1  [cs.SE]  8 Sep 2021
ROUGE scores in predicting log statement’s description.
II. MOTIVATING EXAMPLE
Source code clones are exact or similar snippets of the code
that exist among one or multiple source code projects [25].
There are four main classes of code clones [26]: Type-1, which
is simply copy-pasting a code snippet, Type-2 and Type-3,
which are clones that show syntax differences to some extent,
and ﬁnally Type 4, which represents two code snippets that
are syntactically very different but semantically equal, e.g.,
iterative versus recursive implementations of Fibonacci series
in Figure 1. In this research, we focus on method-level code
clones and call the tuple (MDi, MDj) a ‘clone pair’. Figure 1
shows that the logging pattern in the original code, MDi on
Line 3 can be learned to suggest logging statements for its
clone, MDj, which is missing a logging statement.
1 // Original
code - MDi
2 int
fibonacci(int n){
3
log.info(" Calculating
Fibo
sequence
for %d."
,n)
4
if(n==0||n==1)
5
return n;
6
else
7
return
fibonacci(n-1)
+fibonacci(n -2);
8 }
1 // Clone
Type 4 - MDj
2 int
getFibonacci (int n){
3
if(n==0){ return
0;}
4
if(n==1){ return
1;}
5
int
n_2th =0, n_1th =1,nth
=1;
6
for(int i=2;i<=n;i++){
7
nth=n_2th+n_1th;
8
n_2th=n_1th;
9
n_1th=nth;}
10
return
nth;
Fig. 1: Example for log prediction with code clones.
Practical Scenario. To illustrate how our approach will
be useful for developers during the development cycle of the
software, we provide the following practical scenario. We con-
sider a possible employment of our research as a recommender
tool, which can be integrated as a plugin to code development
environments, i.e., IDE software. Alex is a developer working
on a large-scale software system and has previously developed
method MDi in the code base. At a later time, Dave, Alex’s
colleague, is implementing MDj. Our automated log sugges-
tion1 approach can predict that if this new code snippet, MDj,
requires a logging statement by ﬁnding its clone, MDi, in the
code base. Then, the tool can suggest Dave, just in time, to
add a log statement based on the prediction outcome.
III. RELATED WORK
Prior work has tackled the automation of log statements
with various approaches. Yuan et al. [14] proposed ErrorLog,
a tool to report error handling code, i.e., error logging, such
as catch clauses, which are not logged and to improve the
code quality and help with failure diagnosis by adding a log
statement. Zhao et al. [15] introduced Log20, a performance-
aware tool to inject new logging statements to the source code
to disambiguate execution paths. Log20 introduces a logging
mechanism that does not consider developers’ logging habits
or concerns. Moreover, it does not provide suggestions for
logging descriptions. Zhu et al. [20] proposed LogAdvisor,
a learning-based framework, for automated logging prediction
which aims to learn the frequently occurring logging practices
1We use ‘suggestion’ and ‘prediction’ interchangeably.
automatically. Their method learns logging practices from
existing code repositories for exception and function return-
value check blocks by looking for textual and structural
features within these code blocks with logging statements. Jia
et al. [13] proposed an intention-aware log automation tool
called SmartLog, which uses an Intention Description Model to
explore the intention of existing logs, and Zhenhao et al. [27]
categorized six block-level logging locations.
Recently, Li et al. [18] showed duplicate logging statements
that are the outcome of shallow copy-pasting result in log-
related anti-patterns (i.e., issues). Although their research has a
negative connotation towards copy-pasted logging statements
from code clones, it simultaneously shows the potential of
code clones as a starting point for automated log suggestion
and improvement. In other words, by automating and enhanc-
ing the log statements in the clone pairs, we can expedite
the development process and avoid shallow copy-pasting that
developers tend to do. Additionally, by automation, we reduce
the risk of irregular and ad hoc developers’ logging practices,
e.g., forgetting to log in the ﬁrst place.
IV. RESEARCH APPROACH
Based on the ﬁndings of He et al.[21] in logging description
prediction based on edit distance [28], we hypothesize that
similar code snippets, i.e., code clones, follow similar log-
ging patterns which can be utilized for log statement location
and description prediction. Formally speaking, assuming set
CCMDi is the set of all code clones of Method Deﬁnition
MDi, if MDi has a log print statement (LPS), then its clones
also have LPSs:
∃LPSi ∈MDi =⇒∀MDj ∈CCMDi, ∃LPSj ∈MDj
To evaluate the hypothesis, we guide our research with the
following research objectives (ROs):
• RO1: Demonstrate whether code clones are consistent in
their logging statements.
• RO2: Propose an approach to utilize code clones for log
statement location prediction.
• RO3: Provide logging description suggestions based on
code clones and deep learning NLP models.
• RO4: Utilize clones for predicting other details of log
statements such as log verbosity level and variables.
Our research design comprises a preliminary data collection
phase, Stage 0, and is followed by four stages, Stages I-IV, to
address RO1-RO4, as illustrated in Figure 2. In the following,
we provide the details of our methodology and current results
for each RO.
A. RO1: Demonstrate whether code clones are consistent in
their logging statements and their log verbosity level.
Motivation. To enable code clones for log suggestion,
we ﬁrst require to compare their characteristics and show if
clone pairs follow similar logging patterns. Approach. For
this purpose, we select seven large-scale open-source Java
projects, i.e., Apache Hadoop, Zookeeper, CloudStack, HBase,
Hive, Camel, and ActiveMQ, based on the prior logging
Logging
characteristics of
code clones
Data collection
Source 
 code
Code  
repositories
Log location
prediction
Log description
prediction
Log verbosity and
variables prediction
Stage I
Stage II
Stage III
Stage IV
Stage 0
Match
RO1
Various
types
RO2
RO3
RO4
Log-aware
clone-detection
BLEU and
ROUGE scores
Shortcomings
resolved 
LSD suggestions
Log descriptions
from the clone pairs
Verbosity level from
the clone pairs
Mnemonic 
Done
Ongoing
Finding
Future work
Intermediate data
Clone pairs
Fig. 2: Research steps, including objectives, intermediate data, and ﬁndings.
research [11, 21]. These projects are well-logged, stable,
and well-used in the software engineering community, and
also they enable us to compare our results with prior work,
accordingly. We extract methods with logging statements and
then ﬁnd their clones. Evaluation. We evaluate the existence
of log statements, their verbosity levels, and clone types.
Results. The results show the majority of method clone
pairs are consistent in their logging statements and their log
verbosity levels also match to a high degree. Additionally, we
ﬁnd that the majority (in the range of 78% to 90%) of code
clones are of Types 3 and 4, while the code pairs are matching
in the existence of a logging statement. This observation
signiﬁes the effectiveness of code clones in suggesting
the location of log statements in methods. In other words,
although two snippets of clone pairs are syntactically different
to a high degree, they still follow similar logging patterns.
B. RO2: Propose an approach to utilize code clones for log
statement location prediction.
Motivation. Findings from RO1 show matching logging
statements between clone pairs and motivate enablement of
logging suggestions with code clones. The automated sugges-
tion approach can help developers in making logging decisions
and improve logging practices. Approach. We initially observe
and resolve two shortcomings of general-purpose clone de-
tectors to make them more suitable for log prediction and
reduce false positive and false negative cases [29]. We then
utilize the clone pairs for suggesting logging statements for the
methods which are missing an LPS by ﬁnding their clone pairs
with a logging statement (Stage II in Figure 2). Evaluation.
We evaluate the performance of our approach by measuring
Precision, Recall, F-Measure, and Balanced Accuracy (BA) on
the set of the seven selected projects. Results. Considering the
average of BA values, our log-aware clone detection approach,
LACCP, brings 15.60% improvement over Oreo [30] across the
experimented projects. With the higher accuracy that LACCP
brings, it enables us to provide more accurate clone-based log
statement suggestions.
C. RO3: Provide logging description suggestions based on
code clones and NLP models.
Motivation. Based on the experiment results for predicting
the location of logging statements in RO2 and the additional
available context from the clone pairs, i.e., the logging state-
ment description available from the original method, MDi,
we notice it is a valuable research effort to explore whether it
is also possible to predict the logging statements’ description
automatically. With satisfactory performance, an automated
tool that can predict the description of logging statements will
be a great aid, as it can expedite the software development
process and improve the quality of logging descriptions.
Approach. We base our method on the assumption that clone
pairs tend to have similar logging statement descriptions. This
assumption comes from the observations in predicting log
statements for clone pairs. As logging descriptions explain the
source code surrounding them, it is intuitive for similar code
snippets to have comparable logging descriptions. Based on
this assumption, we propose a deep learning-based method
that combines code clones with NLP learning approaches
(NLP CC’d). In particular, to generate the LSD for a logging
statement in MDj, we extract its corresponding code snippet
and leverage LACCP to locate its clone pairs. Laterally, the
NLP model provides next word suggestions for the LSDs
from the knowledge base available in the training set for each
project. Evaluation. To measure the accuracy of our method
in suggesting the log description, we utilize BLEU [22]
and ROUGE [23] scores. These scores are well-established
for validating the usefulness of an auto-generated text in
prior software engineering and machine learning research,
such as comment and code suggestion [31] and description
prediction [21]. Results. We experiment on seven open-source
Java systems, and our analysis shows that by utilizing log-
aware clone detection and NLP, our hybrid model, (NLP
CC’d), achieves 40.86% higher performance on BLEU and
ROUGE scores for predicting LSDs when compared to the
prior research [21], and achieves 6.41% improvement over the
No-NLP version [29].
D. RO4: Utilize code clones for predicting other details of
log statements such as log verbosity level and variables.
Motivation. Besides log statement location and its LSD, pre-
diction of other details of log statements such as Log verbosity
level (LVL) and its variables (VAR) are useful research efforts
and the focus of prior research [32, 33, 34], as they further
help the developers in more systematic logging and resolve
suboptimal choices of log levels and variables [34]. Approach.
Log-aware clone detection, LACCP, is reasonably extendable
to predict LVL and VAR alongside the LSD suggestion. Since
we have access to the source code of the method that we are
predicting the logging statement for and its clone pair code
snippet, a reasonable starting point is to suggest the same
LVL as of its clone pair, and then augment it with additional
learning approaches such as [32, 33] for more sophisticated
LVL prediction. For VAR prediction, our approach can be
augmented with deep learning [35] and static analysis of the
code snippet under consideration [36] to include log variables
suggestions along with the predicted LSD. Preliminary eval-
uation and results. Our preliminary analysis for the evaluated
projects shows that code clones match in their verbosity levels
in the range of (92, 97)%, which conﬁrms that using the
verbosity level of the clone pair, MDi, is a good starting point
for log verbosity level suggestions for MDj. We are pursuing
RO4 as our future work and will provide additional results and
ﬁndings subsequently.
V. DISCUSSION
In this section, we compare and discuss the signiﬁcance of
our approach in relation to other existing log prediction and
suggestion techniques.
Method-level log prediction rationale. Although clone
detection (and subsequently, log statement prediction) can be
performed in different granularity levels, such as ﬁles, classes,
methods, and code blocks, however, method-level clones ap-
pear to be the most favorable points of re-factoring for all clone
types [37]. We emphasize that our approach also includes all of
the logging statements which are nested inside more prelimi-
nary code blocks within method deﬁnitions, viz., logging state-
ments nested inside code blocks, such as if-else and try-catch.
Comparison. Orthogonal to our research, prior efforts such
as [20], [13], and [27] have proposed learning approaches
for logging statements’ location prediction, i.e., where to
log. The approaches in [20], [13] are focused on error log-
ging statements (ELS), e.g., log statements in catch clauses,
and are implemented and evaluated on C# projects. Li et
al. [27] provide log location suggestions by classifying the
logged locations into six code-block categories. Different from
these works, our approach does not distinguish between error
and normal logging statements, is evaluated on open-source
Java projects, and leverages logging statement suggestions at
method-level by observing logging patterns in similar code
snippets, i.e., clone pairs.
Signiﬁcance. Prior approaches [20, 27] rely on extracting
features and training a learning model on logged and unlogged
code snippets. Thus, they can predict if a new unlogged code
snippet needs a logging statement by mapping its features
to the learned ones. Although these methods initially appear
similar to our approach in extracting log-aware features from
code snippets [24], we believe our approach has an edge over
the prior work. Because we also have access to the clone pair
of the code under development, i.e., MDi in (MDi, MDj),
this enables us to obtain and leverage the additional data from
MDi to predict other aspects of log statements, e.g., LSD,
which the prior work is unable to do. The signiﬁcance of our
approach becomes apparent in LSD prediction as we utilize
the LSD of the clone pair as a starting point for suggesting
the LSD of the new code snippet. Thus, our approach not only
complements the prior work in providing logging suggestions
for developers as they develop new code snippets, but it also
has an edge over them by providing additional context for
further prediction of LPS details, such as the LSD and the
log’s verbosity level.
VI. SUMMARY OF CONTRIBUTIONS
The contributions that become available as the outcomes
of our research are as follows: 1 In RO1, we perform an ex-
perimental study on logging characteristics of code clones and
show the potential for utilizing clone pairs for logging sugges-
tions. 2 In RO2, we introduce a log-aware clone detection tool
(LACCP) [24] for log statements’ ‘location’ prediction, and
resolve two clone detection shortcomings for log prediction
and provide experimentation on seven projects and compare it
with general-purpose state-of-the-art clone detector, Oreo [30].
3 In RO3, we initially show the natural characteristics of
software logs and that enables us to utilize our ﬁndings for
the application of NLP for LSD prediction [38]. We then
propose a deep-learning NLP approach, NLP CC’d, to work
in collaboration with LACCP to automatically suggest log
statements’ descriptions. We calculate the BLEU and ROUGE
scores for our auto-generated log statements’ descriptions by
considering different sequences of LSD tokens, and compare
our performance with the prior work [21].
4
Finally, as
future work in RO4, we investigate the log verbosity level
and variables prediction based on the information available
through code clone pairs.
Thus far, our research ﬁndings have been published for RO1
and RO2 in ACM Symposium on Applied Computing (ACM
SAC) [24] and IEEE/ACM Conference on Mining Software
Repositories (MSR) [38], respectively. We have also evaluated
the trade-offs associated with the cost of logging statements in
our paper accepted in the International Symposium on Reliable
Distributed Systems (SRDS) [39]. Lastly, the research paper
summarizing our contributions for RO3 is currently under
review [29].
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The process of software logging is currently manual and
lacks a uniﬁed guideline for choosing the location and content
of log statements. In this research, with the goal of enhancing
log statement automation, we present a study on the location
and description of logging statements in open-source Java
projects by applying code clones and deep-learning NLP mod-
els. We compare the performance of our proposed approaches,
LACCP and NLP CC’d, for log location and description
prediction, and show their superior performance compared
to prior work. As our future work in RO4, we will provide
automated suggestions for other details of the LPS, such as its
verbosity level and variables.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Bertero, M. Roy, C. Sauvanaud, and G. Tr´edan, “Experience re-
port: Log mining using natural language processing and application
to anomaly detection,” in 28th International Symposium on Software
Reliability Engineering (ISSRE 2017), 2017, p. 10p.
[2] W. Xu, L. Huang, A. Fox, D. Patterson, and M. I. Jordan, “Detecting
large-scale system problems by mining console logs,” in Proceedings
of the ACM SIGOPS 22nd symposium on Operating systems principles.
ACM, 2009, pp. 117–132.
[3] Q. Fu, J.-G. Lou, Y. Wang, and J. Li, “Execution anomaly detection in
distributed systems through unstructured log analysis,” in Data Mining,
2009. ICDM’09. Ninth IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, 2009,
pp. 149–158.
[4] A. A. Makanju, A. N. Zincir-Heywood, and E. E. Milios, “Clustering
event logs using iterative partitioning,” in Proceedings of the 15th ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining, ser. KDD ’09.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2009, pp. 1255–
1264. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1557019.1557154
[5] R. Vaarandi and M. Pihelgas, “Logcluster-A data clustering and pattern
mining algorithm for event logs,” in Network and Service Management
(CNSM), 2015 11th International Conference on. IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–7.
[6] A. Hassan, D. Martin, P. Flora, P. Mansﬁeld, and D. Dietz, “An industrial
case study of customizing operational proﬁles using log compression,”
in 2008 ACM/IEEE 30th International Conference on Software Engi-
neering.
IEEE, 2008, pp. 713–723.
[7] W. Shang, M. Nagappan, and A. E. Hassan, “Studying the relationship
between logging characteristics and the code quality of platform soft-
ware,” Empirical Software Engineering, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 1–27, 2015.
[8] L. Tang, T. Li, and C.-S. Perng, “Logsig: Generating system events
from raw textual logs,” in Proceedings of the 20th ACM International
Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, ser. CIKM
’11.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2011, pp. 785–794. [Online].
Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2063576.2063690
[9] “The Data-to-Everything Platform Built for the Cloud,” https://www.
splunk.com/, 2021.
[10] “Elasticsearch, the heart of the Elastic Stack,” https://www.elastic.co/
elasticsearch/, 2021.
[11] B. Chen and Z. M. J. Jiang, “Characterizing logging practices in
java-based open source software projects–a replication study in apache
software foundation,” Empirical Software Engineering, vol. 22, no. 1,
pp. 330–374, 2017.
[12] “The Apache Software Foundation. logging services project,” http:
//logging.apache.org/.
[13] Z. Jia, S. Li, X. Liu, X. Liao, and Y. Liu, “Smartlog: Place error log
statement by deep understanding of log intention,” in Software Analysis,
Evolution and Reengineering (SANER), 2018 IEEE 25th International
Conference on.
IEEE, 2018, pp. 61–71.
[14] D. Yuan, S. Park, P. Huang, Y. Liu, M. M. Lee, X. Tang, Y. Zhou, and
S. Savage, “Be conservative: enhancing failure diagnosis with proactive
logging,” in Presented as part of the 10th {USENIX} Symposium on
Operating Systems Design and Implementation ({OSDI} 12), 2012, pp.
293–306.
[15] X. Zhao, K. Rodrigues, Y. Luo, M. Stumm, D. Yuan, and Y. Zhou,
“Log20: Fully automated optimal placement of log printing statements
under speciﬁed overhead threshold,” in Proceedings of the 26th Sympo-
sium on Operating Systems Principles.
ACM, 2017, pp. 565–581.
[16] R. Ding, H. Zhou, J.-G. Lou, H. Zhang, Q. Lin, Q. Fu, D. Zhang,
and T. Xie, “Log2: A cost-aware logging mechanism for perfor-
mance diagnosis,” in 2015 {USENIX} Annual Technical Conference
({USENIX}{ATC} 15), 2015, pp. 139–150.
[17] M. Hassani, W. Shang, E. Shihab, and N. Tsantalis, “Studying and
detecting log-related issues,” Empirical Software Engineering, vol. 23,
no. 6, pp. 3248–3280, 2018.
[18] Z. Li, T.-H. P. Chen, J. Yang, and W. Shang, “Studying duplicate logging
statements and their relationships with code clones,” IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering, 2021.
[19] Q. Fu, J. Zhu, W. Hu, J.-G. Lou, R. Ding, Q. Lin, D. Zhang, and T. Xie,
“Where do developers log? an empirical study on logging practices in
industry,” in Companion Proceedings of the 36th International Confer-
ence on Software Engineering.
ACM, 2014, pp. 24–33.
[20] J. Zhu, P. He, Q. Fu, H. Zhang, M. R. Lyu, and D. Zhang, “Learning
to log: Helping developers make informed logging decisions,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 37th International Conference on Software Engineering-
Volume 1.
IEEE Press, 2015, pp. 415–425.
[21] P. He, Z. Chen, S. He, and M. R. Lyu, “Characterizing the natural
language descriptions in software logging statements,” in Proceedings
of the 33rd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering.
ACM, 2018, pp. 178–189.
[22] K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, and W.-J. Zhu, “Bleu: a method
for automatic evaluation of machine translation,” in Proceedings of
the 40th annual meeting on association for computational linguistics.
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2002, pp. 311–318.
[23] C.-Y. Lin, “Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries,”
Text Summarization Branches Out, 2004.
[24] S. Gholamian and P. A. Ward, “Logging statements’ prediction based on
source code clones,” in Proceedings of the 35th Annual ACM Symposium
on Applied Computing, 2020, pp. 82–91.
[25] H. Sajnani, V. Saini, J. Svajlenko, C. K. Roy, and C. V. Lopes,
“Sourcerercc: scaling code clone detection to big-code,” in Software
Engineering (ICSE), 2016 IEEE/ACM 38th International Conference on.
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1157–1168.
[26] D. Rattan, R. Bhatia, and M. Singh, “Software clone detection: A
systematic review,” Information and Software Technology, vol. 55, no. 7,
pp. 1165–1199, 2013.
[27] Z. Li, T.-H. Chen, and W. Shang, “Where shall we log? studying and
suggesting logging locations in code blocks,” in 2020 35th IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 361–372.
[28] E. S. Ristad and P. N. Yianilos, “Learning string-edit distance,” IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 20,
no. 5, pp. 522–532, 1998.
[29] S. Gholamian and P. A. Ward, “Borrowing from Similar Code: A Deep
Learning NLP-Based Approach for Log Statement Automation.”
[30] V. Saini, F. Farmahinifarahani, Y. Lu, P. Baldi, and C. V. Lopes, “Oreo:
Detection of clones in the twilight zone,” in Proceedings of the 2018
26th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference
and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering, 2018, pp.
354–365.
[31] M. Allamanis, E. T. Barr, P. Devanbu, and C. Sutton, “A survey
of machine learning for big code and naturalness,” ACM Computing
Surveys (CSUR), vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 1–37, 2018.
[32] H. Li, W. Shang, and A. E. Hassan, “Which log level should developers
choose for a new logging statement?” Empirical Software Engineering,
vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 1684–1716, 2017.
[33] H. Anu, J. Chen, W. Shi, J. Hou, B. Liang, and B. Qin, “An approach
to recommendation of verbosity log levels based on logging intention,”
in 2019 IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance and
Evolution (ICSME).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 125–134.
[34] Z. Li, H. Li, T.-H. P. Chen, and W. Shang, “Deeplv: Suggesting log
levels using ordinal based neural networks,” in 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 2021,
pp. 1461–1472.
[35] Z. Liu, X. Xia, D. Lo, Z. Xing, A. E. Hassan, and S. Li, “Which variables
should i log?” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 2019.
[36] D. Yuan, J. Zheng, S. Park, Y. Zhou, and S. Savage, “Improving software
diagnosability via log enhancement,” ACM Transactions on Computer
Systems (TOCS), vol. 30, no. 1, p. 4, 2012.
[37] E. Kodhai and S. Kanmani, “Method-level code clone detection through
lwh (light weight hybrid) approach,” Journal of Software Engineering
Research and Development, vol. 2, no. 1, p. 12, 2014.
[38] S. Gholamian and P. A. Ward, “On the Naturalness and Localness of
Software Logs,” in 2021 IEEE/ACM 18th International Conference on
Mining Software Repositories (MSR), 2021, pp. 155–166.
[39] ——, “What Distributed Systems Say: A Study of Seven Spark Applica-
tion Logs,” in The 40th International Symposium on Reliable Distributed
Systems (SRDS), September 2021.
