Title: Validation of a Zero-Shot Learning Natural Language Processing Tool for Data Abstraction from Unstructured Healthcare Data
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2308.00107v1
--------------------------------------------------

*correspondence: basil.kaufmann@mountsinai.org
Validation of a Zero-Shot Learning Natural Language Processing Tool
for Data Abstraction from Unstructured Healthcare Data
Preprint, compiled August 2, 2023
Basil Kaufmann
ID 1, 2∗, Dallin Busby
ID 1, Chandan Krushna Das
ID 1, Neeraja Tillu
ID 1, Mani Menon1,
Ashutosh K. Tewari
ID 1, and Michael A. Gorin
ID 1
1Milton and Carroll Petrie Department of Urology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, USA
2Department of Urology, University Hospital of Zurich, Switzerland
Abstract
Objectives: To describe the development and validation of a zero-shot learning natural language processing
(NLP) tool for abstracting data from unstructured text contained within PDF documents, such as those fre-
quently found within electronic health record systems. Materials and Methods: A data abstraction tool based
on the GPT-3.5 model from OpenAI was developed and compared to three physician human abstractors in
terms of time to task completion and accuracy for abstracting data on 14 unique variables from a set of 199
de-identified radical prostatectomy pathology reports. The reports were processed by the software tool in vec-
torized and scanned formats to establish the impact of optical character recognition on data abstraction. The
tool was assessed for superiority for data abstraction speed and non-inferiority for accuracy. Results: The
human abstractors required a mean of 101 seconds (95% CI, 97 to 104 seconds) per report for data abstraction,
with times varying from 15 to 284 seconds. In comparison, the software tool required a mean of 12.8 second
(95% CI, 12.3 to 13.3 seconds) to process the vectorized reports and a mean of 15.8 seconds (95% CI 15.1 to
16.5 seconds) to process the scanned reports (P < 0.001 for all paired comparisons). The overall accuracies of
the three human abstractors were 94.7% (95% CI, 93.8 to 95.5%), 97.8% (95% CI, 97.2 to 98.3%), and 96.4%
(95% CI, 95.6 to 97%) for the combined set of 2786 datapoints. The software tool had an overall accuracy of
94.2% (95% CI, 93.3 to 94.9%) for the vectorized reports, proving to be non-inferior to the human abstractors
at a margin of -10% (α=0.025). The tool had a slightly lower accuracy of 88.7% (95% CI 87.5 to 89.9%) using
the scanned reports, proving to be non-inferiority to 2 out of 3 human abstractors. Conclusion: The developed
zero-shot learning NLP tool affords researchers comparable levels of accuracy to that of human abstractors,
with significant time savings benefits. Because of the lack of need for task-specific model training, the devel-
oped tool is highly generalizable and can be used for a wide variety of data abstraction tasks, even outside the
field of medicine.
Keywords data abstraction · natural language processing · large language models
1
Introduction
The advent of electronic health records (EHRs) has transformed
clinical research by offering access to vast amounts of patient
data. An essential part of EHRs are free-text fields. Unlike
their structured counterparts, free-text fields offer a nuanced
and comprehensive perspective on individual patient cases, cap-
turing a depth of clinical information that is often not found in
structured data. With that said, the use of unstructured data in
clinical research is fraught with challenges[1–3]. Chief among
them is the labor-intensive task of data extraction. Addition-
ally, the lack of standardization in free-text entries, due to their
subjective and individualistic nature, complicates data aggre-
gation and comparison across different records or healthcare
providers. Furthermore, inconsistencies in the quality and com-
pleteness of data further heighten this challenge for researchers.
This has prompted the need for sophisticated natural language
processing (NLP) techniques for data abstraction, but this has
the downside of introducing the potential for misinterpretation
or omission of vital information[4–7].
Recent advancements in artificial intelligence technologies,
particularly the introduction of large language models (LLMs)
with zero-shot learning capabilities, offer a promising solution
to the abstraction of unstructured healthcare data[8–12]. Zero-
shot learning is a concept in machine learning where a model
is able to accurately classify data into categories that it has not
previously encountered during its training phase. Thus, zero-
shot learning makes it possible to forego the highly technical
and time-consuming work of first training a model for a given
data abstraction task.
Herein, we describe the development of an LLM-based tool that
utilizes zero-shot learning to abstract unstructured healthcare
data contained within Portable Document Format (PDF) files.
Following successful development of the tool, we benchmarked
its performance in terms of time to task completion and accu-
racy for abstracting data from a set of radical prostatectomy
pathology reports. We compare the performance of this tool to
three physician data abstractors.
2
Material and Methods
Software Development. A zero-shot learning tool for data ab-
straction from PDF documents was developed using Python
programming language version 3.10.
The completed tool
incorporates functions from several third-party libraries in-
cluding PyMuPDF for text extraction [13], TensorFlow Hub
Publication doi
Preprint doi
arXiv:2308 0
Preprint
2
(Google DeepMind, London, UK) for loading a universal sen-
tence encoder for creating semantic embedding from the ex-
tracted data[14], Scikit-learn for performing nearest neighbor
searches[15], and an advanced programming interface (API)
from OpenAI (San Francisco, CA) for answer generation[16].
The software relies on the use of an API key provided by Ope-
nAI that serves as an authentication token for accessing the
“text-davinci-003” LLM. This model is based on GPT-3.5 and
has been optimized for instruction-following tasks such as data
abstraction[17].
Figure 1 provides a graphic representation of the steps followed
by the software to perform the data abstraction task. First, the
program extracts text from one or more PDF files specified by
the user and removes any unwanted characters or white spaces.
The extracted text is next divided into smaller chunks and pro-
cessed by the sentence encoder model [14]. This step gener-
ates numerical embeddings of the text and creates an index of
the data using a nearest neighbor algorithm. The software then
performs a semantic search of the embedded data and finds rel-
evant chunks of text based on the user’s input question. Next,
a prompt is formulated for the text-davinci-003 model, incor-
porating the relevant text segments and the user’s question of
interest. The API returns the model’s response, and this text is
cleaned and placed in an Excel spreadsheet (Microsoft Corpo-
ration, Redwood, WA) for downstream data cleaning, standard-
ization, and analysis.
Because the developed tool uses zero-shot learning for data ab-
straction, no training steps are required for its implementation.
The user is only required to provide a prompt written in plain
English to query against a provided set of PDF documents. For
example, a researcher may have a series of articles from which
they are interested in abstracting the name of each article’s first
author. The user can prompt the tool to ‘Query the input files
and return the name of the first author of each article.’ The re-
sult of this will be an Excel file with a column containing author
names and an identifier linking the row to its respective input
PDF file. The code underlying our tool is publicly available
on GitHub (https://github.com/kaufmannb/PDF-Extractor). In
addition, we have made available an executable file that re-
searchers without computer coding experience can use imme-
diately for data abstraction (https://rebrand.ly/5sxu4rn).
Datasets. The performance of the developed NLP tool was
evaluated using a publicly available set of 199 de-identified rad-
ical prostatectomy pathology reports from The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) program [18]. Although provided in PDF for-
mat, these pathology reports were previously printed and then
scanned by the submitting sites. To mitigate potential errors
introduced by optical character recognition (OCR), the reports
were first converted back to a “vectorized” format as they orig-
inally appeared in the EHR. This was performed by export-
ing each document into .docx format using Adobe Acrobat Pro
(Adobe, Inc., San Jose, CA) and then manually correcting any
introduced errors in Microsoft Word.
The corrected reports
were saved back into PDF format, maintaining the integrity of
the original formatting and layout (Supplementary Figure 1).
These vectorized reports served as the input for our main round
of data abstraction by the NLP tool. Additionally, a secondary
analysis was performed using the original scanned reports to
quantify the impact of OCR errors on the tool’s performance.
Figure 1: Workflow of the developed zero-shot learning NLP
tool for data abstraction from unstructured text contained with
PDF documents. Multiple PDF files (such as scanned pathol-
ogy reports), are processed from a designated input folder and
converted into text. Based on the user’s question, the tool ap-
plies an AI algorithm to isolate specific information. Finally, it
outputs an Excel file containing the cleaned and extracted data
into a predetermined output folder.
Assessment of the Data Abstraction Tool.
Following com-
pleted development of the data abstraction tool and generation
of the testing datasets, we benchmark its performance against
three human data abstractors (all of whom are physicians) in
terms of time to task completion and accuracy of data abstrac-
tion.
The human abstractors and software tool were asked
to perform the identical task of abstracting 14 variables from
the pathology reports (Table 1). These variables were selected
based on their clinical relevance and alignment with the proto-
col for examination of radical prostatectomy specimens by the
College of American Pathologists [19].
Responses from the three human abstractors were collected us-
ing a custom-built website that displayed each pathology report
in a PDF viewer, accompanied by an input form designed to
capture the abstracted data. Each variable featured a specific
set of dropdown answer choices, ensuring that only predefined
answers could be selected, thereby precluding the possibility of
Preprint
3
Table 1: List of abstracted variables.
random or extraneous responses. Responses, along with pro-
cessing times, were logged for each abstracted report.
To extract data using the NLP tool, the following prompt was
utilized: “Complete the following list of variables with the
corresponding values extracted from the given pathology re-
port: pT-Stage, Primary Gleason Grade, Secondary Gleason
Grade, Gleason Sum Score, Tertiary Gleason Pattern or Grade,
Extraprostatic Extension, Seminal Vesical Invasion, Lympho-
vascular Invasion, Perineural Invasion, Surgical Margin Sta-
tus, pN-Stage, Number of Lymph Nodes Removed, Number
of Lymph Nodes Involved by Cancer, Specific Prostate Weight
in g.” Additionally, the program was instructed to “Compose a
comprehensive reply to the query using the search results given.
If the search results mention multiple subjects with the same
name, create separate answers for each. Only include informa-
tion found in the results and don’t add any additional informa-
tion. Make sure the answer is correct and don’t output false
content. If the text does not relate to the query, simply state
‘Found Nothing’. Ignore outlier search results which has noth-
ing to do with the question. Only answer what is asked. The
answer should be short and concise.”
The mean time required for data abstraction was calculated for
the three human abstractors as well as the NLP tool using the
two sets of PDF reports. Similarly, the accuracy of data ab-
straction was calculated for these groups in terms of overall
accuracy for the combined set of datapoints (14 variables x 199
reports = 2,786 datapoints) and at the individual variable level.
For this analysis, the ground truth (i.e. the correct answer for
each data point) was established from the individual responses
provided by the human abstractors. The ground truth response
was defined when there was agreement between at least two of
the data abstractors. In cases with any degree of disagreement
among the abstractors, the report was re-examined and if a clear
error was identified on part of the dissenting abstractor, the ma-
jority consensus was upheld as the ground truth. However, if
the re-examination did not reveal an obvious error, further dis-
Figure 2: Violin plot showing the distribution of times required
for data abstraction.
cussions between the abstractors were held until consensus was
reached. In instances where agreement between the three ab-
stractors could not be achieved, a fourth reviewer was involved.
Statistical Analysis. Differences in data abstraction times were
assessed for statistical significance using the paired Student’s t-
test. Comparisons were separately made between the NLP tool
and each human abstractor for the two sets of PDF reports. Ad-
ditionally, the performance of the NLP was compared to itself
in a paired fashion using the two datasets. For comparisons of
superiority, a P-value of <0.05 was considered statistically sig-
nificant. A similar paired analysis was performed to assess the
accuracy of data abstraction using the McNemar’s test of paired
proportions. The accuracy of the NLP tool was assessed for
non-inferiority to the human abstractors using a non-inferiority
margin of -10% (α = 0.025). Data analysis and visualization
was performed using R version 4.0.2 (R Foundation for Statis-
tical Computing).
3
Results
As a group, the human abstractors required a mean of 101 sec-
onds (95% CI, 97 to 104 seconds) per report for data abstrac-
tion, with times varying from 15 to 284 seconds. Assessed indi-
vidually, the three human abstractors had data collection times
of 104 seconds (95% CI 99 to 109 seconds), 94 seconds (95%
CI 89 to 100 seconds), and 103 seconds (95% CI 96 to 110), re-
spectively. In comparison, the software tool required a mean of
12.8 second (95% CI, 12.3 to 13.3 seconds) to process the vec-
torized reports and a mean of 15.8 seconds (95% CI 15.1 to 16.5
seconds) to process the scanned reports (P < 0.001 for all paired
comparisons). The NLP tool required significantly less time to
process the vectorized reports than the scanned documents (P <
0.001). Our observations with respect to data abstraction times
are highlighted in Figure 2.
Preprint
4
Compared to the ground truth, the overall accuracies of the
three human abstractors were 94.7% (95% CI, 93.8 to 95.5%),
97.8% (95% CI, 97.2 to 98.3%), and 96.4% (95% CI, 95.6 to
97%) for the combined set of 2786 datapoints. In contrast, the
software tool achieved an overall accuracy of 94.2% (95% CI,
93.3 to 94.9%) for the vectorized reports and 88.7% (95% CI
87.5 to 89.9%) for the scanned reports. The overall accuracy of
the tool for abstracting data from the vectorized reports proved
to be non-inferior to each of the three human abstractors (Sup-
plementary Figure 2). For the scanned reports, the tool was
non-inferior to 2 out of 3 human abstractors. A significantly
higher degree of accuracy was achieved by the tool for the task
of overall data abstraction when using the vectorized reports
(Supplementary Figure 3).
Two of the three human abstractors achieved an accuracy of
>90% for each of the 14 individual variables. The third abstrac-
tor achieved this level of accuracy for 12 out of 14 variables. In
contrast, the software achieved >90% accuracy for 11 variables
using the vectorized reports whereas this level of accuracy was
achieved for only 8 parameters when using the scanned reports.
Figure 3 provides a summary of the accuracies achieved by the
three human abstractors as well as the NLP tool using both
datasets.
4
Discussion
The present study explored the time efficiency and accuracy of
a zero-shot learning NLP tool for abstracting data from PDF
pathology reports of radical prostatectomy specimens. Our data
show that the tool is capable of achieving a 7-fold increase in
processing speed compared to human abstractors while main-
taining an overall abstraction accuracy of 94%. Notably, the
tool was non-inferior to the three humans at a -10% margin
for the overall task of abstracting 2,786 datapoints from vec-
torized PDF documents. Although the tool performed slightly
worse using the dataset of scanned reports, non-inferiority was
achieved relative to two out of the three human abstractors. The
performance of the software tool varied across the 14 variables
examined, reaching an accuracy of over 90% accuracy in 11 out
of 14 variables. However, the tool struggled with certain vari-
ables such as "Tertiary Gleason Pattern" or "Number of Lymph
Nodes Removed,” achieving accuracies in the range of 83%.
Previous research has employed various machine learning al-
gorithms to parse non-structured data from EHR systems [6, 9,
20–29]. However, these tools have uniformly required complex
supervised training methods. This requirement is highly labor
intensive and limits the number of variables one can practi-
cally extract. Furthermore, the reliance on supervised and semi-
supervised learning methods limits generalizability of tools to
unfamiliar sources of data. These limitations were evident in
a study by McCowan et al. [23] who used a rule-based and
support vector machine classifiers to extract information on tu-
mor (T) and nodal (N) stages from lung cancer pathology re-
ports. This study required a training set of 710 reports and yet
only achieved accuracy levels of 74% and 86% for T and N
stage classification, respectively. Abedian et al. [20] looked
the broaden the capability of NLP tools for abstracting can-
cer staging data from a wider range of cancer types, but this
required and enormous training data from 555,681 pathology
reports and was still only limited to four outputs (ICD10 code
and T, N, and metastasis stage). While other more advanced
tools, such as DeepPhe, have been specifically engineered to
widen the breath of data abstraction capabilities, such tools still
require supervised training methods and/or have seen only lim-
ited validated in a handful of cancer types [26].
Compared to the tools mentioned above, our method utilizes
a zero-shot learning strategy, which requires no task-specific
training. This gives our tool the capacity to abstract data on
any topic from a body of PDF documents. As urologists, the
application described in this report was based on clinical data
abstraction from radical prostatectomy reports, but the devel-
oped tool could be employed for any number of applications
within the field of medicine. Additionally, our tool has the po-
tential be used across a broad range of industries that relay on
insights from data contained in free-text format.
For the development of the software, we specifically utilized the
publicly available text-davinci-003 model from OpenAI’s GPT-
3 family. Compared to other iterations of GPT-3, the model
used in our study was previously shown to excel in tasks like
Named Entity Recognition (NER) to identify and categorize
key information from unstructured text [17]. This study also
showed that the text-davinci-003 model was particularly well
suited for interpreting complex sentences and phrases, as shown
in tasks like Part-of-speech Tagging [30] and Semantic Match-
ing [31].
The prompt crafted by the user and sent to text-davinci-003
model is crucial for achieving the desired output. GPT is highly
sensitive to the form and choice of wording, and there are even
specialists, known as "prompt engineers", who excel in this task
[32, 33]. An example of this can be found in a recent study that
evaluated the specific manner in which multiple choice ques-
tions are presented to an LLM can significantly impact the ac-
curacy of response [34]. These authors found that simply ask-
ing multiple choice questions of the model in the usual manner
resulted in an accuracy of 55.8% when indeterminate responses
were censored and 36.1% when indeterminate responses were
included on the United States Medical Licensing Examination
Step 1. When the users next asked the model to provide a ratio-
nale for each answer choice, the accuracy increased to 64.5%
when indeterminate responses were censored and 41.2% when
indeterminate responses were included.
While our model was highly accurate for the abstraction of 11
of the selected variables, more modest results were achieved for
the remaining 3. As described by Zheng et al. [35], the majority
of incorrect responses from LLMs can be grouped into four cat-
egories of error: (1) comprehension, (2) factualness, (3) speci-
ficity, and (4) inference. In errors of comprehension, the model
does not fully understand the context or the intent of the ques-
tion or the information in the report, whereas for errors of fac-
tualness the model recalls incorrect or outdated information. In
terms of specificity, these errors occur because the model does
not provide enough information that is relevant to the question
to derive a useful answer. For example if it should extract the
Gleason score 8, it answers with “high” instead of providing the
specific number. Finally, for inference errors, the model might
have all the necessary information to answer a question, but it
fails to “reason” with the facts effectively to arrive at the correct
answer.
Preprint
5
Figure 3: Accuracy of data abstraction by the three humans and NLP tool.
The tool’s performance is not solely dependent on the GPT
component or prompt generation. In the application selected for
our tool, parsing PDFs is a critical aspect of the process. Vari-
ous Python libraries are available for PDF parsing, but their ef-
ficacy can vary, potentially leading to data loss or errors during
the conversion from PDF to text. Particularly, data in complex
layouts or tabular formats might be misinterpreted. We found
in our sub-analysis of the scanned reports, that OCR made a
difference in overall accuracy of 5.5%, leading to a decrease in
performance of the NLP tool to 88.7%.
Despite the challenges mentioned, we feel the developed tool
represents a significant advancement in the ability for re-
searchers to abstract data without the need for individual NLP
model creation or training. We feel that if vectorized PDFs or
improved OCR and text extraction methods are utilized with
carefully crafted prompts specific to individual variables, the
error rate achieved would balance well against the gain of 7-
fold improvement in abstraction efficiency, freeing human ab-
stractors to perform more critical research tasks. We should
note, however, that the tool developed for this research report is
not quite ready for immediate use in clinical practice, as it does
not include end-to-end encryption which is required to meet
the standards of the United States Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act (HIPAA) or the General Data Protec-
tion Regulation (GDPR) of the European Union.
5
Conclusion
The presented zero-shot learning NLP tool affords researchers
comparable levels of accuracy to that of human abstractors,
with significant time savings benefits. Because our tool does
not require task-specific training, it can be adopted for a lim-
itless number of data abstraction tasks, including applications
outside the field of medicine. Continued refinement, particu-
larly in terms of optical character recognition (OCR) capabili-
ties, may enhance its practical use, speed, and degree of accu-
racy.
Preprint
6
6
Acknowledgements
The research was supported by a grant from the Swiss Cancer
League (Krebsliga Schweiz), Swiss Urological Society, and the
Menon Family Foundation.
References
[1] Maryam Y Garza, Tremaine Williams, Sahiti Myneni,
Susan H Fenton, Songthip Ounpraseuth, Zhuopei Hu,
Jeannette Lee, Jessica Snowden, Meredith N Zozus, and
Anita C Walden.
Measuring and controlling medical
record abstraction (mra) error rates in an observational
study. BMC Medical Research Methodology, 22(1):227,
2022. ISSN 1471-2288.
[2] Hyoun-Joong Kong. Managing unstructured big data in
healthcare system. Healthcare informatics research, 25
(1):1–2, 2019.
[3] Brock Polnaszek, Andrea Gilmore-Bykovskyi, Melissa
Hovanes,
Rachel Roiland,
Patrick Ferguson,
Roger
Brown, and Amy JH Kind. Overcoming the challenges of
unstructured data in multi-site, electronic medical record-
based abstraction. Medical care, 54(10):e65, 2016.
[4] Hadeel Alzoubi, Raid Alzubi, Naeem Ramzan, Daune
West, Tawfik Al-Hadhrami, and Mamoun Alazab. A re-
view of automatic phenotyping approaches using elec-
tronic health records.
Electronics, 8(11):1235, 2019.
ISSN 2079-9292.
[5] Benjamin T Miller,
Aldo Fafaj,
Luciano Tastaldi,
Hemasat Alkhatib, Samuel Zolin, Raha AlMarzooqi,
Chao Tu, Diya Alaedeen, Ajita S Prabhu, and David M
Krpata.
Capturing surgical data: Comparing a quality
improvement registry to natural language processing and
manual chart review. Journal of Gastrointestinal Surgery,
26(7):1490–1494, 2022. ISSN 1091-255X.
[6] Guergana K Savova, Ioana Danciu, Folami Alamudun,
Timothy Miller, Chen Lin, Danielle S Bitterman, Geor-
gia Tourassi, and Jeremy L Warner. Use of natural lan-
guage processing to extract clinical cancer phenotypes
from electronic medical records. Cancer research, 79(21):
5463–5470, 2019. ISSN 0008-5472.
[7] Seyedmostafa Sheikhalishahi, Riccardo Miotto, Joel T
Dudley, Alberto Lavelli, Fabio Rinaldi, and Venet Os-
mani. Natural language processing of clinical notes on
chronic diseases: systematic review. JMIR medical infor-
matics, 7(2):e12239, 2019.
[8] Alexander Dunn,
John Dagdelen,
Nicholas Walker,
Sanghoon Lee, Andrew S Rosen, Gerbrand Ceder, Kristin
Persson, and Anubhav Jain.
Structured information
extraction from complex scientific text with fine-tuned
large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.05238,
2022.
[9] Sami-Ramzi
Leyh-Bannurah,
Zhe
Tian,
Pierre
I
Karakiewicz, Ulrich Wolffgang, Guido Sauter, Mar-
git Fisch, Dirk Pehrke, Hartwig Huland, Markus Graefen,
and Lars Budäus.
Deep learning for natural language
processing in urology:
State-of-the-art automated ex-
traction of detailed pathologic prostate cancer data from
narratively written electronic health records. JCO clinical
cancer informatics, 2:1–9, 2018. ISSN 2473-4276.
[10] Bernardino Romera-Paredes and Philip Torr. An embar-
rassingly simple approach to zero-shot learning. In In-
ternational conference on machine learning, pages 2152–
2161. PMLR.
[11] Xiaohong Sun, Jinan Gu, and Hongying Sun. Research
progress of zero-shot learning. Applied Intelligence, 51:
3600–3614, 2021. ISSN 0924-669X.
[12] Wen-wai Yim, Meliha Yetisgen, William P Harris, and
Sharon W Kwan.
Natural language processing in on-
cology: a review. JAMA oncology, 2(6):797–804, 2016.
ISSN 2374-2437.
[13] Pymupdf.
version
1.22.3.
retrieved
from
https://github.com/pymupdf/pymupdf, .
[14] Daniel Cer, Yinfei Yang, Sheng-yi Kong, Nan Hua,
Nicole Limtiaco, Rhomni St John, Noah Constant, Mario
Guajardo-Cespedes, Steve Yuan, and Chris Tar. Univer-
sal sentence encoder. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.11175,
2018.
[15] Scikit-learn. version 1.2.2. retrieved from https://scikit-
learn.org/stable/. .
[16] Openai python library. version 0.27.7. retrieved from
https://pypi.org/project/openai/. .
[17] Junjie Ye, Xuanting Chen, Nuo Xu, Can Zu, Zekai Shao,
Shichun Liu, Yuhan Cui, Zeyang Zhou, Chao Gong,
and Yang Shen.
A comprehensive capability analy-
sis of gpt-3 and gpt-3.5 series models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.10420, 2023.
[18] National Cancer Institute. The cancer genome atlas pro-
gram (tcga).
[19] G Paner, J Srigley, Jason Pettus, Giovanna Angela Gian-
nico, Joseph Sirintrapun, and Lara R Harik. Protocol for
the examination of radical prostatectomy specimens from
patients with carcinoma of the prostate gland. College of
American Pathologists (CAP): Northfield, IL, USA, 2021.
[20] Sajjad Abedian, Evan T Sholle, Prakash M Adekkanattu,
Marika M Cusick, Stephanie E Weiner, Jonathan E Shoag,
Jim C Hu, and Thomas R Campion Jr. Automated ex-
traction of tumor staging and diagnosis information from
surgical pathology reports. JCO Clinical Cancer Infor-
matics, 5:1054–1061, 2021. ISSN 2473-4276.
[21] Alexander P Glaser, Brian J Jordan, Jason Cohen, Anuj
Desai, Philip Silberman, and Joshua J Meeks. Automated
extraction of grade, stage, and quality information from
transurethral resection of bladder tumor pathology reports
using natural language processing. JCO Clinical Cancer
Informatics, 2:1–8, 2018. ISSN 2473-4276.
[22] B. J. Kim, M. Merchant, C. Zheng, A. A. Thomas,
R. Contreras, S. J. Jacobsen, and G. W. Chien. A natu-
ral language processing program effectively extracts key
pathologic findings from radical prostatectomy reports. J
Endourol, 28(12):1474–8, 2014. ISSN 0892-7790. doi:
10.1089/end.2014.0221.
[23] Iain A McCowan, Darren C Moore, Anthony N Nguyen,
Rayleen V Bowman, Belinda E Clarke, Edwina E Duhig,
Preprint
7
and Mary-Jane Fry.
Collection of cancer stage data
by classifying free-text medical reports. Journal of the
American Medical Informatics Association, 14(6):736–
745, 2007. ISSN 1527-974X.
[24] Iain McCowan, Darren Moore, and Mary-Jane Fry. Clas-
sification of cancer stage from free-text histology reports.
In 2006 International Conference of the IEEE Engineer-
ing in Medicine and Biology Society, pages 5153–5156.
IEEE. ISBN 1424400325.
[25] Anthony N Nguyen, Michael J Lawley, David P Hansen,
Rayleen V Bowman, Belinda E Clarke, Edwina E Duhig,
and Shoni Colquist. Symbolic rule-based classification of
lung cancer stages from free-text pathology reports. Jour-
nal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 17
(4):440–445, 2010. ISSN 1527-974X.
[26] G. K. Savova, E. Tseytlin, S. Finan, M. Castine, T. Miller,
O. Medvedeva, D. Harris, H. Hochheiser, C. Lin, G. Cha-
van, and R. S. Jacobson.
Deepphe:
A natural lan-
guage processing system for extracting cancer pheno-
types from clinical records. Cancer Res, 77(21):e115–
e118, 2017.
ISSN 0008-5472 (Print) 0008-5472.
doi:
10.1158/0008-5472.Can-17-0615.
[27] Jeremy L Warner, Mia A Levy, Michael N Neuss,
Jeremy L Warner, Mia A Levy, and Michael N Neuss.
Recap: feasibility and accuracy of extracting cancer stage
information from narrative electronic health record data.
Journal of oncology practice, 12(2):157–158, 2016. ISSN
1554-7477.
[28] Adam Yala, Regina Barzilay, Laura Salama, Molly Grif-
fin, Grace Sollender, Aditya Bardia, Constance Lehman,
Julliette M Buckley, Suzanne B Coopey, and Fernanda
Polubriaginof.
Using machine learning to parse breast
pathology reports. Breast cancer research and treatment,
161:203–211, 2017. ISSN 0167-6806.
[29] Sicheng Zhou, Nan Wang, Liwei Wang, Hongfang Liu,
and Rui Zhang.
Cancerbert: a cancer domain-specific
language model for extracting breast cancer phenotypes
from electronic health records.
Journal of the Ameri-
can Medical Informatics Association, 29(7):1208–1216,
2022. ISSN 1527-974X.
[30] Helmut Schmid. Part-of-speech tagging with neural net-
works. arXiv preprint cmp-lg/9410018, 1994.
[31] Jyun-Yu Jiang, Mingyang Zhang, Cheng Li, Michael Ben-
dersky, Nadav Golbandi, and Marc Najork. Semantic text
matching for long-form documents. In The world wide
web conference, pages 795–806.
[32] Peter Lee, Sebastien Bubeck, and Joseph Petro. Benefits,
limits, and risks of gpt-4 as an ai chatbot for medicine.
New England Journal of Medicine, 388(13):1233–1239,
2023. ISSN 0028-4793.
[33] Jules White, Quchen Fu, Sam Hays, Michael Sand-
born, Carlos Olea, Henry Gilbert, Ashraf Elnashar, Jesse
Spencer-Smith, and Douglas C Schmidt. A prompt pat-
tern catalog to enhance prompt engineering with chatgpt.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11382, 2023.
[34] Tiffany H Kung, Morgan Cheatham, Arielle Medenilla,
Czarina Sillos, Lorie De Leon, Camille Elepaño, Maria
Madriaga, Rimel Aggabao, Giezel Diaz-Candido, and
James Maningo. Performance of chatgpt on usmle: Po-
tential for ai-assisted medical education using large lan-
guage models. PLoS digital health, 2(2):e0000198, 2023.
ISSN 2767-3170.
[35] Shen Zheng, Jie Huang, and Kevin Chen-Chuan Chang.
Why does chatgpt fall short in answering questions faith-
fully? arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.10513, 2023.
Preprint
8
7
Supplementary Material
Supplementary Figure 1: Example of a scanned (A) and vectorized (B) de-identified radical prostatectomy pathology reports.
Preprint
9
Supplementary Figure 2: Non-inferiority analysis of accuracy of the NLP tool versus human abstractors using vectorized (A) and
scanned reports (B). Lines represent 97.5% confidence intervals of differences in proportions of accuracy, with points marking
the mean difference. The blue dashed line denotes the -10% non-inferiority margin.
Preprint
10
Supplementary Figure 3: Non-inferiority analysis of accuracy of the NLP tool using vectorized versus scanned reports. Lines
represent 97.5% confidence intervals of differences in proportions of accuracy, with points marking the mean difference.
