Title: PeopleMap: Visualization Tool for Mapping Out Researchers using Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2006.06105v1
--------------------------------------------------

PeopleMap: Visualization Tool for Mapping Out Researchers
using Natural Language Processing
Jon Saad-Falcon, Omar Shaikh, Zijie J. Wang, Austin P. Wright, Sasha Richardson, Duen Horng
Chau
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA
{jonsaadfalcon,oshaikh,jayw,apwright,polo}@gatech.edu
Fayetteville State University, Fayetteville, NC, USA
srichardson@broncos.uncfsu.edu
Figure 1: PeopleMap visually maps out researchers based on their research interests and publications. Here, a PeopleMap user is exploring
the research topics of the faculty members at the Institute of Data Engineering and Science (IDEaS) at Georgia Tech (https://poloclub.github.
io/people-map/ideas/) A. Map View visualizes the embedding of researchers generated using their research topics and publication data,
with each dot representing a researcher. B. Research Query allows users to search for researchers and query areas of study, allowing the
user to both locate specific individuals and see the researchers most associated with a queried field in the Map View. C. Researcher View
shows the detailed information (e.g., affiliation, citations, interests) of a researcher highlighted in Map View. D. Control Panel allows users
to adjust the hyperparameters of the Map View visualization (e.g., show research names and cluster information).
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CIKM ’20, October 19–23, 2020, Galway, Ireland
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
ABSTRACT
Discovering research expertise at institutions can be a difficult
task. Manually curated university directories easily become out of
date and often lack the information necessary for understanding a
researcher’s interests and past work, making it harder to explore
the diversity of research at an institution and identify research
talents. This results in lost opportunities for both internal and
arXiv:2006.06105v1  [cs.DL]  10 Jun 2020
CIKM ’20, October 19–23, 2020, Galway, Ireland
Saad-Falcon, et al.
external entities to discover new connections and nurture research
collaboration.
To solve this problem, we have developed PeopleMap, the first
interactive, open-source, web-based tool that visually “maps out”
researchers based on their research interests and publications by
leveraging embeddings generated by natural language processing
(NLP) techniques. PeopleMap provides a new engaging way for
institutions to summarize their research talents and for people to
discover new connections. The platform is developed with ease-
of-use and sustainability in mind. Using only researchers’ Google
Scholar profiles as input, PeopleMap can be readily adopted by
any institution using its publicly-accessible repository and detailed
documentation.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing →Visualization toolkits; • Com-
puting methodologies →Natural language processing.
KEYWORDS
mapping, clusters, datasets, TFIDF, similarity analysis
ACM Reference Format:
Jon Saad-Falcon, Omar Shaikh, Zijie J. Wang, Austin P. Wright, Sasha
Richardson, Duen Horng Chau. 2020. PeopleMap: Visualization Tool for
Mapping Out Researchers using Natural Language Processing. In Proceed-
ings of 29th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowl-
edge Management (CIKM ’20). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 7 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1
INTRODUCTION
The task of discovering research expertise at institutions pursuing
scientific research can be a difficult task. For example, it is often
challenging for companies or research laboratories to pinpoint
researchers at an institution to collaborate with for the problems
they wish to solve [4]; this can lead to methods such as sending
scores of emails to faculty, hoping that eventually the appropriate
individual will be found. However, this method often leads to lost
opportunities. Furthermore, within institutions themselves, the task
of planning major research efforts often involves the same tactics
when it comes to finding appropriate people.
Both of these situations share a similar problem: the lack of an
easily accessible, up-to-date record with relevant information for
user queries. At the moment, most institutions have manually cu-
rated directories, which hold each individual’s department, position,
and contact information. However, when trying to learn more about
a researcher these directories can sometimes provide inaccurate
or incomplete information. For instance, a full professor’s latest
research interests may be very different from those at the time that
faculty member joined the institution years ago. Additionally, the
information typically lacks important details about their specific
fields of interest as well as their publications. Therefore, these di-
rectories can be less helpful for the companies, laboratories, and
government agencies that seek to pursue business or fund projects
at a specific university. This hinders the ability of both external
and internal individuals to pinpoint research talents, understand
the scope of research activities at an institution, and discover new
connections.
2
CONTRIBUTIONS
To solve this common challenge faced by research institutions, our
work makes the following contributions:
(1) PeopleMap, an interactive tool that “maps out” researchers
based on their research interests and publications by leveraging
embeddings generated by natural language processing (NLP)
techniques. PeopleMap contributes as:
• The first visualization dedicated to helping users ex-
plore researcher embeddings; while there has been re-
search that develops methods to recommend research papers
and publication venues [1–3, 9, 12], less work focuses on de-
veloping usable easy-to-access tools for users to interactively
explore researcher datasets. PeopleMap fills this research gap
and seeks to improve the interpretability and explorability
of researcher datasets.
• An open-source, sustainable web application for the
community that can be easily accessed via web browsers
and implemented as a web-based application. PeopleMap
is registered under the permissive MIT license, and its code
repository is available at https://github.com/poloclub/people-
map. Besides the PeopleMap visualization, it also provides
a series of data collection and preprocessing tools that al-
lows users to create a researcher dataset from any list of re-
searchers found on Google Scholar. Additionally, it includes a
step-by-step documentation guide (https://app.gitbook.com/
@poloclub/s/people-map/) that covers every step of the pro-
cess from downloading the repository to launching the Peo-
pleMap platform (Section 4). With the combined data col-
lection resources and PeopleMap visualization, the tool pro-
vides an automated solution for researcher interest sum-
marization and discovery, which simplifies the exploration
of the work of scientific researchers (Section 3).
(2) PeopleMap Usage Scenarios and Deployment As a first
real-world use case of PeopleMap, we have successfully im-
plemented PeopleMap for The Institute for Data Engineering
and Science(IDEaS), a major cross-campus research entity at
Georgia Tech (http://ideas.gatech.edu/) whose members in-
clude faculty from across colleges and departments on cam-
pus. Preliminary feedback from IDEaS’ leadership team has
been positive; they are very excited about PeopleMap’s inter-
activity and the way that this tool can be easily updated for
new members. The live PeopleMap for IDEaS can be found at
https://poloclub.github.io/people-map/ideas/.
To demonstrate the easy application of PeopleMap to a differ-
ent organization’s members, we also implemented PeopleMap
for the Center of Machine Learning at Georgia Tech (https:
//ml.gatech.edu/), another major cross-campus entity. The live
PeopleMap for the Center of Machine Learning can be found
at: https://poloclub.github.io/people-map/ml/. We also provide
an additional usage scenario to highlight how a potential user
could implement and use PeopleMap.
PeopleMap: Visualization Tool for Mapping Out Researchers using Natural Language Processing
CIKM ’20, October 19–23, 2020, Galway, Ireland
3
INTRODUCING PEOPLEMAP
PeopleMap is an open-source, web-browser-based visualization
tool that maps out researchers using NLP techniques, allowing users
to explore all the different information extracted from researchers’
profiles using textual embeddings. It can determine the possible
groupings of similarly-interested researchers, represent how re-
searchers align with specified fields of study, and reveal potential
Gaussian distributions describing the research topics present in the
dataset. PeopleMap’s user interface consists of four major com-
ponents: (1) Map View (Figure 1A) visualizes the research topic
similarities among researchers; (2) Research Query (Figure 1B)
allows users to search for researchers and query areas of study;
(3) Researcher View (Figure 1C), which shows the detailed infor-
mation of the researcher hovered over by the user (e.g., affiliation,
citations, interests); (4) Control Panel (Figure 1D) allows users to
adjust the hyperparameters of the Map View visualization. Next,
we describe each component in more detail.
3.1
Mapping Out Researcher Interests
The Map View of PeopleMap (Figure 1A) is a visualization of
embeddings representing the researchers in the selected dataset.
Within the Map View, each dot represents a researcher and their
corresponding embedding projected into a two-dimensional space.
With the researcher data extracted from Google Scholar, these em-
beddings were created using term frequencyâĂŞinverse document
frequency (TFIDF) [8] matrices and principal component analysis
(PCA) [15], which is discussed in greater detail in the following
sections:
3.1.1
Collecting Google Scholar data for each researcher.
Generating a PeopleMap visualization requires only public data
that anyone can access. We collect each researcher’s public informa-
tion from Google Scholar, which includes the researcher’s profile,
publications, and research interests using a Python-based mod-
ule called scholarly (https://github.com/scholarly-python-package/
scholarly). The specific information included are:
• Google Scholar profile URL
• Top 50 most cited publications (titles, abstracts, and years of
publication)
• Top 50 most recent publications (titles, abstracts, and years
of publication)
• Google Scholar profile keywords
• Citation count
• Institution affiliation
• Google Scholar profile photo
PeopleMap formats and stores all researcher data in a CSV file, one
column for each category of information listed above.
3.1.2
Researcher Embeddings. Using the publication data ex-
tracted from Google Scholar, the title and abstracts of each re-
searcher’s publications are first concatenated together to create
a combined document for each researcher. Additionally, Google
Scholar keywords of each researcher can also be concatenated into
their respective combined documents. After their creation, in or-
der to normalize and prepare them for analysis, these combined
documents are:
(1) Removed words with non-English alphabet characters to
restrict the bounds of analysis
(2) Eliminated words with fewer than two characters in length
to mitigate noise in the data
(3) Lowercased words to simplify capitalization
(4) Cleaned of HTML tags
(5) Cleaned of stop-words
(6) Stemmed words to simplify syntax
Once the documents have been normalized, they are then con-
verted into researcher embeddings representing each individual
researcher through the use of the TFIDF technique. This technique
takes into account both the occurrence of each word within a re-
searcher’s publications and its frequency. Furthermore, it provides
us a quantitative method by which we can ignore common words
shared by most, if not all, of the researchers, while measuring
specific “important” or “characteristic” words that differentiate re-
searchers [8]. Each researcher’s embedding is a column in a TFIDF
matrix, with each row representing the respective term values for a
specific word in each researcher’s embedding. The following equa-
tion represents the combination of n total researcher embeddings,
each individually represented as vectors v, to create the combined
TFIDF matrix R:
[v1,v2, ...,vn] = R
With the researcher embeddings in the TFIDF matrix, it is neces-
sary to first reduce the dimensionality of the embeddings, which are
vectors in a several-thousand dimensional space, so that they can
be visualized. To achieve this, principle component analysis (PCA)
is used to assist in feature extraction and elimination, simplifying
the researcher embeddings into vectors within a two-dimensional
space that can be visualized in the Map View (Figure 1A).
We chose PCA as a starting embedding technique, because Peo-
pleMap is one of the first tools for interactively mapping out re-
searchers. Our primary goal is to create a platform that improves
the explorability and interpretability of researcher datasets. While
there are many potential embedding techniques for the textual data
of researchers, we aimed to start with more classic embeddings that
could provide adjustable parameters for the platform. We purpose-
fully used PCA over other potential visualization techniques, such
as UMAP [11] or t-SNE [10], because they tend to find structure
within the noise of a dataset with small sample sizes compared
to the dimensionality of the data, while PCA is well justified as
a linear model for such datasets [11]. Thus, we use PCA since it
fits the constraints of our researcher dataset and allows us to still
find emergent patterns among the researcher embeddings. In the
future, we endeavor to improve the complexity of our embeddings
by exploring several potential embedding techniques.
3.2
Querying Researchers and Areas of Study
The Research Query component (Figure 2) allows the user to both
locate specific researchers, as well as see which researchers are
aligned with each of the Google Scholar keywords collected from
the researcher dataset. When the user searches for a researcher,
PeopleMap highlights the researcher’s representation in Map View
by enlarging the dot’s radius and outlining it; PeopleMap also
displays the researcher’s Google Scholar profile information in the
Researcher View. When calculating a researcher’s alignment with
CIKM ’20, October 19–23, 2020, Galway, Ireland
Saad-Falcon, et al.
Figure 2: Research Query component and query results dis-
played in Map View. Researchers are colored based on how well
they align with the query (in this example, “Algorithms” is the
query research topic). Darker means more aligned.
a selected Google Scholar keyword, PeopleMap uses similarity
analysis between researcher embeddings and topic embeddings,
which is discussed in the next section.
3.2.1
Similarity Analysis. The TFIDF researcher embeddings
used for the Map View component are also used to calculate the
similarity between a researcher and a specified topic. For example,
if a user wants to see which researchers frequently use a specific
term prominently throughout their work, it is possible to use their
researcher embeddings to find which ones use the term most often
compared to their overall writing. To calculate this, the specified
topic (e.g. “natural language processing”) is first converted into a
TFIDF embedding using the same process that is outlined for the re-
searcher’s publications in (Section 3.1.2). Then, the cosine similarity
between the specified topic embedding and each of the researcher
embeddings in the TFIDF matrix is calculated, which indicates the
similarity between the two vectors: the higher the value, the greater
the similarity [13]. The following equation represents the cosine
similarity between the specified topic embedding, represented as
the vector q, and the current researcher embedding, represented as
the vector v, to produce the resulting similarity score, represented
as s:
q · v
∥q∥× ∥v∥= s
By performing cosine similarity calculations between the speci-
fied topic embedding and the researcher embeddings in the TFIDF
matrix, the top similarity scores can be used to find the researchers
that most align with the specified topic. These researchers are,
in turn, highlighted in the Map View when the specified topic is
queried in the Research Query component (Figure 2 shows an ex-
ample query). Researchers are colored based on how well they align
with the query. Darker indicates more aligned. The Research Query
tool, together with the color gradient visualizing the query results,
help users better understand the scope of research relevance among
the researchers. The researchers more prominently highlighted are
those who tend to use the query term proportionally more than
their peers in the dataset. This can serve as a reference to begin
inquiries into the individual’s research rather than serve as a full
assessment of their contributions to that research topic.
3.3
Clustering Researchers
To help users more easily identify groups of related researchers,
the Map View (Figure 1A) colors the researcher dots to indicate
clusters of associated researchers. The intention of this coloration
is not to create strictly-defined groups of researchers. Rather, we
want to help users visualize the scope of shared interests among
researchers. To assign these colorings, we use Gaussian mixture
modeling, which will be explained in greater detail in the following
section.
3.3.1
Assigning Colors. Previously, we used PCA to reduce the
dimensionality of the researcher embeddings, projecting them into a
two-dimensional space for visualization (Section 3.1.2). This dimen-
sion reduction of the researcher embeddings is also necessary for
clustering techniques to be performed. In the researcher dataset for
the IDEaS faculty at Georgia Tech (which is visualized in Figure 1),
the researcher embeddings have over 11,000 dimensions, with each
dimension representing a word in the vast vocabulary shared by
the researcher dataset; however, there are only 83 datapoints. Thus,
considering the complexity of the data, it is necessary to simplify
the dimensionality of the data before performing clustering [5].
Therefore, using the newly-reduced researcher vectors created
using PCA, the total set of researcher vectors is analyzed using
Gaussian mixture modeling. Using this technique, the overall dis-
tribution of researcher vectors is categorized into several different
Gaussian distributions (visualized distributions in Figure 3). These
distributions are meant to assist the user in their understanding of
the different topics within the researcher dataset and how these
topics are shared among different groups.
Once these researcher vectors are clustered using Gaussian mix-
ture modeling, they are visualized within the Map View component
of PeopleMap and colored according to their designated Gaussian
distribution, with each distribution being assigned a unique color.
Researcher dots that are close together tend to reflect a similarity in
research pursuits between the two researchers; increased distance
between researcher dots reflects the opposite. Using distance and
coloring of a research embedding as metrics for gauging similarity,
the user can better understand the relationship between each of
the researchers as well as the diversity of topics in the Map View
(Figure 3).
3.4
Calibrating Exploration
To change the settings of the Map View, the user can use the control
panel at the bottom of the visualization (Figure 1D) to manipulate
the Map View and investigate the relationships and information
presented by the dataset. The following settings assist in the ex-
ploratory process of the researcher dataset, allowing the user to
explore the impact of different variables on the overall visualization
and patterns among the researchers.
• Show Distributions: In order to help the user better un-
derstand how each cluster of researchers is formed, this
toggle permits the user to see the Gaussian distributions
calculated by the Gaussian mixture model (discussed in Sec-
tion 3.3). Each distribution is colored differently according
PeopleMap: Visualization Tool for Mapping Out Researchers using Natural Language Processing
CIKM ’20, October 19–23, 2020, Galway, Ireland
Figure 3: Map View component with cluster distributions
displayed. Each dot is an embedding of a researcherâĂŹs com-
bined publications; the color is assigned by their membership in a
cluster of a Gaussian mixture model, which are displayed as ellipti-
cal distributions. Proximity of dots indicates similarity of research
interests while remoteness indicates disparity.
to the dots within it. Additionally, each distribution visual-
izes the space covered by three standard deviations of the
distribution along each of its axes.
• #Clusters: To assist the user in their exploration of the re-
searcher embedding clusters, this slider allows the user to
adjust the number of Gaussian distributions generated by
the Gaussian mixture model algorithm (discussed in Sec-
tion 3.3). The slider itself does not change the embeddings
of the researchers. By increasing the number of clusters, the
Gaussian distributions generated becomes increasingly tight.
Likewise, by decreasing the number of clusters, the Gaussian
distributions become more expansive but also decrease in
tightness.
• Show All Names: To help users find specific researchers
and recognize individuals in different clusters, this toggle
displays the names of researchers alongside their respective
dot within the Map View. It can be used to find researchers
without hovering over each dot individually.
• Keywords Emphasis: This drop-down allows the user to
adjust the emphasis that is placed on a researcher’s Google
Keywords, compared to their titles and abstracts, when gen-
erating their TFIDF embedding (Section 3.1.2). By increasing
the emphasis, more multiples of a researcher’s keyword are
concatenated into their original combined document that
is used to generate their TFIDF embedding. By decreasing
the emphasis, less multiples of a researcher’s keywords are
concatenated into their original combined document. The
purpose of this drop-down is to increase or decrease the
weight placed on a researcher’s self-identified topics of study
when calculating their position in the visualization, allow-
ing the user to better understand the characteristics of each
researcher’s fields of interest.
• Publication Set: This drop-down allows the user to select
which publications they would like to use for the Map View:
The default option will use a researcher’s 50 most cited publi-
cations to characterize their research, while the other option
will use a researcher’s more recent 50 publications in their
characterization. These options allow users to explore the
researcher dataset from two different angles of what a re-
searcher may be more known for and what they are currently
working on.
• Researcher details on demand: To see more information
about a researcher, users can hover over the researcher’s
dot in the Map View (Figure 1A), which will display in the
Researcher View (Figure 1C) the researcher’s:
– Name
– Affiliation
– Google Scholar Profile Keywords
– Keywords
– Total Citation Count
– Google Scholar Profile Link
– Google Scholar Profile Photo
4
USAGE AND ACCESS OF PEOPLEMAP
4.1
PeopleMap Code Repository and
Documentation
The source code for PeopleMap is available at https://github.com/
poloclub/people-map; it is registered under the permissive MIT
license, making it available to anyone. It includes the PeopleMap
visualization as well as the data collection and processing code
for developing a new researcher dataset which can be loaded into
the platform. Furthermore, our documentation provides concrete
tutorial steps for users to follow, so that new users with beginner’s
experience in Python and Javascript may also easily set up the tool.
It walks a new user through the initial steps of collecting data from
Google Scholar to the final stages of setting up the PeopleMap
platform on their computer.
In addition to the source code, we provide two live demos of
PeopleMap that allow anybody to explore and become familiar
with the PeopleMap platform. The first demo analyzes the publi-
cations of the faculty in Georgia Tech’s Center of Machine Learn-
ing (https://poloclub.github.io/people-map/ml/), while the second
demo analyzes the publications of the faculty at the Institute for
Data Engineering and Science (IDEaS), also at Georgia Tech (https:
//poloclub.github.io/people-map/ideas/).
The corresponding datasets for these two faculty groups are
available alongside the source code of the Github page: https://
github.com/poloclub/people-map.
4.2
Example Usage Scenario
James is an academic director at a university, looking to develop a
new project centered around the study of black holes. He is looking
for potential colleagues at his university with whom he can begin
working on this new project. While he does have some current con-
nections with professors at his university, he would like to explore
the diversity of researchers at his university by using PeopleMap.
To start, James clones the PeopleMap repository and begins
following the steps of the documentation. Next, he goes to the
CIKM ’20, October 19–23, 2020, Galway, Ireland
Saad-Falcon, et al.
university directory and gathers the Google Scholar profile names of
all of the relevant researchers. Using tools included in the repository,
he gathers their relevant publication information, processes the
text, and generates the data files for the PeopleMap platform.
With PeopleMap fully set up, James begins exploring the re-
searcher dataset with all the tools explained in Section 3. First, he
uses the Publication Set drop-down and selects Most Recent Publi-
cations since he wants to find researchers currently focusing on
studying black holes. Next, James clicks the Research Query com-
ponent (Section 3.2) and types “black holes”, searching to see the
researchers most closely aligned with the topic. The tool then high-
lights the top-five researchers associated with the topic. From this
initial search, he discovers several individuals he did not know from
his previous correspondence and decides to look a little deeper.
Using this information, James proceeds to use the Researcher
View component (Figure 1C) to identify the researchers, clicking
on their Google Scholar profile links to see some of their published
work. However, before ending his search, he would like to see
some of the other researchers that are in close proximity to the
ones already selected. Using the Keywords Emphasis drop-down, he
tries different choices of keywords to see the groups of researchers
that emerge near the previously identified researchers, using the
Show All Names toggle to take note of other researchers that are
frequently associated with the ones found using the Research Query
component. With this wide array of researchers, James is confident
he has gathered all the potential collaborators and proceeds to
use their Google Scholar profiles found in the Researcher View
component, as well as other resources, to gauge which ones would
be the best fit for the project.
5
PREDICTED IMPACT
5.1
Enhanced and Enabled CIKM Research
Activities
PeopleMap aims to facilitate several different CIKM research ar-
eas. As a tool for the visualization and exploration of researcher
datasets, PeopleMap seeks to assist in the data presentation of
research fields of interest and researcher information. Furthermore,
PeopleMap can provide functionalities for users and interfaces
for information and data systems by increasing the interactiv-
ity and explorability of researcher datasets through the PeopleMap
platform and its functionalities. By assisting in both of these CIKM
research areas, PeopleMap offers a new platform for public and
private organizations to both explore the interests of their members
and summarize the fields of study their members pursue.
5.2
Scaling the Impact of PeopleMap
PeopleMap for research entities. PeopleMap could transform
how research talents at research institutions may be summarized
and discovered by both internal and external collaborators. At
Georgia Tech, we have successfully developed PeopleMap for two
major research entities: IDEaS and the Center for Machine Learning.
The leadership of IDEaS are very excited about this tool, especially
the interactivity and explorability that it provides for researcher
datasets as well as the ease with which it can be updated for new
members. While we used the tool for faculty datasets in IDEaS and
the Center of Machine Learning in Section 4.1, it could be applied
to the entirety of the College of Computing or even Georgia Tech
as a whole. The scope of the researchers included is a matter of
preference for the group seeking to implement PeopleMap.
PeopleMap for larger entities. Using the data-collecting and
processing tools that are part of the PeopleMap repository, it is
possible to expand the platform to other researcher datasets, as
long as these researchers have Google Scholar profiles with their
associated publications listed. The PeopleMap for IDEaS visual-
izes 83 researchers. However, it is possible to have significantly
more researchers than this amount; the limiting factor for the to-
tal count is essentially the size of the Map View visualization. As
more researchers are added, the higher number of dots can lead to
greater visual complexity in the visualization, potentially causing
“overplotting” as it becomes harder to distinguish between each
of the dots and locate specific individuals using either the Show
All Names toggle or the Researcher View component. Additionally,
the researcher information within PeopleMap does not update
automatically when researchers’ Google Scholar profiles update.
PeopleMap users would need to re-run the data collection and
processing step to refresh PeopleMap.
PeopleMap as a complementary resource. Rather than replac-
ing current directories, we developed PeopleMap as a tool to com-
plement these existing directories. PeopleMap can be used in con-
junction with the directories of universities, companies, agencies,
and other institutions to lend an additional perspective upon the
diversity of research interests that the institution holds.
6
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
PeopleMap, in its current form, will continue to be useful for years
to come, but we plan on continuing to improve the system by in-
creasing the sophistication of the NLP techniques used in analysis
and expanding the available functionalities for exploring researcher
datasets. In the current version of PeopleMap, we use TFIDF to
generate researcher embeddings (Section 3.1.2) from our gathered
researcher data before using PCA and Gaussian mixture model-
ing for visualizing these embeddings and performing clustering
techniques (Section 3.3). However, as we seek to increase the com-
plexity of our embeddings, we plan on exploring several potential
embedding techniques. For example, we aim to extract hidden lay-
ers from pretrained and finetuned Transformer [14] models such
as BERT [7]. Prior work has explored fine-tuning these models on
text data from the scientific domain, yielding improved results on
downstream tasks [6]. However, we aim to use similar techniques
in the context of visualization. Using these techniques, we open
up the possibility of both improved information extraction and
visualization of researcher datasets.
Lastly, we hope that PeopleMap can assist any individual seeking
to delve deeper into the fields of interests found within any group of
researchers. We encourage any institution composed of published
researchers to use PeopleMap if they would like to explore the
diversity of content produced by their members. We expect that rec-
ommendation systems for research papers and publication venues
will continue to be a topic of interest in coming years, as there have
been several different studies addressing potential platforms and so-
lutions [1–3, 9, 12]. Furthermore, we also expect organizations will
PeopleMap: Visualization Tool for Mapping Out Researchers using Natural Language Processing
CIKM ’20, October 19–23, 2020, Galway, Ireland
seek to improve outdated directory systems so that both internal
and external groups can more efficiently and confidently connect
with researchers for potential collaborations.
REFERENCES
[1] Hamed Alhoori and Richard Furuta. 2017. Recommendation of scholarly venues
based on dynamic user interests. Journal of Informetrics 11, 2 (2017), 553–563.
[2] Joeran Beel. 2017. Towards effective research-paper recommender systems and
user modeling based on mind maps. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.09109 (2017).
[3] Joeran Beel, Bela Gipp, Stefan Langer, and Corinna Breitinger. 2016. paper rec-
ommender systems: a literature survey. International Journal on Digital Libraries
17, 4 (2016), 305–338.
[4] Omar Belkhodja and Réjean Landry. 2007. The Triple-Helix collaboration: Why do
researchers collaborate with industry and the government? What are the factors
that influence the perceived barriers? Scientometrics 70, 2 (2007), 301–332.
[5] Richard E Bellman. 2015. Adaptive control processes: a guided tour. Princeton
university press.
[6] Iz Beltagy, Kyle Lo, and Arman Cohan. 2019. SciBERT: A Pretrained Language
Model for Scientific Text. arXiv:1903.10676 [cs.CL]
[7] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2018. Bert:
Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1810.04805 (2018).
[8] Karen Sparck Jones. 1972. A statistical interpretation of term specificity and its
application in retrieval. Journal of documentation (1972).
[9] Onur Küçüktunç, Erik Saule, Kamer Kaya, and Ümit V Çatalyürek. 2013. TheAd-
visor: a webservice for academic recommendation. In Proceedings of the 13th
ACM/IEEE-CS joint conference on Digital libraries. 433–434.
[10] Laurens van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. 2008. Visualizing data using t-SNE.
Journal of machine learning research 9, Nov (2008), 2579–2605.
[11] Leland McInnes, John Healy, and James Melville. 2018. Umap: Uniform man-
ifold approximation and projection for dimension reduction. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1802.03426 (2018).
[12] Eric Medvet, Alberto Bartoli, and Giulio Piccinin. 2014. Publication venue recom-
mendation based on paper abstract. In 2014 IEEE 26th International Conference on
Tools with Artificial Intelligence. IEEE, 1004–1010.
[13] Juan Ramos et al. 2003. Using tf-idf to determine word relevance in document
queries. In Proceedings of the first instructional conference on machine learning,
Vol. 242. Piscataway, NJ, 133–142.
[14] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones,
Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention Is All
You Need. arXiv:1706.03762 [cs.CL]
[15] Svante Wold, Kim Esbensen, and Paul Geladi. 1987. Principal component analysis.
Chemometrics and intelligent laboratory systems 2, 1-3 (1987), 37–52.
