Title: Bangla Natural Language Processing: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, Machine Learning, and Deep Learning Based Methods
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2105.14875v3
--------------------------------------------------

Date of publication xxxx 00, 0000, date of current version xxxx 00, 0000.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.DOI
Bangla Natural Language Processing: A
Comprehensive Analysis of Classical,
Machine Learning, and Deep Learning
Based Methods
OVISHAKE SEN
1, MOHTASIM FUAD1, MD. NAZRUL ISLAM1, JAKARIA RABBI
1,
MEHEDI MASUD2, MD. KAMRUL HASAN
3, MD. ABDUL AWAL4, AWAL AHMED FIME1, MD.
TAHMID HASAN FUAD1, DELOWAR SIKDER1, AND MD. AKIL RAIHAN IFTEE1
1Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Khulna University of Engineering & Technology, Khulna-9203, Bangladesh
2Department of Computer Science, College of Computers and Information Technology, Taif University, P. O. Box 11099, Taif 21944, Saudi Arabia
3Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Khulna University of Engineering & Technology, Khulna-9203, Bangladesh
4Electronics and Communication Engineering Discipline, Khulna University, Khulna-9208, Bangladesh
Corresponding author: Jakaria Rabbi (jakaria_rabbi@cse.kuet.ac.bd)
ABSTRACT The Bangla language is the seventh most spoken language, with 265 million native and
non-native speakers worldwide. However, English is the predominant language for online resources and
technical knowledge, journals, and documentation. Consequently, many Bangla-speaking people, who have
limited command of English, face hurdles to utilize English resources. To bridge the gap between limited
support and increasing demand, researchers conducted many experiments and developed valuable tools and
techniques to create and process Bangla language materials. Many efforts are also ongoing to make it easy
to use the Bangla language in the online and technical domains. There are some review papers to understand
the past, previous, and future Bangla Natural Language Processing (BNLP) trends. The studies are mainly
concentrated on the speciﬁc domains of BNLP, such as sentiment analysis, speech recognition, optical
character recognition, and text summarization. There is an apparent scarcity of resources that contain a
comprehensive review of the recent BNLP tools and methods. Therefore, in this paper, we present a thorough
analysis of 75 BNLP research papers and categorize them into 11 categories, namely Information Extraction,
Machine Translation, Named Entity Recognition, Parsing, Parts of Speech Tagging, Question Answering
System, Sentiment Analysis, Spam and Fake Detection, Text Summarization, Word Sense Disambiguation,
and Speech Processing and Recognition. We study articles published between 1999 to 2021, and 50% of the
papers were published after 2015. Furthermore, we discuss Classical, Machine Learning and Deep Learning
approaches with different datasets while addressing the limitations and current and future trends of the
BNLP.
INDEX TERMS
bangla natural language processing, sentiment analysis, speech recognition, support
vector machine, artiﬁcial neural network, long short-term memory, gated recurrent unit, convolutional neural
network.
I. INTRODUCTION
L
ANGUAGE is a medium for living beings to communi-
cate with each other. In everyday life, communication
is a necessary activity for everyone which enables us to
express our feelings, judgment, necessity and language made
all this possible. As humans evolved through civilization the
format of language has been changed drastically. Obviously,
the invention of the computer made a far-reaching impact in
our modern time as it is helping everything towards making
our life easier. The computer communicates and understands
everything through 0 and 1 which is called machine language.
But machine language is very complex to understand for
humans as well as human language is not understandable
to the computer. To reduce this language barrier, computer
scientists came up with methods to enable computers to un-
derstand and process human language. The area of computer
VOLUME 4, 2016
1
arXiv:2105.14875v3  [cs.CL]  9 Apr 2022
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
science that deals with understanding and processing hu-
man language through computers is known as NLP (Natural
Language Processing). In recent years, NLP has become a
popular topic in computer science as it is solving various real-
life problems like auto-correction, text to speech processing,
machine translation, sentiment analysis etc. As computers
are getting more capable of computational power, the ap-
plications of NLP is also increasing. As different languages
are used in different regions of the world, it has become a
necessity to increase the domain of NLP to enable various
language to be used in NLP applications. There are many
languages used in the Indian sub-continent and Bangla is one
of them. It is widely used in the region of Bangladesh and
the West Bengal part of India. The part of NLP that deals
with understanding and processing tasks related to the Bangla
language are known as Bangla Natural Language Processing
(BNLP).
We identiﬁed various components and methods of BNLP
and Bangla speech processing to present them in this paper.
Figure 1 shows the components of Natural Language Pro-
cessing and Figure 2 shows the number of papers reviewed
as per category. Figure 3 shows the methods used in Bangla
speech processing and recognition and Figure 4 shows the
methods used in Bangla natural language processing of text
data.
FIGURE 1. Natural Language Processing Components [1] .
A. PREPROCESSING TECHNIQUES
The main idea behind data preprocessing is to transform the
raw data into a form so that the data becomes usable and an-
alyzable for the target task and the computer can understand
that collected data in the desired format. For every natural
language processing related problem, data preprocessing of
the collected raw data is one of the most crucial parts. The
preprocessed data makes the NLP applications faster and
more accurate for the intended task.
B. CLASSICAL METHODS
The most commonly used classical methods in speech pro-
cessing and recognition system are Dynamic Time Warping
(DTW) [2], Hidden Markov Model (HMM) [3], Linear Pre-
dictive Coding (LPC) [4], Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM)
[2], Template Matching [2], Autocorrelation [5], Cepstrum
[5], Speech Application Program Interface (SAPI) [6], Fac-
torial Hidden Markov Model [7], Minimum Classiﬁcation
Error [8], Knowledge Based Approaches [9], Template Based
Approaches [9], and Perceptual Linear Prediction [10].
The classical methods used in question answering system
are Cosine similarity [11], Jaccard similarity [11], Anaphora-
Cataphora Resolution [12], Vector Space Model [13], Se-
mantic Web Technologies [14], Inductive Rule Learning and
Reasoning [15], Logic Prover [16] and many more.
Spam and fake detection systems mainly use the following
classical methods: Traditional Linguistic Features [17], Text
Mining and Probabilistic Language Model [18], Review Pro-
cessing Method [19], Time Series [20], and Active Learning
[21].
Most of the sentiment analysis systems adopted machine
learning (ML) approaches. There are very few classical ap-
proaches taken in sentiment analysis. One of the classical
methods is the rule-based method [22]. The classical ap-
proaches on machine translation are: Verb based approach
[23], Rule-based approach using parts of speech tagging [24],
Fuzzy rules [25], Rule based method [26] and many more
methods. Parts of speech tagging uses the following classical
approaches: Brill’s Tagger [27], Rule-based approach [28],
[29], [30], and Morphological Analysis [29], [30].
The classical approaches on text summarization are
Heuristic approach [31] and for parsing, mostly used methods
are Simple Sufﬁx Stripping algorithm [32], Score based Clus-
tering algorithm [32], and Feature Uniﬁcation based Morpho-
logical Parsing [33]. In the case of the information extraction
for the Bangla languages, many statistical approaches [34]
[35] have been used to construct different systems. Also, to
make a robust system, the use of the classical methods to add
more feature sets to their datasets is observed. Like Hough
Transform-based Fuzzy Feature [36], Gradient Feature, and
Haar Wavelet Conﬁguration [37] are used to add more fea-
tures to a dataset for extraction of the information.
In NER (Named Entity Recognition), most of the research
works use Dictionary-based, Rule-based, and Statistical-
based approaches [38]. There are also different statistical
models such as Conditional Random Fields (CRF) [39] is
used for NER. Most of the papers in the parsing are based on
the Ruled-based method. Different Lexical Analysis, Seman-
tic Analysis [40], [41] methods have been used for parsing.
The researchers also have taken the help of different context-
free grammar [40] for creating new rules for the parsing.
Additionaly, the researchers have also used different open-
source tools like PC-KIMMO [42] to construct a morpho-
logical parser. Analyzing different semantic information [41]
can be utilized to create a parser.
In the text summarization task, various information re-
trieval techniques for summarization with relational graphs
are used. The topic sentiment recognition and aggregation
are done through the Topic-sentiment model [43], and Theme
Clustering [44]. Frequency, position value, cue words, and
skeleton of the documents are also used [45] for text sum-
2
VOLUME 4, 2016
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
0
5
10
15
20
Information Extraction
Machine Translation
Named Entity Recognition
Parsing
Parts of Speech Tagging
Question Answering System
Sentiment Analysis
Spam and Fake Detection
Text Summarization
Word Sense Disambiguation
Speech Processing and Recognition
7
7
3
5
6
6
9
3
5
6
18
No. of papers
Category
FIGURE 2. Number of Papers Per Category.
31.77%
15.39%
15.39%
23.08%
15.39%
6.69%
CNN
RNN
HMM
LPC
Hybrid methods
Other methods
FIGURE 3. Methods used in Bangla Speech Processing and Recognition.
7.02%
14.04%
8.77%
17.54%
5.26%
8.77%
12.28%
26.32%
Statistical models
ANN
Naive Bayes
Rule-based
N-gram
Clustering algorithms
Hybrid methods
Other methods
FIGURE 4. Methods used in Text Data of Bangla Natural Language Processing.
marization. The classical approaches that used in word sense
disambiguation are Rule-based methods [46], [47]. The rules
to mark the semiotic classes and the regular expressions are
used frequently [46]. Also, the use of different Context-free
Grammars are seen in the word sense disambiguation [47].
C. MACHINE LEARNING AND DEEP LEARNING
METHODS
The most commonly used machine learning and deep learn-
ing methods in speech processing and recognition are Con-
volutional Neural Network (CNN) [48], [49], Backpropaga-
tion Neural Network (BPNN) [50], Transfer Learning [48],
Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) [51], Recurrent Neural Network
(RNN) [52], Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) [53], Arti-
ﬁcial Neural Network (ANN) [54], Deep Generative Model
[55], and Deep Neural Network (DNN) [56].
The machine learning and deep learning methods used in
question answering system are Naive Bayes algorithm [11],
Support Vector Machine (SVM) [11], Stochastic Gradient
Descent (SGD) [57], Decision Tree [13], N-grams Formation
[58], and Convolutional Neural Network [13].
The machine learning and deep learning methods used in
spam and fake detection system are Multinomial Naive Bayes
classiﬁer [59], Support Vector Machine [60], Neural Network
Models [17], Lagrangian Support Vector Machine [61], Lo-
gistic regression [61], and Anomalous Rating Deviation [62].
Many machine learning approaches were used for building
sentiment analysis systems. The most commonly used ma-
chine learning approaches on sentiment analysis are MaxEnt
(Maximum Entropy) [63], CNN [64], [65], LSTM [66],
[64], SVM [63], [64], [67], [68], [69], NB (Naive Bayes)
[64], [70], [67], [69], Decision Tree [67], [69], DBN (Deep
Belief Network) [65], SGDC (Stochastic Gradient Descent
Classiﬁer) [22], Multinomial Naive Bayes [68], K- Nearest
Neighbour (KNN) [69], and Random Forest classiﬁer (RF)
[69].
Machine translation techniques mostly uses classical ap-
proaches. The machine learning approach that was used on
machine translation is N-gram [71] There are many machine
learning approaches used in parts of speech tagging, such as
Semi-supervised method using Hash Mapping [72], Baum-
Welch algorithm [73], and HMM [73], [27]. Text summariza-
tion tasks mostly use K-means clustering [74], and Unsuper-
vised method using ULMFiT model [75]. Moreover, parsing
uses machine learning approaches like K-means clustering
[32].
Machine learning approaches like segmentation using the
Multilayer Perceptron model [76] has been used in retrieving
the textual information from the images. LSTM [77] is usu-
ally used for manipulating Bangla sentences. Hough trans-
VOLUME 4, 2016
3
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
form method [36], KNN classiﬁer [37], CNN-based models
with a Histogram of Oriented Gradient (HOG) feature [78]
are used in retrieving Bangla text information, detecting
Bangla scripts. In the NER task, most of the research works
have been done around the Ruled-based models. However,
some researchers have used modern machine learning algo-
rithms for the NER task. The machine learning algorithm that
has been used in the NER is the RNN model [79]. In case
of word sense disambiguation different machine learning
techniques have been used like KNN-based algorithm, Pal
et al. [47], [80], Naive Bayes classiﬁer and ANN [81].
D. CHALLENGES AND FUTURE RESEARCH IN BNLP
1) Challenges
• The researcher faces several preprocessing challenges
at the time of working with Bangla text and speech
data, including preprocessing of Bangla grammati-
cally wrong words, ambiguous words, erroneous words,
falsely interpreted Bangla speeches, preprocessing of
very noisy or loud Bangla speeches, and reverberations
and overlapping Bangla speeches [82], [83].
• The research works of Bangla Natural Language Pro-
cessing have occasionally faced lackings of rigorous and
comprehensive public corpus availability. That’s why
the researchers need to work on a self-built corpus.
Moreover, Bangla language does not have modern lin-
guistic tools.
• The complexity of Bangla grammar and structure is one
of the most challenging constraints for the researchers
for working with BNLP. Furthermore, the amount of
signiﬁcant and comprehensive research on BNLP is not
enough compared to the other languages, and most are
not publicly available.
• There are many non-native Bangla speakers, and they
also have variations in their speaking attitude. The re-
searchers have been facing a common difﬁculty when
working with the development of a Bangla speech pro-
cessing and recognition system that can accurately work
in natural, freestyle, noisy, and all possible environ-
ments [84].
2) Future Research
Despite being the 7th largest spoken language globally, only
small amount of signiﬁcant research works have been done
on Bangla language. The research projects and works on
BNLP were started in the late 1980s in Bangladesh, and
some tangible results have already been produced on BNLP
researches [85]. However, very little research has been done
on Bangla language processing compared to English or other
more spoken languages. But, there is considerable scope for
working with Bangla natural language processing. Sufﬁcient
linguistic tools and working prototypes for BNLP can be
developed for the Bangla language to create an easier path
for the BNLP researchers.
Quality research on romanized Bangla can be done as most
people communicate through the romanized Bangla [86].
Moreover, romanized Bangla language processing research
has become one of the most trending challenges on Bangla
natural language processing. Quality and signiﬁcant public
corpora on Bangla language can be created as most of the re-
search works on BNLP face the public corpus unavailability.
Furthermore, more contemporary and suitable deep learning-
based models can be developed in the research ﬁelds of
BNLP as upgraded deep learning models have shown better
performance for working with other languages. Therefore, a
vast amount of signiﬁcant research works can be done on
Bangla language.
E. CONTRIBUTIONS
The highlighted points of this paper are noted below:
• Recent works on BNLP based on classical, machine
learning and deep learning have been discussed thor-
oughly in this article with insightful analysis. Currently,
there is no published research that studies the whole
BNLP research area with a thorough investigation.
• We have categorized all the papers into 11 categories
(both textual and visual representation), namely Infor-
mation Extraction, Machine Translation, Named Entity
Recognition, Parsing, Parts of Speech Tagging, Ques-
tion Answering System, Sentiment Analysis, Spam and
Fake Detection, Text Summarization, Word Sense Dis-
ambiguation, and Speech Processing and Recognition.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work that
classiﬁes BNLP in those categories.
• We have discussed the limitations and challenges of the
studies with improvement ideas, various datasets and
current and future trends of BNLP research.
F. LITERATURE SEARCH PROCEDURE AND CRITERIA
As this is a review analysis, it is necessary to describe the
literature search criteria as well as the underlying process
of our study [87]. The methodological steps and guidelines
of Kitchenham et al. [88] for performing a comprehensive
literature review were followed in this study. The research
purpose of this analysis is to make a comprehensive review
study of classical, machine learning, and deep learning-based
methods of the existing Bangla Natural Language Processing
research works. The primary steps for performing the litera-
ture search areas are as follows:
1) CONSTRUCTING SEARCH TERMS
The following information will assist in identifying the
search terms that we utilized for our research topic: speech
recognition, speech processing, word sense disambiguation,
text summarization, spam and fake detection, sentiment anal-
ysis, question answering system, parts of speech tagging,
parsing, machine translation, named entity recognition, infor-
mation, extraction, machine learning, deep learning, Bangla
natural language processing, text dataset, speech dataset,
CNN, RNN, HMM, LPC, ANN, Naive Bayes, clustering, N-
gram, etc.
4
VOLUME 4, 2016
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
TABLE 1. Data sources and selections for literature search.
SL. No
Data Sources
No of selected articles
1.
IEEEXplore
40
2.
Springer
4
3.
Elsevier
2
4.
Brac University
2
5.
International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
1
6.
Others
26
2) SEARCH STRATEGY
The search terms that have been used in our study are mainly
classiﬁed by algorithms of natural language processing as
well as its used cases. We also looked for alternate synonyms
and keywords as well. In our search strings, we included
Boolean operators such as AND, OR, etc. To ﬁnd and ﬁlter
out relevant publications, multiple data sources are utilized.
Table 1 covers the data sources and selected article numbers
for our literature search.
3) PUBLICATION SELECTION
1) INCLUSION CRITERIA: The criteria we used to de-
termine the relevant literature such as journals, articles,
conference papers, books, technical reports etc are as
follows:
• Studies that were related to NLP focused on
Bangla language.
• Studies that contained relevant researches on the
subcategories of NLP.
2) EXCLUSION CRITERIA: The exclusion of litera-
ture that was not relevant to our analysis was deter-
mined by the following criteria:
• Studies that do not provide answers to the relevant
NLP research questions.
• Studies that were outside the domain of the Bangla
language.
3) SELECTING PRIMARY SOURCES: The selection
process of the papers was initialized by selecting pa-
pers that satisfy the search strings or selection criteria
which was based on their respective title, abstract and
keywords. After the primary selection was completed
the ﬁnal selection was proceeded by reading the full
text of the papers and selecting those that did not fall
under the exclusion criteria. With this process we have
identiﬁed our ﬁnal selection of papers.
4) RANGE OF RESEARCH PAPERS: The literature
review performed in our study covers researches pub-
lished from the year 1999 to 2021.
G. PAPER SUMMARY
We have discussed various deep learning approaches and
the ongoing challenges and advances in Bangla natural lan-
guage processing. We have shown various methods and pre-
processing techniques that are being used in information
extraction, machine translation, named entity recognition,
parsing, parts of speech tagging, question answering system,
sentiment analysis, spam and fake detection, text summa-
rization, word sense disambiguation and speech processing
and recognition. Figure 5 illustrates the year-wise number
of paper we have reviewed in this paper. Additionaly, we
have discussed the characteristics and complexity of BNLP
in the beginning. We have discussed various preprocessing
techniques used in various papers. After that, we discussed
various approaches, models, results and their limitations
in their respective topics such as Information Extraction,
Named entity recognition, Sentiment analysis etc. Figure 7
illustrates various categories and techniques used in their
respective sections. We have categorized each section into
classical, machine learning and hybrid approaches. Figure
6 illustrates the year wise linear trends of using various
approaches in BNLP. Furthermore, we have brieﬂy discussed
classical, machine learning and hybrid approach in the re-
spective sections. Table 13 shows the classical methods and
Table 14 shows the machine learning methods used in BNLP.
Bangla natural language processing has various challenges
to overcome and we have discussed challenges in various
sections of BNLP in the challenges section. Datasets are one
of the crucial factors for the advancement of BNLP research
and therefore, in the last section, we have discussed various
text datasets and speech datasets. In conclusion, various
advances, challenges and methods used in BNLP have been
shown in our paper.
H. ORGANIZATION
We have organized the rest of this paper in the following way.
VOLUME 4, 2016
5
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
FIGURE 5. Number of Papers Reviewed as per Year.
FIGURE 6. Trends in BNLP Methods.
• II Bangla Language: The characteristics and complex-
ities of the Bangla language are described brieﬂy.
• III Bangla Natural Language Processing: The ne-
cessity and needs, as well as different categories and
methods used in BNLP are described brieﬂy. Articles
published on different categories of BNLP till now
in both text and speech formats are discussed in this
section.
• IV Challenges in BNLP: The challenges faced in
BNLP research areas on both text and speech formats
are described in this section.
• V BNLP Datasets: The datasets used in BNLP research
articles published till now on both text and speech
formats are described in this section.
• VI Conclusion: Overall summary of our work.
II. BANGLA LANGUAGE
A. CHARACTERISTICS
Bangla language belongs to the Indo-European language
family it is one of the members of the Indo-Aryan group
of the Indo-Iranian branch. The phonology of Bangla is
similar to the other Indo-Aryan languages. The basic Bangla
alphabet consists of 11 vowels, 39 consonants. There are also
ten numerical and compound characters. These compound
characters are constructed using a combination of conso-
nant and consonant or consonant and vowel. Bangla uses
diacritical marks for vowels as well as for some consonants
and compound consonants take different shapes. All of these
result in a total of almost 300 characters set for Bangla
and written from left to right. There is no capitalization or
every character is written on upper-lower case letter. Many
conjuncts, upstrokes, downstrokes, and other features hang-
ing from a horizontal line deﬁne the script. Furthermore, a
regional variation is seen in spoken Bangla. There are two
written forms, namely SADHU and CHALITA. The stress
in Bangla is primarily initial and the stress position does not
affect the meaning of the words.
Bangla is an inﬂectional language which uses various
preﬁxes and sufﬁxes to show the grammatical relations and
there is no gender distinctions. There are three persons to
represent the pronouns in Bangla. Normally the sentences
follow subject-object-verb word patterns. Bangla primarily
has two moods known as indicative and imperative. The
indicative mood has three different tenses, namely present,
past and future. Bangla root verbs are mostly monosyllabic
or bisyllabic. Bangla uses left-branching for the order of
words which mean adjective places before nouns and adverbs
are placed before verbs. Bangla uses a post-verbal negative
particle. The position dependency of a headword is compar-
atively less ﬁrm in the sentences. Moreover, the Bangla’s
lexis consists of native Bangla words and borrowings from
Sanskrit along with other neighbouring languages. Bangla is
a morphologically, rich language.
B. COMPLEXITY
Bangla is a widely spoken language and around 265 million
people speak in Bangla. However, there is a lack of proper
datasets for the research and in most cases, the researchers
use their own set of corpus for their research. It is also seen
that there is less collaborative work among the researchers
in this ﬁeld. Also, the research’s corpus often does not get
labeled professionally, which has become a primary concern
in Bangla NLP works. Lack of standard corpus, labeled data
are making things hard for the researchers to study in this
area. Also, there is a lack of rigorous morphological analysis
of Bangla language.
Furthermore, there are more Bangla characters than other
languages, and many characters are similar. The use of com-
pound characters makes it hard for different OCR [89] and
other related works. Bangla is also a morphologically rich
language, which imposes challenges in research and there
is no proper lexicon built for it. Moreover, Bangla is often
mixed with English and created the code mixed problem for
6
VOLUME 4, 2016
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
the research purposes. Code mixing imposes a signiﬁcant
challenge in sentiment analysis or other types of tasks. Ad-
ditionally, most of the computing tools available for Bangla
only work on speciﬁc platforms, becoming troublesome for
researchers. Also, the lack of adequately labeled datasets
often arises problems when the researchers need to annotate
the datasets for themselves, which may lead to erroneous
results or the impact of the research sometimes becomes
incoherent.
III. BANGLA NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING
Natural language processing is an emerging ﬁeld in modern
computer science. Language is an important medium of
sharing data. It is a way to understand the world that sur-
rounds us. Every living species has its ways to communicate.
But humans created languages to communicate and trans-
fer understandable data to one another. Because of region-
based culture and environment, different languages have been
created throughout centuries. Additionaly, some languages
evolved, some languages went extinct. But the main object
of the language remained the same, communicating with each
other. In modern times, the world has become smaller, people
can communicate with each other living in one place to a
person living in another part of the world. This has intro-
duced a challenge to lessen the language barrier of people’s
communication. Also, the increasing use of computer created
a necessity of broadening the embedding of human language
with the computer.
We can quote some texts about the aim of a linguistic
science from a NLP book [90] written by Christopher D.
Manning as follows - "The aim of a linguistic science is to
be able to characterize and explain the multitude of linguistic
observations circling around us, in conversations, writing,
and other media. Part of that has to do with the cognitive side
of how humans acquire, produce, and understand language,
part of it has to do with understanding the relationship
between linguistic utterances and the world, and part of it has
to do with understanding the linguistic structures by which
language communicates.” Natural language processing en-
ables computers to deal with the linguistic science of human
language. Figure 7 shows the categories and techniques used
in Bangla natural language processing till now.
Bangla is a culturally enriched language used mostly in the
region of South Asia. It is an Indo-Aryan originated language
mostly used in the country of Bangladesh as the ofﬁcial and
the national language and as the ofﬁcial language in the state
of West Bengal Tripura and Assam of India. The language
has around 230 million native speakers and around 35 million
second-language speakers. Moreover, it is 7th among the
most spoken language in the world. The part of natural lan-
guage processing that works on linguistic analysis of Bangla
language is known as Bangla natural language processing.
The digitalization of modern society has increased the use
of computers and other computationally capable devices.
Bangla natural language processing is an important part of
this transformation to the digital world. As one of the biggest
spoken languages in South Asia, the Bangla language is
widely used as a script, books, communication, social media
posts etc. This wide usage of this language in digital form is
creating a massive amount of data in the digital world and
by utilizing the resources, it would be beneﬁcial for the ﬁeld
of modern linguistic analysis and data science. Sentiment
analysis, named entity recognition, parts of speech tagging,
speech processing and recognition, text summarization and
other ﬁelds of natural language processing is now being
able to apply in the Bangla language because of Bangla
natural language processing. Bangla is a culturally diverse
language with having various accent and forms like mixed
and romanized Bangla. Many works are being conducted on
Bangla which is enriching the natural language processing
part of the Bangla language.
A. NECESSITY AND NEEDS
Bangla natural language processing systems are essential
for making the natural Bangla language understandable and
interpretable to computers. BNLP focuses on clipping crucial
features from the Bangla language speech and text data using
available computing resources [79]. The modern world is
generating a large amount of unstructured Bangla text and
speech data every second. So, BNLP systems are used to
structure and process this vast amount of Bangla data and
make it compatible with computers. As a result, Nowadays
BNLP has become highly demandable in many sectors.
Information extraction in BNLP allows machines to de-
cipher and bring out the essential knowledge of words from
Bangla documents [91]. Machine translation in BNLP is used
to translate the Bangla language text data to another language
[71]. Named entity recognition in BNLP aims at identifying
and classifying every word of a Bangla document into some
predeﬁned named categories [92]. The main concern of pars-
ing in BNLP is to identify and classify the part of speech in a
sentence of Bangla documents [41]. Parts of speech tagging
systems in BNLP are used to tag the parts-of-speech, tense,
aspect, case, person, number, gender, etc. of Bangla words in
a sentence [29].
The primary purpose of the question answering system in
BNLP is to implement a chatbot that helps to create better
human-computer interaction system in Bangla language [93].
The main concern of sentiment analysis in BNLP is to select
the opinions, emotions, and sentiments from Bangla texts and
speech data [63]. Spam and fake detection systems in BNLP
aim to detect fake, fabricated, forged, or suspicious Bangla
data produced every day with the help of digital technologies
[94]. Text summarization in BNLP summarizes and extracts
necessary information from the Bangla documents [45]. The
main purpose of word sense disambiguation in BNLP is to
extract the exact meaning of a Bangla word with multiple
meanings by analyzing the other words used in that speciﬁc
sentence. [95]. Speech processing and recognition in BNLP
use Bangla speech data as a user interface to interact with
computers and make the Bangla speech data understandable
to the computers [96].
VOLUME 4, 2016
7
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
FIGURE 7. Bangla Natural Language Processing Tasks
B. PREPROCESSING
The general and most used preprocessing techniques in text
data that are used in Natural language processing are Tok-
enization [97], [13], Removal of Noise and Outliers [98],
Lower Casing [21], Removal of Stop Words [58], Integra-
tion of Raw data [99], Text Stemming [61], Dimensionality
Reduction [100], Text Lemmatization [11], Parts of Speech
Tagging [101], Removal of HTML tags [102], Removal of
URLs [103], Spelling Correction [104], Removal of Emoti-
cons [105] [66], Removing Punctuations or Special Charac-
ters [11] [59], Removing Frequent words [106], Removing
of Rare words [107], Removing Single Characters [108],
Removing Extra Whitespaces [109], Removal of Numeri-
cal Values [59], Removing Alphabets [60], Data Compres-
sion [110], Converting Emojis to Words [111], Converting
Numbers to Words [112], Text Normalization [17], [113],
Text Standardization [114], Poping Wh-type Words [12],
Anaphora [11], Verb Processing [115], Synonym Words Pro-
cessing [116], N-gram Stemming [117] and many more.
The general and most used preprocessing techniques on
speech data in Natural Language processing are Noise Re-
moval [118] [119], Pre-emphasis [120] [4], Hamming Win-
dow [2], Segmentation [50], Sampling [121] [5], Phoneme
Mapping [53], Speech Coding [4], Stemming without Noise
8
VOLUME 4, 2016
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
Removal [122], Voice Activity Detection [123], Framing
[124] and many more.
C. INFORMATION EXTRACTION
Information extraction systems use natural language text as
input and create structured information based on predeﬁned
criteria that is relevant to a speciﬁc application. The main tar-
get of information extraction is to extract salient facts about
pre-speciﬁed categories of events, entities, or connections
to construct more meaningful, rich representations of their
semantic content that may be utilized to populate databases
that require more organized input. [125]
1) Classical Approaches
In 2012, Kundu et al. [35] proposed a statistical language-
independent approach for identifying the foreign words in
the code-mixed language. They mainly implemented the
model in Bangla-English code-mixed scenarios. Moreover,
for Bangla-English code-mixed language, the model gained a
reasonable accuracy. Three cases are seen in Bangla-English
code-mixing. Tag-switching, inter-sentential and intrasenten-
tial are the everyday use cases for the code-mixed example
in Bangla. The authors suggested a statistical model for
detecting foreign words in the code-mixed language and here,
in this case, to detect English words. They used several steps
to detect English words. In their model, the authors ﬁrst
detected the English words in context with roman script.
Then they approached the idea that English which appeared
in Bangla script, might or might not contain Bangla infection.
Also, no Bangla words contain English sufﬁx except some
exceptional examples. Furthermore, Bangla words generally
appear more than English in code-mixed scenarios. The
structure of Bangla grammar remains primary during a code-
mixed example. Based on these ideas, the authors suggested
their statistical model. They trained their model from a blog
article and collected the English words and sentences man-
ually. They got an accuracy of 71.82%, implementing the
model at social media post data.However, No preprocessing
steps were mentioned, and a clear indication of the dataset is
absent. This paper can be improved by using the model on
sophisticated datasets to identify the model’s potential.
Chandra et al. [34] suggested a statistical methods com-
bined with a rule-based approach for identifying the En-
glish words in Benglish and Hinglish languages. Some ba-
sic patterns seen in the code-mixed scenario with English,
like English words are written within roman scripts. Some
sufﬁxes may be added after the English words. English
words may contain a light verb of Bangla, or they are mixed
with the language thoroughly. The authors had Bangla text
collected from CIMC [34] for their work purpose. They
implemented a combined rule-based and statistical method
for detection of the English text from the Bangla language.
They tried to detect the English word based on the rules
in three categories, and they used the Graphene Language
Model (GLM), and Phoneme Language Model (PLM) based
statistical model for their proposed method. The proposed
model achieved 95.96% accuracy in detecting English words
from the Bangla-English code mixed language. The model
was evaluated with 9,152 sentences, and those were col-
lected from different online newspapers, blogs, social media
and journals. However, no results for Hinglish code mixed
language have been presented in this paper. Combining the
method with modern machine learning algorithms can im-
prove this paper.
2) Machine Learning Approaches
Rahman et al. [76] proposed an automated road sign recog-
nition system using ANN to extract information written in
Bangla. The authors offered a system that takes photos of
the road every 2 seconds to detect any road sign. Using
those images, they extracted the text information and road
sign information like a picture of a ﬁxed shape. Related
textual information boxes had been traced, and their proposed
system provided audio feedback of the recognized sign’s to
the driver. The authors made an API that collects photos from
a video every two seconds. Those images then went through
some ﬁlters and get resized. Then the image text from the
images got extracted, the authors fed that information to a
multilayer perceptron model (MLP) to recognize the sign.
Then based on the output, audio feedback was given. To
achieve that, they used an API built on visual basic 6.0.
The authors ﬁrst normalized the images by turning them into
grayscale images and resizing them to 320x240 pixels. Then
the images went through a 3x3 median ﬁlter and an edge-
based detection based on the Sobel edge detection ﬁlter used
for text detection and extraction. After detecting the text from
the image, the authors converted the modiﬁed images into
binary images. Text segmentation were required for identify-
ing the characters from the binary images. Line segmentation
techniques and character segmentation techniques are used
to determine the individual characters and convert into a
feature vector. Then a multilayer perceptron model was used
to recognize the characters. If the identiﬁed text was present
in the record of the predeﬁned list of the road sign, the system
gave audio feedback about the detected sign. The authors
were able to recognize the road sign with 91.5% accuracy.
This accuracy is higher than the previously proposed model.
The success of their text detection and extraction algorithm
was 90.6%. However, their proposed model had lower time
complexity as well and the authors did not identify the road
signs without the textual information. This paper can be
improved by adding a method that recognises the model from
the ﬁxed pictograms to the system.
In 2019, Uddin et al. [77] suggested a neural network
model for identifying the negative sentences from Bangla
sentences. The authors used the LSTM model for their work
and created their own datasets. The authors created a model
to detect negative sentence pattern in Bangla language with
LSTM based model. They applied two-step LSTM. They did
the hyperparameter tuning for their model and implemented
10-fold cross-validation on the best LSTM model they got by
tuning the hyperparameters. They also build a preprocessing
VOLUME 4, 2016
9
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
algorithm for the Bangla data. For the work, the authors
created their dataset collected from the Bangla sentences
and no translated sentences are used for their model. They
collected the data from Twitter and for preprocessing, they
implemented a regex rule. The dataset was mainly labelled
into two categories, namely positive and negative. They
collected 588 samples of positive and negative sentences for
each category for training their model. Their model achieved
an accuracy of 73.6% with the LSTM size of 128. They
observed that their model achieved the best accuracy during
a 1-2 batch size, and it is around 77.1%. However, they did
not implement the model with batch size 1 or 2 because it
was computationally far more expensive. Overall, the authors
have implemented an RNN based LSTM model to analyze
the negative Bangla sentences. They have achieved a good re-
sult with their small dataset with some hyperparameter tuning
and cross-validation.However, the dataset used in this study
was quite small. This paper can be improved by increasing
the size of the dataset and using a larger feature set to make
the model more dynamic.
3) Combination of Classical and ML Approaches
Sural et al. [36] proposed a character recognition from
Bangla scripts using an MLP which uses Hough transform-
based fuzzy feature extraction. The model uses an MLP
model to recognize the character in three stages, and the
Hough transform of character is used for feature extraction.
The authors ﬁrst scanned Bangla scripts with an optical
scanner and generated a bit image. Then they skewed the
scanned data many times for the alignment of the scanner.
The Hough transform method was used to solve the problem.
The matra is then deleted from the word, and the authors
used a recursive algorithm to ﬁnd the minimum containing
rectangles. Then they used the segmented image in the MLP
model to identify the character in three steps. In the ﬁrst
stage, only vowels, consonants, and modiﬁers were detected.
Then, gradually in the second and third stages, the yuktakhars
were detected if a speciﬁc threshold value is not reached in
the ﬁrst stage. The model was tested with the legal document
image where the noise was created artiﬁcially. The authors
created a noisy image using a two-step Markov chain where a
random state produces the error, and the brush stage corrupts
the image pixel. They collected Bangla documents from
magazines, newspapers, novels using a 300 dpi ﬂatbed hp
scanner. They managed to get an overall accuracy of 98%
for their proposed model. The authors found it challenging
to get a good outcome because of the paper’s low quality
texts or defective scan of the documents from their observa-
tion.However, the authors did not give enough information on
what type of data had been used. This paper can be improved
by introducing a more sophisticated preprocessing for the
image for sparsely yuktakhars.
In 2011, Mandal et al. [37] suggested a model to determine
the handwritten Bangla characters in printed forms. Their
model worked based on the combination of the gradient
feature and Haar wavelet [37] conﬁguration. Then combining
two segments, the authors created a feature set, and they have
used a KNN classiﬁer to identify the characters. The authors
proposed a hybrid model based on gradient features and
coefﬁcients of the wavelet transform to recognize characters
inside a printed form. They segmented the machine-printed
portion of the form ﬁrst and then segmented the character
using a morphological opening operation. After that, a Sobel
gradient operator was used to identify the grayscale image’s
gradient. The authors also used the Haar wavelet for ﬁnding
the coefﬁcient of the wavelet transform of the character. By
combining two features, they created a feature vector. Then
by using the KNN algorithm, they determined the character.
A 1-NN algorithm was used in general. If a tie arises for a
similar outcome to break the tie, a 3-NN or 5-NN algorithm
was used. For the datasets, the authors used 25 samples of 49
symbols in the Bangla language. They used 4,372 instances
for the training of the model and evaluate their model with
46 Bangla forms, and each containing character forms 83 to
112. The authors used two types of methods in making the
combined feature vector. In both cases, they managed to gain
accuracy of over 87%. In their ﬁrst method, the normalized
image was decomposed by level three Haar wavelet, and they
gained an accuracy of 87.65%. The second method used the
level 2 Haar wavelet transformation directly with the feature
set and achieved an accuracy of 88.95%. However, in the
training phase of this study, the sample size is insufﬁcient.
More training samples could be used in the training phase to
improve this paper.
Sharif et al. [78] suggested a hybrid CNN model for
detecting the Bangla numerical digit recognition. The model
combines CNN-based models with a Histogram of Oriented
Gradient (HOG) feature. The model was trained with the
Bangla numerals dataset, and the authors evaluated untrained
datasets for evaluation. The authors proposed a hybrid model
consisting of two parts. In the ﬁrst case, two hidden layers
of the respective 32 and 64 sized ANN take feature vectors
extracted from an image as input. This feature has been
acquired from the HOG. In the second part, a conventional
multi-layered CNN has been used, which has a ﬁlter of
32x3x3 and a max-pooling layer of 2x2. The authors used
the output of these two-parts to make a combined larger
feature vector. The model ﬁnally goes through a softmax
function of ten layers. As for the dataset, the authors used the
Bangla numeral datasets from the Indian Statistical Institute
(ISI) handwritten character database and CMATERDB3.1.1
collection. The authors used image augmentation for ISI
datasets, containing 19,392 training images and 3,986 test-
ing images. However, by applying augmentation to the ISI
training dataset images, the authors then created a dataset
of 58,176 to train the model. They used this dataset for
training the model, and the CMATERDB3.1.1 contained
6,000 images used for the testing of the model. The model
gained good accuracy using less computation power, which
is the proposed model’s key feature. Their model reached an
accuracy of 99.02% in only 55 epochs. There is another work
by Sazal et al. [126] where authors used DBN to recognize
10
VOLUME 4, 2016
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
TABLE 2. Summary Table for Information Extraction.
Article
Datasets and Results
Preprocessing Steps and Methods
Sural
et
al.
[36]
A 300 dpi ﬂatbed HP scanner was used to scan the Bangla documents
from different sources including newspapers, magazines, and novels and
the model achieved 98% accuracy.
Hough transformation on the scanned images was applied and
a three MLP model that took a fuzzy feature set obtained from
the Hough transformation for Bangla script recognition.
Rahman et al.
[76]
Captured a photo with a webcam every 2 seconds and the accuracy of the
system in recognizing the Text detection and extraction was 90.6% and the
road sign was 91.5%.
Text segmentation, feature extraction was used as preprocessing
and character recognition was achieved using an MLP neural
network.
Mandal et al.
[37]
25 samples of each character was taken and accuracy of the system in
recognizing the using scheme one was 87.65% and using scheme two was
88.95%.
Segmentation of form, Character segmentation and feature
extraction were done with gradient computation. Wavelet
transform and the character recognition were done using a
KNN algorithm.
Kundu et al.
[35]
Self-collected data from the IT tutorial blog and Bangla sentences and
71.82% accuracy.
Language independent statistical model.
Chandra et al.
[34]
CIMC dataset and 95.96% accuracy.
Introspection of the sentences of CMIC to identify certain
patterns for the rule and rule-based and statistical mode
combined method were applied.
Sharif et al.
[78]
ISI handwritten character database and CMATERDB3.1.1 collection and
the model achieved 99.02% accuracy with 55 epochs.
Smoothing operation for decreasing noise, image converted
into binary format. Hybrid model containing HOG feature
extraction into a two hidden layer ANN plus a multilayer CNN
and ten layers of SoftMax function for the outcome has been
used.
Uddin et al.
[77]
Self-made data, collected from the twitter and 73.6% accuracy.
Regex rules to eliminate any roman or unnecessary scripts and
LSTM model with LSTM size of 128 and batch size of 5.
Bangla handwritten characters. However, a limited dataset
was used, and the evaluation was done with an excellent
noiseless set. This paper can be improved by enlarging the
dataset size and by using more handcrafted feature extraction.
Table 2 shows the short description of the articles of
Bangla ionformation extraction systems.
D. MACHINE TRANSLATION
Throughout civilizations, humans have created language to
communicate with each other. The language differs from
region to region. To understand a language for a person
who does not understand the language we use a translator.
Machine Translation is a technique to translate one language
to another through computer processing.
1) Classical Approaches
Ali et al. [127] presented a procedure for developing machine
translation dictionaries. The authors also provided some mor-
phological rules that helped to develop a Bangla machine
translation dictionary. The procedure of developing a Bangla
machine translation dictionary by the authors goes as fol-
lows: determining contents of the dictionaries, determining
the detail of information, determining the organization of
the dictionaries. The authors discussed that the domain of
the application affects the contents of the dictionaries. The
detailed information of the dictionaries depends on rules
and restrictions that are imposed. The morphology plays
an important role in structuring the words and forming the
sentences. The organization of the dictionaries was signiﬁed
by the authors as the storing and availability of information
and the extendibility also plays an important role in devel-
oping the machine translation dictionary. Later in the paper,
the authors discussed various contents for Bangla machine
translation dictionaries such as grammatical properties and
Bangla morphology. The authors of this paper primarily
focused the development procedure of a machine translation
dictionary and discussed various factors related to the points.
However, no implementation was provided. The authors de-
noted that generalized morphological rules can reduce the
size of dictionaries. The signiﬁcance of morphological rule
was reﬂected in the paper as the authors also provided some
morphological rules.
Ali et al. [128] demonstrated ways to link the Bangla lan-
guage to Universal Networking Language (UNL) [129]. The
conversion between Bangla and UNL would allow Bangla
documents to be converted into any language and vice versa.
The authors provided an outline to make a Bangla-UNL
dictionary, annotation editor for Bangla texts, morpholog-
ical rules etc. The goal of the authors was to eliminate
the huge task of translation between Bangla and any other
languages by converting the Bangla text to Universal Net-
working Language. The core structure of UNL contains six
elements: universal words, attribute labels, relational labels,
UNL expression, hypergraph, knowledge base. To build a
Bangla-UNL dictionary the authors analysed various Bangla
morphological structures to reduce dictionary entries. The
authors suggested the annotation of web documents can be
done scientiﬁcally by trained people in that subject. They also
VOLUME 4, 2016
11
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
TABLE 3. Summary Table for Machine Translation.
Article
Datasets and Results
Preprocessing Steps and Methods
Rabbani et al. [23]
Comparing with Google translation and Anubadok on-
line gave a satisfactory result.
Methods applied: Verb based approach.
Chowdhury [24]
Unicode based document corpus was used.
Methods applied: A rule-based approach using parts of
speech tagging.
Ali et al. [127]
Machine translation dictionaries.
Methods applied: Morphological rules.
Ali et al. [128]
Web documents.
Methods applied: Rule-based approach.
Islam et al. [71]
EMILLE, KDE4 and Prothom-alo corpus were used.
BLEU, NIST and TER score of 11.70, 4.27 and 0.76.
Pre-processing steps: Parallel corpus aligning, manual
cleaning of the corpus. Methods applied: N-gram, 5-gram,
8-gram.
Francisca et al. [25]
The least error rate for adaptive 0.7666% and non-
adaptive 0.8544% using bootstrap.
Pre-processing steps: Tokenization. Methods applied:
Rule-based (fuzzy rules).
Anwar et al. [26]
The success rate of simple, complex and compound
sentences are 93.33%, 92.6%, and 91.67% respectively.
Pre-processing steps: Tokenization. Methods applied:
Rule-based approach.
suggested that the caption of the news can be used as an anno-
tation. The UNL-Bangla dictionary requires morphological
analysis and for that the authors provided some structures to
get the root words. They also provided UNL structure for the
structures. For syntactic analysis and semantic analysis, the
authors provided some rules. The paper provided a suitable
guideline to start working for tasks related to converting
Bangla texts to UNL. The authors did not implement any-
thing but provided an outline so that can be used for future
work.
Anwar et al. [26] proposed a method that analyzes the
Bangla sentences syntactically accepting all types of Bangla
sentences and performs machine translation into English
using an NLP conversion unit. The rules imposed in this
proposed method allows ﬁve categories of sentences for
parsing. The proposed method performs the ﬁrst task by
tokenizing the sentences. Then the syntax analyzer analyzes
Bangla grammatical rules. For representing the grammar, a
set of production rules was used. The lexicon of this method
contained a priori tag and sufﬁx for words. After that, a
parse tree was generated for the given input string. The
analysis and conversion into a parse tree were done by an
NLP conversion unit. The NLP conversion unit used a corpus
containing large amounts of English sentences as training
corpora. Then the output sentence was generated. The result
of the system showed that the success rate of simple, complex
and compound sentences are 93.33%, 92.6% and 91.67%
respectively. The authors of this paper proposed a machine
translation technique combined with syntax analysis that can
translate any type of Bangla sentences into English sentences.
The system generated satisfactory results. However, the sys-
tem was unable to handle idioms and phrases and mixes
Bangla sentences.Adding the capability of handling mixed
sentences and using a bigger dataset can improve the system
drastically.
In 2011, Francisca et al. [25] presented a rule-based adap-
tive Machine translation system from English to Bangla. The
proposed system is based especially on fuzzy rules [130].
The translation process works by classifying the English
sentences into a particular class and then translating them into
Bangla using rules. At the beginning of the methodology, the
authors analysed the essential grammatical rules of English
grammar. After that, the authors performed a comparative
analysis of structures between English and Bangla. After
that morphological analysis was done during mapping of
English to Bangla. After that, a set of rules was imposed for
translation. In this part the English sentence was tokenized by
words, then after lexical analysis fuzzy rule was matched for
structuring the sentences for translation. Then the dictionary
was used to translate the corresponding English words to
Bangla. Finally, the translated part was reconstructed into
Bangla sentences using corresponding rules. Thus, the ﬁnal
result was provided. The authors used three methods to
compare the experiment they conducted. Those methods are:
Hold out, Cross-validation and Bootstrap. Among them, the
bootstrap had the least error rate for adaptive 0.7666% and
non-adaptive 0.8544%. The result provided by the authors
supported the claim made by them. However, a bigger dataset
could clarify their claim robustly. The rule-based approach
provided by the authors in this paper was able to translate
English sentences into Bangla sentences. Testing in a bigger
dataset and reducing complexity can improve the method.
Chowdhury [24] presented an approach to develop Bangla
to English Machine translation using parts of speech tagging.
The article also shows some methods that can resolve pro-
nouns to summarize the text so that coherence and important
information are conserved. The methodology of the proposed
method is divided into three parts: parts of speech tagging,
12
VOLUME 4, 2016
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
Bangla, and English rule implementation, and ﬁnally, the
English sentence generation. The tag vector for tagging con-
sists of sixteen bits, and three bits out of them were kept for
parts of speech. To implement grammatical rules to struc-
ture a proper sentence, the rules of Bangla and the English
language were compared and implemented by generating
an algorithm. The algorithm works by translating individual
words using a dictionary, determining the subject of the
sentence, and ﬁnally, implementing the grammatical sufﬁxes.
In the end, the words were rearranged following Bangla to
English grammar rules. The author gave an example of the
implementation of the method but did not provide any test
result. The author expressed a new approach to machine
translation from Bangla to English in this paper. The method
was described as efﬁcient for simple sentences. The paper
provides a unique approach to translate Bangla into English
machine translation.The performance analysis of the system
was not provided. The author’s claim could be robust if any
performance analysis were provided and tested, comparing
different methods. Providing a performance analysis could
provide clariﬁcation of the proposed method.
In 2014, Rabbani et al. [23] proposed a verb-based ma-
chine translation technology to translate the English language
to the Bangla language. The verb-based approach detects the
main verb of the sentence given in English, then binds other
parts of speeches as subject and object. The authors success-
fully implemented the technique in assertive, interrogative,
imperative, exclamatory, active-passive, simple, complex,
and compound English sentences. The methodology of this
verb-based approach has several steps. The ﬁrst step is to
translate individual English sentences if there is a paragraph.
The second step performs lexical analysis on the texts. In the
third step, words are bound and tagged based on the previous
step, which is an iterative process. The fourth step is deter-
mining the verbs in a sentence using VBMT (Verb Based
Machine Translation) [23]. In the next step, VBMT works
on deﬁning the Bangla sentence structure in correspondence
to the English sentence. In the last step, VBMT is used to
generate the ﬁnal Bangla sentence based on the modiﬁed
English sentence structure obtained from the previous step.
The result was obtained by the authors comparing their ma-
chine translation with Google translate and Anubadok online.
The authors claimed that the proposed machine translation
technique was able to translate and give a satisfactory result.
The machine translation technique proposed by the authors in
this paper suggests a verb-based approach. But the limitations
of preposition binding and phrase binding gives a worse
result than the compared two systems while testing. The
authors expressed the future intention to make improvements,
including the preposition bindings and appropriate tagging
of Parts Of Speech of a word within a sentence. The paper
expresses a proposition of a machine translation technique
based on a verb-based approach. The authors also expressed
some limitations regarding the approach, like limitations in
preposition and phrase binding. Resolving preposition and
phrase binding limitations and improving POS tagging using
a rich dataset can improve the paper.
2) Machine Learning Approaches
Islam et al. [71] proposed a phrase-based machine translation
system for translating the English language to Bangla lan-
guage. Two additional modules were created, for this reason,
one is a transliteration module and another is a preposition
handling module. The experimental results were obtained in
different metrics. The methodology proposed by the authors
gives importance to two points: handling preposition and
transliteration. That is why two dedicated modules were used
in the proposed system. The system architecture is illustrated
in Figure 8. For the dataset, a parallel corpus of South
Asian languages having 12,654 English and 12,633 Bangla
sentences were used. The preposition handling module was
divided into pre-processing and post-processing. The training
corpus and testing corpus were developed individually. For
training, a parallel training corpus containing 10,850 sen-
tence pairs were used. The baseline system was built in a
5-gram language model and tested on a corpus. The corpus
was cleaned by an alignment tool and hard manual labour.
After that, a new translation system was made with an 8-
gram model. The transliteration model was developed to
increase the accuracy. A collection of 2,200 unique names
from Wikipedia and Geonames was used to make sure nouns
are not translated. The implementation of the prepositional
module used the intersection of word alignment. These post-
translation corpora were pre-processed in two steps: coming
up with 19 postpositional words, coming up with a group
of 9 sufﬁxes for attaching nouns. The result compared with
Anubadok shows the proposed system had
BLEU [131]
, NIST [132] and TER score of 11.70, 4.27, and 0.76 re-
spectively where the Anubadok scored 1.60, 1.46 and 1.03
respectively. The evaluation of the ﬁnal combined system
shows the KDE4 corpus performs better than EMILLE [71].
The system handles prepositions very well.
The authors expressed that their proposed system produced
satisfactory results but has some limitations.The system han-
dles prepositions very well. The parallel corpora for English
and Bangla were not enough. The system works well for short
sentences. Also, some verb-noun ambiguity occurs which
was not resolved. The satisfactory results obtained were good
for low-density languages like Bangla. The experimentation
process includes using various N-gram [133] models for
testing. The paper signiﬁes handling prepositions very well.
The overall performance of the proposed system provided a
satisfactory result. Handling compound words, using a bigger
corpus and extension of preposition handling can make the
paper better.
Table 3 covers overall datasets, results, pre-processing
steps and methods used in machine translation papers.
E. NAMED ENTITY RECOGNITION
The task of identifying and categorizing phrases into speciﬁc
classes of named entities, such as names of people, organiza-
tions, and locations, is known as named entity recognition
VOLUME 4, 2016
13
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
FIGURE 8. System Architecture of Phrase based Machine Translation [71].
[134]. Named entity recognition has several applications,
including machine translation, text-to-speech synthesis, nat-
ural language comprehension, information extraction, infor-
mation retrieval, question answering, and so on [135].
1) Classical Approaches
In 2008, Chaudhuri et al. [38] proposed a Name Entity (NE)
detection process for the Bangla language. The authors de-
scribed a three-staged approach for name entity recognition,
containing dictionary-based, rule-based, and statistical-based
approaches. In their proposed model, ﬁrst, a given word goes
through a morphological analyzer for stemming. Then the
given word goes through the dictionary which maintains one
of the three categories of tags attached to each word. If any
match occurs for the word in the dictionary then the algo-
rithm search for the tags otherwise it put a weight on the word
and send it to the next phase where rule-based analysis is
done. The rule for name entity can be positive or negative and
based on the fact the authors suggested 12 different rules for
named entity. A Weight is added to the word if it maintains
certain rules. To be certain if a word is a name entity, a certain
threshold value is set and to be accepted as name entity
the weight of the word has to be greater than the threshold
weight. If a word is not a name entity another threshold
weight is set. If the weight of the test word is less than this
threshold weight, then it must be less than the threshold value
and it is not a name entity. Otherwise, the word is sent for
the next stage, a statistical-based approach where the N-gram
method is used. To generate the N-gram model, the NE words
have been tagged manually. From these tags, words left
and right neighbor words have been checked (for 2-N-gram
Model). The frequency of each pair is calculated from the
corpus. If a particular pair of neighbors occur about a word,
then based on the corpus probability of name entity have been
decided. To form the corpus Anadabazar Patrika was used as
the resource. The data obtained from the newspaper cannot be
used directly as they were in the glyph code. So these texts
were transformed into ISCII format and the result of their
work has been evaluated based on the recall, precision, and F-
measure which is respectively, 85.5%, 94.24%, and 89.51%.
The proposed technique, on the other hand, was trained on
tiny datasets and evaluated on controlled datasets.
2) Machine Learning Approaches
Banik et al. [79] suggested a name entity recognition method.
The authors used a recurrent neural network for their model,
and they have used a gated recurrent unit in their model
for the recurrent neural network. They used data collected
from the newspaper for their purpose. The authors presented
a simple, RNN based network that has three layers. To
solve the vanishing gradient problem in the simple RNN
network, they used GRUs. They have used one-hot encoded
vocabulary for their system. The hidden state in the RNN
would change based on the input size in the network. They
used a non-linear activation function Relu [136]. In their
NER system, the authors focus on four name entity criteria
like person, L location, organization, and day. They created
a dataset containing data collected from a newspaper. Then
they annotated the data based on those four criteria. They
have used some prepossessing for their model such as re-
moval of URL and punctuation character and segmented the
text in the meaningful entity. The authors achieved an F1
score of 69 for their model. The result they obtained is from
50 epochs. Their model worked in the predeﬁned form of
text documents. Their model has a smaller number of hidden
units due to the fewer data. Also, the limited dataset has an
impact on the results. The proposed method, on the other
hand, lacked relevant dataset speciﬁcs, and the data was also
insufﬁcient.
3) Combination of Classical and ML Approaches
Chowdhury et al. [39] presented a NER system that specially
focuses on the Bangladeshi Bangla. They used word-level,
POS, gazetteers, and contextual characteristics, together with
the conditional random ﬁelds for the primary model. They
also observed the performance of a DNN [137] to compare
their base model. They made their primary dataset based on
Bangladesh and created a dataset for the proposed model by
following the Automatic Content Extraction (ACE) [39] and
MUC6 guideline. In their dataset, there were seven entity
types. Their contribution becomes a part of Bangla Content
Annotation Bank (B-CAB) [39]. For collecting data, they
selected different newspapers from Bangladesh for the re-
gional difference. Their model explored four different feature
sets: word level, which has primarily provided morphological
information of the word, POS for making parts of speech
taggers, list of lookup features searches for any named entity
from a previously created corpus, and ﬁnally, a word embed-
ding feature has been used. They also used a DNN model to
compare the CRFs model’s performance, whether the modern
machine learning algorithm exploits the results more or not.
The model was run with India’s different geographic datasets
14
VOLUME 4, 2016
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
TABLE 4. Summary Table for Named Entity Recognition.
Article
Datasets and Results
Preprocessing Steps and Methods
Chaudhuri et al. [38]
E-newspapers of Anandabazar Patrika for the years 2001-2004
were used as the datasets and the result was presented in the
form of recall (R), precision (P), and F-measure, respectively
85.5%, 94.24%, and 89.51%.
Word level morphological parser, combination of
dictionary-based, rule-based, and statistical (N-gram
based) approaches.
Chowdhury et al. [39]
Location speciﬁed dataset BCAB with seven entities and cre-
ated a black list of words for Bangla and the model achieved a
F1 score of 0.58 and for the partial match of domain the model
achieved 0.72.
Created a dataset with seven entities and annotated
them manually. Used a CRF’s based model and a
DNN model for comparison.
Banik et al. [79]
Dataset collected from the “Prothom Alo” newspaper and the
model achieved F1 score of 69 with 50 epochs.
Url remover, punctuation character removal, text seg-
mentation and 3 layer GRU based RNN model are
used.
to show the signiﬁcance of the NER system’s geographic
location. They have evaluated the prediction based on the
exact and partial match. The CRFs model achieved an F1
score of 0.58 and 0.72 respectively for the domain’s exact
and partial match and their proposed model performed better
than a bidirectional LSTMs-CRFs architecture. Moreover,
further research is ongoing in this ﬁeld under Bangla Content
Annotation Bank (B-CAB).
Table 4 shows the short description of the articles of
Bangla named entity recognition system.
F. PARSING
A sentence of a language is made up according to the syntax
of the grammatical rule provided by the language. Parsing in
Natural Language processing works on determining the syn-
tactic structure of the sentence according to the grammatical
rules of that language.
1) Classical Approaches
Dasgupta et al. [33] proposed a morphological parser of
compound words of Bangla language. The authors used a
feature uniﬁcation based morphological parser for parsing
compound words. The authors of this paper used ﬁnite-state
morphological parsing which is based on Kimmo Kosken-
niemi’s two-level morphology technique [33]. There are 3
components for this parsing system: lexicon and morphotac-
tic, morphophonology and word-grammar component. The
authors prepared ﬁnite state machines for compound words.
The ambiguity of two parse trees was resolved by deﬁning
two new features and implementing feature uniﬁcation to
ensure a single parse tree. The nominal and pronominal
inﬂections were classiﬁed into ﬁve categories. The features
were used to modify the lexicon. After that, the compound
words with inﬂectional sufﬁxes were categorized into four
different categories. The ﬁnal grammar was generated in PC-
Kimmo format. The implementation of the morphological
analyser was done in PC-KIMMO version 2. The result
obtained in the implementation shows a 100% correct result
on compound words found in Bangla grammar books. The
paper’s approach to deal with compound words in Bangla
sentence was unique. The evaluation process was not strong
enough.The methodology would be better judged if they used
a wide range of test samples to evaluate the result of their
proposed method.
In 2003, Mehedy et al. [40] suggested a context-free
grammar for generating a parse tree for the Bangla sentence.
The authors have proposed a model that can parse all ﬁve
categories (assertive, interrogative, imperative, exclamatory,
and optative) of Bangla sentences. The parser analysis can be
divided into three categories: the lexical analysis phase, the
syntax analysis phase, and the semantic analysis phase. In
the lexical analysis, the characters of sentences are scanned
sequentially and divided into tokens. Then in the syntax
analysis, the validity of the sentence is checked according
to grammar. Lastly, in the semantic phase ensures that the
discrete input components ﬁt together meaningfully. The
authors maintained all these analyses during their creation of
context-free grammar. Then the authors created context-free
grammar for all possible combinations of the sentences such
as the structural variations of a sentence. They considered the
intonation difference for the sentences. Also, they considered
the indicative form of sentences and created different context-
free grammar for each case to make a parser.
Dasgupta et al. [42] suggested a morphological parsing of
Bangla words. The authors used PC-KIMMO to establish
his model. For constructing morphological parsers, there
are three essential equipment like lexicon, morphotactics,
and orthographic rules. For the lexicon section, the authors
collected a list of stems and afﬁxes, together with necessary
information about them. In the morphotactics section, the
authors established a rule where it described the order of
the morpheme, in other words, which morpheme classes can
follow other classes. Then the authors applied orthographic
rules for his parser. Then they applied a two-level parsing
where the ﬁrst part was a rules component, and the other
part was a lexical component of the lexicon. Finally, the
authors implemented the open-source PC-KIMMO for the
construction of the parser. For their model, they used basic
VOLUME 4, 2016
15
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
TABLE 5. Summary Table for Parsing.
Article
Datasets and Results
Preprocessing Steps and Methods
Das and Bandyopadhyay [32]
Indian languages to Indian languages machine translation system’s
(IL-ILMT) gold standard morphological dataset. The result had an
accuracy of 74.6%.
Methods Applied: K-means clustering, simple
sufﬁx stripping algorithm, score based cluster-
ing algorithm.
Dasgupta et al. [33] [2005]
Grammar book examples of compound words were used as the dataset.
Result had an accuracy of 100%.
Methods applied: Feature uniﬁcation based
morphological parsing.
Mehedy et al. [40]
No speciﬁed dataset. The model can parse all kind of Bangla sen-
tences.
Context free grammar for making parse tree.
Dasgupta et al. [42] [2004]
No speciﬁed dataset. The model was used for the morphogolical
parsing.
The open-source parser PC-KIMMO was used
for the morphological parsing.
Saha et al. [41]
No speciﬁca dataset. The parser can identify parts of speech in Bangla
sentences.
The parser was created based on the grammat-
ical rules of Bangla language.
sets of grammar for Bangla.
Saha [41] proposed a parser for identifying the POS for
the Bangla lexicons. Also, his suggested model annotated
the Bangla sentence with semantic information. The model
was built on a rule-based method to produce a Bangla parser.
Bangla has no small or capital concepts. Thus it does not
become easy to ﬁnd a proper noun based on the characteris-
tics of the characters. Also, in Bangla, a word can be used
as different parts of speech. It is also possible for a word
to be a proper noun or abstract noun based on a particular
sentence. It is observed that common words have different
senses based on the use cases. This word disambiguation
also becomes an uphill struggle in creating a parser. Thus,
the author has suggested an intelligent parser that can deal
with these challenges. In the time of creating the parser, the
proposed model starts annotating POS to each word. If a
particular word is not present in the lexicon, then it is tagged
as a proper noun. If, when generating the parse tree, any
POS-ambiguity happens, then it has been solved by Bangla
grammar rules. In the case of word sense ambiguity, the
author used the N-gram model to deﬁne the word’s correct
sense.
2) Combination of Classical and ML Approaches
In 2010, Das and Bandyopadhyay [32] presented a stemming
cluster-based morphological parsing technique of Bangla
words. Two types of algorithms were experimented for this
purpose: simple sufﬁx stripping algorithm and score based
stemming cluster identiﬁcation algorithm. Indian languages
to Indian languages machine translation system’s (IL-ILMT)
gold standard morphological dataset was used for evaluation.
The authors used two types of morphological clustering
techniques: agglutinative sufﬁx stripping and minimum edit
distance using a sufﬁx list. Four lists were made based on
parts of speech on noun, adjective, adverb and verb. The
simple sufﬁx stripping algorithm used here works well only
for nouns, adverbs and adjectives. A small list consisting
of 205 sufﬁxes for Bangla was generated manually. The
sufﬁx stripping algorithm checked if a word has sufﬁxes
from the list and the cluster is assigned assuming the root
word. For verb minimum edit distance resolves the stemming
problem for inﬂected verb words. Total six times the system
performed an iteration and generated a ﬁnite numbers of stem
clusters. A separate list of verb inﬂections were maintained
for validation. The standard K-means clustering technique
was used for this purpose. The evaluation of their present
system was performed on the IL-ILMT’s gold standard Mor-
phological dataset. The accuracy of the system was reported
at 74.6%. The paper proposed a new morphological parsing
technique using clustering. However, the evaluation process
was not simpliﬁed. Testing other clustering techniques may
improve performance of the system.
Table 5 covers overall datasets, results, pre-processing
steps and method used in Parsing papers.
G. PARTS OF SPEECH TAGGING
Every language has some grammatical rules which determine
and tags what type of words are used in a text. Parts of
Speech Tagging is a part of Natural Language Processing that
classiﬁes and tags different words in a sentence according to
that particular human language.
1) Classical Approaches
Hasan et al. [27] presented a comparative analysis of different
parts of speech tagging techniques (N-gram, HMM [138],
and Brill’s tagger [139]). The authors aimed to maximize
the performance on limited resources. The comparison was
performed on both English and Bangla to understand which
can manage a substantial amount of annotated corpus. At the
beginning of methodology ﬁrst, the tagset was built with 12
tags (noun, adjective, cardinal, ordinal, fractional, pronoun,
indeclinable, verb, post positions, quantiﬁers, adverb, and
punctuation). This was the high-level tagset. The second level
of tagset was based on 41 tags. The training corpus was built
16
VOLUME 4, 2016
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
TABLE 6. Summary Table for Parts of Speech Tagging.
Article
Datasets and Results
Preprocessing Steps and Methods
Ismail et al. [72]
1,000,000 words from various newspapers, blog posts, and articles were
used. Successfully tag 134,749 nouns, 11,067 verbs and 8,435 adjectives
out of 320,443.
Pre-processing steps: Filtering unique words.
Methods applied: Semi-supervised method us-
ing hash mapping.
Hammad Ali [73]
Prothom-Alo articles total to about 50000 tokens and the tagged subset
consists of 18,110 token and 4,760 word types were used. Baum-Welch
algorithm failed to obtain HMM parameters.
Pre-processing steps: Cleaning the corpora to
remove unnecessary data. Methods applied:
Baum-Welch algorithm, HMM.
Hasan et al. [27]
Corpus of 5,000 words from prothom alo were used. Brill’s tagger
performed best among other taggers.
Methods applied: N-gram, Hidden Markov
Model, Brill’s Tagger.
Hoque and Seddiqui [28]
Prothom-Alo articles, around 8,155 words, and 585 sentences were
used. 93.7% tagging accuracy on dictionary + stemmer + verb + dataset
+ rules.
Pre-processing steps: Stemming with custom
rules. Methods applied: Rule-based approach.
Chowdhury et al. [29]
Performance complexity of n log(n).
Methods applied:
Rule-based morphological
approach.
Chakrabarti
and
Pune
CDAC [30]
The tag set is both from the common tag set for Indian Languages and
IIIT Tag set guidelines.
Methods applied: Rule-based approach, mor-
phological analysis.
with 5,000 words from daily newspaper prothom alo. The
training corpus consisted of 4,484 words and the rest was
on the testing set. Then the corpus was trained with various
POS taggers. The English POS taggers had high-performance
96%+ where the Bangla POS taggers did not perform well,
some only 90%. The Brill’s tagger performed best among
other methods. The authors compared various parts of speech
tagging techniques to ﬁgure out which technique performs
best on limited resources. The authors ﬁgured out that the
techniques perform similarly on similar-sized corpus in the
English language. So, the authors believe that if a bigger
corpus was used Bangla POS taggers would perform the
same. This paper answers the question of the best POS tagger
available for the Bangla language. Also, the paper concluded
the necessary improvement concept as the authors ﬁgured out
the corpus size makes an effect on POS taggers performance.
The training dataset seems to be limited. Using a bigger
dataset and including other POS taggers for comparison
could improve the paper.
In 2011, Debasri and Pune CDAC [30] proposed a rule-
based Parts of Speech tagging system for the Bangla lan-
guage. The POS tagger had included layered tagging. The
author proposed 4 levels of tagging which also handles the
tagging of multi verb expressions. The methodology of the
POS tagger starts with morphological analysis of the words.
In the beginning noun, analysis and verb analysis had been
done. Then the sufﬁxes were classiﬁed based on number,
postposition and classiﬁer information. Verbs are classiﬁed
into 6 paradigms based on the morphosyntactic alternation
of the root. The sufﬁxes are further analysed for person and
honoriﬁc information. The ambiguity between a cardinal and
a noun was resolved by a rule. Then the POS tagger was made
to go through 3 stages. For multiverb expression, the POS
tagger goes through additional steps. There was no result
of the analysis given to clarify the claim or performance of
the tagger. The author of this paper proposed a POS tagger
for the Bangla language which follows a rule-based method.
The POS tagger works on multiverb expressions too. The
paper discusses a unique rule-based approach for parts of
speech tagging of the Bangla language. The drawback of this
paper was the lack of ways to measure the performance of
the tagger proposed in this method. Including performance
analysis or testing on a dataset could clarify the claim of this
paper.
Chowdhury et al. [29] proposed a rule-based morpho-
logical analyser for Bangla parts of speech tagging. The
proposed way works from the context-free to the context-
bound level. The authors presented the ﬁrst steps towards an
automated morphological analysis of the Bangla language.
In the methodology of the proposed method, a tag vector
was introduced which was a sixteen-bit tag vector where
parts of speech, person, mode, tense number and emotion
were put in different lengths. Among the bits, three bits were
kept for parts of speech. In POS there are nouns, pronouns,
adjectives, verbs, and prepositions. The noun is divided into
proper noun and dictionary word whereas the adjective is
divided into a proper adjective and modal adjective. Some
morphological rules were introduced for regular inﬂections,
derivations and compounding with additional explicit rules
for irregular inﬂection, derivation, and compounding. The
authors introduced 21 rules for parts of speech and 4 rules
for numbers. The rules were used to tag certain words. The
paper provides a complexity analysis of the proposed method
which was: C(n) = NS ∗n(log2 Nr) where NS was the
complexity of the sufﬁx, Nr was the complexity of accessing
the root and n was the number of characters in the patter to be
VOLUME 4, 2016
17
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
tagged.Performance analysis of the system was not provided.
The POS tagger’s performance can be more understandable
and clariﬁed if the method is tested practically using any NLP
tools.
2) Machine Learning Approaches
Hammad Ali [73] presented the result of some initial ex-
periment in developing an unsupervised POS tagger for
the Bangla language using the Baum-welch algorithm and
HMM. The whole methodology can be summarized in four
phases: collection of corpus and dataset, search for imple-
mentation of Baum-Welch algorithm, performing training
and ﬁnal test against the gold standard for accuracy. The
tagset was developed for 54 tags. The corpora were collected
from a leading Bangladeshi newspaper called Prothom-Alo
totals to about 50,000 tokens and the tagged subset consists
of 18,110 token and 4,760 word types. After that, the Baum-
Welch algorithm was implemented on the corpora using
C++ HMM and NLTK toolkit. The result was stated by the
author that the HMM was unable to ﬁgure out the Markov
parameters from the corpora for the Bangla language in both
C++ HMM and NLTK python toolkit. The paper tried to
experiment on Bangla POS taggers using an unsupervised
approach. The initial experiment was unsuccessful. This pa-
per was an initial presentation of some results on supervised
POS tagger of Bangla language. The author experimented
with conventional unsupervised methods and ﬁgured out that
the method doesn’t work in the Bangla language. This paper
doesn’t provide any solution but gives some idea to the future
work to be done on this topic.
In 2014, Ismail et al. [72] proposed a semi-supervised
method to develop an automated Bangla POS tagging dic-
tionary. The dictionary is developed of nouns, verbs, and ad-
jectives. It was evaluated with a paragraph containing 10,000
manually tagged words with 11 tags. To make this automated
POS tagger, the authors ﬁrst created a list of sufﬁxes that
contained about 500 sufﬁxes. Then large numbers of words
were collected from various resources, which were about
1,000,000 in number. After some ﬁltering, it came into a list
of 320,443 unique words. A Hash table was used that maps
the keys to values for storing data. The algorithm which was
proposed works on three hash tables. The word list words
were checked to examine whether it matches any root word
stored in the hash map. If the word from the sufﬁx list
matches the root word, then this word is added in hashmap-
1, hashmap-2, and hashmap-3. If it matches multiple times,
then the longest match is considered. Then the stored words
in the hash maps were analyzed to ﬁgure out the potential
words suitable for POS tagging words. In this case, the
occurrences of the same tag were eliminated. Finally, the
POS tag dictionary was generated using hash maps using
the potential candidates. The result of the experiment was
evaluated from a dataset of more than 1,000,000 words from
online Bangla newspapers, blogs, and other Bangla websites,
and from that, 320,443 words were extracted as unique.
The proposed algorithm successfully tagged 134,749 nouns,
11,067 verbs, and 8,435 adjectives. The paper shows a unique
way to generate automated parts of speech tagging for the
Bangla language. The POS tagger generally generates 3 POS
tags (noun, verb, and adjectives). It would be better if other
POS tags were added. Also, the result shows the biases on the
noun tag over other POS tags. Resolving these issues would
be able to improve the POS tag’s performance further.
3) Combination of Classical and ML Approaches
Hoque et al. [28] proposed an automated POS tagging sys-
tem for the Bangla language based on word sufﬁxes. The
proposed method contains a custom stemming technique that
is capable of retrieving different forms of sufﬁxes. Also, a
vocabulary of 45,000 words with default tags and a pattern-
based verb dataset was used. The methodology applies sufﬁx
analysis through which the authors developed their desired
Bangla POS tagger. Using the sufﬁx-based morphological
analysis, a stemmer was developed, which converted the
sufﬁx word into a root word. Also, the authors developed a set
of rules based on sufﬁxes, rules of Bangla grammar, and some
real-time observations. After applying the stemming and the
rules, the result was obtained. The dataset used for analysis
was obtained from the daily prothom-alo newspaper. The
dataset contained around 8,155 words and 585 sentences. The
experiment was done in three different contexts: dictionary
and stemmer, verb dataset with dictionary and stemmer, and
ﬁnally, dictionary, stemmer, verb dataset, and set of rules.
The POS tagger worked on eight fundamental parts of speech
tags. The ﬁrst case had an accuracy of 47.1%, the second
case had an accuracy of 63.4%, and the third case had the
best accuracy, which was 93.7%. The method proposed in
this paper was very insightful and thoughtful in Bangla POS
tagging. The custom stemming and rules were helpful enough
to detect the tags as perfectly as possible. Concentrating
on all the subcategories of each base tag with punctuation
will be able to improve the tagger even more. Accuracy can
be increased by providing a small dataset and combining a
probabilistic method.
Table 6 covers overall datasets, results, pre-processing and
methods used in POS Tagging papers.
H. QUESTION ANSWERING SYSTEM
Question answering is the process of answering a question in
natural language and extracting an answer swiftly and simply
while validating the response properly. The primary goal of
this system is to comprehend and interpret phrases into an
internal representation so that it can provide valid responses
to user questions [140], [141]. Question answering systems
can be classiﬁed based on techniques, data resources, do-
mains, responses, question types, and evaluation criteria used
to build a question answering system [142].
Figure 9 shows the basic system architecture of question
answering System.
18
VOLUME 4, 2016
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
FIGURE 9. Basic System Architecture of Question Answering System [143]
1) Classical Approaches
In 2018, Khan et al. [12] proposed a Bangla question an-
swering system by using anaphora-cataphora resolution for
simple sentences. Here, both semantic and syntactic analyses
were done in this model, and a Bangla word net was built
to validate the proposed system process. The authors tok-
enized the question into words, and the wh-type words were
popped. The proposed question answering system yielded an
average accuracy of 74% for giving correct answers for the
tested questions.The authors of this paper focused on using
anaphora-cataphora resolution methods to improve answer
extraction techniques for a Bangali question answering sys-
tem. Despite the fact that their proposed system provided
satisfactory accuracy, the document corpus used to test the
proposed models was small, and there were not enough
variations of document data because the proposed corpus
lacked complex and descriptive sentences. This paper can be
improved if complex and descriptive sentence documents are
collected, and there should be enough variations and contents
of factoid questions and descriptive questions in the proposed
corpus by enlarging the size of the document corpus.
2) Machine Learning Approaches
Islam et al. [57] proposed a machine learning approach to
classify the Bangla question-answer types using stochas-
tic gradient descent. The authors used two-layer taxonomy
[145], which has six coarse classes [146]: abbreviation,
entity, description, human, location, numeric, and 50 ﬁner
classes [147]. The authors achieved an average precision of
0.95562 for coarse classes and 0.87646 for more advanced
classes, and after eliminating stop words, they achieved an
average precision of 0.92421 for coarse classes and 0.8412
for ﬁner classes. The authors focused on the classiﬁcation
of word or phrase-based answer types in Bangla question
answering systems in this paper. Though the authors achieved
satisfactory results in both coarse and more reﬁned classes,
the corpus size used to test the proposed models was small,
and the number of descriptive questions in the proposed
corpus was small, so there was not enough variation in the
data. This paper can be improved if more questions of all
types are collected, and there should be enough variations
and contents of factoid questions and descriptive questions in
the proposed corpus.
In 2019, Islam et al. [58] proposed an automatic question
answering system for Bangla language from single and mul-
tiple documents. The proposed system identiﬁes the ques-
tion type, and for measurement of time and quantity-related
questions, it provides relevant speciﬁc answers; otherwise,
it retrieves relevant answers based on the questions. The
authors removed stop words and performed stemming on
the questions as well as the selected documents. Keywords,
lexical and semantic features are extracted, and N-grams for-
mation was used from these keywords, lexical and semantic
features. Here, an average precision of 0.35, average recall of
0.65, and an F score of 0.45 were obtained.This paper used
multiple documents to create a question answering system.
The authors’ proposed testing corpus is small and has fewer
variations of questions and relevant documents; additionally,
the implementation techniques of keyword extraction and n-
gram formation from keywords for approximate matching
for extracting questions from users’ questions are not brieﬂy
deﬁned. This paper can be improved if more questions will be
collected and more topics will be selected, and there should
be enough variations and contents of factoid questions and
descriptive and complex questions in the proposed corpus.
Uddin et al. [144] proposed a Bangla paraphrased question
answering model using a single supporting line. The au-
thors developed question-answer pairs as well as supporting
lines from the Bangla wiki2 corpus. The authors gathered
about 11,500 question-answer pairs based on history domain-
related questions in Bangla language. Firstly, unnecessary
words or characters and URLs were removed from the raw
data, then web scraping and tokenization were also applied
to the modiﬁed data. In the proposed system, LSTM and
GRU were used with positioning encoding and word em-
bedding. By using positioning encoding with LSTM, the
authors got 86%, 97%, and 82% accuracy for softmax [148],
linear [149], and relu [136] and by using word2vec word
embedding [150] with LSTM, they got 100%, 5% and 5.6%
accuracy, respectively for softmax, linear, and relu activation
functions. Again, using positioning encoding with GRU, the
authors got 96.59% and 88.6% accuracy, respectively, for
softmax and relu, and by using word2vec word embedding
with GRU, they got 98.86% accuracy for softmax activation
function. The accuracy of the authors’ proposed system
was quite good. However, the document corpus used to test
the proposed models was small, and the data did not have
enough variation. This paper can be improved by enlarging
the dataset and considering an open domain-based dataset,
induction, and deduction methods.
VOLUME 4, 2016
19
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
TABLE 7. Summary Table for Question Answering System.
Article
Dataset and Results
Preprocessing Steps and Methods
Khan et
al. [12]
Fifty documents and ten question queries for each document. 74% accuracy
was obtained.
Tokenizing the question into words and popping the wh-type
words. Anaphora- Cataphora resolution method was used.
Islam et
al. [57]
3,334 questions. Precision of 0.95562 for coarse classes and 0.87646 for more
adequate classes, and after eliminating stop words, precision of 0.92421 for
coarse classes and 0.8412 for ﬁner classes were obtained.
Stochastic Gradient Descent was used.
Islam et
al. [58]
Wikipedia documents and 500 questions. The precision of 0.35 recall of 0.65
and the F score of 0.45 was obtained.
Stop words removing and stemming the questions as well as the
documents. Keyword, lexical and semantic feature extraction, and
N-grams formation from these Keywords were used.
Uddin et
al. [144]
11,500 question-answer pairs based on history domain related questions from
Bangla wiki2 corpus. Positioning encoding with LSTM yields 86%, 97%, and
82% accuracy and word embedding with LSTM yields 100%, 5% and 5.6%
accuracy, respectively for Softmax, Linear, Relu activation function.
Unnecessary word or characters and URLs were removed from
the raw data, web scraping and tokenization were applied. LSTM
and GRU were used with positing encoding and word embedding.
Sarker et
al. [13]
15,355 questions and 220 documents. SVM yielded 90.6% accuracy with
a linear kernel for classifying questions. 75.3% accuracy was obtained
for document categorization. 56.8% and 66.2% accuracy obtained without
mentioning and with mentioning the object name, respectively, for extracting
answers.
Removing stop words and sign characters, tokenizing the words
in exceptional cases, checking and making corrections of spelling
mistakes of raw data. SGD, Decision Tree, SVM, Naive Bayes,
FastText, CNN, Vector Space Model, and Edit distance compari-
son techniques were used.
Kowsher
et
al.
[11]
3,127 questions and 74 topics for training and 2,852 questions from the
relevant 74 topics for testing. 93.22% accuracy using Cosine Similarity,
82.64% accuracy using Jaccard Similarity, and 91.34% accuracy using the
Naive Bayes classiﬁer.
Anaphora, cleaning unique characters and punctuations, stop
words removing, verb processing, lemmatization, and synonyms
word processing. Cosine similarity, Jaccard similarity, and Naive
Bayes algorithm and SVM methods were used.
3) Combination of Classical and ML Approaches
Sarker et al. [13] proposed a factoid question answering
system on the closed domain [151] of Shahjalal University
of Science & Technology (SUST) for helping the admis-
sion tests candidates. For question and document catego-
rization, the authors selected ﬁve coarse-grained classes. In
the preprocessing steps, the author removed stop words,
removed sign characters, tokenized the words in exceptional
cases, checked and made corrections of spelling mistakes
of raw data manually, and rechecked the assigned labels.
The authors used stochastic gradient descent, decision tree,
support vector machine, and naive Bayes for classifying the
questions. For document classiﬁcation, they used FastText
[152] as an embedding technique and a convolutional neural
network classiﬁer, and also for extracting answers, vector
space model and edit distance [153] comparison techniques
were used. For question classiﬁcation, support vector ma-
chine with linear kernel provided the best accuracy of 90.6%.
For document categorization, 75.3% accuracy was obtained.
Answer extraction technique provided around 56.8% accu-
racy without declaring the object name and around 66.2%
with indicating the object name. A document hit of around
72% was received from the proposed system. In this paper, a
generic factoid question answering system for Bangla was
implemented. For classifying questions and extracting an-
swers, the authors used a variety of techniques. The proposed
question-answering system, on the other hand, can only
respond to factoids about SUST. This paper can be improved
by enlarging this domain and selecting other domains.
In 2019, Kowsher et al. [11] proposed an informative
question answering system in Bangla. The authors selected
Noakhali Science and Technology University as the only
domain of this proposed chatbot model. The authors used dif-
ferent preprocessing techniques such as anaphora, removal of
unique characters and punctuation, removing of stop words,
processing verbs, lemmatization, and processing synonyms
words. Jaccard similarity, cosine similarity, and naive Bayes
algorithm were used to generate answers to users’ questions,
and support vector machine was also used to reduce space
complexity and execution time. Here, 93.22% accuracy was
obtained for cosine similarity, 82.64% accuracy was obtained
for Jaccard similarity, and 91.34% accuracy was obtained for
the naive Bayes classiﬁer.This paper used a Bengali intelli-
gence bot to retrieve information. Even though the authors’
proposed system provided acceptable accuracy, there was
insufﬁcient variation in the questions and relevant documents
because the proposed model was developed solely for the
NSTU domain. This paper can be improved by selecting and
enlarging other domains and tested them in the proposed
system.
Table 7 shows the short description of the articles of
Bangla Question Answering systems.
I. SENTIMENT ANALYSIS
The sentiment is the state of the human mind. We can
determine sentiment through the reactiveness of the person.
Humans express their feelings through texts which enables us
to ﬁgure out the state of mind. Sentiment Analysis is the part
of Natural Langue Processing that determines the sentiment
through analysing text data.
20
VOLUME 4, 2016
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
Figure 10 shows the basic system architecture of Senti-
ment analysis.
FIGURE 10. Basic System Architecture of Sentiment Analysis [154].
1) Machine Learning Approaches
Chowdhury et al. [63] introduced a paper aimed to automat-
ically extract the sentiments and opinions conveyed by users
from Bangla microblog posts and identify the overall polarity
of texts as either positive or negative. The approach was taken
using semi-supervised bootstrapping for training corpus. The
classiﬁcation task was performed using SVM [155] and Max-
Ent [156] by experimenting with a combination of various
sets of features. Figure 11 shows the overall architecture
of the system. The dataset contained 1,300 (train: 1,000,
test: 300) Bangla tweets downloaded by querying Twitter
API, then the tweets were pre-processed using tokeniza-
tion, normalization, and parts of speech tagging. The pre-
processed data were then processed using a semi-supervised
bootstrapping method. Self-training bootstrapping works by
ﬁrst labelling a small dataset, then a classiﬁer is trained on
that small labelled data, and afterwards, the trained classiﬁer
is applied on a set of unlabelled data. The classiﬁer is then
retrained on this newly labelled data, and the process was
repeated for several iterations. After that SVM and Maxent
were used to classify the tweets as positive or negative
sentiments. The result was obtained on the F- measure [157].
On SVM a score of 0.93 was achieved on both labels using
a combination of unigram and emoticons as features. Using
only unigrams only or other features the scores were about
0.65-0.71 which increases using emoticons. On the same
feature, MaxEnt gives a score of 0.85.The accuracy of the
system was satisfactory. However, the neutral sentiment was
absent. Adding neutral sentiment to the classiﬁcation can
improve the paper.
FIGURE 11. System Architecture of Bangla Sentiment Analysis using
Microblog Posts [63].
In 2015, Ghosal et al. [69] performed sentiment analysis
on Bangla horoscope data collected from daily newspapers
using various classiﬁcation models and evaluated the best
model. The sentiment polarity had two classes (positive and
negative). The authors’ proposed methodology part starts
with collecting a horoscope dataset. The horoscope data was
collected from the Bangla newspaper over one year. Then a
dataset of 6,000 sentences was created and the preprocessing
steps consisted of the removal of punctuation and annotation.
Human annotators did annotations and for feature experimen-
tation, unigram, bigram, and trigram features were used. A
stop word dataset of 58 words was created from this dataset.
Then the data was tested on ﬁve classiﬁers: naive Bayes,
KNN, decision tree, and random forest. Then the perfor-
mance was compared using 10-fold cross-validation. From
the results, the best performance obtained from SVM using
unigram features having an accuracy of 98.7%. The proposed
method was compared with different classiﬁers which show
good performance analysis. However, the paper contained a
classiﬁcation of only two sentiment classes. Addition of more
classes can improve the paper.
Hassan et al. [66] proposed an approach for sentiment
analysis on Bangla and romanized Bangla [158] text using
recurrent neural network. The emoticons and proper nouns
were removed from the dataset, and the data were validated
manually by two native speakers as positive, negative, and
ambiguous categories. The authors used data for one val-
idation set as pre-training for another validation set. The
embedding layer [159], LSTM layer, and a fully connected
layer [160] with various activations were used to detect
positive, negative, and ambiguous categories of Bangla and
romanized Bangla sentiments. Authors achieved 70% ac-
curacy for positive and negative emotions for only Bangla
text and 55% accuracy for positive, negative, and ambiguous
[161] sentiments for both Bangla and romanized Bangla
text. The authors focused on sentimental analysis on both
VOLUME 4, 2016
21
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
Bangla and Romanized Bangla Text in this paper. Though
they were able to detect positive and negative sentiments
with pretty satisfactory accuracy for only Bangla textual, the
accuracy for romanized Bangla sentiment detection was poor.
Collection of more data for romanized Bangla sentiments and
GRU implementation could give a better result for validating
the model.
Islam et al. [70] used the naive Bayes model with a super-
vised classiﬁcation method on Bangla Facebook status. The
supervised method consists of Bi-gram and linguistic analy-
sis. Their sentiment classes were positive and negative. The
authors used Facebook comments for their data domain. They
collected Facebook comment data manually and tagged them
either positive or negative. They collected 1,000 positive and
1,000 negative comments for training and 500 comments for
testing. Their pre-processing steps contained the removal of
hashtags, website URLs, stemming, etc. After that, they per-
formed the negation handling on valence shifting words. The
normalization process was done using linguistic analysis. It
was done according to Bangla grammar. A corpus of 1,200
unique words was used for this purpose. After that, Unigram
and Bigram were used as features in the naive Bayes classi-
ﬁcation model. Laplace smoothing was also used. Then the
polarity of the Facebook data was calculated by prior prob-
ability and conditional probability. After that naive Bayes
classiﬁcation model was used to obtain the result. The result
shows naive Bayes with Unigram had precision, recall, F-
score of 0.65, 0.56, and 0.60, respectively. On the other
hand, naive Bayes with Bigram had precision, recall, and
F-score of 0.77, 0.68, and 0.72, respectively. As people’s
social media comments contain sentiment information, this
polarization could be beneﬁcial to train a model for sentiment
analysis.The system has some drawbacks due to having only
two sentiment classes. The two-class output in this model
is insufﬁcient for some cases. Increasing the classes would
bring more fruitful results.
In 2017, Sarkar et al. [68] described their implementation
of sentiment polarity detection in Bangla Tweets. They used
the Bangla tweet dataset released for SAIL content 2015.
Their methodology is based on four steps. (1) data cleaning
and preprocessing (2) feature extraction (3) model develop-
ment (4) classiﬁcation. The algorithms they used are naive
Bayes multinomial classiﬁer and SMO (a version of SVM)
[162]. They tested it with various combinations of the N-
grams. The authors claimed that their accuracy on multi-
nomial naive Bayes [163] combined with Unigram, Bigram
and SentiWordNet was 44.20%, and SVM with Unigram
and SentiWordNet was 45%. They claimed that SMO was
not giving better results than SMO with the polynomial
kernel. The authors observed that SVM classiﬁers trained
with unigram and SentiWordNet features perform the best
on the Bangla tweet dataset. The problems authors faced was
lack of dataset and incorrect annotation labelled by human
annotators. They implied that more training data with proper
annotation would help them to develop a more accurate
sentiment analysis model. The authors also claimed that
their proposed system can be easily extended to other Indian
languages like Hindi, Tamil, etc. The method proposed had
good performance analysis. However, the proposed method
had low accuracy and also had a limited dataset.Overcoming
the lack of dataset and resolving the human annotation issue
can improve the paper.
Mahtab et al. [67] implemented sentiment analysis on
Bangladesh cricket Bangla text dataset using TF-IDF vec-
torization and SVM as classiﬁers. The dataset was polar-
ized into three emotions: praise, criticism, and sadness. The
dataset used here was the ABSA Bangla dataset containing
2,979 data and manually collected data containing 1,601
text samples. The manual dataset was collected from the
Prothom Alo newspaper. They labelled the opinions on the
dataset as praise, criticism, and sadness. There were 513,
604, and 484 labelled data on praise, criticism, and sadness,
respectively. The authors used python NLTK for tokenizing.
After that, Bangla stopwords were taken into account. The
feature extraction was done using the Bag of words model of
the Scikit-learn library. Then TF-IDF was used to vectorize
as the authors claim to be one of the most powerful ways
to vectorize at that time. The processed data was used on
the SVM to get the result and decision tree, multinomial
naive Bayes classiﬁers were used to compare the results. The
authors used 10% of the data for testing and the rest for
training. The result obtained shows an accuracy of 73.49%
using SVM on the ABSA dataset. On the other hand, naive
Bayes and decision tree had an accuracy of 70.47% and
64.765%. The system can have some drawbacks due to the
narrow scope of the dataset. The authors expressed that
the result was better in the ABSA dataset rather than their
manually created one. Improving the size and domain of the
dataset and the inclusion of more classes can improve the
paper. There is another work by Awal et al. [164] where
naive Bayes is used to detect abusive comments from social
networks.
Tripto and Ali [64] implemented multilabel sentiment and
emotion analysis on Bangla YouTube comments using CNN
[165] and LSTM [166]. The labels were as follows: three
classes (positive, neutral, and negative), ﬁve classes (strongly
positive, positive, neutral, negative, and strongly negative),
and six emotions (anger, disgust, fear, joy, sadness, and
surprise). The dataset was collected from YouTube comments
using YouTube API 3.0. Those are collected from videos
dating from 2013 to early 2018. Google translation was used
to detect the language of each comment. Then the comments
were labelled by human annotators. The amount of com-
ments are as follows: three-class (positive: 3,104, neutral:
2,805, negative: 3,001), ﬁve-class (strongly positive: 416,
positive: 843, neutral: 1,222, negative: 1,064, strongly neg-
ative: 341), emotions (anger/disgust: 823, joy: 762, sadness:
272, fear/surprise: 294, none: 739). The collected data were
then pre-processed using tokenization, stop words removal,
removing URLs, user tags, and mentions. The lemmatization
was not applied to preserve sentiment information. After that,
the pre-processed data was fed into two separate models of
22
VOLUME 4, 2016
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
TABLE 8. Summary Table for Sentiment Analysis.
Article
Datasets and Results
Preprocessing Steps and Methods
Hassan et al. [66]
The dataset contains 6,698 entries of Bangla and 2,639 entries of
romanized Bangla texts that are collected from social media and
other internet resources. Authors achieved 70% accuracy for positive
and negative sentiments for only Bangla text and 55% accuracy for
positive, negative and ambiguous sentiments for both Bangla and
romanized Bangla text.
Preprocessing steps: Removal of emoticons, removal of
proper nouns, and manual validation (by native speakers).
Methods: LSTM and neural network.
Chowdhury et al.
[63]
The dataset contains 1,300 Twitter posts collected using Twitter API
(Train:1000, Test:300). Based on f-score: SVM: 0.93, MaxEnt: 0.85.
Pre-processing steps: Tokenization, normalization, POS tag-
ging, and semi-supervised bootstrapping. Methods: SVM
and MaxEnt.
Tripto and Ali [64]
The dataset contains YouTube comments collected using YouTube
API 3.0 and dataset was divided into 10% test data and from rest of
the data 80% training data, 20% validation data were created. The
highest result obtained from LSTM: Accuracy: 0.6596, F1 score:
0.63532. The highest result obtained from CNN: Accuracy: 0.6089,
F1 score: 0.6052.
Pre-processing steps: Tokenization, normalization, stop
words removal, removal of URLs, user tags, and mentions.
Methods: for the proposed method: CNN, LSTM and for the
baseline method: SVM, naive Bayes.
Islam et al. [70]
The dataset contains Facebook comments (2,500 comments) manu-
ally collected. Naive Bayes with Unigram, F-score: 0.65 and Naive
Bayes with Bigram, F-score: 0.77.
Pre-processing steps: removal of symbols, URLs, stemming,
negation handling, normalization. Method: Naive Bayes.
Mahtab et al. [67]
ABSA Bangla dataset was used. Accuracy: 73.490% using SVM on
ABSA dataset.
Pre-processing steps: Tokenization, stop words removal, vec-
torization. Methods: for the proposed model: SVM and for
comparison: Naive Bayes, Decision Tree.
Kamal Sarkar [65]
SAIL dataset of Bangla tweets (1,500 data) was used. Result ob-
tained from CNN: Accuracy: 46.80%. Result obtained from DBN:
Accuracy: 43%.
Pre-processing steps: Unusual sign removal, SentiWordNet
polarity detection, vectorization. Methods: for the proposed
method: CNN and for the baseline method: DBN.
Mandal et al. [22]
Raw data were collected using Twitter API. Language tagging: ac-
curacy: 81%. Sentiment tagging: accuracy: 80.97%, F-score: 81.2%.
Pre-processing steps: Removal of incomplete tweets, spams
and contradicting sentiment tweets, ﬁltering to preserve
code-mixed property, data annotation. Methods: A hybrid
model combining SGDC and rule-based method.
Sarkar
and
Bhowmick [68]
Bangla tweet dataset released for SAIL content 2015 was used.
Based on accuracy: multinomial naive Bayes: 44.20% and SVM:
45%.
Pre-processing steps: Removing irrelevant characters, obtain
a vector representation. Methods: multinomial naive Bayes
and SVM.
Ghosal et al. [69]
Bangla horoscope data from the daily newspaper over a year was
used. The highest result obtained from SVM: accuracy of 98.7%.
Pre-processing steps: removing punctuation, annotation.
Methods: naive Bayes, SVM, KNN, Decision Tree, Random
Forest.
LSTM and CNN. The classiﬁcation was then compared to
baseline SVM and naive Bayes [167] methods. The authors
claimed that the model outperformed the baseline models.
The results obtained on three-class, ﬁve-class and emotions
was as follows: LSTM (accuracy: 0.6596, 0.542, and 0.5923.
F1 score: 0.63532, 0.5320, and 0.5290), CNN (accuracy:
0.6089, 0.521, and 0.5403. F1 score: 0.6052, 0.52086, and
0.53465). The baseline models scored around 0.44-0.60 on
accuracy and 0.46-0.59 on F1 score. The model achieved at
least 10% more accuracy than the baseline and the existing
approaches. This paper had unique characteristics of includ-
ing extra sentiment classes and emotions, which was uncom-
mon compared to other related works on Bangla sentiment
analysis.However, there was some imbalance in the amount
of data of various classes in the dataset. The accuracy could
be improved if a bigger dataset was provided.
Kamal Sarkar [65] analysed sentiments on a Bangla
Tweet dataset using deep convolutional neural networks. The
classes containing sentiment analysis were three (positive,
negative, and neutral). The proposed method was then com-
pared with a deep belief neural network [168] for evaluation.
The methodology proposed by this paper was divided into
four sections: pre-processing, data representation, training
CNN and saving model for future prediction. In the pre-
processing step, the unusual symbol removal and use of
SentiWordNet to detect polarity were done. For data repre-
sentation, the tweet corpus was turned into word vectors. A
vocabulary of 8,483 was created. After that, the CNN model
was trained which was composed of one convolutional layer,
one hidden layer, and one output layer of softmax activation.
For training and testing, the SAIL tweets dataset was used.
A rectiﬁed linear unit was used in a convolutional and dense
layer. After the training and process were completed, the pro-
posed CNN-based model had an accuracy of 46.80%, where
VOLUME 4, 2016
23
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
the DBN-based model had an accuracy of 43%. The author
expressed concern about scarcity of benchmark datasets for
sentiment analysis in Indian languages. Also, they claimed
that the dataset was insufﬁcient and noisy. The author had a
plan to perform exploitation of unlabelled data in the training
process of DBN and CNN based models. A proposal of
using a recursive neural network was also brought. Though
the methodology was simple the accuracy was poor in this
proposed system. A bigger dataset can improve the overall
performance of the model. Increasing layers in the model can
also be considered.
2) Combination of Classical and ML Approaches
Mandal et al. [22] collected raw twitter data, created Bengali-
English code-mixed corpus for sentiment analysis, and ap-
plied various classiﬁcation methods to measure the best
performance. The data processing work was done manually,
and they followed very complicated steps for providing a
corpus, which the authors claimed to be the gold standard.
The polarity of sentiment analysis had three polarities: posi-
tive, negative, and neutral. In methodology, in the beginning,
the authors collected raw twitter data using Twitter API.
After that, the data was ﬁltered and maintained the code-
mixed property. In the clearing process, spam, incomplete
tweets, ones with contradicting sentiment were removed. Url
and hashtags were preserved as they used to possess some
sentiment information. By this, out of 89,000 data, 5,000
data were taken. The annotation had two phases, language
tagging, and sentiment tagging. The annotated data were
reviewed by human annotators. Language tagging process
contained LBM (Lexicon based module) and SLM (super-
vised learning module). Sentiment tagging was generally
based on rule-based and supervised methods. The training
data consisted of 1,500 training instances and 600 testing
instances that were equally distributed in both processes.
Then naive Bayes and linear models were used to evaluate
the performance. Among them, the performance of SGDC
had the best performance with an F-score of 78.70%. After
that, the SGDC was used on a hybrid classiﬁer built with rule-
based and supervised methods. The ﬁnal result can be divided
into two sections, language tagging, and sentiment tagging.
The language tagging had a performance of 81% accuracy,
and the sentiment tagging had an accuracy of 80.97% and
an F1-score of 81.2%. The performance of the proposed
system provided satisfactory results. But the classiﬁer had
only 3 sentiment classes and the latest methods were not
applied or tested in the system.Bigger dataset and the latest
classiﬁcation models can improve the overall performance of
the model. Also, sentiment classes provided in this paper can
be increased, providing a bigger dataset.
Table 8 covers overall datasets, results, pre-processing and
methods used in Sentiment Analysis.
J. SPAM AND FAKE DETECTION
Deceptive contents, such as fake news and phony reviews,
spam emails, offensive tweets, text, or comments, sometimes
known as opinion spam, have become a growing threat to
online customers and users in recent years. It is feasible to
undertake spam and fake detection in online news, emails,
tweets, reviews, and other text data using various natural
language processing approaches by extracting signiﬁcant fea-
tures from the text using various natural language processing
techniques [169].
1) Machine Learning Approaches
In 2019, Islam et al. [59] proposed an approach for detecting
spam from malicious Bangla text using multinomial naïve
Bayes (MNB). Punctuation marks, numerical values, and
emoticons were extracted, and a TF-IDF vectorizer [170]
was used to extract the features. Here, the multinomial naive
Bayes yielded an overall accuracy of 82.44% with precision:
0.825, recall: 0.824, F-score: 0.808, and error: 17.56. Here,
the authors could not provide enough data for developing
the proposed model, especially since the spam data was tiny
and no processed data were chosen for the validation set, and
the feature extraction mechanism was not good enough. This
paper can be improved by training and testing the proposed
model on a more extensive dataset.
In 2020, Hussain et al. [60] proposed a technique for
investigating Bangla fake news from social media sites. The
authors assumed the articles from very renowned portals as
actual news, and reports from satire news sites are considered
fake news. Various preprocessing techniques, such as remov-
ing special Characters, removing Bangla & English digits,
removing English alphabets, and removing emoticons, were
applied to the raw text data. Count vectorizer [171] and TF-
IDF vectorizer were used to extract features. For classifying
the fake news, the authors used multinomial naive Bayes
classiﬁer and support vector machine classiﬁer with a linear
kernel. Here, 93.32% accuracy was obtained for multinomial
naive Bayes, and 96.64% accuracy was gained using support
vector machine. Here, the author’s assumption of classifying
the fake and real news is controversial because some popular
news portals occasionally publish fake news. This paper can
be improved by enlarging the size of the proposed news
article corpus. Also, the classiﬁcation technique for fake and
real information should be made unambiguous.
2) Combination of Classical and ML Approaches
Hossain et al. [17] proposed an annotated dataset containing
50K news for developing automated phony news detection
systems in Bangla language and evaluated the dataset using
NLP techniques by classifying Bangla fake news. To clas-
sify fake news, the authors used standard linguistic features
including lexical features [172], syntactic features [173],
semantic features [174], metadata [175] and punctuation, and
neural network models including CNN and LSTM. Also,
a multilingual BERT model [176] was used to classify the
news documents. The authors performed several preprocess-
ing techniques like normalizing the text and stop words,
removing punctuations from the raw data. The proposed
system yielded a 91% F1-score when using linguistic features
24
VOLUME 4, 2016
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
TABLE 9. Summary Table for Spam and Fake Detection.
Article
Datasets and Results
Preprocessing Steps and Methods
Islam et
al. [59]
1,965 variational instances, including 646 spam and 1,319 ham (non-spam). 82.44%
accuracy was obtained with precision: 0.825, Recall: 0.824, F-score: 0.808, and Error:
17.56.
Punctuation marks, numerical values, and emoticons
were removed from the raw data. For classiﬁcation,
multinomial naive Bayes and TF-IDF vectorizer
were used.
Hussain
et
al.
[60]
2,500 public articles. 93.32% and 96.64% accuracy were obtained respectively for MNB
and SVM.
Special Characters, English digits, English alphabets,
and emoticons were removed from the raw data. For
classiﬁcation, multinomial naive Bayes and support
vector machine were used.
Hossain
et
al.
[17]
50,000 news, and among them 8,500 news were manually annonated. Linguistic features
with SVM produced a 91% F1-score. SVM and LR had F1 scores of 46% and 53%,
respectively. In CNN, average pooling and the global max technique had F1 scores of
59% and 54%, respectively. In the BERT model, F1-Score was 68%.
The raw text data were normalized, and stop words
and punctuation were also removed. Traditional lin-
guistic features and neural network models were used
for classiﬁcation purposes.
with SVM. For news embedding, RF [177] yielded a 55% of
F1-score and SVM, LR [178] yielded 46% and 53% of F1-
scores respectively. In CNN, 59% and 54% F1-scores were
gained respectively by using average pooling [179], global
max technique [180]. In the BERT model, F1-Score was
68%. Here the authors manually annotated only around 8.5K
news. This paper can be improved by annotating more data.
Table 9 shows the short description of the articles of
Bangla spam and fake detection systems.
K. TEXT SUMMARIZATION
When we need to understand a long text it is time-consuming
to read through the whole text and also hard for us to consume
the learning. Text Summarization is a section of Natural
Language Processing which deals with the summarization of
longer texts with computer processing.
1) Classical Approaches
In 2017, Abujar et al. [31] introduced a Bangls text sum-
marization technique using the extractive method along with
some heuristic rules. The technique uses sentence scoring
to evaluate the key sentences to focus on summarization. In
the proposed method, the process starts from pre-processing,
which consists of tokenization, stop words removal, and
stemming. The prime sentences are then identiﬁed by word
analysis and sentence analysis based on length, distance,
values, etc. Finally, the prime sentences are evaluated using
sentence scoring methods. The ﬁnal process includes aggre-
gate similarities, ﬁnal gist analysis, and sentence ranking.
The result obtained by the authors was counted out of ﬁve.
The result was compared with human-generated summaries.
The proposed method scored around 4.3, where the human-
generated result scored 4.6. The authors expressed that the
abstractive method gave a better summary than the extractive
one, but it requires many development phases. The technique
proposed was able to perform the text summarization in the
Bangla language successfully. No standard way of evaluation
was followed in the proposed system. The performance can
be compared to a standard approach to get further clariﬁca-
tion.
In 2013, Efat et al. [45] suggested a text summariza-
tion technique on Bangla text document. Their model is
extraction-based and summarizes a single document at a
time. The authors have proposed a classical method for
summarizing the model, and they used newspaper articles
for their model. The authors collected the data from the
newspaper from Bangladesh, then they have used some pre-
processing techniques on those Bangla textual documents
like tokenization, stop word removal, and stemming. Then
they ranked the sentences of the document. They counted on
the frequency, position value, cue words, and skeleton of the
documents for this purpose. Frequency is the appearance of
a word, and the position of sentence inﬂuences the summary
of a document. Also, cue words or connecting words play
essential roles. Skeleton consists of the document header,
and title. Based on these features, a summary marking was
allocated to each sentence. The authors collected 45 articles
from different newspapers, and those articles are stored in
UTF-8 ﬁle format. They gave a sentence marking by tuning
the parameters of their model. Based on the sentence rank,
the summary for the article was generated. The authors
claimed that their model achieved an F1 score of 83.57%.
They evaluated the model’s performance by comparing the
summary that was generated by their proposed method and
human summaries. However, this study was limited to a
single themed document. This paper could be improved by
using statistical models like CRFs and machine learning
algorithms like SVM and LSTM to create a model that can
generate a summary of any single document.
2) Machine Learning Approaches
Das et al. [44] suggested an opinion based summarization
of Bangla text in one document. Topic sentiment recogni-
tion and aggregation are done through the topic-sentiment
model and theme clustering. These also create the document
Level theme relational graph from which the summary is
VOLUME 4, 2016
25
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
TABLE 10. Summary Table for Text Summarization.
Article
Datasets and Results
Preprocessing Steps and Methods
Akter et al.
[74]
Satisfactory summary generation consisting 30% of the merged sentences.
Pre-processing steps: Noise removal, tok-
enization, stop-word removal, stemming, sen-
tence scoring. Methods applied: K-Means
clustering.
Abujar et al.
[31]
Scored 4.3 out of 5 where the human score was 4.6.
Pre-processing
steps:
Tokenization,
stop
words removal, stemming. Methods applied:
Heuristic approach.
Rayan et al..
[75]
139 samples of human-written abstractive summary from NCTB books and extractive
dataset BNLPC were used. The Rouge-1, Rogue-2 and Rouge-L scores for abstractive
summary on NCTB dataset: 12.17, 1.92, and 11.35 respectively. The same scores of
extractive summary on BNLPC were 61.62, 55.97, and 61.09 respectively. The scores
from the human evaluation were 4.41, 3.95, and 4.2 for evaluating the content, readability,
and quality.
Pre-processing steps: Tokenization, removal
of stopwords, POS tagging, ﬁltering of punc-
tuation marks. Methods applied: Sentence
clustering using ULMFiT pre-trained model
and word graph using POS tagging.
Das
et
al.
[44]
Data collected from AnandaBazar newspaper for creating the corpus. The F1 score
obtained by theme detection was 79.85% and theme clustering was 69.65%.
Manually the data were annotated and stored
in XML ﬁle. For theme detection, CRFs
model and for theme clustering, K-cluster
algorithm were used.
Efat
et
al.
[45]
Data collected from the newspaper for creating the corpus and The F1 score obtained by
the model was 83.57%.
Tokenization, stop words removal and stem-
ming were used and for the summarization, a
sentence ranking system was created.
generated by Information Retrieval (IR). The authors ﬁrst
created a corpus for their model as Bangla has no established
corpus yet. They collected the data from the AnandaBazar
newspaper. Then they annotated the collected data and stored
the annotated data in an XML ﬁle for future use. They
chose three main criteria for the feature set creation: lexico-
syntactic, syntactic, and discourse-level features. In lexico-
syntactic, there was POS tagger, SentiWordNet, frequency,
and stemming. Under the syntactic features, there were
chunked levels and dependency parsers. Finally, under the
discourse level feature, there was the document’s title, ﬁrst
paragraph, term distribution, and collocation. For the term
distribution, the TF-IDF method was used. The authors then
chose to use a conditional random ﬁeld model to detect the
document’s theme. For the theme clustering, they used a
clustering algorithm. Then they presented the document and
their ﬁnding into a graph. Then based on the IR score, the
summary was generated. The authors achieved accuracy for
the theme detection technique is 83.60% (precision), 76.44%
(recall), and 79.85% (F-measure). The summarization system
achieved the precision of 72.15%, recall of 67.32%, and an
F1 score of 69.65%. The authors presented an opinion based
on summarization techniques. They were looking forward to
generating a hierarchical cluster of theme words with time-
frame relations in the future, which may be useful in the
further progress of Bangla NLP. However, there was less
data, and the annotators were not trained linguists. This
paper can be improved by adding more data and developing
linguistic tools to make the model more robust.
In 2017, Akter et al. [74] proposed a text summariza-
tion technique using the K-means clustering algorithm in
the extractive method. In the extractive method, sentence
scoring was used in this paper to improve summarization.
The proposed method can work on single and multiple
Bangla documents. The proposed method introduced by the
authors is the extractive based text summarization method
using the sentence clustering approach. The pre-processing
steps included noise removal, tokenization, stop word re-
moval, stemming. The sentence scoring method was used for
extraction-based methods. TF-IDF was used to ﬁnd the word
scoring. After that, sentence scoring was obtained by cue
words or skeleton words and sorted in decreasing order. This
same process was performed for multi documents. After that,
based on scoring, the K-means clustering was performed.
From that, top K sentences were extracted from each cluster,
and the summary was generated from 30% sentences of the
original merged document. The proposed method produced
expected output in linear complexity. In the ﬁnal summary
from single or, multiple documents, 30% of the merged doc-
uments were represented. The authors provided a well-made
approach however, the drawback of the proposed method
was summarized sentences were not synchronized. Also the
system performance was not given using any ideal standard
of comparison. The authors implied that this technique had
an improved performance based on linear time complexity.
The performance can be further improved by enhancing the
clustering technique.
3) Combination of Classical and ML Approaches
In 2021, Rayan et al. [75] proposed a graph-based unsuper-
vised abstractive method of summarization. The proposed
method required only a POS tagger and a language model
26
VOLUME 4, 2016
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
FIGURE 12. Proposed BenSumm Model for Bangla Abstractive Text
Summarization [75].
which was pre-trained. At ﬁrst, the sentences were pre-
processed by tokenization, removal of stopwords, parts of
speech tagging and ﬁltering of punctuation marks. Natural
language toolkit was used for preprocessing tasks. After that,
the sentences were clustered to group similar sentences. For
clustering, ULMFiT pre-trained language model was used
as TF-IDF did’t work well. The clusters were minimum 2
and maximum n −1. The silhouette score was also used
to determine the similarity between the sentences. Next, a
word graph was created to obtain abstractive fusions from the
sentences which are related. The top-ranked sentences were
used to represent the summary. The merging of the sentences
provided the summary.
Figure 12 shows the overall architecture of the model.
The proposed model was termed as BenSumm model. The
evaluations were done using Rogue scores and human scores.
The Rouge-1, Rogue-2, and Rouge-L scores for the ab-
stractive summary on the NCTB dataset were 12.17, 1.92
and 11.35 respectively and for the extractive summary on
BNLPC were 61.62, 55.97 and 61.09 respectively. From
human evaluation, the scores were 4.41, 3.95, and 4.2 for
evaluating content, readability, and quality. The overall paper
provided an unsupervised approach for text summarization
that outperformed the previous baseline methods. One of the
drawbacks was that the given model cannot generate new
words. Overcoming this problem will make this model more
robust.
Table 10 covers the overall datasets, results, pre-processing
steps and methods used in text summarization papers.
L. WORD SENSE DISAMBIGUATION
In natural language, the majority of regularly used words
have numerous meanings. Word Sense Disambiguation is the
process of automatically assigning preset meanings to words
in deﬁnite contexts and reducing the problem of ambiguous
words in natural language. The four primary approaches
for constructing a word sense disambiguation system are
supervised, unsupervised, semi-supervised, and knowledge-
based methods [181].
1) Classical Approaches
Kaysar et al. [95] proposed a technique to determine the
meaning of a Bangla word with multiple meanings using
the apriori algorithm [182]. For testing purposes, a new
sentence with an ambiguous term was tokenized. The tokens
were compared with the learned knowledge to determine the
intended meaning of the test sentence’s ambiguous word. The
authors separated the rows for each sense and applied the
apriori algorithm to each set separately to solve the ambiguity
problem. A database was formed with nine data samples
compared with different consensus in different length of
words, and word samples were converted to binary ﬂags.
The authors found out frequent itemset using the apriori
algorithm, and then association rules were generated. Then,
the database attributes were converted into binary ﬂags, and if
word sets were present in the sample, then one otherwise zero
was generated. For 1,600 sentence patterns, the differences
between apriori and grammar-based approaches [183] were
about 26%. The apriori method had a 46% prediction rate
and the processing time of apriori was 1,604 nanosecond
faster than grammar-based processing time.In this paper, the
authors mainly focused on extracting the meaning of Bengali
words with multiple meanings using the apriori algorithm.
However, the proposed dataset size for testing the model
is small, and the implementation steps of using the apriori
algorithm and association rules are not deﬁned brieﬂy in
this paper. This paper can be improved by enlarging the
proposed sentence corpus’s size with more ambiguous words
and developing a combined dictionary-based system with
machine learning.
Alam et al. [46] suggested a model for text normalization
for Bangla. The process is mainly constructed with tok-
enization, token classiﬁcation, token sense disambiguation
and word representation. The authors deﬁned some semiotic
classes for their work. They used two steps procedures to
achieve their semiotic classes for Bangla. They used a python
script in the newspaper corpus, utilized the corpus for their
model and set up some rules to mark the semiotic classes
for the Bangla language. Then the authors have speciﬁed a
particular tag to each of the semiotic classes, and then the
corpus undergoes tokenization. There were three levels in
the tokenization such as tokenizer, spiller, and classiﬁer. For
each type of token, regular expressions was used. Then by
using a token expander, the authors verbalized the tokens and
disambiguated the ambiguous tokens. The authors achieved
a performance of 99% for the ambiguous tokens such as
ﬂoat, time and currency. Their rule-based model successfully
determined the ﬂotation point and currency but lacked much
in determining the time where performance was 62%. The
authors used newspaper, blog, and forums data for their
model. This model did not deal with the misspelling problem,
which can be achieved by introducing a separate module.
VOLUME 4, 2016
27
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
TABLE 11. Summary Table for Word Sense Disambiguation.
Article
Dataset and Results
Preprocessing Steps and Methods
Kaysar
et
al.
[95]
100 to 1,600 sentence patterns for testing. The apriori approach has 46%
prediction rate and 1,604 nanosecond faster processing time than grammar-
based method.
Tokenizing the ambiguous words and apriori algorithm was used.
Alam et
al. [46]
Self created datasets from Prothom Alo newspaper, amader projukti forum,
and blog and overall accuracy obtained 71%.
Use of Semiotic classes for Bangla language and rule based model
were used.
Haque et
al. [184]
500 bangla sentence and overall accuracy obtained 82.40%.
Used a parse tree and a bangla dictionary to detect the ambiguity.
Pal et al.
[47]
The datasets was used in the models are Bangla POS tagged corpus from
Indian Languages corpora initiative and Bangla WordNet developed by
Indian Statistical Institute and the average precision value obtained was 84%.
Text normalization, removal of non-functional words, selection of
ambiguous words and naive Bayes method.
Pandit et
al. [80]
Self created dataset and overall accuracy obtained 71%.
Use of POS tagger, removal of stop words and KNN based
algorithms.
Nazah et
al. [81]
Self created datasets and overall accuracy obtained 77.5%.
Use of POS tagger, removal of stop words and naive Bayes
probabilistic model and GLNN.
In 2016, Haque et al. [184] proposed a word sense disam-
biguation system where they used two primary steps and re-
moved the ambiguity in sentences. First, They took a Bangla
sentence as their input which was tokenized at the beginning.
They used a Bangla dictionary for storing Bangla words and
the corresponding meanings, which was connected to parsers.
This dictionary was used for the veriﬁcation of the parse
tree. Tokenized words are then passed to a parser to create
a parse tree. The authors created CSG rules for making the
Bangla parser. The parser mainly took tokens and checked
their lexicon for validity, and if a valid token was detected,
then the tokens were compared to the CSG rules to generate
the parse tree. From the parse tree, the ambiguity of the word
was determined with the help of the Bangla dictionary. The
authors used 500 sentences to understand the disambiguation,
and among them, they managed to divide 412 sentences cor-
rectly. Thus, the overall accuracy of the system was around
82.40%. The authors also shown concerns about the token
they generated as there was no machine-readable dictionaries
to validate the tokens. Moreover, the model did not consider
the semantic meaning of a sentence. The model also was not
tested with a larger sample of the sentence to evaluate the
performance.
2) Machine Learning Approaches
Pandit et al. [80] suggested a KNN-based algorithm to re-
solve the word sense disambiguation problem. To implement
a KNN-based algorithm, they removed all the stop words.
Then they used a Bengali stemmer on the entire dataset.
To resolve the POS ambiguity, they used the Stanford POS
tagger. They assigned a weight between 0 to 1 to each
neighbour selected by the overlap metric for the test example.
This measure was used to compare the test sets with the
training set. The training example which was nearest to the
observation set was given the highest weight. When selecting
the value of k, they avoided using even numbers as it might
arise the situation of tied votes. The authors introduced a
majority voting to determine the classes of unknown test
examples. In the question of a tie in majority voting, the
test cases were determined based on a priority to select the
ﬁrst class. The experiment was done with a small amount of
dataset, which the authors created. The dataset only contains
25 target words to be disambiguated. They used 250 self-
annotated sentences for their training set and evaluated the
model with 100 sentences containing those target words. The
model had an overall accuracy of 71% and the model was
not consistent in detecting various types of parts of speech.
Their model gained an accuracy of 76.2% in detecting the
nouns, but for determining the adverb, their model achieved
an accuracy of only 53.8%. The possible reason for this might
be the selection of the target words where there were large
amount of imbalance between the numbers of adverbs and
nouns. There also a question remains how well the dataset
was annotated to prepare for the training and testing. Overall,
this has been a sound approach to sense the disambiguation
for the words. The approach can be further enhanced by
introducing more training and testing examples with standard
labelling on them.
In 2017, Nazah et al. [81] created a dataset for developing
a word sense disambiguation system for Bangla sentence and
got overall accuracy of 77.5%. The authors used POS tagger,
removed stop words and applied naive Bayes probabilistic
model and GLNN.
In 2018, Pal et al. [47] suggested a word sense disam-
biguation system for Bangla, which uses a naive Bayes
probabilistic model for their baseline strategy. The authors
also showed two extensions of their naive Bayes probabilistic
model. The authors used the Bangla POS tagged corpus
of the Indian language corpora Initiative and the Bangla
WordNet developed by the Indian Statistical Institute. The
28
VOLUME 4, 2016
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
authors normalized the text by removing unnecessary spaces,
punctuations and delimiters. They converted the whole text
into a unicode format. Then they removed the non-functional
words from the sentences. Then they tried to mark the
unambiguous word. They generated reference output ﬁles
with the help of a Bangla dictionary. Then they applied a
baseline method on 900 sentences. These sentences consist
of 19 ambiguous words mostly used in Bangla. The authors
established an algorithm to sense ambiguous words. Their
model achieved the precision and recall value of 81% on
average for 19 mostly used Bangla ambiguous words. The
authors have suggested two more extensions of their baseline
model by adopting lemmatization and bootstrapping. The use
of lemmatization achieved an improved average precision
and recall value of 84%, and with bootstrapping, they have
achieved 83% of average precision and recall value.
Table 11 shows the short description of the articles of
Bangla word sense disambiguation system.
M. SPEECH PROCESSING AND RECOGNITION
Speech recognition is the process of converting a natural
speech signal into a sequence of words using computer
algorithms. Isolated, connected, continuous, and spontaneous
speech recognition systems are the different types of speech
recognition systems [9]. Signal processing and feature ex-
traction, acoustic model, language model, and hypothesis
search are the main components of an automatic speech
recognition system. Traditional acoustic models, deep neural
networks, DNN-HMM hybrid systems, representation learn-
ing in deep neural networks, and advanced deep models can
all be used to create speech recognition systems [185].
Figure 13 shows the basic system architecture Speech
Processing and Recognition system.
1) Classical Approaches
Sultana et al. [6] proposed an approach for Speech-to-Text
conversion using Speech Application Programming Interface
(SAPI) [186] for the Bangla language. The authors managed
SAPI to combine pronunciation from the spoken continu-
ous Bangla speech with a precompiled grammar ﬁle, and
then SAPI returned Bangla words in English character if
matches occur. For recognizing the Bangla accent, an XML
grammar ﬁle for SAPI was generated with English character
combinations for each Bangla word. The main goal of this
paper is of converting Bangla speech to text data. Though the
overall recognition rate for repeated and different words was
relatively good, SAPI is slow, and its sequential operation
is challenging to work. Some extra tools were needed to
perform this experiment, including Microsoft Visual Studio
2010, Speech Application Programming Interface or SAPI
5.4, Microsoft SQL Server 2008, and Avro software.
FIGURE 13. Basic system architecture of Speech Processing and
Recognition System [187].
The average recognition rate was 78.54% for repeated
words, and the average recognition rate was 74.81% for
different names. However, SAPI is slow, and its sequential
operation is problematic, and again an XML grammar was
required to generate manually for testing data. This paper can
be improved by using the parallel process of SAPI or a faster
speech processing engine.
Ali et al. [2] proposed a technique for recognizing spoken
words in Bangla where Mel-frequency cepstral coefﬁcients
(MFCC), LPC, and GMM were used for feature extraction.
Then, template matching and DTW were used for matching
the speech signal. Preprocessing steps including analog to
digital conversion, pre-emphasis ﬁlter, hamming window,
fast Fourier transform were performed to the raw speech data.
MFCC and DTW yielded a recognition rate of 78%. LPC and
DTW achieved a recognition rate of 60% and using MFCC,
GMM, and posterior probability functions [188] produced
a recognition rate of 84%. Also, MFCC, LPC, and DTW
gained a recognition rate of 50%. The principal purpose of
this research is of establishing an automatic speech recogni-
tion Technique for Bangla isolated voice. Though the authors
used numerous strategies for executing their suggested work,
they did not supply any test data information for detecting the
Bangla voice signal and dealt with isolated Bangla speech
signals only. This paper can be improved by enlarging the
corpus size and dealing with connected speech data.
In 2014, Hasnat et al. [119] proposed a technique for
creating an isolated and continuous Bangla speech recog-
nition system using the Hidden Markov Modeling Toolkit
(HTK) [189]. For recognizing isolated speech word-based
HMM model, a simple dictionary containing only the input-
output HMM model name were created, and for labeling the
dictionary words, the HSLab tool [190] was used. For rec-
ognizing continuous speech, phoneme-based HMM model,
language model and pronunciation dictionary were created
containing the input-output pronunciation for each word en-
try. The authors eliminated the detected noise and end points
from the raw speech data. The proposed isolated speech
recognition model had 70% speaker-dependent accuracy and
90% speaker-independent accuracy. The proposed continu-
ous speech recognition model had 80% speaker-dependent
accuracy and 60% speaker-independent accuracy. Though the
VOLUME 4, 2016
29
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
proposed system works well on isolated speech data, the
amount of training and testing data were small, with very few
variations. This paper can be improved by testing the model
on a bigger dataset.
Aadit et al. [5] proposed a technique for ﬁnding the Bangla
alphabet’s oral characteristics in terms of pitch and formant.
The authors downsampled the speech signal and read small
segments of 40 milliseconds in MATLAB. Autocorrelation
was used for pitch estimation in time domain, and Cepstrum
were used for pitch estimation in frequency domain, and
LPC was used for formant estimation [191]. The authors
worked with both Bangla vowels and consonants speech.
The authors claimed that similar pitch frequencies were
found for the same vowels and consonants in both time
and frequency domain, and pitch and formant frequencies of
vowels and consonants were higher for female speakers than
male speakers. Again, they found that the difference between
formant frequency in male and female voice increased from
the ﬁrst formant to the third formant. The principal purpose of
this research is of reporting pitch and formant estimation of
Bangla vowels and consonants. The authors only dealt with
noise-free speech signals, and only a few tests were done
for estimating the formants and pitch of speech signals. This
paper can be improved by testing the model on variational
speech data and performing more experiments.
Ahmed et al. [192] proposed a voice input speech output
calculator that can recognize isolated and continuous speech
in Bangla language and derive mathematical expressions.
Hidden Markov models in CMU Sphinx performed the
speech-to-text conversion [193], while the result was con-
verted to speech using Android Text-to-Speech (TTS) API.
The acoustic model’s training process requires a Bangla pho-
netic dictionary, a language model, and Bangla acoustic data.
The Google Translate application was used to generate the
phonetic transcription of Bangla words. The proposed Bangla
speech recognizer model achieved 86.7% word recognition
accuracy. Even though the authors gathered a pretty good
accuracy, the amount of voice data utilized to develop the
model was fairly little, with fewer variances. This paper can
be improved if more speech data of Bangla speech can be
collected from different age groups and various locations’
speakers.
In 2021, Paul et al. [194] proposed a Bangla numeral
recognition system from the speech signal using MFCC and
GMM. A dataset containing 1,000 audio samples for ten
classes (0-9) was created for the experiment. MFCC features
were extracted from the audio ﬁles that the authors collected.
The authors developed a GMM based Bengali isolated spo-
ken numerals recognition system for their proposed task. The
authors claimed that 91.7% correct prediction was obtained
for their self-built Bangla numeral data set. Despite the fact
that the authors achieved a high level of accuracy using
their self-created Bangla numeral data set, the speech data
of numerals used to train the model had limited variations.
This paper can be improved by collecting more variational
Bangla speech numeral data, developing and evaluating the
dataset on upgraded and suitable deep learning models.
2) Machine Learning Approaches
In 2017, Ahammad et al. [50] proposed a connected digit
recognition system based on neural network for the Bangla
language. For training and testing purposes, the authors pro-
posed two datasets of connected digits comprising ﬁfteen
male and ﬁfteen female speakers. Connected digits were
subjected to segmentation to acquire isolated words, and the
proposed system used MFCC analysis to elicit meaningful
features for recognition. Backpropagation neural network
was used for training purposes that used 352 neurons in the
input layer, keeping it according to the number of feature
parameters in the MFCC ﬁle. Again, in this proposed system,
for adjusting weight, the gradient descent method had been
used in BPNN. The average accuracy found for recognizing
the digits in this research were: Shunno (0) - 92.31%, EK (1)
- 98.72%, DUI (2) - 98.72%, TIN (3) - 98.72%, CHAR (4) -
82.05%, PACH (5) - 76.92%, CHOY (6) - 75.64%, SHAT (7)
- 92.30%, AAT (8) - 93.59%, NOY (9) - 89.74%. The primary
goal of this paper is to create an automatic recognition system
for connected Bangla digits. Although the authors attained
a high level of accuracy using their self-created Bangla nu-
meral data set, they trained the model with a smaller dataset.
This paper can be improved by enlarging the dataset for
training and testing purposes, employing hybrid classiﬁers,
or incorporating robust features.
Nahid et al. [53] proposed a technique for creating a
Bangla Speech Recognition system using a double layered
LSTM-RNN approach. The authors tested the system on a
dataset containing 2,000 words and split the dataset into
75:12.5:12.5 for training, validation, and testing purposes,
respectively. Noise reduction and phoneme mapping were
made on the raw speech data. The authors divided each word
into several frames and selected the ﬁrst thirteen MFCC for
extracting different types of features from the raw speech
data. The authors imposed random disparity in the number of
frames three times for each training example. The proposed
model was a deep recurrent neural network with two layers
of 100 LSTM cells each. the proposed model achieved 28.7%
phon detection error rate [195] and 13.2% word detection
error rate [196]. The main drawbacks of this paper are that
the dataset is tiny, and the experimental methods for labeling
and threshold value selection are unclear. This paper can be
improved by enlarging the dataset for training, validating,
and testing purposes and using GRU cells in the place of
LSTM cells.
In 2018, Sumit et al. [51] proposed an approach that aims
at developing an end-to-end deep learning method leveraging
current signs of progress in the automatic speech recognition
system to recognize continuous Bangla speech for noisy
environments. Here the authors used data augmentation and
deep learning model architecture to improve the robustness
of their proposed model. The authors used the Kaldi toolkit
[201] for aligning and segmenting tasks of the raw clips in
a maximum of ten seconds long with their corresponding
30
VOLUME 4, 2016
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
TABLE 12. Summary Table for Speech Processing and Recognition System.
Article
Dataset and Results
Preprocessing Steps and
Methods
Task
Sultana et
al. [6]
396 Bangla words, and 270 of them were distinct. 78.54% accuracy for repeated words
and 74.81% accuracy for distinct words.
Generating an XML grammar
and speech application program
interface.
Speech to text
conversion.
Ali et al.
[2]
100 words were recorded 1,000 times. MFCC and DTW achieved 78% accuracy, LPC
and DTW achieved 60% accuracy, MFCC and GMM yield 84% accuracy, and MFCC,
LPC, and DTW achieved 50% accuracy.
Analog to digital conversion,
pre-emphasis
ﬁlter,
hamming
window,
FFT,
MFCC,
LPC,
GMM and DTW methods.
Noisy
isolated
speech
recognition.
Hasnat
et
al. [119]
100 words, 5 to 10 samples for each word, and 1,814 phonemes. The isolated speech
recognition model yielded 70% speaker-dependent and 90% speaker-independent
accuracy, and the continuous speech recognition model achieved 80% speaker-
dependent and 60% speaker-independent accuracy.
Noise elimination, end point de-
tection and Cambridge HMM
toolkit.
Noisy
isolated
and continuous
speech
recognition.
Aadit
et
al. [5]
Speech data were collected from 25 males and 25 females. Similar pitch frequencies for
the same vowels and consonants were found in both time and frequency domain. Female
speakers had higher pitch and formant frequencies than male speakers.
Downsampling
the
speech
signal, autocorrelation cepstrum
and LPC.
Pitch
and
formant
estimation
of
noise-free
speech data.
Ahmed et
al. [192]
500 sentences containing 2,733 Bangla words. 86.7% word recognition accuracy.
CMU Sphinx and Android Text-
to-Speech API.
Noisy
numeral
speech recogni-
tion.
Paul et al.
[194]
1,000 audio samples for (0-9) classes. 91.7% accuracy.
MFCC and GMM.
Numeral speech
recognition.
Ahammad
et al. [50]
Two datasets of connected speech in Bangla. Accuracy for recognizing: Shunno (0) -
92.31%, EK (1) - 98.72%, DUI (2) - 98.72%, TIN (3) - 98.72%, CHAR (4) - 82.05%,
PACH (5) - 76.92%, CHOY (6) - 75.64%, SHAT (7) - 92.30%, AAT (8) - 93.59%, NOY
(9) - 89.74%.
Segmenting the raw speech data
and Backpropagation neural net-
work.
Noise
free
numeral speech
recognition.
Nahid
et
al. [53]
Two thousand words and 114 words of them are unique. 28.7% phon detection error rate
and 13.2% word detection error rate.
Noise reduction, phoneme map-
ping and LSTM.
Noisy
real
numbers speech
recognition.
Sumit
et
al. [51]
350 and 111 hours of Bangla speech. 9.15% and 34.83% character error rate on Socian
and Babel noisy speech, respectively and 12.31% and 10.65% character error rate on
Socian and CRBLP read speech, respectively.
Aligning and segmenting the au-
dio clips, multi-layer neural net-
work, CNN, RNN, GRU and FC
layers.
Augmented
noisy
speech
recognition.
Sumon
et
al. [48]
Ten classes of data and 100 samples per class. MFCC model yielded an accuracy of 74%,
the proposed raw model yielded 71% accuracy, and the proposed transfer model achieves
73% accuracy.
CNN and Transfer learning.
Short
speech
command
recognition.
Islam
et
al. [52]
200,000 wav audio ﬁles. 86.058% accuracy in the CNN model.
Sampling the raw speech data,
CNN and RNN.
General
public
speech recogni-
tion.
Shuvo
et
al. [197]
6,000 utterances. 93.65% test set recognition accuracy.
CNN
Noise-free
numeral speech
recognition.
Sharmina
et al. [198]
1,230 audio ﬁles. 98.37% accuracy was found with 98% precision, 98% recall, and 98%
F1-score.
CNN
Numeral speech
recognition.
Ovishake
et al. [199]
4,000 audio ﬁles. 97.1% accuracy in test set
CNN
Numeral speech
recognition.
Paul et al.
[4]
60 training examples for each digit. High accuracy of recognizing individual digits.
Pre-emphasis
ﬁltering
and
speech coding, LPC and ANN.
General
public
speech recogni-
tion.
Sultan
et
al. [200]
Bangla human voice commands.
Computers, peripheral devices of
the computer and home appli-
ances were used.
Virtual assistant
for visually im-
paired people.
VOLUME 4, 2016
31
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
transcripts. Here, a multi-layer neural network was used,
and the authors evaluated the model architecture up to nine
layers, including convolutional neural networks, gated recur-
rent units, and fully connected layers. The authors used a
private dataset, Babel, in both the training and testing phase
and CRBLP speech corpus [202] in the test phase only. The
authors used connectionist temporal classiﬁcation [203] for
aligning input and output sequence and ignoring blanks and
repeated characters without penalty. The proposed model
yielded a 9.15% character error rate on Socian noisy speech
and 34.83% character error rate [204] on Babel noisy speech.
The proposed model also achieved 12.31% and 10.65%
character error rate on Socian and CRBLP reading speech,
respectively. The authors mainly concentrated on developing
an automatic speech recognition system to recognize contin-
uous Bangla speech for noisy environments. They tested their
proposed model on a moderately large dataset, but the feature
extraction and preprocessing steps are not deﬁned clearly in
this paper. This paper can be improved by developing an
additional language model to improve word or character level
performance.
Sumon et al. [48] proposed three CNN architectures to
recognize Bangla short speech commands. The authors pro-
posed three CNN model approaches, including MFCC based
CNN model, raw CNN model, and pre-trained CNN model
using transfer learning for performing the proposed task. The
authors extracted MFCC features from the audio ﬁles, and
after normalizing them, the authors fed the features to convo-
lutional neural network architecture. The MFCC model had
one convolutional layer with ﬁve ﬁlters, and each of the ﬁlters
has a stride of 1. The raw model had a similar architecture
with one convolutional layer and a softmax layer. In the
pre-trained model, MFCC features were extracted, and the
proposed model had three convolutional layers, which were
associated with max-pooling and batch normalization layers.
The proposed MFCC model yielded accuracy of 74%, the
proposed raw model yielded 71% accuracy, and the proposed
transfer model gave 73% accuracy. The authors described all
types of model performance brieﬂy with diagrams and per-
formance tables. The authors mainly concentrated on build-
ing a speech recognition system to recognize Bangla short
speech commands. The pre-trained English speech dataset
comprises 65,000 samples; however, their self-made dataset
has just 10,000 samples with a slight variation. This paper
can be improved by collecting more variational speech data
of Bangla short speech commands.
In 2019, Islam et al. [52] proposed a speech recognition
system in the Bengali language using CNN and developed
RNN based method to ﬁnd the Bengali character level prob-
abilities. The probabilities were improved by using the CTC
loss function [205] and a language model. For building the
architecture of the CNN system, the authors extracted the
features from the raw speech data by using mel frequency
cepstral coefﬁcients. The authors implemented a ﬁve hidden
layer-based neural network where the ﬁrst layer was the input
layer, and the last layer was the output layer. For training
the proposed CNN model, the authors took 30 samples
of each word to train the proposed CNN model, and for
testing purposes, they took a vocabulary of 100 words. The
recognition system with feature extraction and spectrum had
an average accuracy rate of 86.058%. To build the RNN
system’s architecture, the authors used a dataset of 33,000
Bangla audio ﬁles spoken by 500 speakers. Here, the input
ﬁles were fed into three fully connected layers, followed by
a bidirectional RNN layer [206], and ﬁnally, another fully
connected layer. The output consisted of the softmax function
that resulted from character probabilities for each character
in the alphabet. The authors claimed that the model could
not memorize the outcomes as they started discarding more
parameters using dropout. The authors obtained a signiﬁcant
accuracy in the CNN model however there needed a powerful
tool to train the RNN model with thousands of data. This pa-
per can be improved by collecting and training the proposed
CNN and RNN model with more data.
Shuvo et al. [197] proposed a Bangla numeral recognition
system from the speech signal utilizing CNN. A speech
dataset of ten isolated Bangla digits of a total of 6,000
utterances was recorded in a noise-free environment. MFCC
analysis was used to produce meaningful MFCC features
using the Librosa library [207], where 16 MFCC coefﬁcients
were extracted from the numeral speech signals. Convolu-
tional neural network was used for the recognition task. The
proposed CNN model’s development steps for classifying the
spoken Bangla digits were described brieﬂy in this paper. The
authors claimed that Bangla digits of six were misclassiﬁed
with nine, and seven were misclassiﬁed with eight because
they are phonetically very close to their counterparts when
pronounced. The proposed system achieved an average of
93.65% test set recognition accuracy. The authors mainly
concentrated on building a Bangla numeral recognition sys-
tem from the speech signal. The authors yielded a notable
accuracy for recognizing Bangla numerals and gathered a
pretty good variation in their self-built numeral dataset. This
paper can be improved by collecting more speech data of
Bangla digits.
In 2020, Sharmina et al. [198] proposed an in-depth
learning approach for classifying the Bengali spoken digits.
A dataset containing 1,230 audio ﬁles was created for the
experiment from ﬁve males and ﬁve females. MFCC features
were extracted from the audio ﬁles using the python Librosa
library. The Python Scikit-learn library [208] was used to
divide 80% of the data into training set and the rest of the
20% data into test set. Keras API written in python [209]
was used for developing a convolutional neural network
for feature learning and classiﬁcation purposes. The authors
claimed that when 1,230 data were fed into the model, an ac-
curacy of 98.37% was found with 98% precision, 98% recall,
and 98% F1-score. The authors performed three experiments
based on different amounts of the dataset and compared them
showing the accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score. They
also showed the importance of gender, dialects, age groups by
performing experiments on the proposed model. The authors
32
VOLUME 4, 2016
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
mainly concentrated on constructing a Bangla spoken digit
classiﬁcation system using the voice signal. Although the
authors acquired a fair accuracy for detecting Bangla spoken
digits, the dataset size for evaluating the suggested models
is tiny for training and testing purposes. This paper can be
improved by collecting more variational Bangla speech data
of the digits.
In 2021, Ovishake et al. [199] proposed a CNN based
approach to recognize Bangla spoken digits from speech
signal. This research used audio recordings of Bangladeshis
of diverse genders, ages, and accents to construct a mas-
sive speech collection of spoken ’0-9’ Bangla digits. The
dataset was created by recording of 400 noisy and noise-
free samples per digit. For extracting signiﬁcant features
from raw voice data, MFCCs were used. CNN was used to
recognize Bangla numeral digits. Across the entire dataset,
the proposed technique correctly distinguishes ’0-9’ Bangla
spoken digits with 97.1% accuracy. The model’s efﬁciency
was further evaluated using 10-fold cross-validation, which
resulted in a 96.7% accuracy. This paper’s main purpose is
to develop an automatic recognition system for connected
Bangla digits. The authors achieved a good level of accuracy
using their self-created Bangla numeral data set, but they
trained the model using a smaller dataset. This paper could be
improved by using hybrid classiﬁers and enlarging the dataset
for training and testing.
3) Combination of Classical and ML Approaches
Paul et al. [4] proposed a Bangla speech recognition system
using LPC and ANN. The authors divided the proposed
system into two major parts. The speech signal processing
part consisted of speech starting and endpoint detection,
windowing, ﬁltering, calculating the LPC and cepstral co-
efﬁcients, and ﬁnally constructing the codebook by vector
quantization [210]. The speech pattern recognition part con-
sisted of recognizing patterns using an ANN. Pre-emphasis
ﬁlter and speech coding were applied to the digitized speech.
The recognizer was designed to identify the ten digits, and for
each digit, the input to the recognizer was the feature vectors.
The authors claimed that, they used four different Bangla
words uttered by four different persons, and a satisfactory
level of accuracy was obtained for recognizing individual
digits. The authors mainly concentrated on creating a Bangla
Speech Recognition System employing both classical and
machine learning methodologies. The dataset size and actual
accuracy were not provided in this paper. This paper can be
improved by enlarging the dataset size for training and testing
purposes and by developing a suitable and upgraded version
of deep learning models for the recognition task.
In 2021, Sultan et al. [200] proposed a Bangla virtual
assistant [211], ‘Adrisya Sahayak (Invisible Helper)’ for
visually impaired people. ‘Adrisya Sahayak’ worked as a
desktop application specially created for Bangla-speaking
visually impaired persons to reduce their difﬁculties in their
daily activities. The authors created this virtual assistant
by utilizing a computer and home appliances’ peripheral
devices. This virtual assistant will help visually impaired per-
sons because the existing virtual assistants are mostly in the
English language. The researchers mainly concentrated on
establishing a Bangla virtual assistant for visually impaired
persons. However, the proposed virtual assistant was a user-
independent technology that can only do minimal computer
operations in the home environment using Bangla human
voice commands.
Table 12 shows the short description of the articles of
Bangla speech processing and recognition systems.
N. METHODS USED IN BNLP
Figure 14 shows the overall summary of the methods used in
BNLP.
1) Classical
Table 13 shows the short description of classical methods
used in BNLP till now.
2) ML and DL
Table 14 shows the short description of machine learning
and deep learning methods used in Bangla natural language
processing till now.
44%
6%
6.25%
7.5%
8.75%
16.25%
11.25%
Classical Methods
CNN
ANN
Naive Bayes
SVM
Other ML Methods
Hybrid Methods
FIGURE 14. Methods used in Bangla Natural Language Processing.
IV. CURRENT CHALLENGES AND FUTURE TRENDS IN
BNLP
A. CHALLENGES IN PREPROCESSING
Bangla text data preprocessing’s most common challenges
are character-set dependence, corpus dependence, applica-
tion dependence, writing system dependence, tokenizing of
punctuations, tokenizing of space-delimiters, preprocessing
of Bangla grammatically wrong words, preprocessing of
ambiguous words, preprocessing of erroneous words, pre-
processing multi-label Bangla data. Moreover, the automatic
computerized services for Bangla text preprocessing and
relevant research works are hardly available for facilitating
researches on Bangla language text data [82], [212].
The most common challenges of Bangla speech data pre-
processing are: preprocessing of falsely interpreted Bangla
speeches, preprocessing of very noisy or loud Bangla
speeches, preprocessing of reverberations and overlapping
VOLUME 4, 2016
33
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
Bangla speeches, preprocessing of Bangla speech signal that
has an unnecessary delay at the end of speech frames, prepro-
cessing of sparsely spoken speech, preprocessing ambiguous
speech, preprocessing of erroneous speech data, and prepro-
cessing of different sampling rates speeches in a corpus [83],
[213].
B. CHALLENGES IN TEXT FORMAT
The most common challenges of developing Bangla ques-
tion answering systems are: extracting answers to questions
that have ambiguous answers, answering tricky questions,
answering procedural, temporal, and spatial questions, un-
availability of datasets for creating open domain-based ques-
tion answering system, extracting answers for questions that
are synonyms of Bangla words, lexical gaps between the
knowledge corpus and questions, difﬁculties in developing
multiple choices questions, and lack of signiﬁcant researches
on Bangla question answering systems [214], [215].
At the time of developing Bangla spam and fake detection
systems, the researchers faced many difﬁculties, including
timeliness and oddity can change the classiﬁcation of fake
and authentic information, the classifying of spam and ham
(non-spam) Bangla documents is a difﬁcult task, unavailabil-
ity of public datasets, as well as lack of signiﬁcant researches
on Bangla spam and fake detection [216].
Researchers faced some difﬁculties at the time of devel-
oping Bangla word sense disambiguation systems, including
variation in structure and formatting of Bangla words that are
used in various sentences, shortage of signiﬁcant resources
and knowledge for research in this area, unavailability of
sufﬁcient tools for developing such systems for Bangla lan-
guage, and the existing approaches are only targeted at nouns
and verbs [217].
Sentiment analysis is a well-nourished topic of Bangla
NLP. Most of the challenges in sentiment analysis come from
a lack of a proper dataset. The sentiment labels have limited
classes, so, working with a wide range of sentiments is hard
due to the lack of dataset availability. Furthermore, detecting
ambiguous sentiment is also a big challenge in sentiment
analysis. Sentiment analysis in Bangla code-mixed sentences
is another challenging task that also requires a large dataset.
Machine translation in Bangla is also an important topic to
be working on. Idioms and phrases are one of the vital parts
of a language. Idioms and phrases differ in every language
based on their culture and regional environment. One of the
biggest challenges of machine translation is handling idioms
and phrases. Moreover, limited corpus for creating a machine
translation dictionary is also an issue.
Parts of speech has a big impact on developing other
domains of Bangla NLP. Bangla language has very diverse
parts of speech tags. The tags are very different than we can
see in the English language. It is still a challenge to tag all
the parts of speech properly as the Bangla language structure
has different parts of speech compare to English.
Text summarization in Bangla is quite challenging in ab-
stractive text summarization task. abstractive text summa-
rization has a big challenge in summarizing long sentences.
In terms of mixed Bangla sentences, this challenge gets
harder. The complexity of summarization is less in extractive
methods than abstractive. Additionally, taking care of com-
plexity on abstractive summarization is also a challenging
task.
Parsing in Bangla is quite difﬁcult due to the structure of
the language. Also, complexity is an issue.
In the case of information extraction, the researchers face
the limitation of proper tools for extracting the information
to create a corpus for their model. Also, Bangla does not
have rich linguistic tools to handle the different aspects of the
information retrieval tasks. The lack of quality corpus to train
a model is another signiﬁcant step down in the ﬁeld of Bangla
NLP. Additionally, information retrieval from a Bangla doc-
ument imposes a great challenge as Bangla has almost a set
of 350 characters (full set of letters, letter combinations, and
numbering) [218]. Bangla also has no capitalization, which
becomes a problem for the information extraction from
various tasks. Also, the modern machine learning model’s
parameters have not been tweaked for Bangla.
The ﬁrst complexity the researchers face in constructing
a NER system for Bangla is that it has no capitalization.
Unlike English, all the words are written in capital blocks.
So, there is no easy way to detect the name entity in the
middle of a sentence by observing the capitalization. Also,
in Bangla, an adjective can be used as a proper noun. Like a
person’s name could be "SUNDAR" (beautiful), which is an
adjective. These ambiguities add up to the challenges of NER
tasks. Also, there is a lack of a machine-readable dictionary
and properly annotated corpus for Bangla. To build a NER
system, researchers often create their own corpus sets to
make their model work. Particularly, these constraints make
it difﬁcult for the researchers to create a good NER system.
Parsing is one of the essential factors in the ﬁeld of
natural language processing. In constructing Bangla parsers,
researchers face many obstacles. Bangla is a morphologically
rich language, and there is still no rigorous morphological
analysis of the Bangla language. Also, Bangla has no com-
prehensive corpus to work with. The lack of resources and
complexity of Bangla grammar and structure becomes the
main constraints for the Bangla language parsing. Addition-
ally, the lack of good linguistic tools makes it harder to
create a satisfactory model. So, most of the researchers do
the intermediate works for Bangla parsers.
Text summarization in Bangla also suffers from the lack of
good linguistic tools available in Bangla. Also, the scarcity
of well-built corpus has an impact, especially for summariza-
tion, a lot of linguistic tools are required to make a good
model. To make a summary sentiment of articles plays a
vital role in various tasks and Bangla still does not have a
gold standard sentiment analysis model. Additionally, most
of the works have been done using statistical models, and the
evaluation of these models is also problematic as there is no
concrete metric for evaluating the results.
34
VOLUME 4, 2016
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
C. CHALLENGES IN SPEECH FORMAT
The development of a speech processing and recognition
system that can efﬁciently work in natural, freestyle, loud,
and noisy environments and preparing a plan that effectively
works on all possible practical grounds are some of the
most crucial challenges [84]. The most commonly faced
challenges of Bangla speech processing and recognition are:
imprecision and false interpretations of Bangla speech words,
accents and local differences of Bangla speech data, a vast
number of non-native Bangla speakers and their variations
on speaking attitudes, code-switching, and code-mixing in-
cidences [219], developed methods have inefﬁciency in the
processing of noisy and loud Bangla speech data, unique
phonological systems of speeches [220], word segmentation
problems, fuzzy grammatical structures, lack of publicly
available Bangla speech corpus and lack of signiﬁcant re-
searches on Bangla speech data. Additionally, building a
recognition system that can effectively process and identify
all types of Bangla speech data is a very complicated task.
Consequently, the accuracy remains inadequate for recogniz-
ing the Bangla speeches efﬁciently [48], [221].
D. FUTURE TRENDS IN TEXT FORMAT
The future trends in developing Bangla question answering
systems include: developing algorithmic Bangla Information
Retrieval System (BIRS) [225], classiﬁcation of Bangla ques-
tions towards a factoid question answering system [226], de-
veloping both closed domain-based and open domain-based
question answering systems, developing of Bangla datasets
for both of the open and closed domain-based question an-
swering systems and question answering appplications based
on machine learning and deep learning methods and many
more.
Bangla spam and fake detection system’s future research
trends include: developing hateful speech detection in public
Facebook pages and other social sites [227], misinformation
detection on online social networks [228], developing of
Bangla datasets for both of the spam and ham data and
many more. However, most of the researches on Bangla spam
and fake detection applications is now following machine
learning and deep learning methods.
The future trends in developing Bangla Text summariza-
tion is moving towards developing more accurate extractive
and abstractive summarization techniques. Abstractive sum-
marization is a complex task and very few works have been
done on this topic. The extractive summarization has some
existing works but needs more improvements for matching
the state of the art quality.
In recent years, a lot of works have been done on Bangla
sentiment analysis. With the more availability of datasets
in this section, the accuracy is increasing. But most of the
sentiment analysis work was done in three (positive, negative
and neutral) classes. Five or more classes of sentiment work
is being introduced with a respective dataset which will bring
more dimentionality in sentiment analysis task.
Bangla parts of speech tagging require a different approach
than the approaches taken in English parts of speech tagging.
The previous works were basically based on a rule-based
approach. The future trend in this topic may focus on a hybrid
approach that will increase efﬁciency.
Due to the increasing availability of dataset and vocabu-
lary Bangla machine translation is gradually improving. The
recent works are more focused on using the machine learning
approach as it has proved to be more efﬁcient and accurate.
The future trend of machine translation will primarily be in
the hand of the machine learning approach.
Bangla word sense disambiguation system’s future trends
of research include: developing word sense disambiguation
applications using supervised methodology [229], devel-
oping modern tools and frameworks, and creating Bangla
datasets for working with Bangla word sense disambiguation
applications. Now-a-days, most of the researches on Bangla
word sense disambiguation applications are using machine
learning and deep learning methods.
The future research trends in Bangla information extrac-
tion systems include: developing proper linguistic tools for
extracting the information, creating datasets for information
extraction applications, and many more. Moreover, modern
machine learning and deep learning techniques are com-
monly used for developing Bangla information extraction
systems.
Bangla Named Entity Recognition systems future research
directions include: developing proper linguistic tools and
machine-readable dictionaries, creating datasets for named
entity recognition applications, newest machine learning and
deep learning techniques are also being used for developing
Bangla named entity recognition systems and many more.
E. FUTURE TRENDS IN SPEECH FORMAT
Bangla speech processing and recognition system’s future
research directions are: developing speech recognition sys-
tems for continuous and isolated speech data with modern
machine learning and deep learning techniques, introducing
larger datasets for Bangla natural speech for improving the
performance of automatic speech recognition systems, de-
veloping modern tools and frameworks for detecting speech
data, working with accents and variational local speech
data. Some more future directions might include: developing
speech recognition systems for non-native Bangla speak-
ers, code-switching and code-mixing incidences, and noisy
speech data. Furthermore, creating datasets for isolated and
continuous speech data and many more future works can
be done in this ﬁeld. Today, modern machine learning and
deep learning techniques are being used in most speech pro-
cessing and recognition applications and producing excellent
outcomes with high accuracy. Speech recognition research
will continue to produce novel methods and techniques in
machine learning and deep learning ﬁeld.
V. BNLP DATASETS
VOLUME 4, 2016
35
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
TABLE 13. Classical Methods used in BNLP.
Classical Methods
Use Cases and Best Results
Rule based Methods
Information Extraction (Chandra et al. [34], Accuracy:95.96%), Machine Translation (Chowdhury et al. [24]
and Anwar et al. [26], Accuracy:93.33%), Named Entity Recognition (Chaudhuri et al. [38], Precision:94.24%)
and Parts of Speech Tagging (Hoque et al. [28], Accuracy:93.7%), Sentiment Analysis (Mandal et al. [22],
Accuracy:81% and Chakrabarti et al. [30]), and Word Sense Disambiguation (Alam et al. [46], Accuracy:71%).
Verb based Methods
Machine Translation (Rabbani et al. [23]).
CFG
Parsing (Mehedy et al. [40]).
Language Independent
Statistical Models.
Information Extraction (Chandra et al. [34], Accuracy:95.96%).
Morphological Parsing Techniques
Parsing (Dasgupta et al. [33], Accuracy:100%).
HMM
Parts of Speech Tagging (Hammad Ali [73]) and Speech Processing and recognition (Hasnat et al. [119],
Accuracy:90%).
Hash Mapping
Parts of Speech Tagging (Ismail et al. [72]).
Anaphora-Cataphora
Resolution Methods
Question Answering System (Khan et al. [12], Accuracy:74%).
Basic Classical Methods
Spam and Fake Detection (Hossain et al. [17], Accuracy:91%).
Heuristic Methods
Text Summarization (Abujar et al. [31], Accuracy:86%).
Sentence Ranking Methods
Text Summarization (Efat et al. [45], F1 score:83.57).
Apriori Methods
Word Sense Disambiguation (Kaysar et al. [95], Accuracy:46%).
Parse Tree Methods
Word Sense Disambiguation (Haque et al. [184], Accuracy:82.40%).
Linear Predictive Coding
Speech Processing and Recognition (Aadit et al. [5]).
Gaussian Mixture Model
Speech Processing and Recognition (Ali et al. [2], Accuracy:84%).
Dynamic Time Warping
Speech Processing and Recognition (Ali et al. [2], Accuracy:78%).
A. TEXT DATASETS
Table 15 shows the short description of datasets that are used
in Bangla sentiment analysis and machine translation. Short
description of datasets that are used in Bangla spam and fake
detection systems are shown in Table 16. We also show the
short description of datasets that are used in Bangla question
answering system in Table 17.
B. SPEECH DATASETS
In 2018, Khan et al. [223] proposed a technique of developing
a speech corpus of isolated words in the Bangla language
that was recorded, including high-frequency words from a
text corpus "BdNC01" [230]. Here, 54,000 audio ﬁles were
maintained as training corpus from 50 male and 50 female
persons, and 27,000 audio ﬁles were maintained as testing
corpus from another 25 male and 25 female persons. The
speakers were in the range of 18 to 25 years. High frequent
1,081 words were selected and arranged alphabetically to
construct a signiﬁcantly large scale isolated speech database
for recording a total of 292 hours. Noisy ﬁles were cleaned
using various ﬁlters, and shallow speech level data’s ampli-
tudes were magniﬁed to a suitable level. The time length
of each ﬁle was, on average, 13 seconds. The researchers
concentrated mainly on building an isolated Bangla speech
corpus. The authors obtained a lot of audio data for con-
structing the dataset, but the dataset lacked variations of data
concerning gender, age, and places of the speakers; again,
the connected Bangla speeches were not recorded in the
suggested dataset.
Khan et al. [224] proposed another technique of devel-
oping a speech corpus of connected Bangla words that was
recorded from newspaper text corpus "BdNC01". In this
research, the authors dealt with 1,000 high-frequency words.
From three issues of daily newspapers, they picked randomly
52 sentences, including these high-frequency words for
recording. Twenty-six thousand audio ﬁles were maintained
as training corpus from 50 male and 50 female persons, and
15,600 audio ﬁles were maintained as testing corpus from
another 25 male and 25 female persons. The speakers were in
the range of 18 to 25 years. Fifty-two sentences were selected
from 1,000 high-frequency words for recording a total of
62 hours. Noisy ﬁles were cleaned using various ﬁlters, and
36
VOLUME 4, 2016
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
TABLE 14. Machine Learning Methods used in BNLP.
Machine Leaning and Deep
Learning Methods
Use Cases and Best Results
CNN
Information Extraction (Sharif et al. [78], Accuracy:78%), Speech Processing and Recognition (Sharmina et
al. [198], Accuracy:98.37% and Shuvo et al. [197], Accuracy:93.65%), Question Answering System (Sarker
et al. [13], Accuracy:90.6%), and Sentiment Analysis (Tripto et al. [64] hl Accuracy:60.89% and Sarkar [65],
Accuracy:60.89%).
Backpropagation Neural
Network (BPNN)
Speech Processing and Recognition (Ahammad et al. [50], Accuracy:98.72%).
Transfer Learning
Speech Processing and Recognition (Sumon et al. [48], Accuracy:73%).
Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU)
based RNN
Speech Processing and Recognition (Sumit et al. [51], Character error rate:9.15%).
RNN
Speech Processing and Recognition (Islam et al. [52], Accuracy:86.058%) and Named Entity Recognition
(Banik et al. [79], F1-score:69%).
ANN
Speech Processing and Recognition (Sarma et al. [187], ), Question Answering System, Spam and Fake
Detection, and Information Extraction (Rahman et al. [76], Accuracy:91.5%).
Deep Generative Models
based methods
Speech Processing and Recognition (Ahmed et al. [222], Accuracy:94.05%).
DNN
Speech Processing and Recognition (Ahmed et al. [222], Accuracy:94.05%).
Naive Bayes
Question Answering System (Kowsher et al. [11], Accuracy:91.34%), Word Sense Disambiguation (Nazah et
al. [81], Accuracy:77.5%), and Sentiment Analysis (Tripto et al. [64], [58], Accuracy:60% [70], Mahtab et al.
[67], Precision:77% [67], Accuracy:70.47%, and Ghosal et al. [69], Accuracy:91.67%).
SVM
Question Answering System (Kowsher et al. [11], Accuracy:91.34%), Spam and Fake Detection (Hussain et
al. [60], Accuracy:96.64%), and Sentiment Analysis (Chowdhury et al. [63], F-score:0.93, Tripto et al. [64],
Accuracy:60%, Mahtab et al. [67], Accuracy:73.49%, Sarkar et al. [68], Accuracy:45%, and Ghosal et al. [69],
Accuracy:98.7%).
Stocastic Gradient Descent
Question Answering System (Islam et al. [57], Precision:0.95562%) and Sentiment Analysis (Mandal et al.
[22], F-score:78.70%).
Decision Tree
Question Answering System (Sarker et al. [13], Accuracy:75.3%) and Sentiment Analysis (Mahtab et al. [67],
Accuracy:64.765% and Ghosal et al. [69], Accuracy:95.167%).
N-gram Model
Question Answering System (Islam et al. [58],
Precision:0.35%), Machine Translation (Islam et al. [71],
BLEU:11.70, NIST:4.27 and TER:0.76), and Parts of Speech Tagging (Hasan et al. [27], Accuracy:90%).
Logistic Regression
Spam and Fake Detection (Ahmed et al. [61], Accuracy:89%).
Lagrangian Support Vector
Machine
Spam and Fake Detection (Ahmed et al. [61], Accuracy:92%).
Maximum Entropy
Sentiment Analysis (Chowdhury et al. [63], F-score:0.85).
LSTM based RNN
Sentiment Analysis (Hassan et al. [66], Accuracy:70%, Tripto et al. [64], Accuracy:65.96%, and Uddin et
al. [77], Accuracy:77.1%) and Speech Processing and Recognition (Nahid et al. [53], Word detection error
rate:13.2%).
Multidimensional Naïve Bayes
Spam and Fake Detection (Islam et al. [59], Accuracy:82.44%) and Sentiment Analysis (Sarkar et al. [68],
Accuracy:44.20%).
KNN
Information Extraction (Mandal et al. [37], Accuracy:88.95%), Word Sense Disambiguation (Pal et al. [47],
Precision: 84%, and Pandit et al. [80], Accuracy:71%).
Random Forest
Sentiment Analysis (Ghosal et al. [69], Accuracy:98.65%).
K-Means Clustering
Text Summarization (Akter et al. [74]).
Unsupervised Method
using ULMFiT Model
Text Summarization (Chowdhury et al. [75], Rouge-1:12.17, Rogue-2:1.92, and Rouge-L:11.35) and Parsing
(Das et al. [32], Accuracy:74.6%).
VOLUME 4, 2016
37
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
TABLE 15. Summary Table for Sentiment Analysis and Machine Translation Datasets.
Name
Article
Description
Task
Bengali
ABSA
dataset
Mahtab et al. [67]
Aspect based sentiment analysis dataset. ABSA Bengali dataset containing 2,979 data and manually
collected data contained 1,601 test samples. The manual dataset was collected from the Prothom-Alo
newspaper. The dataset was labelled as praise, criticism, and sadness. There were 513, 604, and 484
labelled data on praise, criticism, and sadness, respectively.
Sentiment
analysis.
SAIL
tweeter
dataset
Kamal
Sarkar
[65]
SAIL dataset of Bengali tweets (1,500 data). The dataset contains three labelled classes (positive,
neutral, and negative). The dataset consists of 356 negative, 368 positives, and 276 neutral examples.
Sentiment
analysis.
EMILLE
corpus
Islam et al. [71]
This corpus contains three components: monolingual, parallel, and annotated corpora. Fourteen
are monolingual corpora, including both written and spoken data for fourteen South Asian languages.
The corpora contains approximately 92,799,000 words (2,627,000 words of transcribed spoken data for
various South Asian languages).
Machine
transla-
tion.
KDE4 cor-
pus
Islam et al. [71]
A parallel corpus containing 92 languages, 60.75M tokens, 8.89M sentence fragments.
Machine
transla-
tion.
TABLE 16. Summary Table for Bangla Spam and Fake Detection System Datasets.
Article
Dataset Description
Task
Islam et al.
[59]
The proposed dataset has 1,965 variational instances, including 646 spam and 1,319 ham data.
Spam detection from
malicious Bangla text
data.
Hussain et
al. [60]
The authors collected around 2,500 articles for building the dataset from public articles. 1,548 articles from the
popular website were considered as real news, and 993 articles from satire news articles were considered as fake
news.
Fake Bangla news de-
tection.
Hossain et
al. [17]
The Dataset contains 50K news, and 8.5K news of them were manually annonated. Misleading, clickbait, and satire:
these three news types were collected from 22 popular news portals of Bangladesh.
Noisy
isolated
and
continuous
speech
recognition.
TABLE 17. Summary Table for Bangla Question Answering System Datasets.
Article
Dataset Description
Task
Khan et al.
[12]
50 afﬁrmative sentences of 50 documents were selected where one possesses nouns, and another
possesses pronouns of corresponding nouns. Ten question queries for each document were selected.
Improving answer extraction tech-
nique In Bangali Q/A system.
Islam et al.
[57]
3,334 questions were collected from random documents.
Word or phrase based answer type
classiﬁcation for Bangla Q/A sys-
tem.
Islam et al.
[58]
Several documents from Wikipedia were collected, and 500 questions were selected from these
proposed documents.
Bangla Q/A system for multiple
documents.
Uddin et al.
[144]
11,500 question-answer pairs based on history domain related questions and single supporting line
were created from Bangla wiki2 corpus.
Bangla paraphrased Q/A system.
Sarker et al.
[13]
15,355 questions and 220 documents were selected from a closed domain.
Bengali Q/A System for Factoid
Questions.
Kowsher
et
al. [11]
74 topics and 3,127 questions from the topics were selected for training, and 2,852 questions from
the relevant topics were selected for testng.
Bangla intelligence-based Q/A sys-
tem.
38
VOLUME 4, 2016
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
TABLE 18. Summary Table for Bangla Speech Processing and Recognition System Datasets.
Article
Dataset Description
Speakers Speciﬁcation
Speech Environment
and Task
Sultana
et
al. [6]
396 Bangla words with ﬁve paragraphs and 270 words of them are
distinct.
Not mentioned.
Speech to text conversion
of newspapers’ data.
Ali et al. [2]
100 words were recorded 1,000 times. Each word was recorded with
a 3-second duration and ten repetitions.
Not mentioned.
Noisy
isolated
speech
recognition from random
articles.
Hasnat
et
al. [119]
100 words were used for testing purposes. 5 to 10 samples for
each word were taken for the training purposes of isolated speech
recognition, and 1,814 phonemes were used for training purposes of
continuous speech recognition.
Five speakers.
Noisy
isolated
and
continuous
speech
recognition from random
articles.
Aadit et al.
[5]
Not mentioned.
Twenty-ﬁve males and 25 females, and their
age range is from 20 to 25 years.
Pitch and formant estima-
tion of noise-free speech
data.
Ahmed
et
al. [192]
500 sentences containing 2,733 Bangla word speeches for training
the proposed model. One hundred audio ﬁles from 20 more speakers
were used for testing the proposed model.
Seven speakers consisting of ﬁve males and
two females, all aged between 19 and 23
years, were from ﬁve various locations of
Bangladesh.
Noisy
numeral
speech
recognition.
Paul et al.
[194]
1,000 audio samples for (0-9) classes.
Not mentioned.
Numeral speech recogni-
tion.
Ahammad
et al. [50]
Two datasets of connected speech in Bangla for training and testing.
15 male and 15 female speakers.
Noise
free
numeral
speech recognition.
Nahid et al.
[53]
2,000 words and 114 words of them are unique.
15 male speakers of age between 20 to 24.
Noisy
real
numbers
speech recognition.
Sumit et al.
[51]
A self-constructed (Babel) dataset was used in both the training and
test phases, and CRBLP speech corpora was used only in the test
phase. Training data contained about 350 hours of Bangla speech,
and Testing data included approximately 111 hours of Bangla
speech.
Not mentioned.
Augmented noisy speech
recognition
from
bus,
cafe, street and pedestrian
areas.
Sumon
et
al. [48]
The developed dataset has ten classes of data and 100 samples per
class, and each utterance duration was less than 2 seconds. The
pre-trained English speech dataset has 65,000 samples, and each
utterance duration was not more than 1 second.
Not mentioned.
Short speech command
recognition.
Islam et al.
[52]
The dataset contains 200,000 wav audio ﬁles, and 33,000 audio ﬁles
were used for a RNN model for the experiment.
500 speakers.
General
public
speech
recognition.
Shuvo et al.
[197]
6,000 utterances and each report was one second in length. 420
instances of each digit were used in the training set, and 180 cases
of each number were used in the testing set.
60 male and 60 female native Bangla
speakers
from
different
regions
of
Bangladesh.
Five
trails
of
each
digit
from each speaker were recorded.
Noise-free
numeral
speech recognition.
Sharmina et
al. [198]
1,230 audio ﬁles.
Five males and ﬁve females. The people are
from different age groups and various parts
of Bangladesh.
Numeral speech recogni-
tion.
Ovishake et
al. [199]
4,000 audio samples.
Nineteen speakers and the speakers are from
different age groups and various parts of
Bangladesh.
Numeral speech recogni-
tion.
Paul et al.
[4]
There were 60 training examples for each digit, and in the testing
phase, there were ten samples for each number.
Four different Bangla words uttered by four
different persons.
General
public
speech
recognition.
Sultan et al.
[200]
Bangla human voice commands.
Not mentioned.
Bangla virtual assistant.
Khan et al.
[223]
54,000 audio ﬁles were maintained as a training corpus, and 27,000
audio ﬁles were held as a testing corpus. A list of high-frequent
1,081 words were selected for recording a total of 292 hours.
Training data were collected from 50 male
and 50 female persons, and test data were
collected from another 25 male and 25
female persons. The speakers were in the
range of 18 to 25 years.
Creation of noisy isolated
speech dataset.
Khan et al.
[224]
26,000 audio ﬁles were maintained as a training corpus, and 15,600
audio ﬁles were kept as a testing corpus. 52 sentences were selected
from 1,000 high-frequency words for recording a total of 62 hours.
Train data were collected from 50 male and
50 female persons, and test data were col-
lected from another 25 male and 25 female
persons. The speakers are in the range of 18
to 25 years.
Creation of noisy con-
nected speech dataset.
VOLUME 4, 2016
39
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
short speech level data’s amplitudes were magniﬁed to a suit-
able level. The original unedited recorded ﬁles were edited
for completing a sentence. The authors primarily focused on
establishing a connected Bangla speech corpus. The created
dataset lacked data differences for gender, age, and places of
the speakers; again, the isolated Bangla speeches were not
recorded in the suggested dataset.
We summarize the datasets that are used in Bangla speech
processing and recognition system in Table 18.
VI. CONCLUSION
Natural language processing is an emerging ﬁeld in the
modern machine learning and deep learning realm. The usage
of natural language processing is increasing day by day. The
importance of BNLP is undeniable as Bangla is one of the
languages spoken by many people around the world. We
have presented a broad discussion of the BNLP ﬁeld in this
paper. We have covered various preprocessing techniques
and discussed many classical and machine learning methods
used in this ﬁeld, giving us an idea about mainly used
methods and new areas yet to be explored. Moreover, we
discussed challenges and future research possibilities and
further reviewed the characteristics and complexity essen-
tial to understanding modern challenges in this ﬁeld. The
necessity and needs of BNLP in the modern world were
also discussed. Furthermore, we present various methods and
approaches of different categories in the respective sections,
giving some brief idea about implemented approaches. We
also addressed the challenges faced during the development
of BNLP systems. Additionally, we have summarized various
datasets which are commonly used. In conclusion, we have
presented a comprehensive review of BNLP methods with
datasets and results while addressing the limitations, sug-
gesting improvement ideas and discussing current and future
trends.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank for the support from Taif
University Researchers Supporting Project number (TURSP-
2020/10), Taif University, Taif, Saudi Arabia.
REFERENCES
[1] “Natural language processing (nlp) simpliﬁed : A step-by-step guide.”
Accessed: 2021-03-21.
[2] M. A. Ali, M. Hossain, M. N. Bhuiyan, et al., “Automatic speech recog-
nition technique for bangla words,” International Journal of Advanced
Science and Technology, vol. 50, 2013.
[3] D. Ververidis and C. Kotropoulos, “Emotional speech recognition: Re-
sources, features, and methods,” Speech communication, vol. 48, no. 9,
pp. 1162–1181, 2006.
[4] A. K. Paul, D. Das, and M. M. Kamal, “Bangla speech recognition
system using lpc and ann,” in 2009 Seventh International Conference on
Advances in Pattern Recognition, pp. 171–174, IEEE, 2009.
[5] M. N. A. Aadit, S. G. Kirtania, and M. T. Mahin, “Pitch and formant
estimation of bangla speech signal using autocorrelation, cepstrum and
lpc algorithm,” in 2016 19th International Conference on Computer and
Information Technology (ICCIT), pp. 371–376, IEEE, 2016.
[6] S. Sultana, M. Akhand, P. K. Das, and M. H. Rahman, “Bangla speech-
to-text conversion using sapi,” in 2012 International Conference on Com-
puter and Communication Engineering (ICCCE), pp. 385–390, IEEE,
2012.
[7] T. Virtanen, “Speech recognition using factorial hidden markov models
for separation in the feature space,” in Ninth International Conference on
Spoken Language Processing, 2006.
[8] B.-H. Juang, W. Hou, and C.-H. Lee, “Minimum classiﬁcation error
rate methods for speech recognition,” IEEE Transactions on Speech and
Audio processing, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 257–265, 1997.
[9] S. K. Gaikwad, B. W. Gawali, and P. Yannawar, “A review on speech
recognition technique,” International Journal of Computer Applications,
vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 16–24, 2010.
[10] N. Dave, “Feature extraction methods lpc, plp and mfcc in speech
recognition,” International journal for advance research in engineering
and technology, vol. 1, no. 6, pp. 1–4, 2013.
[11] M. Kowsher, M. M. Rahman, S. S. Ahmed, and N. J. Prottasha, “Bangla
intelligence question answering system based on mathematics and statis-
tics,” in 2019 22nd International Conference on Computer and Informa-
tion Technology (ICCIT), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2019.
[12] S. Khan, K. T. Kubra, and M. M. H. Nahid, “Improving answer extraction
for bangali q/a system using anaphora-cataphora resolution,” in 2018
International Conference on Innovation in Engineering and Technology
(ICIET), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2018.
[13] S. Sarker, S. T. A. Monisha, and M. M. H. Nahid, “Bengali question
answering system for factoid questions: A statistical approach,” in 2019
International Conference on Bangla Speech and Language Processing
(ICBSLP), pp. 1–5, IEEE, 2019.
[14] A. B. Abacha and P. Zweigenbaum, “Means: A medical question-
answering system combining nlp techniques and semantic web tech-
nologies,” Information processing & management, vol. 51, pp. 570–594,
2015.
[15] A. Mitra and C. Baral, “Addressing a question answering challenge by
combining statistical methods with inductive rule learning and reason-
ing,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
vol. 30, 2016.
[16] D. Moldovan, C. Clark, et al., “Natural language question answering
system and method utilizing a logic prover,” Nov. 17 2005. US Patent
App. 10/843,178.
[17] M. Z. Hossain, M. A. Rahman, M. S. Islam, and S. Kar, “Banfak-
enews: A dataset for detecting fake news in bangla,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.08789, 2020.
[18] R. Y. Lau, S. Liao, R. C.-W. Kwok, K. Xu, Y. Xia, and Y. Li, “Text mining
and probabilistic language modeling for online review spam detection,”
ACM Transactions on Management Information Systems (TMIS), vol. 2,
no. 4, pp. 1–30, 2012.
[19] R. Ghai, S. Kumar, and A. C. Pandey, “Spam detection using rating and
review processing method,” in Smart Innovations in Communication and
Computational Sciences, pp. 189–198, Springer, 2019.
[20] A. Heydari, M. Tavakoli, and N. Salim, “Detection of fake opinions using
time series,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 58, pp. 83–92, 2016.
[21] M. I. Ahsan, T. Nahian, A. A. Kaﬁ, M. I. Hossain, and F. M. Shah,
“Review spam detection using active learning,” in 2016 IEEE 7th An-
nual Information Technology, Electronics and Mobile Communication
Conference (IEMCON), pp. 1–7, IEEE, 2016.
[22] S. Mandal, S. K. Mahata, and D. Das, “Preparing bengali-english code-
mixed corpus for sentiment analysis of indian languages,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.04000, 2018.
[23] M. Rabbani, K. M. R. Alam, and M. Islam, “A new verb based approach
for english to bangla machine translation,” in 2014 International Confer-
ence on Informatics, Electronics & Vision (ICIEV), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2014.
[24] M. S. A. Chowdhury, “Developing a bangla to english machine transla-
tion system using parts of speech tagging,” Journal of Modern Science
and Technology, vol. 1, pp. 113–119, 2013.
[25] J. Francisca, M. M. Mia, and S. M. Rahman, “Adapting rule based
machine translation from english to bangla,” Indian Journal of Computer
Science and Engineering (IJCSE), vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 334–342, 2011.
[26] M. M. Anwar, M. Z. Anwar, and M. A.-A. Bhuiyan, “Syntax analysis
and machine translation of bangla sentences,” International Journal of
Computer Science and Network Security, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 317–326,
2009.
[27] F. M. Hasan, N. UzZaman, and M. Khan, “Comparison of different
pos tagging techniques (n-gram, hmm and brill’s tagger) for bangla,” in
Advances and innovations in systems, computing sciences and software
engineering, pp. 121–126, Springer, 2007.
[28] M. N. Hoque and M. H. Seddiqui, “Bangla parts-of-speech tagging using
bangla stemmer and rule based analyzer,” in 2015 18th International
40
VOLUME 4, 2016
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
Conference on Computer and Information Technology (ICCIT), pp. 440–
444, IEEE, 2015.
[29] M. S. A. Chowdhury, N. M. Uddin, M. Imran, M. M. Hassan, and M. E.
Haque, “Parts of speech tagging of bangla sentence,” in Proceeding of the
7th International Conference on Computer and Information Technology
(ICCIT), 2004.
[30] D. Chakrabarti and P. CDAC, “Layered parts of speech tagging for
bangla,” Language in India, www. languageinindia. com, Special Vol-
ume: Problems of Parsing in Indian Languages, 2011.
[31] S. Abujar, M. Hasan, M. Shahin, and S. A. Hossain, “A heuristic approach
of text summarization for bengali documentation,” in 2017 8th Inter-
national Conference on Computing, Communication and Networking
Technologies (ICCCNT), pp. 1–8, IEEE, 2017.
[32] A. Das and S. Bandyopadhyay, “Morphological stemming cluster identi-
ﬁcation for bangla,” Knowledge Sharing Event-1: Task, vol. 3, 2010.
[33] S. Dasgupta, N. Khan, A. I. Sarkar, D. S. H. Pavel, and M. Khan,
“Morphological analysis of inﬂecting compound words in bangla,” 2005.
[34] S. Chandra, B. Kundu, and S. K. Choudhury, “Hunting elusive english
in hinglish and benglish text: Unfolding challenges and remedies,” in
Proceedings of 10th International Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (ICON-2013), 2013.
[35] B. Kundu and S. Chandra, “Automatic detection of english words in
benglish text: A statistical approach,” in 2012 4th International Confer-
ence on Intelligent Human Computer Interaction (IHCI), pp. 1–4, IEEE,
2012.
[36] S. Sural and P. Das, “An mlp using hough transform based fuzzy feature
extraction for bengali script recognition,” Pattern Recognition Letters,
vol. 20, no. 8, pp. 771–782, 1999.
[37] S. Mandal, S. Sur, A. Dan, and P. Bhowmick, “Handwritten bangla
character recognition in machine-printed forms using gradient infor-
mation and haar wavelet,” in 2011 International Conference on Image
Information Processing, pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2011.
[38] B. B. Chaudhuri and S. Bhattacharya, “An experiment on automatic
detection of named entities in bangla,” in Proceedings of the IJCNLP-
08 Workshop on Named Entity Recognition for South and South East
Asian Languages, 2008.
[39] S. A. Chowdhury, F. Alam, and N. Khan, “Towards bangla named entity
recognition,” in 2018 21st International Conference of Computer and
Information Technology (ICCIT), pp. 1–7, IEEE, 2018.
[40] L. Mehedy, N. Ariﬁn, and M. Kaykobad, “Bangla syntax analysis: A
comprehensive approach,” in Proceedings of International Conference
on Computer and Information Technology (ICCIT), Dhaka, Bangladesh,
pp. 287–293, 2003.
[41] G. K. Saha, “Parsing bengali text: An intelligent approach,” Ubiquity,
vol. 2006, no. April, pp. 1–1, 2006.
[42] S. Dasgupta and M. Khan, “Morphological parsing of bangla wods using
pc-kimmo,” 2004.
[43] C. Lin and Y. He, “Joint sentiment/topic model for sentiment analysis,” in
Proceedings of the 18th ACM conference on Information and knowledge
management, pp. 375–384, 2009.
[44] A. Das and S. Bandyopadhyay, “Topic-based bengali opinion summariza-
tion,” in Coling 2010: Posters, pp. 232–240, 2010.
[45] M. I. A. Efat, M. Ibrahim, and H. Kayesh, “Automated bangla text
summarization by sentence scoring and ranking,” in 2013 International
Conference on Informatics, Electronics and Vision (ICIEV), pp. 1–5,
IEEE, 2013.
[46] F. Alam, S. Habib, and M. Khan, “Text normalization system for bangla,”
tech. rep., BRAC University, 2008.
[47] A. R. Pal, D. Saha, N. S. Dash, and A. Pal, “Word sense disambiguation
in bangla language using supervised methodology with necessary modiﬁ-
cations,” Journal of The Institution of Engineers (India): Series B, vol. 99,
no. 5, pp. 519–526, 2018.
[48] S. A. Sumon, J. Chowdhury, S. Debnath, N. Mohammed, and S. Momen,
“Bangla short speech commands recognition using convolutional neural
networks,” in 2018 International Conference on Bangla Speech and
Language Processing (ICBSLP), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2018.
[49] D. Palaz, R. Collobert, et al., “Analysis of cnn-based speech recognition
system using raw speech as input,” tech. rep., Idiap, 2015.
[50] K. Ahammad and M. M. Rahman, “Connected bangla speech recogni-
tion using artiﬁcial neural network,” International Journal of Computer
Applications, vol. 149, no. 9, pp. 38–41, 2016.
[51] S. H. Sumit, T. Al Muntasir, M. A. Zaman, R. N. Nandi, and T. Sourov,
“Noise robust end-to-end speech recognition for bangla language,” in
2018 International Conference on Bangla Speech and Language Process-
ing (ICBSLP), pp. 1–5, IEEE, 2018.
[52] J. Islam, M. Mubassira, M. R. Islam, and A. K. Das, “A speech recogni-
tion system for bengali language using recurrent neural network,” in 2019
IEEE 4th International Conference on Computer and Communication
Systems (ICCCS), pp. 73–76, IEEE, 2019.
[53] M. M. H. Nahid, B. Purkaystha, and M. S. Islam, “Bengali speech recog-
nition: A double layered lstm-rnn approach,” in 2017 20th International
Conference of Computer and Information Technology (ICCIT), pp. 1–6,
IEEE, 2017.
[54] J. Neto, L. Almeida, M. Hochberg, C. Martins, L. Nunes, S. Renals, and
T. Robinson, “Speaker-adaptation for hybrid hmm-ann continuous speech
recognition system,” 1995.
[55] A. A. Nugraha, K. Sekiguchi, and K. Yoshii, “A deep generative
model of speech complex spectrograms,” in ICASSP 2019-2019 IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), pp. 905–909, IEEE, 2019.
[56] B. Wu, K. Li, F. Ge, Z. Huang, M. Yang, S. M. Siniscalchi, and C.-
H. Lee, “An end-to-end deep learning approach to simultaneous speech
dereverberation and acoustic modeling for robust speech recognition,”
IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, vol. 11, no. 8,
pp. 1289–1300, 2017.
[57] M. A. Islam, M. F. Kabir, K. Abdullah-Al-Mamun, and M. N. Huda,
“Word/phrase based answer type classiﬁcation for bengali question an-
swering system,” in 2016 5th International Conference on Informatics,
Electronics and Vision (ICIEV), pp. 445–448, IEEE, 2016.
[58] S. T. Islam and M. N. Huda, “Design and development of question
answering system in bangla language from multiple documents,” in 2019
1st International Conference on Advances in Science, Engineering and
Robotics Technology (ICASERT), pp. 1–4, IEEE, 2019.
[59] T. Islam, S. Latif, and N. Ahmed, “Using social networks to detect
malicious bangla text content,” in 2019 1st International Conference on
Advances in Science, Engineering and Robotics Technology (ICASERT),
pp. 1–4, IEEE, 2019.
[60] M. G. Hussain, M. R. Hasan, M. Rahman, J. Protim, and S. Al Hasan,
“Detection of bangla fake news using mnb and svm classiﬁer,” in 2020
International Conference on Computing, Electronics & Communications
Engineering (iCCECE), pp. 81–85, IEEE, 2020.
[61] H. Ahmed, I. Traore, and S. Saad, “Detecting opinion spams and fake
news using text classiﬁcation,” Security and Privacy, vol. 1, no. 1, p. e9,
2018.
[62] D. Savage, X. Zhang, X. Yu, P. Chou, and Q. Wang, “Detection of
opinion spam based on anomalous rating deviation,” Expert Systems with
Applications, vol. 42, no. 22, pp. 8650–8657, 2015.
[63] S. Chowdhury and W. Chowdhury, “Performing sentiment analysis in
bangla microblog posts,” in 2014 International Conference on Informat-
ics, Electronics & Vision (ICIEV), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2014.
[64] N. I. Tripto and M. E. Ali, “Detecting multilabel sentiment and emotions
from bangla youtube comments,” in 2018 International Conference on
Bangla Speech and Language Processing (ICBSLP), pp. 1–6, IEEE,
2018.
[65] K. Sarkar, “Sentiment polarity detection in bengali tweets using deep
convolutional neural networks,” Journal of Intelligent Systems, vol. 28,
no. 3, pp. 377–386, 2019.
[66] A. Hassan, M. R. Amin, A. K. Al Azad, and N. Mohammed, “Sentiment
analysis on bangla and romanized bangla text using deep recurrent
models,” in 2016 International Workshop on Computational Intelligence
(IWCI), pp. 51–56, IEEE, 2016.
[67] S. A. Mahtab, N. Islam, and M. M. Rahaman, “Sentiment analysis on
bangladesh cricket with support vector machine,” in 2018 International
Conference on Bangla Speech and Language Processing (ICBSLP),
pp. 1–4, IEEE, 2018.
[68] K. Sarkar and M. Bhowmick, “Sentiment polarity detection in bengali
tweets using multinomial naïve bayes and support vector machines,” in
2017 IEEE Calcutta Conference (CALCON), pp. 31–36, IEEE, 2017.
[69] T. Ghosal, S. K. Das, and S. Bhattacharjee, “Sentiment analysis on
(bengali horoscope) corpus,” in 2015 Annual IEEE India Conference
(INDICON), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2015.
[70] M. S. Islam, M. A. Islam, M. A. Hossain, and J. J. Dey, “Supervised
approach of sentimentality extraction from bengali facebook status,”
in 2016 19th international conference on computer and information
technology (ICCIT), pp. 383–387, IEEE, 2016.
VOLUME 4, 2016
41
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
[71] M. Z. Islam, J. Tiedemann, and A. Eisele, “English to bangla phrase-
based machine translation,” in Proceedings of the 14th Annual conference
of the European Association for Machine Translation, 2010.
[72] S. Ismail, M. S. Rahman, and M. A. Al Mumin, “Developing an au-
tomated bangla parts of speech tagged dictionary,” in 16th Int’l Conf.
Computer and Information Technology, pp. 355–359, IEEE, 2014.
[73] H. Ali, “An unsupervised parts-of-speech tagger for the bangla language,”
Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia,
vol. 20, pp. 1–8, 2010.
[74] S. Akter, A. S. Asa, M. P. Uddin, M. D. Hossain, S. K. Roy, and M. I.
Afjal, “An extractive text summarization technique for bengali document
(s) using k-means clustering algorithm,” in 2017 IEEE International
Conference on Imaging, Vision & Pattern Recognition (icIVPR), pp. 1–6,
IEEE, 2017.
[75] R. Rayan Chowdhury, M. Tafseer Nayeem, T. T. Mim, M. Saifur Rah-
man Chowdhury, and T. Jannat, “Unsupervised abstractive summariza-
tion of bengali text documents,” arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2102, 2021.
[76] M. O. Rahman, F. A. Mousumi, E. Scavino, A. Hussain, and H. Basri,
“Real time road sign recognition system using artiﬁcial neural networks
for bengali textual information box,” European journal of scientiﬁc
research, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 478–487, 2009.
[77] A. H. Uddin, S. K. Dam, and A. S. M. Arif, “Extracting severe negative
sentence pattern from bangla data via long short-term memory neural
network,” in 2019 4th International Conference on Electrical Information
and Communication Technology (EICT), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2019.
[78] S. M. A. Sharif, N. Mohammed, N. Mansoor, and S. Momen, “A hybrid
deep model with hog features for bangla handwritten numeral classiﬁca-
tion,” in 2016 9th International Conference on Electrical and Computer
Engineering (ICECE), pp. 463–466, 2016.
[79] N. Banik and M. H. H. Rahman, “Gru based named entity recognition
system for bangla online newspapers,” in 2018 International Conference
on Innovation in Engineering and Technology (ICIET), pp. 1–6, IEEE,
2018.
[80] R. Pandit and S. K. Naskar, “A memory based approach to word sense
disambiguation in bengali using k-nn method,” in 2015 IEEE 2nd in-
ternational conference on recent trends in information systems (ReTIS),
pp. 383–386, IEEE, 2015.
[81] S. Nazah, M. M. Hoque, and M. R. Hossain, “Word sense disambiguation
of bangla sentences using statistical approach,” in 2017 3rd International
Conference on Electrical Information and Communication Technology
(EICT), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2017.
[82] N. Indurkhya and F. J. Damerau, Handbook of natural language process-
ing, vol. 2. CRC Press, 2010.
[83] K. Kuligowska, P. Kisielewicz, and A. Włodarz, “Speech synthesis
systems: disadvantages and limitations,” Int J Res Eng Technol (UAE),
vol. 7, pp. 234–239, 2018.
[84] L. Deng and X. Huang, “Challenges in adopting speech recognition,”
Communications of the ACM, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 69–75, 2004.
[85] M. Islam, “Research on bangla language processing in bangladesh:
progress and challenges,” in 8th international language & development
conference, pp. 23–25, 2009.
[86] M. T. Ahmed, M. Rahman, S. Nur, A. Islam, and D. Das, “Deployment of
machine learning and deep learning algorithms in detecting cyberbullying
in bangla and romanized bangla text: A comparative study,” in 2021
International Conference on Advances in Electrical, Computing, Com-
munication and Sustainable Technologies (ICAECT), pp. 1–10, IEEE,
2021.
[87] A. Dutt, M. A. Ismail, and T. Herawan, “A systematic review on educa-
tional data mining,” Ieee Access, vol. 5, pp. 15991–16005, 2017.
[88] B. Kitchenham, O. P. Brereton, D. Budgen, M. Turner, J. Bailey, and
S. Linkman, “Systematic literature reviews in software engineering–
a systematic literature review,” Information and software technology,
vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 7–15, 2009.
[89] R. Smith, “An overview of the tesseract ocr engine,” in Ninth interna-
tional conference on document analysis and recognition (ICDAR 2007),
vol. 2, pp. 629–633, IEEE, 2007.
[90] C. Manning and H. Schutze, Foundations of statistical natural language
processing, pp. 3. MIT press, 1999.
[91] R. Karim, M. Islam, S. R. Simanto, S. A. Chowdhury, K. Roy,
A. Al Neon, M. Hasan, A. Firoze, R. M. Rahman, et al., “A step
towards information extraction: Named entity recognition in bangla using
deep learning,” Journal of Intelligent & Fuzzy Systems, vol. 37, no. 6,
pp. 7401–7413, 2019.
[92] A. Ekbal and S. Bandyopadhyay, “A hidden markov model based named
entity recognition system: Bengali and hindi as case studies,” in Inter-
national Conference on Pattern Recognition and Machine Intelligence,
pp. 545–552, Springer, 2007.
[93] T. D. Orin et al., Implementation of a Bangla chatbot. PhD thesis, BRAC
University, 2017.
[94] O. Sharif, M. M. Hoque, A. Kayes, R. Nowrozy, and I. H. Sarker,
“Detecting suspicious texts using machine learning techniques,” Applied
Sciences, vol. 10, no. 18, p. 6527, 2020.
[95] M. S. Kaysar and M. I. Khan, “Word sense disambiguation for bangla
words using apriori algorithm,” in International Conference on Recent
Advances in Mathematical and Physical Sciences, p. 61, 2018.
[96] M. Hossain, M. Rahman, U. K. Prodhan, M. Khan, et al., “Implemen-
tation of back-propagation neural network for isolated bangla speech
recognition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.3785, 2013.
[97] T. Boro¸s, S. D. Dumitrescu, and R. Burtica, “Nlp-cube: End-to-end raw
text processing with neural networks,” in Proceedings of the CoNLL
2018 Shared Task: Multilingual Parsing from Raw Text to Universal
Dependencies, pp. 171–179, 2018.
[98] M. Perovšek, J. Kranjc, T. Erjavec, B. Cestnik, and N. Lavraˇc, “Textﬂows:
A visual programming platform for text mining and natural language
processing,” Science of Computer Programming, vol. 121, pp. 128–152,
2016.
[99] G. G. Chowdhury, “Natural language processing,” Annual review of
information science and technology, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 51–89, 2003.
[100] G. Gorrell, Generalized Hebbian Algorithm for Dimensionality Reduc-
tion in Natural Language Processing.
PhD thesis, Institutionen för
datavetenskap, 2006.
[101] A. Voutilainen, Part-of-speech tagging, vol. 219. The Oxford handbook
of computational linguistics, 2003.
[102] S. Gupta, G. Kaiser, D. Neistadt, and P. Grimm, “Dom-based content
extraction of html documents,” in Proceedings of the 12th international
conference on World Wide Web, pp. 207–214, 2003.
[103] M. Kanakaraj and R. M. R. Guddeti, “Nlp based sentiment analysis on
twitter data using ensemble classiﬁers,” in 2015 3rd International Con-
ference on Signal Processing, Communication and Networking (ICSCN),
pp. 1–5, IEEE, 2015.
[104] P. Etoori, M. Chinnakotla, and R. Mamidi, “Automatic spelling correction
for resource-scarce languages using deep learning,” in Proceedings of
ACL 2018, Student Research Workshop, pp. 146–152, 2018.
[105] H. Wang and J. A. Castanon, “Sentiment expression via emoticons on
social media,” in 2015 ieee international conference on big data (big
data), pp. 2404–2408, IEEE, 2015.
[106] H. Gonen and Y. Goldberg, “Lipstick on a pig: Debiasing methods cover
up systematic gender biases in word embeddings but do not remove
them,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.03862, 2019.
[107] B. Chiu, G. Crichton, A. Korhonen, and S. Pyysalo, “How to train
good word embeddings for biomedical nlp,” in Proceedings of the 15th
workshop on biomedical natural language processing, pp. 166–174, 2016.
[108] O. Kolak, W. Byrne, and P. Resnik, “A generative probabilistic ocr model
for nlp applications,” in Proceedings of the 2003 Human Language Tech-
nology Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pp. 134–141, 2003.
[109] C. Nath, M. S. Albaghdadi, and S. R. Jonnalagadda, “A natural language
processing tool for large-scale data extraction from echocardiography
reports,” PLoS One, vol. 11, no. 4, p. e0153749, 2016.
[110] P. M. Nadkarni, L. Ohno-Machado, and W. W. Chapman, “Natural
language processing: an introduction,” Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 544–551, 2011.
[111] Z. Wu, H. Zheng, J. Wang, W. Su, and J. Fong, “Bnu-hkbu uic nlp
team 2 at semeval-2019 task 6: Detecting offensive language using bert
model,” in Proceedings of the 13th International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation, pp. 551–555, 2019.
[112] B. Rychalska, K. Pakulska, K. Chodorowska, W. Walczak, and P. An-
druszkiewicz, “Samsung poland nlp team at semeval-2016 task 1: Ne-
cessity for diversity; combining recursive autoencoders, wordnet and
ensemble methods to measure semantic similarity.,” in Proceedings of the
10th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2016),
pp. 602–608, 2016.
[113] O. Tursun and R. Cakıcı, “Noisy uyghur text normalization,” in Proceed-
ings of the 3rd Workshop on Noisy User-generated Text, pp. 85–93, 2017.
[114] K. Kreimeyer, M. Foster, A. Pandey, N. Arya, G. Halford, S. F. Jones,
R. Forshee, M. Walderhaug, and T. Botsis, “Natural language processing
systems for capturing and standardizing unstructured clinical informa-
42
VOLUME 4, 2016
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
tion: a systematic review,” Journal of biomedical informatics, vol. 73,
pp. 14–29, 2017.
[115] P. Hanks and J. Pustejovsky, “A pattern dictionary for natural language
processing,” Revue Française de linguistique appliquée, vol. 10, no. 2,
pp. 63–82, 2005.
[116] M. Jarmasz, “Roget’s thesaurus as a lexical resource for natural language
processing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1204.0140, 2012.
[117] T. T. Urmi, J. J. Jammy, and S. Ismail, “A corpus based unsupervised
bangla word stemming using n-gram language model,” in 2016 5th
International Conference on Informatics, Electronics and Vision (ICIEV),
pp. 824–828, IEEE, 2016.
[118] J. Droppo, A. Acero, and L. Deng, “Uncertainty decoding with splice for
noise robust speech recognition,” in 2002 IEEE International Conference
on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, vol. 1, pp. I–57, IEEE,
2002.
[119] M. Hasnat, J. Mowla, M. Khan, et al., “Isolated and continuous bangla
speech recognition: implementation, performance and application per-
spective,” 2007.
[120] R. Vergin and D. O’Shaughnessy, “Pre-emphasis and speech recog-
nition,” in Proceedings 1995 Canadian Conference on Electrical and
Computer Engineering, vol. 2, pp. 1062–1065, IEEE, 1995.
[121] M. Shannon, “Optimizing expected word error rate via sampling for
speech recognition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.02776, 2017.
[122] S. Repp, J. Waitelonis, H. Sack, and C. Meinel, “Segmentation and
annotation of audiovisual recordings based on automated speech recog-
nition,” in International Conference on Intelligent Data Engineering and
Automated Learning, pp. 620–629, Springer, 2007.
[123] J. Ramirez, J. M. Górriz, and J. C. Segura, “Voice activity detection.
fundamentals and speech recognition system robustness,” Robust speech
recognition and understanding, vol. 6, no. 9, pp. 1–22, 2007.
[124] S. Lokesh and M. R. Devi, “Speech recognition system using enhanced
mel frequency cepstral coefﬁcient with windowing and framing method,”
Cluster Computing, vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 11669–11679, 2019.
[125] S. Singh, “Natural language processing for information extraction,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1807.02383, 2018.
[126] M. M. R. Sazal, S. K. Biswas, M. F. Amin, and K. Murase, “Bangla
handwritten character recognition using deep belief network,” in 2013
International Conference on Electrical Information and Communication
Technology (EICT), pp. 1–5, IEEE, 2014.
[127] M. Ali and M. M. Ali, “Development of machine translation dictionaries
for bangla language,” in 5th ICCIT, pp. 272–276, 2002.
[128] M. N. Y. Ali, J. K. Das, S. A. Al-Mamun, and M. E. H. Choudhury,
“Speciﬁc features of a converter of web documents from bengali to
universal networking language,” in 2008 International Conference on
Computer and Communication Engineering, pp. 726–731, IEEE, 2008.
[129] H. Uchida and M. Zhu, “The universal networking language beyond
machine translation,” in International Symposium on Language in Cy-
berspace, Seoul, pp. 26–27, 2001.
[130] L.-X. Wang and J. M. Mendel, “Generating fuzzy rules by learning from
examples,” IEEE Transactions on systems, man, and cybernetics, vol. 22,
no. 6, pp. 1414–1427, 1992.
[131] K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, and W.-J. Zhu, “Bleu: a method
for automatic evaluation of machine translation,” in Proceedings of the
40th annual meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pp. 311–318, 2002.
[132] M. Przybocki, K. Peterson, S. Bronsart, and G. Sanders, “The nist
2008 metrics for machine translation challenge—overview, methodology,
metrics, and results,” Machine Translation, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 71–103,
2009.
[133] G. Doddington, “Automatic evaluation of machine translation quality
using n-gram co-occurrence statistics,” in Proceedings of the second
international conference on Human Language Technology Research,
pp. 138–145, 2002.
[134] R. Sasano and S. Kurohashi, “Japanese named entity recognition using
structural natural language processing,” in Proceedings of the Third
International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing: Volume-
II, 2008.
[135] S. Morwal, N. Jahan, and D. Chopra, “Named entity recognition using
hidden markov model (hmm),” International Journal on Natural Lan-
guage Computing (IJNLC) Vol, vol. 1, 2012.
[136] B. Hanin, “Universal function approximation by deep neural nets with
bounded width and relu activations,” Mathematics, vol. 7, no. 10, p. 992,
2019.
[137] A. Canziani, A. Paszke, and E. Culurciello, “An analysis of deep
neural network models for practical applications,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1605.07678, 2016.
[138] L. Rabiner and B. Juang, “An introduction to hidden markov models,”
ieee assp magazine, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 4–16, 1986.
[139] E. Brill, “A simple rule-based part of speech tagger,” tech. rep., PENN-
SYLVANIA UNIV PHILADELPHIA DEPT OF COMPUTER AND
INFORMATION SCIENCE, 1992.
[140] B. McCann, N. S. Keskar, C. Xiong, and R. Socher, “The natural
language decathlon: Multitask learning as question answering,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1806.08730, 2018.
[141] L. Hirschman and R. Gaizauskas, “Natural language question answering:
the view from here,” natural language engineering, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 275–
300, 2001.
[142] P. Gupta and V. Gupta, “A survey of text question answering techniques,”
International Journal of Computer Applications, vol. 53, no. 4, 2012.
[143] M. Montes-y Gómez, L. V. Pineda, M. A. Pérez-Coutiño, J. M. G.
Soriano, E. S. Arnal, and P. Rosso, “Inaoe-upv joint participation in
clef 2005: Experiments in monolingual question answering.,” in CLEF
(Working Notes), 2005.
[144] M. M. Uddin, N. S. Patwary, M. M. Hasan, T. Rahman, and M. Tanveer,
“End-to-end neural network for paraphrased question answering architec-
ture with single supporting line in bangla language,” International Journal
of Future Computer and Communication, vol. 9, no. 3, 2020.
[145] X. Li and D. Roth, “Learning question classiﬁers,” in COLING 2002:
The 19th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, 2002.
[146] D. Gupta, S. Kumari, A. Ekbal, and P. Bhattacharyya, “Mmqa: A
multi-domain multi-lingual question-answering framework for english
and hindi,” in Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018), 2018.
[147] A. Aouichat, M. S. H. Ameur, and A. Geussoum, “Arabic question
classiﬁcation using support vector machines and convolutional neural
networks,” in International Conference on Applications of Natural Lan-
guage to Information Systems, pp. 113–125, Springer, 2018.
[148] A. Kamath, R. Jia, and P. Liang, “Selective question answering under
domain shift,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.09462, 2020.
[149] S. Zheng, Y. Li, S. Chen, J. Xu, and Y. Yang, “Predicting drug–protein in-
teraction using quasi-visual question answering system,” Nature Machine
Intelligence, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 134–140, 2020.
[150] R. N. Al-Matham and H. S. Al-Khalifa, “Synoextractor: a novel pipeline
for arabic synonym extraction using word2vec word embeddings,” Com-
plexity, vol. 2021, 2021.
[151] C. Derici, Y. Aydin, Ç. Yenialaca, N. Y. AYDIN, G. Kartal, A. Özgür,
and T. Güngör, “A closed-domain question answering framework using
reliable resources to assist students,” Natural Language Engineering,
vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 725–762, 2018.
[152] E. Perez, P. Lewis, W.-t. Yih, K. Cho, and D. Kiela, “Unsuper-
vised question decomposition for question answering,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2002.09758, 2020.
[153] K. Kaﬂe, B. Price, S. Cohen, and C. Kanan, “Dvqa: Understanding
data visualizations via question answering,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 5648–5656,
2018.
[154] “Sentiment analysis.” Accessed: 2021-03-24.
[155] L. Wang, Support vector machines: theory and applications, vol. 177.
Springer Science & Business Media, 2005.
[156] S. J. Phillips et al., “A brief tutorial on maxent,” AT&T Research,
vol. 190, no. 4, pp. 231–259, 2005.
[157] D. R. Musicant, V. Kumar, A. Ozgur, et al., “Optimizing f-measure with
support vector machines.,” in FLAIRS conference, pp. 356–360, 2003.
[158] M. H. Alam, M.-M. Rahoman, and M. A. K. Azad, “Sentiment analysis
for bangla sentences using convolutional neural network,” in 2017 20th
International Conference of Computer and Information Technology (IC-
CIT), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2017.
[159] X. Li, L. Bing, W. Zhang, and W. Lam, “Exploiting bert for end-to-
end aspect-based sentiment analysis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.00883,
2019.
[160] F. Abid, M. Alam, M. Yasir, and C. Li, “Sentiment analysis through
recurrent variants latterly on convolutional neural network of twitter,”
Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 95, pp. 292–308, 2019.
[161] H. Liu, P. Burnap, W. Alorainy, and M. L. Williams, “A fuzzy approach to
text classiﬁcation with two-stage training for ambiguous instances,” IEEE
Transactions on Computational Social Systems, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 227–
240, 2019.
VOLUME 4, 2016
43
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
[162] G. W. Flake and S. Lawrence, “Efﬁcient svm regression training with
smo,” Machine Learning, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 271–290, 2002.
[163] A. M. Kibriya, E. Frank, B. Pfahringer, and G. Holmes, “Multinomial
naive bayes for text categorization revisited,” in Australasian Joint Con-
ference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pp. 488–499, Springer, 2004.
[164] M. A. Awal, M. S. Rahman, and J. Rabbi, “Detecting abusive comments
in discussion threads using naïve bayes,” in 2018 International Confer-
ence on Innovations in Science, Engineering and Technology (ICISET),
pp. 163–167, IEEE, 2018.
[165] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, et al., “Convolutional networks for images, speech,
and time series,” The handbook of brain theory and neural networks,
vol. 3361, no. 10, p. 1995, 1995.
[166] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
computation, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
[167] I. Rish et al., “An empirical study of the naive bayes classiﬁer,” in IJCAI
2001 workshop on empirical methods in artiﬁcial intelligence, vol. 3,
pp. 41–46, 2001.
[168] G. E. Hinton, S. Osindero, and Y.-W. Teh, “A fast learning algorithm for
deep belief nets,” Neural computation, vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 1527–1554,
2006.
[169] M. Crawford, T. M. Khoshgoftaar, J. D. Prusa, A. N. Richter, and
H. Al Najada, “Survey of review spam detection using machine learning
techniques,” Journal of Big Data, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–24, 2015.
[170] B. Bhutani, N. Rastogi, P. Sehgal, and A. Purwar, “Fake news detection
using sentiment analysis,” in 2019 Twelfth International Conference on
Contemporary Computing (IC3), pp. 1–5, IEEE, 2019.
[171] S. Kaur, P. Kumar, and P. Kumaraguru, “Automating fake news detection
system using multi-level voting model,” Soft Computing, vol. 24, no. 12,
pp. 9049–9069, 2020.
[172] M. Z. Asghar, A. Ullah, S. Ahmad, and A. Khan, “Opinion spam de-
tection framework using hybrid classiﬁcation scheme,” Soft computing,
vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 3475–3498, 2020.
[173] A. Choudhary and A. Arora, “Linguistic feature based learning model
for fake news detection and classiﬁcation,” Expert Systems with Appli-
cations, vol. 169, p. 114171, 2021.
[174] C. Jiang and X. Zhang, “Neural networks merging semantic and non-
semantic features for opinion spam detection,” in CCF International
Conference on Natural Language Processing and Chinese Computing,
pp. 583–595, Springer, 2019.
[175] A. Rastogi, M. Mehrotra, and S. S. Ali, “Effective opinion spam detec-
tion: A study on review metadata versus content,” Journal of Data and
Information Science, vol. 5, no. 2, p. 76, 2020.
[176] S. S. Aluru, B. Mathew, P. Saha, and A. Mukherjee, “Deep learn-
ing models for multilingual hate speech detection,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.06465, 2020.
[177] Z. Alom, B. Carminati, and E. Ferrari, “Detecting spam accounts on
twitter,” in 2018 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in
Social Networks Analysis and Mining (ASONAM), pp. 1191–1198,
IEEE, 2018.
[178] N. S. Murugan and G. U. Devi, “Feature extraction using lr-pca hy-
bridization on twitter data and classiﬁcation accuracy using machine
learning algorithms,” Cluster Computing, vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 13965–
13974, 2019.
[179] P. Kaur, R. S. Boparai, and D. Singh, “A review on detecting fake news
through text classiﬁcation,” Int. J. Electron. Eng., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 393–
406, 2019.
[180] F. Masood, A. Almogren, A. Abbas, H. A. Khattak, I. U. Din, M. Guizani,
and M. Zuair, “Spammer detection and fake user identiﬁcation on social
networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 68140–68152, 2019.
[181] I. Iacobacci, M. T. Pilehvar, and R. Navigli, “Embeddings for word sense
disambiguation: An evaluation study,” in Proceedings of the 54th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pp. 897–907, 2016.
[182] M. S. Kaysar, M. A. B. Khaled, M. Hasan, and M. I. Khan, “Word sense
disambiguation of bengali words using fp-growth algorithm,” in 2019
international conference on electrical, computer and communication en-
gineering (ECCE), pp. 1–5, IEEE, 2019.
[183] A. R. Gonzales, L. Mascarell, and R. Sennrich, “Improving word sense
disambiguation in neural machine translation with sense embeddings,” in
Proceedings of the Second Conference on Machine Translation, pp. 11–
19, 2017.
[184] A. Haque and M. M. Hoque, “Bangla word sense disambiguation system
using dictionary based approach,” ICAICT, Bangladesh, 2016.
[185] D. Yu and L. Deng, Automatic Speech Recognition. Springer, 2016.
[186] T. D. Chung, M. Drieberg, M. F. B. Hassan, and A. Khalyasmaa,
“End-to-end conversion speed analysis of an fpt. ai-based text-to-speech
application,” in 2020 IEEE 2nd Global Conference on Life Sciences and
Technologies (LifeTech), pp. 136–139, IEEE, 2020.
[187] M. Sarma and K. K. Sarma, “Acoustic modeling of speech signal using
artiﬁcial neural network: A review of techniques and current trends,” In-
telligent Applications for Heterogeneous System Modeling and Design,
pp. 282–299, 2015.
[188] H. Miyoshi, Y. Saito, S. Takamichi, and H. Saruwatari, “Voice conversion
using sequence-to-sequence learning of context posterior probabilities,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.02360, 2017.
[189] M. Gales and S. Young, “The application of hidden markov models in
speech recognition,” 2008.
[190] E. Zarrouk, Y. B. Ayed, and F. Gargouri, “Hybrid continuous speech
recognition systems by hmm, mlp and svm: a comparative study,” In-
ternational Journal of Speech Technology, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 223–233,
2014.
[191] L. Welling and H. Ney, “Formant estimation for speech recognition,”
IEEE Transactions on Speech and Audio Processing, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 36–
48, 1998.
[192] T. Ahmed, M. F. Wahid, and M. A. Habib, “Implementation of bangla
speech recognition in voice input speech output (viso) calculator,” in
2018 International Conference on Bangla Speech and Language Process-
ing (ICBSLP), pp. 1–5, IEEE, 2018.
[193] A. U. Nasib, H. Kabir, R. Ahmed, and J. Uddin, “A real time speech
to text conversion technique for bengali language,” in 2018 International
Conference on Computer, Communication, Chemical, Material and Elec-
tronic Engineering (IC4ME2), pp. 1–4, IEEE, 2018.
[194] B. Paul, S. Bera, R. Paul, and S. Phadikar, “Bengali spoken numerals
recognition by mfcc and gmm technique,” in Advances in Electronics,
Communication and Computing, pp. 85–96, Springer, 2021.
[195] S. Ghannay, Y. Esteve, N. Camelin, and P. Deléglise, “Acoustic word
embeddings for asr error detection.,” in INTERSPEECH, pp. 1330–1334,
2016.
[196] A. Sarma and D. D. Palmer, “Context-based speech recognition error
detection and correction,” in Proceedings of HLT-NAACL 2004: Short
Papers, pp. 85–88, 2004.
[197] M. Shuvo, S. A. Shahriyar, and M. Akhand, “Bangla numeral recogni-
tion from speech signal using convolutional neural network,” in 2019
International Conference on Bangla Speech and Language Processing
(ICBSLP), pp. 1–4, IEEE, 2019.
[198] R. Sharmin, S. K. Rahut, and M. R. Huq, “Bengali spoken digit classi-
ﬁcation: A deep learning approach using convolutional neural network,”
Procedia Computer Science, vol. 171, pp. 1381–1388, 2020.
[199] O. Sen, P. Roy, et al., “A convolutional neural network based approach to
recognize bangla spoken digits from speech signal,” in 2021 International
Conference on Electronics, Communications and Information Technol-
ogy (ICECIT), pp. 1–4, IEEE, 2021.
[200] M. R. Sultan, M. M. Hoque, F. U. Heeya, I. Ahmed, M. R. Ferdouse, and
S. M. A. Mubin, “Adrisya sahayak: A bangla virtual assistant for visually
impaired,” in 2021 2nd International Conference on Robotics, Electrical
and Signal Processing Techniques (ICREST), pp. 597–602, IEEE, 2021.
[201] D. Povey, A. Ghoshal, G. Boulianne, L. Burget, O. Glembek, N. Goel,
M. Hannemann, P. Motlicek, Y. Qian, P. Schwarz, et al., “The kaldi
speech recognition toolkit,” in IEEE 2011 workshop on automatic speech
recognition and understanding, no. CONF, IEEE Signal Processing Soci-
ety, 2011.
[202] S. Murtoza, F. Alam, R. Sultana, S. Chowdhur, and M. Khan, “Phonet-
ically balanced bangla speech corpus,” in Proc. Conference on Human
Language Technology for Development 2011, pp. 87–93, 2011.
[203] J. Salazar, K. Kirchhoff, and Z. Huang, “Self-attention networks for
connectionist temporal classiﬁcation in speech recognition,” in ICASSP
2019-2019 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 7115–7119, IEEE, 2019.
[204] T. Starner, J. Makhoul, R. Schwartz, and G. Chou, “On-line cursive hand-
writing recognition using speech recognition methods,” in Proceedings
of ICASSP’94. IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing, pp. V–125, IEEE, 1994.
[205] J. Lee and S. Watanabe, “Intermediate loss regularization for ctc-based
speech recognition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.03216, 2021.
[206] A. Graves, A.-r. Mohamed, and G. Hinton, “Speech recognition with
deep recurrent neural networks,” in 2013 IEEE international conference
on acoustics, speech and signal processing, pp. 6645–6649, Ieee, 2013.
44
VOLUME 4, 2016
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
[207] A. Tjandra, S. Sakti, and S. Nakamura, “Listening while speaking:
Speech chain by deep learning,” in 2017 IEEE Automatic Speech Recog-
nition and Understanding Workshop (ASRU), pp. 301–308, IEEE, 2017.
[208] A. Géron, Hands-on machine learning with Scikit-Learn, Keras, and
TensorFlow: Concepts, tools, and techniques to build intelligent systems.
O’Reilly Media, 2019.
[209] D. C. de Andrade, S. Leo, M. L. D. S. Viana, and C. Bernkopf, “A
neural attention model for speech command recognition,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1808.08929, 2018.
[210] S. Manchanda and D. Gupta, “Hybrid approach of feature extraction and
vector quantization in speech recognition,” in Proceedings of the Second
International Conference on Computational Intelligence and Informatics,
pp. 639–645, Springer, 2018.
[211] M. Doumbouya, L. Einstein, and C. Piech, “Using radio archives for low-
resource speech recognition: Towards an intelligent virtual assistant for
illiterate users,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, vol. 35, 2021.
[212] M. M. Haque, S. Pervin, A. Hossain, and Z. Begum, “Approaches and
trends of automatic bangla text summarization: challenges and opportu-
nities,” International Journal of Technology Diffusion (IJTD), vol. 11,
no. 4, pp. 1–17, 2020.
[213] L. Sun, J. Du, T. Gao, Y.-D. Lu, Y. Tsao, C.-H. Lee, and N. Ryant, “A
novel lstm-based speech preprocessor for speaker diarization in realistic
mismatch conditions,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference on Acous-
tics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 5234–5238, IEEE,
2018.
[214] K. Höffner, S. Walter, E. Marx, R. Usbeck, J. Lehmann, and A.-C.
Ngonga Ngomo, “Survey on challenges of question answering in the
semantic web,” Semantic Web, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 895–920, 2017.
[215] K. Kaﬂe and C. Kanan, “Visual question answering: Datasets, algorithms,
and future challenges,” Computer Vision and Image Understanding,
vol. 163, pp. 3–20, 2017.
[216] X. Zhou, R. Zafarani, K. Shu, and H. Liu, “Fake news: Fundamental
theories, detection strategies and challenges,” in Proceedings of the
twelfth ACM international conference on web search and data mining,
pp. 836–837, 2019.
[217] S. Moon, B. McInnes, and G. B. Melton, “Challenges and practical ap-
proaches with word sense disambiguation of acronyms and abbreviations
in the clinical domain,” Healthcare informatics research, vol. 21, no. 1,
p. 35, 2015.
[218] “Bengali alphabet.” Accessed: 2021-05-29.
[219] M. O. Ayeomoni, “Code-switching and code-mixing: Style of language
use in childhood in yoruba speech community,” Nordic journal of African
studies, vol. 15, no. 1, 2006.
[220] B. Boets, M. Vandermosten, H. Poelmans, H. Luts, J. Wouters, and
P. Ghesquiere, “Preschool impairments in auditory processing and speech
perception uniquely predict future reading problems,” Research in devel-
opmental disabilities, vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 560–570, 2011.
[221] L. Besacier, E. Barnard, A. Karpov, and T. Schultz, “Automatic speech
recognition for under-resourced languages: A survey,” Speech communi-
cation, vol. 56, pp. 85–100, 2014.
[222] M. Ahmed, P. C. Shill, K. Islam, M. A. S. Mollah, and M. Akhand,
“Acoustic modeling using deep belief network for bangla speech recog-
nition,” in 2015 18th International Conference on Computer and Infor-
mation Technology (ICCIT), pp. 306–311, IEEE, 2015.
[223] M. F. Khan and M. A. Sobhan, “Construction of large scale isolated
word speech corpus in bangla,” Global Journal of Computer Science and
Technology, 2018.
[224] M. F. Khan and M. A. Sobhan, “Creation of connected word speech
corpus for bangla speech recognition systems,” Asian Journal of Research
in Computer Science, pp. 1–6, 2018.
[225] “Natural language processing (nlp) simpliﬁed : A step-by-step guide.”
Accessed: 2021-05-18.
[226] S. T. A. Monisha, S. Sarker, and M. M. H. Nahid, “Classiﬁcation of
bengali questions towards a factoid question answering system,” in 2019
1st International Conference on Advances in Science, Engineering and
Robotics Technology (ICASERT), pp. 1–5, IEEE, 2019.
[227] A. M. Ishmam and S. Sharmin, “Hateful speech detection in public face-
book pages for the bengali language,” in 2019 18th IEEE International
Conference On Machine Learning And Applications (ICMLA), pp. 555–
560, IEEE, 2019.
[228] M. R. Islam, S. Liu, X. Wang, and G. Xu, “Deep learning for misinforma-
tion detection on online social networks: a survey and new perspectives,”
Social Network Analysis and Mining, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 1–20, 2020.
[229] A. R. Pal, D. Saha, N. S. Dash, S. K. Naskar, and A. Pal, “A novel
approach to word sense disambiguation in bengali language using su-
pervised methodology,” S¯adhan¯a, vol. 44, no. 8, pp. 1–12, 2019.
[230] M. F. Khan, A. Ferdousi, and M. A. Sobhan, “Creation and analysis of
a new bangla text corpus bdnc01,” International Journal for Research in
Applied Science & Engineering Technology (IJRASET), vol. 5, 2017.
OVISHAKE SEN was born in Thakurgaon,
Bangladesh. Currently, he is pursuing a B.Sc. de-
gree in computer science and engineering (CSE)
with the Khulna University of Engineering &
Technology (KUET), Khulna, Bangladesh. He has
developed some exciting projects using C, C++,
Python, Java, HTML, CSS, ASP.net, SQL, An-
droid, and iOS. His research interests include nat-
ural language processing, computer vision, speech
processing, machine learning, deep learning, com-
petitive programming, and data science.
MOHTASIM FUAD was born in Chattrogram,
Bangladesh. He is currently pursuing a B.Sc. de-
gree in computer science and engineering (CSE)
with the Khulna University of Engineering &
Technology (KUET), Khulna, Bangladesh. His re-
search interests include computer vision, natural
language processing, data science, machine learn-
ing and deep learning. He is currently working on
deep learning projects.
MD. NAZRUL ISLAM was born in Chandpur,
Bangladesh. He is currently pursuing a B.Sc. de-
gree in computer science and engineering (CSE)
with the Khulna University of Engineering &
Technology (KUET), Khulna, Bangladesh. He has
worked on some exciting projects and some col-
laborative works throughout his study. He has
worked sincerely at one of the data science
projects of OneBlood Blood Centers in a con-
certed effort with success. His research interests
include machine learning, arm architecture, data science, deep learning,
computer vision, RISC architecture, and natural language processing.
JAKARIA RABBI received a master’s degree in
Computing Science from University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Canada. He is currently working as
an Assistant Professor at the department of Com-
puter Science and Engineering (CSE), Khulna
University of Engineering & Technology (KUET),
Khulna, Bangladesh. His research interests in-
clude Machine Learning, Deep Learning, Com-
puter Vision Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Data Science
and Remote Sensing. He has authored and coau-
thored several articles in peer-reviewed Remote Sensing journal and IEEE
conferences.
VOLUME 4, 2016
45
Ovishake et al.: BNLP: A Comprehensive Analysis of Classical, ML, and DL Based Methods
MEHEDI MASUD (SM’11) is a Full Professor in
the Department of Computer Science at the Taif
University, Taif, KSA. Dr. Mehedi Masud received
his Ph.D. in Computer Science from the Uni-
versity of Ottawa, Canada. His research interests
include cloud computing, distributed algorithms,
data security, data interoperability, formal meth-
ods, cloud and multimedia for healthcare. He has
authored and coauthored around 50 publications
including refereed IEEE/ACM/Springer/Elsevier
journals, conference papers, books, and book chapters. He has served as a
technical program committee member in different international conferences.
He is a recipient of a number of awards including, the Research in Excellence
Award from Taif University. He is on the Associate Editorial Board of IEEE
Access, International Journal of Knowledge Society Research (IJKSR),
and editorial board member of Journal of Software. He also served as a
guest editor of ComSIS Journal and Journal of Universal Computer Science
(JUCS). Dr. Mehedi is a Senior Member of IEEE, a member of ACM.
MD. KAMRUL HASAN received B. Sc. and M.
Sc. engineering degrees in Electrical and Elec-
tronic Engineering (EEE) from Khulna University
of Engineering & Technology (KUET) in 2014
and 2017, respectively. He received another M. Sc.
in Medical Imaging and Application (MAIA) from
France (University of Burgundy), Italy (the Uni-
versity of Cassino and Southern Lazio), and Spain
(University of Girona) as an Erasmus scholar in
2019. Currently, Mr. Hasan is serving as an As-
sistant Professor at KUET in the EEE department. He analyzed different
medical image modalities and machine learning during the MAIA study
to build a generic computer-aided diagnosis system. His research interest
includes medical image and data analysis, machine learning, deep convolu-
tional neural network, medical image reconstruction, and surgical robotics
in minimally invasive surgery. Mr. Hasan is currently a supervisor of several
undergraduate students on the classiﬁcation, segmentation, and registration
of medical images with different modalities. He has already published
many research articles on medical image and signal processing in different
international journals and conferences.
MD. ABDUL AWAL has completed his B.Sc.
in Electronics and Communication Engineering
(ECE) from ECE Discipline, Khulna University
in 2009. Later on, he has ﬁnished his M.Sc. in
Biomedical Engineering from Khulna University
of Engineering and Technology in 2011. He com-
pleted his PhD in Biomedical Engineering from
The University of Queensland, Australia, in 2018.
His research interests are Signal Processing, es-
pecially Biomedical Signal Processing, Big Data
Analysis, Image Processing, Time-Frequency Analysis, Machine Learning
Algorithms, Deep Learning, Optimization, and Computational Intelligence
Biomedical Engineering. He has more than 35 papers published in inter-
nationally accredited journals and conferences. He is currently working
as an Associate Professor at ECE Discipline, Khulna University, Khulna,
Bangladesh. He is now investigating some projects as principal investigator
and co-investigator and supervising several undergraduate and post-graduate
students.
AWAL AHMED FIME was born in Jashore,
Bangladesh. He is currently pursuing the B.Sc. de-
gree in Computer Science and Engineering (CSE)
with the Khulna University of Engineering &
Technology (KUET), Khulna, Bangladesh. His
research interests includes Computer vision, Ar-
tiﬁcial Intelligence, Signal processing, Machine
learning, and Deep learning. He has already
worked on some Web and Mobile Application us-
ing ASP.NET, CSS, JavaScript, Android through-
out his study using latest technology.
MD. TAHMID HASAN FUAD was born in Ra-
jshahi, Bangladesh. He is currently pursuing a
B.Sc. degree in Computer Science and Engineer-
ing (CSE) with the Khulna University of Engineer-
ing & Technology (KUET), Khulna, Bangladesh.
His research interests include Image Processing,
Computer Vision, Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Machine
Learning, and Deep Learning. He has already
worked on some exciting Android Development
and Machine Learning based mini-projects. He
has also done some mini-projects using C++, Python, Java etc.
DELOWAR SIKDER was born in Patuakhali,
Bangladesh. He is currently pursuing the B.Sc. de-
gree in Computer Science and Engineering (CSE)
with the Khulna University of Engineering &
Technology (KUET), Khulna, Bangladesh. His
research interests include Computer vision, Ar-
tiﬁcial Intelligence, Machine learning, and Deep
learning. He has also keen interested to Automated
system design, Web and Mobile Application De-
velopment. He has already worked on some inter-
esting projects throughout his study using latest technology.
MD.AKIL RAIHAN IFTEE was born in Joy-
purhat, Bangladesh. He is currently pursuing a
B.Sc. degree in Computer Science and Engineer-
ing (CSE) with the Khulna University of Engineer-
ing & Technology (KUET), Khulna, Bangladesh.
His research interests include Deep Learning, Data
Science, Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Machine Learn-
ing, and Natural Language Processing. He has
already developed some projects using C, C++,
Python, Java, HTML, SQL, etc. He is a regular
participant in machine learning and data science competitions on an online
platform such as Kaggle, Hacker-Earth, etc.
46
VOLUME 4, 2016
