Title: Deep Natural Language Processing for LinkedIn Search
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2108.13300v1
--------------------------------------------------

DEEP NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING FOR
LINKEDIN SEARCH
A PREPRINT
Weiwei Guo, Xiaowei Liu, Sida Wang, Michaeel Kazi, Zhiwei Wang,
Zhoutong Fu, Jun Jia, Liang Zhang, Huiji Gao, Bo Long
{wguo,xwli,sidwang,mikazi,zhiwwang,zfu,jjia,lizhang,hgao,blong}@linkedin.com
LinkedIn, Mountain View, CA
August 31, 2021
ABSTRACT
Many search systems work with large amounts of natural language data, e.g., search queries, user
proﬁles, and documents. Building a successful search system requires a thorough understanding
of textual data semantics, where deep learning based natural language processing techniques (deep
NLP) can be of great help. In this paper, we introduce a comprehensive study for applying deep NLP
techniques to ﬁve representative tasks in search systems: query intent prediction (classiﬁcation),
query tagging (sequential tagging), document ranking (ranking), query auto completion (language
modeling), and query suggestion (sequence to sequence). We also introduce BERT pre-training as
a sixth task that can be applied to many of the other tasks. Through the model design and experi-
ments of the six tasks, readers can ﬁnd answers to four important questions: (1) When is deep NLP
helpful/not helpful in search systems? (2) How to address latency challenges? (3) How to ensure
model robustness? This work builds on existing efforts of LinkedIn search, and is tested at scale on
LinkedIn’s commercial search engines. We believe our experiences can provide useful insights for
the industry and research communities.
Keywords Natural Language Processing, Deep Learning, Search Engine, Query Understanding
1
Introduction
Search systems are widely used to help users retrieve information from large and often difﬁcult to categorize data
sources. Search engines are typically complicated ecosystems that contain many components. As shown in Figure
1, after a user issues a query, the language generation modules (Bar-Yossef and Kraus, 2011; Li et al., 2006; Cao
et al., 2008) serve as search assistants to generate a better query. The language understanding modules Kang and Kim
(2003); Guo et al. (2009); Blanco et al. (2015) aim to extract semantic information from the query and documents,
such as user intent and named entities. Finally, all the extracted information is used for document retrieval and ranking.
A common part of these search components is that they all deal with large amounts of text data, such as queries, user
proﬁles and documents. Text data is sequential, and understanding such sequential information is a nontrivial task
with traditional methods. For example, the systems need to handle (1) synonyms/similar concepts, e.g., ”software
engineer” vs ”programmer”, (2) disambiguation, e.g., ”job opening” vs ”restaurant opening”, and (3) word importance
weighting, e.g., the important words in a query ”looking for a research scientist job” would be ”research scientist”,
and so on. Traditional methods highly rely on sparse features such as unigram features, which do not have strong
generalization power to handle these cases.
On the other hand, deep learning has shown great success in NLP tasks LeCun et al. (2015), indicating its potential in
search systems. In addition to alleviating the language problems mentioned above, there are several other beneﬁts of
using deep learning, such as end-to-end training, automatic feature engineering, etc.
arXiv:2108.13300v1  [cs.IR]  16 Aug 2021
Deep Natural Language Processing for
LinkedIn Search
A PREPRINT
Developing deep NLP models for search systems requires considering three challenges of the complicated ecosystem
of search engines Croft et al. (2010); Mitra et al. (2018). Firstly, serving latency constraints preclude complex models
from being used in production. In addition, directly trained deep learning models can have robustness issues such as
overﬁtting. The last challenge is effectiveness: often production models are very strong baselines that are trained on
millions of data examples with many handcrafted features, and have been tweaked for years.
In this paper, we focus on developing practical solutions to tackle the three challenges, and share real world experi-
ences. As shown in Figure 2, we have picked ﬁve representative search tasks that cover the classic NLP problems:
classiﬁcation, ranking, sequence tagging, language modeling, and sequence-to-sequence. For each of the tasks, we
investigate the unique challenges, provide practical deep NLP solutions, and analyze the ofﬂine/online experiments
results. By providing a comprehensive study, we hope the readers can not only learn how to handle the different
challenges in search systems, but also generalize and apply it to new tasks in other industry productions such as
recommender systems.
The contribution of the paper is:
• To our best knowledge, this is the ﬁrst comprehensive study for applying deep NLP models in search produc-
tions. Five tasks in search systems are selected, which cover most common NLP problems. For each task, we
provide practical solutions, and report experiments in LinkedIn’s commercial search engines.
• We go beyond the task boundary and summarize the observations and solutions into lessons. We believe
our experience would be a valuable resource for other vertical searches, as well as other applications such as
recommender systems.
• We successfully deploy BERT to two real world productions: query intent and document ranking.
Language 
Understanding
Query 
Intention
NER
Documents
Entity 
Disambiguation
Language 
Generation
Auto 
Completion
Spell Check
Query 
Suggestion
Raw query
Doc Retrieval 
& Ranking
Retrieval
Ranking
…...
…...
Figure 1: Overview of a search system.
2
Search Systems at LinkedIn
2.1
LinkedIn Search Systems Overview
LinkedIn provides multiple vertical searches, each corresponding to a document type, e.g., people, job, company, etc.
In this paper, the experiments are conducted on 3 vertical searches (people search, job search, help center search),
and federated search. Federated search retrieves the documents from all vertical searches and blends them into the
same search result page. When users go to LinkedIn, federated search is the default. People search is the most popular
search engine, which retrieves member proﬁles; job search returns job posts for job seekers; help center search provides
answers on how to use LinkedIn with a lot of natural language queries, e.g., ”how to change my account password”.
2
Deep Natural Language Processing for
LinkedIn Search
A PREPRINT
A typical search system is shown in Figure 1. There are three main components: (1) Language understanding
constructs important features for the other two components; (2) Language generation improves user experiences by
suggesting queries that are more likely to lead to desirable search results. (3) Document retrieval & ranking produces
the ﬁnal results of search systems and presents them to users.
2.2
Characteristics of Vertical Search Data
Search data is different from classic NLP task data, mainly from two aspects: data genre and training data size. In
classic NLP datasets Pang and Lee (2005); Hu and Liu (2004), the data unit is one or several complete sentences
with dozens of words in proper grammar. In a search system, queries have several keywords without grammar, which
introduces ambiguity. Meanwhile, LinkedIn searches are vertical searches instead of web search such as Google. The
vocabulary is mostly domain speciﬁc entities, e.g., people names, company, skills, etc.
In addition, the training data size is noteworthy. Classic NLP datasets are human annotated, therefore the size is
usually around tens of thousands of sentences, e.g., 11k training examples in the sentiment analysis dataset Pang and
Lee (2005). However, search training data is usually derived from click-through data, hence contains millions of noisy
training examples.
2.3
Challenges of Deep NLP for Search
There are several common challenges to applying deep NLP models to search systems. The ﬁrst challenge is the online
production latency. Deep learning models are known for their large compute time. Assuming the time complexity
of a bag-of-words model is O(n), where n is the number of words in a sentence, then a LSTM model Hochreiter
and Schmidhuber (1997) has a time complexity of O(nd2), where d is the number of dimensions used for word
embeddings. In this paper, we analyze the unique latency challenge faced by each task, and provide multiple practical
solutions to resolve or mitigate the latency issue.
The second challenge is robustness. Deep learning models have many parameters, hence are more likely to overﬁt
to the training data, and ignore the infrequent patterns. For example, in query tagging, the LSTM models always
recognize the query ”linkedin facebook” as one company, since queries with two companies are rare. In addition, deep
NLP models tend to over-generalize word semantics, e.g., in people search, professor proﬁles are matched to the query
”student”. In this paper, we show several tasks that could lead to overﬁtting, and provide practical solutions such as
more careful training data creation to tackle it.
The third challenge is effectiveness. The traditional production models are usually optimized for many iterations and
are trained with millions of examples, hence hard to beat. In general, we reuse the existing handcrafted features to
alleviate the issue. We also analyze why deep learning models do not work well in some scenarios.
Sequential Modeling
Classification
(Query Intent)
Representation Learning
(BERT Pretraining)
to sequence 
label
to 
documents
Sequence Generation
(Query Suggestion)
to next 
sequence
Sequence Completion
(Auto Completion)
to completed 
sequence
Sequential Labeling
(Query Tagging)
to word 
label
Ranking
(Search Ranking)
Figure 2: Deep NLP models for representative search tasks.
2.4
Search Tasks
The core of deep NLP is sequential modeling with CNN/LSTM/Transformer LeCun and Bengio (1995); Hochreiter
and Schmidhuber (1997); Vaswani et al. (2017) networks to generate word or sequence embeddings. By adding
speciﬁc loss functions on top of these embeddings, they can serve different NLP problems: predicting a sequence
level label is a classiﬁcation problem; predicting a label for each word is a sequential tagging problem, etc. In total
3
Deep Natural Language Processing for
LinkedIn Search
A PREPRINT
there are ﬁve common NLP problems: classiﬁcation, ranking, sequence tagging, language modeling, and sequence-
to-sequence. For each of the NLP tasks, we present a corresponding search task in Figure 2. These search tasks cover
major components in search systems, ranging from language understanding/generation to document ranking. We also
present a fundamental model pre-training task Devlin et al. (2019) that can potentially beneﬁt all tasks.
3
Representative Search Tasks
In this section, we introduce each speciﬁc task, outline the challenges, show how to overcome the challenges, and
analyze the ofﬂine/online experiment results.
The experiments are conducted on the LinkedIn English market. Ofﬂine results are reported on the test set. All
reported online metrics are statistically signiﬁcant with p < 0.05.
3.1
Query Intent Prediction
3.1.1
Introduction
Query intent prediction Kang and Kim (2003); Hu et al. (2009) is an important product in modern search engines.
Query intent is used in federated search to predict the probability of a user’s intent towards seven search verticals:
people, job, feed, company, group, school, event. The predicted intent is an important feature leveraged by downstream
tasks such as search result blending Li et al. (2008) to rank higher the documents from relevant search verticals.
The challenge of this task is there are very few words in a query, hence it is hard to disambiguate words, such as
”michael dell” (person names) vs ”dell engineer jobs” (company). Deep NLP models can alleviate this issue, especially
BERT which produces contextualized word embeddings Devlin et al. (2019) (more details can be found in Section 3.6).
3.1.2
Approach
The query intent prediction task is modeled as a multi-class classiﬁcation problem. CNNs have achieved signiﬁcant
performance gains in text classiﬁcation problemsKalchbrenner et al. (2014); Kim (2014); Hashemi et al. (2016). In
our approach (Figure 3), we combine the extracted text embedding with handcrafted features, and use a hidden layer
to enable feature non-linearity. The existing handcrafted features are powerful. For example, the query tagger (Section
3.2) feature can identify almost all people names accurately, including those out of the word embedding vocabulary.
The member behavior features can enable personalization (e.g., whether a user clicks on job postings in a certain
period of time).
Max pooling
Conv layers
Embeddings
Dense layer
Intent classes
seq_len
...
...
Handcrafted 
features
PEOPLE
JOB
engineer
position
LinkedIn
software
...
Figure 3: CNN based query intent prediction.
4
Deep Natural Language Processing for
LinkedIn Search
A PREPRINT
Table 1: Ofﬂine comparison w.r.t. production baseline.
Accuracy
P99 Latency
LR (baseline)
-
-
CNN w/o handcrafted features
+1.03%
+0.44ms
CNN
+1.49%
+0.45ms
LSTM
+1.61%
+0.96ms
Table 2: Online comparison for CNN based query intent prediction model vs production baseline. CTR@5 calculates the propor-
tion of searches that received a click at top 5 items.
Metrics
Percentage Lift
CTR@5 of job posts
+0.43%
3.1.3
Experiments
The label is inferred from click-through behaviors in the search log: if a user clicked on a document from one of the
seven verticals, then the query is assigned the corresponding vertical label. We use 24M queries for training and 50k
for dev and test. Besides the production baseline SCRF model, another baseline is bidirectional LSTM Graves et al.
(2013). For the CNN and LSTM model, the vocabulary size is 100k with word embedding dimension as 64; word
embedding is pre-trained with GloVe Pennington et al. (2014);1 hidden layer dimension is 200 (Figure 3). In the CNN
model, 128 ﬁlters of size 3 is used to capture word tri-grams. In LSTM, the hidden state size is 128.
3.1.4
Results
The baseline model is the production model, logistic regression on bag-of-words features and other handcrafted fea-
tures. The ofﬂine relevance and latency performance are shown in Table 1. Both CNN and LSTM models outperform
the production model, meaning that the features automatically extracted by CNN/LSTM can capture the query intents.
For online experiments (Table 2), we choose CNN instead of LSTM, since the relevance difference is small, but CNN
is faster than LSTM. The online results show CNN increases the job documents click metrics.
3.1.5
Related Work
The traditional methods use many handcrafted features, such as unigram, language model scores, lexicon matching
features, etc Arguello et al. (2009); Cao et al. (2009). For Deep NLP models, ofﬂine experiments with CNN are
conducted on 10k queries Hashemi et al. (2016). In contrast, our CNN model is trained on millions of queries with
many handcrafted features (personalization, query tagger, etc). We also provided detailed analysis on latency and
online impact on the vertical prediction task.
3.2
Query Tagging
3.2.1
Introduction
The goal of query tagging is to identify the named entities in queries. At LinkedIn, we are interested in 7 types of
entities: ﬁrst name, last name, company name, school name, geolocation, title, and skill. After entities are identiﬁed,
many important features can be constructed for downstream tasks such as query intent prediction or search ranking.
Query tagging is not a trivial task. For example, lexicon matching cannot solve the simple case such as ”research
scientist”, because there are three entities matched: ”research” as skill, ”scientist” as title, ”research scientist” as title.
In addition, for ambiguous queries, the query tagger should produce the most probable hypotheses, e.g., ”vera wang”
as a company rather than a person.
1In the ﬁve tasks except question suggestion, we always pre-train the word embedding on millions of training data with GloVe.
In query tagger, we add additional queries and member proﬁles to enrich the corpus for pre-training. We ﬁnd word embedding
pre-training always yields comparable or better relevance performance.
5
Deep Natural Language Processing for
LinkedIn Search
A PREPRINT
Table 3: Features used in SCRF based query tagger.
Type
Description
char based
preﬁx/sufﬁx features, such as ”er”, ”ist”
word based
word
lemma
brown cluster id Brown et al. (1992)
bigram with previous word, bigram with next word
lexicon
proﬁle lexicon, collected from member proﬁles
clickthrough lexicon, collected from clickthrough data
Table 4: Query tagging results, measure by F1 score.
Model
Hand-crafted Ftrs
F1
SCRF (baseline)
char/word/lexicon
-
CRF
char/word/lexicon
−0.6%
SCRF-nolex
char/word
−6.1%
LSTM-SCRF
char/lexicon
−0.3%
LSTM-SCRF-all
char/word/lexicon
−0.1%
3.2.2
Approach
Query tagging is a named entity recognition task on query data. The production model uses three categories of features:
character based, word based and lexicon based, as summarized in Table 3. It is worth noting that we are able to extract
powerful lexicon features leveraging large amount of user generated data, i.e., collecting the lexicon items from the
corresponding ﬁelds of 600 million member proﬁles. Because of this, we choose semi-markov conditional random
ﬁeld (SCRF) Sarawagi and Cohen (2005) as a baseline model, which can better exploit lexicon features than CRF
Lafferty et al. (2001).
The bidirectional LSTM-CRF architecture Lample et al. (2016) proves to be a successful model on classic NLP
datasets Sang and De Meulder (2003). We further extend it to bidirectional LSTM-SCRF. Essentially, the deep part,
Bidirectional LSTM, is used to replace the word-based features in Table 3.
3.2.3
Experiments
Queries from LinkedIn federated search are collected and manually annotated. Meanwhile, a few thousand queries are
generated to overcome the robustness problem (explained later). In total, we have 100k training queries, 5k dev and
5k test queries. For all models, the Adagrad optimizer Duchi et al. (2011) is used with learning rate 10−3; batch size
is 100; word embedding size is 50. This is tuned on a dev set.
3.2.4
Results
The traditional method SCRF achieves the best results in Table 4. LSTM-SCRF has all the handcrafted features
except word based features, however, it cannot outperform the SCRF baseline, and neither can LSTM-SCRF-all with
all handcrafted features. Due to no signiﬁcant ofﬂine experiment gain, these models are not deployed online.
We believe the major reason is the strength of lexicon features, therefore LSTM does not help much. The SCRF-nolex
(without lexicon based features) performance also indicates lexicon features are the most important. Meanwhile,
looking at the data, we found most entities are already covered by the lexicons that are built on large scales of data.
Other reasons could be due to the data genre: Queries are much shorter than natural language sentences. Therefore,
LSTM’s ability to extract long distance dependencies is not helpful in this task.
3.2.5
Related Work
The early works use CRF/SCRF to extract entities in queries Li et al. (2009); Guo et al. (2008). SCRF Sarawagi and
Cohen (2005) yields stronger performance superior by better exploiting lexicon features. The deep NLP models are
mainly designed for natural language sentences with LSTM-CRF Lample et al. (2016); Ma and Hovy (2016), where
LSTM is able to generate more powerful features by summarizing the long distance dependency. In this paper, we
6
Deep Natural Language Processing for
LinkedIn Search
A PREPRINT
Table 5: Statistics of two document ranking datasets.
People Search
Help Center
# docs
600M
2,700
# training data (queries)
5M
340,000
presented a strong production baseline SCRF with lexicons constructed from large scale datasets, and analyzed why
deep NLP models failed to improve the relevance performance.
3.3
Document Ranking
3.3.1
Introduction
Ranked documents are the ﬁnal results presented to users. Given a query, a searcher proﬁle and a set of retrieved
documents, the goal is to assign a relevance score to each document and generate the ranking.
Latency is the biggest challenge for this task. Although it has the same time complexity as query intent/tagging
tasks, the data unit of document ranking task is a set of documents, therefore the absolute time is not affordable. The
other challenge comes from effectiveness. The production model is optimized in many iterations, with many strong
handcrafted features.
In this paper, the experiments are conducted on people search and help center search. Table 5 shows the statistics of
two searches.
3.3.2
Approach
The production model uses XGBoost Chen and Guestrin (2016) for training, which works well with large scale training
data and is effective in modeling feature non-linearity. In people search, many non-text features are used, such as
personalized features based on social network structures and past user behaviors, and document popularity features
based on search log statistics. In addition, millions of training examples are available for people search.
Raw text
Text 
embeddings
Deep features
Handcrafted features
Hidden layer
Doc score
Doc_field1
Query
Doc_field2
CNN
CNN
CNN
Figure 4: Model architecture for ranking model (The learning-to-rank layer is not included).
One beneﬁt of a deep learning approach is that we can easily combine the deep NLP based semantic matching with
other techniques that prove to be effective. Figure 4 shows the architecture.
In Figure 4, the input is a query, multiple document ﬁelds, and a hand crafted feature vector. After text embeddings are
extracted, cosine similarity is computed for each query/document ﬁeld embedding. The cosine similarity is combined
with hand crafted features, and a Multi-Layer Perception Pal and Mitra (1992) layer is used with a hidden layer,
followed by a learning-to-rank layer. In general, we extend the previous work Huang et al. (2013); Zamani et al.
(2018), by combining hand crafted features with cosine similarities and adding a hidden layer.
7
Deep Natural Language Processing for
LinkedIn Search
A PREPRINT
Table 6: Ofﬂine document ranking results (NDCG@10).
Models
People Search
Help Center
XGBoost (baseline)
-
-
CNN-ranking
+3.02%
+11.56%
CNN-ranking w/o handcrafted features
−4.52%
+11.07%
Table 7: Online document ranking results on two searches. ”Sat click” is a people search metric: number of satisfactory searches
that include (1) connecting, messaging or following a proﬁle (2) viewing a proﬁle with dwelling time ¿ 5 seconds. ”Happy path
rate” is a help center search metric: proportion of users who searched and clicked a document without using help center search
again in that day.
Search
Metrics
Percentage lift
People Search
CTR@5
+1.13%
Sat Click
+0.76%
Help Center
Happy Path Rate
+15.0%
Online Production Deployment As mentioned before, latency is a major issue for ranking tasks. To reduce latency,
we use two different online deployment strategies, based on the particular production environment. For the help center
task, since there are only thousands of documents in total, we pre-compute the document embeddings. By doing
this, the computation is reduced to query embedding extraction and cosine similarity between query and document
embeddings.
Pre-computing the document embeddings requires nontrivial infrastructure changes for people search, where there are
600 million documents (member proﬁles). It needs a lot of space to store the embeddings, as well as complicated
designs to keep them fresh. In the P99 case in people search, there are thousands of retrieved documents on a searcher
machine.2 Our solution is a two-pass ranking strategy: ﬁrstly apply a lightweight model without deep learning modules
(MLP layer only), and choose the top hundreds of documents to send to deep models for reranking. After applying
this change, the P99 latency is signiﬁcantly reduced.
3.3.3
Experiments
The experiments are conducted on two searches (Table 5). On average each query has around 10 documents. Dev and
test size is 50k. For all models that apply, Adam optimizer Kingma and Ba (2015) is used with learning rate 10−3;
batch size is 256; word embedding size is 64.
3.3.4
Results
We report ofﬂine and online results in Table 6 and 73, respectively. In general, the ofﬂine and online performance
are consistent. The baseline is the production model trained with xgboost. Our model CNN-ranking signiﬁcantly
outperforms the baseline by a large margin.
To understand the impact of handcrafted features, we perform another experiment using CNN-ranking without any
these features. It turns out the handcrafted features in people search are more powerful than the help center, largely
because people search contains a lot of social network features and document clickthrough features.
By comparing CNN-ranking vs baseline across the two searches, it is interesting to see that the impact of deep NLP
models is signiﬁcantly larger in the help center setting. This is again caused by the data genre. In help center, the
queries and documents are mostly natural language sentences, such as a query ”how to hide my proﬁle updates” to
document ”Sharing Proﬁle Changes with Your Network”, where CNNs can capture the semantic meaning. In people
search, it is more important to perform exact matching, for example, query ”facebook” should not return member
proﬁles who work at ”linkedin”.
Finally, we present the latency of different deployment strategies in Table 8. For people search, we do not observe
signiﬁcant difference in terms of online relevance metrics between two pass ranking and all-decoding. We manually
2there are many searcher machines, each responsible for a part of the 600m proﬁles
3The online setting is slightly different in help center search. Since there are only thousands of documents in total, the production
model will score all the documents. Therefore, for cnn-ranking we also adopt this setting.
8
Deep Natural Language Processing for
LinkedIn Search
A PREPRINT
Table 8: P99 latency in document ranking.
Deployment Strategy
Search
#Docs
@P99 latency
Two pass ranking
People search
100-999
+21ms
All-decoding
1000-9999
+55ms
Document pre-computing
Help center
1000-9999
+25ms
checked the ranking scores, and found that the documents discarded in the ﬁrst phrase ranking usually have very low
scores.
3.3.5
Related Work
There are many existing works on deep NLP models for search ranking Huang et al. (2013); Shen et al. (2014);
Palangi et al. (2016); Guo et al. (2016); Xiong et al. (2017); Dai et al. (2018). Our model adopted many designs in
previous work to achieve balance between efﬁciency and effectiveness: multiple document ﬁelds Zamani et al. (2018)
to improve document understanding, text-level interaction instead of word-level interaction Huang et al. (2013), etc.
In addition, we also show that combining existing handcrafted features with deep features in an MLP layer to optimize
relevance performance. For production deployment, while the previous work focus on the embedding precomputing
Ramanath et al. (2018); Yin et al. (2016); Grbovic and Cheng (2018), we demonstrate that two pass ranking can work
well with signiﬁcantly less infra changes.
3.4
Query auto completion
3.4.1
Introduction
Query auto completion Bar-Yossef and Kraus (2011) is a language generation task. The input is a preﬁx typed by a
user, and the goal is to return a list of completed queries that match the user’s intent. As a search assistance component,
it improves user experience in two aspects: (1) Saves user keystrokes and returns search results in less time. (2) More
importantly, it guides users to better queries and search results, e.g., for a preﬁx sof, the query software engineer is
considered better than software developer, since the former is a more common job title that leads to better recall.
Query auto completion has a strict latency requirement, since the model needs to return results for each keystroke.
3.4.2
Approach
The traditional auto completion system has two separate steps: candidate generation and candidate ranking. The
candidate generation performs a lookup from a query preﬁx to a completed query, which is extremely efﬁcient. This
is done by memorizing each query preﬁx to the set of all possible queries that have been seen in the search log.
For unseen query preﬁxes, a heuristic is used to generate the candidates Mitra and Craswell (2015). The candidate
ranking component is to rank the completed queries with frequency based counting or ML models like XGBoost.
Several features are constructed for the completed queries, with the most effective feature being the query frequency.
In summary, both candidate generation and candidate rank stages are lightweight and can be ﬁnished within several
milliseconds.
Since query auto completion is a language generation task, an ideal model is neural language modeling Mikolov
et al. (2010) with beam search decoding Park and Chiba (2017). This neural language modeling approach achieves
impressive relevance results, but at the cost of latency. During beam search decoding, generation and ranking are
performed at the same time for many iterations (one iteration for one generated token); while in traditional methods,
there is only one generation and one ranking step. According to reported previous work Park and Chiba (2017),
relevance performance can be increased by 10%, while latency can rise to over 1 second Wang et al. (2018).
To reduce latency, instead of a end-to-end neural network approach, we apply deep learning only for the ranking
component (Figure 5). A LSTM based language model is used to assign a score for each candidate. We notice that the
majority of time is spent on the computing the normalization constant of the word probability, since it sums over the
entire vocabulary:
log P(wi|hi) = log
exp(v⊤
i hi)
P
j exp(v⊤
j hi) = v⊤
i hi −log
X
j
exp(v⊤
j hi)
(1)
9
Deep Natural Language Processing for
LinkedIn Search
A PREPRINT
researcher
linkedin
<s>
LSTM
researcher
linkedin
</s>
query score
word score
Figure 5: Model architecture for query auto completion. The learning-to-rank layer is not included.
Table 9: P99 Latency in query auto completion task. Each preﬁx has 100 candidates to rank.
Models
Latency
Baseline
-
Language Model (ranking only)
+61ms
Unnormalized LM (ranking only)
+9ms
Therefore, following the unnormalized language model approach Sethy et al. (2015), we approximate the denominator
by log P
j exp(v⊤
j hi) = b, where b is another parameter to estimate. The computation time reduction is summarized
in Table 9.
3.4.3
Experiments
The model is applied on job search query auto completion. We follow the experiment setting and the train/dev/test
splitting schema deﬁned in Mitra and Craswell (2015). The LSTM has one layer with a 100 dimension hidden state.
Adagrad is used with learning rate 10−3. The vocabulary is 100k words with 100 dimensional embedding.
3.4.4
Results
XGBoost is used as the product baseline model for candidate ranking component. Table 10 and 11 show the of-
ﬂine/online results, respectively. All deep learning models outperforms the traditional methods by a large margin.
More interestingly, the gain is mostly from unseen query preﬁxes. For seen preﬁxes, the frequency based methods
can do a fairly good job. We also compare with CLSM model Mitra and Craswell (2015). It formulates the problem
as ranking the completed sufﬁx given a preﬁx, i.e., the cosine similarity between the preﬁx and sufﬁx is the ranking
score. It has worse results than language modeling based methods, since the task nature is to rank the likelihood of
completed queries, while CLSM focuses on extracting ngram patterns.
3.4.5
Related Work
Traditional query auto completion systems use a two-step framework, candidate generation and ranking Cai and De Ri-
jke (2016), similar to the production baseline described in Section 3.4.2. The deep NLP models in previous work
perform candidate generation and ranking at the same time via beam search Park and Chiba (2017). This neural beam
Table 10: Ofﬂine relevance performance in query auto completion task, measured by mean reciprocal rank (MRR@10 Craswell
(2009)).
Ranking Models
All
Seen preﬁx
Unseen preﬁx
baseline
-
-
-
Unnormalized LM
+3.2%
+0.06%
+6.0%
CLSM Mitra and Craswell (2015)
+2.1%
+0.06%
+3.9%
10
Deep Natural Language Processing for
LinkedIn Search
A PREPRINT
Table 11: Online metrics of query auto completion at job search. ”Job Applies” is the number of job posts applied from search.
”Job Views” is the number of job posts clicked from search.s
Metric
Percentage Lift
Job Applies
+1.45%
Job Views
+0.43%
search framework is followed by adding personalization Jaech and Ostendorf (2018); Fiorini and Lu (2018); Jiang
et al. (2018) and time information Fiorini and Lu (2018). While impressive relevance performance is achieved, the
model latency does not meet industry requirement. In this paper, we proposed a novel approach to effectively model
the query context and reduce the latency.
3.5
Query Suggestion
3.5.1
Introduction
Query suggestion Fonseca et al. (2005); Cao et al. (2008) is another essential part of our search experience. Many
search engines offer such a function, e.g., Google’s ”Searches related to ...”, and LinkedIn’s ”People also search for”,
to assist users to seek relevant information.
3.5.2
Approach
The production baseline is based on frequency counting of search queries. It collects query pairs, and for each input
query, sorts the suggestions by the query pair frequency. Heuristics are used to make sure the query pairs are seman-
tically related: (1) The query pairs must be in the same session, where sessions are deﬁned by queries separated by
no more than 10 minutes; and either (2) two queries must share one common word or (3) the two queries co-occur for
several distinct users.
We formulate the problem as machine translation in sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) framework Sutskever et al.
(2014), where the main beneﬁt is to generalize to infrequent and unseen queries. We ﬁnd the deep learning model can
overﬁt to reformulation pairs if not careful handled. When training data contain query generalization, e.g. ”research
scientist –¿ scientist”, the trained model will degrade to only delete words, to produce low perplexity suggestions. We
handle this by removing these types of examples from the training data.
The seq2seq model has a large latency, which can be an issue in production. In this case, we serve our model in parallel
with search result ranking, which gives us plenty of time (more than 100ms) to run the seq2seq model.
3.5.3
Experiments
The seq2seq model is tested in federated search. Training/dev/test data size is 300m/50k/50k query pairs. For the
seq2seq model, we use a small model to reduce latency (dimension in LSTM is 100 units, 2 layers deep). Stochastic
gradient descent is used with a learning rate of 1.0.
3.5.4
Results
In our ofﬂine experiments in Table 12, we measure both the relative lift of MRR@10, and the coverage. The MRR
of the model is computed based on the position of the gold standard query in the top 10 list, if it appears at all. The
coverage indicates whether the model is able to produce any suggestion at all from the input. The MRR improves
signiﬁcantly relative to the baseline by using a deep learning method. The coverage of the deep learning method is
trivially 100%, although in practice it is lower due to ﬁltering of unknown words or the rare blacklisted query. Overall,
we can see that query suggestion is an area where deep learning provides great impact over traditional methods.
Online experiments (Table 13) display evidence of an enhanced user experience, particularly on ﬁnding jobs and
overall proportion of successful LinkedIn use.
3.5.5
Related Work
Traditional approaches to this problem are frequency based counting of search queries, or collaborative ﬁltering Paine
et al. (2007), both of which only work on previously seen searches. He et al. He et al. (2016) applied seq2seq to
rewrite queries into document titles, which is later used as features for search ranking. For query suggestions, multiple
11
Deep Natural Language Processing for
LinkedIn Search
A PREPRINT
Table 12: Ofﬂine experiments for query suggestion task.
Model
MRR@10
Coverage
Frequency baseline
-
67.3%
Seq2Seq
+11.1%
100%
Table 13: Query suggestion online results.
Metric
Percentage Lift
Job views
+0.6%
Job apply
+1.0%
session models have been proposed Dehghani et al. (2017); Ren et al. (2018) by exploiting the other queries in a search
session. However, these works focus on ofﬂine results. In this paper, we outlined a practical solution for the related
search production, from query reformulation collection to model training and online deployment. Our approach is
applicable to any search engine with search logs.
3.6
BERT Pre-training
BERT Devlin et al. (2019) is a pre-trained language representation model that is proven to be beneﬁcial for many
NLP tasks. In this paper, our goal is to pre-train a BERT model on LinkedIn data (hence the name LiBERT). The
advantage of a LinkedIn speciﬁc BERT model is: (1) Better relevance for domain speciﬁc tasks. In Google’s pre-
trained model, ”linkedin” and many other companies are not in the vocabulary. (2) Smaller model structure for the
ease of deployment. Our model is 6 layer with 34m parameters, compared to 12 layers and 110M parameters in
Google’s BERT-Base model.
3.6.1
Model Pre-training
The original BERT models were pre-trained on Wikipedia and BooksCorpus data, which are widely used datasets in
language modeling. The text data in LinkedIn search systems are of a different genre. For pre-training the LiBERT
models, we extracted data from different domains at LinkedIn. Table 14 shows the data source of the pre-training data
as well as the statistics. The large amount of text data from these domains should cover most NLP use cases in search
products and are general enough for downstream ﬁne-tuning tasks.
The major challenge of productionizing BERT is the latency. In this paper, we train a smaller LiBERT on LinkedIn
data to minimize the latency. We experimented with the original BERT implementation Devlin et al. (2019), as well
as our more light-weight LiBERT architecture (LiBERT). The model speciﬁcation is 6 transformer layers (L=6), 12
hidden size (H=512), 8 attention heads (A=8), and 64 positional embeddings (P=64). A much smaller number of
positional embeddings is used, due to that the length of search queries are much shorter than the sentences in classic
NLP tasks. The resulting model has 1/3 as many parameters as BERT-Base.
3.6.2
Experiments on Fine-tuning Tasks
Fine-tuning experiments are conducted on two tasks: help center search ranking and query intent classiﬁcation. For
help center ranking, the deployment strategy is document embedding pre-computing. The CNN model in the classiﬁ-
cation and ranking task (Figure 3 and 4) is replaced by our LiBERT model. Since queries are short, we only keep the
ﬁrst 16 words in queries, to further reduce P99 computation.
Table 14: Corpus used for LiBERT pre-training.
Corpus
Description
#Words
Search
Search queries
890M
Member proﬁles
Headlines, summaries, positions
728M
Job listings
Job titles and descriptions
604M
Ads
Ads titles and descriptions
637M
12
Deep Natural Language Processing for
LinkedIn Search
A PREPRINT
Table 15: LiBERT ﬁne-tuning ofﬂine performance comparison on query intent and help center ranking tasks.
Model
BERT HParams
Query intent
Help center
#L
#H
#A
#P
Accuracy
NDCG@10
CNN
-
-
-
-
-
-
BERT-Base
12
768
12
512
+2.89%
+2.15%
LiBERT
6
512
8
64
+3.28%
+2.13%
Table 16: Online experiments of LiBERT over the baseline model (CNN) in query intent prediction and help center ranking tasks.
Task
Metrics
Percentage lift
Query intent
CTR@5
+0.17%
SAT click
+1.36%
Help center
Happy Path Rate
+11.3%
In Table 15, the LiBERT model achieves comparable performance to BERT-Base in both tasks, even though a simpler
architecture is used. This is due to the in-domain pre-training data that is more relevant to the task. Similar trend of
performance improvements are observed in online experiments, as shown in Table 16. We also reported the P99 ofﬂine
latency. In the help center search task, recall that document pre-computing is used, and all 2,700 document embeddings
are directly compared to the queries. As shown in Table 17, LiBERT can signiﬁcantly reduce the computation time,
compared to BERT-Base. Accordingly, we deployed the LiBERT based models to production.
4
Lessons Learned
Our previous section focuses on task speciﬁc challenges and solutions for each individual task. In this section, we go
beyond the task boundary and generalize the interesting observations into lessons. We believe these lessons are not
limited to search systems, but also can be applied to other areas such as recommender systems.
4.1
When is Deep NLP Helpful?
In general, the deep NLP models achieve better relevance performance than traditional methods in search tasks, and
are particularly powerful in the following scenarios:
• Language generation tasks. Based on the ofﬂine experiments, query suggestion (Table 12) beneﬁts most
from deep NLP modeling. This is determined by the nature of language generation tasks. In the seq2seq
framework, the hidden state summarizes the context well, and the decoder can produce related queries for
any input query.
• Data with rich paraphrasing. In document ranking, the improvement brought by using CNN is larger in
help center than in people search (Table 6 and 7), since help center has a lot of natural language queries while
people search queries are combination of keywords.
4.2
When is Deep NLP not Helpful?
There are two cases in search systems where no gain is observed by applying deep NLP models: (1) query tagging
(Table 4); (2) seen preﬁxes in query auto completion (Table 10).
Table 17: Ofﬂine P99 latency of LiBERT on query intent classiﬁcation and help center ranking.
Model
Classiﬁcation
Ranking
CNN
+0.5ms
+25ms
BERT-Base
+53ms
+65ms
LiBERT
+15ms
+44ms
13
Deep Natural Language Processing for
LinkedIn Search
A PREPRINT
There are mainly two reasons for this. The ﬁrst reason is for the particular task, the handcrafted features are powerful
enough to solve most of the problems. In query tagging, there is a lexicon built on 700 million user proﬁles, therefore
the lexicons can give a pretty accurate estimation of the entity label. Similarly, for seen preﬁxes of query auto comple-
tion, the frequencies of preﬁxes to completed queries is collected on million of entries in the search logs, which makes
them reliable.
The second reason is the data genre. Firstly, query tagging datasets contain a lot of people names (over 50%) where
word embedding do not help much. In fact, except for query intent and query tagging, the other three tasks work on
datasets without people names. Secondly, it lacks language variation, similar to what we mentioned in the last section.
It is interesting that in classic NLP data sets, e.g. CoNLL’03 Sang and De Meulder (2003), the LSTM-CRF Lample
et al. (2016) outperforms CRF by a large margin. In the NLP data set, each data unit is a complete sentence, which
provides context clues. For example, the headline ”Jordan expels Iraqi diplomat” makes it obvious what kind of entity
”Jordan” is, but it would be rare to see this in search data.
4.3
Latency is the Biggest Challenge
We found latency to be the biggest challenge of applying deep NLP models to search productions. We summarize as
below the practical solutions to reduce latency: Dense matrix multiplication and evaluating softmax are costly, and
these are often performed on every word in a text.
• Algorithm redesign. In query auto completion, instead of a fully neural network approach, we only apply
deep learning for candidate ranking. In addition, the unnormalized language model is applied to further
reduce latency.
• Parallel computing. In query suggestion, the seq2seq model runs in parallel with search ranking, which
leave more than 100ms buffer for seq2seq model.
• Embedding pre-computing. In help center search ranking, the document embeddings are pre-computed,
leaving only query processing to be computed at run-time.
• Two pass ranking. In people search ranking, a lightweight model is applied to handle all documents, then
a deep model reranks the top ones. Compared to embedding pre-computing, two pass ranking has less of an
infrastructure requirement.
It is also worth noting that due to the nature of the production setting, computation time may not be a blocker. In
query intent, the BERT model is computationally heavy, but it only needs to handle several words in a query (+15ms),
therefore the search system can afford the absolute additional time.
4.4
How to Ensure Robustness?
Robustness proves to be a challenge in multiple tasks, since deep learning models are more likely to overﬁt the training
data and over generalize word semantics, compared to traditional methods. Our solution is to manipulate the training
data and reuse handcrafted features to enforce robustness.
• Training data manipulation. In query suggestion, we observe that with generalization pairs (”senior re-
search scientist” -> ”research scientist”), the trained seq2seq will mostly generate queries by deleting original
words. We address it by removing the generalization pairs in the training data.
• Reuse handcrafted features. In document ranking, the deep NLP model may rank the topically related
documents higher than the keywords matched documents. For example, in people search, matching professor
proﬁles to query ”student”. This can be alleviated by incorporating the existing handcrafted features (e.g.,
keywords matching features such as cosine similarity) into neural networks.
5
Related Work
The task speciﬁc related work is mentioned in Section 3, therefore, in this section, we mainly focus on the common
text based features and machine learning approaches.
5.1
Traditional NLP Approaches
For language understanding tasks, the text based features are usually sparse features such as unigrams, bigrams Finkel
et al. (2005) (classiﬁcation and sequential tagging tasks), and dense matching features between queries and documents
14
Deep Natural Language Processing for
LinkedIn Search
A PREPRINT
such as BM25 Robertson and Zaragoza (2009) (ranking tasks). In terms of algorithms, logistic regression, SVM,
neural networks or decision tree Cortes and Vapnik (1995); Zhang (2000); Burges (2010) are used for classiﬁcation
and ranking. The latter three introduce feature non-linearity but are usually not applied on sparse text features. For
language generation tasks, usually there are two separate steps: candidate generation and candidate ranking Bar-
Yossef and Kraus (2011); Fonseca et al. (2005); Cao et al. (2008); Shokouhi (2013); Li et al. (2006). The generation
is usually done by string matching, without explicitly modeling the word semantics. Ranking is usually similar to
document ranking.
5.2
Deep NLP Models
CNN/LSTM/Transformer LeCun and Bengio (1995); Vaswani et al. (2017); Hochreiter and Schmidhuber (1997) are
used to generate contextualized embeddings for words and sentences. These embeddings are able to replace the sparse
textual features such as unigrams/bigrams (in classiﬁcation and sequential tagging) and textual matching features (in
ranking). For language generation tasks, a language model with beam search decoding can perform the generation
and ranking at the same time. Attention Bahdanau et al. (2015) is usually used in sequence-to-sequence framework
Sutskever et al. (2014). Recently, the pre-trained language models Peters et al. (2018); Radford et al. (2018); Devlin
et al. (2019) have shown impressive results on many NLP tasks by exploiting unsupervised data.
5.3
Deep NLP for Search
As mentioned in Section 3, deep NLP models have been applied in most of the search tasks Hashemi et al. (2016);
Huang et al. (2013); Mitra and Craswell (2015); He et al. (2016); Guo et al. (2016); Xiong et al. (2017); Dai et al.
(2018). Additional information has been incorporated into the deep NLP models, such as personalization Jaech and
Ostendorf (2018); Fiorini and Lu (2018), session-aware Dehghani et al. (2017); Ren et al. (2018), etc.
Instead, the focus of this paper is to overcome the challenges of productionizing deep NLP models: latency, robustness,
effectiveness Mitra et al. (2018). All the resulting models have been deployed in the LinkedIn commercial search
engines. For example, an efﬁcient BERT based ranking model is designed to enable document pre-computing which is
crucial for productionization. In contrast, the existing BERT based ranking models Dai and Callan (2019); MacAvaney
et al. (2019); Nogueira and Cho (2019) do not allow document pre-computing.
There are some existing efforts that report online experiments, however, most models are for the document ranking
task Ramanath et al. (2018); Yin et al. (2016); Grbovic and Cheng (2018); Li et al. (2019). In this paper, we have a set
of much broader tasks that covers query understanding and language generation.
6
Conclusions
Industry provides its own set of challenges, different in key ways from classic studied NLP tasks: (1) the amount and
type of data, (2) constraints on latency or infrastructure, and (3) the highly optimized production baselines. This paper
focused on how to apply deep NLP models to ﬁve representative search productions, illuminating the challenges along
the way. All resulting models except query tagging are deployed in LinkedIn’s search engines. More importantly, we
also summarized the lessons learned across the tasks. We listed the factors to consider when estimating the potential
improvement brought by deep NLP models for a new task. We showed robustness and overﬁtting can be typically
handled with careful data analysis. Latency, which is almost always a concern, can be addressed creatively in many
ways, such as architecture simpliﬁcation, two-pass systems, memorization, or parallel computation.
References
Jaime Arguello, Fernando Diaz, Jamie Callan, and Jean-Francois Crespo. 2009. Sources of evidence for vertical
selection. In SIGIR.
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. 2015. Neural Machine Translation by Jointly Learning to
Align and Translate. In ICLR.
Ziv Bar-Yossef and Naama Kraus. 2011. Context-sensitive query auto-completion. In WWW.
Roi Blanco, Giuseppe Ottaviano, and Edgar Meij. 2015. Fast and space-efﬁcient entity linking for queries. In WSDM.
Peter F Brown, Peter V Desouza, Robert L Mercer, Vincent J Della Pietra, and Jenifer C Lai. 1992. Class-based
n-gram models of natural language. Computational linguistics (1992).
Christopher JC Burges. 2010. From ranknet to lambdarank to lambdamart: An overview. Learning 11 (2010).
15
Deep Natural Language Processing for
LinkedIn Search
A PREPRINT
Fei Cai and Maarten De Rijke. 2016. A survey of query auto completion in information retrieval. Foundations and
Trends® in Information Retrieval (2016).
Huanhuan Cao, Derek Hao Hu, Dou Shen, Daxin Jiang, Jian-Tao Sun, Enhong Chen, and Qiang Yang. 2009. Context-
aware query classiﬁcation. In SIGIR.
Huanhuan Cao, Daxin Jiang, Jian Pei, Qi He, Zhen Liao, Enhong Chen, and Hang Li. 2008. Context-aware query
suggestion by mining click-through and session data. In KDD.
Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. 2016. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In KDD.
Corinna Cortes and Vladimir Vapnik. 1995. Support-vector networks. Machine Learning (1995).
Nick Craswell. 2009. Mean reciprocal rank. Encyclopedia of Database Systems (2009).
W. Bruce Croft, Donald Metzler, and Trevor Strohman. 2010. Search engines: Information retrieval in practice.
Reading: Addison-Wesley.
Zhuyun Dai and Jamie Callan. 2019. Deeper Text Understanding for IR with Contextual Neural Language Modeling.
In SIGIR.
Zhuyun Dai, Chenyan Xiong, Jamie Callan, and Zhiyuan Liu. 2018. Convolutional neural networks for soft-matching
n-grams in ad-hoc search. In WSDM.
Mostafa Dehghani, Sascha Rothe, Enrique Alfonseca, and Pascal Fleury. 2017. Learning to attend, copy, and generate
for session-based query suggestion. In CIKM.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional
Transformers for Language Understanding. In NAACL: HLT.
John Duchi, Elad Hazan, and Yoram Singer. 2011. Adaptive subgradient methods for online learning and stochastic
optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research 12, Jul (2011), 2121–2159.
Jenny Rose Finkel, Trond Grenager, and Christopher Manning. 2005. Incorporating non-local information into infor-
mation extraction systems by gibbs sampling. In ACL.
Nicolas Fiorini and Zhiyong Lu. 2018. Personalized neural language models for real-world query auto completion. In
NAACL.
Bruno M Fonseca, Paulo Golgher, Bruno Pˆossas, Berthier Ribeiro-Neto, and Nivio Ziviani. 2005. Concept-based
interactive query expansion. In CIKM.
Alex Graves, Navdeep Jaitly, and Abdel-rahman Mohamed. 2013. Hybrid speech recognition with deep bidirectional
LSTM. In IEEE workshop on automatic speech recognition and understanding.
Mihajlo Grbovic and Haibin Cheng. 2018. Real-time Personalization using Embeddings for Search Ranking at Airbnb.
In KDD.
Jiafeng Guo, Yixing Fan, Qingyao Ai, and W Bruce Croft. 2016. A deep relevance matching model for ad-hoc
retrieval. In CIKM.
Jiafeng Guo, Gu Xu, Xueqi Cheng, and Hang Li. 2009. Named entity recognition in query. In SIGIR.
Jiafeng Guo, Gu Xu, Hang Li, and Xueqi Cheng. 2008. A uniﬁed and discriminative model for query reﬁnement. In
SIGIR.
Homa B. Hashemi, Amir Asiaee, and Reiner Kraft. 2016. Query Intent Detection using Convolutional Neural Net-
works. In WSDM, Workshop on Query Understanding.
Yunlong He, Jiliang Tang, Hua Ouyang, Changsung Kang, Dawei Yin, , and Yi Chang. 2016. Learning to rewrite
queries. In CIKM.
Sepp Hochreiter and J¨urgen Schmidhuber. 1997. Long short-term memory. In Neural computation.
Jian Hu, Gang Wang, Fred Lochovsky, Jian-tao Sun, and Zheng Chen. 2009. Understanding user’s query intent with
wikipedia. In WWW.
Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. 2004. Mining and summarizing customer reviews. In KDD.
Po-Sen Huang, Xiaodong He, Jianfeng Gao, Li Deng, Alex Acero, and Larry Heck. 2013. Learning deep structured
semantic models for web search using clickthrough data. In CIKM.
Aaron Jaech and Mari Ostendorf. 2018. Personalized Language Model for Query Auto-Completion. In ACL.
Danyang Jiang, Wanyu Chen, Fei Cai, and Honghui Chen. 2018. Neural Attentive Personalization Model for Query
Auto-Completion. In IAEAC.
16
Deep Natural Language Processing for
LinkedIn Search
A PREPRINT
Nal Kalchbrenner, Edward Grefenstette, and Phil Blunsom. 2014. A Convolutional Neural Network for Modelling
Sentences. In ACL.
In-Ho Kang and GilChang Kim. 2003. Query type classiﬁcation for web document retrieval. In SIGIR.
Yoon Kim. 2014. Convolutional Neural Networks for Sentence Classiﬁcation. In EMNLP.
Diederick P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2015. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR.
John Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando CN Pereira. 2001. Conditional random ﬁelds: Probabilistic models
for segmenting and labeling sequence data. In ICML.
Guillaume Lample, Miguel Ballesteros, Sandeep Subramanian, Kazuya Kawakami, and Chris Dyer. 2016. Neural
architectures for named entity recognition. NAACL (2016).
Yann LeCun and Yoshua Bengio. 1995. Convolutional networks for images, speech, and time series. The handbook
of brain theory and neural networks (1995).
Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. 2015. Deep learning. nature (2015).
Cheng Li, Mingyang Zhang, Michael Bendersky, Hongbo Deng, Donald Metzler, and Marc Najork. 2019. Multi-view
Embedding-based Synonyms for Email Search. In SIGIR.
Mu Li, Yang Zhang, Muhua Zhu, and Ming Zhou. 2006. Exploring distributional similarity based models for query
spelling correction. In ACL.
Xiao Li, Ye-Yi Wang, and Alex Acero. 2008. Learning query intent from regularized click graphs. In SIGIR.
Xiao Li, Ye-Yi Wang, and Alex Acero. 2009. Extracting structured information from user queries with semi-supervised
conditional random ﬁelds. In SIGIR.
Xuezhe Ma and Eduard Hovy. 2016. End-to-end Sequence Labeling via Bi-directional LSTM-CNNs-CRF. In ACL.
Sean MacAvaney, Andrew Yates, Arman Cohan, and Nazli Goharian. 2019. CEDR: Contextualized embeddings for
document ranking. In SIGIR.
Tom´aˇs Mikolov, Martin Karaﬁ´at, Luk´aˇs Burget, Jan ˇCernock´y, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. 2010. A neural probabilistic
language model. In ISCA.
Bhaskar Mitra and Nick Craswell. 2015. Query auto-completion for rare preﬁxes. In CIKM.
Bhaskar Mitra, Nick Craswell, et al. 2018. An introduction to neural information retrieval. Foundations and Trends®
in Information Retrieval (2018).
Rodrigo Nogueira and Kyunghyun Cho. 2019. Passage Re-ranking with BERT. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.04085
(2019).
Mark Paine, Winton Davies, Donald F Geddis, Jon Dukes-Schlossberg, and Darren J Davis. 2007. Recommending
search terms using collaborative ﬁltering and web spidering. US Patent 7,225,182.
Sankar K Pal and Sushmita Mitra. 1992. Multilayer perceptron, fuzzy sets, and classiﬁcation. IEEE Transactions on
neural networks (1992).
Hamid Palangi, Li Deng, Yelong Shen, Jianfeng Gao, Xiaodong He, Jianshu Chen, Xinying Song, and Rabab Ward.
2016. Deep Sentence Embedding Using Long Short-Term Memory Networks: Analysis and Application to Infor-
mation Retrieval. IEEE Trans Audio Speech Lang Process (2016).
Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2005. Seeing stars: Exploiting class relationships for sentiment categorization with respect
to rating scales. In ACL.
Dae Hoon Park and Rikio Chiba. 2017. A neural language model for query auto-completion. In SIGIR.
Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher Manning. 2014. Glove: Global Vectors for Word Representation.
In EMNLP.
Matthew E Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
2018. Deep contextualized word representations. In NAACL.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever. 2018. Improving language understanding by
generative pre-training. (2018).
Rohan Ramanath, Hakan Inan, Gungor Polatkan, Bo Hu, Qi Guo, Cagri Ozcaglar, Xianren Wu, Krishnaram Kentha-
padi, and Sahin Cem Geyik. 2018. Towards Deep and Representation Learning for Talent Search at LinkedIn. In
CIKM.
Gary Ren, Xiaochuan Ni, Manish Malik, and Qifa Ke. 2018. Conversational Query Understanding Using Sequence to
Sequence Modeling. In WWW.
17
Deep Natural Language Processing for
LinkedIn Search
A PREPRINT
Stephen Robertson and Hugo Zaragoza. 2009. The probabilistic relevance framework: BM25 and beyond. Foundations
and Trends® in Information Retrieval (2009).
Erik F Sang and Fien De Meulder. 2003. Introduction to the CoNLL-2003 shared task: Language-independent named
entity recognition. In NAACL: HLT.
Sunita Sarawagi and William W Cohen. 2005. Semi-markov conditional random ﬁelds for information extraction. In
NeurIPS.
Abhinav Sethy, Stanley Chen, Ebru Arisoy, and Bhuvana Ramabhadran. 2015. Unnormalized exponential and neural
network language models. In ICASSP.
Yelong Shen, Xiaodong He, Jianfeng Gao, Li Deng, and Gr´egoire Mesnil. 2014.
A latent semantic model with
convolutional-pooling structure for information retrieval. In CIKM.
Milad Shokouhi. 2013. Learning to personalize query auto-completion. In SIGIR.
Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V. Le. 2014. Iterative quantization: A procrustean approach to learning binary
codes for large-scale image retrieval. In NeurIPS.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia
Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all you need. In NeurIPS.
Po-Wei Wang, Huan Zhang, Vijai Mohan, Inderjit S. Dhillon, and J. Zico Kolter. 2018. Realtime query completion
via deep language models. In SIGIR Workshop On eCommerce.
Chenyan Xiong, Zhuyun Dai, Jamie Callan, Zhiyuan Liu, and Russell Power. 2017. End-to-end neural ad-hoc ranking
with kernel pooling. In SIGIR.
Dawei Yin, Yuening Hu, Jiliang Tang, Tim Daly, Mianwei Zhou, Hua Ouyang, Jianhui Chen, Changsung Kang,
Hongbo Deng, Chikashi Nobata, et al. 2016. Ranking relevance in yahoo search. In KDD.
Hamed Zamani, Bhaskar Mitra, Xia Song, Nick Craswell, and Saurabh Tiwary. 2018. Neural ranking models with
multiple document ﬁelds. In WSDM.
Guoqiang Peter Zhang. 2000. Neural networks for classiﬁcation: a survey. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics, Part C (2000).
18
