Title: Visual Grounding Strategies for Text-Only Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2103.13942v1
--------------------------------------------------

Visual Grounding Strategies for Text-Only Natural Language Processing
Damien Sileo
Department of Computer Science (CS)
KU Leuven
damien.sileo@kuleuven.be
Abstract
Visual grounding is a promising path to-
ward more robust and accurate Natural Lan-
guage Processing (NLP) models. Many multi-
modal extensions of BERT (e.g., VideoBERT,
LXMERT, VL-BERT) allow a joint modeling
of texts and images that lead to state-of-the-
art results on multimodal tasks such as Visual
Question Answering. Here, we leverage mul-
timodal modeling for purely textual tasks (lan-
guage modeling and classiﬁcation) with the ex-
pectation that the multimodal pretraining pro-
vides a grounding that can improve text pro-
cessing accuracy. We propose possible strate-
gies in this respect. A ﬁrst type of strategy,
referred to as transferred grounding consists
in applying multimodal models to text-only
tasks using a placeholder to replace image in-
put. The second one, which we call associative
grounding, harnesses image retrieval to match
texts with related images during both pre-
training and text-only downstream tasks. We
draw further distinctions into both strategies
and then compare them according to their im-
pact on language modeling and commonsense-
related downstream tasks, showing improve-
ment over text-only baselines.
1
Introduction
Representation of text with transferable encoding
is a central task of artiﬁcial intelligence. Transfer
from larger and larger transformer-based text en-
coders trained on masked language modeling has
become a standard way to achieve state-of-the-art
results. Progress is shown in tasks such as natural
language inference and semantic similarity esti-
mation when evaluated on natural language under-
standing benchmark datasets (Kaplan et al., 2020)
such as GLUE and SuperGLUE (Wang et al., 2019).
However, these scores do not tell the whole story.
Firstly, marginally better benchmark scores can
come at the price of impractical GPU requirements.
Secondly, super-human scores can be obtained by
exploiting spurious dataset-speciﬁc correlations in-
stead of more generalizable reasoning (Niven and
Kao, 2019). Mastering commonsense reasoning
is regarded as a requirement for ”true” language
understanding (Bisk et al., 2020), and grounding
representations of natural language on other modal-
ities such a visual perception is a privileged strategy
in that endeavor. Since the meaning of language
stems from the physical world, visual grounding1
is a valuable way to guide the training of NLP mod-
els. Thus, we hypothesize that text encoders, even
already pretrained on a massive amount of text-
only data, can be improved by a further multimodal
pretraining stage.
Many visuolinguistic transformer architectures
such as LXMERT (Tan and Bansal, 2019) VilBERT
(Lu et al., 2019) or VL-BERT (Su et al., 2019) have
been proposed to augment BERT (Devlin et al.,
2019) with joint text-image understanding in order
to tackle multimodal tasks including visual ques-
tion answering and image retrieval, each leading
to substantial performance improvement over the
previous state of the art. To that end, these models
generalize BERT’s Masked Language Modeling
(MLM) objective to a multimodal setting. More
speciﬁcally, they perform the MLM task on im-
age captions while allowing the model to use fea-
tures of the paired image2, and also perform image
modeling while letting the model attend to textual
features. Nevertheless, it is not clear whether joint
pretraining is better than text-only pretraining when
transferring to text-only tasks (e.g., language mod-
eling, text classiﬁcation, similarity estimation) and
how it should be done. In this work, we address this
question by breaking down the strategies toward
1Here, we deﬁne visual grounding as learning language
representations from explicit visual associations.
2An image is represented as a sequence of regions features
extracted with a Convolutional Neural Network.
arXiv:2103.13942v1  [cs.CL]  25 Mar 2021
that endeavor.
A ﬁrst proposed way to leverage visuolinguistic
models for textual tasks is to perform the afore-
mentioned joint modeling pretraining and then ﬁne-
tuning on text-only tasks while using a placeholder
as image input. However, this only trains the text
encoder on the caption domain (which is different
from the wider domain usually used to train text en-
coders) and the model is not exposed to any training
example without images. To alleviate this problem,
it is possible to combine joint masked modeling
on captioned images with unimodal MLM on a
broader domain text-only corpus during pretraining
by associating an image placeholder with the text-
only examples. We call this strategy transferred
grounding.
We also propose another technique named asso-
ciative grounding where for each textual input, an
association module retrieves the most relevant im-
ages from a large external images collection. The
text encoder parameters can then harness these ex-
ternally provided images for better text understand-
ing instead of having to internally model them.
Since we are bringing an additional computa-
tional cost by using images and not only pure text,
we will strive to reduce the incurred additional
memory usage in our models.
The goal of this paper is to identify and compare
techniques that bridge visuolinguistic multimodal
modeling with text-only tasks. To that aim, our con-
tributions are the following: (i) 4 visuolinguistic
grounding strategies for text-only tasks transfer;
(ii) An evaluation of the size/accuracy trade-off of
image representation to reduce the memory usage
of multimodal transformers; and (iii) A systematic
comparison of the proposed strategies for trans-
formers on English text-only tasks.
2
Grounding strategies
In this section we present the two main ground-
ing strategies, that is transferred grounding and
associative grounding, of which Figure 1 shows an
overview. We ﬁrst describe the multimodal model
architecture used in both grounding strategies.
2.1
Multimodal model structure
We rely on a setup shared by several multimodal ex-
tensions of BERT (Tan and Bansal, 2019; Su et al.,
2019; Lu et al., 2019). The text encoding takes
place in two stages. The output of the text unimodal
encoder (e.g., BERT) provides an intermediate rep-
Visually Grounded  Text Processing
Transferred Grounding
Associative Grounding        
            (JMLM)
Text-to-Image
(t2i)
Image-To-Text
(i2t)
Synthesis-based
Retrieval-based
Object-based
Scene-based
Figure 1: A categorization of the proposed grounding
strategies.
resentation of the text input. The visual input has
a vector representation (typically CNN-extracted
embedding possibly contextualized with a trans-
former model). Then, both are fed to a cross-modal
encoder that learns to compose the modalities in
order to perform visuolinguistic modeling tasks.
This multimodal model structure is illustrated in
both Figures 2 and 3.
This architecture could directly be used in order
to perform downstream tasks. However, a multi-
modal pretraining, for instance through masked
modeling, is key to achieve high performance (Tan
and Bansal, 2019).
2.2
Masked modeling of multimodal features
In our grounding strategies we rely on masking. In
Joint Masked Language Modeling (JMLM), ran-
dom tokens of the input text t are replaced by a
[masked] token. A softmax JMLM head on top of
the cross-modal encoder has to predict the original
value of the masked tokens through cross-entropy
(H) loss minimization. The cross modal encoder is
thus incentivized to use the visual input regions r
when they are relevant for the masked tokens pre-
diction. Joint Masked Region Modeling (JMRM)
is the visual counterpart of JMLM. Here, image re-
gion features are masked and have to be predicted,
for example, through a Lp loss minimization, based
on both the text and non-masked visual cues. The
corresponding losses are the following:
LJMLM =
|t|
X
k=1
mkH(tk, ˆtk(¯t, r))
LJMRM =
|r|
X
k=1
mkLp(rk, ˆrk(t, ¯r))
where mk = 1 when a token/region is masked, ¯t/¯r
represents the masked tokens/regions sequence, ˆt
the predicted probability distributions, and ˆr the
predicted region features.
2) Text-Only Tasks (Fine-Tuning/Inference).
JMLM
Head
(i2t)
[cls]
Cross
Modal
Encoder
Text 
Encoder
Features
Extractor
[cls]
t1
[mask]
[img]
 r1
 r2
 r3
...
            or
[placeholder]
1) Joint Modeling Pre-Training.
...
JMRM
Head
(t2i)
Task
Head
[cls]
Cross
Modal
Encoder
Text 
Encoder
Features
Extractor
[cls]
t1
[mask]
[img]
 r1
 r2
 r3
...
[placeholder]
...
Image Captioning 
+ Text-Only Corpus
Text-Only
Dataset
TRANSFERRED GROUNDING
Figure 2: Overview of the Transferred grounding strategy.
2.3
Transferred grounding
In transferred grounding the masked modeling of
multimodal features is used in pretraining as shown
in Figure 2.
The corpus used for pretraining contains images
paired with captions, which can also be extended
with another text-only corpus. Adding examples
from a text-only corpus allows the encoder to be
exposed to a wider domain of text during pretrain-
ing. Since no image is available for these examples,
we replace the image features by a single train-
able embedding h[placeholder] ∈Rd where d is the
dimension of the cross-modal encoder inputs.
Cross-modal prediction can occur in the two fol-
lowing directions, each providing a different way
to ground language understanding.
2.3.1
Transfer from Text-To-Image
prediction (t2i)
Pretraining a model to perform JMRM incentivizes
the text representations to abstract the visual knowl-
edge involved in visual region modeling. This pro-
vides a form of grounding that could be useful for
textual downstream tasks. Here the model learns
to predict masked image aspects from text, which
might help language understanding by visually
imagining the language content.
2.3.2
Transfer from Image-To-Text
prediction (i2t)
A different way to perform pretraining is to per-
form JMLM in the presence of visual input. The
model can learn to use visual information for tex-
tual modeling, thus developing useful abstractions.
We hypothesize that these abstractions can help
text-only tasks when the visual input they relied on
is missing.
2.3.3
Text-only tasks
Once pretrained, the multimodal architecture can
be applied to text-only tasks. To do so, the place-
holder features h[placeholder] are used to replace the
missing visual input.
2.4
Associative Grounding
In an alternative grounding strategy, called associa-
tive grounding, we do not rely on a text corpus that
is a priori paired with images, but the pairing is
part of the model. As seen in Figure 3, for each text
input3 t (e.g., sentence or paragraph), a visual asso-
ciation module retrieves the most relevant images
from an archive of images.
Here, we instantiate the visual association mod-
ule in the following way. A query encoder provides
representation qt for the masked input text t using
the cross-modal encoder described above, and a
relevance metric R(qt,ki) such as the cosine sim-
ilarity identiﬁes the K most relevant images in a
collection M of images i, which are encoded into
key vector representations {ki, i ∈M}.
Associated images can be visual scenes that
match the input text as a whole. However, the space
of situations matching the content of the input text
is immense, and in many cases, the most relevant
images in M will only be loosely associated to the
textual input. Decomposing the situation evoked
in the text into objects that play an important role
can help narrowing down the space of possible rel-
evant images, thus leading to closer associations,
albeit more partial. We call the ﬁrst substrategy
scene-based and the second one object-based.
3During JMLM pretraining, the masked text is used to ﬁnd
associations. This to prevent trivial prediction of the masked
text tokens from their presence in the images.
ASSOCIATIVE GROUNDING
...
Visual
Association 
Module
[cls]
Cross
Modal
Encoder
Text 
Encoder
Features
Extractor
[cls]
t1
[mask]
[img]
 r1
 r2
 r3
...
JMLM/Task
 Head
Text-Only
Dataset
Figure 3: Overview of the Associative grounding strategy.
2.4.1
Scene-based association
Here we propose to use textual captions to index
images.Each input text t is then associated with
the K most similar images, according to the rel-
evance computation of a caption given the input
text. Of course, retrieved images may not be sufﬁ-
ciently relevant, and it is not clear whether some
sentences can be illustrated by existing images. But
we hypothesize that the cross-modal encoder of
the captions is able to ignore non-relevant infor-
mation. Kiela et al. (2014) have shown that image
retrieval systems map abstract words to high disper-
sion results, that is, retrieved images are different to
each other. This dispersion could be informative for
the cross-modal encoder. Besides, concrete images
could also ground more abstract concepts (Lakoff
and Johnson, 1980); a very simple illustration of
this is that images captioned with references to sad-
ness tend to be darker than those containing the
word happiness.
2.4.2
Object-based associations
Another possibility is to rely on objects mentioned
in the text. Here, we extract all common nouns in
the input text and perform a Gaussian Mixture Clus-
tering to extract κ ≤K clusters among the noun
representations to ﬁnd the key concepts. For each
centroid, the closest noun is chosen as a representa-
tive. A noun-indexed database, here ImageNet22K
(Deng et al., 2009), can be used to map these nouns
to images.
The two association systems used in the experi-
ments are illustrated in Figure 4 in the appendix.
2.4.3
Image synthesis
It would also be possible to synthesize images that
represent the input text with a dedicated model.
We experimented with the DeepAI system4 and as
shown in Figure 3, the results suggests that more
work is needed to get conclusive results. Conse-
quently, we do not further consider image synthesis
here.
3
Experiments
We evaluate the proposed grounding strategies in
language modeling and downstream tasks.
3.1
Text-only corpus
Following (Devlin et al., 2019), we use a combina-
tion of Wikipedia English pages and the BookCor-
pus (Zhu et al., 2015) as language modeling corpus.
We extract the body of pages from the Wikipedia
pages with at least 20 views in the 2013 dump5,
totaling 463k documents, and we sample the same
number of passages from the BookCorpus. We call
this combination Wiki-BC. We select 90% of the
pages/passages as training data, 5% for validation
and 5% for test.
3.2
Visuolinguistic corpus
For the scene-based associations, we populate the
scenes bank M, with the combination of two image
captioning datasets. The Stony Brook University
corpus (SBU) (Ordonez et al., 2011) is composed
of 860k images from the Flickr website, ﬁltered to
ensure that the caption literally describes the image.
ConceptualCaptions (CC) (Sharma et al., 2018)
gathers 3M images that come from web pages that
also were heuristically ﬁltered. We use a 90/5/5%
4https://deepai.org/machine-learning-
model/text2img
5Available
at
https://storage.googleapis.
com/lateral-datadumps/wikipedia_utf8_
filtered_20pageviews.csv
train/validation/test split for SBU and the standard
split for CC.
When performing object-based associations,
M is populated with ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009).
We keep the 15k synsets that are associated to at
least 10 images, and we randomly sample the im-
ages when more are available. Each image is in-
dexed with the average of the lemmas embeddings
of its synset, averaged with the embedding of the
synset deﬁnition.
When performing transferred grounding, we
concatenate the captioned images (CC-SBU) with
our text-only corpus. We sample CC-SBU so that
its size matches the text only corpus size (840k
passages) to balance the train set. Since our end-
goal is text-only processing, we do not use the
captioned images in the validation and test set but
only in the train set.
In order to test image representations and lan-
guage modeling on literal text, we also run experi-
ments on the COCO (Lin et al., 2014) dataset made
of 400k image/captions pairs. When we do so, we
discard the original images when using the associa-
tive setup, but we always keep the images in the
transferred setup.
3.3
Setup and hyperparameters
We build upon the LXMERT (Tan and Bansal,
2019) code and experimental setup, and rely on
its hyperparameters values because of the state-of-
the-art results and code availability of this model.
Our text encoder is an Albert model pretrained
from albert-base-v2 checkpoint (Lan et al., 2019).
Its weights are kept ﬁxed during pretraining and
ﬁne-tuned during downstream task training. We use
a different copy of this Albert model as the cross-
modal encoder initialization and always keep its
weights trainable.
In this work, our key/query encoder is a con-
tinuous bag of words.We use fastText (Mikolov
et al., 2018) embeddings6 which are competitive
with state-of-the-art models on semantic similarity
tasks (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019). Queries and
keys are matched according to cosine distance with
the Faiss (Johnson et al., 2017) library.
Following LXMERT, each image is represented
with a sequence N region features. A linear projec-
tion maps the region features to the input space of
the cross-modal encoder. We also provide K rank
6We
use
the
CommonCrawl
version
https://
fasttext.cc/docs/en/english-vectors.html.
and discard stop-words with NLTK.
embeddings which are added to the cross-modal
encoder input image representation. Input text is
lower-cased and token sequence length is clipped
to 64. We use the Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2014) op-
timizer with a batch size of 32 and a learning rate
of 10−4 for downstream tasks until convergence
on the validation accuracy, with a maximum of 4
epochs. When we retrieve K = 16 images 7 with
object-based associations, we use κ = 8 clusters8.
Following (Tan and Bansal, 2019), we mask 15%
of text tokens during the JMLM pretraining; and we
use a linear regression head with L1 regularization
for JMRM.
We ﬁrst compare the expressivity of the image
representations in function of their size, then delve
into the comparison of grounding strategies, accord-
ing to JMLM pretraining and downstream tasks
scores.
3.4
Efﬁcient image representation
We want to be able to provide K > 1 images to the
cross-modal encoder. However, the cross-modal
encoder memory usage scales quadratically with
the number of regions K.N, so we will evaluate
to what extent N ≫1 is necessary. Previous work
use object detection on a single image to ﬁnd 36
Regions of Interest (RoI) and represents them by
ResNet-50 (He et al., 2016) features with 2048 di-
mensions. We run the JMLM pretraining setup with
several image representations. We evaluate two rep-
resentations: (1) the previously used ResNet region
representations provided by (Tan and Bansal, 2019)
with various values of N; (2) Single representation
of the whole image, using EfﬁcientNet-B1 Noisy
Student (Xie et al., 2020) pre-logit max-pooled fea-
tures. We ﬁnetune neither of them.
We use the COCO dataset for this evaluation
because its annotations are manual and not heuristi-
cally ﬁltered, and because the image features used
by (Tan and Bansal, 2019) are publicly available.
We evaluate the image representations with JMLM
pretraining perplexity. Table 1 shows the results
of this experiment. Overall, the presence of im-
age features (N > 0) signiﬁcantly improves the
JMLM performance. While the standard FastR-
CNN(Girshick, 2015)+ResNet with 16 objects rep-
resentation achieves the best perplexity (even bet-
7We have tested values {1, 4, 8, 16, 24} and the lowest
Wiki-BC validation perplexity for both object and scene based
setups is 16.
8We capped this value to 8 since some short texts do not
refer to many objects.
N
Features
COCO perplexity
0
-
8.4
1
EfﬁcientNet-1280
4.6
8
ResNet-2048
4.6
16
ResNet-2048
4.0
36
ResNet-2048
4.2
Table 1: The effect of image representations on cross-
modal JMLM perplexity on the COCO dataset with
K = 1 image per example; N is the number of visual
regions per image.
ter than with 36 features, which can be attributed
to a reduced over-ﬁtting), while this performance
breaks down with few recognized objects. The per-
formance of EfﬁcientNet representations using the
whole image as a single region is competitive while
being much lighter. Consequently, in the experi-
ments described in the following section we rep-
resent images with EfﬁcientNet-B1 features and
N = 1 region per image.
4
Empirical comparison of grounding
strategies
4.1
JMLM training
We run the pretraining for each strategy on the
Wiki-BC corpus, and also run a separate pretrain-
ing on the COCO corpus in order to assess language
modeling performance on a literal, descriptive do-
main. Table 2 reports the inﬂuence of the grounding
strategies on test perplexities. (Zhang et al., 2020)
is an image retrieval system ranking the images
according to the number of text keywords they
contain. It was originally used to improve Neu-
ral Machine translation (see Related Work). On
the COCO dataset, using the original image paired
with the text captions leads to the lowest perplexity,
but surprisingly, using K = 16 associated object
or scenes leads to a competitive perplexity. This
suggests than the many distantly related images
can be a good substitution to a canonically associ-
ated image, even though associating K = 1 object
seems to be a too noisy signal.
The results on the Wiki-BC dataset reveal a sim-
ilar pattern. Here, the transferred strategies can-
not use images at test time and suffer from a do-
main shift which leads to inferior results. How-
ever, the associative strategies and K = 16 lead
to the lowest perplexity even though the gap be-
tween ungrounded and grounded methods is small
than with the COCO dataset due to abstractness
of the open-domain texts. We thereby show that
Strategy
K
Wiki-BC
ppl.
COCO
ppl.
No Grounding
0
8.7
7.6
Transferred i2t
0/1
30.0
4.6
Transferred t2i
0/1
41.6
-
Transferred t2i+i2t
0/1
25.3
-
Associative (Zhang et al., 2020)
16
8.9
8.6
Associative (scene-based)
16
8.5
4.6
Associative (scene-based)
1
9.1
7.3
Associative (object-based)
1
9.0
35.6
Associative (object-based)
16
8.6
4.7
Table 2: JMLM test perplexity on the Wiki-BC+CC-
SBU dataset and on the COCO captions. On the COCO
dataset, COCO images are used at test time for the
transferred i2t strategy. On the Wiki-BC dataset, the im-
age placeholder is used at test time for the transferred
strategies while associative strategies always use asso-
ciated images.
even language modeling can beneﬁt from ground-
ing, and the masked language modeling perplexity
might translate to yet further applications in text
generation (Wang and Cho, 2019). We will now in-
vestigate how grounding translates to downstream
classiﬁcation tasks accuracy.
4.2
Downstream evaluation
We hypothesize that grounded models should be
better equipped to perform common sense related
downstream tasks. A ﬁrst component of our evalu-
ation on tasks RTE, PDTB and JOCI will test that
claim. But we also expect the concreteness to have
an inﬂuence on the behavior of grounded models.
Thus, we also perform a more targeted evaluation
on concrete-only examples (SICK) and metaphoric-
ity classiﬁcation (VUA tasks) to better interpret our
results.
Recognizing Textual Entailment (RTE)
(Da-
gan et al., 2006) is a Natural Language Inference
(NLI) task. Its dataset gathers sentence pairs with
a premise and a hypothesis. The labels describe
the logical relationship between the two, that is,
entailment and non-entailment.
JHU Ordinal Common-sense Inference (JOCI)
(Zhang et al., 2017) The dataset for this task also
consists of premise/hypothesis sentence pairs, but
the labels are numerical scores from 1 to 5 that
reﬂect the plausibility of the hypothesis given the
premise according to human annotators, relying on
their own common sense.
Sentences Involving Compositional Knowledge
(SICK)
(Kiela et al., 2018) is also a NLI dataset
Strategy
Pretraining Text
K
JOCI
PDTB
RTE
SICK
VUA
VUAN
AVG
Albert-base
-
-
6.7
49.6
68.0
88.2
82.7
85.0
63.4
No-Grounding
Wiki-BK
0
8.7
46.0
56.8
87.4
82.2
83.8
60.8
Transferred i2t
CC-SBU+Wiki-BK
0/1
-0.4
31.1
60.2
85.7
82.1
84.5
57.2
Transferred t2i
CC-SBU+Wiki-BK
0/1
8.3
19.3
65.6
87.4
82.9
84.6
58.0
Transferred t2i+i2t
CC-SBU+Wiki-BK
0/1
11.1
52.0
61.1
88.0
82.7
85.2
63.4
Associative (Zhang et al., 2020)
Wiki-BK
16
2.4
48.4
54.3
87.6
79.6
81.9
59.0
Associative (scene-based)
Wiki-BK
16
1.2
49.3
54.5
86.1
83.0
84.0
59.7
Associative (object-based)
Wiki-BK
16
8.6
50.8
67.6
87.1
83.1
84.0
63.5
Table 3: Downstream tasks transfer results. Reported score is Spearman’s correlation percentage for the JOCI
task and accuracy percentage, otherwise. Albert-base is the pretrained model from (Lan et al., 2019) without
architectural change or further pretraining before the downstream ﬁne-tuning. Our models are based on Albert-base
but have an additional cross-modal transformer that underwent an additional pretraining stage. K is the number of
images per example. The No-Grounding setup is equivalent to the transferred setup on Wiki-BK, or the associative
setup with K = 0.
with entailment, neutral and contradiction classes
but it differs from the previous two in that its
premises are only composed of image captions and
video descriptions. This allows a more speciﬁc eval-
uation of concrete language, as opposed to abstract
domain language in the RTE tasks.
Penn Discourse TreeBank (PDTB)
(Prasad
et al., 2008) contains a collection of ﬁne-grained
implicit (i.e., not signaled by a discourse marker)
relations between sentences from the news domain
in PDTB2.0, which signal the purpose of an utter-
ance given a context utterance. We select level 2
implicit relations as categories. The task involves
presupposition recognition and the ability to deal
with non-literal meaning.
VU
Amsterdam
Metaphor
Corpus
(VUA)
(Krennmayr and Steen, 2017) annotates the uses
of verbs in sentences of the British National Cor-
pus according to their level of metaphoricity. For
instance, in the sentence The alligator’s teeth are
like white daggers, the use of the word daggers is
metaphorical while teeth is not. We use the dataset
of a shared task on verb metaphoricity detection
(Klebanov et al., 2020) as well as another ver-
sion where we kept only the nouns which we call
VUAN.
Table 4 in appendix A.2 shows the dataset sizes,
and Table 3 reports the results of the Wiki-BC
trained models on the above tasks. We perform
8 runs for each task and report the median score.
As baselines we propose the Albert-base model
alongside an ablated model without visual ground-
ing and a state-of-the-art association model which
uses visual input as described by Zhang et al.
(2020). The Albert-base model (Lan et al., 2019) is
a pretrained transformer that takes the text tokens
as inputs and provides a representation of the text
examples at the output of the [CLS] token which
is used to perform the logistic regression. In the
No-Grounding model, the cross-modal encoder is
trained on text-only corpus always using the place-
holder as visual input. (Zhang et al., 2020) is an
image retrieval system that ranks images accord-
ing to the number of text keywords their captions
contain. In this work, the retrieved image features
are combined with the source text features to per-
form neural machine translation. Here, we use this
retrieval model with our associative strategy as a
baseline.
The No-Grounding model performance does not
match the Albert-base model, which indicates that
our linguistic pretraining is not as well tuned. How-
ever, grounding still yields improvements on the
JOCI, PDTB and VUA tasks. The image-to-text
(i2t) pretraining does not transfer well in the ab-
sence of images. But combining both text-to-image
and image-to-text training leads to higher results.
This suggests that the resulting model is able to use
the obtained multimodal features to better perform
the downstream tasks. The performance of the asso-
ciative strategies depends on the image retrieval sys-
tem but the comparison suggests that object-based
and scene-based retrieval perform well enough to
yield meaningful results.
Overall, the object-based associative strategy has
the best performance and also performs well on
language modeling, especially when generating de-
scriptions. But the transferred strategy seems to
be a better choice for the downstream NLP tasks,
since it does not require images during ﬁne-tuning
and at test time.
5
Related work
Visual grounding has been repeatedly applied in
NLP. The speciﬁcity of our work lies in the system-
atic categorization and comparison of grounding
strategies, alongside the proposition of image-to-
text and associative grounding.
It was shown to improve machine text transla-
tion (Specia et al., 2016; Elliott et al., 2017). How-
ever, these improvements only affected multimodal
translation tasks. Zhang et al. (2020) showed that
text-only translation tasks could beneﬁt from exter-
nal visual knowledge through image search, which
we also demonstrate in our associative grounding
strategy when applied to different NLP tasks.
Visual grounding has also been applied to trans-
ferable word representation learning. Bruni et al.
(2014) generalize the distributional hypothesis by
extracting discrete visual words from images and
using them as context of text while relying on di-
mensionality reduction. This latter idea is reused
with an autoencoder (Silberer and Lapata, 2014)
and a SkipGram model (Lazaridou et al., 2015).
Kiela and Bottou (2014) combine word embed-
dings with ImageNet visual features associated to
words. Conversely, Collell et al. (2017) learn to
predict ImageNet visual features from words and
use the predicted imagined visual representation as
auxiliary features. However, the above techniques
are not applicable beyond the word-level. Image
captioning datasets do provide sentences associated
with relevant images, but the multimodal models
trained on these are not commonly used in down-
stream NLP tasks. Kiela et al. (2018) train sentence
embeddings for text processing tasks by learning to
predict images from captions and report marginal
improvements on SentEval (Conneau and Kiela,
2018) downstream tasks. This approach is similar
to our text-to-image transferred grounding. Concur-
rent work incorporate grounding into Transformers-
based pretrained language models (Tan and Bansal,
2020). They match each word in a text-only cor-
pora with an image, and perform a masked image
modeling with associated tokens. In our framework,
this could be Transferred Associative object-based
Grounding.
Other work targets grounded language under-
standing, but mostly in the context of robotics (Ma-
tuszek, 2018) where the text mostly regards task-
oriented interactions in a closed-world.
Numerous text-level encoders were recently pro-
posed to leverage images but were only applied to
tasks involving both text and images. They all take
BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) as a starting point and
represent images with region features. They adapt
masked language modeling to images with a form
of masked image modeling, and each have more
speciﬁc contributions. For instance, LXMERT (Tan
and Bansal, 2019) demonstrates the value of vi-
sual question answering as a transferable pretrain-
ing task. UNITER (Chen et al., 2020) shows that
masked image modeling and masked language
modeling are best done separately. VL-BERT (Su
et al., 2019) uses an additional text-only train-
ing. VilBERT (Lu et al., 2019) proposes a KL-
divergence loss for masked image modeling.
Ideas comparable to associative visual grounding
have also previously been used with external graph
and text data. Liu et al. (2020) leverage triplets
found in knowledge bases to better ﬁnd entities
in text. Guu et al. (2020) use language modeling
pretraining in order to learn to retrieve and use
relevant passages in question answering tasks.
6
Conclusion
In this paper we have proposed visual grounding
strategies to make joint text-image models applica-
ble to text-only processing. We have demonstrated
that the associative strategy leads to consistent im-
provements when performing NLP tasks such as
masked language modelling, plausibility estima-
tion, metaphoricity detection and discourse relation
prediction. Results could be further improved by re-
ﬁning the image representation and retrieval model.
Since relying on image captions limited the number
of images we could use, it would be interesting to
investigate the use of larger-scale image datasets.
Further work is needed to reﬁne the effect of mul-
timodality on NLP tasks. It is also interesting to
study how NLP performance scales with the sizes
of datasets used in pretraining the multimodal rep-
resentations as is also suggested in (Kaplan et al.,
2020).
7
Acknowledgements
This work is part of the CALCULUS5 project,
which is funded by the ERC Advanced Grant
H2020-ERC-2017 ADG 7885069.
9https://calculus-project.eu/
References
Yonatan Bisk, Ari Holtzman, Jesse Thomason, Jacob
Andreas, Yoshua Bengio, Joyce Chai, Mirella Lap-
ata, Angeliki Lazaridou, Jonathan May, Aleksandr
Nisnevich, et al. 2020.
Experience grounds lan-
guage. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.10151.
Elia Bruni, Nam-Khanh Tran, and Marco Baroni. 2014.
Multimodal distributional semantics. Journal of Ar-
tiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 49:1–47.
Yen-Chun Chen, Linjie Li, Licheng Yu, Ahmed El
Kholy, Faisal Ahmed, Zhe Gan, Yu Cheng, and
Jingjing Liu. 2020. Uniter: Universal image-text rep-
resentation learning. In Proceedings of ECCV.
Guillem Collell, Ted Zhang, and Marie-Francine
Moens. 2017.
Imagined visual representations as
multimodal embeddings. In Proceedings of AAAI.
Alexis Conneau and Douwe Kiela. 2018. SentEval: An
evaluation toolkit for universal sentence representa-
tions. In Proceedings of the Eleventh International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2018), Miyazaki, Japan. European Language
Resources Association (ELRA).
Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini.
2006.
The pascal recognising textual entailment
challenge. In Machine Learning Challenges. Eval-
uating Predictive Uncertainty, Visual Object Classi-
ﬁcation, and Recognising Tectual Entailment, pages
177–190, Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer Berlin Hei-
delberg.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li,
and Li Fei-Fei. 2009. Imagenet: A large-scale hier-
archical image database. In Proceedings of CVPR,
pages 248–255. Ieee.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019.
BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT Volume 1
(Long and Short Papers), pages 4171–4186. ACL.
Desmond Elliott, Stella Frank, Lo¨ıc Barrault, Fethi
Bougares, and Lucia Specia. 2017. Findings of the
second shared task on multimodal machine transla-
tion and multilingual image description. In Proceed-
ings of the Second Conference on Machine Transla-
tion, pages 215–233, Copenhagen, Denmark. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Ross Girshick. 2015. Fast r-cnn. In Proceedings of
ICCV.
Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung, Panupong Pasu-
pat, and Ming-Wei Chang. 2020. Realm: Retrieval-
augmented language model pre-training.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2002.08909.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian
Sun. 2016. Deep residual learning for image recog-
nition. In Proceedings of CVPR, pages 770–778.
Jeff Johnson, Matthijs Douze, and Herv´e J´egou. 2017.
Billion-scale similarity search with gpus.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:1702.08734.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan,
Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott
Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei.
2020.
Scaling laws for neural language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361.
Douwe Kiela and L´eon Bottou. 2014. Learning image
embeddings using convolutional neural networks for
improved multi-modal semantics. In Proceedings of
EMNLP, pages 36–45. ACL.
Douwe Kiela, Alexis Conneau, Allan Jabri, and Max-
imilian Nickel. 2018. Learning visually grounded
sentence representations. In Proceedings of NAACL
HLT, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pages 408–418. ACL.
Douwe Kiela, Felix Hill, Anna Korhonen, and Stephen
Clark. 2014.
Improving multi-modal representa-
tions using image dispersion: Why less is sometimes
more. In Proceedings of ACL (Volume 2: Short Pa-
pers), pages 835–841. ACL.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2014. Adam: A
method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980.
Beata Beigman Klebanov, Ekaterina Shutova, Patricia
Lichtenstein, Smaranda Muresan, Chee Wee, Anna
Feldman, and Debanjan Ghosh, editors. 2020. Pro-
ceedings of the Second Workshop on Figurative Lan-
guage Processing. ACL.
Tina Krennmayr and Gerard Steen. 2017. Vu amster-
dam metaphor corpus. In Handbook of linguistic an-
notation, pages 1053–1071. Springer.
George Lakoff and Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors
we Live by. University of Chicago Press.
Zhenzhong Lan, Mingda Chen, Sebastian Goodman,
Kevin Gimpel, Piyush Sharma, and Radu Soricut.
2019. Albert: A lite bert for self-supervised learn-
ing of language representations.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.11942.
Angeliki Lazaridou, Nghia The Pham, and Marco Ba-
roni. 2015. Combining language and vision with a
multimodal skip-gram model. In Proceedings of the
2015 Conference of NAACL-HLT, pages 153–163.
ACL.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James
Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Doll´ar,
and C Lawrence Zitnick. 2014.
Microsoft coco:
Common objects in context.
In Proceedings of
ECCV, pages 740–755. Springer.
Weijie Liu, Peng Zhou, Zhe Zhao, Zhiruo Wang, Qi Ju,
Haotang Deng, and Ping Wang. 2020.
K-BERT:
Enabling language representation with knowledge
graph. In Proceedings of AAAI 2020.
Jiasen Lu, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh, and Stefan Lee.
2019. Vilbert: Pretraining task-agnostic visiolinguis-
tic representations for vision-and-language tasks. In
Proceedings of NIPS, pages 13–23.
Cynthia Matuszek. 2018. Grounded language learning:
Where robotics and nlp meet. In Proceedings of IJ-
CAI, pages 5687–5691.
Tomas Mikolov, Edouard Grave, Piotr Bojanowski,
Christian Puhrsch, and Armand Joulin. 2018. Ad-
vances in pre-training distributed word representa-
tions. In Proceedings of the International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
2018).
Timothy Niven and Hung-Yu Kao. 2019. Probing neu-
ral network comprehension of natural language ar-
guments. In Proceedings of ACL, pages 4658–4664.
ACL.
Vicente Ordonez, Girish Kulkarni, and Tamara L. Berg.
2011. Im2text: Describing images using 1 million
captioned photographs. In Proceedings of NIPS.
Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Eleni Milt-
sakaki, Livio Robaldo, Aravind Joshi, and Bonnie
Webber. 2008. The penn discourse treebank 2.0. In
Proceedings of LREC, Marrakech, Morocco. Euro-
pean Language Resources Association (ELRA).
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019.
Sentence-
bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-
networks. In Proceedings of EMNLP. ACL.
Piyush Sharma, Nan Ding, Sebastian Goodman, and
Radu Soricut. 2018.
Conceptual captions: A
cleaned, hypernymed, image alt-text dataset for au-
tomatic image captioning. In Proceedings of ACL
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 2556–2565. ACL.
Carina Silberer and Mirella Lapata. 2014.
Learn-
ing grounded meaning representations with autoen-
coders. In Proceedings of ACL (Volume 1: Long Pa-
pers), pages 721–732. ACL.
Lucia Specia, Stella Frank, Khalil Sima’an, and
Desmond Elliott. 2016.
A shared task on multi-
modal machine translation and crosslingual image
description. In Proceedings of the First Conference
on Machine Translation: Volume 2, Shared Task Pa-
pers, pages 543–553.
Weijie Su, Xizhou Zhu, Yue Cao, Bin Li, Lewei Lu,
Furu Wei, and Jifeng Dai. 2019.
Vl-bert: Pre-
training of generic visual-linguistic representations.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.08530.
Hao Tan and Mohit Bansal. 2019. LXMERT: Learning
cross-modality encoder representations from trans-
formers.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing and the 9th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP),
pages 5100–5111, Hong Kong, China. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Hao Tan and Mohit Bansal. 2020.
Vokenization:
Improving language understanding with contextu-
alized, visual-grounded supervision.
In Proceed-
ings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages
2066–2080, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Alex Wang and Kyunghyun Cho. 2019.
BERT has
a mouth, and it must speak: BERT as a Markov
random ﬁeld language model.
In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Methods for Optimizing and Eval-
uating Neural Language Generation, pages 30–36.
ACL.
Alex Wang, Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia,
Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer
Levy, and Samuel R. Bowman. 2019. SuperGLUE:
A stickier benchmark for general-purpose language
understanding systems. arXiv preprint 1905.00537.
Qizhe Xie, Minh-Thang Luong, Eduard Hovy, and
Quoc V. Le. 2020. Self-training with noisy student
improves imagenet classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
Sheng Zhang, Rachel Rudinger, Kevin Duh, and Ben-
jamin Van Durme. 2017. Ordinal common-sense in-
ference. Transactions of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, 5:379–395.
Zhuosheng Zhang, Kehai Chen, Rui Wang, Masao
Utiyama, Eiichiro Sumita, Zuchao Li, and Hai Zhao.
2020. Neural machine translation with universal vi-
sual representation. In Proceedings of ICLR.
Yukun Zhu, Ryan Kiros, Rich Zemel, Ruslan Salakhut-
dinov, Raquel Urtasun, Antonio Torralba, and Sanja
Fidler. 2015. Aligning books and movies: Towards
story-like visual explanations by watching movies
and reading books. In Proceedings of ICCV.
A
Appendix
A.1
Image association systems
a) A close up of a banana next to a cup with liquid.   (Scene-based)
b) A close up of a banana next to a cup with liquid.   (Object-based)
c) A close up of a banana next to a cup with liquid.   (Synthesis)
CC
CC
CC
CC
ImageNet
ImageNet
ImageNet
ImageNet
DeepAI Synthesis
DeepAI Synthesis
DeepAI Synthesis
DeepAI Synthesis
Figure 4: Association of images with a random text
sample from the COCO dataset, with scene-based and
object-based matching with K = 4 and κ = 2. Scene-
based matching (a) indexes images by their caption em-
bedding to match it with the input text. CC refers to the
Conceptual Captions dataset. Object-based matching
(b) identiﬁes key concepts and matches them with Im-
ageNet images. The Synthesis (c) example illustrates
the failure of the DeepAI image synthesis system when
the input text is out of domain.
A.2
Downstream tasks sizes
Task
#Examples (Train/Val/Test)
#Labels
JOCI
2.4k/299/298
-
RTE
2.2k/249/277
2
SICK
4.5k/500/4.9k
3
PDTB
12.9k/1.2k/1.1k
16
VUAN
5.0k/1.3k/2.2k
2
VUA
16k/1.7k/5.9k
2
Table 4: Dataset sizes for each downstream task
