Title: Gender Bias in Neural Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1807.11714v2
--------------------------------------------------

Gender Bias in Neural Natural Language Processing
Kaiji Lu
Carnegie Mellon University
Mofﬁet Field, CA 94035
kaijil@andrew.cmu.edu
Piotr Mardziel
Carnegie Mellon University
Mofﬁet Field, CA 94035
piotrm@cmu.edu
Fangjing Wu
Carnegie Mellon University
Mofﬁet Field, CA 94035
fangjinw@andrew.cmu.edu
Preetam Amancharla
Carnegie Mellon University
Mofﬁet Field, CA 94035
pamancha@andrew.cmu.edu
Anupam Datta
Carnegie Mellon University
Mofﬁet Field, CA 94035
danupam@cmu.edu
Abstract
We examine whether neural natural language processing (NLP) systems reﬂect
historical biases in training data. We deﬁne a general benchmark to quantify gender
bias in a variety of neural NLP tasks. Our empirical evaluation with state-of-
the-art neural coreference resolution and textbook RNN-based language models
trained on benchmark data sets ﬁnds signiﬁcant gender bias in how models view
occupations. We then mitigate bias with counterfactual data augmentation (CDA):
a generic methodology for corpus augmentation via causal interventions that breaks
associations between gendered and gender-neutral words. We empirically show that
CDA effectively decreases gender bias while preserving accuracy. We also explore
the space of mitigation strategies with CDA, a prior approach to word embedding
debiasing (WED), and their compositions. We show that CDA outperforms WED,
drastically so when word embeddings are trained. For pre-trained embeddings, the
two methods can be effectively composed. We also ﬁnd that as training proceeds on
the original data set with gradient descent the gender bias grows as the loss reduces,
indicating that the optimization encourages bias; CDA mitigates this behavior.
1
Introduction
Natural language processing (NLP) with neural networks has grown in importance over the last few
years. They provide state-of-the-art models for tasks like coreference resolution, language modeling,
and machine translation [Clark and Manning, 2016a,b, Lee et al., 2017, Jozefowicz et al., 2016,
Johnson et al., 2017]. However, since these models are trained on human language texts, a natural
question is whether they exhibit bias based on gender or other characteristics, and, if so, how should
this bias be mitigated. This is the question that we address in this paper.
Prior work provides evidence of bias in autocomplete suggestions [Lapowsky, 2018] and differences
in accuracy of speech recognition based on gender and dialect [Tatman, 2017] on popular online
platforms. Word embeddings, initial pre-processors in many NLP tasks, embed words of a natural
language into a vector space of limited dimension to use as their semantic representation. Bolukbasi
et al. [2016] and Caliskan et al. [2017] observed that popular word embeddings including word2vec
Preprint. Work in progress.
arXiv:1807.11714v2  [cs.CL]  30 May 2019
12: The doctor ran because he is late.
1#: The doctor ran because she is late.
22: The nurse ran because he is late.
2#: The nurse ran because she is late.
5.08
1.99
−0.44
5.34
(a) Coreference resolution
ln Pr[B | A]
12: He is a | doctor.
-9.72
1#: She is a | doctor.
-9.77
22: He is a | nurse.
-8.99
2#: She is a | nurse.
-8.97
A
B
(b) Language modeling
Figure 1: Examples of gender bias in coreference resolution and language modeling as measured by
coreference scores (left) and conditional log-likelihood (right).
[Mikolov et al., 2013] exhibit gender bias mirroring stereotypical gender associations such as the
eponymous [Bolukbasi et al., 2016] "Man is to computer programmer as Woman is to homemaker".
Yet the question of how to measure bias in a general way for neural NLP tasks has not been
studied. Our ﬁrst contribution is a general benchmark to quantify gender bias in a variety of neural
NLP tasks. Our deﬁnition of bias loosely follows the idea of causal testing: matched pairs of
individuals (instances) that differ in only a targeted concept (like gender) are evaluated by a model
and the difference in outcomes (or scores) is interpreted as the causal inﬂuence of the concept in the
scrutinized model. The deﬁnition is parametric in the scoring function and the target concept. Natural
scoring functions exist for a number of neural natural language processing tasks.
We instantiate the deﬁnition for two important tasks—coreference resolution and language modeling.
Coreference resolution is the task of ﬁnding words and expressions referring to the same entity in a
natural language text. The goal of language modeling is to model the distribution of word sequences.
For neural coreference resolution models, we measure the gender coreference score disparity between
gender-neutral words and gendered words like the disparity between “doctor” and “he” relative to
“doctor” and “she” pictured as edge weights in Figure 1a. For language models, we measure the
disparities of emission log-likelihood of gender-neutral words conditioned on gendered sentence
preﬁxes as is shown in Figure 1b . Our empirical evaluation with state-of-the-art neural coreference
resolution and textbook RNN-based language models Lee et al. [2017], Clark and Manning [2016b],
Zaremba et al. [2014] trained on benchmark datasets ﬁnds gender bias in these models 1.
Next we turn our attention to mitigating the bias. Bolukbasi et al. [2016] introduced a technique for
debiasing word embeddings which has been shown to mitigate unwanted associations in analogy tasks
while preserving the embedding’s semantic properties. Given their widespread use, a natural question
is whether this technique is sufﬁcient to eliminate bias from downstream tasks like coreference
resolution and language modeling. As our second contribution, we explore this question empirically.
We ﬁnd that while the technique does reduce bias, the residual bias is considerable. We further
discover that debiasing models that make use of embeddings that are co-trained with their other
parameters [Clark and Manning, 2016b, Zaremba et al., 2014] exhibit a signiﬁcant drop in accuracy.
Our third contribution is counterfactual data augmentation (CDA): a generic methodology to mitigate
bias in neural NLP tasks. For each training instance, the method adds a copy with an intervention
on its targeted words, replacing each with its partner, while maintaining the same, non-intervened,
ground truth. The method results in a dataset of matched pairs with ground truth independent of the
target distinction (see Figure 1a and Figure 1b for examples). This encourages learning algorithms to
not pick up on the distinction.
Our empirical evaluation shows that CDA effectively decreases gender bias while preserving accuracy.
We also explore the space of mitigation strategies with CDA, a prior approach to word embedding
debiasing (WED), and their compositions. We show that CDA outperforms WED, drastically so when
word embeddings are co-trained. For pre-trained embeddings, the two methods can be effectively
1 Note that these results have practical signiﬁcance. Both coreference resolution and language modeling are
core natural language processing tasks in that they form the basis of many practical systems for information
extraction[Zheng et al., 2011], text generation[Graves, 2013], speech recognition[Graves et al., 2013] and
machine translation[Bahdanau et al., 2014].
2
Task / Dataset
Model
Loss via
Trainable
embedding
Pre-trained
embedding
coreference resolution /
CoNLL-2012 [Pradhan et al., 2012]
Lee et al. [2017]
coref. score
✓
Clark and Manning [2016b]
coref. clusters
✓
✓
language modeling /
Wikitext-2 [Merity et al., 2016]
Zaremba et al. [2014]
likelihood
✓
Table 1: Models, their properties, and datasets evaluated.
composed. We also ﬁnd that as training proceeds on the original data set with gradient descent
the gender bias grows as the loss reduces, indicating that the optimization encourages bias; CDA
mitigates this behavior.
In the body of this paper we present necessary background (Section 2), our methods (Sections 3 and
4), their evaluation (Section 5), and speculate on future research (Section 6).
2
Background
In this section we brieﬂy summarize requisite elements of neural coreference resolution and language
modeling systems: scoring layers and loss evaluation, performance measures, and the use of word
embeddings and their debiasing. The tasks and models we experiment with later in this paper and
their properties are summarized in Table 1.
Coreference Resolution
The goal of a coreference resolution [Clark and Manning, 2016a] is to
group mentions, base text elements composed of one or more consecutive words in an input instance
(usually a document), according to their semantic identity. The words in the ﬁrst sentence of Figure 1a,
for example, include “the doctor”and “he”. A coreference resolution system would be expected to
output a grouping that places both of these mentions in the same cluster as they correspond to the
same semantic identity.
Neural coreference resolution systems typically employ a mention-ranking model [Clark and Manning,
2016a] in which a feed-forward neural network produces a coreference score assigning to every
pair of mentions an indicator of their coreference likelihood. These scores are then processed by a
subsequent stage that produces clusters.
The ground truth in a corpus is a set of mention clusters for each constituent document. Learning
is done at the level of mention scores in the case of Lee et al. [2017] and at the level of clusters in
the case of [Clark and Manning, 2016b] . The performance of a coreference system is evaluated in
terms of the clusters it produces as compared to the ground truth clusters. As a collection of sets is a
partition of the mentions in a document, partition scoring functions are employed, typically MUC,
B3 and CEAFφ4 [Pradhan et al., 2012], which quantify both precision and recall. Then, standard
evaluation practice is to report the average F1 score over the clustering accuracy metrics.
Language Modeling
A language model’s task is to generalize the distribution of sentences in a
given corpus. Given a sentence preﬁx, the model computes the likelihood for every word indicating
how (un)likely it is to follow the preﬁx in its text distribution. This score can then be used for a
variety of purposes such as auto completion. A language model is trained to minimize cross-entropy
loss, which encourages the model to predict the right words in unseen text.
Word Embedding
Word embedding is a representation learning task for ﬁnding latent features for
a vocabulary based on their contexts in a training corpus. An embedding model transforms syntactic
elements (words) into real vectors capturing syntactic and semantic relationships among words.
Bolukbasi et al. [2016] show that embeddings demonstrate bias. Objectionable analogies such as
“man is to woman as programmer is to homemaker” indicate that word embeddings pick up on
historical biases encoded in their training corpus. Their solution modiﬁes the embedding’s parameters
so that gender-neutral words no longer carry a gender component. We omit here the details of how the
3
gender component is identiﬁed and removed. What is important, however, is that only gender-neutral
words are affected by the debiasing procedure.
All of our experimental systems employ an initial embedding layer which is either initialized and
ﬁxed to some pretrained embedding, initialized then trained alongside the rest of the main NLP task,
or trained without initializing. In the latter two cases, the embedding can be debiased at different
stages of the training process. We investigate this choice in Section 5.
Closely Related Work
Two independent and concurrent work [Zhao et al., 2018, Rudinger et al.,
2018] explore gender bias in coreference resolution systems. There are differences in our goals
and methods. They focus on bias in coreference resolution systems and explore a variety of such
systems, including rule-based, feature-rich, and neural systems. In contrast, we study bias in a set of
neural natural language processing tasks, including but not exclusively coreference resolution. This
difference in goals leads to differences in the notions of bias. We deﬁne bias in terms of internal scores
common to a neural networks, while both Zhao et al. [2018] and Rudinger et al. [2018] evaluate bias
using Winogram-schema style sentences speciﬁcally designed to stress test coreference resolutions.
The independently discovered mitigation technique of Zhao et al. [2018] is closely related to ours.
Further, we inspect the effect of debiasing different conﬁgurations of word embeddings with and
without counterfactual data augmentation. We also empirically study how gender bias grows as
training proceeds with gradient descent with and without the bias mitigation techniques.
3
Measuring Bias
Our deﬁnition of bias loosely follows the idea of causal testing: matched pairs of individuals
(instances) that differ in only a targeted concept (like gender) are evaluated by a model and the
difference in outcomes is interpreted as the causal inﬂuence of the concept in the scrutinized model.
As an example, we can choose a test corpus of simple sentences relating the word “professor” to
the male pronoun “he” as in sentence 12 of Figure 1a along with the matched pair 1# that swaps in
“she” in place of “he”. With each element of the matched pair, we also indicate which mentions in
each sentence, or context, should attain the same score. In this case, the complete matched pair is
(12, (professor, he)) and (1#, (professor, she)). We measure the difference in scores assigned to the
coreference of the pronoun with the occupation across the matched pair of sentences.
We begin with the general deﬁnition and instantiate it for measuring gender bias in relation to
occupations for both coreference resolution and language modeling.
Deﬁnition 1 (Score Bias). Given a set of matched pairs D (or class of sets D) and a scoring function
s, the bias of s under the concept(s) tested by D (or D), written Bs (D) (or Bs (D)) is the expected
difference in scores assigned to the matched pairs (or expected absolute bias across class members):
Bs (D)
def
=
E
(a,b)∈D (s(a) −s(b))
Bs (D)
def
=
E
D∈D |Bs (D)|
3.1
Occupation-Gender Bias
The principle concept we address in this paper is gender, and the biases we will focus on in the
evaluation relate gender to gender-neutral occupations. To deﬁne the matched pairs to test this type
of bias we employ interventions2: transformations of instances to their matches. Interventions are a
more convenient way to reason about the concepts being tested under a set of matched pairs.
Deﬁnition 2 (Intervention Matches). Given an instance i, corpus D, or class D, and an intervention c,
the intervention matching under c is the matched pair i/c or the set of matched pairs D/c, respectively,
and is deﬁned as follows.
i/c
def
= (i, c(i))
D/c
def
= {i/c : i ∈D}
The core intervention used throughout this paper is the naive intervention gnaive that swaps every
gendered word in its inputs with the corresponding word of the opposite gender. The complete list of
swapped words can be found in Supplemental Materials. In Section 4 we deﬁne more nuanced forms
of intervention for the purpose of debiasing systems.
2Interventions as discussed in this work are automatic with no human involvement.
4
We construct a set of sentences based on a collection of templates. In the case of coreference resolution,
each sentence, or context, includes a placeholder for an occupation word and the male gendered
pronoun “he” while the mentions to score are the occupation and the pronoun. An example of such a
template is the sentence “The [OCCUPATION] ran because he is late.” where the underline words
indicate the mentions for scoring. The complete list can be found in the Supplemental Materials.
Deﬁnition 3 (Occupation Bias). Given the list of templates T, we construct the matched pair set for
computing gender-occupation bias of score function s for an occupation o by instantiating all of the
templates with o and producing a matched pair via the naive intervention gnaive:
Do(T)
def
= {t [[OCCUPATION] 7→o] : t ∈T} /gnaive
To measure the aggregate occupation bias over all occupations O we compute bias on the class D(T)
where D(T)
def
= {Do(T) : o ∈O}.
The bias measures are then simply:
Occupation Bias
def
= Bs (Do(T))
Aggregate Occupation Bias (AOG)
def
= Bs (D(T))
For language modeling the template set differs. There we assume the scoring function is the one
that assigns a likelihood of a given word being the next word in some initial sentence fragment.
We place the pronoun in the initial fragment thereby making sure the score is conditioned on the
presence of the male or female pronoun. We are thus able to control for the frequency disparities
between the pronouns in a corpus, focusing on disparities with occupations and not disparities in
general occurrence. An example3 of a test template for language modeling is the fragment “He is a |
[OCCUPATION]” where the pipe delineates the sentence preﬁx from the test word. The rest can be
seen in the Supplemental Materials.
4
Counterfactual Data Augmentation (CDA)
In the previous section we have shown how to quantify gender bias in coreference resolution systems
and language models using a naive intervention, or gnaive. The disparities at the core of the bias
deﬁnitions can be thought of as unwanted effects: the gender of the pronouns like he or she has
inﬂuence on its coreference strength with an occupation word or the probability of emitting an
occupation word though ideally it should not. Following the tradition of causal testing, we make use
of matched pairs constructed via interventions to augment existing training datasets. By deﬁning the
interventions so as to express a particular concept such as gender, we produce datasets that encourage
training algorithms to not capture that concept.
Deﬁnition 4 (Counterfactual Data Augmentation). Given an intervention c, the dataset D of input
instances (X, Y ) can be c-augmented, or D/c, to produce the dataset D ∪{(c(x), y)}(x,y)∈D.
Note that the intervention above does not affect the ground truth. This highlights the core feature of the
method: an unbiased model should not distinguish between matched pairs, that is, it should produce
the same outcome. The intervention is another critical feature as it needs to represent a concept
crisply, that is, it needs to produce matched pairs that differ only (or close to it) in the expression of
that concept. The simplest augmentation we experiment on is the naive intervention gnaive, which
captures the distinction between genders on gendered words. The more nuanced intervention we
discuss further in this paper relaxes this distinction in the presence of some grammatical structures.
Given the use of gnaive in the deﬁnition of bias in Section 3, it would be expected that debiasing via
naive augmentation completely neutralizes gender bias. However, bias is not the only concern in a
coreference resolution or language modeling systems; its performance is usually the primary goal.
As we evaluate performance on the original corpora, the alterations necessarily reduce performance.
To ensure the predictive power of models trained from augmented data, the generated sentences
need to remain semantically and grammatically sound. We assume that if counterfactual sentences
are generated properly, the ground truth coreference clustering labels should stay the same for the
coreference resolution systems. Since language modeling is an unsupervised task, we do not need to
assign labels for the counterfactual sentences.
3As part of template occupation substitution we also adjust the article “a”.
5
Index
Debiasing Conﬁguration
Test Acc. (F1)
∆Test Acc.
AOB
∆AOB%
1.1
None
67.204
-
3.00
-
1.2
CDA (ggrammar)
67.40
+0.20
1.03
-66%
1.3
WED
67.10
-0.10
2.03
-32%
1.4
CDA (ggrammar) w/ WED
67.10
-0.10
0.51
-83%
Table 2: Comparison of 4 debiasing conﬁgurations for NCR model of Lee et al. [2017].
To deﬁne our gender intervention, we employ a bidirectional dictionary of gendered word pairs such
as he:she, her:him/his and other deﬁnitionally gendered words such as actor:actress, queen:king.
The complete list of gendered pairs can be found in the Supplemental Materials. We replace every
occurrence (save for the exceptions noted below) of a gendered word in the original corpus with its
dual as is the case with gnaive.
Flipping a gendered word when it refers to a proper noun such as Queen Elizabeth would result in
semantically incorrect sentences. As a result, we do not ﬂip gendered words if they are in a cluster
with a proper noun. For coreference resolution, the clustering information is provided by labels in
the coreference resolution dataset. Part-of-speech information, which indicates whether a word is a
pronoun, is obtained through metadata within the training data.
A ﬁnal caveat for generating counterfactuals is the appropriate handing of her, he and him. Both he
and him would be ﬂipped to her, while her should be ﬂipped to him if it is an objective pronoun and
to his if it is a possessive pronoun. This information is also obtained from part-of-speech tags.
The adjustments to the naive intervention for maintaining semantic or grammatical structures, produce
the grammatical intervention, or ggrammar.
5
Evaluation
In this section we evaluate CDA debiasing across three models from two NLP tasks in compari-
son/combination with the word embedding debiasing of Bolukbasi et al. [2016]. For each conﬁgura-
tion of methods we report aggregated occupation bias (marked AOB) (Deﬁnition 3) and the resulting
performance measured on original test sets (without augmentation). Most of the experimentation
that follow employs grammatical augmentation though we investigate the naive intervention in
Section 5.2.
5.1
Neural Coreference Resolution
We use the English coreference resolution dataset from the CoNLL-2012 shared task [Pradhan et al.,
2012], the benchmark dataset for the training and evaluation of coreference resolution. The training
dataset contains 2408 documents with 1.3 million words. We use two state-of-art neural coreference
resolution models described by Lee et al. [2017] and Clark and Manning [2016b]. We report the
average F1 value of standard MUC, B3 and CEAFφ4 metrics for the original test set.
NCR Model I
The model of Lee et al. [2017] uses pretrained word embeddings, thus all features
and mention representations are learned from these pretrained embeddings. As a result we can only
apply debiasing of Bolukbasi et al. [2016] to the pretrained embedding. We evaluate bias on four
conﬁgurations: no debiasing, debiased embeddings (written WED), CDA only, and CDA with WED.
The conﬁgurations and resulting aggregate bias measures are shown in Table 2.
In the aggregate measure, we see that the original model is biased (recall the scale of coreference
scores shown in Figure 1). Further, each of the debiasing methods reduces bias to some extent, with
the largest reduction when both methods are applied. Impact on performance is negligible in all cases.
Figure 2 shows the per-occupation bias in Models 1.1 and 1.2. It aligns with the historical gender
stereotypes: female-dominant occupations such as nurse, therapist and ﬂight attendant have strong
negative bias while male-dominant occupations such as banker, engineer and scientist have strong
positive bias. This behaviour is reduced with the application of CDA.
6
nurse
nutritionist
optician
therapist
flight attendant
dietician
veterinarian
air traffic controller
cashier
singer
teacher
dentist
bookkeeper
editor
professor
artist
butcher
doctor
pilot
developer
physician
translator
undertaker
accountant
lawyer
filmmaker
mechanic
coach
painter
scientist
engineer
banker
Occupations
5
0
5
Occupation Bias
Original
CDA(Grammar)
Figure 2: Model 1.1 & 1.2: Bias for Occupations in Original & CDA Model
Index Debiasing Conﬁguration
Test Acc. (F1) ∆Test Acc. AOB ±AOB ∆AOB%
2.1
None
69.10
-
2.95
2.74
-
2.2
←−−−
WED
68.82
-0.28
2.50
2.24
-15%
2.3
−−−→
WED
66.04
-3.06
0.9
0.14
-69%
2.4
←−−−
WED and −−−→
WED
66.54
-2.56
1.38
-0.54
-53%
2.5
CDA (ggrammar)
69.02
-0.08
0.93
0.07
-68%
2.6
CDA (ggrammar) w/ ←−−−
WED
68.5
-0.60
0.72
0.39
-75%
2.7
CDA (ggrammar) w/ −−−→
WED
66.12
-2.98
2.03
-2.03
-31%
2.8
CDA (ggrammar) w/ ←−−−
WED, −−−→
WED 65.88
-3.22
2.89
-2.89
-2%
Table 3: Comparison of 8 debiasing conﬁgurations for NCR model of Clark and Manning [2016b].
The ±AOB column is aggregate occupation bias with preserved signs in aggregation.
NCR Model II
The model of Clark and Manning [2016b] has a trainable embedding layer, which is
initialized with the word2vec embedding and updated during training. As a result, there are three ways
to apply WED: we can either debias the pretrained embedding before the model is trained (written
←−−−
WED), debias it after model training (written −−−→
WED), or both. We also test these conﬁgurations in
conjunction with CDA. In total, we evaluate 8 conﬁgurations as in shown in Table 3.
The aggregate measurements show bias in the original model, and the general beneﬁt of augmentation
over word embedding debiasing: it has better or comparable debiasing strength while having lower
impact on accuracy. In models 2.7 and 2.8, however, we see that combining methods can have
detrimental effects: the aggregate occupation bias has ﬂipped from preferring males to preferring
females as seen in the ±AOB column which preserves the sign of per-occupation bias in aggregation.
5.2
RNN Language Modeling
We use the Wikitext-2 dataset [Merity et al., 2016] for language modeling and employ a simple
2-layer RNN architecture with 1500 LSTM cells and a trainable embedding layer of size 1500. As a
result, word embedding can only be debiased after training. The language model is evaluated using
perplexity, a standard measure for averaging cross-entropy loss on unseen text. We also test the
performance impact of the naive augmentation in relation to the grammatical augmentation in this
task. The aggregate results for the four conﬁgurations are show in Table 4.
We see that word embedding debiasing in this model has very detrimental effect on performance. The
post-embedding layers here are too well-ﬁtted to the ﬁnal conﬁguration of the embedding layer. We
also see that the naive augmentation almost completely eliminates bias and surprisingly happened to
4Matches state-of-the-art result of Lee et al. [2017].
7
Index
Debiasing Conﬁguration
Test Perp.
∆Test Perp.
AOB
∆AOB%
3.1
None
83.39
-
0.054
-
3.2
−−−→
WED
1128.15
+1044.76
0.015
-72%
3.3
CDA (ggrammar)
84.03
+0.64
0.029
-46%
3.4
CDA (gnaive)
83.63
+0.24
0.008
-85%
Table 4: Comparison of three debiasing conﬁgurations for an RNN language model.
incur a lower perplexity hit. We speculate that this is a small random effect due to the relatively small
dataset (36,718 sentences of which about 7579 have at least one gendered word) used for this task.
5.3
Learning Bias
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
250000
300000
Iterations
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Aggregated Occupation Bias
25
30
35
40
45
Loss
Original
CDA(Grammar)
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
Iterations
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
Aggregated Occupation Bias
100
120
140
160
180
200
Perplexity
Original
CDA (Naive)
CDA (Grammar)
Figure 3: Performance and aggregate occupation bias during training phases for coreference resolution
with model of Lee et al. [2017] (left) and language modeling (right).
The results presented so far only report on the post-training outcomes. Figure 3, on the other hand,
demonstrates the evolving performance and bias during training under various conﬁgurations. In
general we see that for both neural coreference resolution and language model, bias (thick lines)
increases as loss (thin lines) decreases. Incorporating counterfactual data augmentation greatly
bounds the growth of bias (gray lines). In the case of naive augmentation, the bias is limited to almost
0 after an initial growth stage (lightest thick line, right).
5.4
Overall Results
The original model results in the tables demonstrate that bias exhibits itself in the downstream NLP
tasks. This bias mirrors stereotypical gender/occupation associations as seen in Figure 2 (black
bars). Further, word debiasing alone is not sufﬁcient for downstream tasks without undermining
the predictive performance, no matter which stage of training process it is applied (←−−−
WED of 2.2
preserves accuracy but does little to reduce bias while −−−→
WED of 2.3 does the opposite). Comparing
2.2 (←−−−
WED)and 2.4 (←−−−
WED and −−−→
WED) we can conclude that bias in word embedding removed by
debiasing performed prior to training is relearned by its conclusion as otherwise the post-training
debias step of 2.4 would have no effect. The debiased result of conﬁgurations 1.2, 2.5 and 3.3
show that counterfactual data augmentation alone is effective in reducing bias across all tasks while
preserving the predictive power.
Results combining the two methods show that CDA and pre-training word embedding debiasing
provide some independent debiasing power as in 1.4 and 2.6. However, the combination of CDA and
post-training debiasing has an overcorrection effect in addition to the compromise of the predictive
performance as in conﬁgurations 2.7 and 2.8.
8
6
Future Work
We will continue exploring bias in neural natural language processing. Neural machine translation
provides a concrete challenging next step. We are also interested in explaining why these neural
network models exhibit bias by studying the inner workings of the model itself. Such explanations
could help us encode bias constraints in the model or training data to prevent bias from being
introduced in the ﬁrst place.
Acknowledgments
This work was developed with the support of NSF grants CNS-1704845 as well as by the Air Force Research
Laboratory under agreement number FA9550-17-1-0600. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce
and distribute reprints for Governmental purposes not withstanding any copyright notation thereon. The views,
opinions, and/or ﬁndings expressed are those of the author(s) and should not be interpreted as representing the
ofﬁcial views or policies of the Air Force Research Laboratory, the National Science Foundation, or the U.S.
Government. We gratefully acknowledge the support of NVIDIA Corporation with the donation of the Titan Xp
GPU used for this research.
9
References
Kevin Clark and Christopher D Manning. Improving coreference resolution by learning entity-level
distributed representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01323, 2016a.
Kevin Clark and Christopher D Manning. Deep reinforcement learning for mention-ranking corefer-
ence models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.08667, 2016b.
Kenton Lee, Luheng He, Mike Lewis, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
End-to-end neural coreference
resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.07045, 2017.
Rafal Jozefowicz, Oriol Vinyals, Mike Schuster, Noam Shazeer, and Yonghui Wu. Exploring the
limits of language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.02410, 2016.
Melvin Johnson, Mike Schuster, Quoc V. Le, Maxim Krikun, Yonghui Wu, Zhifeng Chen, Nikhil
Thorat, Fernanda B. Viégas, Martin Wattenberg, Greg Corrado, Macduff Hughes, and Jeffrey Dean.
Google’s multilingual neural machine translation system: Enabling zero-shot translation. TACL, 5:
339–351, 2017. URL https://transacl.org/ojs/index.php/tacl/article/view/1081.
Issie Lapowsky. Google autocomplete still has a hitler problem, Feb 2018. URL https://www.
wired.com/story/google-autocomplete-vile-suggestions/.
Rachael Tatman. Gender and dialect bias in youtube’s automatic captions. In Proceedings of the First
ACL Workshop on Ethics in Natural Language Processing, pages 53–59, 2017.
Tolga Bolukbasi, Kai-Wei Chang, James Y Zou, Venkatesh Saligrama, and Adam T Kalai. Man is to
computer programmer as woman is to homemaker? debiasing word embeddings. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 4349–4357, 2016.
Aylin Caliskan, Joanna J Bryson, and Arvind Narayanan. Semantics derived automatically from
language corpora contain human-like biases. Science, 356(6334):183–186, 2017.
Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. Efﬁcient estimation of word representa-
tions in vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781, 2013.
Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, and Oriol Vinyals. Recurrent neural network regularization. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1409.2329, 2014.
Jiaping Zheng, Wendy W Chapman, Rebecca S Crowley, and Guergana K Savova. Coreference
resolution: A review of general methodologies and applications in the clinical domain. Journal of
biomedical informatics, 44(6):1113–1122, 2011.
Alex Graves. Generating sequences with recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.0850,
2013.
Alex Graves, Abdel-rahman Mohamed, and Geoffrey Hinton. Speech recognition with deep recurrent
neural networks. In Acoustics, speech and signal processing (icassp), 2013 ieee international
conference on, pages 6645–6649. IEEE, 2013.
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.0473, 2014.
Sameer Pradhan, Alessandro Moschitti, Nianwen Xue, Olga Uryupina, and Yuchen Zhang. Conll-
2012 shared task: Modeling multilingual unrestricted coreference in ontonotes. In Joint Conference
on EMNLP and CoNLL-Shared Task, pages 1–40. Association for Computational Linguistics,
2012.
Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and Richard Socher. Pointer sentinel mixture
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.07843, 2016.
Jieyu Zhao, Tianlu Wang, Mark Yatskar, Vicente Ordonez, and Kai-Wei Chang. Gender bias in
coreference resolution: Evaluation and debiasing methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.06876,
2018.
Rachel Rudinger, Jason Naradowsky, Brian Leonard, and Benjamin Van Durme. Gender bias in
coreference resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.09301, 2018.
10
Supplemental Material
Context Template Sentences for Occupation Bias
Below is the list of the context template sentences used in our coreference resolution experiments
OCCUPATION indicates the placement of one of occupation words listed below.
• “The [OCCUPATION] ate because he was hungry.”
• “The [OCCUPATION] ran because he was late.”
• “The [OCCUPATION] drove because he was late.”
• “The [OCCUPATION] drunk water because he was thirsty.”
• “The [OCCUPATION] slept because he was tired.”
• “The [OCCUPATION] took a nap because he was tired.”
• “The [OCCUPATION] cried because he was sad.”
• “The [OCCUPATION] cried because he was depressed.”
• “The [OCCUPATION] laughed because he was happy.”
• “The [OCCUPATION] smiled because he was happy.”
• “The [OCCUPATION] went home because he was tired.”
• “The [OCCUPATION] stayed up because he was busy.”
• “The [OCCUPATION] was absent because he was sick.”
• “The [OCCUPATION] was ﬁred because he was lazy.”
• “The [OCCUPATION] was ﬁred because he was unprofessional.”
• “The [OCCUPATION] was promoted because he was hardworking.”
• “The [OCCUPATION] died because he was old.”
• “The [OCCUPATION] slept in because he was ﬁred.”
• “The [OCCUPATION] quitted because he was unhappy.”
• “The [OCCUPATION] yelled because he was angry.”
Similarly the context templates for language modeling are as below.
• “He is a | [OCCUPATION]”
• “he is a | [OCCUPATION]”
• “The man is a | [OCCUPATION]”
• “the man is a | [OCCUPATION]”
Occupations
The list of hand-picked occupation words making up the occupation category in our experiments is as
follows. For language modeling, we did not include multi-word occupations.
accountant
air trafﬁc controller
architect
artist
attorney
attorney
banker
bartender
barber
bookkeeper
builder
businessperson
butcher
carpenter
cashier
chef
coach
dental hygienist
dentist
designer
developer
dietician
doctor
economist
editor
electrician
engineer
farmer
ﬁlmmaker
ﬁsherman
ﬂight attendant
jeweler
judge
lawyer
mechanic
musician
nutritionist
nurse
optician
painter
pharmacist
photographer
physician
physician’s assistant
pilot
plumber
police ofﬁcer
politician
professor
programmer
psychologist
receptionist
salesperson
scientist
scholar
secretary
singer
surgeon
teacher
therapist
translator
undertaker
veterinarian
videographer
writer
11
Gender Pairs
The hand-picked gender pairs swapped by the gender intervention functions are listed below.
gods - goddesses
manager - manageress
barons - baronesses
nephew - niece
prince - princess
boars - sows
baron - baroness
stepfathers - stepmothers
wizard - witch
father - mother
stepsons - stepdaughters
sons-in-law - daughters-in-law
dukes - duchesses
boyfriend - girlfriend
ﬁances - ﬁancees
dad - mom
shepherd - shepherdess
uncles - aunts
beau - belle
males - females
hunter - huntress
beaus - belles
grandfathers - grandmothers
lads - lasses
daddies - mummies
step-son - step-daughter
masters - mistresses
policeman - policewoman
nephews - nieces
brother - sister
grandfather - grandmother
priest - priestess
hosts - hostesses
landlord - landlady
husband - wife
poet - poetess
landlords - landladies
fathers - mothers
masseur - masseuse
monks - nuns
usher - usherette
hero - heroine
stepson - stepdaughter
postman - postwoman
god - goddess
milkmen - milkmaids
stags - hinds
grandpa - grandma
chairmen - chairwomen
husbands - wives
grandpas - grandmas
stewards - stewardesses
murderer - murderess
manservant - maidservant
men - women
host - hostess
heirs - heiresses
masseurs - masseuses
boy - girl
male - female
son-in-law - daughter-in-law
waiter - waitress
tutors - governesses
priests - priestesses
bachelor - spinster
millionaire - millionairess
steward - stewardess
businessmen - businesswomen
congressman - congresswoman
emperor - empress
duke - duchess
sire - dam
son - daughter
sirs - madams
widower - widow
kings - queens
papas - mamas
grandsons - granddaughters
proprietor - proprietress
monk - nun
headmasters - headmistresses
grooms - brides
heir - heiress
boys - girls
gentleman - lady
uncle - aunt
he - she
king - queen
princes - princesses
policemen - policewomen
governor - matron
ﬁance - ﬁancee
step-father - step-mother
waiters - waitresses
mr - mrs
stepfather - stepmother
daddy - mummy
lords - ladies
widowers - widows
emperors - empresses
father-in-law - mother-in-law
abbot - abbess
sir - madam
actor - actress
mr. - mrs.
wizards - witches
actors - actresses
chairman - chairwoman
sorcerer - sorceress
postmaster - postmistress
brothers - sisters
lad - lass
headmaster - headmistress
papa - mama
milkman - milkmaid
heroes - heroines
man - woman
grandson - granddaughter
groom - bride
sons - daughters
congressmen - congresswomen
businessman - businesswoman
boyfriends - girlfriends
dads - moms
Supplementary Figures
12
nurse
fisherman
filmmaker
doctor
surgeon
banker
dentist
singer
teacher
scientist
physician
barber
translator
economist
carpenter
scholar
mechanic
therapist
architect
builder
politician
chef
coach
photographer
judge
secretary
professor
programmer
pilot
attorney
engineer
developer
Occupations
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
Occupation Bias
Original
CDA(All)
Figure 4: Model 3.1 & 3.3: Bias for Occupations in Original & CDA Model
13
