Title: Using Natural Language Processing to Predict Costume Core Vocabulary of Historical Artifacts
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2212.07931v1
--------------------------------------------------

THIS PAPER HAS BEEN ACCEPTED AT ICMLA 2022 AND THE FINAL VERSION HAS BEEN SUBMITTED
1
Using Natural Language Processing to Predict
Costume Core Vocabulary of Historical Artifacts
Madhuvanti Muralikrishnan
Computer Science Dept.
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA
madhuvantim@vt.edu
Amr Hilal 1
Informatics Lab
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA
ahilal@vt.edu
Chreston Miller
Informatics Lab
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA
chmille3@vt.edu
Dina Smith-Glaviana
Apparel, Housing, and Resource Management Dept.
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA
dinacs@vt.edu
Abstract—Historic dress artifacts are a valuable source for
human studies. In particular, they can provide important insights
into the social aspects of their corresponding era. These insights
are commonly drawn from garment pictures as well as the accom-
panying descriptions and are usually stored in a standardized and
controlled vocabulary that accurately describes garments and
costume items, called the Costume Core Vocabulary. Building
an accurate Costume Core from garment descriptions can be
challenging because the historic garment items are often donated,
and the accompanying descriptions can be based on untrained
individuals and use a language common to the period of the items.
In this paper, we present an approach to use Natural Language
Processing (NLP) to map the free-form text descriptions of the
historic items to that of the controlled vocabulary provided by
the Costume Core. Despite the limited dataset, we were able to
train an NLP model based on the Universal Sentence Encoder
to perform this mapping with more than 90% test accuracy
for a subset of the Costume Core vocabulary. We describe our
methodology, design choices, and development of our approach,
and show the feasibility of predicting the Costume Core for
unseen descriptions. With more garment descriptions still being
curated to be used for training, we expect to have higher accuracy
for better generalizability.
I. INTRODUCTION
Throughout history, various terms have been used to de-
scribe the names of fabrics, colors, and styles of garments,
which makes it difﬁcult for the contemporary reader to under-
stand extant or historical written material and interpret the at-
tributes of the garment/artifact described accurately [1]. Dress
artifacts are forms of primary data that provide “evidence” of
what was worn and is considered “more democratic” than the
written words [2].
In the context of historic clothing and textile collections,
donors often provide inaccurate written descriptions of arti-
facts based on their limited knowledge of fashion terminology.
Collection managers also adopt these inaccurate descriptions
or may unintentionally misdescribe dress artifacts because the
artifacts may have been remade or reworked over time. In such
instances, the written word cannot be relied upon and a close
study and examination of artifacts is necessary.
It is, therefore, a challenge to map a garment written
description to a controlled vocabulary, speciﬁcally Costume
1 Amr Hilal is also afﬁliated with the Department of Computer and Systems
Engineering, Alexandria University, Egypt.
Core. Costume Core is a metadata schema with controlled
descriptive fashion terminology (vocabulary) for garments and
accessories [3], [4]. Cataloging using a controlled vocabulary
is important as it minimizes any potential bias or incorrect
interpretation from the curator as described above. A garment
contains multiple attributes like Color, Medium, Work Type,
Sleeve Type, etc. that describe it, each of which has a term
in the Costume Core vocabulary. Having this task done via a
human subject is obviously a tedious task. Natural Language
Processing (NLP) techniques can be applied to map the his-
torically written descriptions to the Costume Core vocabulary.
In this paper, we build an NLP model to automatically
map the free-form written garment descriptions to controlled
vocabulary terms. We catalogued hundreds of garments and
accessories along with their accompanying historic descrip-
tions, and used them to train our NLP model.
Having a relatively small number of descriptions was a
challenge. The use of multiple terms of the same costume
core category in the same description (e.g., multiple secondary
colors in addition to the primary one) was also misleading to
our model that we needed to go through iterations of model
design and tuning to overcome. Despite those challenges, we
were able to achieve above 90% test accuracy.
While mapping historical artifacts to a controlled vocabulary
has been traditionally done manually [5], automating the
process is largely unexplored. The contribution of this paper
is to introduce a level of automation into this process using
NLP to save collection staff time and ultimately encourage
the digitization of costume collections and increase their
accessibility and use [6].
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. A brief
literature review is provided in Section II. Section III describes
our materials and methodology with Sections IV and V
describing our experimental design and choices as well as the
corresponding results. We provide a discussion of the results
in Section VI followed by our conclusions in Section VII.
II. LITERATURE REVIEW
The study of dress (the process and product of dressing the
body [7]) is important to the humanities. Not only is dress a
process in which most, if not all individuals, participate, but
it is also an interdisciplinary ﬁeld of study that draws from
©2022 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or
reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.
arXiv:2212.07931v1  [cs.CL]  24 Nov 2022
THIS PAPER HAS BEEN ACCEPTED AT ICMLA 2022 AND THE FINAL VERSION HAS BEEN SUBMITTED
2
academic disciplines within the humanities such as anthropol-
ogy, history, sociology, and psychology, which spark interests
among a variety of scholars and students who contribute to
humanistic scholarship. Historic costume artifacts are forms
of primary data that provide evidence of what was worn in
the past [2]. Thus, the artifacts are forms of material culture
that indicate the social norms, values, mores, and ways of
life that humans adopted during a speciﬁc time and place.
More speciﬁcally, historic dress artifacts provide information
about social structures regarding age, gender, social class,
and race/ethnicity. For this reason, Costume Core provides
controlled vocabularies relating to age/stage of life, gender,
social class, and country of origin [3]. This assists in providing
a record of the social and historical context behind each artifact
that more clearly allows curators to examine and, in turn,
communicate the cultural signiﬁcance of dress and fashion to
the public through exhibitions and online digital libraries.
Historically, the process of describing these artifacts using
a controlled vocabulary, such as Costume Core, has been
manually completed by close examination of each artifact [5].
In this process, the accompanying description may or may not
be used. It could be used to provide some clariﬁcations on
things such as material or fabrication. We view the accompa-
nying descriptions as being a rich source of information that
NLP techniques can use to aid in the describing pipeline. In
essence, NLP techniques have the potential to assist in building
accessible descriptions of these dress artifacts.
The problem addressed in this paper closely relates to text
classiﬁcation of which there are a number of approaches. The
authors of [8] perform a very detailed survey of techniques
and approaches. Some researchers have investigated the use
of different variations of recurrent neural networks [9], [10]
where news articles are classiﬁed into different story types.
However, with the arrival of a transformer encoder-decoder
architecture [11] provided new opportunities for solving text
classiﬁcation tasks such as [12], [13].
Focusing in on the speciﬁc problem presented in this paper,
there has been work on training text classiﬁcation on small
datasets with multi-labels. Such work address feature selection
methods for creating text classiﬁcation solutions [14], [15].
The small size of our dataset leads us to the need of data
augmentation. There are a number of techniques for text data
augmentation [16]. However, due to the nature of our data and
its conceptual meaning, we decided that back-translation [17]
is the most applicable technique (more details in Section III).
Since describing garments and accessories has been a
manual process, to the authors’ knowledge, there has not
been any other work to date focused on automated multi-
label classiﬁcation of these items based on provided text
descriptions.
III. MATERIALS AND METHODOLOGY
In this work, we followed the well-known NLP encoder-
decoder model architecture where an encoder consumes the
artifact description and produces a ﬁxed length embedding
vector that is used by a decoder to do the classiﬁcation task.
We describe below how we did this in more detail.
A. Dataset
The dataset we are working with stems from a curated
costume and textile collection [citation withheld for blind
review]. The collection consists of thousands of garments
and accessories, however, only a subset has been labeled
using Costume Core (380). This is because, as mentioned
earlier, describing items (e.g., with Costume Core), is a
time-consuming process performed manually. This describing
process is currently being accomplished by the curator’s team.
As this is a curated collection from donors, each item is
accompanied by a free-form text description provided by the
donors. Each description was originally typed on a physical
notecard. The notecards were digitized with optical character
recognition (OCR) performed on the images to extract the
text. This OCR’ed text was then inspected for quality control.
The OCR technology used was Spark OCR [18]. From several
attributes in the controlled vocabulary, we focused on Color
and Work Type as they apply to all garments and artifacts and
are independent. We have developed a pipeline that can be
later expanded for the other attributes.
B. The Learning Model
There are two approaches towards building a model capable
of processing complex input (text in our case): train a model
from scratch or use transfer learning. In transfer learning,
a model pre-trained on a large amount of similar data is
connected to a small Feed Forward Neural Network (FNN).
This structure harnesses the knowledge learned by the pre-
trained model and ﬁts this knowledge to the domain problem
through training the connected FNN. Since we have a limited
dataset, using transfer learning was our best option. To realize
this, we used Google’s Universal Sentence Encoder (USE) [19]
to ﬁll in the encoder part of our model representing the context
of the input text. The USE reduces the knowledge contained
in a sentence to a ﬁxed length embedding vector. This is
achieved through a transformer-based encoder, or a Deep
Averaging Network based encoder. We used the transformer-
based encoder which has a higher accuracy but is more
complex and resource-heavy. The produced embeddings are
fed to the FNN to proceed in the classiﬁcation task .
C. Data Augmentation
While the use of transfer learning relatively reduces our
need for data, we recognize that 380 garments descriptions are
still not enough to produce a well-trained model. The lack of
training data is a common problem in training machine learn-
ing models and can limit the model’s ability to generalize well.
To overcome the training data problem, data augmentation can
be used to synthetically enrich our training data [20], [21].
We used back-translation to achieve this task, in which we
translate a description to multiple different languages; namely
French, German, and Spanish, then back to English. Despite
the historic nature of the original text, the resulting different
©2022 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or
reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.
THIS PAPER HAS BEEN ACCEPTED AT ICMLA 2022 AND THE FINAL VERSION HAS BEEN SUBMITTED
3
English versions of the description add a level of resiliency
to our model and made it more generalizable. The size of
the dataset after augmentation is 1520, which after sentence
tokenization increases to 4169.
D. Evaluation
In machine learning, the training dataset should represent
the original dataset distribution. The test set, however, plays
the role of the unseen data, hence should not be impacted
by the design choices to guarantee a fair evaluation of the
trained model. While data augmentation enriches our dataset
by producing sentences different from the original ones, the
derived sentences can still exhibit some correlation to their
original ones. Consequently, we needed to carefully split our
data and evaluate the model predictions.
• Data Split: Having correlated descriptions between the
training set and test set can mislead the model evaluation
scores by overestimating the model’s ability to predict in
a real scenario. To avert this effect, we split our dataset
then augmented the training descriptions separately using
the described augmentation techniques.
• Prediction: The augmentation techniques we used en-
riched our dataset with different versions of the orig-
inal descriptions. Therefore, we evaluated our model
predictability on each description in the test set by
aggregating and averaging the prediction score across a
set of descriptions produced via the same augmentation
techniques used on the training set. This method was
followed by some of the major seminal papers that were
produced based on the ImageNet Large Scale Visual
Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC) [22], such as ResNet
[23] and GoogLeNet [24].
In addition to using the average prediction score, and since
our classiﬁcation problem includes more than 10 labels, we
used the top-k error evaluation technique used in ILSVRC
[22]. The top-k error measures the possibility that the target
label does not exist in the top k predicted labels (k labels with
highest probability where P Pclass = 1). We used the top-k
error for k up to 3.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
A. Intuition
While a description contains multiple sentences describing
the artifact in detail, information relevant to the primary color
or Work Type is often present only in one sentence, and
sometimes it includes multiple colors for different parts of
the garment. Only one of them is considered the “primary
color” and another is considered a “secondary color” and the
rest are of no signiﬁcance. For example, in the description
“Short brown, grey, beige mink fur cape. ”, brown is the
primary color, grey is the secondary color, and beige is of
no signiﬁcance.
Irrelevant information potentially adds noise to the data and
hinders the model from focusing on the right features. In some
extreme cases, this irrelevant information can turn adversarial.
An example of an adversarial case is when multiple color
TABLE I
COLOR GROUPS
color
color-group
color
color-group
black
black
coral
orange
blue
blue
orange
navy blue
brass
teal
fuchsia
pink
brown
brown
pink
tan
lavender
purple
gray
gray
purple
silver
burgundy
red
green
green
maroon
turquoise
red
gold
metallic
rust
metallic
beige
white
gold
cream
yellow
yellow
white
amber
clear
variants of the same artifact are mentioned in the description
such as ”robe: ﬂoorlength hot pink wool robe. crew neck lined
with a brocade teal and gold ribbon going down the front”.
The robe is pink while the brocade is teal and ribbon is gold.
At an early stage of this work, our model took the entire
description as input. But this model was unable to generalize
well given a multi-sentence description and a ﬁxed length
embedding, the model could not attend enough on the right
context to capture the correct Costume Core Vocabulary.
To ﬁx this, we changed the structure of the descriptions and
the grouping of the class labels. The intuition is to introduce
context isolation and allow the model to better attend to the
important details .
B. Changing Structure of Input Text
To better attend to context, we tokenize the descriptions into
multiple sentences. After sentence tokenization, each training
data sample contains one sentence from a description rather
than the whole description. This can help the model to focus on
sentence-level context rather than a description-level context.
Now that the data is on a sentence-level we re-annotated
each sentence based on the information that the sentence
contains. This is helpful in cases where there are multiple
attribute values for one garment such as “a pink dress with
white detailing”. The model would classify every sentence
into the corresponding primary color or work type of the
original garment description if it is present in the sentence.
Otherwise, a no-color/no-work-type label is attached to the
sentence. Finally, data augmentation using back-translation is
applied on the sentence-level.
C. Color Grouping
Having many classes resulted in data sparsity class-wise. By
reducing the number of classes, we were able to tackle this
problem and ensure that there is enough data per class. The
Costume Core Vocabulary deﬁnes 31 colors, which include
metallic colors like rust, gold, silver for jewellery and acces-
sories. These 31 classes were mapped to a broader grouping
of colors as shown in Table I.
©2022 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or
reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.
THIS PAPER HAS BEEN ACCEPTED AT ICMLA 2022 AND THE FINAL VERSION HAS BEEN SUBMITTED
4
D. Data Balancing
While our new labeling scheme improves the model atten-
tion, it introduces another challenge, data imbalance. After
sentence tokenization, the data contains many more sentences
labeled “no-color” than those with a primary color. To counter
this imbalance, undersampling is performed for the “no-color”
and “no-work-type” class. The class is sampled by a fraction
of 0.15 to match the largest classes like white and black as
shown in Figures 1 and 2. By reducing to the largest class, we
reduce the chance of model bias towards the majority class,
“no-color” and “no-work-type”. The majority classes could
not be further undersampled to obtain better data balance as
that would signiﬁcantly reduce the size of the dataset. It is
worth mentioning that we apply data balancing only to the
training data after shufﬂing and splitting the original dataset.
As pointed out in Section III-D, each description in the test set
is tokenized and augmented separately but without balancing.
Fig. 1. Class-wise Distribution of Training Data - Color
Fig. 2. Class-wise Distribution of Training Data - Work Type
E. Architecture and Hyperparameters
Our model architecture consists of the USE and multiple
FNN layers, as shown in Figure 3. The embedding is produced
by the USE and then passed to a Fully Connected (FC) Layer
of the FNN. The FNN consists of 3 Fully Connected Layers.
The output of the ﬁnal layer is passed through a SoftMax
TABLE II
HYPERPARAMETERS OF THE MODEL
Hyperparameter
Value
Batch Size
8
Learning Rate
0.001
Optimizer
Adam
β1
0.9
β2
0.99
ε
1e-07
No. of epochs
20
Loss function
Cross Entropy Loss
layer to produce the predictions and their corresponding prob-
abilities. The best conﬁguration of hyperparameters that lead
to the results in Section V are summarized in Table II. The
values were tuned using grid search for a range of 1e-05 to
1e-02 for Learning rate and 4 to 128 for Batch Size. We
experimented with Adam, SGD and RMSProp for optimizers.
Gradient clipping was employed in experiments with SGD and
RMSProp although Adam ﬁnally proved the best. Although
we set the range to 20 epochs, we used early stopping to
ensure that the model does not overﬁt. The raw dataset is split
into 80/20 for the training and test sets. The training set and
test set are augmented, and sentence tokenized separately. The
processed training set is then further split into 80/20 as training
and validation sets.
Fig. 3. Model Architecture - A labeled description is provided to the USE to
produce an embedding of size m. This embedding is then passed to the FC
layers to obtain an output vector of size where c is the number of classes. The
output vector is provided to a SoftMax layer which results in the prediction
and probability of the prediction.
V. RESULTS
A. Training and Validation Accuracy
Figures 4 and 5 show the model learning curves, partic-
ularly accuracy. For the color classiﬁcation task, the model
achieved training and validation accuracy of 99% and 97.95%,
respectively. For the work type, the achieved training and
validation accuracy are 99% and 93.05% respectively. The
training and validation accuracy differ marginally. From the
©2022 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or
reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.
THIS PAPER HAS BEEN ACCEPTED AT ICMLA 2022 AND THE FINAL VERSION HAS BEEN SUBMITTED
5
TABLE III
EXAMPLE FROM TRAINING SET
Original Description
White and cream formal dress.
Fully covered in netting and lace.
Cream taffeta, white netting with
cream ﬂocked and ﬂoral design.
Example sentence after tokenization
white and cream formal dress
Variants after augmentation
formal white dress and cream,
white and cream formal dress,
white dress and cream,
white and cream formal dress.
Class label for Color
white, no color, white
Class label for Work Type
dress,no work type,no work type
training accuracy we can infer that the model is learning the
features of the data and the validation accuracy shows that it is
learning it well. Based on the difference between the training
and validation accuracy we can infer that the model does not
overﬁt. Table III shows an example of a description from
the training dataset undergoing tokenization and augmentation
before feeding to the model for training.
Fig. 4. Training and Validation Accuracy for Color
Fig. 5. Training and Validation Accuracy for Work Type
B. Test Results
The test set was separated from the training set and eval-
uated following the methodology described in Section III.
Tables IV and V show the overall evaluation metrics for the
Color and Work Type attributes (precision, recall, and F1-
score) as well as a breakdown for each color and Work Type
class. Figures 6 and 7 also show a detailed confusion matrix
for the Color and Work Type attributes. The model achieves
an F1-score of 0.91 for Color and 0.85 for Work Type.
Figure 8 shows a description from a test record for which
predictions have been obtained by the model. It tracks a
description before aggregation on a sentence-level to the ﬁnal
prediction on a description level as described in Section III.
TABLE IV
COLOR PERFORMANCE
Color
Precision
Recall
F1-Score
Support
black
1
1
1
9
blue
1
0.9
0.95
10
brown
0.57
1
0.73
4
green
1
1
1
3
no color
0.86
0.75
0.8
8
pink
1
0.67
0.8
3
red
1
0.5
0.67
4
white
0.91
1
0.96
32
yellow
1
0.67
0.8
3
accuracy
0.91
76
TABLE V
WORK TYPE PERFORMANCE
Work Type
Precision
Recall
F1-score
Support
accessories
0.82
1.00
0.90
14
blouses
1.00
1.00
1.00
4
cape
1.00
1.00
1.00
1
coats
1.00
1.00
1.00
2
crinolines
0.00
0.00
0.00
1
dress
0.96
1.00
0.98
24
jacket
1.00
0.50
0.67
2
kimono
0.00
0.00
0.00
1
no work type
0.83
0.79
0.81
19
shirt
0.33
1.00
0.50
1
shorts
1.00
0.50
0.67
2
suit
1.00
1.00
1.00
1
sweater
0.00
0.00
0.00
2
accuracy
0.85
75
Fig. 6. Confusion Matrix - Color
TABLE VI
RESULTS
Experiment
Evaluation
Test Accuracy(%)
Initial approach of testing
on original descriptions
Standard
accuracy
evaluation
44
Augmentation &
Color Grouping
Standard
accuracy
evaluation
52
Testset augmentation
Top-k
accuracy
78 for top-3
Sentence Tokenization
Our evaluation
strategy
91
©2022 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or
reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.
THIS PAPER HAS BEEN ACCEPTED AT ICMLA 2022 AND THE FINAL VERSION HAS BEEN SUBMITTED
6
Fig. 7. Confusion Matrix - Work Type
VI. DISCUSSION
When working with detailed text descriptions where each
sentence describes a different part of the garment, it is
important to capture the relevant features to achieve good
performance, i.e., the model needs to attend to the right
context. In the English language, context is critical as one word
can have many meanings. In our task of Color classiﬁcation, a
model cannot distinguish between the primary and secondary
color unless the importance is induced through context.
We started by training the model on the descriptions after
preprocessing. We achieved a high training and validation
accuracy over 95%, but the test accuracy was 44%. The model
was unable to generalize well. In a complex training record,
we see that multiple details are mentioned in the description
making it difﬁcult for the model to learn the right feature.
While analyzing the results, we observed the accuracy increase
from 44% to 63% if we accepted a secondary color in the
prediction as the correct prediction. The model had trouble
capturing the key features. We suspected that the model was
overﬁtting since the model complexity was high while the
dataset was small and sparse.
Our next effort was to provide more examples per class to
the model through augmentation, hoping that would reinforce
the important features and make the model more robust. Since
we had already achieved a good accuracy on training and
validation, we focused on the generalization capabilities of
the model which can be measured through the test accuracy.
Although that helped in improving accuracy by 8%, reaching
52%, it was not good enough. When we evaluated the model
with top-k accuracy as described in Section III, we saw an
increase in test accuracy to 78% for the top-3 accuracy. We
observed that as we increased k, the accuracy increased and
then saturated at k = 3. Observing that the primary color was
in the top-3 predictions of the model hinted that the model
requires more attention for the primary class, so that it could
appear as the top prediction instead of one amongst the top-3.
To provide the model with the right context to attend to,
we simpliﬁed the description and provided only sentences
(fragments of a description) to the model to train on. By
sentence tokenization, we were able to break down the com-
plexity associated with multiple sentences where each sentence
referred to at least one other attribute of the garment. This
helped the model concentrate more on the class present in the
given sentence. But colors may not appear in every sentence
of the model. Since we wanted our model to be robust to
descriptions where there might be no color cue present, we
labeled the sentences as color c if it were present as the
primary color, otherwise it was labeled “no-color”. Now the
model not only could identify colors in each sentence, but it
could also identify sentences that do not have a primary color
in them. By breaking down the sentences, we were able to
also capture different colors in a garment if they appeared in
different sentences. As an example, in the description ”Girl’s
pink organza dress. Dress has a peter pan collar trimmed in
lace and ﬂoral embroidery in white”, by tokenizing it into
multiple sentences, the ﬁrst sentence is labeled “pink” while
the rest are “no-color”. Now, we can label the second sentence
as white in case we wished to capture secondary color in the
future. The results are summarized in Table VI.
The ﬁnal goal of the work is to be able to automatically map
a new set of descriptions to their Costume Core vocabulary. If
the model were to give a sentence-level result when provided
with a description, there would be uncertainty while using
the resulting predictions for further tasks. Hence, we used
aggregation for the model predictions. Through aggregation,
we get one ﬁnal prediction for a description that can be traced
back to the sentence-level results if required. If the requirement
were to change to a sentence-level prediction or to identify if
color is present, the results can be used as such or aggregated
however deemed ﬁt. This ﬂexibility of using a sentence or
description-level prediction enables the model to be used with
different tasks. The results can be used in conjunction with the
confusion matrix to interpret and understand why a particular
class is performing well or poorly. For color, we can see
that white is performing well with a precision of 0.91 and
a recall of 1. A recall score of 1 means that all the 32 white
descriptions were classiﬁed correctly as white. But a lower
precision score indicates that there may be false positives for
the class. Looking at the confusion matrix, we can see that
one data sample, which did not have any primary color, was
misclassiﬁed as white.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper we use machine learning to automate the
Costume Core classiﬁcation problem for description of historic
garments, and we particularly target the garment Primary
Color and Work Type. In this problem, we seek to extract
these two attributes from the garment accompanying free-form
text descriptions, where a human expert would otherwise be
needed. We present an NLP solution based on the USE. In the
presented approach, we described our methodology including
the preprocessing and data augmentation needed to get the
garment descriptions ready for consumption by the model.
We also described how the evaluation method is framed to
©2022 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or
reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.
THIS PAPER HAS BEEN ACCEPTED AT ICMLA 2022 AND THE FINAL VERSION HAS BEEN SUBMITTED
7
Fig. 8.
Tokenization Pipeline: A tokenized sentence is aggregated with its augmented variants to produce a set of predictions and probabilities. The ﬁnal
prediction is then derived from majority vote and ﬁnal probability from the mean of all probabilities.
follow the rationale of the steps taken in training the model.
While our early trials had less than 50% test accuracy, we
managed to adjust and tune the model to reach more than 90%
accuracy. Given a small dataset (380 garment descriptions),
we consider the accuracy achieved acceptable and promising.
As there are more descriptions currently being OCR’ed and
prepared for use, we anticipate having this accuracy increase.
This solution can be further extended to other Costume Core
attributes such as Medium, Technique and Dress Type. As a
part of the collection, some artifacts are also photographed.
The images can be used in addition to the descriptions and
a multimodal machine learning model can be built on this
dataset in the future.
VIII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work is partially supported by the Virginia Tech
Libraries Collaborative Research Grant (January 2022).
REFERENCES
[1] G. Tortora Phyllis and B. Marcketti Sara, Survey of Historic Costume,
6th ed.
Fairchild Books, 2015.
[2] J. D. Prown, “Mind in Matter: An Introduction to Material Culture
Theory and Method,” Winterthur Portfolio, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 1–19,
Apr. 1982. [Online]. Available: https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/
10.1086/496065
[3] A. Kirkland, “Costume Core: Metadata for Historic Clothing,” Visual
Resources Association Bulletin, vol. 45, no. 2, 2018, number: 2. [Online].
Available: https://online.vraweb.org/index.php/vrab/article/view/36
[4] A. Kirkland, K. Martin, M. Schoeny, K. Smith, and G. Strege,
“Sharing Historic Costume Collections Online: Why and How,”
Dress, Jan. 2016, publisher: Routledge. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/03612112.2015.1130394
[5] L. Taylor, “Doing the Laundry? A Reassessment of Object-based Dress
History,” Fashion Theory, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 337–358, Nov. 1998, pub-
lisher: Routledge eprint: https://doi.org/10.2752/136270498779476118.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.2752/136270498779476118
[6] S. Marcketti and J. F. Gordon, “I should probably know more: Reasons
for and roadblocks to the use of historic university collections in
teaching,” Journal of Conservation and Museum Studies, vol. 17, no. 1,
2019.
[7] J. B. Eicher and S. L. Evenson, The Visible Self: Global Perspectives on
Dress, Culture and Society.
Bloomsbury Publishing USA, Aug. 2014,
google-Books-ID: X3qXBgAAQBAJ.
[8] K.
Kowsari,
K.
Jafari
Meimandi,
M.
Heidarysafa,
S.
Mendu,
L. Barnes, and D. Brown, “Text Classiﬁcation Algorithms: A Survey,”
Information, vol. 10, no. 4, p. 150, Apr. 2019, number: 4 Publisher:
Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mdpi.com/2078-2489/10/4/150
[9] S. Lai, L. Xu, K. Liu, and J. Zhao, “Recurrent Convolutional
Neural Networks for Text Classiﬁcation,” in Twenty-Ninth AAAI
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Feb. 2015. [Online]. Available:
https://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/AAAI/AAAI15/paper/view/9745
[10] C. Li, G. Zhan, and Z. Li, “News Text Classiﬁcation Based on
Improved Bi-LSTM-CNN,” in 2018 9th International Conference
on Information Technology in Medicine and Education (ITME).
Hangzhou:
IEEE,
Oct.
2018,
pp.
890–893.
[Online].
Available:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8589431/
[11] A.
Vaswani,
N.
Shazeer,
N.
Parmar,
J.
Uszkoreit,
L.
Jones,
A. N. Gomez, . Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is All you
Need,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 30,
2017. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/
hash/3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Abstract.html
[12] S. Zheng and M. Yang, “A New Method of Improving BERT for Text
Classiﬁcation,” in Intelligence Science and Big Data Engineering. Big
Data and Machine Learning, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
Z. Cui, J. Pan, S. Zhang, L. Xiao, and J. Yang, Eds.
Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2019, pp. 442–452.
[13] W. Li, S. Gao, H. Zhou, Z. Huang, K. Zhang, and W. Li, “The Automatic
Text Classiﬁcation Method Based on BERT and Feature Union,” in
2019 IEEE 25th International Conference on Parallel and Distributed
Systems (ICPADS).
Tianjin, China: IEEE, Dec. 2019, pp. 774–777.
[Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8975793/
[14] R. Dzisevic and D. Sesok, “Text Classiﬁcation using Different Feature
Extraction Approaches,” in 2019 Open Conference of Electrical,
Electronic and Information Sciences (eStream).
Vilnius, Lithuania:
IEEE, Apr., pp. 1–4. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/8732167/
[15] G. Kou, P. Yang, Y. Peng, F. Xiao, Y. Chen, and F. E. Alsaadi,
“Evaluation of feature selection methods for text classiﬁcation with
small datasets using multiple criteria decision-making methods,” Applied
Soft Computing, vol. 86, p. 105836, Jan. 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1568494619306179
[16] C. Shorten, T. M. Khoshgoftaar, and B. Furht, “Text Data Augmentation
for Deep Learning,” Journal of Big Data, vol. 8, no. 1, p. 101,
Dec. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://journalofbigdata.springeropen.
com/articles/10.1186/s40537-021-00492-0
[17] R. Sennrich, B. Haddow, and A. Birch, “Improving Neural Machine
Translation Models with Monolingual Data,” 2015, publisher: arXiv
Version Number: 4. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.06709
[18] “Spark OCR.” [Online]. Available: https://www.johnsnowlabs.com/
spark-ocr/
[19] D. Cer, Y. Yang, S. Kong, N. Hua, N. Limtiaco, R. S. John, N. Constant,
M. Guajardo-Cespedes, S. Yuan, C. Tar, Y. Sung, B. Strope, and
R. Kurzweil, “Universal sentence encoder,” CoRR, vol. abs/1803.11175,
2018. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.11175
[20] R. S. Sinha, S.-M. Lee, M. Rim, and S.-H. Hwang, “Data augmenta-
tion schemes for deep learning in an indoor positioning application,”
Electronics, vol. 8, no. 5, p. 554, 2019.
[21] H. Rizk, M. Torki, and M. Youssef, “CellinDeep: Robust and accurate
cellular-based indoor localization via deep learning,” IEEE Sensors
Journal, vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 2305–2312, 2018.
[22] Imagenet large scale visual recognition challenge. [Online]. Available:
https://www.image-net.org/challenges/LSVRC/
[23] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2016.
[24] C. Szegedy, W. Liu, Y. Jia, P. Sermanet, S. Reed, D. Anguelov, D. Erhan,
V. Vanhoucke, and A. Rabinovich, “Going deeper with convolutions,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 2015, pp. 1–9.
©2022 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or
reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.
