Title: Filter Drug-induced Liver Injury Literature with Natural Language Processing and Ensemble Learning
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2203.11015v1
--------------------------------------------------

1
Filter Drug-induced Liver Injury Literature with
Natural Language Processing and Ensemble
Learning
Xianghao Zhan, Fanjin Wang, Olivier Gevaert
Abstract—Drug-induced liver injury (DILI) describes the ad-
verse effects of drugs that damage liver. Life-threatening results
including liver failure or death were also reported in severe
DILI cases. Therefore, DILI-related events are strictly monitored
for all approved drugs and the liver toxicity became impor-
tant assessments for new drug candidates. These DILI-related
reports are documented in hospital records, in clinical trial
results, and also in research papers that contain preliminary
in vitro and in vivo experiments. Conventionally, data extraction
from previous publications relies heavily on resource-demanding
manual labelling, which considerably decreased the efﬁciency of
the information extraction process. The recent development of
artiﬁcial intelligence, particularly, the rise of natural language
processing (NLP) techniques, enabled the automatic processing
of biomedical texts. In this study, based on around 28,000 papers
(titles and abstracts) provided by the Critical Assessment of
Massive Data Analysis (CAMDA) challenge, we benchmarked
model performances on ﬁltering out DILI literature. Among four
word vectorization techniques, the model using term frequency-
inverse document frequency (TF-IDF) and logistic regression
outperformed others with an accuracy of 0.957 with our in-
house test set. Furthermore, an ensemble model with similar
overall performances was implemented and was ﬁne-tuned to
lower the false-negative cases to avoid neglecting potential DILI
reports. The ensemble model achieved a high accuracy of 0.954
and an F1 score of 0.955 in the hold-out validation data provided
by the CAMDA committee. Moreover, important words in posi-
tive/negative predictions were identiﬁed via model interpretation.
Overall, the ensemble model reached satisfactory classiﬁcation
results, which can be further used by researchers to rapidly
ﬁlter DILI-related literature.
Index Terms—drug-induced liver injury, natural language
processing, ensemble learning, word2vec, sentence embedding
I. INTRODUCTION
D
URG-induced liver injury (DILI) is deﬁned as the un-
expected adverse reaction of the liver to drugs. DILI is
a common and critical cause of liver injury because the liver
plays a key role in drug metabolism [1], [2]. Brieﬂy, liver
toxicity caused by drugs can be classiﬁed into two types:
intrinsic and idiosyncratic. Intrinsic liver toxicity of drugs
is more predictable and is directly related to the dosage of
a speciﬁc drug. The damage to liver occurs within a short
X. Zhan is with the Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University,
Stanford, 94305, USA.
F. Wang is with the Department of Pharmaceutics, UCL School of Phar-
macy, University College London, 29-39 Brunswick Square, London WC1N
1AX, UK.
O. Gevaert is with the Department of Biomedical Informatics, Stanford
University, Stanford, 94305, USA
(Corresponding Author: O. Gevaert e-mail: ogevaert@stanford.edu)
time window, typically several hours after administration of
the drugs. In comparison, idiosyncratic liver toxicity is more
patient-speciﬁc and has a longer onset of occurrence. For
drugs with high lipophilicity, idiosyncratic liver damage could
be triggered even below the recommended daily dosage [3].
The severity of DILI can be different among different patients
considering the interaction of genetic and environmental fac-
tors [2]. Although most patients can recover from DILI, DILI
cases may lead to acute liver failure [1], [4]. For example,
the intrinsic liver toxicity of paracetamol, often caused by
overdosing, is reported to account for 73.7% of acute liver
injury and acute liver failure in Scotland from 1992 to 2014
[5]. Additionally, approximately 75% of the idiosyncratic drug
reactions result in liver transplantation or death [1]. Therefore,
DILI has become one of the most common reasons that reject
the promising novel drug candidates and is strictly evaluated
during the drug development process [2].
The complex mechanism of DILI and the severity of the
DILI consequences call for a better prediction of DILI [2].
However, the majority of DILI results from clinical practices
or experimental studies have been reported and recorded in the
free text of publications. Conventionally, scientiﬁc publications
need to be manually checked and processed by researchers
for these DILI-related results. However, thousands of new
articles are published in journals on a daily basis, let alone
millions of previous publications in the PubMed archive. This
makes it almost impossible for manual inspection. Recently,
the rapid development of natural language processing (NLP)
technology has enabled data mining applications based on free
text. To give some examples, long short-term memory (LSTM)
structure in recurrent neural networks (RNN) allows the under-
standing of long-term dependencies in texts [6]. Bidirectional
encoder representation from transformers (BERT) has been
developed as a pre-trained language model for understanding
text information [7]. Generally, in order to use these learning
algorithms, words will be ﬁrstly converted into vectors using
word vectorization (embedding) techniques like bag-of-words
(BOW), term frequency-inverse document frequency (TF-
IDF), and Word2Vec. BOW is the most straightforward word
embedding method. It counts the time that a word appears in
the document. However, this leads to a very sparse feature
matrix as only a few words in the whole vocabulary (the
collection of words) will appear in the document. As its name
suggests, TF-IDF uses the time frequency and the inverse
document frequency to represent a word. It assigns more
importance to less-frequently occurring words which might
arXiv:2203.11015v1  [cs.IR]  9 Mar 2022
2
contain more meaningful information in a document. On top
of these methods, Word2Vec embedding uses a pre-trained
neural network to vectorize words to ﬁxed-length vectors.
These techniques made it possible to process scientiﬁc publi-
cations automatically. For example, Wang et al. constructed
an NLP model to extract clinical information to support
clinical decisions [8]. Zhan et al. used TF-IDF as the word
embedding and logistic regression to extract ICD-10 codes of
common cardiovascular disease from electronic health records
[9]. Thus, it is promising to utilize NLP techniques to expedite
the labelling process of the publications with DILI results and
enable researchers to fast ﬁlter the literature.
In this study with the data from the National Institute of
Health (NIH) LiverTox database [10], we developed a model
to ﬁlter the DILI literature from irrelevant literature based on
the title and abstract of publications with ensemble learning
and multiple text vectorization algorithms in NLP. The model
showed high classiﬁcation performance and interpretable re-
sults.
II. METHODS
A. Data Description and Data Pre-processing
The dataset for modelling comprises approximately 14,000
DILI-related papers (which are referred to as positive samples)
and approximately 14,000 papers irrelevant to DILI (which are
referred to as negative samples). For the contest released by
the Annual International Conference on Critical Assessment
of Massive Data Analysis (CAMDA 2021), only 50% of the
positive samples (7,177) and negative samples (7,026) was
released while the remaining samples were held out for model
assessment. For the hold-out test data, which we refer to as the
hold-out test dataset 1 in this study, there are 14,211 samples
with labels masked to test the model performance on unseen
data. For each sample, there are the publication titles and/or
the abstracts. The challenge also releases an additional hold-
out test data set with 2,000 abstracts, which we refer to as the
hold-out test dataset 2 in this study.
We partitioned the published data (excluding the hold-out
datasets) into 80% training and 20% validation data. We pre-
processed the free text by lowercasing, removing punctuation,
numeric, special characters, multiple white spaces, stop words,
and ﬁnally tokenized the text with Gensim library on Python
3.7 [11]. We also performed stemming by changing the terms
into their word stems (e.g. “hepatotoxicity” to “hepatotox”) to
reduce the number of distinct terms for sake of avoiding model
overﬁtting. We regarded stemming as a model hyperparameter
tuned based on the performance on the validation set.
B. Text Vectorization
To extract features from the free-text literature, we have
used several different text vectorization algorithms to transfer
the text into numerical features (i.e. word/sentence vectors):
Bag-of-words (BOW), term frequency-inverse document fre-
quency (TF-IDF), word2vec (W2V), and sent2vec (S2V).
Both BOW [12] and TF-IDF [13] are based on word counts.
They are among the simple word vectorization algorithms
which are widely used to classify text. As a basic word
vectorization approach, BOW enumerates the number of each
term’s occurrences in a piece of text and uses the number of
occurrences of each term as the feature. Since the BOW relies
on the counts of all terms, the dimensionality of the features
from the extracted text equals the number of all different terms
in the training corpus. Based on the basic features extracted
based on BOW, TF-IDF further regularized the features by
calculating the ratio of term frequency (TF), which denotes the
number of term occurrences, and inverse document frequency
(IDF), which denotes the number of text samples that contain
this term. As a result, the value of a feature for a sample
increases as the number of occurrences in the text increases
but decreases as the total number of texts that include the
term increases. With the regularization, the TF-IDF algorithms
put more emphasis on the rare terms over the entire training
corpus. In this study, after we applyied the BOW and TF-IDF
word vectorization algorithms, the feature dimensions were
30,753 and 42,452 with/without stemming.
Word2vec (W2V) [14] is a neural-network-based vector-
ization algorithm. Without directly relying on the number
of occurrences of distinct terms, W2V tries to create an
embedding matrix E of the term embeddings with a pre-set for
all the terms that occurred in the training corpus. Then, W2V
optimizes the embedding matrix E and ﬁnally when applying
the embedding matrix for downstream tasks, W2V maps the
terms to their associated embedding vectors in the embedding
matrix. The embedding matrix is the goal of optimization in
the W2V training process. The randomly initialized embedding
matrix is learned with shallow neural networks based on
simple prediction tasks, such as the continuous bag-of-words
(CBOW) and the continuous skip-gram. In this study, we used
two pre-trained biomedical W2V models: one was trained on a
corpus from Wikipedia, PubMed, and PMC (W2V1) [15], and
the other was trained on a corpus from PubMed and MIMIC-
III (W2V2) [16]. Both models include 16,545,452 terms with
an embedding dimension of 200. After converting each term
in a text into a 200-dimension embedding, an average of all
the term embeddings was taken as the embedding for a text.
S2V is another unsupervised sentence embedding algorithm
that allows researchers to compose sentence embeddings us-
ing word vectors along with n-gram embeddings [17]. It
simultaneously trains the composition and the embedding
vectors. S2V can be regarded as an extension of the word
contexts from CBOW to a larger sentence context, while the
sentence words are speciﬁcally optimized via an unsupervised
objective function. In this study, we applied a biomedical
S2V model trained on PubMed and MIMIC-III corpora with
a dimensionality of 700 for a text [18].
C. Classiﬁcation Model Development and Assessment
In the development of the DILI literature classiﬁcation
model, we adopted two protocols: 1) non-ensemble learn-
ing, where we developed classiﬁers based on 80% of the
training data and the four different vectorization algorithms;
2) ensemble learning, where we further separated the 80%
training data into 60% data for training separate learners
and 20% data for training the meta-learner. The separate
3
learners output the predicted probabilities on the samples for
meta-learner training while the meta-learner aggregates the
predicted probabilities. The rationale for developing ensemble
learning models is because the different embedding algorithms
contain much diversity as they adopted different frameworks to
compute the word vectors and document vectors. The diversity
of the separate learners may aid in boosting the performance
of document classiﬁcation via the fusion of predicted prob-
abilities given by different models. It is worth noting that,
in the ensemble learning protocol, we discarded the BOW
model because it generally performs inferiorly compared with
TF-IDF while being similar to TF-IDF as word-count-based
algorithms [19]. Additionally, we added three different weights
to the positive/negative classes for the TF-IDF/W2V/S2V
models in the ensemble learning, to add divergence and focus
more on the positive cases, because in a real-world application
setting, considering the broad range of research ﬁelds archived
in PubMed, the positive case prevalence is likely to be much
lower.
In the development of separate learners and in the non-
ensemble learning protocol, we adopted the logistic regression
(LR) and random forest (RF) models as the classiﬁcation al-
gorithms. These two algorithms were applied because of their
interpretability of important features in the decision-making
process. In the meta-learner training, we used LR to reduce
the variance and avoid overﬁtting caused by more ﬂexible
classiﬁers such as RF and support vector machine (SVM). The
hyperparameters including the strength of L2 penalty, different
class weights for LR, the number of estimators, the number
of maximum splits for RF, were tuned via ﬁve-fold cross-
validation on the corresponding part of training data, with
classiﬁcation accuracy as the optimization goal.
To evaluate the model performance, on the 20% validation
data partitioned from the released dataset (for which we know
the labels), we calculated the classiﬁcation accuracy, the area
under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC),
the area under the precision-recall curve (AUPRC), and the F1
score. AUROC is the area under the curve in which the x-axis
denotes the false positive rate and the y-axis denotes the true
positive rate (TPR), while AUPRC is the area under the curve
in which the x-axis denotes the recall and the y-axis denotes
the precision. The reasons why we adopted both AUROC
and AUPRC in evaluating our models are: ﬁrstly, AUROC
has been a widely used metric in evaluating binary classiﬁers
without reliance on the decision threshold set on predicted
class probability; secondly, AUPRC was also used in this study
because it is more sensitive to the prevalence and can better
reﬂect model performance in an imbalanced data set [20].
Therefore, AUPRC and F1-score were particularly emphasized
as in real-world applications, the prevalence of the DILI-
positive cases can be much lower and the AUPRC and F1 score
can be more comprehensive in evaluating model performance
with different weights on positive/negative cases. For the hold-
out validation dataset 1 and dataset 2, the accuracy, F1 score,
precision, and recall were calculated to validate the model
performance on unseen data.
Fig. 1.
The t-SNE visualization of the text vectors of the training and
validation data. (A) TF-IDF text vector visualization; (B) S2V text vector
visualization.
III. RESULTS
A. Data Visualization
First, we visualized the text vectors given by TF-IDF and
S2V as examples, with the unsupervised non-linear dimen-
sionality reduction method: t-distributed stochastic neighbour
embedding (t-SNE), which has been shown effective in vi-
sualizing high-dimensional data [19], [21]. The results show
that the positive samples and the negative samples cluster
separately indicating the potential feasibility of classifying
the DILI-positive samples (Fig. 1). It should be noted that
the t-SNE visualization is completely unsupervised and the
clusters shown are labelled with the ground truth labels from
the dataset.
B. Model Performance on Validation Data
With text vectors, we built classiﬁers based on each of the
four vectorization algorithms. The results show that besides
the ensemble learning model, TF-IDF outperformed the other
models with the highest AUROC (0.990), accuracy (0.957),
4
Classifier
Vectorizer
AUROC
Accuracy
AUPRC
F1 Score
LR
BOW
0.985
0.950
0.985
0.951
LR
TF-IDF
0.990
0.957
0.990
0.958
LR
W2V1
0.979
0.939
0.979
0.940
LR
W2V2
0.981
0.942
0.982
0.943
LR
S2V
0.986
0.951
0.987
0.952
LR
Ensemble
0.989
0.957
0.990
0.958
A
B
C
Fig. 2.
The classiﬁcation performance of the models. (A) The table of classiﬁcation performance metrics of different vectorization models. The receiver
operating characteristic curves (B), and the precision-recall curves (C) of the different models.
AUPRC (0.990), and F1-score (0.958) (Fig. 2). The RF models
did not outperform the LR models and were therefore not
shown and used in our ensemble models.
Additionally, after plotting the confusion matrices, it can be
seen that among the separate learners, the TF-IDF model has
the fewest false-positive cases while the S2V model has the
fewest false-negative cases (Fig. 3). We plotted the Venn plots
of the false predictions (Fig. 3A). According to the results,
although most false-positive and false-negative cases overlap
across different word-vectorization models, there is diver-
gence among different models, which motivates the ensemble
learning protocol which aggregates the diverse knowledge of
diverse learners for potentially better model performance.
We then built the ensemble classiﬁer based on TF-IDF, two
W2V models, and S2V. The results show that it has reached
the same highest AUPRC, accuracy, and F1-score as the TF-
IDF model, with a similar AUROC (Fig. 2). According to
the confusion matrices (Fig. 3), the ensemble model shows
the fewest false-negative cases and a decent number of false-
positive cases. Based on the hyperparameter tuning processes,
the hyperparameters of the ﬁnal ensemble model has the
strength of L2 penalty at 10 and the class weight at 1:1. The
hyperparameters of the 12 separate LR models leveraged in
the ensemble models: strength of L2 penalty: 0.1 for the nine
TF-IDF/W2V1/W2V2 models, 1 for three S2V models.
C. Model Interpretation
On the validation data, we interpreted the best-performing
models of TF-IDF and ensemble learning. For the TF-IDF
model, we bootstrapped the training data 1000 times, extracted
the coefﬁcients of LR, and averaged the coefﬁcients which
correspond to each term. We then ranked the mean coefﬁ-
cients and selected the top 10 most important words for the
positive prediction and negative prediction respectively. The
results show the important words in the stemmed version: the
important words for the positive prediction such as “safety”,
“hepatotoxic/hepatotoxicity”, and “liver” show clear meaning
related to DILI, illustrating model interpretability (Fig. 4A).
Additionally, we visualized the contribution of different vec-
torization models in the ensemble learning in a similar manner
of bootstrapping on the meta-learner training data and ﬁnding
the normalized LR coefﬁcients (Fig. 4B). The results show that
all coefﬁcients are positive indicating the positive contributions
of different text vectorization models. Based on these results,
it is shown that among these models, TF-IDF models and S2V
models perform the best.
D. Model Performance on Hold-out Data and Additional
Hold-out Test Data
After testing the models on the validation data, we picked
up the two best models: the TF-IDF model and the ensemble
model and tested them on the hold-out test data. The perfor-
mance on the hold-out test data is shown in Table 1 and it
should be noted that the labels on the hold-out datasets are
completely blinded and only the performance metrics can be
given upon the submission of predictions. On the hold-out
test dataset 1, both models reach the same accuracy of 0.954,
while the ensemble model reaches a higher precision of 0.960,
and the TF-IDF model reaches a higher recall of 0.961. On
the additional hold-out test data (hold-out test dataset 2) with
5
False Positive
False Negative
A
B
Fig. 3. The confusion matrices and the numbers of false-positive cases and false-negative cases of different models. (A) The Venn plot of the false-positive
cases and false-negative cases given by four separate learners. (B) The confusion matrices of the six different algorithms, top, from left to right: BOW, TF-IDF,
W2V1, bottom: from left to right, W2V2, S2V, and ensemble learning models.
abstract only, the TF-IDF model outperformed the ensemble
model with higher accuracy of 0.927, a higher F1 score of
0.930 and a higher precision of 0.886, while the ensemble
showed a higher recall of 0.988. Generally, on the two datasets
of the hold-out data released by the challenge, both models
show high performance in classifying the literature with high
accuracy and F1 score, which may enable researchers to ac-
curately ﬁlter the DILI-negative literature for further analysis.
IV. DISCUSSION
In this study, to develop a machine-learning-based model
to automatically ﬁlter drug-induced liver injury (DILI) related
publications out of the irrelevant publications, four different
natural language processing (NLP) text vectorization methods
TABLE I
THE PERFORMANCE OF THE TF-IDF MODEL AND THE ENSEMBLE MODEL
ON THE HOLD-OUT DATA (1) AND ADDITIONAL HOLD-OUT DATA (2)
Model
Accuracy
F1 Score
Precision
Recall
TF-IDF-1
0.954
0.954
0.947
0.961
Ensemble-1
0.954
0.955
0.960
0.950
TF-IDF-2
0.927
0.930
0.886
0.979
Ensemble-2
0.900
0.908
0.840
0.988
were used to vectorize scientiﬁc publications. Then, logistic
regression models and random forest models were built based
on the text vectors and ensemble learning, to predict whether
the publications are related to DILI or not. The TF-IDF model
and the ensemble learning model with logistic regression
6
1-3: TF-IDF models with class weight 1:1, 2:1, 5:1
4-6: W2V1 models with class weight 1:1, 2:1, 5:1
7-9: W2V2 models with class weight 1:1, 2:1, 5:1
10-12: S2V models with class weight 1:1, 2:1, 5:1
A
B
Fig. 4. Interpretation of the important words for classiﬁcation based on TF-IDF and the contribution of separate learners in the ensemble learning model. (A)
The top 10 most important words for positive predictions and negative predictions with the distribution of logistic regression coefﬁcients in 2,000 bootstrapping
experiments. (B) The normalized logistic regression coefﬁcients of separate learners in 2,000 bootstrapping experiments.
classiﬁers reached the highest classiﬁcation performance in
terms of accuracy, AUPRC, and F1 score on the validation
set. Both models show high classiﬁcation performance on
the hold-out data. Additionally, the TF-IDF model is also
interpretable with the important words for making positive
predictions showing meanings clearly related to DILI, and
important words for making negative predictions not directly
related to DILI. As DILI, which may cause acute liver failure
and even death, has become the major killer of prospective new
drug candidates and most DILI research results are in the free-
text format in scientiﬁc publications, the models developed
in this study would enable researchers to fast ﬁlter the DILI
literature without time-consuming manual work.
The reason for using an ensemble model is that the different
text vectorizations are believed to capture different details in
the sentence. The concept is validated by the Venn plot in
Fig. 3A which showed overlapping false negatives and false
positives of predictions given by models built on various text
vectorizations. On top of these overlapping wrong predictions,
different text vectorizations also owned their distinctive false
positives and false negatives. By using a meta-learner in
the ensemble learning process to adopt multiple predictions
from different models, this ensemble model could potentially
compensate for limitations and boost the strength of differ-
ent text vectorizations in this task. And this is evidenced
by its better prediction results on the hold-out data (Table
1). More importantly, on the validation data, the ensemble
learning strategy yields fewer false-negative rate (reduced to
1.69%, while the individual word-vectorization model can only
reach 2.29%). The fewer false negative predictions better help
prevent the missing of DILI-information for researchers, which
can be critical for the drug candidates.
As for the application of this study, ﬁrstly, the models
developed in this study can be applied to ﬁlter DILI liter-
ature for drug discovery researchers from the large corpus
of publications and monitor the latest research on DILI, as
assistant systems for information retrieval. Secondly, these
literature-ﬁltering models can lay a foundation for future
quantitative structure-property relationship (QSPR) modelling
in drug discovery because the systems can expedite the DILI-
labelling process for different drug candidates effectively [22]–
[24]. Furthermore, this paradigm of literature-ﬁltering system
development can be expanded to other ﬁelds of biomedical
research as well.
Although the models developed in this study have shown
good classiﬁcation performance, there are limitations in this
study that can be further addressed. Firstly, in this study,
we mainly applied the context-independent word vectorization
and document embedding algorithms to get the features for
classiﬁcation modelling. We haven’t tested transformer-based
models such as BERT and GPT-2 or the recurrent-neural-
network-based models in this study for the following reasons:
1) the current classiﬁcation performance has been satisfactory
on both the validation set and the two hold-out test sets
given by the CAMDA challenge; 2) there have been recent
reports which show that the transformer-based models did
not show signiﬁcant improvement over conventional models
[17], [25], [26]; 3) the large pre-trained models are complex
models which entails a large corpus for ﬁne-tuning and large
computational resources as well, which can be hard in this
7
setting as there are only thousands of training data in the cor-
pus; 4) the transformer-based and recurrent-neural-network-
based models are not easily interpretable when compared
with the conventional word-vector-based method with logistic
regression and random forest classiﬁers. In the future, more
studies are warranted to try out context-dependent sentence
embeddings. For example, including a pre-trained transformer-
based model in ensemble learning that may further improve
the classiﬁcation performance.
Secondly, the training corpus is relatively small for the
model training when compared with the majority of natu-
ral language processing applications. In this study, we have
adopted the pre-trained biomedical word/sentence embedding
models such as S2V and W2V to address the issue of limited
training data. In the future, a larger training corpus can be
made with the addition of multiple additional biomedical text
corpus (which may be referred to as unlabelled data for semi-
supervised learning or data augmentation) to further improve
the model performances on real-world applications. These
supplementary data are not necessarily directly related to the
DILI topic, but this unbalanced training set better represents
the actual application scenario where the majority of the
publications on PubMed are irrelevant to DILI.
V. CONCLUSION
In this study, several models were developed to ﬁlter DILI-
related literature based on four text vectorization techniques
(bag-of-words, TF-IDF, two biomedical word2vec models,
biomedical sent2vec model) and ensemble learning. The model
with TF-IDF and LR outperformed others with an AUROC of
0.990, an accuracy of 0.957, and an AUPRC of 0.990. An
ensemble learning model with overall similar performance but
the fewest false-negative cases was developed based on the
prediction probability from 12 individual word-vectorization
models, which shows the highest accuracy (0.954) and F1
score on the hold-out data (0.955). Both models performed
well on the two hold-out test data with each model taking a
lead in different classiﬁcation metrics (the ensemble learning
model accuracy: 0.954, F1-score: 0.955, precision: 0.960,
recall: 0.950). The development of both TF-IDF and ensemble
models enables the users to apply these two models for
applications and the ensemble-learning-based model enables
a more efﬁcient literature ﬁlter with fewer false negatives
for researchers who focus on the DILI in the ﬁeld of drug
discovery.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank the support from the Department of
Bioengineering and the Department of Biomedical Data Sci-
ence, Stanford University. The authors also thank the CAMDA
challenge for the DILI literature data.
REFERENCES
[1] W. M. Lee, “Drug-Induced Hepatotoxicity,” New England Journal of
Medicine, vol. 349, no. 5, pp. 474–485, Jul. 2003. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMra021844
[2] R. J. Andrade, N. Chalasani, E. S. Bj¨ornsson, A. Suzuki, G. A.
Kullak-Ublick, P. B. Watkins, H. Devarbhavi, M. Merz, M. I. Lucena,
N. Kaplowitz, and G. P. Aithal, “Drug-induced liver injury,” Nature
Reviews Disease Primers, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1–22, Aug. 2019. [Online].
Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41572-019-0105-0
[3] M. Chen, J. Borlak, and W. Tong, “High lipophilicity and high daily
dose of oral medications are associated with signiﬁcant risk for drug-
induced liver injury,” Hepatology (Baltimore, Md.), vol. 58, no. 1, pp.
388–396, Jul. 2013.
[4] N.
Kaplowitz,
“Drug-Induced
Liver
Injury,”
Clinical
Infectious
Diseases, vol. 38, no. Supplement 2, pp. S44–S48, Mar. 2004.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1086/381446
[5] M. C. Donnelly, J. S. Davidson, K. Martin, A. Baird, P. C. Hayes, and
K. J. Simpson, “Acute liver failure in Scotland: changes in aetiology
and outcomes over time (the Scottish Look-Back Study),” Alimentary
Pharmacology & Therapeutics, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 833–843, Mar. 2017.
[6] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long Short-Term Memory,” Neural
Computation, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, Nov. 1997.
[7] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding,”
arXiv:1810.04805 [cs], May 2019. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/
abs/1810.04805
[8] Y. Wang, M. Rastegar-Mojarad, R. Komandur-Elayavilli, S. Liu, and
H. Liu, “An Ensemble Model of Clinical Information Extraction and
Information Retrieval for Clinical Decision Support,” in Preceedings of
TREC Conference.
National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST), 2016, p. 10.
[9] X.
Zhan,
M.
Humbert-Droz,
P.
Mukherjee,
and
O.
Gevaert,
“Structuring clinical text with AI: Old versus new natural language
processing techniques evaluated on eight common cardiovascular
diseases,” Patterns, vol. 2, no. 7, Jul. 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.cell.com/patterns/abstract/S2666-3899(21)00122-7
[10] J. H. Hoofnagle, J. Serrano, J. E. Knoben, and V. J. Navarro,
“LiverTox,” Hepatology (Baltimore, Md.), vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 873–874,
Mar. 2013. [Online]. Available: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC5044298/
[11] R. ˇReh˚uˇrek and P. Sojka, “Software Framework for Topic Modelling
with Large Corpora,” in Proceedings of the LREC 2010 Workshop on
New Challenges for NLP Frameworks.
Valletta, Malta: ELRA, May
2010, pp. 45–50.
[12] Z. S. Harris, “Distributional Structure,” WORD, vol. 10, no. 2-3,
pp. 146–162, Aug. 1954. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1080/
00437956.1954.11659520
[13] K. Sparck Jones, “A Statistical Interpretation of Term Speciﬁcity and Its
Application in Retrieval,” Journal of Documentation, vol. 28, no. 1, pp.
11–21, Jan. 1972. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1108/eb026526
[14] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Dis-
tributed Representations of Words and Phrases and their Composition-
ality,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 26.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2013.
[15] S. Pyysalo, F. Ginter, H. Moen, T. Salakoski, and S. Ananiadou,
“Distributional semantics resources for biomedical text processing,”
2013.
[16] Y. Zhang, Q. Chen, Z. Yang, H. Lin, and Z. Lu, “BioWordVec,
improving biomedical word embeddings with subword information and
MeSH,” Scientiﬁc Data, vol. 6, no. 1, p. 52, May 2019. [Online].
Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41597-019-0055-0
[17] M. Pagliardini, P. Gupta, and M. Jaggi, “Unsupervised Learning
of Sentence Embeddings using Compositional n-Gram Features,”
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pp. 528–540, 2018. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1703.02507
[18] Q. Chen, Y. Peng, and Z. Lu, “BioSentVec: creating sentence embed-
dings for biomedical texts,” in 2019 IEEE International Conference on
Healthcare Informatics (ICHI), Jun. 2019, pp. 1–5.
[19] L. v. d. Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing Data using t-SNE,” Journal
of Machine Learning Research, vol. 9, no. 86, pp. 2579–2605, 2008.
[Online]. Available: http://jmlr.org/papers/v9/vandermaaten08a.html
[20] J. Davis and M. Goadrich, “The relationship between Precision-Recall
and ROC curves,” in Proceedings of the 23rd international conference
on Machine learning, ser. ICML ’06. New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, Jun. 2006, pp. 233–240. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/1143844.1143874
[21] L. Liu, X. Zhan, R. Wu, X. Guan, Z. Wang, W. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Luo,
and G. Li, “Boost ai power: data augmentation strategies with unlabelled
data and conformal prediction, a case in alternative herbal medicine
8
discrimination with electronic nose,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.03088,
2021.
[22] V. Tshitoyan, J. Dagdelen, L. Weston, A. Dunn, Z. Rong, O. Kononova,
K. A. Persson, G. Ceder, and A. Jain, “Unsupervised word embeddings
capture latent knowledge from materials science literature,” Nature,
vol. 571, no. 7763, pp. 95–98, Jul. 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-019-1335-8
[23] Y.-C. Lo, S. E. Rensi, W. Torng, and R. B. Altman, “Machine
learning in chemoinformatics and drug discovery,” Drug Discovery
Today, vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 1538–1546, Aug. 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1359644617304695
[24] M. Elbadawi, S. Gaisford, and A. W. Basit, “Advanced machine-
learning techniques in drug discovery,” Drug Discovery Today, Dec.
2020. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1359644620305213
[25] J. Wieting, M. Bansal, K. Gimpel, and K. Livescu, “Towards universal
paraphrastic sentence embeddings,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.08198,
2015.
[26] S. Arora, Y. Liang, and T. Ma, “A simple but tough-to-beat baseline for
sentence embeddings,” 2016.
