Title: Selecting Informative Contexts Improves Language Model Finetuning
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2005.00175v3
--------------------------------------------------

Selecting Informative Contexts Improves Language Model Fine-tuning
Richard Antonello
UT Austin
rjantonello@utexas.edu
Nicole M. Beckage
Intel Labs
nicole.beckage@intel.com
Javier S. Turek
Intel Labs
javier.turek@intel.com
Alexander G. Huth
UT Austin
huth@cs.utexas.edu
Abstract
Language
model
ﬁne-tuning
is
essential
for
modern
natural
language
processing,
but is computationally expensive and time-
consuming. Further, the effectiveness of ﬁne-
tuning is limited by the inclusion of training
examples that negatively affect performance.
Here we present a general ﬁne-tuning method
that we call information gain ﬁltration for im-
proving the overall training efﬁciency and ﬁnal
performance of language model ﬁne-tuning.
We deﬁne the information gain of an exam-
ple as the improvement on a validation met-
ric after training on that example.
A sec-
ondary learner is then trained to approximate
this quantity. During ﬁne-tuning, this learner
selects informative examples and skips unin-
formative ones. We show that our method has
consistent improvement across datasets, ﬁne-
tuning tasks, and language model architec-
tures. For example, we achieve a median per-
plexity of 54.0 on a books dataset compared to
57.3 for standard ﬁne-tuning. We present sta-
tistical evidence that offers insight into the im-
provements of our method over standard ﬁne-
tuning. The generality of our method leads us
to propose a new paradigm for language model
ﬁne-tuning — we encourage researchers to re-
lease pretrained secondary learners on com-
mon corpora to promote efﬁcient and effec-
tive ﬁne-tuning, thereby improving the perfor-
mance and reducing the overall energy foot-
print of language model ﬁne-tuning.
1
Introduction
Language modeling is the task of generating lan-
guage from context. This is often framed as an
autoregressive task, where a model predicts the
conditional probability of the next word based on
the sequence of previously observed or generated
tokens.
Language modeling has seen a recent
surge in relevance thanks to its success as a pre-
training objective for self-supervised representa-
tion learning. The most prominent language mod-
els today are Transformer-based models (Vaswani
et al., 2017) such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2019)
and GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019).
Language models are most commonly trained
with backpropagation using traditional NLP loss
functions such as cross entropy. These loss func-
tions are designed so that the models are rewarded
for assigning high probability to text that appears
commonly in the training corpus. The energy and
computational costs of training a state-of-the-art
language model from scratch are very high, to
the point of impracticality for most researchers.
One recent estimate suggests that training a sin-
gle state-of-the-art model with architecture search
takes more energy than ﬁve cars will use in their
entire lifetimes (Strubell et al., 2019).
In prac-
tice, this cost is sidestepped by pretraining, where
a language model is trained once and then released
publicly. This language model can then be up-
dated for use in other tasks through ﬁne-tuning.
For example, a generic language model can be
ﬁne-tuned to generate text that matches the style
and syntax of any new corpus (Howard and Ruder,
2018). While better than training from scratch, the
cost of ﬁne-tuning such large networks is still rel-
atively high. Fine-tuning to convergence for a sin-
gle task can easily take in excess of a day on multi-
ple energy-intensive GPUs (Strubell et al., 2019).
Recent work analyzing the ﬁne-tuning process
has shown that it has high variability between
runs and is particularly sensitive to data ordering
(Dodge et al., 2020). Those authors propose to
overcome this variability by training models us-
ing many random seeds and then only keeping the
best, effectively trading computational efﬁciency
for model performance. While this improves per-
formance, the reasons for the high variability be-
tween random seeds have yet to be explored. We
hypothesize that much of this variability can be ex-
arXiv:2005.00175v3  [cs.CL]  19 May 2022
plained by the random selection of highly “infor-
mative” training examples, which most effectively
capture low-level distributional statistics of the tar-
get corpus. If this is the case, then it should be
possible to quickly screen for informative training
examples, ensuring high performance at reduced
cost.
In this paper, we suggest replacing the retro-
spective approach of testing many random seeds
(Dodge et al., 2020) with a prospective approach
to improving the effectiveness of language model
ﬁne-tuning.
Our approach uses a secondary
learner to estimate the usefulness of each train-
ing example, and then selects only informative ex-
amples for training. We show that this technique
works well and is applicable in a variety of ﬁne-
tuning settings. We examine why it works well,
and present evidence that supports our hypothesis
about informative examples explaining data order-
ing effects. In addition to performance gains, this
method may mitigate the energy impact of deep
neural network language modeling, as we require
fewer backpropagation steps than other techniques
that trade computational power for ﬁne-tuning per-
formance.
2
Related Work
Several methods have recently been proposed to
improve language model ﬁne-tuning performance.
Lee et al. (2020) proposed a technique based on
neural network dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014)
for regularizing ﬁnetuned language models that
involved stochastically mixing the parameters of
multiple language models for the same domain,
and further demonstrated the usefulness of pre-
trained weight decay over conventional weight
decay for improving language model ﬁne-tuning
performance.
Phang et al. (2018) showed that
adding supplementary training to pretrained lan-
guage models using supervised tasks yielded state
of the art results for BERT (Devlin et al., 2019).
Moore and Lewis (2010) proposed a related tech-
nique for increasing the amount of language model
training data from out-of-domain data sources that
relies on ﬁltering out high cross-entropy contexts
as measured by an in-domain language model.
Tenney et al. (2019) and Liu et al. (2019) have
both suggested that language model ﬁnetuning is
better in Transformer-based models when starting
when using features from intermediate layers as
opposed to later layers.
The instability of language model ﬁne-tuning
has previously been investigated by others. Mos-
bach et al. (2021) suggested that this instability is
caused by a combination of insufﬁciently general
training sets and optimization challenges. Zhang
et al. (2021) investigated how similar factors, such
as non-standard optimization techniques and over-
reliance on a standard number of training itera-
tions hurts the performance of ﬁne-tuned language
models.
Dodge et al. (2020), whose work we
replicate and build on here, showed that language
model ﬁnetuning is sufﬁciently stochastic so that
even random seed searches are a suitable tech-
nique for improving their overall performance.
3
Background
A language model L is a function with parameters
θ, which, when given an ordered sequence of to-
kens X = {x1, . . . , xn} as input, outputs a proba-
bility distribution over the next token y:
L(X; θ) = ˆp(y|X).
Given a test set T of (sequence, next token) pairs,
T
= {(X1, y1), . . . , (Xn, yn)}, the perplexity
Λ(T ; θ) of the language model L(X; θ) over the
set T is deﬁned as:
Λ(T ; θ) = 2−P
(Xi,yi)∈T ¯p(yi)·log2 L(Xi;θ),
where ¯p(yi) denotes the one-hot probability dis-
tribution that assigns all of its probability mass
to the token yi. Autoregressive language models
such as GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) are trained
to minimize perplexity using backpropagation on
very large training corpora.
In practice, pre-trained language models are of-
ten ﬁne-tuned using a new corpus or transferred to
a new task (Howard and Ruder, 2018). Formally,
let F = {(Xi, yi)}i be a target set. Fine-tuning on
the set F tries to minimize the expected value of
the loss function Λ:
ˆθ = arg min
θ
E(log2 Λ(F; θ)).
(1)
The initial parameterization ˆθ0 of the language
model is deﬁned by its pre-trained parameters
ˆθ0 = θ. The ﬁne-tuning problem in Eq. (1) is
then solved by applying stochastic gradient de-
scent (SGD) on samples from F. Namely, for a
given batch B of samples from F, the language
model parameters are updated by ˆθk ←ˆθk−1 −
α∇Λ(B; ˆθk−1), where α is the step size. We refer
to methods that randomly sample contexts to up-
date pretrained model parameters as standard ﬁne-
tuning.
While random sampling methods are useful
(Bottou, 1991), the stochasticity of context sam-
pling suggests an avenue for additional improve-
ment. Such methods make no assumption on the
informativeness of the examples in F, instead re-
lying on randomness to ﬁnd useful training sam-
ples. It is worth asking ourselves: can we efﬁ-
ciently measure the informativeness of an exam-
ple? And if so, can we exploit that measurement
for additional ﬁne-tuning improvement?
4
Information Gain Filtration
4.1
Informativeness of an Example
Next, we characterize the informativeness of an
example (X, y) ∈F, given a pre-trained language
model L(X; θ) and a target dataset F. We deﬁne
an example (X, y) as “informative” if our estimate
of the improvement that it will grant to the model
exceeds a chosen threshold. Namely, if we expect
that a given example will reduce model perplexity
by more than a preset amount, then we will denote
it as “informative”.
We deﬁne the information gain (IG) of a exam-
ple (X, y) over an objective set O as the difference
in perplexity measured on the objective set O be-
fore and after training on the example (X, y),
IGO(X, y) = Λ(O; θ′(X, y)) −Λ(O; θ),
(2)
where θ is the initial parameterization of the
language model and θ′(X, y) is the parameteri-
zation after backpropagating the loss associated
with training example (X, y). The objective set
O = {(X1, y1), . . . , (Xn, yn)} is a held-out sub-
set of training data that informs our decision about
which contexts are informative. In practice, the
objective set could be a subset of the ﬁne-tuning
set F. For brevity, we denote IGO(X, y) as sim-
ply IG(X) since there exists an implicit direct bi-
jection between all X’s and y’s and the objective
set is implied.
4.2
Filtering Examples
Since information gain evaluates the informative-
ness of an example, we next propose a method that
exploits it for ﬁne-tuning. Let us assume that the
method encounters a new example (X, y). Then,
the method has a choice between two actions:
• BACKPROP:
update the language model
parameters θ by backpropagating the loss
Λ({(X, y)}; θ), taking the gradient descent
step, and updating parameters from θ to θ′.
• SKIP: leave the language model parameters
unchanged.
With this idea in mind we deﬁne the function1
q(X, action) and assign a value to each of the ac-
tions above:
q(X, BACKPROP)
=
IG(X)
(3)
q(X, SKIP)
=
TSKIP,
(4)
where TSKIP is a free “threshold” parameter for de-
ciding which IG(X) values are sufﬁciently high
to warrant backpropagation.
Following this deﬁnition, we can apply a greedy
policy for ﬁltering examples during ﬁne-tuning:
π(X) = argmaxa∈{BACKPROP,SKIP}q(X, a).
By ﬁltering examples in this way, we aim to reduce
the effect of variability in data order observed in
previous work (Dodge et al., 2020), and improve
the generalizability of our training set (Mosbach
et al., 2021). By doing this, we expect to improve
the performance of our language model. We call
this technique Information Gain Filtration or sim-
ply IGF.
4.3
Approximating Information Gain
Thus far, we have described a general method
to segregate informative from non-informative ex-
amples, deferring the issue of computational cost.
Computing IG(X) in Equation (2) entails a back-
propagation step, making direct application of
q(X, action) at least as expensive as standard
ﬁne-tuning. To address this issue, we aim to ap-
proximate the information gain IG(X) using a
separate model that we will call the secondary
learner and denote with ˆQ(X).
To train this secondary learner, we ﬁrst con-
struct a training dataset D by measuring IG(X)
for a random subset of examples drawn from the
ﬁne-tuning set F.
The objective set O used to
compute IG(X) is selected as a different sub-
set of F. Each entry in D consists of a pair of
1Due to its intuitive similarity with notions in reinforce-
ment learning (Mnih et al., 2013) of using a network to ap-
proximate the expected value of a given action, we abbre-
viate this normalized informativeness metric as a “Q-value”
(Watkins and Dayan, 1992)
the input text X and its associated IG(X) value,
i.e., D = {(X1, IG(X1)), . . . , (Xn, IG(Xn))}.
We then train the secondary learner ˆQ to approxi-
mate a normalized IG(X) given X. We normalize
IG(X) so that TSKIP can be interpreted as a stan-
dardized threshold on the selectivity of the ﬁltra-
tion. Finally, the resulting secondary learner ˆQ is
used to ﬁlter examples during ﬁne-tuning. Algo-
rithm 1 summarizes IGF with a secondary learner
for language model ﬁne-tuning.
Algorithm 1 Information Gain Filtration
Input: Fine-tuning (F) and objective (O) dataset
of contexts, (X, O) := {(X1, y1), ..., (Xn, yn)},
parameterization of initial pretrained LM, θ, and
initial secondary learner model ˆQ.
Parameters: Size of learner dataset, s, and
threshold parameter, TSKIP
Output: θ′, new parameterization for the LM
1: Initialize D, B = {}.
2: for i = 0 . . . s do
3:
Sample context (Xi, yi) from X.
4:
Append (Xi, IGO(Xi, yi)) to D.
5: Normalize IGO(X, y) values in D to N(0, 1).
6: Train secondary learner ˆQ, using dataset D.
7: for i = 0 . . . number of batches−1 do
8:
while |B| < batch size do
9:
Sample context C = (X, y) from X.
10:
if ˆQ(C) ≥TSKIP then
11:
Add C to batch B.
12:
Backpropagate over batch B, updating θ
13:
Reset batch B = {}.
14: Return θ.
4.4
Scheduled Thresholding
The secondary learner training set D is con-
structed using the initial pretrained model param-
eters θ0. This means that the effectiveness of the
learner at distinguishing “high quality” from “low
quality” examples should degrade as the parame-
ters diverge from their initial values. To amelio-
rate this problem, Equation (4) can be modiﬁed
by changing TSKIP during the ﬁne-tuning process.
Since ˆQ is most accurate at the ﬁrst step, we sched-
uled TSKIP to switch from highly selective (a high
value) to highly permissive (a low value). This
allows the model to take advantage of the accu-
rate predictions for IG(X) early in the ﬁne-tuning
process without overﬁtting once those predictions
become less accurate later on.
5
Results
Here we ﬁrst provide an empirical analysis sug-
gesting that IGF outperforms standard ﬁne-tuning
across different choices of datasets, ﬁne-tuning
tasks, and neural architectures.
We follow this
analysis with an examination of why IGF works,
and an exploration into the statistical properties of
standard ﬁne-tuning and of IGF. We tested these
results on a standard Books dataset (Zhu et al.,
2015), a “mixed” dataset which is composed of
training examples from two corpora (the Books
corpus and a corpus of scraped Reddit comments
(Huth et al., 2016)), and the WikiText-103 dataset
(Merity et al., 2017). The Books corpus allows us
to fairly compare standard ﬁne-tuning against IGF,
whereas the Mixed corpus allows us to analyze the
effectiveness of the method at separating informa-
tive contexts from uninformative ones.
In practice, our secondary learner, ˆQ, repre-
sents the input text X by embedding it with 768-
dimensional byte-pair embeddings (Gage, 1994).
We then pass the input representations through a
convolution with kernel width 3, followed by max-
pooling operation over the time axis and a 2-layer
feedforward network.
This architecture was re-
ﬁned through coordinate descent, and evaluated on
a separate held-out set of measured IG(X) values.
The choice of architecture does not strongly affect
method performance (see Appendix A, Figure 11).
Additionally, a neural network is not necessary for
the learner, as simpler learning methods are sufﬁ-
cient (see Figure 5).
5.1
Language Model Fine-tuning
We ﬁrst compare IGF directly to standard ﬁne-
tuning, which we deﬁne as basic batched stochas-
tic gradient descent with Adam (Kingma and
Ba, 2015) using random samples from the tar-
get corpus.
For initial tests, we chose the pre-
trained GPT-2 Small Transformer model, a com-
monly used unidirectional language model with
roughly 124 million parameters. We used the pub-
licly available GPT-2 Small implementation of the
transformers package (Wolf et al., 2020). We
performed 50 runs each of standard ﬁne-tuning
on (1) training examples sampled from the Mixed
corpus, and (2) from the easier Books corpus. We
then performed 50 runs of IGF using two thresh-
olding schedules, one with a ﬁxed TSKIP and one
with shifting TSKIP. For both methods, batches of
size 16 were used to train the language model with
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Batches
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
Test perplexity
Standard Mixed
Standard Books
IGF with Constant Threshold
IGF with Shifting Threshold
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
Test perplexity at 60
Figure 1: Comparing IGF to Standard Fine-tuning:
IGF with constant (p < 10−3, t-test) and shifting
(p < 10−6, t-test) thresholding signiﬁcantly outper-
form standard ﬁne-tuning. The left-hand ﬁgure shows
test-set perplexity after each ﬁne-tuning batch, aver-
aged over 50 runs (error bars denote ± one standard er-
ror). The right-hand ﬁgure shows the perplexity of each
method after 60 batches. IGF with shifting threshold-
ing (red) clearly improves over standard batched ﬁne-
tuning with Adam. For the constant threshold, TSKIP
was set to 0.75. For the shifting threshold, TSKIP was
change from 1 to -1 after the tenth batch. In both IGF
tests, the Mixed corpus was used and a set of 160 exam-
ple contexts of 32 tokens each from the Books corpus
was used as the objective set.
a learning rate of 5 × 10−5 and β1 = 0.9, β2 =
0.999. The convolutional network that we used
for our secondary learner was trained using SGD
with Adam with a learning rate of 10−5 and β1 =
0.9, β2 = 0.999. Both types of IGF runs were
performed on the strictly more challenging Mixed
corpus only.
In all cases model perplexity was
tested on a set drawn solely from the Books cor-
pus. Figure 1 plots the averaged ﬁne-tuning curves
of these 4 different approaches over 60 batches.
We see that IGF signiﬁcantly improves ﬁnal test
perplexity when compared to standard ﬁne-tuning
on both the Mixed corpus and the Books corpus.
Standard ﬁne-tuning on Books achieves a median
perplexity of 57.3, compared to 56.9 for IGF with
a constant threshold and 54.0 for IGF with the
shifting threshold schedule.2 All 50 runs of IGF
with a shifting schedule outperformed all 50 stan-
dard ﬁne-tuning runs. This means that the over-
all improvements to data order that IGF achieves
through selective sampling of informative contexts
are far in excess of what might be reasonably
achieved through random sampling of contexts.
2Demo code and data can be found at https:
//github.com/huggingface/transformers/
tree/main/examples/research_projects.
Next, we show that the improvements offered
by IGF persist across several choices of dataset,
ﬁne-tuning speciﬁcations, and model architecture.
Figure 2 shows the ﬁnal converged values for
ﬁne-tuning GPT-2 Small on a different dataset
from Figure 1 (WikiText-103), a different archi-
tecture (GPT2-Medium), a different embedding
space with different directionality (BERT) (De-
vlin et al., 2019), and a different overall ﬁne-
tuning task (SST-2) (Socher et al., 2013). In ev-
ery case, IGF exceeds the performance of standard
ﬁne-tuning. This suggests that IGF is a resilient
method that is broadly applicable to a variety of
ﬁne-tuning modalities and domains.
GPT2-Small
65.0
67.5
70.0
72.5
Perplexity 
GPT2-Medium
26.5
27.5
28.5
Perplexity 
Standard
IGF
BERT
4.20
4.35
4.50
Masked Perp. 
SST-2
94.0
94.2
94.4
94.6
Accuracy 
Figure 2: IGF is Invariant to Model Variation: We
compare performance of IGF and standard ﬁne-tuning
across a variety of choices of model speciﬁcation and
dataset.
Box plots show results from 50 runs with
each method. Top left: IGF outperforms standard ﬁne-
tuning with an average test perplexity of 67.8 compared
to 69.8 when ﬁne-tuning on GPT2-Small. Top right:
When using the GPT2-Medium pretrained model, IGF
converges to 27.1 as opposed to 27.4 for standard ﬁne-
tuning. Bottom left: When ﬁne-tuning BERT (a bi-
directional language model trained to minimize masked
perplexity rather than next-word perplexity), masked
perplexity declines from 4.33 to 4.29. Bottom right:
When ﬁne-tuning instead to the Stanford Sentiment
Treebank, a sentiment analysis task, IGF improves
accuracy from an average of 94.06 to 94.27.
The
WikiText-103 dataset was use for all comparisons ex-
cept for SST-2.
All other model parameters are as
in Figure 1 and use a shifting thresholding schedule.
When ﬁne-tuning on BERT and SST-2, the plotted met-
rics (masked perplexity and accuracy) were used in-
stead of next-word perplexity to compute IG(X). All
differences are statistically signiﬁcant to p < 10−3.
5.2
Understanding IGF
It is clear that IGF is successful as a general
method for improving ﬁne-tuning performance,
105
110
115
120
Perplexity After 1 Batch
56
58
60
62
64
Perplexity After 50 Batches
r = 0.280
Figure 3: Reduction in Perplexity in Early Steps is Pre-
dictive of Total Reduction: If the ﬁrst batch in a ﬁne-
tuning run leads to a large reduction in perplexity, the
ﬁne-tuning run as a whole will tend to converge to a
lower value (r = 0.28). This is signiﬁcant to p < 0.01.
Corpus
Unigram Freq. Uniform
Training Distribution
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Reduction in Loss
Figure 4: Learning the New Unigram Frequency Dis-
tribution Constitutes Most of the Beneﬁt of Fine-tuning:
These plots show the reduction in cross-entropy of a
GPT-2 language model, tested on a Reddit corpus after
training on each 32 token contexts sampled from dif-
ferent distributions. Each example consisted of a word
along with the preceding 32 words of context. Positive
values indicate that learning from that example resulted
in reduced loss on the test dataset. (left) Actual se-
quence from corpus. The language model learns some-
thing useful from every example when ﬁnetuned on text
from the corpus. (middle) Random sequence with pre-
served word probabilities. For this sequence, 32 tokens
are sampled to generate a context using the unigram
probabilities for the Reddit corpus. Here the model
also learns something useful from every example, de-
spite being ﬁnetuned on scrambled text. (right) Ran-
dom sequence with uniform word probabilities. When
the unigram probability distribution is replaced with a
uniform probability distribution, the model no longer
consistently learns. All pairs of distributions are differ-
ent with p < 10−6.
however why this is the case remains unexamined.
Here, we present an analysis of the statistical prop-
erties of ﬁne-tuning that illuminates why IGF is
able to improve over standard ﬁne-tuning.
A main assumption of IGF is that it is possible
to approximate IG(X). If IG(X) is not approx-
imable, then the secondary learner could not effec-
tively ﬁlter out uninformative contexts and there-
fore would be useless. In order to support this as-
sumption, we will ﬁrst show that a given example
is worth learning from even if it only possesses
the correct low-level features of informative con-
texts, such as the correct unigram frequency dis-
tribution. We performed an experiment in which
we ﬁne-tuned a language model on either (1) real
example sequences from a corpus, (2) artiﬁcial se-
quences that were constructed by independently
sampling each token from the frequency distribu-
tion of the corpus, and (3) sequences constructed
by uniformly sampling tokens from the set of all
possible tokens. We then measured the change in
loss on a separate portion of the corpus. Figure 4
shows the results of this experiment. The average
reduction in loss for examples constructed using
the unigram frequency distribution is signiﬁcantly
better than random and roughly 70% as good as
using real examples from the corpus. Thus, a sig-
niﬁcant fraction of the beneﬁt of training on real
contexts can be estimated by merely knowing the
unigram frequency distribution from which those
contexts were derived, which is easily estimable
without knowing the particular parameterization
of the language model itself. Therefore, it makes
sense that IGF can inexpensively estimate whether
a given context generalizes well to the target cor-
pus.
The secondary learner only bases its estimates
on the update to loss after the ﬁrst backpropoga-
tion step. We might question whether early im-
provement translates to long-term improvement
over the course of ﬁne-tuning. If it did not, then
the estimates that the secondary learner produces
would eventually disappear as ﬁne-tuning contin-
ued. Dodge et al. (2020) observed that the qual-
ity of a ﬁne-tuning run could usually be estab-
lished by looking at the trajectory of the loss curve
very early during training. In order to explain why
these early estimates are sufﬁcient for sample ﬁl-
tration, we attempted to determine whether train-
ing on good contexts early is an important element
of the variability in data order between ﬁne-tuning
runs. Figure 3 compares test perplexity after train-
ing from a randomly sampled ﬁrst batch against
the test perplexity after many randomly sampled
5
0
Predicted
6
4
2
0
2
Actual
r = 0.784
Conv. Network
5
0
Predicted
6
4
2
0
2
r = 0.773
Embed. Linear Reg.
5
0
Predicted
6
4
2
0
2
r = 0.765
One-Hot Linear Reg.
5
0
Predicted
4
2
0
2
r = 0.707
Avg. Token Value
CNN
ELR
OHR
ATV
STD
Learner Type
54
56
58
Test perplexity
Figure 5: Comparing The Ability of Simple Learners To Estimate Information Gain: The above plots show the
prediction accuracy (scatter plots on the left) and overall ﬁne-tuning performance of each learner when used during
IGF (boxplot on the right) for a variety of secondary learners. Each performs well in estimating IG(X) when
trained on a dataset of (X, IG(X)) pairs. The convolutional network (far left) which we chose as our secondary
learner moderately outperforms the other simple learners. As alternative learners, we also tested linear regression
where x is represented as its average embedded representation in the GPT-2 byte-pair embedding space (center
left), linear regression where x is represented as a one-hot encoding over the token values (center), and a trivial
learner which estimated the value of a context as average of the values of the tokens that compose it, whose values
are in turn computed as the average value of the training contexts they occur in (center right). A comparison to
standard ﬁnetuning without IGF (far right) is included. As a difference of means, the CNN is statistically different
(p < 0.001) from the other types of learners. For the one-hot and average token value learners, contexts with
tokens appearing in the training set and not in the test set were excluded. All learners were trained on a dataset of
10,000 training examples.
batches. Good early batches improve the proba-
bility of converging to an ideal ﬁnal value. The
correlation between the test perplexity after a sin-
gle batch and the test perplexity after 50 batches,
which is near convergence for most runs, is sta-
tistically signiﬁcant (r = 0.28). While this value
appears somewhat low, it is signiﬁcant and there-
fore can be exploited for improvements in perfor-
mance.
Taken together, the pair of observations that (1)
early data quality is important, and (2) that the
quality of a context can be summarized by its low-
level statistics serves to motivate our understand-
ing of why IGF is effective. Speciﬁcally, if we
can carefully ensure that early batches are good,
as IGF does, then we will likely end up with a su-
perior model after convergence.
5.3
Understanding the Secondary Learner
This raises the question of which contexts are con-
sidered “informative” by the secondary learner. To
answer this question, we apply IGF to the Mixed
corpus containing both Reddit and Books. We cre-
ated a dataset of 10,000 (X, IG(X)) pairs using
an objective set of 160 contexts with 32 tokens
each drawn solely from the Books corpus.
We
used this dataset to train a secondary learner. Next,
the secondary learner was fed randomly sampled
contexts from the Mixed corpus. Because the ob-
jective set contains only examples from one cor-
2
1
0
1
Predicted Q-Value
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Probability Density
95%
59%
4%
Books
Reddit
Figure 6: Normalized Predicted Q’s by Training Cor-
pus: In the mixed setting, a corpus composed of Red-
dit comments (25% of contexts) and a corpus of books
(75% of contexts) were mixed into a single training
dataset. Using the predicted q-value generated from
our convolutional secondary learner, we can achieve
good separation of the corpora using the information
gain metric despite computing the true q-value using a
small objective set. The percentage of examples from
the Books corpus that are higher than several frequently
referenced TSKIP values are given for our dataset.
pus, we expect the secondary learner to assign
higher IG(X) values to other examples from the
same corpus. Figure 6 shows that there is indeed a
signiﬁcant difference in the distributions of ˆQ val-
ues between the two corpora, demonstrating that
the Books and Reddit corpora can be separated by
the secondary learner. Almost all examples from
the Reddit corpus are expected by the secondary
learner to produce a reduction in perplexity that
is at least one standard deviation below the mean.
This indicates that the secondary learner can iden-
tify with strong conﬁdence that Books corpus ex-
amples are more informative for ﬁne-tuning to-
wards the Books objective than Reddit corpus ex-
amples. It is also worthwhile to note that the sec-
ondary learner achieves dataset separation despite
having access to just 160 labeled examples of 32
tokens in our objective set, a total of just 5120 to-
kens from the Books corpus, and zero examples
from the Reddit corpus.
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
Number of Samples
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
r (Predicted v. Actual)
Conv. Network
One-Hot Linear Reg.
Embed. Linear Reg.
Avg. Token Value
Figure 7: Comparison of the Sample Efﬁciency of Sec-
ondary Learners: Here we compare the relative sample
efﬁciency of the various secondary learners that were
tested in the paper using contexts from the WikiText-
103 dataset. We plot the correlation coefﬁcient of the
model prediction against ground truth as the number
of samples in the training set for that model increases
from 1000 to 10000. We see that the convolutional net-
work, being the most highly regularized of the four
models owing to its architectural structure and rela-
tively low parameter size, is also the most sample ef-
ﬁcient of all of the models tested.
5.4
Efﬁciency of IGF
For previous results we used a simple convolu-
tional neural network described in Section 3 as our
secondary learner. However, it may not be neces-
sary to use a such a complex model for IG(X).
Alternative methods could provide similar perfor-
mance at less cost. Figure 5 shows predicted vs.
actual normalized IG(X) values for several learn-
ing methods.
While the 45,000 parameter con-
volutional neural network is most effective at ap-
proximating IG(X), other learners perform al-
most well. We encoded the contexts both by us-
ing the standard GPT-2 Small word embedding
and with a one-hot encoding of the token iden-
tities.
Standard linear regression performed on
both encoding types (30K parameters for word
embeddings and 450,000 parameters for one-hot
encoding) performs nearly as well at approximat-
ing IG(X) with a convolutional model. We also
tested an even simpler learner with only 25,000
parameters that assigned each token a value by av-
eraging the IG(X) values for contexts that con-
tained that token. Values for new contexts are then
computed as the average of token values contained
in that context. Even this model is a reasonable
approximator of IG(X). This underscores that,
while IG(X) is an extremely complex function
to compute exactly, it can nevertheless be effec-
tively approximated through simple unigram in-
formation. Figure 7 compares the performance of
these secondary learners architectures across dif-
ferent numbers of training examples.
Here the
convolutional network is the most sample efﬁcient
method, as it can effectively learn IG(X) with as
few as 2,000 training examples.
5.5
Comparison to Random Seed Search
We proposed IGF as a prospective alternative to
the random seed search approach suggested by
Dodge et al. (2020). Since IGF aims to replaces
random search with a directed search, we expect
IGF to be signiﬁcantly more efﬁcient. Of course
the methods can also be combined: IGF can be run
many times with different data orders, and then
the best model selected. In Figure 8 we compare
the Dodge et al. (2020) method, where the best
model is selected across 1, 5, or 50 runs of stan-
dard ﬁnetuning, to a similar setup where the best
IGF model is selected across 1, 5, or 50 runs. We
ﬁnd that even in a single run, IGF signiﬁcantly
outperforms choosing the best of 50 runs of stan-
dard ﬁnetuning.
Still, IGF performance can be
improved even further by choosing the best result
across 5 or 50 runs. This suggests that while IGF
exploits some of the beneﬁts that could be gained
from ideal data ordering, there are still improve-
ments to be made over IGF for further improving
data order during language model ﬁne-tuning.
6
Conclusion and Future Work
In the context of language model ﬁne-tuning, we
have shown that a secondary learner can efﬁciently
and effectively distinguish between informative
and uninformative training examples. This sec-
ondary learner can be used to select useful train-
SF-1
SF-5 SF-50 IGF-1 IGF-5IGF-50
Method and Number of Runs
54
56
58
Test perplexity
Figure 8: Prospective IGF Is More Efﬁcient Than Ret-
rospective Random Seed Search: We show boxplots of
the best run from differently-sized sets of runs to visu-
alize the expected beneﬁt of using random seed testing
(Dodge et al., 2020) and compare it to the beneﬁt of
using IGF. Even one IGF run is signiﬁcantly more ef-
fective than 50 random seed tests using standard ﬁne-
tuning, denoted here as SF. We further observe that the
improvements to data order that come from IGF are
somewhat disjoint from the improvements to data or-
der than come with random seed testing, so both ap-
proaches can be applied simultaneously for further per-
plexity reduction. Sets of runs of each size were gen-
erated by sampling without replacement from a pool of
independent 50 runs for each method. For the 50 run
case, the minimum over the entire pool of runs for each
method is plotted instead.
ing examples in a technique we call Information
Gain Filtration, leading to better model perfor-
mance than standard ﬁne-tuning. We encourage
researchers to release pretrained secondary learn-
ers for frequently used corpora, in order to en-
able more effective ﬁnetuning and save energy.
This would cut down the largest computational
cost of applying IGF while retaining the perfor-
mance improvements across the ﬁeld. We have
included several examples of open-sourced sec-
ondary learners in the supplementary material to
promote this paradigm.
This work also raises several questions. Since
our focus was on developing a lightweight tech-
nique, the most complex secondary learner we
tested was a small convolutional network. Data
efﬁciency during training could potentially be fur-
ther improved by using a more complex model.
The question of how far one could reasonably take
a function approximator network for estimating
information gain remains unexplored.
Finally, we do not fully understand why improv-
ing performance on early training batches results
better performance at convergence. Is this exclu-
sively a property of language models, or do other
networks and tasks exhibit this phenomenon? An-
swering this question could lead to better opti-
mization methods across many different ﬁelds.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank all of the people whose
contributions, opinions and suggestions helped
with the development of this project, especially
Kaj Bostrom, Greg Durrett, Shailee Jain, and Vy
Vo. This project was funded by a generous gift
from Intel, and by the Burroughs-Wellcome Ca-
reer Award at the Scientiﬁc Interface.
References
L´eon Bottou. 1991.
Stochastic gradient learning in
neural networks.
Proceedings of Neuro-Nımes,
91(8):12.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019.
Bert: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages
4171–4186.
Jesse Dodge, Gabriel Ilharco, Roy Schwartz, Ali
Farhadi, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Noah Smith.
2020.
Fine-tuning pretrained language models:
Weight initializations, data orders, and early stop-
ping.
Philip Gage. 1994. A new algorithm for data compres-
sion. C Users Journal, 12(2):23–38.
Jeremy Howard and Sebastian Ruder. 2018. Universal
language model ﬁne-tuning for text classiﬁcation. In
Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Alexander G Huth, Wendy A De Heer, Thomas L Grif-
ﬁths, Fr´ed´eric E Theunissen, and Jack L Gallant.
2016. Natural speech reveals the semantic maps that
tile human cerebral cortex. Nature, 532(7600):453–
458.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2015. Adam: A
method for stochastic optimization.
In 3rd Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2015.
Cheolhyoung Lee, Kyunghyun Cho, and Wanmo Kang.
2020. Mixout: Effective regularization to ﬁnetune
large-scale pretrained language models. In Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations.
Nelson F. Liu, Matt Gardner, Yonatan Belinkov,
Matthew E. Peters, and Noah A. Smith. 2019. Lin-
guistic knowledge and transferability of contextual
representations. In Proceedings of the 2019 Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Pa-
pers), pages 1073–1094, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and
Richard Socher. 2017.
Pointer sentinel mixture
models. In International Conference on Learning
Representations.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver,
Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wierstra,
and Martin A. Riedmiller. 2013. Playing atari with
deep reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/1312.5602.
Robert C. Moore and William Lewis. 2010. Intelligent
selection of language model training data. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL 2010 Conference Short Papers,
pages 220–224, Uppsala, Sweden. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Marius Mosbach, Maksym Andriushchenko, and Diet-
rich Klakow. 2021. On the stability of ﬁne-tuning
BERT: Misconceptions, explanations, and strong
baselines. In International Conference on Learning
Representations.
Jason Phang, Thibault F´evry, and Samuel R Bowman.
2018. Sentence encoders on stilts: Supplementary
training on intermediate labeled-data tasks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1811.01088.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan,
Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. 2019. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI
Blog, 1(8).
Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Wu, Jason
Chuang, Christopher D Manning, Andrew Y Ng,
and Christopher Potts. 2013. Recursive deep mod-
els for semantic compositionality over a sentiment
treebank. In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on
empirical methods in natural language processing,
pages 1631–1642.
Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky,
Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. 2014.
Dropout:
A simple way to prevent neural net-
works from overﬁtting.
J. Mach. Learn. Res.,
15(1):1929–1958.
Emma Strubell, Ananya Ganesh, and Andrew McCal-
lum. 2019.
Energy and policy considerations for
deep learning in NLP. In Proceedings of the 57th
Conference of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 3645–3650. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Ian Tenney, Patrick Xia, Berlin Chen, Alex Wang,
Adam Poliak, R Thomas McCoy, Najoung Kim,
Benjamin Van Durme, Sam Bowman, Dipanjan Das,
and Ellie Pavlick. 2019. What do you learn from
context? probing for sentence structure in contextu-
alized word representations. In International Con-
ference on Learning Representations.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems, pages 5998–6008.
Christopher JCH Watkins and Peter Dayan. 1992. Q-
learning. Machine learning, 8(3-4):279–292.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien
Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pier-
ric Cistac, Tim Rault, Remi Louf, Morgan Funtow-
icz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen,
Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu,
Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame,
Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander Rush. 2020. Trans-
formers: State-of-the-art natural language process-
ing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing:
System Demonstrations, pages 38–45, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Tianyi Zhang, Felix Wu, Arzoo Katiyar, Kilian Q
Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. 2021. Revisiting few-
sample BERT ﬁne-tuning. In International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations.
Yukun Zhu, Ryan Kiros, Richard Zemel, Ruslan
Salakhutdinov, Raquel Urtasun, Antonio Torralba,
and Sanja Fidler. 2015. Aligning books and movies:
Towards story-like visual explanations by watching
movies and reading books.
A
Supplementary Material
A.1
Miscellaneous Figures
Figure 9: CDF of Predicted Q’s: CDFs of the datasets
against the Books objective set. Note that a threshold
of TSKIP = −1 almost entirely excludes contexts in the
Mixed corpus that originated from the Reddit corpus.
This allows IGF with a constant threshold of -1 on the
Mixed dataset to perform almost identically to standard
ﬁne-tuning on just the Books corpus.
Figure 10: Replication of Performance Improvement
on WikiText-103: IGF signiﬁcantly outperforms (p <
10−4) standard ﬁne-tuning without context ﬁltering on
the WikiText-103 dataset. We plot the model perplexity
over many batches as in Figure 4 of the paper. This ﬁg-
ure can be replicated by following the Jupyter tutorial
provided along with the supplementary material.
Figure 11: Architecture Invariance: The method per-
forms similarly regardless of the convolutional setup
of the model. Allowing the convolutional secondary
learner to be informed by higher-order frequencies
such as trigram and 10-gram do not signiﬁcantly affect
performance.
Figure 12: Improved ﬁne-tuning Efﬁciency Over Stan-
dard ﬁne-tuning:
We plot the number of batches it
takes for each threshold schedule to exceed the perplex-
ity of standard at each step. This serves as a barome-
ter for comparing the relative efﬁciency of ﬁne-tuning.
In the early stages of ﬁne-tuning, we can see that IGF
requires 30%-40% fewer backpropagation steps over
standard ﬁne-tuning. This suggests that IGF could be
used as a more energy efﬁcient alternative to standard
language model ﬁne-tuning. Note that since IGF con-
verges to a lower ﬁnal value than standard ﬁne-tuning,
these values asymptote to a ﬁxed value.
A.2
Sample High IG(X) Contexts
A few randomly sampled contexts from the Books
corpora with IG(X) > 1 are given below. Note
that all are highly structured conversations which
are common of the narrative setting in the Books
corpus:
• ’t you.
He forced your hand with Max. ”
” We’re going to die, ” she said.
” Aren’t we?
• ” The world is ending. ”
” No it’s not. ”
Valerie snapped.
” It’s a world war, that
• You? ”
” Yep.
Did your dad leave? ”
She nodded.
” They all said to tell you congratulations and
they’ll
A.3
Sample Low IG(X) Contexts
A few sample contexts from the Books corpora
with IG(X) < −1 are given below.
Many of
these contexts appear to be long, run-on sentences
that are more challenging to follow:
• n order ; you’ve got to make friends, you’ve
got to put on a united front and for the gov-
ernments of Earth that was no mean feat
• - headed eunuchs in crimson robes knelt in a
cluster to one side of the dais, resting on their
haunches and gazing at the woman and
• don’t hold back, and by God, if I could be
like you for even a moment, if I could have
your strength, your courage, your
• frantically down one path, doubled back,
and headed down another, like a frightened
mouse trying to outsmart a determined cat in
a warren of false trails and
B
Iterated Information Gain Filtration
Instead of scheduling the selectivity of the sec-
ondary learner to taper off as the ﬁne-tuning
process continues, we might instead replace the
learner periodically with a new learner trained on
a new dataset of (X, IG(X)) pairs generated us-
ing the current parameterization of the language
model. This process, which we call iterated in-
fomation gain ﬁltration (IIGF), allows us to re-
place the obsolete learner that was trained to pre-
dict IG(X) for early examples with a learner that
is more relevant later in ﬁne-tuning. IIGF has the
added advantage of allowing us to keep TSKIP high
throughout ﬁne-tuning, as secondary learner irrel-
evance is no longer a concern.
This procedure
is very computationally expensive, as the over-
head in generating the new dataset and learner
far exceeds the computational cost of ﬁne-tuning.
Nonetheless, this enables ﬁner control of data or-
der throughout the ﬁne-tuning process and further
improvements in ﬁnal perplexity over IGF with
scheduled thresholding. Due to its computational
expense, we ran a small set of 5 tests of iter-
ated information gain ﬁltration by training a sec-
ondary learner using a dataset built from example
(X, IG(X)) pairs derived from a language model
that had already been fully ﬁnetuned to the Books
corpus. IIGF was able to improve these already-
converged models by an average of 0.29 additional
perplexity points after reconverging, with a stan-
dard deviation of 0.11 points.
Algorithm 2 Iterated Information Gain Filtration
Input: Training (X) and objective (O) dataset of
contexts, (X, O) = {(X1, y1), ..., (Xn, yn)}, and
parameterization of initial pretrained LM, θ
Parameters: Size of learner dataset, s,
threshold parameter, TSKIP, and
number of batches per secondary learner reset, t
Output: θ′, new parameterization for the LM
1: Initialize D, B = {}.
2: for all i, 0 ≤i ≤num batches do
3:
while |B| < batch size do
4:
if i mod t = 0 then
5:
for all i, 0 ≤i ≤s do
6:
Sample context (Xi, yi) from X.
7:
Append (Xi, IGO(Xi, yi)) to D.
8:
Normalize IGO(X, y) values in D to
N(0, 1).
9:
Train learner ˆQ, using D as a train set.
10:
Sample context C = (X, y) from X.
11:
if ˆQ(C) ≥TSKIP then
12:
Append C to batch B.
13:
Update θ by backpropagating over batch B,
and clear batch B.
14: Return θ.
C
Relative Informativeness of Contexts
Since our method uses a black box learner to es-
timate the informativeness of a given context, one
might wonder what it is about these contexts that
makes them more or less informative. To investi-
gate this, we constructed test sets of 100 contexts
each from the Books corpus which were rated as
either highly informative (IG(X) > 1) or unin-
formative (IG(X) < 1) by the secondary learner.
We then ﬁnetuned GPT2-Small using both stan-
dard ﬁne-tuning and IGF as in Figure 1 and peri-
odically evaluated the performance of the model
on the informative and uninformative contexts as
training proceeded. Figure 13 shows that contexts
which were rated as highly informative experi-
enced a signiﬁcantly greater reduction in perplex-
ity over time as compared to contexts that were
rated as uninformative.
The poorly informative
contexts actually performed worse on average af-
ter ﬁne-tuning than either standard ﬁne-tuning or
IGF. This suggests that highly informative con-
texts are also highly informed, or more easily pre-
dicted after ﬁne-tuning on the target corpus. In-
spection of highly informative contexts shows that
they tend to employ simple diction and basic sen-
tence structure that is representative of the cor-
pus, whereas uninformative contexts tend to em-
ploy complex sentence structure and atypical vo-
cabulary. All highly rated contexts from the Books
corpus consisted of dialog, which suggests that
the secondary learner prioritizes linguistic patterns
that are common to the ﬁne-tuning corpus but rare
in general writing.
Since the Books corpus is
composed of narrative stories heavy on dialog, it
makes sense that conversations, which rarely ap-
pear in non-narrative corpora, would be rated as
highly informative. The supplementary material
gives some examples of highly informative and
uninformative contexts from the Books corpus.
0
20
40
60
Batches
20
40
60
80
Test perplexity
Uninformative, SF
Uninformative, IGF
Informative, SF
Informative, IGF
Figure 13: Informative Contexts Are Informed Con-
texts: Shown above are plots of the evaluation perfor-
mance of sets of 100 contexts rated as highly infor-
mative (IG(X) > 1) and uninformative (IG(X) <
−1) by the secondary learner, as the language model
is trained by either IGF or standard ﬁne-tuning (SF).
The contexts that the secondary learner rates as highly
informative are also those contexts that the language
model learns to predict very accurately after ﬁne-tuning
is complete. Conversely, contexts that the learner rates
as poorly informative perform worse after ﬁne-tuning.
Examples of highly informative and poorly informa-
tive contexts from the Books corpus are presented in
the supplementary material and support the assertion
that the best contexts for ﬁne-tuning are those that are
highly predictable.
