Title: A survey on extremism analysis using Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2104.04069v2
--------------------------------------------------

A SURVEY ON EXTREMISM ANALYSIS USING NATURAL
LANGUAGE PROCESSING
A PREPRINT
Javier Torregrosa
Department of Computer Science
Universidad Politecnica de Madrid
28051 Madrid, Spain
franciscojavier.torregrosa@upm.es
Gema Bello-Orgaz
Department of Computer Science
Universidad Politecnica de Madrid
28051 Madrid, Spain
Eugenio Martinez-Camara
Andalusian Research Institute in
Data Science and Computational
Intelligence (DaSCI)
Department of Computer Science and
Artiﬁcial Intelligence
University of Granada
18071 Granada, Spain
Javier Del Ser
TECNALIA
Basque Research & Technology
Alliance (BRTA)
and University of the Basque
Country (UPV/EHU)
Alliance (BRTA)
48160 Derio, Spain
David Camacho
Department of Computer Science
Universidad Politecnica de Madrid
28051 Madrid, Spain
April 22, 2021
ABSTRACT
Extremism has grown as a global problem for society in recent years, especially after the apparition
of movements such as jihadism. This and other extremist groups have taken advantage of different
approaches, such as the use of Social Media, to spread their ideology, promote their acts and recruit
followers. The extremist discourse, therefore, is reﬂected on the language used by these groups
texts. Natural Language Processing (NLP) represents a way of detecting this type of content, and
several authors make use of it to describe and discriminate the discourse held by these groups, with
the ﬁnal objective of detecting and preventing its spread. Following this approach, this survey aims
to review the contributions of NLP to the ﬁeld of extremism research, providing the reader with a
comprehensive picture of the state of the art of this research area. The content includes a description
and comparison of the frequently used NLP techniques, how they were applied, the insights they
provided, the most frequently used NLP software tools, descriptive and classiﬁcation (based on
machine learning algorithms) applications, and the availability of datasets and data sources for
research. Finally, research questions are approached and answered with highlights from the review,
while future trends, challenges and directions derived from these highlights are suggested towards
stimulating further research in this exciting research area.
Keywords Natural Language Processing · Radicalisation · Extremism · Deep Learning
1
Introduction
The rise of Social Media platforms has strengthened the interest of researchers for studying human behavior on different
contexts. The potential of these platforms relies on how users behavior can be traced during or even long after they have
manifested it, which facilitates the work of behavioral scientists to track them under different circumstances. This is
possible thanks to the chance of crawling real time data from the users, and also to the fact that most data remains stored
or published during long periods of time [1]. Data, however, must be analyzed with an adequate approach, depending
on their type (e.g. based on interactions, text or images) and their source (e.g. the type of social platform).
arXiv:2104.04069v2  [cs.CY]  21 Apr 2021
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
Taking into consideration that most of the content published on the Internet is textual, it is unsurprising that one of
the most frequently used approaches for online pattern extraction comes from Natural Language Processing (NLP).
This discipline uses a set of computational methods for making human language accessible to computers, and more
speciﬁcally for giving the computers the ability to understand and generate human language [2]. NLP techniques are
used in both academia and industry for text analysis applications, such as medicine [3, 4], mental health [5, 6], economy
[7] or crime prevention [8].
One of the area that has beneﬁted of NLP techniques on recent years is the study of extremist discourse, particularly due
to the increasing use of Social Media by different extremist groups as a speaker for disseminating their ideologies. While
the ﬁrst relevant extremist movements of the century (e.g. the 11-S) took advantage of emails for their communication
and organization, the growth of online platforms such as blogs, forums and ﬁnally Social Media platforms (e.g. Twitter
or Facebook) has changed the way extremists communicate, recruit and disseminate their ideas [9]. The rise of groups
such as Islamic State or the Alt-right, together with their use of online Social Media platforms with different objectives
[10], has represented a threat for many countries, specially considering that extremism can facilitate the justiﬁcation of
violent actions to achieve a movement’s agenda [11]. This threat led different countries to ﬁnance research projects
and other initiatives related to the study of the traces that extremists users left online, with the aim of identifying early
behaviors to stop them before embracing violent extremism. In fact, during the worst days of the jihadist threat (between
2015 and 2018), the European Union invested in several research projects where NLP was applied to track terrorism
and online extremism [12, 13, 14, 15]. The core of most of the initiatives aimed to counter this phenomenon, detecting
and classifying extremist content that could lead people to adopt these ideologies. Machine learning techniques made a
great contribution to this purpose (see, for example, Scanlon & Gerber [16]).
As stated before, the use of NLP techniques has led to several contributions focused on extremism research. After the
fruitful period of research from different perspectives aimed to study and analyze the extremism phenomenon, a few
systematic surveys have approached the speciﬁc relationship between NLP and extremism research. These systematic
reviews can be divided in two types. The ﬁrst type has analyzed NLP contributions to areas conceptually related to
extremism, such as hate speech [17] or law enforcement [18]. The second type gravitates on extremism, including NLP
as a key part of its identiﬁcation [19, 20]. However, reviews belong to this latter type undergo two main limitations. On
the on hand, their content is restricted to the speciﬁc task of detection, not covering the rest of the whole data mining
process [20]. On the other hand, their lack of depth when studying the NLP approaches under focus [19], missing to
provide a thorough description of the diverse spectrum of techniques used in both descriptive and detection processes.
This article aims to cover the gap left by this prior work and other similar surveys by placing an emphasis on
NLP contributions to extremism analysis (including both description and classiﬁcation/detection tasks), with a more
comprehensive and critical approach on the different types of NLP techniques used to date. To this end, a systematic
review is conducted to collect and systematically analyze the literature regarding NLP contributions on the study
of extremism. This review will present a whole picture about the state of the art of this research ﬁeld, both from a
descriptive and a comparative approach. The ﬁrst one will focus on describing the features of the articles and the content
they study, whereas the second will compare their outcomes to extract useful insights for researchers. To do so, ﬁve
research questions (summarized in Fig. 2) are formulated to orchestrate the contributions of this review:
• RQ1. What are the current topics and contributions from NLP to extremism research?
This question aims to highlight the most relevant topics analysed by the articles, such as type of extremism
or which platform is used for the research approaches, among others. This will eventually help presenting a
general picture of the research ﬁeld.
• RQ2. What NLP techniques are used on extremism research?
After the screening process, the NLP techniques used by each of the articles included on the review will
be extracted. After that, they will be brieﬂy described and compared, with the aim of showing their main
contributions and differences.
• RQ3. How have NLP techniques been applied in the ﬁeld of extremism research?
The different applications of the NLP techniques found in the literature will be categorized and divided
depending on their approach, either the description of extremist texts or their classiﬁcation. The main extremist
discourse features found by the articles will be highlighted, together with the machine learning algorithms
used to identify extremist texts.
• RQ4. What NLP software tools are commonly used on extremism research?
The objective of this research question is to compare the different NLP tools (open or commercial) used by the
articles reviewed.
• RQ5. Which publicly available datasets or datasources have authors used to conduct NLP experiments
on extremism research?
2
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
This research question will approach the availability of public datasets and datasources including extremist
content, to facilitate researchers their experiments.
RQ2
 What NLP techniques
are used?
RQ3
How have NLP
techniques been
applied?
RQ4
What NLP software tools
are commonly used?
RQ1 
What are the current topics and
contributions from NLP to extremism
research?
RQ5
Which publicly available
datasets or datasources
have authors used?
Figure 1: Summary of the research questions.
The main contributions of the article can be summarized in six points:
1. It provides a general picture of the theoretical foundations behind the concept of "extremism", discussing its
differences and similarities with other concepts that are often misused as synonyms on the literature.
2. It brieﬂy deﬁnes the concept of extremist discourse, including some key elements that are present on this type
of discourses.
3. It presents an updated picture of the NLP techniques (including pre-processing techniques) used on extremism
research, together with an analysis and comparison of their advantages and disadvantages.
4. It summarizes the different applications that NLP techniques can have on extremism research, such as discourse
description and classiﬁcation. The main machine learning algorithms used to identify extremist content are
also highlighted.
5. It presents different available tools, together with open datasets and datasources regarding extremism, which
may be helpful for authors interested on conducting future experiments.
6. It highlights future trends, challenges and directions of this ﬁeld, regarding the conclusions extracted from the
analysis.
A summary of the structure of the paper can be seen in Figure 2, which is presented as follows: Section 2 deﬁnes what is
understood as extremism, the differences among extremism and other topics and what deﬁnes the concept of extremist
discourse. Section 3 explains how the review was planned and conducted, including the inclusion and exclusion criteria,
and a brief summary of the process. Section 4 presents a general descriptive analysis of the outcomes of the search
conducted, including the trends of publication and the main keywords associated to the articles. Section 5 describes and
compares the different NLP techniques used by the authors. Section 6 focus on the applications of these techniques,
dividing them in two approaches: text description and text classiﬁcation, including the machine learning algorithms
used for this task. Section 7 describes the NLP open datasets, datasources and tools used by the authors. Finally, section
8 focuses on answering the research questions and on presenting future trends, challenges and directions of the area,
and presents the ﬁnal conclusions.
2
Contextualizing the concept of extremist discourse
The deﬁnition of extremism has traditionally led to different misconceptions in the literature, specially for authors with
few background on social sciences. This section deals with the different deﬁnitions around this topic. To do so, the
ﬁrst subsection analysis the differences between extremism and radicalisation, two concepts that are frequently used
indistinctly [21]. The second subsection brieﬂy presents other concepts related to extremism, including deﬁnitions and
relationships with it. Finally, the last subsection presents how the concept of extremism will be used in this article,
including an operativization of the extremist language that will act as a framework on which the different articles
reviewed can be compared.
3
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
Survey of NLP
for  Extremism Research
4. General 
Analysis
3. Methodology
2. Contextualizing 
extremist discourse
1. Introduction
2.1 Extremism and radicalisation:
differences
and similarities
2.2 Extremism and other
related concepts
5. NLP techniques
6. Applications
5.1 Text pre-processing
5.2 Feature Extraction
2.3 Definition and operativization
of extremist discourse
5.2.1 Lexical or Vectorial
Based Features
5.2.2 Neural Language
Models
5.2.3. Syntactic and
Semantic Features
6.1 Classification
approaches
6.2 Descriptive
approaches
6.2.1 Insights about
religious extremism
6.2.2 Insights about
political extremism
7.1 Datasets
7.2 Tools
8.1 Answer to
research
questions
8.2 Future
trends and
challenges
8. Discussion and
Conclusion
7. NLP Dataset
& Tools 
8.3 Conclusion
Figure 2: Structure of the overall review.
2.1
Extremism and radicalisation: differences and similarities
Literature shows that extremism and radicalisation are often used as synonyms or exchangeable terms to refer the same
phenomenon, which leads to the false idea that both terms mean the same. However, while authors do not usually
distinguish between them from a methodological perspective, there are indeed theoretical differences that make both
terms conceptually different. While there is no academic consensus about the deﬁnitions of extremism and radicalisation
[22], the different perspectives concerning their relationship can be summarized into three main approaches:
1. Both concepts are synonyms. This could be related to the use of both terms on political discourse, which has
transformed them in pejorative concepts that are used indistinctly [21]
2. Both concepts are different, but one of them is part of the other. In this line, several articles use the
concept of radicalisation as a term to refer to the psychological process previous to the involvement on
terrorism and extremism [23].
3. Both concepts are different without a necessary relationship among them. Regarding this approach,
Botticher [24] conducted a deep analysis of the historical roots of these concepts, when trying to deﬁne the
differences underlying them. Essentially, the term radicalisation was born during the 18th century, as a way to
deﬁne a movement against the establishment, but that is not inherently violent or positioned against democratic
values. Meanwhile, the concept of extremism refers to an anti-democratic movement, and stands against "all
those who do not embrace its dogmatic recipe for a transformation of society". Another reference to this article
can be found in Schuurman and Taylor [23] which highlight that radicalisation, understood in its historical
context, does not necessarily imply a negative connotation of "change" of the socio-political order, while
extremism does.
Concerning the present review, it is necessary to have an open position towards the three different approaches. Extremism
will be considered the core concept to study on this review, and therefore it will be used as a keyword instead of
4
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
radicalisation (as all the social movements of interest for this article are, essentially, those against democratic values).
However, due to the misconception or confusing use of both terms in the literature, both radicalisation and extremism
will be used as keywords to conduct the search on the databases during the article gathering process. Through this
decision we will be able to include articles from authors considering both terms as synonyms and those using one as
part of the other.
2.2
Extremism and other related concepts
Similarly to the terms extremism and radicalisation, there are other concepts that are currently confusing on their use in
the context of extremism research. While some of these terms are quite related, they do not share the same theoretical
deﬁnition.
Table 1 includes some of these terms, their deﬁnition, their difference with the concept of extremism and an example
from the literature regarding them. Taking into account that the main characteristic to classify a movement as extremism
is that it goes against democratic values, we can ﬁnd three different types of concepts related to extremism in this table.
The ﬁrst two terms (supremacism and sectarianism) are actually subtypes of extremism since they are both different
types of ideological movements that try to suppress or limit certain fundamental democratic values of other social
groups. When these ideological movements against democratic values use violence to try to achieve their objectives, it
could be said that they constitute a type of Terrorism (third term in the Table). Finally, the last three terms shown in the
Table (polarization, fundamentalism and nationalism), although are related to extremism, do not necessarily share its
main characteristic of going against democratic values.
There are other concepts that, appearing related to extremism, are just manifestations of the violence and discrimination
underlying this concept. Some examples could be hate speech [25], racism [26] or stalking/cyber-stalking [27]. The
creation of fake news [28] and its relationship with extremism currently represents another rising problem that has
attracted the attention from researchers.
2.3
Deﬁnition and operativization of extremist discourse
Until now, it has been presented a distinction between the concepts of radicalization and extremism, choosing extremism
as a key concept to justify the aims of this article. Also, extremism has been compared with other concepts that tend to
appear. As has been stated, this term can have different meanings depending on the approach considered by the author,
and this is why its relevant to establish a clear deﬁnition to work with. In this review, our deﬁnition of extremism will
be "an ideological movement, contrary to the democratic and ethical values of a society, that uses different methods,
including violence (physical or verbal) to achieve its objectives".
Following this deﬁnition, a second step would be to clarify what does this article means when it refers to extremist
discourse. While it could be addressed as "the use of language held by people when expressing their extremist views", it
shall be notice how authors have highlighted several features that characterizes an extremist narrative from a regular
discourse. These features, derived from different authors [46, 47, 17, 48, 49], can be summarized as follows:
• Types of extremist narrative: there are several ways on which extremist narratives try to justify their
vision and objectives. Ashour [46] divided these narratives into ﬁve categories: political, historical, socio-
psychological, instrumental and theological/moral.
– Political: the discourse includes references to grievances from one or more group towards other group.
– Historical: legitimization of the political grievance narratives through the use of historical examples and
similes.
– Socio-psychological: gloriﬁcation of acts against the system, both violent or not.
– Instrumental: justiﬁcation of the violence and "self-defense" as a way of reaching objectives.
– Theological/moral: legitimization of actions or reactions against political grievance or social oppression
through religion, morality or ethics.
• Linguistic style: the narrative styles or topics previously mentioned are built based on a speciﬁc vocabulary
and style, that helps extremists structuring their discourse. Several articles have found differences on the
linguistic style from radical and extremist texts compared to a regular sample of texts [50]. For example, the
higher use of ﬁrst and third person plural pronouns, a more negative tone or the use of more words related to
negative topics are common in these texts [49].
• Use of discursive resources such as hate speech, otherness or war narrative: extremist texts tend to use
discursive resources to justify their actions and ideas towards others. Some of these techniques have been
deeply studied, such as hate speech [17], otherness [48] or the use of war terminology to create "enemies" and
a "call to action" on others [47].
5
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
Table 1: Concepts, deﬁnitions and distinction from extremism.
Concept
Deﬁnition
Distinction from extrem-
ism
Example of the con-
cept
Supremacism
Ideology that assumes that
one group is naturally supe-
rior to another one, due to
their race, sex, economic sta-
tus, nation, etc. [29]
Could
be
a
subtype
of
extremism, as supremacist
groups are contrary to the ex-
istence of equal rights.
White
supremacist
movement [30]
Sectarianism
Form of discrimination be-
tween groups based on a spe-
ciﬁc factor. For years, it was
limited to religion, but nowa-
days this concept is techni-
cally similar to supremacism.
[31]
Would be a subtype of ex-
tremism as Supremacism,
and it is contrary to the ex-
istence of equal rights.
Conﬂicts between Na-
tionalists and Union-
ists in Northern Ireland
[32] or political dispar-
ity between Shia and
Sunni Muslims [33]
Terrorism
Systematic use of violence,
propaganda and fear towards
and speciﬁc population to
achieve ideological objec-
tives. [34]
Always
implies
violence,
while extremism does not
necessarely use it. However,
both are against one or more
fundamental values of a soci-
ety.
IRA in Ireland/North
Ireland [35], ETA in
Spain [36], FARC in
Colombia [37],
The
Islamic State [38] or
Al’Qaeda [39]
Polarization
Ideological movement to-
wards a more extreme point
of view in whatever direc-
tion is indicated by the mem-
ber’s
predeliberation
ten-
dency [40]
It is not necessarely violent
or against fundamental val-
ues of a society, as occurs
with radicalization.
Political or “partisan"
polarization [41]
Nationalism
Ideology based on the nodal
point “nation", on which a
community is tied to a cer-
tain space, and that is struc-
tured through the opposition
between the nation and dif-
ferent outgroups. [42]
Does not necessarily imply a
negative connotation. When
it turns extremist, it would
convert to supremacism.
Catalonia,
Scotland
and Canada have some
renowned
political
movements related to
nationalism [43]
Fundamentalism
Tendency to follow literally
certain dogmas or ideolo-
gies from the "fundamental"
and unchangeable practices
of the past. As sectarianism,
it has a religious connotation.
[44]
Is not necessarely violent or
against democratic values.
The “Amish" (example
of christian fundamen-
talist group) [45].
6
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
Table 2: Articles extracted from the different databases that apply NLP to extremism research.
Datasource
No. Articles
ScienceDirect
95
Scopus
573
Web of Science
41
IEEE Xplore
20
On this point, both the deﬁnition and operativization of extremist discourse have been stated. This type of discourse
is characterized by the use of speciﬁc narratives, an aggressive and polarized linguistic style and several techniques
oriented to justify a feeling of superiority or inferiority towards another group. The next sections of this article will
review how authors have used NLP to detect and describe the extremist discourse on Social Media, and the outcomes
they have reached.
3
Methodology
This section describes the process carried out to conduct the survey of the articles that apply NLP to extremism research.
This process was conducted through a systematic approach, extracting all the articles from four databases: Scopus,
ScienceDirect, IEEE Xplore and Web of Science.
Concerning the thesaurus used for the search, it was decided to use both the terms extremism and radicalisation on
the search. The reason behind this decision was that, as stated before, it is quite common that authors miss-use these
concepts as synonyms [24, 21].
Second, while the thesaurus "Natural Language Processing" was included, it was also decided to expand the search with
different subtopics, such as "Sentiment analysis", "Topic detection" and "Semantic analysis". Eventually, and due to the
recent contributions from the ﬁeld of deep learning to natural language processing [51], it was decided to include also
the subtopic "Deep learning" to the search.
Therefore, the thesaurus ﬁnally included on the searching process are presented below:
("Natural Language Processing" OR "Sentiment Analysis" OR "Topic Detection" OR "Semantic Analysis" OR "Deep
Learning") AND ("Extremism" OR "Radicalization")
No time limits were selected when conducting the review, meaning that the articles could be published any year. The
extraction was conducted in January 2021. 729 documents were found on the different databases. Table 2 shows the
distribution of articles found per database. After deleting the duplicates and the non-scientiﬁc articles (e.g. indexes),
675 articles remained on the survey.
After the searching process, a general screening of the articles was conducted. This screening process included checking
the title, the abstract and the methodology to ﬁnd out if the articles accomplished the inclusion criteria of the review.
This criteria can be summarized as:
1. The documents shall empirically apply NLP to extremism description or classiﬁcation.
2. The analysis conducted on the documents shall be quantitative.
3. The documents shall clearly state the NLP techniques they use to conduct the analysis.
4. The documents shall present a clear methodology, including all the scores and the process they followed to
conduct the analysis.
5. The article shall be written in English
After this general screening, 70 documents remained on the review. Next, a more exhaustive review was conducted over
those 70 articles, reading the content of the document and excluding the ones not accomplishing the criteria presented
above. After the second screening, 6 articles were discarded. The rest of the articles (a total of 64) were ﬁnally included
for the review.
7
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
4
General descriptive analysis of the articles
This section presents a general descriptive analysis of the articles ﬁnally included on the review. Firstly, a general
introduction is presented where the publishing years and the types of extremism detected are reviewed. Then, to identify
the most relevant topics related to NLP that deal with the selected articles, a textual analysis has been performed using
their indexing keywords. This description will also be used to structure the following sections of the paper, as it shows a
general picture about the main topics addressed by the reviewed papers.
Analyzing the timeline of the publications reviewed and the type of extremism addressed, it can be seen that the interest
for conducting research works applying NLP to study extremism has been increasing during recent years, as shown in
Fig 3. This in turn supports the ideas presented on the introduction of this article: most of the articles were published
during or after 2015, which overlaps the time lapse when ISIS was more active.
Figure 3: Type of extremism addressed by the articles included in the survey
Besides, as Fig 3 conﬁrms, the most frequently addressed type of extremism in the articles is jihadi extremism, with
a signiﬁcant gap with the rest of types. In general terms, there are 5 types of extremism approached in the literature
reviewed: religious (all of them concerning jihadism), political (far-right) political mixed (concerning far right/far left),
war (concerning conﬂicts in different countries, such as Afghanistan), and mixed (studying both religious and political
extremism). Since 2015, the studies approaching NLP and extremism grew year by year has, having a substantial
increase. In this last period, while jihadi extremism has attracted more interest, political extremism remains relatively
steady. Therefore, it could be concluded that the two predominant types of extremism analyzed religious and political.
Continuing the preliminary analysis to determine the more common topics associated with the thesaurus used on the
search on the articles, a textual analysis of the keywords related to the reviewed articles has been performed. For this
purpose, Fig. 4 shows a word cloud with the top 30 of the most frequently used keywords by the articles (keywords
used as thesaurus were excluded from the count).
As can be seen, there are different keywords than can be grouped under 4 similar concepts. First, different NLP
techniques are mentioned on the keywords (e.g. topic modeling, sentiment classiﬁcation or semantics). Second, the
8
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
Figure 4: Word cloud of keywords extracted from the articles analysed
source of the data analyzed also appears frequently on the articles keywords (e.g. Twitter, social media, YouTube, web
pages, or Dabiq, a jihadi magazine), as well as speciﬁc tools that can be used (e.g. LIWC). Third, different keywords
related to extremism are mentioned (e.g. terrorism, ISIS, far-right, extreme right, hate speech, online radicalisation, or
radicalism). Finally, some keywords are related to the methods applied, including classiﬁcation techniques, to detect
extremist content (machine learning, classiﬁcation, data/text, logistic regression or feature engineering). It should be
mentioned that, while not the objective of this survey, Social Network Analysis (SNA) appeared as one of the most used
keywords (both Social Network Analysis, Social Networks and Network Analysis), and one concurrent approach when
conducting NLP analysis.
5
NLP techniques for extremisn research
The main objective of NLP techniques is to transform free text into structured data by capturing its lexical, syntactic
and semantic information to acquire or infer new knowledge. Considering this, the NLP process can be divided
into two main phases: text pre-processing (simplifying and preparing the text for its analysis) and feature generation
(transforming the text into a structured data representation suitable to be used by the different algorithms or methods of
analysis). According to this division, the following subsections present a detailed analysis of the techniques used by the
articles reviewed for each of those speciﬁc phases.
5.1
Text pre-processing
The pre-processing of textual data is a key part of NLP, as it helps to identify and establish the fundamental units that
will be assessed during the analysis [52, 53]. This process includes a set of techniques that allow NLP algorithms
to compute and analyse words, simplifying and preparing the text for its analysis. The pre-processing techniques
mentioned on the articles are:
• Tokenization: Process of dividing a sentence in smaller units (tokens), such as words.
• Cleaning: Removal of strange or non-informative characters of the text URLs, such as symbols, punctuation,
hashtags or other special characters.
• Stop-words: Removal of words that occurs frequently and do not carry relevant information in most contexts
(such as articles or prepositions).
• Lowercasing: Process of lowercasing the capital letters (some NLP algorithms do not discriminate between
lower and uppercase).
• Lemmatization: Process of reducing inﬂected words to their roots (lemma).
• Stemming: Process of erasing preﬁxes or sufﬁxes from a word to obtain its stem.
9
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
Table 3 shows all the articles reviewed that explicitly mention using one or more of these pre-processing techniques.
Tokenization is an essential task in natural language processing used to break up a string of words into semantically
useful units called tokens, so all the articles, even if not explicitly mentioned, perform this pre-processing as part of it
NLP process.
The rest of the preprocessing tasks may or may not be performed depending on the application to be carried out. As
shown in Table 3, most of the works reviewed apply cleaning processes to the texts to eliminate unnecessary characters
and words, while few of them use the process of lowercasing. However, in the case of the process of transformation of
the words to their stems or lemmas, it can be concluded that stemming is the most used technique. The aim of both
techniques is to reduce the words to a common base form. As opposed to stemming, lemmatization does not simply
chop off inﬂections. Instead it uses lexical knowledge bases to get the correct base forms of words, and it is more
expensive computationally, which may be the reason for its minor application.
Table 3: NLP pre-processing techniques applied in reviewed articles.
Pre-processing techniques
Percentage Use
Articles explicitly mentioning them
Tokenization
100%
All the articles use tokenization.
Stop-words
35.93%
[54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68,
69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76]
Filtering
37.5%
[55, 56, 58, 60, 62, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73,
74, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84]
Lowercasing
9.37%
[71, 72, 56, 78, 84, 85]
Lemmatization
4.68%
[77, 56, 86]
Stemming
20.31%
[76, 75, 62, 74, 65, 71, 59, 61, 54, 66, 86, 87, 88]
5.2
Feature Extraction
After the pre-processing of the textual data, different text mining techniques are used to transform tokens into structured
data by capturing its lexical, syntactic and semantic information. These structured data can be eventually used as input
for the different algorithms to acquire or infer new knowledge. Table ?? presents all the techniques mentioned on the
review, together with the articles included on the review that have apply them as part of their methodological approach.
These techniques can be grouped into 3 different categories according to the type of linguistic information captured,
which are explained below in detail in the following sections. A ﬁrst descriptive analysis of the techniques is conducted
for each of these subsections. Afterwards, a comparative analysis of these techniques is carried out within the area of
research on extremism, highlighting the advantages and disadvantages of each technique within this speciﬁc domain.
5.2.1
Lexical or Vectorial Based Features
The tokens extracted from the pre-processing phase have to be transformed into more complex data structures represent-
ing a ﬁnal textual features to be further processed. For this purpose, different techniques of text representation modeling
can be applied. Vector Space Models (VSM) [117] is one of the most widely text representation used in classical NLP
approaches. The idea of the VSM is to represent each text or document in a collection as a point in a space (a vector
in a vector space) based on the token extracted. After the tokenization process, the ﬁrst step to generate this type of
representation consists on deﬁning the weighting technique to compute the tokens (terms) appearance’s frequency in a
text. The articles reviewed mention several different techniques to generate this vector representation:
• N-grams: tokens of size 1 are obtained from pre-process the free texts, which means that represents only
one word. However, sentences generally contain compound terms (such as living room or coffee machine)
formed by several words with a single meaning. The use of grouping multiple tokens together to represent that
inherent meaning can be very beneﬁcial for NLP subsequent tasks, and this is what n-grams models provide
[118]. A uni-gram is any single element of the text, while a bi-gram or a tri-gram is composed by two or three
elements, respectively, that appear sequentially on the text. Skip-gram is a special version of n-gram, as it
works the same way, but considering tokens that are not necessarily juxtaposed on the text. Therefore, an
analysis based on n-grams consider n elements as a single token. One of the main advantages of this approach
is that high “n" sizes help providing context for words [17]. Table 5 summarizes which type of n-gram used
the articles reviewed, where the unigrams are not shown since, as mentioned above, they would be 1-sized
tokens that have been already obtained through the pre-process techniques.
• Dictionaries: uses pre-established lists of lexicons (words or sentences) to ﬁlter or group the pre-processed
tokens. Therefore, any term found inside the lexicon is considered as a ﬁnal token to generate the ﬁnal text
10
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
Table 4: Summary of NLP techniques for feature generation using in the articles reviewed.
Approach
NLP technique
Percentage Use
Articles
Lexical or Vectorial
N-grams
28,12%
[89, 66, 59, 73, 54, 90, 60, 64, 63, 91, 70,
67, 72, 68, 55, 85, 56, 84]
Dictionaries
37.5%
[92, 82, 93, 65, 94, 83, 95, 96, 79, 57, 97,
77, 84, 64, 98, 99, 100, 101, 70, 67, 81, 102,
72, 103]
TF
50%
[98, 80, 63, 83, 104, 89, 99, 86, 60, 73, 100,
105, 101, 106, 70, 67, 95, 96, 107, 92, 81,
108, 102, 82, 72, 103, 76, 78, 85, 91, 75, 93,
87]
TF-IDF
23.43%
[75, 58, 69, 61, 62, 66, 74, 59, 68, 88, 71,
55, 90, 54, 56]
Dichotomous ap-
pearance
1.56%
[109]
Log-likelihood
3.12%
[87, 91]
Neural Lenguage Models
Word2Vec
9.37%
[55, 78, 97, 90, 85, 54, 56, 77]
FastText
4.68%
[58, 78, 93]
GloVe
3.12%
[78, 79]
Sintantic and Semantic
Part-of-speech
25%
[93, 101, 61, 54, 110, 105, 86, 111, 112,
113, 114, 89, 106, 107, 115, 88]
NER
7.81%
[83, 64, 94, 13, 60]
LSF
4.68%
[90, 54, 60]
Parse trees
1.56%
[115]
LDA
15.62%
[83, 96, 77, 84, 64, 85, 69, 82, 73, 90]
NMF
4.68%
[69, 116, 62]
Sentiment scoring
37.49%
[110, 104, 64, 60, 54, 69, 84, 101, 105, 86,
112, 113, 114, 106, 107, 65, 95, 99, 81, 78,
92, 108, 76, 58]
Semantic tagging
12.50%
[110, 64, 94, 13, 77, 93, 98, 91]
Word/sentence
length
7.81%
[87, 88, 115, 114, 113]
Use of emoticons
3.12%
[80, 108]
Use of punctua-
tion
3.12%
[115, 88]
Table 5: Type of n-gram used on the article reviewed.
N-gram type
Percentage Use
Articles using it
Bi-gram
15.62%
[89, 66, 59, 73, 54, 90, 60, 64, 63, 91]
Bi-gram + Tri-gram
6.25%
[70, 67, 72, 68]
Bi-gram + Tri-gram + Skip-gram
4.68%
[55, 85, 56]
Tri-gram + Tetra-gram + Penta-gram
1.56%
[84]
representation. Dictionaries can also group the frequency of terms as a whole token, thus calculating the
frequency of occurrence of a dictionary itself. The main advantage of the dictionaries is that they capture
concepts deﬁned by different terms. However, they are also very vulnerable to words not previously included
on the lexicon.
• Term frequency (TF): is the more basic weighting technique in NLP, and consists on the raw sum of the
apparition of each token found in the text. It can be represented as tf(t, d), on which t is the number of times a
token appears on the document d.
• Term Frequency - Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF): is an evolution of the aforementioned TF.
While the TF just sums the frequency of occurrence of a token in a text, TF-IDF also divides it by the frequency
of occurrence of a word in the whole corpus. When a word is more frequent in a text than in the whole
corpus, it means that this word is relevant for the text, and therefore it has a higher score [119]. It is useful to
discriminate between relevant words and words with no relevant meaning, such as stop-words [17].
11
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
• Dichotomous appearance: this technique does not consider the frequency of a token, but instead the pres-
ence/not presence of a token. Therefore, it is computed as 0 if the term does not appear, and 1 if the term
appears.
• Log-likelihood: this association metric [120] is used to compute the signiﬁcance of co-occurrence of two
variables (for example, two tokens, a token with the group used to classify, etc.). Therefore, this technique
is not focused on the frequency of a single token, but in the frequency of two conditions appearing together,
which may include one or two tokens.
Focusing on Table ??, the ﬁrst point to note is the high use of N-grams and dictionary techniques, exceeding 25% in
both cases. This is due to the fact that, from the text pre-processing phase, tokens of size 1 are obtained representing
the text, and in many cases, before applying more complex techniques that transform such tokens into complex data
structures, it is beneﬁcial to apply some basic NLP techniques. These techniques allow to group or ﬁlter the tokens by
aggregating them a ﬁrst level of lexical information.
The major advantage provided by the N-grams approach is that it is independent from the text. This means that all the
text can be vectorized using these techniques, no matter if they appear on a lexicon or not. This is specially useful when
applying NLP to extremism research, as texts usually combine terms in different languages. However, this versatility
also has a handicap: the terms vectored may have no relevant meaning for the researcher, and therefore extra work shall
be conducted here to identify which terms are relevant or not.
On the other hand, the use of dictionaries is helpful to detect and classify tokens into meaningful psycho-linguistic
categories [72, 86]. This is a great advantage in the ﬁeld of extremism research, taking into consideration the
psychological background that motivates extremist behaviour. In fact, one of the main dictionaries’ based tool, LIWC,
was born with the aim of conducting psychological research from texts, and has been frequently applied to extract
psychological insights and extremist slang from extremist texts [49]. However, they require a previous effort from the
researchers to prepare the lexicons or to adapt them to other languages [115]. This last point is specially relevant in the
case of jihadi extremism, as texts usually combine Islamic terminology (written in Arabic) with different languages
[115].
Continuing with the analysis of the Vectoral Space Models applied in the reviewed articles, TF and TF-IDF are the
most used techniques. The second is a evolution from the ﬁrst one, using IDF to eliminate the common terms from the
language that are not relevant to categorize texts (in this case, extremist content). Taking into consideration that several
articles from the review conduct ﬁltering pre-processing techniques to eliminate irrelevant terms (such as stop-words),
there is not a huge difference among them concerning the extremism research ﬁeld. The main advantage of these
techniques is their simplicity and broad use, which lead them to be the most commonly applied techniques. But they
have the great disadvantage that they do not provide semantic information about the terms.
Dichotomous appearance was only used in one article. While it presents a clear advantage (it is quite easy to implement),
it has one main disadvantage: as stated on the previous section, some terms are used with different semantic meanings
in regular and extremist texts [13, 79, 94, 102]. Analyzing only the apparition of a term can be poorly informative for
the researcher. Finally, Log-likelihood can be used for analysing association among terms, which allows to provide
more contextual information, but it is still a very little used technique within the extremist ﬁeld of study.
A brief summary of the advantages and disadvantages of all these techniques appears on table 6:
5.2.2
Neural Language Models (Word embedding)
Techniques based on Neural Models include a set of methods that transform tokens obtained from the pre-processing
phase into meaningful vectors through the use of neural networks, allowing to capture the relationship among them
[121] and, therefore, information about words semantically related. In recent years, the application of these models in
the ﬁeld of extremism research have gained more relevance, as they are useful to keep information about the semantic
meaning of terms. This is, precisely, the advantage of this type of models to extract textual features compared with the
classics models seen in the previous section. This aspect is specially relevant when applied to classiﬁcation tasks and
the use of deep learning to identify extremist content [97, 57]. The most common Neural Models found on the reviewed
articles are:
• Word2Vec: allows to predict words depending on the context, maintaining the semantic meaning of the
sentence. To do so, the model creates a vector related to each word through the use of a single layer neural
network, which can be interpreted as a space. The words that are more likely to appear together on the text
will appear closer on that space, therefore sharing semantic context [122]. Among the different versions of this
technique, Continuous Bag-of-Word model and Skip-Gram model are the more commonly used [123, 124].
12
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
Table 6: Comparison of Vector Space Models based techniques to generate features in the articles reviewed.
Technique
Advantages
Disadvantages
N-grams
-Able to keep semantic information.
-Captures basic semantic information.
-High versatility, due to its indepen-
dence from the text (useful for multi-
language texts)
-The tokens detected may not have in-
terest for the researcher.
Dictionaries
-Useful to conduct psycho-linguistic
meaningful analysis
-Low
versatility
(vulnerable
to
changes on the language and word
structure).
-Useful to detect and classify speciﬁc
slang and terminology.
-Highly dependent on the lexicons in-
cluded.
TF/TF-IDF
-Simple and widely used.
-Not capture semantic context infor-
mation.
-TF needs a previous stopwords ﬁlter-
ing.
Dichotomous appearance
-The simplest technique.
-Not capture semantic context infor-
mation.
Log Likelihood
-Captures information of association
among terms.
-Few applied in the area.
• FastText: technique developed by Facebook [125] that works similarly than Word2Vec skip-gram, but
overcoming two limitations of this model: it allows to incorporate subwords in the embedding process, and
therefore allows to include words not contained on the original test lexicon [126].
• GloVe: standing for Global Vectors for Word Representation, this technique was developed in Stanford [127],
and relies on the use of a word co-occurrence matrix on which factorization techniques are applied to extract
the vectors associated with each word. While Word2Vec appears to have a better performance than this
technique, Glove has the advantage of having more available trained models to work with [128].
Analysing the application of these approaches in the reviewed articles on extremism, three different purposes can be
identiﬁed: bias analysis (how pejorative terms are related to some entities and not to others) [77], to check how two
texts use similar tokens but with different meanings [85, 79], or to create new lexicons based on an already checked text
[78, 56]. Another advantage of these techniques, beyond the variety of applications they have, is that they can be used
to overcome language limitations on extremist detection [57].
Regarding the frequency of use of these techniques in the ﬁeld of extremism, as shown in the Table 4, the technique
most used (Word2Vec) does not reach 10%, a value much lower than most of the classical techniques based on vector
space models. This is due to the fact that this type of approach is becoming of great importance just in the last few
years, and it is at the current time when the extension of its application in the ﬁeld of extremism is taking place.
Only one article reported a comparison among FastText, Word2Vec and GloVe on an extremism classiﬁcation task.
FastText performed slightly better than the others two. However, Word2Vec and its variations (doc2vec, graph2vec,
etc.) still remain as most used word embedding technique. Table 7 summarizes the comparative of these techniques in
the context of extremism research.
A brief summary of the advantages and disadvantages of all these techniques appear on table 7.
Table 7: Comparison of Neural Models based techniques to generate features used in articles reviewed.
Technique
Advantages
Disadvantages
Word2Vec
-Allows to predict words depending on the
context.
-Does not recognize words not included on
the trained lexicon (problematic in multilin-
gual approaches).
FastText
-Allows to incorporate words not contained
on trained lexicon.
-Few applied in the area
GloVe
-High amount of trained models to work
with.
-Few applied in the area
13
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
5.2.3
Syntactic and Semantic Features
There are NLP techniques based on the analysis of data according to a particular context for generating features
representing the text [129]. The type of contextual information assessed depends on the NLP technique applied, but
common approaches include sentiment analysis, topic detection or semantic analysis, among others. Techniques of this
type used by the reviewed articles include:
• Part-of-Speech (POS): allows tagging every word with its grammatical category (e.g. nouns, verbs or
adjectives) depending on the structure of the text where it is found [130].
• Lexical Syntactic Feature-based (LSF): allows capturing the dependence inside a sentence or a text between
two terms [131]. These two terms are later compared to determine the context and the direction of the
expression.
• Named Entity Recognition (NER): deals with the identiﬁcation of entities (e.g. names, organizations or
locations) in the text, tagging them as relevant subjects [132].
• Parse trees (PT): allows to construct a representation of how the concepts can be used recursively in a
sentence. Parse trees include all the tokens and their relationships, along with a set of rules that allow to
substitute the token while maintaining the syntactic rules.
• Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA): is one of the most popular topic detection techniques on Natural Lan-
guage Processing. It extracts topics from a corpus of text based on word probabilities: for each latent topic, it
extracts the probability distribution of a combination of words, which helps to identify the main topics. [133]
• Non-Negative Matrix Factorization (NMF): is a topic modeling technique which relies on the use of linear
algebra algorithms in a TF-IDF document matrix to deﬁne topics [134].
• Sentiment Scoring: (SS) provides a score for every text unit (e.g. sentence or text) based on its latent
emotional valence, with the aim of understanding the authors opinion or emotional state about something
[135]. This score can be computed as dimensional (through a single scoring about the valence) or categorical
(specifying which emotions are expressed in the text). Table 8 summarizes how both approaches are distributed
among the reviewed articles:
Table 8: Type of sentiment analysis approaches using in the reviewed articles on extremist
Sentiment analysis approach
Percentage Use
Articles using it
Sentiment scoring (dimensional)
32.81%
[110, 101, 107, 84, 104, 105, 86, 112, 113, 114,
106, 65, 95, 99, 81, 92, 108, 76, 54, 64, 58]
Emotion scoring (categorical)
9.37%
[110, 104, 69, 78, 60, 58]
• Semantic tagging (ST): implies the process of automatic extracting concepts, entities or topics from the
tokens in a text [136].
• Word/sentence length: analyses the length of the words (based on characters) and/or the sentences (based on
words) [87, 88, 115, 114, 113].
• Use of emoticons: emoticons are built as graphical ﬁgures to express emotions or behaviours on the text,
using a combination of characters [80, 108].
• Use of punctuation: this approach implies the analysis of the use of punctuation signs as part of the syntactic
distribution of the sentence [115, 88].
These types of techniques go a step further into the representation of texts, taking advantage of the tokens to conduct
more complex analysis. This is specially useful in a ﬁeld such as extremism research, on which simply token use or
frequency can be misleading in the interpretation of outcomes [13].
The ﬁrst four techniques mentioned, POS, NER, LSF and PT, are used to analyze, tag and extract information about
the syntactical structure underlying tokens. POS and NER are used to identify the nouns and entities present on the
text. Then this information is used to determine which nouns from the text are actual people, organizations or locations
[60, 64, 94, 13, 83], among others. In particular, according to the articles reviewed, NER technique shows that using
a combination of noun semantic categories was statistically more accurate to determine if a text included extremist
content than using token analysis, sentiment or topic features [64, 94]. Analyzing the frequency of application shown in
the Table 4 of these 4 techniques in the ﬁeld of extremism, it can be noticed that the technique most commonly used is
POS with 25%, being the rest of the techniques very few used in comparison.
14
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
On the other hand, LSF and PT take into consideration the syntax and the dependencies among tokens. In this case, LSF
analyze the relationship between two syntactically dependent tokens [90, 54], while Parse trees build representations of
several tokens and use their syntactic structure to ﬁnd tokens combined in the same way [115]. LSF was compared with
Vectorial Space Models as classiﬁcation feature, but it did not perform better than the latter [60].
Concerning topic extraction, LDA and NMF have been the mainly used techniques on the reviewed articles. LDA
has the advantage of relying on a statistical base and to be commonly used in the literature [69]. However, as a study
states [82], it performs poorly with short texts (e.g. tweets). Taking into account that most of the articles reviewed use
Twitter to extract their extremist datasets, this is an important disadvantage. NMF appears as an alternative to LDA, as
it appears to present more readily interpretable results [62, 116], and also to have a better performance on short texts
[134], although in the articles reviewed it is used much less frequently (see Table 4).
Adding a topic an “emotional value" can help forming a representative idea about the author’s agreement with that
topic [76, 113]. For example, two studies focused on Arabic regular population found that Twitter users tone was more
negative when ISIS conducted a murdered, won a battle or made a public call or movement [65, 137]. Sentiment scoring
techniques are divided in two different approaches: a dimensional approach, based on a single score, and a categorical
approach, based on the classiﬁcation of tokens inside one or more emotions (such as anger, fear or happiness). A
combination of both strategies can be found on some of the articles reviewed [110, 86]. These techniques can be used
to measure the emotions expressed on the text, together with the opinion of the writer towards a speciﬁc token in the
text[138]. The main difference among them are their theoretical approach, but also how they are applied: dimensional
scoring usually involves selecting a token, around which the scoring process takes part. On the other hand, categorical
scoring usually classiﬁes tokens depending on the emotion they represent, and therefore are more focused on single
tokens. In the case of extremism research, both approaches can be useful, as they can be used to identify how do
extremist texts approach different topics [110, 105], which valence have their tones [108] or which connotations have
the terms they use [104]. Finally, the concept of semantic tagging was used on the articles reviewed to tag tokens
with semantic information regarding their context. This strategy, very similar to NER (sometimes using it), tags the
tokens with entities, but also with concepts and categories [110]. Focusing on the use of this type of techniques in
the reviewed articles, Table 4 shows that the sentiment analysis techniques are the most used within the techniques to
extract syntactic and semantic features, exceeding 37% in the case of sentiment scoring.
Last three techniques are focused on the analysis of the text formatting characteristics, to build other types of features
that capture more information than that provided by the text itself. For example, the length and quantity of texts,
sentences or words, the number of characters inside a word, the use of punctuation or emoticons, etc. In all the cases,
text characteristic features have been used as a complement to other text features, never as single feature extracted from
the free text. However, they have showed little impact to describe or predict extremism on texts, and in general all of
them are being applied in few of the reviewed works (as can be seen in the last 3 rows of the Table 4).
Table 9 presents a summary of all the techniques used to generate syntactic and semantic features showing their
advantages and disadvantages both in general application and in extremism literature.
6
Applications of NLP in extremism research
Previous section has detailed all the NLP techniques used in the reviewed works on extremism to process data in text
form and generate features as structured data. Depending on the objectives to be achieved in each of the reviewed works,
one or several of these generated features are used to acquire new knowledge. But, in general, two main purposes have
been identiﬁed in the reviewed papers for which they are used:
• As a feature for classiﬁcation models generated with machine learning algorithms to discriminate between
extremist and non-extremist content.
• To conduct a descriptive analysis characterizing the extremism: for example, to detect speciﬁc slang in the
case of extremism.
Based on these two main approaches, next subsections present a descriptive and comparative analysis of the works that
apply each one, highlighting their outcomes.
6.1
Classiﬁcation approaches
As can be derived from the general analysis of the reviewed articles presented in Section 4, classiﬁcation was one of the
main topics of interest regarding NLP applications on extremism. This is unsurprising, as one of the key objectives of
this research ﬁeld is to help Law Enforcement Agencies to identify extremist content. More than half of the articles
15
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
Table 9: Comparison of Syntactic and Semantic based techniques to generate features for text representation.
Technique
Advantages
Disadvantages
POS
-Allows to detect the grammatical type of
tokens
-Regarding nouns, not as informative as
NER.
-Widely used in the area with different ap-
plications (term disambiguation or classiﬁ-
cation)
NER
-Detects entities, categorizing them. Useful
to identify the main actors in an extremist
discourse.
-Not as extended as POS, limited to nouns
and to a trained lexicon.
LSF
-Provides a meaningful relationship among
tokens.
-Does not perform better in the applications
within the area than more simple features.
PT
-Finds sentences with an structure grammat-
ically similar.
-Does not inform about the tokens itself.
Not commonly used on extremism litera-
ture.
LDA
-Widely used on extremism research.
-Performs poorly on short texts, such as
tweets (very used to conduct extremism
analysis).
-Performs closer to a human topic classiﬁer
than other techniques.
-Tends to over-generalize topics
NMF
-Alternative for LDA showing a good per-
formance on short texts.
-Not commonly used by authors, who tend
to use LDA.
SS (Dim.)
-Simple way of measuring a sentence emo-
tional value.
-Does not provide elaborate information
about emotions in the sentence.
-Useful to detect opinions, specially use-
ful when combined with the detection of
entities in the radical discourse.
SC. (Cat.)
-Provides information about emotions in the
sentence, tagging tokens and sentences with
emotional categories (Happiness, sadness,
anger...)
-Not so useful to detect opinions or tone
towards a token.
ST
-As an evolution of NER, this approach
"tags" nouns with their entity, concept and
category.
-Useful to discriminate a word thanks to its
context, very useful on extremism research.
Text formatting
-Captures more information than those pro-
vided by the text itself.
-Has to be used as a complement to other
text features.
included on the review (54.68% of the articles) applied one or more classiﬁcation algorithms, specially during the ﬁrst
years of ISIS activity. As shown in Fig. 5, 2015 and 2018 were the only years after the beginning of ISIS activity
on which there are more articles not using classiﬁcation techniques than articles using them. The common use of
classiﬁcation approaches shows that there was a bigger interest on detecting extremism than on deﬁning it.
With the objective of training classiﬁcation models based on NLP features to discriminate between extremist and
non-extremist content, different Machine Learning (ML) algorithms have been applied in the reviewed works. These
works uses ML approaches to address issues that goes from sentiment tagging (using a pre-labelled dataset) to proper
user classiﬁcation (extremist vs non-extremist). Fig. 6 shows the frequency of application of every ML algorithm found
on the articles reviewed, where it can be seen that Support Vector Machine (SVM) is the most commonly used model,
followed by Random Forest, Naïve Bayes and Decision Tree (J48).
Concerning the model used by each article, Table 10 summarizes what kind of Machine Learning algorithms were
used by all the articles including classiﬁcation tasks. It also highlights the NLP features that are directly (or indirectly)
involved on the generation of the classiﬁcation models.
Apart from these classiﬁcation tasks, ﬁve articles conducted other predictive learning tasks. These include the prediction
of how the radicalization process takes place [72], how extremist behavioral changes occur among the members of a
group [103], the daily level of online recruitment activities conducted by extremist groups [96], the risk of a video to be
raided by extremist groups [61] or the risk of pro-ISIS terms as part of a person’s vocabulary [95].
16
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
Figure 5: Frequency of articles using classiﬁcation techniques vs those not using them.
Focusing on the use of basic features based on vectorial space models, such as n-grams and dictionaries (shown in Table
10), the ﬁrst ones [83, 60, 85, 101, 70, 96, 59, 71] has been used more than the second ones [58, 78, 72, 85]. It would
be difﬁcult to determine which of these two techniques performs better. In fact, the study of Figea et al. [86] found that
there is no relevant difference between using dependent techniques (such n-grams) or independent (such as LIWC)
from the text when creating a classiﬁcation model. A general limitation from both techniques is that similar terms can
be used with different meanings in two texts, leading to confusions on the data interpretation process [94, 13, 102, 79].
This is common in the context of religious radicalization, where religious terms can be used by regular religious texts,
but also by extremists texts [79]. While using n-grams (when n > 1) is a way to overcome this limitation, they are a
primitive option to keep semantic information [84, 59]. There are, however, techniques that are more informative than
these to conduct complex NLP analysis. For example, n-grams were found to be less able to identify topics in radical
texts than LDA or dictionaries [84].
Regarding sentiment features, they are not usually used as a single feature to detect extremist content, specially
concerning political radicalisation [107]. While the type of features do not perform bad either and they, in fact, perfform
better than other less complex features [58], usually classiﬁcation models trained with more features perform better
than those who use only sentiment features [114, 60, 64, 101, 106, 78]. In fact, those classiﬁers based on semantic
features exclusively performed better than those based on sentiment features exclusively [64, 78]. For example, a study
conducted by Weir et al. [114] compared the usefulness of two classiﬁcation tools, one based on sentiment features
and the other using POS feature together with text formatting features such as number of sentences, average length or
quantity of characters. The second showed a better performance, but it could be due to the high number of features used
on it. Other three articles [115, 88, 87] also used text formatting features and other text features, as models to describe
and classify extremist content. None showed a signiﬁcant difference from classiﬁers that only use features that extract
information from the text itself. But there are several works which conclude that text text formatting features (such as
sentence length[88] or emoticons [80, 108]) are a good add-on to improve the accuracy of the classiﬁcation models.
Finally, the best classiﬁcation outcomes are achieved using features based on Neural Language Models (word embed-
ding). Articles using this type of textual representation as classiﬁcation feature found that it tends to perform better than
other classical features such as vectorial space models [93, 85, 54], or syntactic and semantic features [90, 78]. One
article, however, pointed that word embedding tend to perform poorly than n-grams on short pieces of text [55]. As
happened with other NLP features, it was found that combining word embedding based features with the other types
also showed better classiﬁcation outcomes than using it isolated [78, 56].
17
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
Figure 6: Type of Machine Learning algorithm used among the articles
The main purpose of most articles that use features based on Neural Language Models in classiﬁcation tasks is the
detection of extremist content. As other types of features, they are quite dependent on the type of machine learning
algorithm used [54, 90, 97, 93], but they work specially good when combined with neural networks of different type
[58, 57]. They are also good to detect radical users, but have been found to perform poorer than n-grams to detect
extremism on small pieces of text [55].
6.2
Descriptive approaches
A second application of NLP techniques in extremism research found is the characterization and study of the phe-
nomenon of extremism from a descriptive perspective. Within these works, 5 different descriptive focus can be
identiﬁed:
• Terms: descriptive analysis on the terms commonly used by extremists. Characterization of the type of
extremist vocabulary.
• Topics: detection of the most common topics discussed by extremist texts.
• Sentiment: analysis of the sentiment and tone of an extremist discourse.
• Semantic: analysis of the contextual information around terms inside an extremist text.
• Punctuation: descriptive analysis of the text format commonly used in the extremist environment.
Table 11 summarizes the type of descriptive analysis performed for each of the articles reviewed. The most simple
descriptive approach would focus on the terms, while the inclusion of other approaches (topics, sentiment, semantic or
18
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
Table 10: Type of features input to the ML models employed in the reviewed articles (SVM: Support Vector Machine,
KNN: K-Nearest Neighbors, NB: Naïve Bayes, RF: Random Forest, Log R: Logistic Regression, LMM: Linear Mixed
Models, RNN: Recurrent Neural Networks, CNN: Convolutional Neural Networks, FCNN: Fully-Connected Neural
Networks, SGD: Stochastic gradient descent).
ML
method
Features
N-
grams
Dic.
TF-IDF TF
POS
NER
LSF
PT
SS
LDA
Emb.
ST
Others
SVM
[60, 54,
64,
66,
59, 55]
[86,
115, 88,
80, 66]
[88, 66,
59,
54,
90, 55]
[60, 54,
96,
58,
93,
90,
65, 104,
86, 108,
80,
78,
13]
[86,
115, 88,
93]
[60, 88] [60, 54,
90]
[115] [86, 65,
108, 54,
64,
88,
58,
78,
60]
[64, 96,
90]
[78, 54,
93,
90,
55]
[64, 13, 93] [115, 88]
KNN
[59, 55] [80]
[59, 68,
55]
[58,
108, 80]
[108,
58]
NB
[54, 66,
59,
68,
55]
[88, 66,
72]
[88, 71,
66,
59,
54, 55]
[54, 96,
58,
94,
93,
68,
108, 72,
85, 13]
[88, 93] [88]
[54]
[108,
54,
88,
58]
[96]
[54, 93,
85, 55]
[94, 13, 93] [88]
Boosting
[96, 93]
[93]
[96]
[93]
[93]
J48
[59, 67,
68, 55]
[72]
[59, 68,
54, 55]
[68, 65,
106, 67,
101, 72,
13]
[101]
[101,
112,
114,
106, 65]
[55]
[13]
[114]
RF
[54, 89,
66,
59,
68,
55,
56]
[86, 66,
56]
[58, 61,
66,
59,
68,
55,
56]
[54, 61,
58,
93,
68,
65,
86,
89,
85]
[86, 93,
89]
[54]
[86,
114, 65,
54,
58,
56]
[54, 93,
85,
55,
56]
[93]
[114, 89]
Adaboost
[86, 88] [88]
[86]
[86, 88] [88]
[86, 88]
[88]
Log R
[54, 68,
55]
[103,
72]
[68, 54,
55]
[54, 93,
68, 108,
103, 72,
78]
[93]
[54]
[108,
54, 78]
[78, 54,
97,
93,
55]
[93]
LMM
[103]
[103]
XGBoost
[90]
[90]
[90]
[90]
Maximum
En-
tropy
[65]
[65]
Bagging
[65]
[65]
RNN
[61]
[58]
[97, 58]
CNN
[58]
[58]
FCNN
[57]
Extra
Ran-
dom
Trees
[61]
[61]
Ensemble
meth-
ods
[59]
[59]
SGD
[68]
[68]
[68]
punctuation) add extra layers to the description of the discourse. This is why the terms approach is the most common.
In addition, we can see that almost all the rest of descriptive analyses have previously performed a term analysis,
showing that all the approaches are complementary. Sentiment analysis is the only one that is occasionally performed
independently.
19
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
Table 11: Descriptive linguistic approach used by the reviewed articles.
Descriptive linguistic approach
Percentage Use
Articles using it
Terms
67.85%
[69, 70, 73, 79, 81, 82, 83, 84, 87, 91, 63, 75, 76, 100, 98,
102, 110, 105, 111]
Topics
46,42%
[69, 73, 82, 83, 84, 63, 75, 76, 100, 62, 77, 116, 109]
Sentiment
39.28%
[69, 76, 81, 110, 105, 104, 92, 99, 113, 107, 82]
Semantic
17.85%
[110, 77, 79, 91, 98]
Punctuation
3.57%
[87]
Regarding the insights about extremism found in the reviewed works, sections 6.2.1 and 6.2.2 highlight the main
patterns observed, classiﬁed by the two predominant types of extremism found in Section 4: Religious and Political.
Table 12 introduces a summary and comparison between the two most studied extremist movements, Jihadism and
Far-right, which are explained in detail below.
Table 12: Comparison of discourse insights from the most commonly mentioned extremist groups’ discourse.
Insights
Jihadi extremism
Far-right extremism
Terms
-Religious terms, geographical references.
-Supremacist, racist, antiimmigration and
anti-left terms. Speciﬁc slang regarding these
-Speciﬁc slang related to the religious conﬂict
(e. g. “Crusaders", “Kafﬁr", etc.).
-Speciﬁc slang regarding the previously
mentioned terms (e.g.
“Illegal Aliens",
“WhiteGenocide", “14-88", etc.)
Topics
-Religion, war, geopolitics, extremist philoso-
phy, recruitment, military.
-Politics, racial topics, immigration and war.
Sentiment
-Jihadi women tend to be more extreme on
their messages than men.
-Negative messages directed against Jews,
LGBT and black people.
-General presence of negative tone.
-General presence of negative tone
-Words related with emotions of fear, hate and
violence, except when talking about topics
such as paradise or martyrdom.
-Use of anger, disgust and negativity related
terms.
-A positive tone towards ISIS can be related
to a complicity with this group.
Semantic
-Preference for terms such as “Islamic State"
or “Caliphate", instead of ISIS. Entities are a
good way to discriminate between a regular
or an extremist use of a term.
-Common semantic categories include “vio-
lence" and “anger"
Punctuation
-Frequent use of Arabic terms, even in non-
Arabic texts.
6.2.1
Literature insights about religious extremism
Concerning common terms used by religious extremism, the name "ISIS" was more mentioned by neutral users than by
extremist users [110, 79, 83], who preferred the term "Islamic State" or "Caliphate".The more frequent terms found in
the extremist text analyzed in the articles were related to religious (e.g. Allah, Jihad or Islam) or geographical references
(e.g. Syria, Raqqa, America or Iraq) [110, 79, 102, 83, 111]. The descriptive analysis of the text also detected the
common use of speciﬁc slang terms, such as "Crusaders", "Mujahideen" or "Abu" [79, 102].
The works carrying out an descriptive analysis focused on the topics shows that the most frequent topic related to
Jihadi extremism was, unsurprisingly, religion [96, 76, 73]. Jihadi magazines more easily identiﬁable topics were
war, geopolitics, religious speech, government and administration [83]. Inspire (Al Qaeda’s magazine) was more
focused on conﬂict legitimisation and philosophy, while Dabiq and Rumiyah (ISIS magazine) were more focused on
the geopolitical conﬂict [73]. Some of the topics, such as recruitment, were found hidden among topics referring to
religious and military aspects of the Syria conﬂict[96].
Combining sentiment analysis and topic detection, jihadi women were found more extreme than men on their messages
on nearly every relevant topic [76]. Concerning the journals, it was found that most of their texts had negative tone,
while using terms related to fear, except when they discussed about topics such as paradise or martyrdom [110, 105].
Words such as Allah or Islamic State were also found to have negative connotations when analyzed through a sentiment
20
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
analysis approach. Authors hypothesize that this can be due to their use use as justiﬁcation of violent behaviours. A
study concerning jihadi radical forums also found that the most extremist texts also scored more on negative dimensions,
using violence and hate terms, than those more moderate [104]. Finally, a study hypothesized that radical users that
presented a good tone towards ISIS (on their tweets) showed in fact complicity with it [108].
While the descriptive term analysis approach helps providing a ﬁrst insight, it shall be remembered that context can
vary the meaning of a token [102]. From this perspective, articles focused on semantic discrimination allowed to check
how these keywords are used depending on the intention of the text. For example, Gomes et al. [79] stated that the
background of the terms "ISIS", "Islamic" and "Syria" changes depending on the origin of the text analysed (neutral
or extremist). A study analyzing divergences on the semantic meaning of words, conducted by Fernandez et al. [13],
classiﬁed terms into different semantic groups (category, entity and type of entity). It was found that similar words were
used differently by radical and non-radical users, including the name of radical groups. Entities were found to be a
good way of discriminating the semantic meaning of a term. Finally, the study of Kursunku et al. [85] conducted a
comparative analysis between extremist and non-extremist religious users. They found that, while both groups shared
terminology when referring to the religious concept, the extremist group used much more terms related to radical
Islamism and hate speech. This is why using token analysis techniques combined with other strategies can be more
informative than using it isolated.
As can be stated by these insights, and taking into consideration the features of an extremist discourse presented on
section 2.3, Jihadi extremism presents several of these features. Their use of speciﬁc slang and expressions, together
with a negative tone, shows how they present and speciﬁc linguistic style. Also, they build their discourses with a
special emphasis on a theological and moral narrative, but also with the gloriﬁcation of religious acts of violence against
a common enemy (Western society and non-believers). While it is difﬁcult to determine how much their use of war
topics is related with a speciﬁc narrative or the geopolitical situation of the territories on which they operated, it can
also be stated that war (and its instrumentalization) its a key element on the construction of their narrative.
6.2.2
Literature insights about political extremism
Regarding the reviewed works focused on conducting a descriptive analysis of the terms most commonly used
by far-right extremism, an article analyzing an Alt-right community [81] found that they used racist (BlackMagic,
WhitesLivesMatter), anti-immmigration (BuildTheWall, IllegalAliens) supremacist (WhiteGenocide, WhitePeople,
ChasingDownWhites) and anti-left (AntifaTerrorists) terms and hashtags on their tweets. This work also found to use
speciﬁc slang to refer to other racial minorities, such as "aliens" to refer to immigrants. Among a sample of videos
massively attacked by far right groups from 4chan, some of the most mentioned keywords were “black", “police",
“white", “shot", “gun", “world", “war", “American", “government" or “law". [61]. Other relevant keywords on far-right
extremist groups can be the mention of the numbers “14" (a reference to the “fourteen words", a white nationalist
slogan) and “88" (meaning “Heil Hitler", as the H is the 8th letter of the alphabet), but also to the genocide, nazism,
anti-islamic and anti-jewish groups [62, 116].
Concerning the analysis of topics in political extremist groups, it was found that the more common topics discussed by
far-right groups were racial topics [77, 63, 82, 116], immigration [77, 63] and war [77], being very aggressive with
these topics [61]. This was unsurprising, as both racial content, war and immigration are topics commonly found on the
far-right discourse [139]. An interesting pattern was to ﬁnd that non institutional groups were more focused on a racial
and anti-immigration discourse [63, 100] than the institutional far-right groups, such as political parties. Those parties
were occasionally found to have a populist discourse directed against the elites [100]. The only article analysing far-left
groups found that they discussed more about feeling related topics than other groups[82].
Regarding sentiment analysis, one of the reviewed articles [81] also found that a higher relevance on a far right
community was related to a signiﬁcantly higher use of negative and aggressive terminology. Similarly, the study of
Figea et al. [86] found that words of anger can also be useful to identify emotional concepts related to political extremist
content, such as aggressiveness and concerns about other groups. Also, high negative messages were commonly directed
against Jews, LGBT and black people (specially the ﬁrst two) [92].
Only one article [82] focused on analyzing differences between far-right and far-left discourses, using a dictionary-based
approach (both LIWC and Moral Foundation dictionaries). For these purpose the authors combine different NLP
features to achieve a descriptive analysis from different perspectives, terms, topics and feelings. They found that far-right
used more positive words, together with terms regarding obedience to authority and pureness, while far-left used more
negative terms, anxiety words and terms related with justice and harm avoidance. Concerning a sentiment approach,
this study found that both groups used a general negative tone compared to non-extremist political groups. However,
from all the previously mentioned outcomes, only obedience to authority words showed a signiﬁcant difference.
21
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
Finally, the only reference to semantic analysis in political extremism related articles appear on Ottoni et al. [77], who
detected that terms from extremist groups tend to be classiﬁed in "negative" categories using the semantic tagger from
Empath. Among this category, the more relevants were anger and violence.
As it happened with religious extremism, far-right extremism also presented several features of the extremist discourses
presented on section 2.3. One of their most relevant traits is their use of speciﬁc and aggressive slang to refer to
other groups. However, this is not specially surprising, considering that some of these groups are very active on
the Internet. They rely on political and historical narratives to build their discourse, also including a component of
“self-victimization" on it. They also use hate speech and otherness as discursive resources (specially the ﬁrst one,
compared to religious extremism), and frequently include references to war narrative.
7
NLP Dataset & Tools
In the analysis carried out in Section 4, it was noted that the sources and the speciﬁc tool used for NLP appear frequently
as relevant keywords of the articles. This is because they are a fundamental part of any research work related to the
study of a particular domain, in this case the extremism phenomena. The following subsections present a detailed
description of both the data sources and tools used in the works reviewed.
7.1
Datasets and datasources
Obtaining a dataset is a key part of the NLP research process. In the case of online extremism, this step becomes
specially difﬁcult, as most of the information represents a risk for security or anonymity. Therefore, it becomes a hard
task to ﬁnd open datasets online.
Table 13: Publicly available extremist datasets.
Dataset
Size
Language
Source
Articles
using
this
source
Al-Firdaws [140]
39.715 posts - 2.187 users
Arabic
Dark web forum
[104]
Montada [141]
1.865.807 posts - 52.546 users
Arabic
Dark web forum
[104]
Ansar1 [142]
29.492 posts - 382 users
English
Dark web forum
[96]
How ISIS uses Twitter
(Kaggle) [143]
17.410 tweets - 112 users
English
Twitter
[78,
71,
13,
66, 85, 72, 55,
56, 79]
Automated Hate Speech
Detection and the Prob-
lem of Offensive Lan-
guage [144]
24.802 tweets - N/A users
English
Twitter
[97]
Crisis Lex Dataset (not
speciﬁed) [145]
Not speciﬁed
English
Twitter
[71]
UDI-TwitterCrawl-
Aug2012 [146]
50.000.000 tweets - 147.909 users
English
Twitter
[80]
Dataset-ATM-
TwitterCrawl-Aug2013
[147]
5.000.000 tweets - N/A users
English
Twitter
[80]
Religious Texts Used By
ISIS [148]
2,685 religious texts
English
Religious texts
[66, 55]
Tweets
targeting
ISIS
[149]
122.000 tweets - 95.725 users
English
Twitter
[66, 55, 56]
Gawaher [150]
372.499 posts - 9.629 users
English
Dark web forum
[107, 113]
Turn to Islam [151]
335.338 posts - 10.858 users
English
Dark web forum
[107, 113]
Much of the articles included on the review use their owns datasets. The reader is encouraged to contact with the authors
of the different articles to ask for their data. However, this section deals with the articles which used datasets that are
either public, or can be obtained from their original source. Table 13 shows a summary of the publicly available datasets
used by the literature. This table contains the name of the dataset, an approximation to its size, the original language,
the source of the data,the articles using those datasets and a bibliographic reference including a link to the dataset itself.
22
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
Also, there are data sources which are often used to extract texts, but that are not pre-processed in the way datasets are.
Table 14 presents the different extremist journals used by the literature to conduct NLP analysis. The data from these
sources, however, shall be curated before conducting any analysis.
It shall be stated that, besides the already mentioned datasets (who are part of this review), there are other sources
that might be useful for the person interested on obtaining more textual data related to the topic of extremism and
radicalization. While these datasets are not used by the reviewed documents, and therefore remain outside of this article
scope, the authors considered interesting to highlight some of them in order to help researchers to ﬁnd more publicly
available data. As with the type of extremism of the articles in this review, they will be divided into two groups: political
and religious extremism.
Concerning political extremism, a dataset of the far-right forum named Stormfront [152] can be found on GitHub1.
Also, a dataset of alt-right users was validated by Thorburn et al. [153], which is publicly available under request
to authors. Besides, speeches from different political parties can be found on the webpage of the Manifesto Project
Database2, with textual data from parties with different ideologies.
Finally, related to religious extremism, the Global Terrorism Research Project (which is the source to download Inspire
magazine on Table 13) present much more content than previously stated, including more magazines or datasets3. Same
happens with the AZSecure webpage, which contains datasets from dark web jihadist forums in different languages4.
Table 14: Publicly available extremist data sources.
Data source
Type of source
Articles using this
source
Dabiq [154]
Extremist magazine
[105, 73, 110, 83, 78, 57, 97, 89, 69, 111]
Rumiyah [155]
Extremist magazine
[105, 73, 110, 78, 57, 97, 89, 69]
Inspire [156]
Extremist magazine
[115, 57, 97, 111]
Azan [157]
Extremist magazine
[111]
7.2
Tools
While conducting a research work, authors shall consider which tools are they using for their experiments, along with
which knowledge bases do they use, for example, to create a lexicon. In this section, the more frequently used NLP
tools when studying extremism and radicalisation will be reviewed.
Fig. 7 shows the frequency of use of different NLP tools. Only those being used on three or more articles have their
own category, while the rest are included under the "others" category. Also, the category "non speciﬁed" includes all
those articles not clearly mentioning the software tools they used [104, 75, 95, 102, 96, 60, 71, 59, 72].
The most frequently used NLP tools are:
• SentiStrength5: this tool, developed in 2010 [158], was created to analyse the emotional valence (sentiment) of
short texts. It uses a dictionary with sentiment related terms, from which it calculates the "strength" of the tone
of different expressions. SentiStreght can report binary (positive vs negative), trinary (positive/negative/neutral)
and single scale (-4 to +4) sentiment results. From the reviewed articles, it was the most commonly used tool
to determine sentiment [114, 112, 108, 64, 106, 107, 105, 92, 113].
• Linguistic Inquiry Word Count6: this tool, also known as LIWC [159], was created on 2007 with the aim
of studying the language through a psychological perspective. LIWC relies on the usage of pre-established
dictionaries (which can be expanded with dictionaries made by the researcher) that are used to identify
categories of words and psycho-linguistic processes underlying a text [160] . Eight articles used it to conduct
their analysis [82, 84, 103, 115, 86, 56, 81, 66].
1https://github.com/Vicomtech/hate-speech-dataset
2https://manifestoproject.wzb.eu/
3http://gtrp.haverford.edu/resources/
4https://www.azsecure-data.org/dark-web-forums.html
5http://sentistrength.wlv.ac.uk/
6http://liwc.wpengine.com/
23
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
Figure 7: NLP tools used among the articles
• OpenNLP7: Apache OpenNLP library is a machine learning based toolkit for the processing of natural
language text 8, coded in Java. It supports different NLP tasks, providing several options to analyse texts. Four
articles used OpenNLP on the review [113, 107, 112, 114].
• IBM Watson Natural Language Understanding9: this software, developed by IBM, includes in fact several
packages inside it, which allows to conduct NLP analysis from different approaches (for example, open
analysis vs questions and answers). This software can apply several NLP techniques to texts, such as semantic
tagging, sentiment scoring or keywords and topic extraction. It was used by two articles on the review [58, 110].
Also, the software AlchemyAPI, which was used by other two articles from the review [64, 94], was included
in the core of Watson NLU in 201510.
• Natural Language Toolkit11: the Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK) is a NLP Python library created on 2002
[161]. It performs very similar NLP tasks than OpenNLP. Four articles used this algorithm [63, 69, 73, 100].
• Stanford Core NLP12: the Stanford CoreNLP is another Java based NLP tool, developed on Stanford [162].
It can perform analysis in different languages, and one its main features is that it is quite easy to set up and run
[163]. Three articles used this NLP tool [108, 90, 83].
Even though Fig. 7 summarizes the most used NLP tools, other tools are used by less than three reviewed articles.
These tools include WordNet [76], Stanford Maximum Entropy Part-of-speech Tagger [76], Vader[108, 81], WMatrix
[91], Gensim [77], iSA [137], the Arules Package [70], MALLET [84], the Language Detection Library for Java [80],
POSIT [114, 101], TextRazor [13], Language Model Toolkit [61], ConcepNet [61], TensorFlow Vocabulary Processor
[97] and the Python-based tone analyzer API [58].
8
Discussion and Conclusion
This review aimed to explain the contributions that NLP has provided for extremism research so far. This interest
was divided in several research questions presented in the introduction, regarding the different NLP issues analyzed.
Through the whole article, those issues have been both descriptively and comparatively analyzed based in the literature
included in the review. This last section presents three topics: the answer to the research questions previously presented,
the summary of future trends, challenges and directions, and a brief conclusion.
7https://opennlp.apache.org/
8https://opennlp.apache.org/docs/
9https://www.ibm.com/watson/natural-language-processing
10https://www.ibm.com/cloud/blog/announcements/bye-bye-alchemyapi
11https://www.nltk.org/
12https://stanfordnlp.github.io/CoreNLP/
24
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
8.1
Answer to research questions
The different research questions, regarding the state of the literature, were presented on the introduction as a justiﬁcation
to conduct the survey. These research questions can now be answered through the detailed analysis and insights drawn
from the literature review process conducted in this article. Figure 8 shows a summary of the conclusions reached after
the exhaustive review, highlighting the main ﬁndings drawn for each of the questions posed at the beginning of the
review. Each of these answers is explained in more detail below.
RQ2
Common 
Techniques?
RQ3
Machine Learning
approaches?
RQ4
 NLP Software?
Embeddings
Sentiment
N-grams
J48
RF
SVM
NB
LIWC
SentiStrength
Self 
approaches
RQ1 
Hot Topics?
Jihadi
Far-right 
RQ5
Available
datasets?
12 Open 
Datasets
4 Datasources
Extra datasets 
suggested 
Figure 8: Research questions’ answer highlights.
• RQ1. What are the current topics and contributions from NLP to extremism research?
Literature related to NLP approaches to extremism research has experienced a growth over the last years.
Religious extremism remains as the most covered topic, followed by far-right extremism. Terrorism (specially
Jihadist terrorism) and counter-terrorism appear to be key motivations behind the interest for these topics, as
detecting extremist content can help preventing radicalisation processes and, therefore, avoid attacks as the
one experienced on recent years [164].
The interest for extremism detection appears reﬂected on the many mentions to machine learning algorithms,
as their combination with NLP approaches can be useful to create classiﬁcation models to identify extremist
content. Finally, even though it is beyond the scope of this review, SNA also appears as an analytical approach
commonly linked to the study of language on extremism research.
• RQ2. What NLP techniques are used on extremism research?
Section 5 highlights that n-grams, TF/TF-IDF and sentiment analysis are the techniques most commonly used
to study extremist discourse. It is unsurprising to see the ﬁrst two approaches as the most common, taking into
account that they are a previous step to conduct more complex analysis, for example sentiment analysis itself.
However, it shall be considered that the use of neural networks models (word embedding) is getting more
recurrent on the study of extremist discourses, and therefore it shall be considered for researchers interested on
this topic. This is specially relevant, as authors have pointed that detecting a the most commons terms used in
the speciﬁc domain is not enough to understand in what meaning they are being used in the text. Therefore,
techniques capturing information about the context and the meaning of the terms (e.g. embedding or semantic
tagging) shall also be considered as an important part of any textual analysis. Specially, taking into account
that extremist texts use words from regular discourses, but with different objectives.
• RQ3. How have NLP techniques been applied in the ﬁeld of extremism research?
54.68% of the articles reviewed performed classiﬁcation tasks using ML approaches, as stated on Section 6.1.
Again, this is unsurprising, as the main objective of extremism researchers is to detect and prevent that content.
Among the ML algorithms, SVM was the most commonly used, followed by Random Forests, Naïve Bayes
and Decision Trees. Concerning the best models performing classiﬁcation, SVM reported having a general
good performance. However, in the most recent research works, Neural Networks approaches performed
specially good compared to other models, and appear as a promising trend on the detection of extremism.
25
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
The rest of the articles (see Section 6.2 focused on describing the main features that differentiate between
regular and extremist texts, with the interest of deﬁning this type of discourse. This helped providing insights
that could be helpful for future researchers to identify which textual features are more useful to analyse to
detect (and prevent) extremism on Social Media.
• RQ4. What NLP software tools are commonly used on extremism research?
Section 7 highlights SentiStrength as the most used tools to conduct NLP analysis. Speciﬁcally, this tool is
used to conduct sentiment scoring, through automatic tagging of words around a token. The second one is
LIWC, a tool based on dictionaries with a psycholinguistic approach.
Two points shall be stated here. First, 25 articles did not report the software tool they used to conduct the
analysis. Second, 17 articles used a software tool used by less of three articles. Therefore, while several NLP
software tools were used, it can be stated that there is not a commonly used technique in the literature to
conduct NLP analysis.
• RQ5. Which publicly available datasets or datasources have authos used to conduct NLP experiments
on extremism research?
Most of the articles included on the review relied on their own private datasets to conduct their research.
However, some of the datasets, specially those concerning religious radicalization and Twitter, forums or
radical magazines, remain currently public. A summary of those public datasets, together with extra datasets
suggested by the authors, are presented on section 7.1.
8.2
Future trends and challenges
The research questions and their answers provide a general picture of the current state of the art concerning contributions
of NLP on extremism research. However, the analysis conducted on this survey also provides with different insights
concerning the future of the area. This section presents the future trends that the literature will follow concerning its
current state, the challenges that will be faced, and the directions to confront those challenges (see Figure 9).
5 – Classification models’ 
explainability
4 – Multi-language limitations
4
5
6
1
2
3
02 –Use of Deep Learning 
models
03 – Multivariate classification 
models
1 – Increased interest for political 
extremism
6 – Data limitations
Future Trends
Future Challenges
NLP 
applications 
to extremism 
research
Figure 9: Future trends and challenges of NLP approaches applying on extremism research area.
As shown in Figure 9, there are 3 main trends that can be derived from the research questions and 3 future challenges
for the NLP applications to extremism research, which are explained in detail as follows:
• Future Trends:
1. Interest for political extremism relevance will grow in a short term. At the time this survey is being written,
the Capitol assault and the shutdown of Parler (one of the most famous online bastions of Far-right groups)
have attracted the interest of both the general public and researchers. In fact, several datasets concerning
online political extremism are being released nowadays, which will also increase the opportunities of
studying this phenomena, also taking advantage of the lessons learnt on the study of religious extremism.
Therefore, this research ﬁeld remains promising for future years.
26
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
2. Concerning Machine Learning for extremist prediction, Neural Network based techniques have shown
promising outcomes on the articles reviewed. Therefore, and due to the few literature that has approached
extremist classiﬁcation from this perspective, the use of these techniques remains as one promising trend
for the future. The use of Deep Learning-NLP approaches (based on neural language models), also
provides a way to overcome the lack of semantic information extracted from the texts, which is a key
challenge in the study of extremist discourses. However, the overcome of their main limitation for this
area (the explainability of the model) will represent a turning point on the use of this type of approaches,
which will lead to more accurate discriminant models.
3. Multivariate classiﬁcation models (those using different types of features to discriminate) achieve better
results in the reviewed papers. Furthermore, the general analysis carried out in section 4 shows that some
of works reviewed use Social Network Analysis to pursue research studies in the area of extremism. This
approach, based on the analysis of interactions among users, could be a good complement to the study of
extremist dynamics on online environments [165]. Indeed, approaches combining NLP and SNA have
been used in other research ﬁelds, such as fake news [166], and also on some articles on the extremism
area [81], providing good results. Therefore, the application of approaches combining techniques from
both areas to not only analyze extremist behaviors based on discourse (text), but also on their dynamics
in online social media, will be another relevant trend to address in a short term.
• Future Challenges:
4. The presence of multiple languages on an extremist text is one of the ﬁrst limitation of the research
area (especially, those concerning religious extremism). This limitation, very common on these type
of texts, can bias an analysis depending on the techniques used (for example, dictionaries vs n-grams),
which therefore implies a lot of extra interpretative or preparatory work for the researcher. The use of
new approaches, such as word embedding (and, specially, those that recognize word variations) could be
the right direction to follow here, together with the creation of speciﬁc lexicons for different types of
extremism.
5. The explainability of the classiﬁcation models is one of the most important challenges currently facing
the area due to the psychological, criminological and sociological roots of extremism. The interest of
detecting extremist content relays not only on the detection itself, but on the extraction of insights to
understand more about the mind of extremists. With this understanding, classiﬁcation can be ﬁne-tuned,
discourses can be countered, and ﬁrst signs can be identiﬁed. Therefore, a balance shall be found between
the accuracy of the model and its explainability.
6. The relative absence of public data sources will remain as one of the more challenging tasks to confront
on extremism research. Even though there is a lot of data that can be extracted from online platforms,
such as Twitter or web forums, the ethical concerns related to anonymity and the private nature of most
of the data stored cause researchers to avoid sharing their datasets. This ultimately leads researchers to
create new datasets each time they want to conduct a new experiment, instead of improving data already
stored with new information. Therefore, creating and sharing full datasets with other researchers, always
respecting the ethical steps to do it, will facilitate the access of new researchers to this ﬁeld, improving
the quality and quantity of the outcomes.
8.3
Conclusion
Currently, extremism represents a security and ideological challenge for Europe. Different kind of movements, such
as jihadi terrorism and far-right groups, have changed the political and social agenda of several countries, including
hot topics that are now discussed as relevant issues for those countries [167]. To confront this phenomena, it is ﬁrst
necessary to understand the discourse, which is a reﬂect of the ideology of extremist groups. Only through this
understanding these movements can be countered.
NLP, with its limitations, offers technical resources to describe these discourses, together with ways of extracting
insights regarding how extremists use language compared to non-extremist groups. Through the descriptive and
comparative analysis of techniques, software tools, classiﬁcation approaches and datasets, this survey aims to provide
the reader with a global picture of the applications NLP can provide to the study of extremism. This, ultimately, will
help authors to identify future research directions, relevant trends and challenges to overcome in the study of extremist
discourses.
27
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
Acknowledgements
This research has been supported by Ministry of Science and Education under DeepBio (TIN2017-85727-C4-3-P) and
CHIST-ERA 2017 BDSI PACMEL projects (PCI2019-103623), by Comunidad Autónoma de Madrid under S2018/
TCS-4566 (CYNAMON) and S2017/BMD-3688 grants and by the project DeepSCOP-Ayudas Fundación BBVA
a Equipos de Investigación Cientíﬁca en Big Data 2018. Eugenio Martínez-Cámara is supported by the Spanish
Government fellowship program Juan de la Cierva Incorporación (IJC2018-036092-I). Javier Del Ser acknowledges
funding support received from the Basque Government (Consolidated Research Group MATHMODE, ref. IT1294-19).
References
[1] P Saskia Bayerl, Babak Akhgar, Ben Brewster, Konstantinos Domdouzis, and Helen Gibson. Social media and
its role for leas: Review and applications. In Cyber Crime and Cyber Terrorism Investigator’s Handbook, pages
197–220. Elsevier, 2014.
[2] Jacob Eisenstein. Introduction to natural language processing. MIT press, 2019.
[3] Yanshan Wang, Liwei Wang, Majid Rastegar-Mojarad, Sungrim Moon, Feichen Shen, Naveed Afzal, Sijia Liu,
Yuqun Zeng, Saeed Mehrabi, Sunghwan Sohn, et al. Clinical information extraction applications: a literature
review. Journal of biomedical informatics, 77:34–49, 2018.
[4] Guergana K Savova, Ioana Danciu, Folami Alamudun, Timothy Miller, Chen Lin, Danielle S Bitterman, Georgia
Tourassi, and Jeremy L Warner. Use of natural language processing to extract clinical cancer phenotypes from
electronic medical records. Cancer research, 79(21):5463–5470, 2019.
[5] Rafael A Calvo, David N Milne, M Sazzad Hussain, and Helen Christensen. Natural language processing in
mental health applications using non-clinical texts. Natural Language Engineering, 23(5):649–685, 2017.
[6] Robert Stewart and Sumithra Velupillai. Applied natural language processing in mental health big data. Neu-
ropsychopharmacology, 46(1):252, 2021.
[7] Ingrid E Fisher, Margaret R Garnsey, and Mark E Hughes. Natural language processing in accounting, auditing
and ﬁnance: A synthesis of the literature with a roadmap for future research. Intelligent Systems in Accounting,
Finance and Management, 23(3):157–214, 2016.
[8] Anna Schmidt and Michael Wiegand. A survey on hate speech detection using natural language processing. In
Proceedings of the Fifth International Workshop on Natural Language Processing for Social Media, pages 1–10,
2017.
[9] Geoff Dean, Peter Bell, and Jack Newman. The dark side of social media: review of online terrorism. Pakistan
Journal of Criminology, 3(3):103–122, 2012.
[10] Jasmine Jawhar. Terrorists’ use of the internet: The case of daesh. Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia: The Southeast Asia
Regional Centre for Counter-Terrorism (SEARCCT), Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 2016.
[11] Paul Thomas. Responding to the threat of violent extremism: Failing to prevent. A&C Black, 2012.
[12] D Bouzar. Stages of the radicalization and deradicalization process. practicies project. Technical report, Objective
H2020-SEC-06-FCT-2016 Research and Innovation Action (RIA ..., 2018.
[13] Miriam Fernandez and Harith Alani. Contextual semantics for radicalisation detection on twitter.(2018). 2018.
[14] M Florea, C Potlog, P Pollner, D Abel, O Garcia, S Bar, S Naqvi, and W Asif. Complex project to develop real
tools for identifying and countering terrorism: Real-time early detection and alert system for online terrorist
content based on natural language processing, social network analysis, artiﬁcial intelligence and complex event
processing. 2019.
[15] Javier Torregrosa and Ángel Panizo. Risktrack: assessing the risk of jihadi radicalization on twitter using
linguistic factors. In International Conference on Intelligent Data Engineering and Automated Learning, pages
15–20. Springer, 2018.
[16] Jacob R Scanlon and Matthew S Gerber. Automatic detection of cyber-recruitment by violent extremists. Security
Informatics, 3(1):5, 2014.
[17] Paula Fortuna and Sérgio Nunes. A survey on automatic detection of hate speech in text. ACM Computing
Surveys (CSUR), 51(4):1–30, 2018.
[18] Matthew Edwards, Awais Rashid, and Paul Rayson. A systematic survey of online data mining technology
intended for law enforcement. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 48(1):1–54, 2015.
28
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
[19] Saja Aldera, Ahmad Emam, Muhammad AL-Qurishi, Majed Alrubaian, and Abdulrahman Alothaim. Online
extremism detection in textual content: A systematic literature review. IEEE Access, page "To appear", 2021.
[20] Mayur Gaikwad, Swati Ahirrao, Shraddha Phansalkar, and Ketan Kotecha. Online extremism detection: A
systematic literature review with emphasis on datasets, classiﬁcation techniques, validation methods and tools.
IEEE Access, page "To appear", 2021.
[21] Alex P Schmid. Radicalisation, de-radicalisation, counter-radicalisation: A conceptual discussion and literature
review. ICCT Research Paper, 97(1):22, 2013.
[22] Annemarie van de Weert and Quirine AM Eijkman. Subjectivity in detection of radicalisation and violent
extremism: a youth worker’s perspective. Behavioral sciences of terrorism and political aggression, 11(3):191–
214, 2019.
[23] Bart Schuurman and Max Taylor. Reconsidering radicalization: Fanaticism and the link between ideas and
violence. Perspectives on Terrorism, 12(1):3–22, 2018.
[24] Astrid Bötticher. Towards academic consensus deﬁnitions of radicalism and extremism. Perspectives on terrorism,
11(4):73–77, 2017.
[25] Alexandra Olteanu, Carlos Castillo, Jeremy Boy, and Kush Varshney. The effect of extremist violence on hateful
speech online. In Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media, volume 12, 2018.
[26] Christian Fuchs. Racism, nationalism and right-wing extremism online: The austrian presidential election 2016
on facebook. Momentum Quarterly, 5(3):172–196, 2016.
[27] Arie W Kruglanski, Ewa Szumowska, Catalina H Kopetz, Robert J Vallerand, and Antonio Pierro. On the
psychology of extremism: How motivational imbalance breeds intemperance. Psychological Review, 2020.
[28] Dominic Spohr. Fake news and ideological polarization: Filter bubbles and selective exposure on social media.
Business Information Review, 34(3):150–160, 2017.
[29] Richard T Schaefer. Racial and ethnic groups . glenview, il: Scott foresman, 1990.
[30] Stephen Kantrowitz. Ben Tillman and the reconstruction of white supremacy. UNC Press Books, 2015.
[31] Christopher Phillips. Sectarianism and conﬂict in syria. Third World Quarterly, 36(2):357–376, 2015.
[32] Ed Cairns and John Darby. The conﬂict in northern ireland: Causes, consequences, and controls. American
psychologist, 53(7):754, 1998.
[33] Frederic M Wehrey. Beyond Sunni and Shia: The roots of sectarianism in a changing Middle East. Oxford
University Press, 2017.
[34] Francisco Javier Torregrosa López, Rafael López Pérez, David Garriga Guitart, Nahikari Sánchez Herrero, and
Ángel García Collantes. Boko haram: análisis del fenómeno terrorista en nigeria. Criminalidad, 58(1):67–79,
2016.
[35] Dean G Pruitt. Readiness theory and the northern ireland conﬂict. American Behavioral Scientist, 50(11):1520–
1541, 2007.
[36] William S Shepard. The eta: Spain ﬁghts europe’s last active terrorist group. Mediterranean Quarterly,
13(1):54–68, 2002.
[37] Bilal Y Saab and Alexandra W Taylor. Criminality and armed groups: A comparative study of farc and
paramilitary groups in colombia. Studies in Conﬂict & Terrorism, 32(6):455–475, 2009.
[38] Olivier Roy. Jihad and death: The global appeal of Islamic State. Oxford University Press, 2017.
[39] Jason Burke. Al qaeda. Foreign Policy, pages 18–26, 2004.
[40] Cass R Sunstein. The law of group polarization. University of Chicago Law School, John M. Olin Law &
Economics Working Paper, (91), 1999.
[41] Markus Prior. Media and political polarization. Annual Review of Political Science, 16:101–127, 2013.
[42] Benjamin De Cleen. Populism and nationalism. The Oxford handbook of populism, pages 342–362, 2017.
[43] Michael Keating. Nations against the state: The new politics of nationalism in Quebec, Catalonia and Scotland.
Springer, 1996.
[44] Bruce Hunsberger. Religion and prejudice: The role of religious fundamentalism, quest, and right-wing
authoritarianism. Journal of Social Issues, 51(2):113–129, 1995.
[45] Peter C Hill and William Paul Williamson. The psychology of religious fundamentalism. Guilford Press, 2005.
29
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
[46] Omar Ashour. Online de-radicalization? countering violent extremist narratives: Message, messenger and media
strategy. Perspectives on Terrorism, 4(6):15–19, 2010.
[47] R Bennett Furlow and Harold Lloyd Goodall Jr. The war of ideas and the battle of narratives: A comparison of
extremist storytelling structures. Cultural Studies? Critical Methodologies, 11(3):215–223, 2011.
[48] Inari Sakki and Katarina Pettersson. Discursive constructions of otherness in populist radical right political blogs.
European journal of social psychology, 46(2):156–170, 2016.
[49] Javier Torregrosa, Joshua Thorburn, Raúl Lara-Cabrera, David Camacho, and Humberto M Trujillo. Linguistic
analysis of pro-isis users on twitter. Behavioral Sciences of Terrorism and Political Aggression, 12(3):171–185,
2020.
[50] Katie Cohen, Fredrik Johansson, Lisa Kaati, and Jonas Clausen Mork. Detecting linguistic markers for radical
violence in social media. Terrorism and Political Violence, 26(1):246–256, 2014.
[51] Tom Young, Devamanyu Hazarika, Soujanya Poria, and Erik Cambria. Recent trends in deep learning based
natural language processing. ieee Computational intelligenCe magazine, 13(3):55–75, 2018.
[52] Subbu Kannan and Vairaprakash Gurusamy. Preprocessing techniques for text mining. International Journal of
Computer Science & Communication Networks, 5(1):7–16, 2014.
[53] S Vijayarani, Ms J Ilamathi, and Ms Nithya. Preprocessing techniques for text mining-an overview. International
Journal of Computer Science & Communication Networks, 5(1):7–16, 2015.
[54] Muhammad Ali Masood and Rabeeh Ayaz Abbasi. Using graph embedding and machine learning to identify
rebels on twitter. Journal of Informetrics, 15(1):101121.
[55] Ahmed IA Abd-Elaal, Ahmed Z Badr, and Hani MK Mahdi. Detecting violent radical accounts on twitter.
International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 8(11), 2020.
[56] Mariam Nouh, RC Jason Nurse, and Michael Goldsmith. Understanding the radical mind: Identifying signals
to detect extremist content on twitter. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security
Informatics (ISI), pages 98–103. IEEE, 2019.
[57] Andrew H Johnston and Gary M Weiss. Identifying sunni extremist propaganda with deep learning. In 2017
IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2017.
[58] Shakeel Ahmad, Muhammad Zubair Asghar, Fahad M Alotaibi, and Irfanullah Awan. Detection and classiﬁcation
of social media-based extremist afﬁliations using sentiment analysis techniques. Human-centric Computing and
Information Sciences, 9(1):24, 2019.
[59] Waqas Sharif, Shahzad Mumtaz, Zubair Shaﬁq, Omer Riaz, Tenvir Ali, Mujtaba Husnain, and Gyu Sang Choi.
An empirical approach for extreme behavior identiﬁcation through tweets using machine learning. Applied
Sciences, 9(18):3723, 2019.
[60] Matthias Hartung, Roman Klinger, Franziska Schmidtke, and Lars Vogel. Identifying right-wing extremism
in german twitter proﬁles: A classiﬁcation approach. In International conference on applications of natural
language to information systems, pages 320–325. Springer, 2017.
[61] Enrico Mariconti, Guillermo Suarez-Tangil, Jeremy Blackburn, Emiliano De Cristofaro, Nicolas Kourtellis,
Ilias Leontiadis, Jordi Luque Serrano, and Gianluca Stringhini. " you know what to do" proactive detection of
youtube videos targeted by coordinated hate attacks. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction,
3(CSCW):1–21, 2019.
[62] Derek O’Callaghan, Derek Greene, Maura Conway, Joe Carthy, and Pádraig Cunningham. An analysis of
interactions within and between extreme right communities in social media. In Ubiquitous social media analysis,
pages 88–107. Springer, 2012.
[63] Anat Ben-David and Ariadna Matamoros Fernández. Hate speech and covert discrimination on social media:
Monitoring the facebook pages of extreme-right political parties in spain. International Journal of Communica-
tion, 10:27, 2016.
[64] Hassan Saif, Thomas Dickinson, Leon Kastler, Miriam Fernandez, and Harith Alani. A semantic graph-based
approach for radicalisation detection on social media. In European semantic web conference, pages 571–587.
Springer, 2017.
[65] Tarun B Mirani and Sreela Sasi. Sentiment analysis of isis related tweets using absolute location. In 2016
International Conference on Computational Science and Computational Intelligence (CSCI), pages 1140–1145.
IEEE, 2016.
30
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
[66] Zia Ul Rehman, Sagheer Abbas, Muhammad Adnan Khan, Ghulam Mustafa, Hira Fayyaz, Muhammad Hanif,
and Muhammad Anwar Saeed. Understanding the language of isis: An empirical approach to detect radical
content on twitter using machine learning. CMC-COMPUTERS MATERIALS & CONTINUA, 66(2):1075–1090,
2021.
[67] Amal Rekik, Salma Jamoussi, and Abdelmajid Ben Hamadou. A recursive methodology for radical communities’
detection on social networks. Procedia Computer Science, 176:2010–2019, 2020.
[68] Omar Sharif, Mohammed Moshiul Hoque, ASM Kayes, Raza Nowrozy, and Iqbal H Sarker. Detecting suspicious
texts using machine learning techniques. Applied Sciences, 10(18):6527, 2020.
[69] Mojtaba Heidarysafa, Kamran Kowsari, Tolu Odukoya, Philip Potter, Laura E Barnes, and Donald E Brown.
Women in isis propaganda: A natural language processing analysis of topics and emotions in a comparison with
a mainstream religious group. In Science and Information Conference, pages 610–624. Springer, 2020.
[70] Amal Rekik, Salma Jamoussi, and Abdelmajid Ben Hamadou. Violent vocabulary extraction methodology:
Application to the radicalism detection on social media. In International Conference on Computational Collective
Intelligence, pages 97–109. Springer, 2019.
[71] K. Zahra, F. Azam, W. H. Butt, and F. Ilyas. A framework for user characterization based on tweets using
machine learning algorithms. In 2018 VII International Conference on Network, Communication and Computing,
pages 11–16. ICNCC, 2018.
[72] Miriam Fernandez, Moizzah Asif, and Harith Alani. Understanding the roots of radicalisation on twitter. In
Proceedings of the 10th ACM Conference on Web Science, pages 1–10, 2018.
[73] Alexander B Kinney, Andrew P Davis, and Yongjun Zhang. Theming for terror: Organizational adornment in
terrorist propaganda. Poetics, 69:27–40, 2018.
[74] Thabit Sabbah and Ali Selamat. Hybridized feature set for accurate arabic dark web pages classiﬁcation. In
International Conference on Intelligent Software Methodologies, Tools, and Techniques, pages 175–189. Springer,
2015.
[75] Hanan M Alghamdi and Ali Selamat. Topic detections in arabic dark websites using improved vector space
model. In 2012 4th Conference on Data Mining and Optimization (DMO), pages 6–12. IEEE, 2012.
[76] Adam Bermingham, Maura Conway, Lisa McInerney, Neil O’Hare, and Alan F Smeaton. Combining social
network analysis and sentiment analysis to explore the potential for online radicalisation. In 2009 International
Conference on Advances in Social Network Analysis and Mining, pages 231–236. IEEE, 2009.
[77] Raphael Ottoni, Evandro Cunha, Gabriel Magno, Pedro Bernardina, Wagner Meira Jr, and Virgílio Almeida.
Analyzing right-wing youtube channels: Hate, violence and discrimination. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM
Conference on Web Science, pages 323–332, 2018.
[78] Oscar Araque and Carlos A Iglesias. An approach for radicalization detection based on emotion signals and
semantic similarity. IEEE Access, 8:17877–17891, 2020.
[79] Bruno Guilherme Gomes, Pedro HF Holanda, Ana Paula Couto da Silva, and Olga Goussevskaia. Proﬁling
isis supporters on twitter. In Proceedings of the 23rd Brazillian Symposium on Multimedia and the Web, pages
457–460, 2017.
[80] Swati Agarwal and Ashish Sureka. Using knn and svm based one-class classiﬁer for detecting online radicaliza-
tion on twitter. In International Conference on Distributed Computing and Internet Technology, pages 431–442.
Springer, 2015.
[81] Javier Torregrosa, Ángel Panizo-Lledot, Gema Bello-Orgaz, and David Camacho. Analyzing the relationship
between relevance and extremist discourse in an alt-right network on twitter. Social Network Analysis and
Mining, 10(1):1–17, 2020.
[82] Meysam Alizadeh, Ingmar Weber, Claudio Ciofﬁ-Revilla, Santo Fortunato, and Michael Macy. Psychology
and morality of political extremists: evidence from twitter language analysis of alt-right and antifa. EPJ Data
Science, 8(1):17, 2019.
[83] Halil Bisgin, Hasan Arslan, and Yusuf Korkmaz. Analyzing the dabiq magazine: The language and the
propaganda structure of isis. In International Conference on Social Computing, Behavioral-Cultural Modeling
and Prediction and Behavior Representation in Modeling and Simulation, pages 1–11. Springer, 2019.
[84] Margeret Hall, Michael Logan, Gina S Ligon, and Douglas C Derrick. Do machines replicate humans? toward a
uniﬁed understanding of radicalizing content on the open social web. Policy & Internet, 12(1):109–138, 2020.
31
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
[85] Ugur Kursuncu, Manas Gaur, Carlos Castillo, Amanuel Alambo, Krishnaprasad Thirunarayan, Valerie Shalin,
Dilshod Achilov, I Budak Arpinar, and Amit Sheth. Modeling islamist extremist communications on social
media using contextual dimensions: Religion, ideology, and hate. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer
Interaction, 3(CSCW):1–22, 2019.
[86] Léo Figea, Lisa Kaati, and Ryan Scrivens. Measuring online affects in a white supremacy forum. In 2016 IEEE
conference on intelligence and security informatics (ISI), pages 85–90. IEEE, 2016.
[87] Lazar Stankov, Derrick Higgins, Gerard Saucier, and Goran Kneževi´c. Contemporary militant extremism: A
linguistic approach to scale development. Psychological assessment, 22(2):246, 2010.
[88] Ming Yang, Melody Kiang, Yungchang Ku, Chaochang Chiu, and Yijun Li. Social media analytics for radical
opinion mining in hate group web forums. Journal of homeland security and emergency management, 8(1),
2011.
[89] Álvaro de Pablo, Oscar Araque, and Carlos Angel Iglesias. Radical text detection based on stylometry. In
ICISSP, pages 524–531, 2020.
[90] Jung-jae Kim, Yong Liu, Wee Yong Lim, and Vrizlynn LL Thing. An empirical study on collective online
behaviors of extremist supporters. In International Conference on Advanced Data Mining and Applications,
pages 445–459. Springer, 2017.
[91] Sheryl Prentice, Paul Rayson, and Paul J Taylor. The language of islamic extremism: Towards an automated
identiﬁcation of beliefs, motivations and justiﬁcations. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 17(2):259–
286, 2012.
[92] Ryan Scrivens, Garth Davies, and Richard Frank. Measuring the evolution of radical right-wing posting behaviors
online. Deviant Behavior, 41(2):216–232, 2020.
[93] Dmitry Devyatkin, Ivan Smirnov, Margarita Ananyeva, Maria Kobozeva, Andrey Chepovskiy, and Fyodor
Solovyev. Exploring linguistic features for extremist texts detection (on the material of russian-speaking illegal
texts). In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI), pages 188–190.
IEEE, 2017.
[94] Hassan Saif, Miriam Fernández, Matthew Rowe, and Harith Alani. On the role of semantics for detecting pro-isis
stances on social media. In CEUR Workshop Proceedings, volume 1690, 2016.
[95] Matthew Rowe and Hassan Saif. Mining pro-isis radicalisation signals from social media users. In tenth
international AAAI conference on web and social media, 2016.
[96] Jacob R Scanlon and Matthew S Gerber. Forecasting violent extremist cyber recruitment. IEEE Transactions on
Information Forensics and Security, 10(11):2461–2470, 2015.
[97] Andrew Johnston and Angjelo Marku. Identifying extremism in text using deep learning. In Development and
Analysis of Deep Learning Architectures, pages 267–289. Springer, 2020.
[98] Esra’ Moustafa Abdelzaher. The systematic adaptation of violence contexts in the isis discourse: A contrastive
corpus-based study. Corpus Pragmatics, 3:173–203, 2019.
[99] Leevia Dillon, Loo Seng Neo, and Joshua D Freilich. A comparison of isis foreign ﬁghters and supporters social
media posts: An exploratory mixed-method content analysis. Behavioral Sciences of Terrorism and Political
Aggression, 12(4):268–291, 2020.
[100] Ofra Klein and Jasper Muis. Online discontent: comparing western european far-right groups on facebook.
European societies, 21(4):540–562, 2019.
[101] Kolade Olawande Owoeye and George RS Weir. Classiﬁcation of radical web text using a composite-based
method. In 2018 International Conference on Computational Science and Computational Intelligence (CSCI),
pages 53–58. IEEE, 2018.
[102] Yifang Wei and Lisa Singh. Detecting users who share extremist content on twitter. In Surveillance in Action,
pages 351–368. Springer, 2018.
[103] Laura GE Smith, Laura Wakeford, Timothy F Cribbin, Julie Barnett, and Wai Kai Hou. Detecting psychological
change through mobilizing interactions and changes in extremist linguistic style. Computers in Human Behavior,
108:106298, 2020.
[104] Hsinchun Chen. Sentiment and affect analysis of dark web forums: Measuring radicalization on the internet. In
2008 IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics, pages 104–109. IEEE, 2008.
[105] Logan Macnair and Richard Frank. Changes and stabilities in the language of islamic state magazines: A
sentiment analysis. Dynamics of Asymmetric Conﬂict, 11(2):109–120, 2018.
32
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
[106] Kolade Olawande Owoeye and George RS Weir. Classiﬁcation of extremist text on the web using sentiment
analysis approach. In 2019 International Conference on Computational Science and Computational Intelligence
(CSCI), pages 1570–1575. IEEE, 2019.
[107] Ryan Scrivens, Garth Davies, Richard Frank, and Joseph Mei. Sentiment-based identiﬁcation of radical authors
(sira). In 2015 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining Workshop (ICDMW), pages 979–986. IEEE,
2015.
[108] Yifang Wei, Lisa Singh, and Susan Martin. Identiﬁcation of extremism on twitter. In 2016 IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining (ASONAM), pages 1251–1255.
IEEE, 2016.
[109] Pooja Wadhwa and MPS Bhatia. An approach for dynamic identiﬁcation of online radicalization in social
networks. Cybernetics and Systems, 46(8):641–665, 2015.
[110] Peter Wignell, Kevin Chai, Sabine Tan, Kay O’Halloran, and Rebecca Lange. Natural language understanding
and multimodal discourse analysis for interpreting extremist communications and the re-use of these materials
online. Terrorism and Political Violence, pages 1–26, 2018.
[111] David B Skillicorn. Empirical assessment of al qaeda, isis, and taliban propaganda. In 2015 IEEE International
Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI), pages 61–66. IEEE, 2015.
[112] Ryan Scrivens and Richard Frank. Sentiment-based classiﬁcation of radical text on the web. In 2016 European
Intelligence and Security Informatics Conference (EISIC), pages 104–107. IEEE, 2016.
[113] Ryan Scrivens, Garth Davies, and Richard Frank. Searching for signs of extremism on the web: an introduction
to sentiment-based identiﬁcation of radical authors. Behavioral sciences of terrorism and political aggression,
10(1):39–59, 2018.
[114] George RS Weir, Emanuel Dos Santos, Barry Cartwright, and Richard Frank. Positing the problem: enhancing
classiﬁcation of extremist web content through textual analysis. In 2016 IEEE International Conference on
Cybercrime and Computer Forensic (ICCCF), pages 1–3. IEEE, 2016.
[115] Jennifer Sikos, Peter David, Nizar Habash, and Reem Faraj. Authorship analysis of inspire magazine through
stylometric and psychological features. In 2014 IEEE Joint Intelligence and Security Informatics Conference,
pages 33–40. IEEE, 2014.
[116] Derek O’Callaghan, Derek Greene, Maura Conway, Joe Carthy, and Pádraig Cunningham. Down the (white)
rabbit hole: The extreme right and online recommender systems. Social Science Computer Review, 33(4):459–
478, 2015.
[117] Peter D Turney and Patrick Pantel. From frequency to meaning: Vector space models of semantics. Journal of
artiﬁcial intelligence research, 37:141–188, 2010.
[118] Grigori Sidorov, Francisco Velasquez, Efstathios Stamatatos, Alexander Gelbukh, and Liliana Chanona-
Hernández. Syntactic dependency-based n-grams as classiﬁcation features. In Mexican International Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pages 1–11. Springer, 2012.
[119] Rung-Ching Chen, Jui-Yuan Liang, and Ren-Hao Pan. Using recursive art network to construction domain
ontology based on term frequency and inverse document frequency. Expert systems with Applications, 34(1):488–
501, 2008.
[120] Ted E Dunning. Accurate methods for the statistics of surprise and coincidence. Computational linguistics,
19(1):61–74, 1993.
[121] Omer Levy and Yoav Goldberg. Dependency-based word embeddings. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pages 302–308, 2014.
[122] Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. Efﬁcient estimation of word representations in
vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781, 2013.
[123] Yoav Goldberg and Omer Levy. word2vec explained: deriving mikolov et al.’s negative-sampling word-
embedding method. arXiv preprint arXiv:1402.3722, 2014.
[124] Xin Rong. word2vec parameter learning explained. arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.2738, 2014.
[125] Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and Tomas Mikolov. Enriching word vectors with subword
information. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 5:135–146, 2017.
[126] Martin Schmitt, Simon Steinheber, Konrad Schreiber, and Benjamin Roth. Joint aspect and polarity classiﬁcation
for aspect-based sentiment analysis with end-to-end neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.09238, 2018.
33
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
[127] Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D Manning. Glove: Global vectors for word representation.
In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP), pages
1532–1543, 2014.
[128] Tomas Mikolov, Edouard Grave, Piotr Bojanowski, Christian Puhrsch, and Armand Joulin. Advances in
pre-training distributed word representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.09405, 2017.
[129] Klaus Krippendorff. Content analysis: An introduction to its methodology. Sage publications, 2018.
[130] Douglass Cutting, Julian Kupiec, Jan Pedersen, and Penelope Sibun. A practical part-of-speech tagger. In Third
Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing, pages 133–140, 1992.
[131] Diego Benito Sánchez. Design and development of a hate speech detector in social networks based on Deep
Learning technologies. PhD thesis, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, 2019.
[132] Alan Ritter, Sam Clark, Oren Etzioni, et al. Named entity recognition in tweets: an experimental study. In
Proceedings of the 2011 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, pages 1524–1534,
2011.
[133] Hamed Jelodar, Yongli Wang, Chi Yuan, Xia Feng, Xiahui Jiang, Yanchao Li, and Liang Zhao. Latent dirichlet
allocation (lda) and topic modeling: models, applications, a survey. Multimedia Tools and Applications,
78(11):15169–15211, 2019.
[134] Yong Chen, Hui Zhang, Rui Liu, Zhiwen Ye, and Jianying Lin. Experimental explorations on short text topic
mining between lda and nmf based schemes. Knowledge-Based Systems, 163:1–13, 2019.
[135] Ronen Feldman. Techniques and applications for sentiment analysis. Communications of the ACM, 56(4):82–89,
2013.
[136] Jelena Jovanovic, Ebrahim Bagheri, John Cuzzola, Dragan Gasevic, Zoran Jeremic, and Reza Bashash. Auto-
mated semantic tagging of textual content. IT Professional, 16(6):38–46, 2014.
[137] Andrea Ceron, Luigi Curini, and Stefano M Iacus. Isis at its apogee: The arabic discourse on twitter and what
we can learn from that about isis support and foreign ﬁghters. Sage open, 9(1):2158244018789229, 2019.
[138] Rushlene Kaur Bakshi, Navneet Kaur, Ravneet Kaur, and Gurpreet Kaur. Opinion mining and sentiment analysis.
In 2016 3rd International Conference on Computing for Sustainable Global Development (INDIACom), pages
452–455. IEEE, 2008.
[139] A´ngel Panizo-LLedot, Javier Torregrosa, Gema Bello-Orgaz, Joshua Thorburn, and David Camacho. Describing
alt-right communities and their discourse on twitter during the 2018 us mid-term elections. In International
Conference on Complex Networks and Their Applications, pages 427–439. Springer, 2019.
[140] Artiﬁcial-Intelligence-Lab.
Al-ﬁrdaws forum, 2012.
Data retrieved from AZSecure, https://www.
azsecure-data.org/dark-web-forums.html.
[141] Artiﬁcial-Intelligence-Lab.
Montada forum, 2012.
Data retrieved from AZSecure, https://www.
azsecure-data.org/dark-web-forums.html.
[142] Artiﬁcial-Intelligence-Lab.
Ansar1 forum, 2012.
Data retrieved from AZSecure, https://www.
azsecure-data.org/dark-web-forums.html.
[143] Fifth-Tribe.
How isis uses twitter, 2016.
Data retrieved from Kaggle, https://www.kaggle.com/
fifthtribe/how-isis-uses-twitter.
[144] Thomas Davidson, Dana Warmsley, Michael Macy, and Ingmar Weber. Automated hate speech detection and
the problem of offensive language, 2017. Data retrieved from Github, https://github.com/t-davidson/
hate-speech-and-offensive-language.
[145] Alexandra Olteanu, Carlos Castillo, Fernando Diaz, and Sarah Vieweg. Crisis datasets collection, 2015. Data
retrieved from CrisisLex, https://crisislex.org/data-collections.html.
[146] Rui Li, Shengjie Wang, Hongbo Deng, Rui Wang, and Kevin Chen-Chuan Chang. Dataset-udi-twittercrawl-
aug2012, 2012. Data retrieved from Wiki.illinois, https://wiki.illinois.edu/wiki/display/forward/
Dataset-UDI-TwitterCrawl-Aug2012.
[147] Rui
Li,
Shengjie
Wang,
and
Kevin
Chen-Chuan
Chang.
Dataset-atm-twittercrawl-aug2013,
2013.
Data retrieved from Wiki.illinois, https://wiki.illinois.edu/wiki/display/forward/
Dataset-ATM-TwitterCrawl-Aug2013.
[148] Fifth-Tribe. Religious texts used by isis, 2017. Data retrieved from Kaggle, https://www.kaggle.com/
fifthtribe/isis-religious-texts.
34
A PREPRINT - APRIL 22, 2021
[149] ActiveGalaXy.
Tweets targeting isis, 2016.
Data retrieved from Kaggle, https://www.kaggle.com/
activegalaxy/isis-related-tweets/metadata.
[150] Artiﬁcial-Intelligence-Lab.
Gawaher forum, 2012.
Data retrieved from AZSecure, https://www.
azsecure-data.org/dark-web-forums.html.
[151] Artiﬁcial-Intelligence-Lab.
Turn to islam forum, 2012.
Data retrieved from AZSecure, https://www.
azsecure-data.org/dark-web-forums.html.
[152] Ona de Gibert, Naiara Perez, Aitor García-Pablos, and Montse Cuadros. Hate Speech Dataset from a White
Supremacy Forum. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Abusive Language Online (ALW2), pages 11–20,
Brussels, Belgium, October 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[153] Joshua Thorburn, Javier Torregrosa, and Ángel Panizo. Measuring extremism: Validating an alt-right twitter
accounts dataset. In International Conference on Intelligent Data Engineering and Automated Learning, pages
9–14. Springer, 2018.
[154] Global-Terorrism-Research-Project. Dabiq issues 1-15, 2016. Data retrieved from Global Terorism Research
Project, http://gtrp.haverford.edu/resources/.
[155] Global-Terorrism-Research-Project. Rumiyah issues 1-13, 2017. Data retrieved from Global Terorism Research
Project, http://gtrp.haverford.edu/resources/.
[156] Global-Terorrism-Research-Project. Inspire 1-17, 2017. Data retrieved from Global Terorism Research Project,
http://gtrp.haverford.edu/resources/.
[157] Mujahid-Azhar. Azan issues 1-5, 2016. Data retrieved from Archive.org, https://archive.org/download/
azan-magazine.
[158] Mike Thelwall, Kevan Buckley, Georgios Paltoglou, Di Cai, and Arvid Kappas. Sentiment strength detection in
short informal text. Journal of the American society for information science and technology, 61(12):2544–2558,
2010.
[159] James W Pennebaker, Martha E Francis, and Roger J Booth. Linguistic inquiry and word count: Liwc 2001.
Mahway: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 71(2001):2001, 2001.
[160] Yla R Tausczik and James W Pennebaker. The psychological meaning of words: Liwc and computerized text
analysis methods. Journal of language and social psychology, 29(1):24–54, 2010.
[161] Edward Loper and Steven Bird. Nltk: the natural language toolkit. arXiv preprint cs/0205028, 2002.
[162] Christopher D Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer, Jenny Rose Finkel, Steven Bethard, and David McClosky.
The stanford corenlp natural language processing toolkit. In Proceedings of 52nd annual meeting of the
association for computational linguistics: system demonstrations, pages 55–60, 2014.
[163] Alexandre Pinto, Hugo Gonçalo Oliveira, and Ana Oliveira Alves. Comparing the performance of different
nlp toolkits in formal and social media text. In 5th Symposium on Languages, Applications and Technologies
(SLATE’16). Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2016.
[164] Fredrik Johansson, Lisa Kaati, and Magnus Sahlgren. Detecting linguistic markers of violent extremism in online
environments. In Artiﬁcial Intelligence: Concepts, Methodologies, Tools, and Applications, pages 2847–2863.
IGI Global, 2017.
[165] David Camacho, Ángel Panizo-LLedot, Gema Bello-Orgaz, Antonio Gonzalez-Pardo, and Erik Cambria. The
four dimensions of social network analysis: An overview of research methods, applications, and software tools.
Information Fusion, 63:88–120, 2020.
[166] Xinyi Zhou and Reza Zafarani. A survey of fake news: Fundamental theories, detection methods, and opportuni-
ties. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 53(5):1–40, 2020.
[167] Mr Syed Shehzad Ali. Far-right extremism in europe. Journal of European Studies (JES), 37(1):119–139, 2021.
35
