Title: occ2vec: A principal approach to representing occupations using natural language processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2111.02528v2
--------------------------------------------------

occ2vec: A principal approach to representing
occupations using natural language processing∗
Nicolaj Søndergaard Mühlbach∗
This version: July 15, 2022
Abstract
We propose occ2vec, a principal approach to representing occupations,
which can be used in matching, predictive and causal modeling, and other
economic areas. In particular, we use it to score occupations on any deﬁnable
characteristic of interest, say the degree of “greenness”. Using more than
17,000 occupation-speciﬁc text descriptors, we transform each occupation
into a high-dimensional vector using natural language processing. Similar,
we assign a vector to the target characteristic and estimate the occupational
degree of this characteristic as the cosine similarity between the vectors.
The main advantages of this approach are its universal applicability and
veriﬁability contrary to existing ad-hoc approaches. We extensively validate
our approach on several exercises and then use it to estimate the occupational
degree of charisma and emotional intelligence (EQ). We ﬁnd that occupations
that score high on these tend to have higher educational requirements.
Turning to wages, highly charismatic occupations are either found in the
lower or upper tail in the wage distribution. This is not found for EQ, where
higher levels of EQ are generally correlated with higher wages.
Keywords: Text embeddings; natural language processing; deep learning
JEL Classiﬁcation: J01; J24; C45
∗The author is grateful to Susan Athey, Victor Chernozhukov, Daron Acemoglu, Andrew
Scott, Elisa Macchi, Erik Christian Montes Shütte, Mathias Siggard, and Thyge Enggaard,
for helpful comments and suggestions, and to the Department of Economics, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT), the Center for Research in Econometric Analysis of Time Series
(CREATES), the Dale T. Mortensen Center, Aarhus University, and the Danish Council for
Independent Research (Grant 0166-00020B) for research support.
∗Department of Economics, MIT, and CREATES. Email: muhlbach@mit.edu.
arXiv:2111.02528v2  [econ.EM]  13 Jul 2022
I. Introduction
Designing optimal education and labor markets, policy-makers face an increasingly
important yet diﬃcult challenge of assessing critical aspects of occupations. For
instance, Autor et al. (2003, 2006); Acemoglu and Autor (2011); Autor and
Dorn (2013); Autor and Handel (2013) ﬁnd the occupational degree of abstract,
routine, and manual job tasks to be important in explaining changes in the labor
market; Goldin (2014) examines the role of various occupational characteristics in
explaining the gender wage gap; Deming (2017) consider the degree of social skills
in occupations; Frey and Osborne (2017) examine the susceptibility of occupations
to computerization; Brynjolfsson et al. (2018) estimate an occupational suitability
index for machine learning (ML); Bowen et al. (2018) examine the “greenness” of
occupations; and Dingel and Neiman (2020) and Mongey et al. (2021) construct
measures of the occupational feasibility of working at home and exposure to social
distancing, respectively, to study the economic impact of social distancing in the
perspective of COVID-19.
Common to these seminal studies is the need to measure fundamental charac-
teristics of occupations. But all existing studies use case-by-case approaches that
are deeply diﬃcult to generalize and validate. Most on them rely on detailed data
from the Occupational Information Network (O*NET) that provides measures of
hundreds of occupational features. Although the richness of the data certainly
allows for novel contributions, an inherent risk of overﬁtting lurks in the dark.
That is, researchers might be tempted to select exactly those features of the data
that makes the analysis ﬁt the narrative. The real diﬃculty is, however, that
it may be borderline impossible to validate and verify truly novel measures of
occupational characteristics. Another challenge is that every new measure requires
a new approach, method, study, etc., which is surely laborious.
We propose occ2vec, a principal approach to representing occupations as high-
dimensional vectors, which can then be used in matching, comparative studies,
predictive and causal modeling, and other economic areas of interest. Speciﬁcally,
we demonstrate how the high-dimensional occupation vectors can be used to score
occupations on any deﬁnable target characteristic, for instance, the occupational
degree of “greenness”. At its core, our approach essentially transforms every
occupation into a high-dimensional vector for which reason we call it occ2vec.
1
The only input needed is an objective and reliable textual deﬁnition of the target
characteristic. For instance, the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics deﬁnes green jobs
as Deﬁnition 1:
Deﬁnition 1 (Green jobs). “(A) Jobs in businesses that produce goods or provide
services that beneﬁt the environment or conserve natural resources. (B) Jobs in
which workers’ duties involve making their establishment’s production processes
more environmentally friendly or use fewer natural resources.” (U.S. Bureau of
Labor Statistics, 2021)
Using O*NET, we rely on 244 occupational attributes, 873 occupation descrip-
tions, and 16,804 occupation-speciﬁc tasks to learn a vector representation of each
occupation, leveraging natural language processing (NLP).1 Once all occupations
are embedded as high-dimensional vectors, we consider a given target characteristic
of interest and assign to it a vector in the same vector space as the occupations.
This allows us to estimate the occupational degree of the target characteristic as
the (standardized) cosine similarity between its vector and any occupation vector.
The advantage of this framework is that it is fully data-driven and universal,
only requiring the user to provide a reliable and objective deﬁnition of the target
characteristic. Hence, this is easily extendable to genuinely novel attributes of
occupations. In principle, one could extend the framework to default to using an
encyclopedia, e.g., Wikipedia, and then the approach would be truly automated.
Another advantage is how easy it is to validate the framework in contrast to
existing approaches that do not consider any ground truth. We validate occ2vec
in two ways. First, we visually inspect the occupation vectors by compressing
them into two-dimensional vectors using principal component analysis (PCA)
and t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) (van der Maaten and
Hinton, 2008). We plot all occupations on the two dimensions and show that
occupations cluster according to major occupational groups and educational
requirements. This indicates that even after compressing the information from
1In principal, any database containing detailed information on the universe of occupations
could be used. To our knowledge, O*NET provides the most comprehensive information on
occupations. In addition, O*NET provides both textual descriptions and numerical scores, which
is necessary for our validation strategy. This will be thoroughly explained in Section IV. An
alternative source of occupation data would be the European Skills, Competences, Qualiﬁcations
and Occupations (ESCO) data, which can be found here. We are not familiar with any papers
using the ESCO data, and thus we leave this for further research.
2
the high-dimensional vectors into two dimensions, the low-dimensional occupation
vectors still precisely capture diﬀerences between occupations. Second, we estimate
the occupational degree of all of the 244 occupational attributes from O*NET and
compare our estimates to the original O*NET scores. We ﬁnd strong evidence
that our estimates coincide with the original O*NET scores both between and
within occupations and take this altogether as evidence that occ2vec produces
high-quality occupation vectors that capture essential features of the occupations.
These vectors can then be used to match occupations more precisely, act as control
covariates in regressions, etc. Speciﬁcally, we demonstrate how the vectors can be
used to score occupations on novel characteristics.
Once the quality of the occupation vectors has been scrutinized and conﬁrmed,
we showcase the framework using several applications, which we divide into
estimating well-studied versus novel characteristics of occupations.
First, we revisit the popular task measures (abstract, manual, and routine
tasks, respectively) by Autor et al. (2003, 2006); Acemoglu and Autor (2011);
Autor and Dorn (2013); Autor and Handel (2013) and the innovative measures
of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) by Felten et al. (2018), Brynjolfsson et al. (2018),
and Webb (2019).
This illustrates how one could have used our framework
had the other case-speciﬁc approaches not been invented. Note carefully that
this is not another validation exercise, except under the assumption that the
existing measures represent the ground truth. We feel more conﬁdent making this
assumption for the original O*NET scores.
We document that our estimates of each task measure coincide well with the
original measures, and we ﬁnd that performing a high amount of routine tasks is
on average associated with lower educational attainment and lower wages. We
ﬁnd the same education and wage patterns for occupations that are characterized
by performing manual tasks, whereas the opposite holds for abstract tasks.
We ﬁnd that our estimates of AI exposure generally behave as a mix of the
measures of Felten et al. (2018) and Webb (2019) with no clear relationship to
that of Brynjolfsson et al. (2018). The close similarity of Felten et al. (2018) and
Webb (2019) in contrast to Brynjolfsson et al. (2018) was ﬁrst noted by Acemoglu
et al. (2022). Occupations that have a high degree of AI have similar proﬁles as
those that score high on abstract tasks. That is, these occupations generally have
higher educational requirements and enjoy higher wages.
3
Second, we investigate the occupational degree of two novel characteristics,
namely charisma and emotional intelligence (EQ). We use deﬁnitions from psycho-
logical outlets, e.g., the American Psychological Association. Both characteristics
are intrinsically interesting and have been found to play a fundamental role in
leadership skills and social aﬀability. At the outset, charisma and EQ seem concep-
tually closely related, and we do ﬁnd similarities empirically. The occupations that
score high on both charisma and EQ are often found within community and social
service, educational instruction, and arts, design, entertainment, sports, and media
occupations. as well as educational instruction. For charisma, another frequent
occupational group is sales. The occupations with high degrees of charisma and EQ
also share similar wage proﬁles. Particularly, our estimates suggest occupations in
the upper part of the wage distribution score high on both charisma and EQ. One
diﬀerence appears in the lower part of the wage distribution, where occupations
tend to score high on charisma but not on EQ. Another diﬀerence that we detect
at the aggregate level enters between occupations that require master’s degree
versus doctoral degrees. Essentially, these occupations score similarly on charisma,
whereas there is a dip in the level of EQ for occupations that require doctorates.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the data used
in occ2vec, whereas Section III introduces the framework and our NLP method
of choice. Section IV validates our framework and Section V considers our four
applications on task measures, AI, charisma, and EQ, respectively. Section VI
concludes. Appendices to data, method, and applications are found in Appendix
A, B, and C–F, respectively. Throughout the paper we will be using the notation
|A| for the cardinality of a generic set A and [a, b] = {z ∈Z|a ≤z ≤b} denotes
the set of integers between a and b with [a] simply meaning {1, . . . , a}.
II. Data
In this section, we describe the data used to construct the occupation vectors.
Starting with the data has two advantages. First, in our experience, it is easier to
understand the framework with a speciﬁc source of data in mind, especially for
readers less versed in NLP. Second, although any detailed occupational database
could be used, O*NET provides the most comprehensive information to our
knowledge. Speciﬁcally, the validation strategy requires the source of occupational
4
Table 1: Two examples of O*NET attributes
Element ID
Element name
Deﬁnition
1.A.1.a.1
Oral Comprehension
The ability to listen to and understand information and
ideas presented through spoken words and sentences.
1.A.4.a.6
Depth Perception
The ability to judge which of several objects is closer or
farther away from you, or to judge the distance between
you and an object.
Notes: This table shows the deﬁnition of two occupational attributes from the O*NET®
Content Model. The examples include the ability oral comprehension (link), and the ability
depth perception (link).
data to contain both textual descriptions and numerical scores for descriptors of
the entire universe of occupations, which we have not come across elsewhere.2
O*NET keeps track of hundreds of descriptors for each occupation and we
use the 873 unique occupations available. Each occupation is described textually
by a general description (e.g., writers generally originate and prepare written
material, such as scripts, stories, advertisements, and other material) and by
detailed tasks (e.g., bakers place dough in pans, molds, or on sheets), as well
as measured numerically on several attributes (e.g., how important is critical
thinking for surgeons). We denote the three sources of occupational information
(i.e., descriptions, tasks, and attributes) collectively as occupational descriptors.
We highlight this distinction because the majority of the existing approaches is
only suited for using the numerical scores of the attributes, whereas our method
incorporates purely textual data as the tasks and descriptions as well.3 Note that
attributes are also deﬁned textually and that tasks are also associated with a
weight (i.e., a numerical score). Thus, all the occupational descriptors are both
expressed as text and associated with an occupation-speciﬁc numerical score. For
instance, the deﬁnitions of the attributes oral comprehension and depth perception
follow from Table 1. These textual deﬁnitions naturally apply to all occupations,
but each occupation is also assigned a speciﬁc score between zero and one for all
attributes. For instance, being an astronomer is associated with a score of 0.74 on
oral comprehension and of 0.25 on depth perception.
2Speciﬁcally, the O*NET® Content Model, which can be found here. We use O*NET version
26.3, which can be found here.
3One important exception is Webb (2019), who uses the tasks but not the attributes. To the
best of our knowledge, Webb (2019) cannot be generalized to using the attributes as well.
5
Table 2: Example of occupation description and tasks
Category
Deﬁnition
Weight
Description
Observe, research, and interpret astronomical phenomena to
increase basic knowledge or apply such information to practical
problems.
1
Task
Calculate orbits and determine sizes, shapes, brightness, and
motions of diﬀerent celestial bodies.
0.053
Task
Measure radio, infrared, gamma, and x-ray emissions from
extraterrestrial sources.
0.061
Notes: This table shows the description and two tasks of astronomers from the O*NET®
Content Model. The summary report for astronomers can be found here.
Similar, Table 2 exempliﬁes an occupation description as well as a few tasks
for astronomers. Additionally, the descriptors are associated with a weight.
The occupational descriptors represent ten categories; namely, description,
tasks, abilities, interests, work values, work styles, skills, knowledge, work activities,
and work context.4 The total number of occupational descriptors amounts to
17,048, which includes 873 occupation descriptions (one for each occupation),
16,804 unique tasks (some tasks are occupation-speciﬁc, while others are performed
by a few occupations, leading to on average 20 tasks per occupation), and 244
attributes (common across occupations but with occupation-speciﬁc weights).
Figure 1 shows the structure of the data.
We are exhaustive in the selection of occupational descriptors in the sense that
we include all those for which meaningful textual descriptions are included.5 The
occupation-speciﬁc weight that is associated with each descriptor is constructed
based on at least one scale, e.g., importance, level, etc., and the realized value of
the scale diﬀers by occupations. The deﬁnition of each scale along with the set
of categories that each scale applies to are presented in Table A.1 in Appendix
A. Each scale has a minimum and maximum value and to enable comparison, all
4Technically, the ten categories further represent four broader types of information about
work; worker characteristics, worker requirements, occupational requirements, and occupation-
speciﬁc information. Speciﬁcally, worker characteristics include abilities, interests, work values,
and work styles; worker requirements include skills and knowledge; occupational requirements
include work activities and work context; and occupation-speciﬁc information include description
and tasks. In this paper, we focus on the ten categories and we do not distinguish further
between the four broader types of occupational information.
5For instance, the ability stamina is deﬁned by the ability to exert yourself physically over
long periods of time without getting winded or out of breath, whereas the technological skill
electronic mail software (e.g., Microsoft Outlook) is not further deﬁned.
6
Occupational descriptors (17,048)
Abilities
(52)
Interests
(6)
Work values (6)
Work styles (16)
Skills
(35)
Knowledge
(33)
Work activities
(41)
Work context 
(55)
Attributes (244)
Tasks (16,804)
Core
(12,289)
Supplemental
(4,566)
Descriptions (873)
Descriptions
(873)
Figure 1: Overview of the occupational descriptors and subcategories
Notes: This ﬁgure shows the occupational descriptors provided by O*NET that can be expressed
meaningfully by both text and numeric scores. The 17,048 unique occupational descriptors
consist of 873 occupation descriptions, 16,804 detailed tasks, and 244 attributes. Note that a
small number of tasks may be core to some occupations while supplemental to others, meaning
that the sum of core and supplemental tasks exceed the total number of unique tasks. We divide
the descriptors into ten categories of which one category belongs to descriptions, one category
belongs to tasks (core and supplemental tasks are grouped as one category), and eight categories
belong to attributes as it appears on the ﬁgure.
scales have been standardized to ranging from 0 to 1 following O*NET guidelines.
In the case of multiple scales for a speciﬁc descriptor, we take a uniform average
of the standardized scales.
III. Methodology
In this section, we present our principal approach to measuring any deﬁnable
target characteristic of an occupation by quantifying the similarity between two
vectors that represent the occupation and the target characteristic, respectively.
The occupation vectors are text embeddings (more intuition below) generated
by our preferred NLP method that heavily rely on the plethora of occupation-
speciﬁc information provided by the O*NET, and thus, our approach essentially
transforms every occupation into a high-dimensional vector that captures the tasks
and attributes of the occupation. Similar, the vector of the target characteristic is
a text embedding of its deﬁnition that can in principle be provided by any objective
and reliable source of information, e.g., international standards or dictionaries.
7
The characteristic of interest, say the “greenness” of occupations, is thereby also
transformed into a high-dimensional vector, which allow us to compute a measure
of similarity of the two vectors; one vector representing a particular occupation
and one vector representing the characteristic.
A. Intuition behind text embeddings
Before deep-diving into details, we provide some intuition of the text embeddings
that are the central building blocks of occ2vec. Overall speaking, a text embed-
ding is a real-valued vector that represents a mathematical analogue of the piece
of text in question such as words, sentences, paragraphs, etc. The vector encodes
the meaning of the text such that the texts that are closer in the vector space
are expected to be similar in meaning. In a highly-simpliﬁed one-dimensional
world, this would mean that the occupation “actuary” could have a mathematical
representation of, say, the number 2 and “mathematician” the number 3. This
means that linguistically “actuary” and “mathematician” are similar in the sense
that their tasks and attributes overlap to a high degree. In contrast, imagine “ac-
tors” and “dancers” would be represented by, say, 11 and 14, respectively, meaning
that actors and dancers are more similar to each other than to either actuaries or
mathematicians.6 Thus, the process of mapping pieces of texts to real numbers
leads to the creation of embeddings that capture the meaning of the text. The
beneﬁt of using text embeddings is that it allows texts with similar meanings to
have similar vector representations (as measured by high cosine similarity).
Embedding more than 17,000 textual descriptors, plenty of NLP methods exist.
Common to all is the assumption of the Distributional Hypothesis due to Harris
(1954), claiming that words that occur in the same contexts tend to have similar
meanings and also popularized by Firth (1957) as “a word is characterized by the
company it keeps”. Some of the natural choices to consider are Word2Vec (Mikolov
et al., 2013), its document version Doc2Vec/Paragraph2Vec (Le and Mikolov,
2014), GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014), Fasttext (Bojanowski et al., 2016; Joulin
et al., 2016a,b), or BERT (Devlin et al., 2018). In this paper, we use an optimized
version of BERT called Sentence-RoBERTa (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019; Liu
et al., 2019), and thus our foundation is BERT. Our framework is not limited to
6In modern applications of text embeddings, the dimensions are several hundreds and we use
p = 1024.
8
speciﬁc embedding techniques, and our ﬁndings are robust to the choice of NLP
methods. We will not review all details of BERT/RoBERTa as this is out of scope.
Instead, we provide an intuitive explanation of BERT/RoBERTa and refer readers
to Appendix B for more details or Rogers et al. (2021) for an excellent review.
Let T be a given piece of text (e.g., a sentence or a paragraph) from corpus T .
Each T is essentially a sequence of tokens (e.g., words or subwords). Further, let
D ∈Rp be an embedding of T, i.e., a p-dimensional vector that mathematically
represents the meaning of T. At least conceptually, the assumption underlying all
approaches to text embeddings is that there exists a map f : T →D approximating
the relationship between T and D. Any text embedding model may be viewed
as a nonparametric estimate ˆf of the map f. The challenge is that the true
embeddings are latent, and thus not observed. The various methods consider
diﬀerent approaches to circumventing this, but the most common routine to learn
f is to mask a random sample of tokens and then train the model to produce
embeddings by minimizing the cross-entropy loss from predicting the masked
tokens given the estimated embeddings, which is essentially a cloze procedure
(Taylor, 1953). The training process encodes a lot of semantics and syntactic
information about the language by training the model on massive amounts of
unlabeled textual data drawn from the web. The objective is to detect generic
linguistic patterns in the text.
B. General framework
Index occupations by i for i ∈[n] and assume access to data {(Wj, Tj) : j ∈[d]},
where Tj ∈T is the textual deﬁnition of the jth occupational descriptor, T
represents the universe of unique descriptor deﬁnitions, and Wj ∈[0, 1]n is an
n-dimensional vector of occupation weights on the jth descriptor such that wi,j
represents the importance of descriptor j for occupation i. Let W = (W1 · · · Wd) ∈
[0, 1]n×d denote the matrix of concatenated weights.7 In principle, all occupations
could be represented by any descriptor but in practice many weights are zero
because the descriptors contain tasks only performed by a subset of occupations.
The goal of the NLP algorithm of choice is to turn each descriptor deﬁnition
7We normalize W such that each Wi,· sum to unity for i ∈[n]. We further normalize W
such that each of the ten O*NET categories contribute equally, that is, weights representing the
same category sum to one over the number of categories.
9
Tj into a descriptor embedding Dj ∈Rp, where p represents the dimensionality
of the embeddings, leading to an embedding matrix D = (D1 · · · Dd) ∈Rd×p.
The occupation embeddings are then constructed as a weighted average of the
descriptor embeddings via (1), i.e.
X = WD,
(1)
where X = (X1 · · · Xn) ∈Rn×p, and Xi ∈Rp represents occupation i as a p-
dimensional vector. Note that p is typically several hundreds and we use p = 1024.
Using this representation of occupations, we think of a given occupation as
a weighted average of its descriptors (attributes, tasks, and title), where the
weights are governed by the combined importance, relevance, and frequency of
the descriptor.
B.1. Fine-tuning occupation vectors
Tailoring occ2vec to occupational data, we develop a novel ﬁne-tuning step.8
Imagine access to a new, unseen target occupational characteristic, T0, and an
n-dimensional vector Y0 of occupational scores on T0. Similar to the construction
of D, we use our NLP algorithm to embed T0 into a p-dimensional vector D0.
Our goal is then to ﬁne-tune the occupation embeddings, X, such that the
cosine similarity between the occupation embeddings and the target characteristic
embedding predicts the score, Y0, as closely as possible. The cosine similarity
between a particular occupation embedding Xi and the target characteristic
embedding D0 is given by
Scos (Xi, D0) =
Xi · D0
∥Xi∥2 ∥D0∥2
=
Pp
k=1 Xi,kD0,k
pPp
k=1 Xi,k
pPp
k=1 D0,k
,
(2)
which simpliﬁes to the dot product, Scos (Xi, D0) = Xi · D0, because both embed-
dings are normalized to unit length. Our approach to ﬁne-tuning the occupation
embeddings is to estimate a (p × p)-dimensional rotation matrix R that solves
R = arg min
 ∥Y0 −XRD0∥2
2

(3)
8Since we only have access to 873 occupations via O*NET, we cannot ﬁne-tune the embeddings
in the standard way of formulating a deep neural network to classify the occupations.
10
Estimating R via Eq. (3), it is most appropriate9 to consider descriptors that are
shared across all occupations, namely the attributes in the case of O*NET. For
this reason, let D denote the entire set of descriptors and let A denote the (smaller)
set of attributes that are shared among occupations, such that D \ A represents
tasks and job titles. Then, let Y = W·,{j:j∈A} ∈[0, 1]n×a be the subset of columns
in W that represents the attributes among all descriptors, where a = |A|.10 We
interpret each entry in Y, namely yi,j for i ∈[n] and j ∈A, as representing the
score of occupation i on attribute j. Similarly, let A = D{i:i∈A},· ∈Ra×p denote
the subset of rows in D that represent the attributes, such that Aj,· represents
the p-dimensional vector embedding of attribute j. The empirical matrix analog
to (3) then reads
RUR = arg min

∥Y −XRA′∥2
F

,
(4)
where subscript UR abbreviates unrestricted, and ∥·∥F denotes the Frobenius
norm. The optimization problem in Eq. (4) without any constraints has an
analytic solution given by
RUR = (X′X)−1 X′YA (A′A)−1 ,
(5)
provided that X and A have full column rank such that the inverses exist.
Empirically, we ﬁnd, however, that using Eq.
(4) rather than imposing
additional constraints leads to sub-optimal performance on unseen data.11 This is
most likely due to overﬁtting as the unconstrained optimization problem is highly
overparametrized. Thus, we experiment with three additional constraints, namely
Rk,k′∈[p]:k,k′∈k̸=k′ = 0 (ensuring that R is diagonal), Rk,k′∈[p] ≥0 (ensuring that all
entries in R are non-negative), and P
k
P
k′ Rk,k′ ≤c, where c is some constant
(ensuring that the sum of entries in R is constrained to avoid too much ﬂexibility).
We always enforce R to be diagonal and refer to the rotation matrices stemming
from each constraint as RDIAG, RDIAG+NONNEG, and RDIAG+SUM, respectively. To
no-tuning benchmark is R = Ip, where Ip is the p-dimensional identity matrix,
9Technically, we avoid severely sparse matrices by focusing on common descriptors.
10Recall that descriptors include attributes (shared among occupations), tasks (unique to
subset of occupations), and titles (unique per occupation).
11Essentially, setting R = Ip performs comparably to RUR on data not used in the estimation
of RUR
11
which we denote RIDENTITY.
To avoid overﬁtting, we never re-use the same data to estimate the occupation
vectors in X and the rotation matrix R, or to evaluate the performance. Hence,
we randomly split the set of attributes multiple times into three equal-sized sets
without replacement such that A = A1 ∪A2 ∪A3 and Ah ∩Ag = ∅∀h ̸= g.
Then, deﬁne Yg = Y·,{j:j∈Ag} for g = 1, 2, 3, such that the concatenation ˜Y =
(Y1, Y2, Y3) is simply a reshuﬄed version of Y. Similarly, deﬁne Ag = A·,{j:j∈Ag}
for g = 1, 2, 3. Last, deﬁne Wg = W·,{j:j /∈∪h̸=gAh} and Dg = D{i:i/∈∪h̸=gAh},· for
g = 1, 2, 3. Having the deﬁnitions in place, we compare the various strategies for
obtaining an estimate of R by the following procedure:
1. Compute occupational embeddings X1 = W1D1
2. Estimate rotation matrix R2 = arg minR
Y2 −X1RA2′2
F

potentially
subject to constraints
3. Evaluate performance by Q3 =
Y3 −X1R2A3′2
F
We re-do the above procedure ﬁve times (with a random split of attributes each
time) and report the performance relative to the benchmark in Table 3.
Since our objective is to generalize the performance of our occupation embed-
dings to unseen target characteristics, the most interesting rows are in the bottom
of Table 3, representing the out-of-sample performance. The best performing
strategy on both loss functions is RDIAG+NONNEG, where the rotation matrix is
forced to be diagonal and have non-negative entries. The gain relative to the
benchmark is almost 16% in terms of the Frobenius norm, which we optimize
with respect to. Note also from Table 3 how especially RUR is prone to overﬁtting
since the in-sample performance is essentially perfect but the out-of-sample per-
formance is actually marginally worse than the benchmark. Thus, we overwrite
the occupation vectors and shall henceforth use X := XRDIAG+NONNEG.
12
Table 3: Performance overview of tuning strategies
Frobenius norm
Nuclear norm
average
max
min
average
max
min
Sample
Strategy
Full sample
IDENTITY
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
UR
0.598
0.626
0.585
0.483
0.497
0.475
DIAG
0.739
0.752
0.729
0.961
0.963
0.958
DIAG+NONNEG
0.742
0.745
0.740
0.946
0.945
0.946
DIAG+SUM
0.754
0.762
0.748
0.978
0.980
0.977
In-Sample
IDENTITY
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
UR
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
DIAG
0.580
0.595
0.582
0.871
0.873
0.878
DIAG+NONNEG
0.680
0.689
0.678
0.912
0.914
0.916
DIAG+SUM
0.598
0.613
0.603
0.893
0.894
0.896
Out-of-Sample
IDENTITY
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
UR
1.006
1.023
1.019
1.149
1.134
1.182
DIAG
0.964
0.980
0.951
1.012
1.002
1.008
DIAG+NONNEG
0.842
0.857
0.833
0.958
0.949
0.955
DIAG+SUM
0.977
0.978
0.959
1.027
1.019
1.026
Notes: This table shows the relative performance of various tuning strategies relative to the
no-tuning benchmark, where the rotation matrix equals the identity matrix. We report the
results in terms of the average, minimum, and maximum Frobenius and Nuclear norm across
the ﬁve random splits, when the tuning strategies are evaluated on the entire sample, in-sample,
and out-of-sample, respectively.
IV. Validation
In this section, we validate occ2vec by performing two exercises. The ﬁrst exercise
is exploratory and visual, where we show that occupation vectors can be well
separated by major occupational groups and required educational attainment.
The second exercise is more formal and statistical, where we use various metrics to
assess the performance of our estimates of the same occupational attributes that
O*NET provides. Note that if one is interested in characteristics that appear in
the O*NET database (any of the 244 occupational attributes), there is no reason
to use our approach. In this case, one should use the O*NET scores directly.
Our method is relevant when one is considering novel characteristics that are not
included in O*NET. Taking the O*NET scores as the ground truth simply allows
for an transparent validation of our approach.
13
A. Visualizing occupations
Having outlined how we quantify an occupation by transforming it to a high-
dimensional vector, we illustrate the occupations in a two-dimensional space and
color them by major occupational groups and educational requirements in Figure
2 and 3, respectively. Reducing the 1024 dimensions of the embeddings to only
two dimensions, we ﬁrst use PCA to reduce the number of dimensions to 50 and
then we use t-SNE (van der Maaten and Hinton, 2008) to further reduce the
dimensionality to two.12
From Figure 2, it follows that the 873 occupations can robustly be separated
into the 22 major occupational groups as the occupations tend to cluster into these
groups (of the same color). Note that the diﬀerent colors have no interpretation
as groups are sorted alphabetically. For instance, both production occupations
in purple, construction and extraction occupations in green, and installation,
maintenance, and repair occupations in blue can be found in the LHS, and despite
the diﬀerences in colors, these groups represent a cluster related to physical and
manual occupations.
Likewise, Figure 3 indicates that educational requirement is an important
separator of occupations. Especially the two extremes, i.e., high school diploma
and doctoral degree, occupy two diﬀerent positions in the two-dimensional space.
Note that the colors do have an interpretation is this ﬁgure, because we can order
educations by level.
The two ﬁgures support the idea that occupations are quantiﬁable and separable
and this is despite the fact that we compress all the information in the high-
dimensional space to only two dimensions. When comparing the ﬁgures, note
that they would be identical without the coloring because we only perform the
dimension reduction once.
B. Comparing occ2vec estimates to the original O*NET scores
Recall that O*NET provides 244 occupational attributes for each of the 873
occupations. Principally, we may estimate the occupational degree of each of these
12This is a popular tool to visualize high-dimensional data, which works by converting
similarities between data points to joint probabilities and minimizing the Kullback-Leibler
divergence between the joint probabilities of the low-dimensional embedding and the high-
dimensional data.
14
20
0
20
t-SNE 1
10
0
10
20
t-SNE 2
Architecture and Engineering Occupations
Arts, Design, Entertainment, Sports, and Media Occupations
Building and Grounds Cleaning and Maintenance Occupations
Business and Financial Operations Occupations
Community and Social Service Occupations
Computer and Mathematical Occupations
Construction and Extraction Occupations
Educational Instruction and Library Occupations
Farming, Fishing, and Forestry Occupations
Food Preparation and Serving Related Occupations
Healthcare Practitioners and Technical Occupations
Healthcare Support Occupations
Installation, Maintenance, and Repair Occupations
Legal Occupations
Life, Physical, and Social Science Occupations
Management Occupations
Office and Administrative Support Occupations
Personal Care and Service Occupations
Production Occupations
Protective Service Occupations
Sales and Related Occupations
Transportation and Material Moving Occupations
Figure 2: Occupation embeddings by major occupation groups
Notes: This ﬁgure shows the occupational embeddings in a two-dimensional space, where each
dot represents a unique occupation. We apply PCA and t-SNE to reduce the dimensionality
of the embeddings to two dimensions. The occupations are color-coded by the corresponding
major occupational group.
20
0
20
t-SNE 1
10
0
10
20
t-SNE 2
Education
High School Diploma or Equivalent
Associate's Degree or Equivalent
Bachelor's Degree or Equivalent
Master's Degree or Equivalent
Doctoral Degree or Equivalent
Figure 3: Occupation embeddings by education
Notes: This ﬁgure shows the occupational embeddings in a two-dimensional space, where each
dot represents a unique occupation. We apply PCA and t-SNE to reduce the dimensionality
of the embeddings to two dimensions. The occupations are color-coded by the corresponding
educational requirement.
attributes the same way as we would for any target characteristic of interest. That
is, we compare the occupation embeddings to each of the attribute embeddings,
15
thereby quantifying the degree of each attribute as the cosine similarity. This
gives us 244 estimates of occupational attributes for each of the 873 occupations,
totaling 213,012 estimates we can readily use to validate our framework assuming
O*NET to be the the ground truth. This is possible because O*NET provides
both numerical scores as well as textual deﬁnitions for all attributes.13
Between and within occupations
First, we assess the ability to correctly
estimate an occupational attribute by considering correlations between and within
occupations. The reason we care about a high correlation between occupations is
that for a speciﬁc attribute, we should be able to rank the occupations accordingly
(e.g., how do judges compare to carpenters on critical thinking?). To assess
between-occupations validity, we use the 213,012 attribute estimates and compute
the Spearman correlation coeﬃcient between the O*NET score and our estimate
by attribute, yielding 244 correlation estimates.
A high correlation within occupations is equally important because for a
speciﬁc occupation, we should be able to rank multiple attributes (e.g., how does
static strength compare to dynamic strength for ﬁreﬁghters?). To assess within-
occupations validity, we again use the 213,012 attribute estimates and compute
the Spearman correlation coeﬃcient but this time by occupation, yielding 873
correlation estimates.
Obtaining two sets of correlations, we determine if each mean correlation
diﬀers signiﬁcantly from zero using classic t-tests. In additional, we test if each
mean correlation diﬀers signiﬁcantly from hypothesized values ordered from 1%
to 99% and report the ﬁrst postulated correlation for which we fail to reject the
null hypothesis of no signiﬁcant diﬀerence at the 5% level. The results follow from
Table 4, where Table 4a shows the between-occupations tests and Table 4b shows
the within-occupations tests.
Both types of validity tests strongly reject the null hypothesis of zero correlation.
In fact, it is not until reaching a postulated correlation coeﬃcient 53% between
occupations and 77% within occupations that we fail to reject the null hypothesis.14
Together, the validation exercises suggest a signiﬁcant non-zero mean correlation
13Note that we cannot do this for the 873 occupation descriptions nor the 16,804 occupation-
speciﬁc tasks both because these descriptors not comparable across occupations.
14These results indicate that our framework is relatively more capable of ranking attributes
for a speciﬁc occupation.
16
Table 4: Correlation between O*NET measure and our generalized measure
(a) Between occupations
ρ = ρ0
t-stat
p-value
0.000
38.267
0.000
0.530
1.925
0.055
(b) Within occupations
ρ = ρ0
t-stat
p-value
0.000
265.095
0.000
0.770
-0.173
0.863
Notes: This table shows the results from several t-tests that examine various null hypotheses
of the form H0 : ρ = ρ0 on the correlation between the O*NET measures and our generalized
measures. For each table, the ﬁrst row covers the null hypothesis that the correlation is not
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero (ρ0 = 0), whereas the second row highlights the ﬁrst null
hypothesis that leads to a p-value above 5% in the testing sequence ρ0 = 0.01, . . . , 0.99. Likewise
for each table, the ﬁrst column is the postulated null hypothesis (ρ), the second column is the
t-statistics, and the third column is the corresponding p-value. Table 4a considers the correlation
between occupations, whereas Table 4b considers the correlation within occupations.
between the O*NET scores and our estimates.
Overall explainability
As a second validation exercise, we run various regres-
sions of the O*NET scores on our estimates (and a constant), using the entire
set of 213,012 attribute estimates. The speciﬁcations we consider are the eight
combinations that may be generated using occupation, attribute, and category
dummies, respectively. That is, the baseline speciﬁcation includes no control
dummies, whereas the full speciﬁcation includes all three sets of dummies. In
Table 5, we report the results from all eight regressions. The ﬁrst row shows the
coeﬃcient on our measure, the standard error in parentheses, and the t-statistic
in brackets. Rows 2-4 details the speciﬁcation and the last two rows show the
adjusted R2 and the number of observations, respectively.
From Table 5, the coeﬃcient under scrutiny is highly signiﬁcant and strongly
robust across all speciﬁcations, with t-statistics above 300 in all speciﬁcations. In
addition, the adjusted R2 in the baseline speciﬁcation reaches 59%. This supports
the consistency, reliability, and validity of our proposed framework.
17
Table 5: Explainability by regression
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
occ2vec predicted O*NET
1.1838∗∗∗
1.1863∗∗∗
1.2775∗∗∗
1.2149∗∗∗
1.2911∗∗∗
1.2189∗∗∗
1.2775∗∗∗
1.2911∗∗∗
(0.0018)
(0.0018)
(0.0042)
(0.0023)
(0.0040)
(0.0022)
(0.0042)
(0.0040)
[649.69]
[677.26]
[303.93]
[529.50]
[321.17]
[551.82]
[303.90]
[321.22]
Job dummies included
False
True
False
False
True
True
False
True
Descriptor dummies included
False
False
True
False
True
False
True
True
Category dummies included
False
False
False
True
False
True
True
True
Adj. R2
0.590
0.629
0.721
0.601
0.760
0.640
0.721
0.760
N
213,012
213,012
213,012
213,012
213,012
213,012
213,012
213,012
Notes: This table shows the results from regressing the O*NET scores on our estimates using
eight speciﬁcations that each represent a column. Column (1) represents the baseline speciﬁcation
with no control, whereas column (8) represents the full speciﬁcation with occupation, descriptor,
and category dummies included, respectively. Columns (2)-(7) represent the speciﬁcations in
between the baseline and full speciﬁcation as detailed in rows 2-4. Coeﬃcients estimates are
shown in the ﬁrst row alongside standard errors in parentheses and t-statistics in brackets.
Superscripts ***, **, and * indicate statistical signiﬁcance based on a (two-sided) t-test using
heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors at signiﬁcance levels 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.
V. Applications
In this section, we estimate the occupational degree of both some well-known
characteristics (task measures and AI measures, respectively), and some novel
characteristics (charisma and EQ, respectively). We show how the occ2vec frame-
work ranks occupations according to the characteristics and how our estimates
correlate with various occupational statistics, e.g., educational requirements and
wage. All occupational statistics are sourced from the U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics. For the well-known characteristics, we also assess the similarity of our
estimates to those already established in the literature.
A. Well-known characteristics
A.1. The occupational degree of task measures
We revisit the seminal work of Autor et al. (2003, 2006); Acemoglu and Autor
(2011); Autor and Dorn (2013); Autor and Handel (2013) to study tasks measures,
namely abstract, manual, and routine tasks. In Table C.1 in Appendix C, we
outline the individual O*NET attributes that comprise the tasks measures and
refer to Acemoglu and Autor (2011) for details on precisely how to construct them.
We will mainly focus on the degree of routine tasks and refer to Appendix C for
similar analyses on the degree of abstract and manual tasks, respectively.
18
Table 6: Top and bottom 10 occupations on degree of routine tasks
Top 10
Bottom 10
Rank
1
Word Processors and Typists
Choreographers
2
Oﬃce Clerks, General
Sports Medicine Physicians
3
Data Entry Keyers
Music Therapists
4
Secretaries and Administrative Assistants, Exc...
Environmental Restoration Planners
5
Maids and Housekeeping Cleaners
Psychiatrists
6
Oﬃce Machine Operators, Except Computer
Chief Sustainability Oﬃcers
7
Payroll and Timekeeping Clerks
Social Work Teachers, Postsecondary
8
Cleaning, Washing, and Metal Pickling Equipmen...
Substance Abuse and Behavioral Disorder Counse...
9
Bookkeeping, Accounting, and Auditing Clerks
Fire-Prevention and Protection Engineers
10
Machine Feeders and Oﬀbearers
Agents and Business Managers of Artists, Perfo...
Notes: This table shows the top and bottom 10 occupations on degree of routine tasks estimated
by the occ2vec framework as the cosine similarity between occupation embeddings and the
embedding of routine tasks.
Routine tasks
We start by deﬁning routine tasks in Deﬁnition 2, relying heavily
on Acemoglu and Autor (2011).15 Recall how we feed this deﬁnition into our NLP
method, which returns an embedding in the same vector space as the occupations.
We then measure the occupational degree of routine tasks by the cosine similarity
between each occupational embedding and the embedding of routine tasks.
Deﬁnition 2 (Routine tasks). “Routine tasks are cognitive or physical tasks,
which follow closely prescribed sets of precise rules and well-deﬁned procedures and
are executed in a well-controlled environment. These routine tasks are increasingly
codiﬁed in computer software and performed by machines or sent electronically to
foreign work-sites to be performed by comparatively low-wage workers. Routine
tasks are characteristic of many middle-skilled cognitive and production activities,
such as bookkeeping, clerical work and repetitive production tasks.”
In Table 6, we list the top and bottom 10 occupations on the degree of routine
tasks. The results are as expected and the NLP algorithm even picks up the speciﬁc
examples in Deﬁnition 2 such as clerical work (e.g., rank 2) and bookkeeping
(e.g., rank 9). All top 10 occupations are truly characterized by accomplishing
codiﬁable tasks that can be speciﬁed as a series of instructions to be executed by
a machine. In stark contrast, the tasks of choreographers or psychiatrists are by
no means codiﬁable.
Given the ability of the framework to separate occupations by major occupa-
tional groups and educational requirements, we show the degree of routine tasks
15We thank Daron Acemoglu for providing feedback on this deﬁnition.
19
2
0
2
4
Degree of Routine Tasks
Architecture and Engineering Occupations
Arts, Design, Entertainment, Sports, and Media Occupations
Building and Grounds Cleaning and Maintenance Occupations
Business and Financial Operations Occupations
Community and Social Service Occupations
Computer and Mathematical Occupations
Construction and Extraction Occupations
Educational Instruction and Library Occupations
Farming, Fishing, and Forestry Occupations
Food Preparation and Serving Related Occupations
Healthcare Practitioners and Technical Occupations
Healthcare Support Occupations
Installation, Maintenance, and Repair Occupations
Legal Occupations
Life, Physical, and Social Science Occupations
Management Occupations
Office and Administrative Support Occupations
Personal Care and Service Occupations
Production Occupations
Protective Service Occupations
Sales and Related Occupations
Transportation and Material Moving Occupations
Major Group
Figure 4: Routine tasks by major occupational group
Notes: This ﬁgure shows a boxplot of the occupational degree of routine tasks by major
occupational groups.
by these two attributes in Figure 4 and 5, respectively. Figure 4 conﬁrms that
occupations that accomplish a higher degree of routine tasks are to be found in
oﬃce and administrative support occupations, where the opposite can be found
in community and social service occupations as well as educational instruction
and library occupations. Figure 5 further shows that routine tasks are character-
istic of occupations that require low-to-medium educational attainment, where
occupations that require bachelor’s, master’s or doctoral degrees rarely involve
routine tasks. In fact, the occupational degree of charisma and the educational
requirement are inversely, monotonically related.
We next highlight how our estimates largely coincide with the original measures
by Autor et al. (2003). Essentially, we estimate a smoothed polynomial regression
of both measures of routine tasks for each occupation against its rank in the
wage distribution. The result is shown in Figure 6. Overall, the two approaches
agree nearly perfectly on the relationship between the degree of routine tasks
and the wage rank; occupations in the upper part of the wage distribution tend
to be characterized by smaller amounts of routine tasks, whereas the opposite
holds for the lower part of the wage distribution where mainly occupations with
many routine tasks reside. A trend that has been evidenced by many (see, e.g.,
Acemoglu and Autor (2011)).
As a ﬁnal comparison, we compute the Spearman correlation coeﬃcients
20
2
0
2
4
Degree of Routine Tasks
High School Diploma or Equivalent
Associate's Degree or Equivalent
Bachelor's Degree or Equivalent
Master's Degree or Equivalent
Doctoral Degree or Equivalent
Education
Figure 5: Routine tasks by education
Notes: This ﬁgure shows a boxplot of the occupational degree of routine tasks by educational
requirement.
0
25
50
75
100
Annual wage percentile
1
0.5
0
0.5
1
Degree of Routine tasks
Autor et al. (2003)
Mühlbach (2022)
Figure 6: Comparing estimates of routine tasks on wage
Notes: This ﬁgure shows a smoothed polynomial regression of both standardized measures of
routine tasks in each 6-digit SOC occupation against its rank in the wage distribution.
between our estimates of abstract, manual, and routine tasks and the original
ones. The correlation coeﬃcients are 0.40, 0.84, and 0.64, respectively. Thus, the
degree of association between the two approaches appears strong and signiﬁcant,
particularly for manual and routine tasks.
21
A.2. The occupational degree to artiﬁcial intelligence
Turning to the occupational degree of AI, we use the Deﬁnitions 6–14 presented
in Appendix D. Similar, all ﬁgures and tables for this application is deferred to
Appendix D. We start by considering the top and bottom 10 occupations on degree
of AI from Table D.1. In top 10, we ﬁnd e.g., business intelligence analysts and
statisticians, which is aligned with our expectation as these occupations involve
tasks that require various forms of e.g., predictive and prescriptive analytics, which
are integral parts of AI. In the bottom 10, we ﬁnd e.g., manicurists, pedicurists,
and stonemasons.
Considering the degree of AI by major occupational groups and educational
requirement, we show Figure D.1 and Figure D.2, respectively. As expected, the
top major occupational groups computer and mathematical occupations, which
coincides with the top occupations from Table D.1. The educational requirements
tend to be higher for occupations with high degrees of AI, which makes sense as AI
is diﬃcult to skill to acquire, but the association is not monotonically increasing
in education. In fact, occupations requiring bachelor’s or master’s degrees tend to
have a higher exposure to AI than occupations that require doctoral degrees.
Next, we compare our estimates of occupational degree of AI to the already
established measures, namely those of Felten et al. (2018), Brynjolfsson et al.
(2018), and Webb (2019). In Figure D.3, we repeat the previous analysis and
estimate a smoothed polynomial of the measures for each occupation against its
rank in the wage distribution. Our measure of the occupational degree of AI
is to be found in the middle between the measures of Felten et al. (2018) and
Webb (2019), meaning that its relationship to occupational wage and employment
growth is a mix of those of these well-established measures. Interestingly, our
measure of occupational AI tends to agree relatively more with the one of Felten
et al. (2018) for the high-wage occupations and agree relatively more with the one
of Webb (2019) for the low-wage occupations. In fact, the Spearman correlation
coeﬃcient between our measure and those two is 0.35 and 0.2, respectively, as
shown in Table D.2. Speciﬁcally, occupations receiving higher wages tend to
have a higher degree of AI compared to the occupations that receive less. The
diﬀerences between the AI–wage proﬁles shown in Figure D.3, however, suggest
that the three established measures are picking up diﬀerent aspects of AI. A fact
that is already found by Acemoglu et al. (2022), who also ﬁnd that the measures
22
of Felten et al. (2018) and Webb (2019) tend to coincide and be diﬀerent than the
one of Brynjolfsson et al. (2018).
B. Novel characteristics
The second part of this section considers two novel characteristics of occupations,
namely the degree of charisma and EQ. To economize on space, all ﬁgures and
tables for the EQ application are deferred to Appendix F. Deﬁnitions are likewise
found in Appendix E and F, respectively.
B.1. The occupational extent of charisma
The ﬁrst systematic treatment of charisma is due to Weber (1947) and popularized
by Dow (1969). Charisma is at the very center of eﬀective leadership (Avolio and
Yammarino, 2013) and is continuously being studied (see, e.g., von Hippel et al.
(2016)). It has been recognized as one of the main explanations for why certain
leaders, i.e., charismatic leaders, develop emotional attachment with followers
and other leaders that eventually foster performance that surpass expectations.
Likewise, charisma is associated with being considerate, inspirational, visionary
and intellectually stimulating (for a review, see, e.g., Spencer (1973) or Turner
(2003)). One deﬁnition of charisma follows from Deﬁnition 3, which is part of the
deﬁnitions we use to construct the charisma embedding.16
Deﬁnition 3 (Charisma). “The special quality of personality that enables an
individual to attract and gain the conﬁdence of large numbers of people. It is
exempliﬁed in outstanding political, social, and religious leaders.”
(American
Psychological Association, 2021a)
We begin our analysis by highlighting the top and bottom 10 occupations
on the degree of charisma in Table 7. Public Relations specialists, actors, and
fundraisers are among the top occupations that associate with charisma, because
those occupations require both the ability to catch the attention of the audience
and the knowledge of group behavior and dynamics, societal trends and inﬂuences.
Similar for school psychologists who must be knowledgeable of human behavior
and be capable of assessing individual diﬀerences in personality and interests.
16The other deﬁnitions that are included in the construction of the embedding of charisma
follow from Deﬁnitions 15–18 in Appendix E.
23
Table 7: Top and bottom 10 occupations on degree of charisma
Top 10
Bottom 10
Rank
1
Telemarketers
Biofuels Processing Technicians
2
Public Relations Specialists
Woodworking Machine Setters, Operators, and Te...
3
Fundraisers
Fence Erectors
4
Actors
Floor Sanders and Finishers
5
Directors, Religious Activities and Education
Separating, Filtering, Clarifying, Precipitati...
6
Search Marketing Strategists
Textile Winding, Twisting, and Drawing Out Mac...
7
Human Resources Managers
Extruding, Forming, Pressing, and Compacting M...
8
School Psychologists
Extruding and Forming Machine Setters, Operato...
9
Writers and Authors
Potters, Manufacturing
10
Advertising Sales Agents
Paving, Surfacing, and Tamping Equipment Opera...
Notes: This table shows the top and bottom 10 occupations on degree of charisma estimated by
the occ2vec framework.
2
0
2
Degree of Charisma
Architecture and Engineering Occupations
Arts, Design, Entertainment, Sports, and Media Occupations
Building and Grounds Cleaning and Maintenance Occupations
Business and Financial Operations Occupations
Community and Social Service Occupations
Computer and Mathematical Occupations
Construction and Extraction Occupations
Educational Instruction and Library Occupations
Farming, Fishing, and Forestry Occupations
Food Preparation and Serving Related Occupations
Healthcare Practitioners and Technical Occupations
Healthcare Support Occupations
Installation, Maintenance, and Repair Occupations
Legal Occupations
Life, Physical, and Social Science Occupations
Management Occupations
Office and Administrative Support Occupations
Personal Care and Service Occupations
Production Occupations
Protective Service Occupations
Sales and Related Occupations
Transportation and Material Moving Occupations
Major Group
Figure 7: Charisma by major occupational group
Notes: This ﬁgure shows a boxplot of the occupational degree of charisma by major occupational
groups.
An interesting yet obvious ﬁnding is that directors within religious activities and
education are among the top occupations as these directors must be able to speak
to the public and gain followers by promoting the religious education or activities
and teaching their religion’s doctrines. Generally, occupations within community
and social services as well as sales score high on charisma. On the other side of the
spectrum, we mostly ﬁnd occupations within production, construction, farming,
ﬁshing, and forestry. These occupations have less of a need to be able to inspire
and motivate large numbers of people. This ﬁnding is conﬁrmed by Figure 7,
showing the occupational degree of charisma by major occupational groups.
24
2
0
2
Degree of Charisma
High School Diploma or Equivalent
Associate's Degree or Equivalent
Bachelor's Degree or Equivalent
Master's Degree or Equivalent
Doctoral Degree or Equivalent
Education
Figure 8: Charisma by education
Notes: This ﬁgure shows a boxplot of the occupational degree of charisma by educational
requirement.
Interestingly, an almost monotonic pattern appears between education require-
ments and degree of charisma as shown in Figure 8. The educational requirements
that score the lowest on charisma is high school diploma or equivalent, whereas
occupations with educational requirements of bachelor’s degrees or higher are
increasingly associated with charisma.
Last, we examine how charisma is connected to wage in Figure 9 by the
means of a smoothed polynomial regression. Figure 9 indicates that there is
a non-monotonic relationship between charisma and wage. Essentially, in the
lowest part of the wage distribution, occupations tend to have high degrees of
charisma. These occupations are, e.g., actors (presumably non-Hollywood actors),
teachers, and social workers. In contrast, the occupations with the lowest score on
charisma are on average found between the ﬁrst and second quartile of the wage
distribution, whereas occupations in the upper part of the wage distribution can
be characterized by high degrees of charisma. The latter would be the occupations
that require advanced degrees and leadership capabilities.
B.2. The occupational extent of emotional intelligence
Although the term gained popularity by Goleman (1995), the concept of EQ has
been well-studied before starting with Maslow (1950); Beldoch (1964); Leuner
25
0
25
50
75
100
Annual wage
0.3
0
0.3
Degree of Charisma
Figure 9: Charisma by occupation wages
Notes: This ﬁgure shows a smoothed polynomial regression of our standardized measure of
charisma in each 6-digit SOC occupation against its rank in the wage distribution.
(1966). Generally speaking, EQ refers to the ability to intelligently perceive,
understand, and manage emotions, and people with high EQ use this ability to
guide behavior. The occupational degree of EQ is particularly interesting as EQ
has been shown to correlate positively with many desirable outcomes. In summary,
a recent review by Mayer et al. (2008) documents that higher EQ correlates with
better social relations, better perceptions by others, better academic achievement,
and better general well-being, e.g., higher life satisfaction.
We begin the analysis with Table F.1, tabulating the top and bottom ten
occupations on EQ, and Figure F.1 showing EQ by occupational groups. Many
top 10 occupations are either therapists, counselors, or psychologists, and these
occupations truly require the ability to carry out reasoning about emotions to
support others in various needs. Contrary in the bottom 10, these occupations, e.g.,
brickmasons, riggers, or tapers, require less emotional knowledge and more arm-
hand steadiness and manual dexterity. This applies more generally to occupations
within construction, maintenance, installation, and repair.
An interesting tail eﬀect is found when considering EQ by educational re-
quirements in Figure F.2. We generally ﬁnd a monotonic relationship from low
education and low EQ to high education and high EQ, but this monotonicity stops
once we consider occupations that on average require a doctorate. This indicates
that occupations that require doctorates rather than people with a master’s degree
26
need very specialized employees that may not have to engage too often with a
larger group of coworkers rather than focusing deeply on very complex problems.
Last, we consider the usual smoothed regression against ranks in the wage
distribution in Figure F.3. The EQ-wage relationship from Figure F.3 is slightly
concave for low-wage occupations and slightly convex and tapering oﬀfor high-
wage occupations, but generally high-wage occupations are associated with high
levels of EQ. That EQ should be positively correlated with wage at the individual
level is also found by Rode et al. (2017), however, the full distribution tells us
that tail eﬀects do exists. The highly nonlinear relationship between occupational
charisma and wage in Figure 9 cannot, however, is not found EQ. This tentatively
suggests that EQ is on average a more diﬃcult characteristic to achieve compared to
charisma in terms of wage returns. However, we emphasize that these relationships
are mere correlations and we do not attempt to draw any causal inference.
VI. Conclusion
It is inherently interesting to study occupational characteristics and how they
associate with descriptive statistics of the labor market, e.g., wage, educational
attainment, labor force participation rates, etc. These studies inform policy-
makers on how to optimally design education and labor markets. But estimating
the occupational degree of certain characteristics is challenging for many reasons.
Most importantly, it may be severely diﬃcult to validate and verify novel measures
of occupational characteristics once constructed. This implicitly leaves too much
room for research creativity with regards to the selection of occupational features
that enter the composition of new ones.
We propose occ2vec as a fully data-driven and principal approach to quantify-
ing occupations, which enable the measurement of any occupational characteristic
of interest in a transparent and veriﬁable way. Using NLP, we embed more
than 17,000 occupation-speciﬁc descriptors sourced from the O*NET as vectors
and combine them into unique occupation vectors of high dimensions. Using an
objective and reliable deﬁnition of a given target characteristic of interest, we also
embed this into a high-dimensional vectors and measure the occupational degree
of the given characteristic as the cosine similarity between the vectors.
Using the actual scores from O*NET on 244 attributes common to the universe
27
of occupations as the ground truth, we extensively validate our approach by
comparing our estimates to those scores. We ﬁnd that our estimates explain
almost 60% of the variation in the original scores and, joint with other validation
exercises, we take this as evidence that our framework is capable of producing high-
quality occupation vectors that accurately capture detailed aspects of occupations.
We apply occ2vec to four applications, where we study the occupational
degree of two known characteristics as well as two novel. As known, or previously
studied, characteristics, we consider the popular task measures (abstract, manual,
and routine tasks), and exposure to AI. Our estimates of the task measures largely
match the original ones. For instance, we also ﬁnd that occupations involving many
routine or manual tasks tend to appear in the bottom of the wage distribution.
The opposite holds for abstract tasks. Regarding exposure to AI, our measure
also broadly agrees with the already-proposed measures and can in fact be seen
as a mix of the two most widely used ones. As novel characteristics, we consider
the occupational degree of charisma and EQ. We ﬁnd that occupations that score
high on these attributes tend to be found within community and social service
occupations, arts, entertainment, sports, and media occupations, and educational
instruction occupations. High scores occur most often for occupations that require
advanced degrees and in the top of the wage distribution. The most striking
diﬀerence in found for occupations in the bottom of the wage distribution, where
scores tend to be high on charisma but not on EQ. This suggests that wage returns
to charisma and EQ could be very diﬀerent.
In summary, this paper proposes a data-driven and universal approach to
representing occupations as mathematical objects. This has many interesting
economic applications, and particularly, we demonstrate how one may advance
from purely qualitative deﬁnitions to quantitative scores at the occupational level.
The occ2vec framework, therefore, opens many doors for future analyses that
study how novel occupational characteristics that have previously been inaccessible
to researchers matter for labor market outcomes.
28
References
Acemoglu, D. and D. Autor (2011): “Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Im-
plications for Employment and Earnings,” in Handbook of Labor Economics,
Elsevier, 1043–1171.
Acemoglu, D., D. Autor, J. Hazell, and P. Restrepo (2022): “Artiﬁcial
Intelligence and Jobs: Evidence from Online Vacancies,” Journal of Labor
Economics, 40, S293–S340.
American
Psychological
Association
(2021a):
“Deﬁnition
of
charisma,”
Dictionary
of
Psychology,
Retrieved
August
26,
2021,
https://dictionary.apa.org/charisma.
——— (2021b): “Deﬁnition of emotional intelligence,” Dictionary of Psychology,
Retrieved August 26, 2021, https://dictionary.apa.org/emotional-intelligence.
Autor, D. H. and D. Dorn (2013): “The growth of low-skill service jobs and
the polarization of the U.S. labor market,” American Economic Review, 103,
1553–97.
Autor, D. H. and M. J. Handel (2013): “Putting Tasks to the Test: Human
Capital, Job Tasks, and Wages,” Journal of Labor Economics, 31, S59–S96.
Autor, D. H., L. F. Katz, and M. S. Kearney (2006): “The polarization of
the U.S. labor market,” American Economic Review, 96, 189–194.
Autor, D. H., F. Levy, and R. J. Murnane (2003): “The Skill Content
of Recent Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration*,” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 118, 1279–1333.
Avolio, B. J. and F. J. Yammarino, eds. (2013): Transformational and
Charismatic Leadership: The Road Ahead 10th Anniversary Edition, Emerald
Group Publishing Limited.
Beldoch, M. (1964): Sensitivity to expression of emotional meaning in three
modes of communication, The Communication of Emotional Meaning, Davitz,
Joel R. (Ed.) McGraw-Hill.
29
Bojanowski, P., E. Grave, A. Joulin, and T. Mikolov (2016): “Enriching
Word Vectors with Subword Information,” CoRR, abs/1607.04606.
Bowen, A., K. Kuralbayeva, and E. L. Tipoe (2018): “Characterising green
employment: The impacts of ‘greening’ on workforce composition,” Energy
Economics, 72, 263–275.
Brynjolfsson, E., T. Mitchell, and D. Rock (2018): “What Can Machines
Learn, and What Does It Mean for the Occupations and Industries,” in AEA
Papers and Proceedings.
Cambridge
University
Press
(2021a):
“Deﬁnition
of
charisma,”
Dictionary,
Retrieved
August
26,
2021,
https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/charisma.
——— (2021b): “Deﬁnition of emotional intelligence,” Dictionary, Retrieved Au-
gust 26, 2021, https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/emotional-
intelligence.
Deming, D. J. (2017): “The Growing Importance of Social Skills in the Labor
Market*,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132, 1593–1640.
Devlin, J., M. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova (2018): “BERT: Pre-
training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding,”
CoRR, abs/1810.04805.
Dingel, J. I. and B. Neiman (2020): “How many jobs can be done at home?”
Journal of Public Economics, 189, 104235.
Dow, T. E. (1969): “The Theory of Charisma,” The Sociological Quarterly, 10,
306–318.
Felten, E. W., M. Raj, and R. Seamans (2018): “A Method to Link Advances
in Artiﬁcial Intelligence to Occupational Abilities,” AEA Papers and Proceedings,
108, 54–57.
Firth, J. (1957): “A Synopsis of Linguistic Theory 1930-1955,” in Studies in
Linguistic Analysis, Oxford: Philological Society, reprinted in Palmer, F. (ed.
1968) Selected Papers of J. R. Firth, Longman, Harlow.
30
Frey, C. B. and M. A. Osborne (2017): “The future of employment: How
susceptible are jobs to computerisation?” Technological Forecasting and Social
Change, 114, 254–280.
Goldin, C. (2014): “A Grand Gender Convergence: Its Last Chapter,” American
Economic Review, 104, 1091–1119.
Goleman, D. (1995): Emotional intelligence, New York: Bantam Books.
Harris, Z. S. (1954): “Distributional Structure,” WORD, 10, 146–162.
Holland, J. L. (1985): Making vocational choices: A theory of vocational
personalities and work environments, Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Joulin, A., E. Grave, P. Bojanowski, M. Douze, H. Jégou, and
T. Mikolov (2016a): “FastText.zip: Compressing text classiﬁcation mod-
els,” CoRR, abs/1612.03651.
Joulin, A., E. Grave, P. Bojanowski, and T. Mikolov (2016b): “Bag of
Tricks for Eﬃcient Text Classiﬁcation,” CoRR, abs/1607.01759.
Kingma, D. P. and J. Ba (2015): “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimiza-
tion,” in 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015,
San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings, ed. by
Y. Bengio and Y. LeCun.
Le, Q. and T. Mikolov (2014): “Distributed Representations of Sentences and
Documents,” in Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Machine
Learning, ed. by E. P. Xing and T. Jebara, Bejing, China: PMLR, vol. 32.2 of
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 1188–1196.
Leuner, B. (1966): “Emotionale Intelligenz und Emanzipation. Eine psychody-
namische Studie über die Frau. [Emotional intelligence and emancipation. A
psychodynamic study on women],” Praxis der Kinderpsychologie und Kinderpsy-
chiatrie. [Practice of Child Psychology and Chil Psychiatry], 15, 196–203.
Liu, Y., M. Ott, N. Goyal, J. Du, M. Joshi, D. Chen, O. Levy, M. Lewis,
L. Zettlemoyer, and V. Stoyanov (2019): “RoBERTa: A Robustly
Optimized BERT Pretraining Approach,” CoRR, abs/1907.11692.
31
Maslow, A. (1950): Social theory of motivation, Twentieth century mental
hygiene: New directions in mental health, Shore, Maurice J. (Ed.) New York,
Social Science Publishers.
Mayer, J. D., R. D. Roberts, and S. G. Barsade (2008): “Human Abilities:
Emotional Intelligence,” Annual Review of Psychology, 59, 507–536.
Mikolov, T., K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, and J. Dean (2013): “Eﬃcient
Estimation of Word Representations in Vector Space,” in ICLR.
Mongey, S., L. Pilossoph, and A. Weinberg (2021): “Which workers bear
the burden of social distancing?”
The Journal of Economic Inequality, 19,
509–526.
Oxford
University
Press
(2021a):
“Deﬁnition
of
charisma,”
Dictionary,
Retrieved
August
26,
2021,
https://www.oxfordreference.com/view/10.1093/oi/authority.20110803095603124.
———
(2021b):
“Deﬁnition
of
emotional
intelli-
gence,”
Dictionary,
Retrieved
August
26,
2021,
https://www.oxfordreference.com/view/10.1093/oi/authority.20110803095749954.
Pennington, J., R. Socher, and C. D. Manning (2014): “Glove: Global
Vectors for Word Representation,” in Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2014, October
25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar, A meeting of SIGDAT, a Special Interest Group of
the ACL, ed. by A. Moschitti, B. Pang, and W. Daelemans, ACL, 1532–1543.
Psychology Today (2021a): “Deﬁnition of charisma,” Dictionary, Retrieved
August 26, 2021, https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/basics/charisma.
——— (2021b): “Deﬁnition of emotional intelligence,” Dictionary, Retrieved
August 26, 2021, https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/basics/emotional-
intelligence.
Reimers, N. and I. Gurevych (2019): “Sentence-BERT: Sentence Embeddings
using Siamese BERT-Networks,” in Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Association for Computational
Linguistics.
32
Rode, J. C., M. Arthaud-Day, A. Ramaswami, and S. Howes (2017): “A
time-lagged study of emotional intelligence and salary,” Journal of Vocational
Behavior, 101, 77–89.
Rogers, A., O. Kovaleva, and A. Rumshisky (2021): “A Primer in BERTol-
ogy: What We Know About How BERT Works,” Transactions of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, 8, 842–866.
Spencer, M. E. (1973): “What Is Charisma?” The British Journal of Sociology,
24, 341.
Taylor, W. L. (1953): ““Cloze Procedure”: A New Tool for Measuring Read-
ability,” Journalism Quarterly, 30, 415–433.
Turner, S. (2003): “Charisma Reconsidered,” Journal of Classical Sociology, 3,
5–26.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2021): “Measuring Green Jobs,” Green
Jobs, Retrieved November 2, 2021, https://www.bls.gov/green/home.htm.
van der Maaten, L. and G. Hinton (2008): “Visualizing Data using t-SNE,”
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 9, 2579–2605.
Vaswani, A., N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N.
Gomez, L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin (2017): “Attention Is All You Need,”
CoRR, abs/1706.03762.
von Hippel, W., R. Ronay, E. Baker, K. Kjelsaas, and S. C. Mur-
phy (2016): “Quick Thinkers Are Smooth Talkers: Mental Speed Facilitates
Charisma,” Psychological Science, 27, 119–122, pMID: 26621964.
Webb, M. (2019): “The Impact of Artiﬁcial Intelligence on the Labor Market,”
SSRN Electronic Journal.
Weber, M. (1947): The theory of social and economic organization. Translated
by A. M. Henderson and Talcott Parsons; edited with an Introduction by Talcott
Parsons, New York, Oxford University Press.
Wikipedia (2021a): “Article on charisma,” Encyclopedia, Retrieved August 26,
2021, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charisma.
33
——— (2021b): “Article on emotional intelligence,” Encyclopedia, Retrieved
August 26, 2021, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emotional_intelligence.
Wu, Y., M. Schuster, Z. Chen, Q. V. Le, M. Norouzi, W. Macherey,
M. Krikun, Y. Cao, Q. Gao, K. Macherey, J. Klingner, A. Shah,
M. Johnson, X. Liu, L. Kaiser, S. Gouws, Y. Kato, T. Kudo,
H. Kazawa, K. Stevens, G. Kurian, N. Patil, W. Wang, C. Young,
J. Smith, J. Riesa, A. Rudnick, O. Vinyals, G. Corrado, M. Hughes,
and J. Dean (2016): “Google’s Neural Machine Translation System: Bridging
the Gap between Human and Machine Translation,” CoRR, abs/1609.08144.
34
A. Data appendix
In this appendix, we provide additional details to those given in Section II on
the data used. This appendix is meant as a supplement and is not self-contained
without the main text.
Table A.1: O*NET scales
Scale
Category
Deﬁnition
Importance
Tasks, Knowledge, Skills,
Abilities, Work Activi-
ties, and Work Styles
Rating indicates the degree of importance a particular
descriptor is to the occupation.
Level
Knowledge, Skills, Abili-
ties, and Work Activities
Rating indicates the degree to which a particular descrip-
tor is required or needed to perform the occupation.
Relevance
Tasks
Rating indicates the degree to which a particular task is
relevant to perform the occupation.
Frequency
Tasks
Rating indicates how frequent a particular task is per-
formed within a given time period.
Occupational
Interest
Interests
Rating indicates the degree to which a particular interest
(Holland, 1985) matches the occupation.
Extent
Work Values
Rating indicates the degree to which a particular work
value aﬀects the nature of the occupation.
Context
Work Context
Rating indicates the degree to which a particular work
context inﬂuences the nature of the occupation.
Notes: This table shows scales associated with each descriptor within categories. All scales are
standardized to a scale ranging from 0 to 1. See O*NET site on scales, ratings, and standardized
scores for more information (here).
35
B. Method appendix
In this appendix, we provide additional details to those given in Section III on the
methods applied. This appendix is meant as a supplement and is not self-contained
without the main text.
BERT—Deep Bidirectional Transformers
BERT stands for Bidirectional
Encoder Representations from Transformers and is a revolutionary technique
to learning general-purpose language representations, using a deep bidirectional
Transformer encoder based on the original Transformer encoder-decoder from
Vaswani et al. (2017). The bidirectional aspect of BERT means that it simultane-
ously learns a language representation from left to right and from right to left
compared to either a left-to-right model or the shallow concatenation of a left-
to-right and a right-to-left model. Upon release, BERT achieved state-of-the-art
results on a range of NLP tasks. Because the use of Transformers has become
common, we will omit an exhaustive description of the attention architecture and
refer readers to Vaswani et al. (2017).
In general, BERT consists of two steps, namely a pre-training and a ﬁne-
tuning step. First, the pre-training step encodes a lot of semantics and syntactic
information about the language by training the model on massive amounts of
unlabeled textual data drawn from the web. The objective is to detect generic
linguistic patterns in the text, and it is mathematically represented as the sum of
two separate objectives, that is, the Masked Language Model (MLM) objective
and the Next Sentence Prediction (NSP) objective. The intuition behind MLM is
that deep language knowledge is required to be able to ﬁlling in the blanks within
a sentence with missing words. This in return requires one to read the entire
sentence and that is why the bidirectional conditioning is important. The MLM is
essentially a cloze procedure (Taylor, 1953) that masks a random sample of tokens
by replacing the given token with the [MASK] token. The MLM objective is then
a cross-entropy loss on predicting the masked tokens, where the cross-entropy loss
for a speciﬁc masked token, t0, is
H (t0) = −
|V|
X
c=1
yt0,c log pt0,c,
(B.1)
36
where yt0,c = 1{c:pt0,c=maxc∈V pt0,c}=c is a binary indicator that indicates if the
(predicted) class c is correct for token t0, and pt0,c is the (predicted) probability
that token t0 is of c. BERT uniformly selects 15% of the input tokens and perform
one of three replacements on the selected tokens; (1) 80% are replaced with
[MASK], (2) 10% are left unchanged, and (3) 10% are replaced with a randomly
selected token from vocabulary V. In theory, BERT performs MLM once in the
beginning, although in practice, the masks are not the same for every sequence
because the data are duplicated for parallel training.
In contrast, NSP is used for understanding the relationship between sentences
and it similarly a classiﬁcation problem. But where MLM considers multiclass
classiﬁcation, however, NSP uses a binary classiﬁcation loss for whether one
sentence is adjacent to another in the original texts. BERT optimizes the sum of
the two loss functions using ADAM (Kingma and Ba, 2015) and the parameters
can be found in Table B.1 further below.
Second, ﬁne-tuning is used to optimize performance for a speciﬁc downstream
task, e.g., question answering, text summarization, or sentence embedding, and
BERT is thus an example of transfer learning that can use that language rep-
resentation learnt in the pre-training step across many speciﬁc language tasks.
Fine-tuning is often performed by adding one or more layers on top of the deep
network obtained under pre-training. We follow Reimers and Gurevych (2019) and
ﬁne-tune BERT/RoBERTa to yield useful sentence embeddings by training the
model on labeled sentence pairs and minimizing the mean-squared-error (MSE)
loss between sentence embeddings. In principal, the pre-training step is suﬃcient
to construct the text embeddings but Reimers and Gurevych (2019) demonstrate
that these embeddings are not always meaningful. For this reason, we add the
ﬁne-tuning step of Reimers and Gurevych (2019) to construct the sentence embed-
dings. In addition, we implement another ﬁne-tuning step of estimating a rotation
matrix tailored to occ2vec, which we describe in the main text.
RoBERTa—A robustly optimized BERT
Liu et al. (2019) ﬁnd that the
original implementation of BERT was signiﬁcantly undertrained and propose
RoBERTa, a robustly optimized version of BERT. RoBERTa builds on the same
Transformer model as BERT and also uses the MLM objective, where it learns
to predict intentionally hidden pieces of texts. The architectural diﬀerence is
37
that RoBERTa drops the NSP objective and updates the MLM strategy to be
dynamic within training epochs. In addition, RoBERTa is trained on more data
and modiﬁes some hyperparameters in the training process compared to BERT,
e.g., larger batches and step sizes, leading to 4-5 times longer training times. The
advantage is a 2-20% improvement over BERT on several benchmark tasks for NLP
algorithms. In essence, RoBERTa outperforms BERT and could, at the time of
release, match or exceed every NLP model published after BERT in all individual
tasks on several benchmarks, including the General Language Understanding
Evaluation (GLUE), the Stanford Question Answering Dataset (SQuAD), and
the ReAding Comprehension from Examinations (RACE) benchmarks, which is
the reason we choose RoBERTa as our preferred NLP algorithm. We will omit
repeating unnecessarily the details of the implementation of RoBERTa and refer
readers to Liu et al. (2019).
Neural network architecture
Let L denote the number of layers (i.e., Trans-
former blocks), let d denote the hidden size (i.e., the dimensions of the embeddings),
and let A denote the number of self-attention heads. The model size we consider
uses L = 24, d = 1024, and A = 16. All hyperparameters can be found in Table
B.1. For m = 1, . . . , N, let Tm be a piece of text (e.g., a sentence or a paragraph)
from T . Each Tm is a sequence of tokens (e.g., words or subwords), tm,1, . . . , tm,Nm.,
generated by WordPiece tokenization (Wu et al., 2016). BERT takes as input a
concatenation of two sequences, tm,1, . . . , tm,Nm and tm′,1, . . . , tm′,Nm′ for m ̸= m′.
The two sequences are delimited by special tokens, namely
tok (Tm, Tm′) = [CLS] , tm,1, . . . , tm,Nm, [SEP] , tm′,1, . . . , tm′,Nm′, [EOS] ,
(B.2)
where tok (·, ·) produces the special tokenization of two input texts, CLS abbre-
viates classiﬁcation, SEP separation, and EOS end-of-sentence. The lengths of
Tm and T ′
m are constrained such that Nm + Nm′ < ¯N, where ¯N is ﬁxed before-
hand. From B.2, BERT constructs three temporary input embeddings that, once
summed, act as the input embedding to the Transformer. First, each token t in
38
tok (Tm, Tm′) is passed through three deterministic functions,
l : (t, V) →[1, |V|] ,
(B.3)
p : (t, tok (Tm, Tm′)) →

1, ¯N

,
(B.4)
s : (t, tok (Tm, Tm′)) →[1, 2] ,
(B.5)
where l (t, V) is a lookup function that returns the index of token t in vocabulary
V of all tokens, p (t, tok (Tm, Tm′)) is a position function that returns the index
of token t in the concatenated sequences tok (Tm, Tm′), and s (t, tok (Tm, Tm′))
is a sequence function that returns the sequence index that token t belongs to
in tok (Tm, Tm′). Essentially, each token is represented as three integers that
determines the both position of the token in the vocabulary and the concatenated
sequences, respectively, and which of the individual sequences that the token
belongs to. Last, each integer (i.e., token, position, and sequence) is passed
through an embedding layer φh : R →Rd for h = l, p, s that returns a d-
dimensional embedding. The three embeddings are summed to generate the ﬁnal
input embedding et ≡e (t; V, Tm, Tm′). That is,
e (t; V, Tm, Tm′) = φl (l (t, V)) + φp (p (t, tok (Tm, Tm′))) + φs (s (t, tok (Tm, Tm′)))
(B.6)
We show the full process of turning tokens into input embeddings in Figure
B.1. These input embeddings are then passed through the layers of the deep
Transformer model. During training, BERT considers two primary objectives, i.e.,
the MLM objective and the NSP objective, as described above.
In our framework, the object of interest is the sentence or paragraph embedding
of Tm, and generally, three strategies exist to compute these embeddings once the
ﬁnal word embeddings have been estimated; mean-pooling that uses the average
of all the word embeddings from Tm, max-pooling that uses the maximum of
all the word embeddings from Tm, or ﬁrst-pooling that uses the ﬁrst of all the
word embeddings from Tm (i.e., the [CLS] token). In theory, embeddings from
any of the L layers can be used as word embeddings, but it is common practice
to average over a range of the last L layers, e.g., the last four layers. We use
mean-pooling over the last four layers to construct our initial sentence embeddings,
and then we add a pooling operation to the output of BERT/RoBERTa to derive
39
[CLS]
tm,1
. . .
tm,Nm
[SEP]
tm′,1
. . .
tm′,Nm
[EOS]
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
l ([CLS])
l (tm,1)
. . .
l (tm,Nm)
l ([SEP])
l (tm′,1)
. . .
l (tm′,Nm)
l ([EOS])
p ([CLS])
p (tm,1)
. . .
p (tm,Nm)
p ([SEP])
p (tm′,1)
. . .
p (tm′,Nm)
p ([EOS])
s ([CLS])
s (tm,1)
. . .
s (tm,Nm)
s ([SEP])
s (tm′,1)
. . .
s (tm′,Nm)
s ([EOS])
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
φl (l ([CLS]))
φl (l (tm,1))
. . .
φl (l (tm,Nm))
φl (l ([SEP]))
φl (l (tm′,1))
. . .
φl (l (tm′,Nm))
φl (l ([EOS]))
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
φp (p ([CLS]))
φp (p (tm,1))
. . .
φp (p (tm,Nm))
φp (p ([SEP]))
φp (p (tm′,1))
. . .
φp (p (tm′,Nm))
φp (p ([EOS]))
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
φs (s ([CLS]))
φs (s (tm,1))
. . .
φs (s (tm,Nm))
φs (s ([SEP]))
φs (s (tm′,1))
. . .
φs (s (tm′,Nm))
φs (s ([EOS]))
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
e[CLS]
etm,1
. . .
etm,Nm
e[SEP]
etm′,1
. . .
etm′,Nm
e[EOS]
Figure B.1: BERT input embedding
Notes: This ﬁgure shows how BERT translates tokens into an input embedding by summing
embeddings of the integers that describe both the token’s position in the vocabulary and the
concatenated sequences and which of the sequences the token belongs to.
the sentence embeddings, which is proposed Reimers and Gurevych (2019). This
is essentially a ﬁne-tuning layer such that BERT/RoBERTa generates better
sentence embeddings. For more details, we refer interested readers to Reimers and
Gurevych (2019). The hyperparameters used for pre-training follow from Table
B.1.
40
Table B.1: Hyperparameters for pre-training BERT and RoBERTa
BERT
RoBERTa
Number of layers, L
24
24
Hidden size, d
1024
1024
Feed-forward/ﬁlter size
4096
4096
Attention heads
16
16
Dropout
0.1
0.1
Warm-up steps
10,000
30,000
Weight decay, L2
0.01
0.01
Peak learning rate
0.0001
0.0004
Learning rate decay
Linear
Linear
Gradient clipping
0.0
0.0
Maximum tokens, N0
512
512
Minibatch size, B
256
8,000
Max steps, S
1,000,000
500,000
Activation function
GELU
GELU
Optimizer
Adam
Adam
Adam, β1
0.9
0.9
Adam, β2
0.999
0.98
Adam, ϵ
0.000001
0.000001
Notes: This table shows the hyperparameters using to pre-train BERT and RoBERTa, respec-
tively.
41
C. Degree of task measures
In this appendix, we provide additional details to those given in Section V on the
application. This appendix is meant as a supplement and is not self-contained
without the main text.
Table C.1: Components of the task measures
Scale
Subscale
Element ID
Element name
Abstract
Non-routine
cogni-
tive: Analytical
4.A.2.a.4
Analyzing data/information
4.A.2.b.2
Thinking creatively
4.A.4.a.1
Interpreting information for others
Non-routine
cogni-
tive: Interpersonal
4.A.4.a.4
Establishing and maintaining personal relationships
4.A.4.b.4
Guiding, directing and motivating subordinates
4.A.4.b.5
Coaching/developing others
Manual
Non-routine manual
4.A.3.a.4
Operating vehicles, mechanized devices, or equipment
4.C.2.d.1.g
Spend time using hands to handle, control or feel objects,
tools or controls
1.A.2.a.2
Manual dexterity
1.A.1.f.1
Spatial orientation
Routine
Routine cognitive
4.C.3.b.7
Importance of repeating the same tasks
4.C.3.b.4
Importance of being exact or accurate
4.C.3.b.8
Structured v. Unstructured work (reverse)
Routine manual
4.C.3.d.3
Pace determined by speed of equipment
4.A.3.a.3
Controlling machines and processes
4.C.2.d.1.i
Spend time making repetitive motions
Notes: This table shows the task measures and their components. Each measure is a standardized
sum of its subscales, and equivalently, each subscale is a standardized sum of its individual
elements. See Acemoglu and Autor (2011) for further details.
Abstract tasks
Deﬁnition 4 (Abstract tasks). “Abstract tasks are problem-solving and managerial
tasks, which require intuition, persuasion, and creativity and are unstructured and
nonroutine. These abstract tasks are performed by workers who have high levels of
education and analytical capability, and they beneﬁt from computers that facilitate
the transmission, organization, and processing of information. Abstract tasks are
characteristic of professional, managerial, technical, and creative occupations, such
as law, medicine, science, engineering, marketing, and design.”
42
Table C.2: Top and bottom 10 occupations on degree of abstract tasks
Top 10
Bottom 10
Rank
1
Operations Research Analysts
Bicycle Repairers
2
Intelligence Analysts
Rail Car Repairers
3
Graphic Designers
Outdoor Power Equipment and Other Small Engine...
4
Mathematicians
Tire Repairers and Changers
5
Sociologists
Motorcycle Mechanics
6
Computer and Information Research Scientists
Non-Destructive Testing Specialists
7
Fine Artists, Including Painters, Sculptors, a...
Rail-Track Laying and Maintenance Equipment Op...
8
Oﬃce Clerks, General
Solar Thermal Installers and Technicians
9
Search Marketing Strategists
Plasterers and Stucco Masons
10
Word Processors and Typists
Telecommunications Line Installers and Repairers
Notes: This table shows the top and bottom 10 occupations on degree of abstract tasks estimated
by the occ2vec framework as the cosine similarity between occupation embeddings and the
embedding of abstract tasks.
2
1
0
1
2
3
Degree of Abstract Tasks
Architecture and Engineering Occupations
Arts, Design, Entertainment, Sports, and Media Occupations
Building and Grounds Cleaning and Maintenance Occupations
Business and Financial Operations Occupations
Community and Social Service Occupations
Computer and Mathematical Occupations
Construction and Extraction Occupations
Educational Instruction and Library Occupations
Farming, Fishing, and Forestry Occupations
Food Preparation and Serving Related Occupations
Healthcare Practitioners and Technical Occupations
Healthcare Support Occupations
Installation, Maintenance, and Repair Occupations
Legal Occupations
Life, Physical, and Social Science Occupations
Management Occupations
Office and Administrative Support Occupations
Personal Care and Service Occupations
Production Occupations
Protective Service Occupations
Sales and Related Occupations
Transportation and Material Moving Occupations
Major Group
Figure C.1: Abstract tasks by major occupational group
Notes: This ﬁgure shows a boxplot of the occupational degree of abstract tasks by major
occupational groups.
43
2
1
0
1
2
3
Degree of Abstract Tasks
High School Diploma or Equivalent
Associate's Degree or Equivalent
Bachelor's Degree or Equivalent
Master's Degree or Equivalent
Doctoral Degree or Equivalent
Education
Figure C.2: Abstract tasks by education
Notes: This ﬁgure shows a boxplot of the occupational degree of abstract tasks by educational
requirement.
0
25
50
75
100
Annual wage percentile
1
0.5
0
0.5
1
Degree of Abstract tasks
Autor et al. (2003)
Mühlbach (2022)
Figure C.3: Abstract tasks by occupation wages
Notes: This ﬁgure shows a smoothed polynomial regression of both standardized measures of
abstract tasks in each 6-digit SOC occupation against its rank in the wage distribution.
44
Manual tasks
Deﬁnition 5 (Manual tasks). “Manual tasks are innate tasks like dexterity, sight-
edness, and visual and language recognition, which require adaptability, ﬂexibility,
and in-person interactions. These tasks are typically nonpredictable but straight-
forward. Manual tasks are characteristic of construction and service occupations,
such as truck drivers, janitors, and house-cleaners.”
Table C.3: Top and bottom 10 occupations on degree of manual tasks
Top 10
Bottom 10
Rank
1
Laborers and Freight, Stock, and Material Move...
Political Science Teachers, Postsecondary
2
Dishwashers
Chief Sustainability Oﬃcers
3
Industrial Truck and Tractor Operators
Financial Quantitative Analysts
4
Helpers–Electricians
Philosophy and Religion Teachers, Postsecondary
5
Cleaning, Washing, and Metal Pickling Equipmen...
Environmental Economists
6
Excavating and Loading Machine and Dragline Op...
Mathematical Science Teachers, Postsecondary
7
Maids and Housekeeping Cleaners
Communications Teachers, Postsecondary
8
Agricultural Equipment Operators
Law Teachers, Postsecondary
9
Cleaners of Vehicles and Equipment
Climate Change Policy Analysts
10
Welding, Soldering, and Brazing Machine Setter...
Agents and Business Managers of Artists, Perfo...
Notes: This table shows the top and bottom 10 occupations on degree of manual tasks estimated
by the occ2vec framework as the cosine similarity between occupation embeddings and the
embedding of manual tasks.
2
1
0
1
2
Degree of Manual Tasks
Architecture and Engineering Occupations
Arts, Design, Entertainment, Sports, and Media Occupations
Building and Grounds Cleaning and Maintenance Occupations
Business and Financial Operations Occupations
Community and Social Service Occupations
Computer and Mathematical Occupations
Construction and Extraction Occupations
Educational Instruction and Library Occupations
Farming, Fishing, and Forestry Occupations
Food Preparation and Serving Related Occupations
Healthcare Practitioners and Technical Occupations
Healthcare Support Occupations
Installation, Maintenance, and Repair Occupations
Legal Occupations
Life, Physical, and Social Science Occupations
Management Occupations
Office and Administrative Support Occupations
Personal Care and Service Occupations
Production Occupations
Protective Service Occupations
Sales and Related Occupations
Transportation and Material Moving Occupations
Major Group
Figure C.4: Manual tasks by major occupational group
Notes: This ﬁgure shows a boxplot of the occupational degree of manual tasks by major
occupational groups.
45
2
1
0
1
2
Degree of Manual Tasks
High School Diploma or Equivalent
Associate's Degree or Equivalent
Bachelor's Degree or Equivalent
Master's Degree or Equivalent
Doctoral Degree or Equivalent
Education
Figure C.5: Manual tasks by education
Notes: This ﬁgure shows a boxplot of the occupational degree of manual tasks by educational
requirement.
0
25
50
75
100
Annual wage percentile
1
0.5
0
0.5
Degree of Manual tasks
Autor et al. (2003)
Mühlbach (2022)
Figure C.6: Manual tasks by occupation wages
Notes: This ﬁgure shows a smoothed polynomial regression of both standardized measures of
manual tasks in each 6-digit SOC occupation against its rank in the wage distribution.
46
D. Degree of artiﬁcial intelligence
In this appendix, we provide additional details to those given in Section V on the
application. This appendix is meant as a supplement and is not self-contained
without the main text.
Deﬁnition of artiﬁcial intelligence
The following deﬁnitions jointly deﬁne
artiﬁcial intelligence. The deﬁnitions are from IEEE Guide for Terms and Concepts
in Intelligent Process Automation, IEEE Std 2755TM-2017 (link). Starting from
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Deﬁnition 7, we include the deﬁnitions of all related terms
repeatedly until we have these nine deﬁnitions. By using our NLP algorithm,
we get one embeddings for each deﬁnition, which we ﬁnally combine into one
embedding by a simple average.
Deﬁnition 6 (Artiﬁcial General Intelligence). “Complex, computational artiﬁcial
intelligence capable of providing descriptive, discovery, predictive, prescriptive,
and deductive analytics with relevance and accuracy equal to or exceeding human
experts in multiple general knowledge domains. Artiﬁcial general intelligence
includes artiﬁcial intelligence systems capable of interacting naturally with humans
and machines in a way undetectable to expert observers and consistently passing
the Turing Test for artiﬁcial intelligence.”
Deﬁnition 7 (Artiﬁcial Intelligence). “The combination of cognitive automation,
machine learning, reasoning, hypothesis generation and analysis, natural language
processing, and intentional algorithm mutation producing insights and analytics at
or above human capability.”
Deﬁnition 8 (Machine Learning). “The combination of cognitive automation,
machine learning, reasoning, hypothesis generation and analysis, natural language
processing, and intentional algorithm mutation producing insights and analytics at
or above human capability.”
Deﬁnition 9 (Cognitive Automation). “The identiﬁcation, assessment, and ap-
plication of available machine learning algorithms for the purpose of leveraging
domain knowledge and reasoning to further automate the machine learning already
present in a manner that may be thought of as cognitive. With cognitive automa-
tion, the system performs corrective actions driven by knowledge of the underlying
47
analytics tool itself, iterates its own automation approaches and algorithms for
more expansive or more thorough analysis, and is thereby able to fulﬁll its purpose.
The automation of the cognitive process reﬁnes itself and dynamically generates
novel hypotheses that it can likewise assess against its existing corpus and other
information resources.”
Deﬁnition 10 (Descriptive Analytics). “Insights, reporting, and information
answering the question, “Why did something happen?” Descriptive analytics deter-
mines information useful to understanding the cause(s) of an event(s).”
Deﬁnition 11 (Deductive Analytics). “Insights, reporting, and information an-
swering the question, “What would likely happen IF...?” Deductive analytics evalu-
ates causes and outcomes of possible future events.”
Deﬁnition 12 (Diagnostic Analytics). “Insights, reporting, and information
answering the question, “Why did something happen?” Diagnostic analytics deter-
mines information useful to understanding the cause(s) of an event(s).”
Deﬁnition 13 (Predictive Analytics). “Insights, reporting, and information an-
swering the question, “What is likely to happen?” Predictive analytics support high
conﬁdence foretelling of future event(s).”
Deﬁnition 14 (Prescriptive Analytics). “Insights, reporting, and information
answering the question, “What should I do about it?” Prescriptive analytics deter-
mines information that provides high conﬁdence actions necessary to recover from
an event or fulﬁll a need.”
Top and bottom 10 occupations
Major occupational groups and educational requirements
Wage and employment growth proﬁles
Correlation coeﬃcients
48
Table D.1: Top and bottom 10 occupations on degree of artiﬁcial intelligence
Top 10
Bottom 10
Rank
1
Business Intelligence Analysts
Helpers–Brickmasons, Blockmasons, Stonemasons...
2
Statisticians
Helpers–Painters, Paperhangers, Plasterers, a...
3
Intelligence Analysts
Farmworkers and Laborers, Crop, Nursery, and G...
4
Operations Research Analysts
Construction Laborers
5
Market Research Analysts and Marketing Special...
Meat, Poultry, and Fish Cutters and Trimmers
6
Financial Quantitative Analysts
Tapers
7
Data Warehousing Specialists
Roof Bolters, Mining
8
Clinical Data Managers
Plasterers and Stucco Masons
9
Biostatisticians
Manicurists and Pedicurists
10
Search Marketing Strategists
Fence Erectors
Notes: This table shows the top and bottom 10 occupations on degree of artiﬁcial intelligence
estimated by the occupation2vec framework.
2
0
2
4
Degree of Artificial Intelligence
Architecture and Engineering Occupations
Arts, Design, Entertainment, Sports, and Media Occupations
Building and Grounds Cleaning and Maintenance Occupations
Business and Financial Operations Occupations
Community and Social Service Occupations
Computer and Mathematical Occupations
Construction and Extraction Occupations
Educational Instruction and Library Occupations
Farming, Fishing, and Forestry Occupations
Food Preparation and Serving Related Occupations
Healthcare Practitioners and Technical Occupations
Healthcare Support Occupations
Installation, Maintenance, and Repair Occupations
Legal Occupations
Life, Physical, and Social Science Occupations
Management Occupations
Office and Administrative Support Occupations
Personal Care and Service Occupations
Production Occupations
Protective Service Occupations
Sales and Related Occupations
Transportation and Material Moving Occupations
Major Group
Figure D.1: Artiﬁcial intelligence by major occupational group
Notes: This ﬁgure shows a boxplot of the occupational degree of artiﬁcial intelligence by major
occupational groups.
Table D.2: Correlation coeﬃcients between measures
Brynjolfsson et al. (2018)
Felten et al. (2018)
Mühlbach (2022)
Webb (2020)
Brynjolfsson et al. (2018)
1.000
-0.090
0.284
0.059
Felten et al. (2018)
-0.090
1.000
0.353
0.391
Mühlbach (2022)
0.284
0.353
1.000
0.202
Webb (2020)
0.059
0.391
0.202
1.000
Notes: This table shows the Spearman correlation coeﬃcient from comparing our occupational
estimates of artiﬁcial intelligence to the ones of Felten et al. (2018), Brynjolfsson et al. (2018),
and Webb (2019)., respectively.
49
2
0
2
4
Degree of Artificial Intelligence
High School Diploma or Equivalent
Associate's Degree or Equivalent
Bachelor's Degree or Equivalent
Master's Degree or Equivalent
Doctoral Degree or Equivalent
Education
Figure D.2: Artiﬁcial intelligence by education
Notes: This ﬁgure shows a boxplot of the occupational degree of artiﬁcial intelligence by
educational requirement.
0
25
50
75
100
Annual wage percentile
1
0
1
Degree of Artificial intelligence
Brynjolfsson et al. (2018)
Felten et al. (2018)
Mühlbach (2022)
Webb (2020)
Figure D.3: Artiﬁcial intelligence by occupation wages
Notes: This ﬁgure shows a smoothed polynomial regression of standardized measures of artiﬁcial
intelligence in each 6-digit SOC occupation against its rank in the wage distribution.
50
E. Degree of charisma
In this appendix, we provide additional details to those given in Section V on the
application. This appendix is meant as a supplement and is not self-contained
without the main text.
Deﬁnition of charisma
The following deﬁnitions jointly deﬁne charisma. The
deﬁnitions are from Psychology Today, Cambridge University Press, Oxford
University Press, and Wikipedia, respectively. In addition, we use American
Psychological Association’s Dictionary of Psychology (see Deﬁnition 3). By using
our NLP algorithm, we get one embedding for each deﬁnition, which we ﬁnally
combine into one embedding by a simple average.
Deﬁnition 15 (Charisma). “Charisma is an individual’s ability to attract and
inﬂuence other people. While it is often described as a mysterious quality that one
either has or doesn’t have, some experts argue that the skills of charismatic people
can be learned and cultivated.” (Psychology Today, 2021a)
Deﬁnition 16 (Charisma). “A special power that some people have naturally
that makes them able to inﬂuence other people and attract their attention and
admiration.” (Cambridge University Press, 2021a)
Deﬁnition 17 (Charisma). “A quality possessed by some individuals that encour-
ages others to listen and follow. Charismatic leaders tend to be self-conﬁdent,
visionary, and change oriented, often with eccentric or unusual behavior.” (Oxford
University Press, 2021a)
Deﬁnition 18 (Charisma). “Charisma is compelling attractiveness or charm that
can inspire devotion in others. Scholars in sociology, political science, psychology,
and management reserve the term for a type of leadership seen as extraordinary;
in these ﬁelds, the term charisma is used to describe a particular type of leader
who uses values-based, symbolic, and emotion-laden leader signaling.” (Wikipedia,
2021a)
51
F. Degree of emotional intelligence
In this appendix, we provide additional details to those given in Section V on the
application. This appendix is meant as a supplement and is not self-contained
without the main text.
Deﬁnition of emotional intelligence
The following deﬁnitions jointly deﬁne
emotional intelligence. The deﬁnitions are from American Psychological Associa-
tion, Psychology Today, Cambridge University Press, Oxford University Press,
and Wikipedia, respectively. By using our NLP algorithm, we get one embedding
for each deﬁnition, which we ﬁnally combine into one embedding by a simple
average.
Deﬁnition 19 (Emotional intelligence). “A type of intelligence that involves the
ability to process emotional information and use it in reasoning and other cognitive
activities, proposed by U.S. psychologists Peter Salovey and John D. Mayer.
According to Mayer and Salovey’s 1997 model, it comprises four abilities: to
perceive and appraise emotions accurately; to access and evoke emotions when they
facilitate cognition; to comprehend emotional language and make use of emotional
information; and to regulate one’s own and others’ emotions to promote growth and
well-being. Their ideas were popularized in a best-selling book by U.S. psychologist
and science journalist Daniel J. Goleman who also altered the deﬁnition to include
many personality variables.” (American Psychological Association, 2021b)
Deﬁnition 20 (Emotional intelligence). “Emotional intelligence refers to the
ability to identify and manage one’s own emotions, as well as the emotions of
others. Emotional intelligence is generally said to include a few skills: namely
emotional awareness, or the ability to identify and name one’s own emotions; the
ability to harness those emotions and apply them to tasks like thinking and problem
solving; and the ability to manage emotions, which includes both regulating one’s
own emotions when necessary and helping others to do the same.” (Psychology
Today, 2021b)
Deﬁnition 21 (Emotional intelligence). “The ability to understand the way people
feel and react and to use this skill to make good judgments and to avoid or solve
problems.” (Cambridge University Press, 2021b)
52
Deﬁnition 22 (Emotional intelligence). “Ability to monitor one’s own and other
people’s emotions, to discriminate between diﬀerent emotions and label them
appropriately, and to use emotional information to guide thinking and behavior.
It encompasses four competencies: the ability to perceive, appraise, and express
emotions accurately; the ability to access and evoke emotions when they facilitate
cognition; the ability to comprehend emotional messages and to make use of
emotional information; and the ability to regulate one’s own emotions to promote
growth and well-being. (. . .) Popularized interpretations of emotional intelligence
include various other factors such as interpersonal skills and adaptability.” (Oxford
University Press, 2021b)
Deﬁnition 23 (Emotional intelligence). “Emotional intelligence is most often
deﬁned as the ability to perceive, use, understand, manage, and handle emotions.
People with high emotional intelligence can recognize their own emotions and
those of others, use emotional information to guide thinking and behavior, discern
between diﬀerent feelings and label them appropriately, and adjust emotions to
adapt to environments.” (Wikipedia, 2021b)
Table F.1: Top and bottom 10 occupations on degree of emotional intelligence
Top 10
Bottom 10
Rank
1
Marriage and Family Therapists
Helpers–Brickmasons, Blockmasons, Stonemasons...
2
Clinical and Counseling Psychologists
Riggers
3
Mental Health Counselors
Helpers–Painters, Paperhangers, Plasterers, a...
4
School Psychologists
Tapers
5
Insurance Underwriters
Maintenance Workers, Machinery
6
Investment Fund Managers
Bicycle Repairers
7
Search Marketing Strategists
Reinforcing Iron and Rebar Workers
8
Business Continuity Planners
Rolling Machine Setters, Operators, and Tender...
9
Business Intelligence Analysts
Woodworking Machine Setters, Operators, and Te...
10
Video Game Designers
Rail-Track Laying and Maintenance Equipment Op...
Notes: This table shows the top and bottom 10 occupations on degree of emotional intelligence
estimated by the occ2vec framework.
Top and bottom 10 occupations
Major occupational groups and educational requirements
Wage proﬁles
53
2
1
0
1
2
3
Degree of Emotional Intelligence
Architecture and Engineering Occupations
Arts, Design, Entertainment, Sports, and Media Occupations
Building and Grounds Cleaning and Maintenance Occupations
Business and Financial Operations Occupations
Community and Social Service Occupations
Computer and Mathematical Occupations
Construction and Extraction Occupations
Educational Instruction and Library Occupations
Farming, Fishing, and Forestry Occupations
Food Preparation and Serving Related Occupations
Healthcare Practitioners and Technical Occupations
Healthcare Support Occupations
Installation, Maintenance, and Repair Occupations
Legal Occupations
Life, Physical, and Social Science Occupations
Management Occupations
Office and Administrative Support Occupations
Personal Care and Service Occupations
Production Occupations
Protective Service Occupations
Sales and Related Occupations
Transportation and Material Moving Occupations
Major Group
Figure F.1: Emotional intelligence by major occupational group
Notes: This ﬁgure shows a boxplot of the occupational degree of emotional intelligence by major
occupational groups.
2
1
0
1
2
3
Degree of Emotional Intelligence
High School Diploma or Equivalent
Associate's Degree or Equivalent
Bachelor's Degree or Equivalent
Master's Degree or Equivalent
Doctoral Degree or Equivalent
Education
Figure F.2: Emotional intelligence by education
Notes: This ﬁgure shows a boxplot of the occupational degree of emotional intelligence by
educational requirement.
54
0
25
50
75
100
Annual wage
0.4
0
0.4
0.8
Degree of Emotional Intelligence
Figure F.3: Emotional intelligence by occupation wages
Notes: This ﬁgure shows a smoothed polynomial regression of our standardized measure of
emotional intelligence in each 6-digit SOC occupation against its rank in the wage distribution.
55
