Title: Neural Machine Translation model for University Email Application
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2007.16011v1
--------------------------------------------------

Neural Machine Translation model for University Email
Application
Sandhya Aneja
Faculty of Integrated Technologies
Universiti Brunei Darussalam
Brunei Darussalam
sandhya.aneja@ubd.edu.bn
Siti Nur Afikah Bte Abdul
Mazid
Faculty of Integrated Technologies
Universiti Brunei Darussalam
Brunei Darussalam
16b4005@ubd.edu.bn
Nagender Aneja
Institute of Applied Data Analytics
Universiti Brunei Darussalam
Brunei Darussalam
nagender.aneja@ubd.edu.bn
ABSTRACT
Machine translation has many applications such as news transla-
tion, email translation, official letter translation etc. Commercial
translators, e.g. Google Translation lags in regional vocabulary and
are unable to learn the bilingual text in the source and target lan-
guages within the input. In this paper, a regional vocabulary-based
application-oriented Neural Machine Translation (NMT) model is
proposed over the data set of emails used at the University for com-
munication over a period of three years. A state-of-the-art Sequence-
to-Sequence Neural Network for ML →EN (Malay to English) and
EN →ML (English to Malay) translations is compared with Google
Translate using Gated Recurrent Unit Recurrent Neural Network
machine translation model with attention decoder. The low BLEU
score of Google Translation in comparison to our model indicates
that the application based regional models are better. The low BLEU
score of English to Malay of our model and Google Translation in-
dicates that the Malay Language has complex language features
corresponding to English.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Computing methodologies →Machine translation.
KEYWORDS
Machine Translation; Gated Recurrent Unit; Recurrent Neural Net-
work Model; Malay Language
ACM Reference Format:
Sandhya Aneja, Siti Nur Afikah Bte Abdul Mazid, and Nagender Aneja.
2020. Neural Machine Translation model for University Email Application.
In ICNLP 2020: International Conference on Natural Language Processing,
July 11-13, 2020. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 5 pages. https://doi.org/10.
1145/1122445.1122456
1
INTRODUCTION
Machine translation is important for news translation, a biomedical
translation, automatic post-editing task, chatbots for understand-
ing different languages, and question/answer systems[13]. Machine
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
to be published by ICNLP 2020, July 11-13, 2020, submitted version,
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/1122445.1122456
Translation (MT) provides metrics to assess (i) the translation qual-
ity given reference translation, (ii) the translation quality without
access to any reference, (iii) a robust translation task, and (iv) a
parallel comparable corpora task to improve the translations by
parallelizing model for translation and searching the web for trans-
lation. MT quality have increased considerably with most notably
advances in the field of Neural Machine Translation (NMT) ([2])
by learning the mapping between source and target language via
neural networks and attention mechanisms.
Neural MT models - Recurrent Neural Network, Long Short Term
Memory, Gated Recurrent Unit, Transformer (16-layer) , Transformer-
Big (more hidden units) [11, 12] are used for translation. These mod-
els are also used for selection and preparation of training data using
comparable corpora for MT. The Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)
units stacked with 1-2 layers are sufficient for a small data set
system which may be used for mobile applications or embedded
system. However recently the system based on multi-layer self-
attention has shown some improvement on large scale state-of-art
datasets.
[4] presented online learning for NMT wherein authors inte-
grated machine translation with the user interface so that machine
continuously learn from human choices and adapt the model to
a specific domain. [13] presented a context-aware model for ma-
chine comprehension using an encoder, decoder and reinforcement
learning.
In this paper, an application-based corpus populated with re-
gional vocabulary, human translations and corresponding transla-
tions of the email content from Google Translate is prepared for
developing the neural machine translation model. We want to show
that these types of models are required in comparison to commercial
general translators e.g. Google translator. Therefore, a RNN based
Gated Recurrent Unit with attention decoder model is used for the
University Email application, which predicts the next word con-
ditioned on the previous context words [14]. The bilingual emails
collected at the University for communication over a period of three
years in size is small in comparison with state-of-the-art-dataset
e.g. WMT-18 (English →German).
The problem is found to require the context of the email con-
tent to be preserved during training on the dataset that may have
multiple contexts. The problem has different challenges for ML
→EN and EN →ML translations. The model developed for the
problem initially was unable to learn the context for source and
target languages within an email even in the presence of attention
mechanism. Thus, the problem needs more efforts and a different
approach when the dataset has multiple contexts. The bilingual
arXiv:2007.16011v1  [cs.CL]  20 Jul 2020
to be published by ICNLP 2020, July 11-13, 2020, submitted version,
Sandhya Aneja, Siti Nur Afikah Bte Abdul Mazid, and Nagender Aneja
emails are compared with ML →EN Google translations and EN
→ML Google translations, respectively.
Table 1 depicts the format of the email corpus for the problem
undertaken in the research. The trained model output sentence
usually has multiple reasonable translations even if it generates a
word different from ground truth word.
reference: Dear All
candidate 1: All in all
candidate 2: Dear all
candidate 3: Respected all
For example, the translation candidate 1 can be treated as a potential
error in comparison to candidate 2 and candidate 3.
We observed that splitting the input email based on the context
before feeding it into RNN Encoder improved the performance over
Google Translate by 10-20 BLEU points which means the model
error was improved. However, we could not address all the problems
observed in Google Translate.
We improved the BLEU score over the regional vocabulary keep-
ing the size of dataset small, including multiple contexts in an email.
Results show that the training can be improved on the application
scale, even with a small dataset and using a simple model rather
than a very deep model. The results indicate that application-based
regional models are better.
Our contributions are following
(1) Bilingual regional vocabulary populated email corpus with
corresponding translations from Google Translate
(2) Trained NMT model with higher BLEU score than Google
Translate
(3) Context-based results of language translations when using
NMT model
(4) Regional language Malay based application
Table 1: Email Corpus format
eng
human
malay
human
malay google
translate
eng
google
translate
Dear Stu-
dents
Pelajar yang
dihormati
Pelajar yang di-
hormati
Dear student
2
RNN-BASED NMT MODEL
The approach can be used in applications of NMT models. We take
the RNN-based NMT model to explain the method we used in this
application [1]. Assume the source email and observed translation
email can be expressed as sequence of word as x = x1,x2, . . . ,x |x |
and y = y1,y2, . . . ,y|y | respectively. The core of the NMT is com-
posed of sequence to sequence model generating translations using
sequence to sequence or encoder-decoder network. The network
consists of mainly three parts:
(1) Encoder
(2) Attention Context Vector
(3) Decoder
Encoder: An encoder is a stack of many recurrent units where
each accepts a single word or element of the input sequence, pro-
cess the element and pass the state forward. The hidden states ht
are computed as in Equation 1 with the help of current input xt ,
previous state ht−1, and weights of the networkW . This is the final
hidden state of the encoder that is represented by Equation 1.
ht = f (W (hh)ht−1 + W (hx)xt )
(1)
Attention: The context vector aims to encapsulate input se-
quence information to assist the prediction of another sequence by
a decoder. This acts as an initial hidden state for the decoder. The
context vector cp are computed as in Equation 2, 3 and 4 with the
help of previous hidden state ht−1, previous state sp−1, and weights
of the network normalized over the source sequence in Equation 3
rrp = vT
a tanh(W (ss)sp−1 +W (hh)ht−1)
(2)
αtp =
exp(rtp)
Σ|x |
t=1exp(rtp)
(3)
The source context vector cp is weighted sum of all source an-
notations and can be calculated in Equation 4
cp = Σ|x |
t=1αtpht
(4)
Decoder: A decoder is similar to the encoder as it comprises
of many recurrent units cells wherein each cell predicts an output
word at a time step. Each recurrent unit cell accepts the previous
target state yp−1 and source context vector cp to produce output
and next target hidden state represented by Equation 5.
sp = f (W (ss).sp−1 + W (sy)yp−1 + W (sc)cp)
(5)
The jth target hidden state in the decoder is computed using
the previous hidden state. The Probability distribution Pj over all
words in target vocabulary is produced from the decoder at any
time, is computed using Softmax using Equation 7.
tj = f (W (ss).sj + W (sy)yj−1 + W (sc)cj)
(6)
Pj = sof tmax(W s.tj)
(7)
Thus, sequence to sequence model can map sequences of varying
lengths to each other.
3
APPROACH: NEURAL MACHINE
TRANSLATION MODEL FOR EMAIL
APPLICATION WITH ATTENTION
DECODER
The main aim of our method is to feed the higher context, i.e. split-
ting the input text into contextual content to increase the model
output probability distribution so that it matches with the prob-
ability distribution of the ground truth values. This potentially
can reduce the gap between training and inference by training the
model to handle the situation, which will appear during test time.
We discuss two methods to use NMT for the applications. To
predict the p-th target word yp, the following steps are involved in
our approach:
(1) Solely-Email-Level Selection
(2) Contextual-Paragraph-Level Selection
3.1
Solely-Email-Level Selection
Solely-Email-Level Selection approach uses the full email that has
multiple contexts in different paragraphs.
rrp = vT
a tanh(W (ss)sp−1 +W (hh)ht−1)
(8)
αtp =
exp(rtp)
Σ|x |
t=1exp(rtp)
(9)
Neural Machine Translation model for University Email Application
to be published by ICNLP 2020, July 11-13, 2020, submitted version,
(a)
(b)
Figure 1: Neural Machine Translation model for email application (a) Solely-Email-Level Selection (b) Contextual-Paragraph-Level Selection
The source context vector is a weighted sum of all source anno-
tations and can be calculated as in Equation 10
cp = Σ|x |
t=1αtpht
(10)
At the p-th step, the NMT model needs the ground truth word
yp−1 word as the context word to predict yp, thus we need to select
a yp which need to be similar to the ground truth word. We used
Equations 8, 9 and 10, however, the model could not converge. We
used GRU model for translation, and it could not converge because
Equations 8, 9 and 10 determine the context over the whole length
of input text while the context may not be preserved in the different
paragraphs of the input text.
3.2
Contextual-Paragraph-Level Selection
One option is to optimize the length of the input sequence such
that the context is preserved in the input text.
Assume the source email text with sequence of words x =
{x1,x2, . . . ,x |x |} has multiple contextual paragraphs with context
vector c = {c1,c2, . . . ,cj }. The objective of this approach is to split
the text vector comprising the words so that split vector is based
on the context vector.
x = x1,x2, . . . ,x |c1|,
x |c1|+1,x |c1|+2, . . . ,x |c1|+|c2|,
x |c1|+|c2|+1,x |c1|+|c2|+2, . . . ,x |c1|+|c2|+|c3|
x |c1|+|c2|+|c3|+1,x |c1|+|c2|+|c3|+2, . . . ,x |c1|+|c2|+|c3|
. . .
x |c1|+|c2|+|cj |+1,x |c1|+|c2|+|cj |+2, . . . x |x |
Equation 10 would be transformed to Equations 11, 12,13 accord-
ing to the context vector.
c1p = Σ|c1 |
t=1αtpht
(11)
c2p = Σ|c2 |
t=1αtpht
(12)
cjp = Σ|cj |
t=1αtpht
(13)
The NMT model needs the ground truth word yp−1 word as
the context word to predict yp, which is provided since context is
maintained in the paragraph in Equations 11, 12, 13.
Thus, at the p-th step the model converges. A comparison of
Equation 10 and Equations 11, 12,13 clearly depicts the convergence
of two scenarios and further explained in the Section 3.6. Figure
1b demonstrates the proposed implementation of the model for an
application to optimize in comparison to implementation in Figure
1a.
3.3
Results and Analysis
The objective of this research is to develop an NMT model for
English Malay emails which were circulated to Universiti Brunei
Darussalam teaching staff and students. The international staff and
students are part of the University and therefore the communication
in many emails is in both the languages.
We also paired each email with a translation from Google Trans-
late. A sample of the dataset is shown in Table 1. The table has four
columns, the content of the first and second columns are from the
email used in the communication. The third column is the English
translation of email content in Malay language using Google Trans-
late. The fourth column is the Malay translation of email content
in English Language using Google Translate.
There are a few issues in Google Translate as shown in the table
when translating English language ‘Dear All ’to Malay Language,
Google still shows ‘Dear All ’. Additionally, one can see in other
cases that the English and Malay translation from Google doesn’t
correspond to what has been used in the email. The problem is
defined in terms of why the dataset of using emails is important.
Since the translation of a sentence word-by-word is not that a user
wants. In many cases, translation varies from person to person
since, in many sentences or words, there are different ways to
communicate the same matter.
3.4
Experiment Settings
We split 131 emails into contextual paragraphs. Thus, our dataset
for English →Malay translation and vice versa comprises 785
contextual paragraph pairs.
to be published by ICNLP 2020, July 11-13, 2020, submitted version,
Sandhya Aneja, Siti Nur Afikah Bte Abdul Mazid, and Nagender Aneja
We divided the email into contextual paragraphs since training
a model with full email which has multiple contextual paragraphs
is error-prone. We also observed this fact when training the model
with full email. This indicates that Gated Recurrent Unit Recurrent
Neural Network machine translation model does not perform well
in learning the patterns for long context, which in fact is not there,
but the model tries to find and thus make an error.
The dataset dictionary comprises 1808 English words and 1628
Malay words. We set a maximum length of input text as 2000 to
cover most sentences or paragraphs in the training process and
also to terminate the output.
To train the network, we pass the input sequence through the
encoder and track every output and hidden state. Thus, after passing
an input sequence with the initial hidden state, we get encoder
outputs and the final hidden state. Passing an input sequence of five
words with 256 hidden sizes will produce encoder outputs of the
tensor size (5, 256) and final hidden state of 256 size tensor vector.
The decoder is then given the first input as ⟨SOS ⟩token and
final hidden state of the encoder. The decoder can be given next
input as the best guess by the decoder or the real target outputs
during the training process. The concept of using target outputs
as the next input is called teacher forcing that helps to converge
the training process faster. We used the teacher forcing algorithm
randomly with a probability of 0.5 [5]. However, during testing
or evaluation time, the decoder is given the next input as the best
guess only.
Network loss is computed based on decoder output and target
tensor. Network weights are optimized using Stochastic Gradient
Descent (SGD) optimizer using the initial learning rate of 0.01. We
stored loss after every 100 steps to track if the network is learning.
3.5
Model convergence
In this section, we provide results for both translation models,
namely Malay →English and English →Malay when we split the
email with contextual paragraphs. We show results in terms of NLL
loss, BLEU score [6] and comparison with Google Translation.
The loss explains the training process so that how the training
performed during the number of iterations. Figure 2a shows graph
of NLL loss with the number of iterations for Malay →English.
We performed 80,000 iterations that reduced the cross-entropy loss
from 4.498 to 0.023. Figure 2b shows a graph of NLL loss with the
number of iterations for English →Malay. We performed 40,000
iterations that reduced the loss from 4.14 to 0.106. These graphs
show that the model training is computationally faster in English
→Malay rather than Malay →English.
3.6
Contextual Variation
Figure 2c - 2d shows graphs with the number of iterations for the
variation of context with English →Malay and Malay →English
wherein we observed that the context does not converge when
email was not split in both Figure 2c -2d while, when the email split,
context starts with a lower value and converge to 1 with an increase
in the number of iterations. The context in the decoder depends on
the attention weights calculated at each iteration. In a paragraph
with multiple contexts, the attention weights are computed with
a higher value and remain the same while the model does not
converge. In the case of the contextual paragraph with split context,
the attention weights start with a lower value and converge to 1,
therefore, contributing to target predicted sequence to near the
ground-truth value.
3.7
BLEU Score Comparison
Table 2 shows the comparison of BLEU score between (i) Malay →
Model English, (ii) English →Model Malay, (iii) Malay →Google
English translation, and (iv) English →Google Malay.
We present BLEU score for randomly chosen 100 paragraphs
from the dataset after the model is trained when the NLL Loss is
negligible.
The low BLEU of English to Malay of our model and Google
Translation indicates that the Malay Language has complex lan-
guage features corresponding to English.
The low BLEU of Google Translation in comparison to our model
indicates that the application based regional models with contextual
split are better.
Table 2: BLEU Score
Model
Human Model
Model
Google Model
E->M
0.95
E->M
0.75
M->E
0.93
M->E
0.735
Below we present a sample output from the model. The sample
shows input text, the true value expected from model and google,
predicted text from model and predicted text from Google.
Input: dengan itu para pensyarah pegawai kakitangan dan para
pelajar dan juga alumni universiti brunei darussalam adalah amat
dialu alukan untuk turut serta menjadi pembimbing bagi program
ini.
Truth: therefore lecturers officers staff and students as well as
university brunei darussalam alumni are welcome to participate in
this program .
Pred: therefore lecturers officers staff and students as well as uni-
versity brunei darussalam alumni are welcome to participate in this
program .
Google: therefore the faculty staff staff and students as well as the
university of brunei darussalam alumni are welcome to participate
in the program .
4
RELATED WORK
Researchers [9] have used five deep layered Long Short Term Mem-
ory training model improving the existing result of WMT-14 dataset
for an EN →FR translation of fixed conditionality. Cho et al. [3]
improved hidden unit of LSTM Recurrent Neural Network by drop-
ping a previously hidden unit whenever there is irrelevant infor-
mation. The reset gate and update gate collectively improve the
hidden state. The states which capture short term dependencies
were including reset gate while long term dependencies were cap-
tured with updated gate. The research also incorporated phrase
pair based dependencies to improve the model.
The authors in [8] improved the Long Short Term Memory Re-
current Neural Network model by integrating it with canonical
segmentation of words by providing the exact words of the verb.
This is an improvement over the character level for language model
Neural Machine Translation model for University Email Application
to be published by ICNLP 2020, July 11-13, 2020, submitted version,
(a) Malay →English
(b) English →Malay
(c) Malay →English
(d) English →Malay
Figure 2: (a)-(b) Variation of model training (Negative Log Likelihood Loss Model Loss) x 100 iteration. Figure 2: (c)-(d) Variation of model
context x 100 iteration
with morphemes. The length constraint due to segmentation is also
included in the model to handle variable-length sequences.
Machine Translation has been promising but on state-of-art
datasets research is still in progress by reducing the noise between
source and target sentence-level, reducing the overcorrection at
word-level as well as at sentence level. The authors [14] proposed to
solve overcorrection problem by selecting predicted word as next
input rather than ground truth by defining a measure on BLEU
score on word-level as well as on sentence-level.
The recent problem under application of Machine Translation is
inferential machine comprehension. The inferential network [13]
is proposed to comprise a micro infer cell where one master unit
is for reading the document to locate the ending of reasoning for
the question according to context of the question. The reader unit
uses attention mechanism from the reasoning operation to retrieve
the content. The writer unit write the content to memory cell. The
problem can not be optimized using back propagation therefore
reinforcement learning is used to terminate the mechanism. An-
other approach in the direction of improvement of Neural Machine
Translation is to augmenting the source sentences [2] with fuzzy
matches from translation memory using similarity match.
[6] presented ‘BLEU’ a metric for automatic evaluation of MT.
Human evaluation of a translation is exhaustive but expensive. The
authors defined n-gram precision over a corpus by first comparing
the n-grams of the reference sentence with n-grams of the candidate
translations in the corpus. BLEU score is given higher value when
the number of n-gram matches are higher.
[10] used Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) for POS tagging over
the Malay Language dataset. The authors compared the Weighted
Finite-State Transducer, Hidden Markov Model (HMM) and Long
Short Term Memory for tagging and found the state transducer
produced more accurate tagging with morphological information.
The work [7] provided a rule-based method to identify unknown
words in the corpus of Malay language. The abbreviations, affixed
words, proper nouns, and loanwords were mainly identified and
classified unknown words types.
5
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, the performance of RNN based NMT model namely
Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) with attention decoder is presented
on our dataset populated with English-Malay translated emails
circulated at the University. The model was unable to learn the
context for source and target language within the input text even
in the presence of attention mechanism. Thus, a different approach
splitting the input text into contextual content is used. General
purpose trained model doesnâĂŹt perform well for a specific appli-
cation. Thus, there is need to develop application oriented trained
model populated with application specific vocabulary. The model
using regional email vocabulary showed 10-20 BLUE score better
than google translate. The model was unable to learn when source
input contains bilingual text. Thus, there is need to update general
translators for multilingual blended input text.
REFERENCES
[1] Bahdanau, D., Cho, K., and Bengio, Y. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. arXiv:1409.0473 (2014).
[2] Bulté, B., and Tezcan, A. Neural fuzzy repair: Integrating fuzzy matches into
neural machine translation. In 57th Conference of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL) (2019), pp. 1800–1809.
[3] Cho, K., Van Merriënboer, B., Gulcehre, C., Bahdanau, D., Bougares, F.,
Schwenk, H., and Bengio, Y. Learning phrase representations using rnn encoder-
decoder for statistical machine translation. arXiv:1406.1078 (2014).
[4] Domingo, M., García-Martínez, M., Estela, A., Bié, L., Helle, A., Peris, Á.,
Casacuberta, F., and Herranz, M. Demonstration of a neural machine transla-
tion system with online learning for translators. arXiv:1906.09000 (2019).
[5] Lamb, A. M., Goyal, A. G. A. P., Zhang, Y., Zhang, S., Courville, A. C., and
Bengio, Y. Professor forcing: A new algorithm for training recurrent networks.
In Advances In Neural Information Processing Systems (2016), pp. 4601–4609.
[6] Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., and Zhu, W.-J. Bleu: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting on
association for computational linguistics (2002), Association for Computational
Linguistics, pp. 311–318.
[7] Ranaivo-Malangonr, B., Chua, C. C., and Ng, K. Identifying and classifying
unknown words in malay texts. Int. Sym. on Natural Language Processing, Pattaya
(2007), 493–498.
[8] Ruzsics, T., and Samardzic, T. Neural sequence-to-sequence learning of internal
word structure. In Proceedings of the 21st Conference on Computational Natural
Language Learning (CoNLL 2017) (2017), pp. 184–194.
[9] Sutskever, I., Vinyals, O., and Le, Q. V. Sequence to sequence learning with
neural networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems (2014),
pp. 3104–3112.
[10] Tan, T.-P., Ranaivo-Malançon, B., Besacier, L., Yeong, Y.-L., Gan, K. H., and
Tang, E. K. Evaluating lstm networks, hmm and wfst in malay part-of-speech
tagging. Journal of Telecommunication, Electronic and Computer Engineering
(JTEC) 9, 2-9 (2017), 79–83.
[11] Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N.,
Kaiser, Ł., and Polosukhin, I. Attention is all you need. In Advances in neural
information processing systems (2017), pp. 5998–6008.
[12] Wang, Q., Li, B., Xiao, T., Zhu, J., Li, C., Wong, D. F., and Chao, L. S. Learning
deep transformer models for machine translation. arXiv:1906.01787 (2019).
[13] Yu, J., Zha, Z., and Yin, J. Inferential machine comprehension: Answering
questions by recursively deducing the evidence chain from text. In Proceedings
of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (2019),
pp. 2241–2251.
[14] Zhang, W., Feng, Y., Meng, F., You, D., and Liu, Q. Bridging the gap between
training and inference for neural machine translation. arXiv:1906.02448 (2019).
