Title: From Imitation to Prediction, Data Compression vs Recurrent Neural Networks for Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1705.00697v1
--------------------------------------------------

From Imitation to Prediction, Data Compression vs
Recurrent Neural Networks for Natural Language
Processing
Juan Andr´es Laura∗, Gabriel Masi† and Luis Argerich‡
Departemento de Computaci´on, Facultad de Ingenier´ıa
Universidad de Buenos Aires
Email: ∗jandreslaura@gmail.com, †masigabriel@gmail.com, ‡largerich@ﬁ.uba.ar
Abstract—In recent studies [1][13][12] Recurrent Neural Net-
works were used for generative processes and their surprising
performance can be explained by their ability to create good
predictions. In addition, data compression is also based on
predictions. What the problem comes down to is whether a data
compressor could be used to perform as well as recurrent neural
networks in natural language processing tasks. If this is possible,
then the problem comes down to determining if a compression
algorithm is even more intelligent than a neural network in
speciﬁc tasks related to human language. In our journey we
discovered what we think is the fundamental difference between
a Data Compression Algorithm and a Recurrent Neural Network.
I. INTRODUCTION
One of the most interesting goals of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
is the simulation of different human creative processes like
speech recognition, sentiment analysis, image recognition,
automatic text generation, etc. In order to achieve such goals,
a program should be able to create a model that reﬂects how
humans think about these problems.
Researchers think that Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN)
are capable of understanding the way some tasks are done such
as music composition, writing of texts, etc. Moreover, RNNs
can be trained for sequence generation by processing real data
sequences one step at a time and predicting what comes next
[1][13].
Compression algorithms are also capable of understanding
and representing different sequences and that is why the com-
pression of a string could be achieved. However, a compression
algorithm might be used not only to compress a string but also
to do non-conventional tasks in the same way as neural nets
(e.g. a compression algorithm could be used for clustering
[11], sequence generation or music composition).
Both neural networks and data compressors have something
in common: they should be able to learn from the input data
to do the tasks for which they are designed. In this way, we
could argue that a data compressor can be used to generate
sequences or a neural network can be used to compress data.
In consequence, if we use the best data compressor to generate
sequences then the results obtained should be better that the
ones obtained by a neural network but if this is not true then
the neural network should compress better than the state of
the art in data compression.
Our hypothesis is that, if compression is based on learning
from the input data set, then the best compressor for a given
data set should be able to compete with other algorithms in
natural language processing tasks. In the present work, we
will analyze this hypothesis for two given scenarios: sentiment
analysis and automatic text generation.
II. DATA COMPRESSION AS AN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
FIELD
For many authors there is a very strong relationship between
Data Compression and Artiﬁcial Intelligence [8][9]. Data
Compression is about making good predictions which is also
the goal of Machine Learning, a ﬁeld of Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
We can say that data compression involves two steps:
modeling and coding. Coding is a solved problem using
arithmetic compression. The difﬁcult task is modeling. In
modeling the goal is to build a description of the data using the
most compact representation; this is again directly related to
Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Using the Minimal Description Length
principle[10] the efﬁciency of a good Machine Learning
algorithm can be measured in terms of how good is is to
compress the training data plus the size of the model itself.
If we have a ﬁle containing the digits of π we can compress
the ﬁle with a very short program able to generate those
digits, gigabytes of information can be compressed into a few
thousand bytes, the problem is having a program capable of
understanding that our input ﬁle contains the digits of π. We
can they say that, in order to achieve the best compression
level, the program should be able to always ﬁnd the most
compact model to represent the data and that is clearly an
indication of intelligence, perhaps even of General Artiﬁcial
Intelligence.
III. RNNS FOR DATA COMPRESSION
Recurrent Neural Networks and in particular LSTMs were
used for predictive tasks [7] and for Data Compression [14].
While the LSTMs were brilliant in their text[13], music[12]
and image generation[18] tasks they were never able to defeat
the state of the art algorithms in Data Compression[14].
This might indicate that there is a fundamental difference
between Data Compression and Generative Processes and
between Data Compression Algorithms and Recurrent Neural
arXiv:1705.00697v1  [cs.CL]  1 May 2017
Networs.After experiments we will show that there’s indeed
a fundamental difference that explains why a RNN can be
the state of the art in a generative process but not in Data
Compression.
IV. SENTIMENT ANALYSIS
A. A Qualitative Approach
The Sentiment of people can be determined according to
what they write in many social networks such as Facebook,
Twitter, etc.. It looks like an easy task for humans. However, it
could be not so easy for a computer to automatically determine
the sentiment behind a piece of writing.
The task of guessing the sentiment of text using a computer
is known as sentiment analysis and one of the most popular
approaches for this task is to use neural networks. In fact,
Stanford University created a powerful neural network for
sentiment analysis [3] which is used to predict the sentiment
of movie reviews taking into account not only the words
in isolation but also the order in which they appear. In our
ﬁrst experiment, the Stanford neural network and a PAQ
compressor [2] will be used for doing sentiment analysis of
movie reviews in order to determine whether a user likes or not
a given movie. After that, results obtained will be compared.
Both algorithms will use a public data set for movie reviews
[17].
It is important to understand how sentiment analysis could
be done with a data compressor. We start introducing the
concept of using Data Compression to compute the distance
between two strings using the Normalized Compression Dis-
tance [16].
NCD(x, y) = C(xy) −min{C(x), C(y)}
max{C(x), C(y)}
Where C(x) is the size of applying the best possible
compressor to x and C(xy) is the size of applying the best
possible compressor to the concatenation of x and y.
The NCD is an approximation to the Kolmogorov distance
between two strings using a Compression Algorithm to ap-
proximate the complexity of a string because the Kolmogorov
Complexity is uncomputable.
The principle behind the NCD is simple: when we con-
catenate string y after x then if y is very similar to x we
should be able to compress it a lot because the information in
x contains everything we need to describe y. An observation is
that C(xx) should be equal, with minimal overhead difference
to C(x) because the Kolmogorov complexity of a string
concatenated to itself is equal to the Kolmogorov complexity
of the string.
As introduced, a data compressor performs well when it is
capable of understanding the data set that will be compressed.
This understanding often grows when the data set becomes
bigger and in consequence compression rate improves. How-
ever, it is not true when future data (i.e. data that has not
been compressed yet) has no relation with already compressed
data because the more similar the information it is the better
compression rate it is.
Let C(X1, X2...Xn) be a compression algorithm that
compresses a set of n ﬁles denoted by X1, X2...Xn. Let
P1, P2...Pn and N1, N2...Nm be a set of n positive reviews
and m negative reviews respectively. Then, a review R can be
predicted positive or negative using the following inequality:
C(P1, ...Pn, R)−C(P1, ..., Pn) < C(N1, ..., Nm, R)−C(N1, ..., Nm)
The formula is a direct derivation from the NCD. When
the inequality is not true, we say that a review is predicted
negative.
The order in which ﬁles are compressed must be considered.
As you could see from the proposed formula, the review R is
compressed last.
Some people may ask why this inequality works to predict
whether a review is positive or negative. So it is important
to understand this inequality. Suppose that the review R is a
positive review but we want a compressor to predict whether it
is positive or negative. If R is compressed after a set of positive
reviews then the compression rate should be better than the
one obtained if R is compressed after a set of negative reviews
because the review R has more related information with the set
of positive reviews and in consequence should be compressed
better. Interestingly, both the positive and negative set could
have different sizes and that is why it is important to subtract
the compressed ﬁle size of both sets in the inequality.
B. Data Set Preparation
We used the Large Movie Review Dataset [17] which is a
popular dataset for doing sentiment analysis, it has been used
by Kaggle for Sentiment Analysis competitions.
We describe the quantity of movie reviews used in the
following table.
Positive
Negative
Total
12491
12499
Training
9999
9999
Test
2492
2500
C. PAQ for Sentiment Analysis
The idea of using Data Compression for Sentiment Analysis
is not new, it has been already proposed in [5] but the authors
did not use PAQ.
We chose PAQ [2] because at the time of this writing it was
the best Data Compression algorithm in several benchmarks.
The code for PAQ is available and that was important to
be able to run the experiments. For the Sentiment Analysis
task we used PAQ to compress the positive train set and the
negative train set storing PAQ’s data model for each set. Then
we compressed each test review after loading the positive and
negative models comparing the size to decide if the review
was positive or negative.
Correct
Incorrect
Inconcluse
PAQ
77.20%
18.41%
4.39%
RNN
70.93%
23.60%
5.47%
D. Experiment Results
In this section, the results obtained are explained giving a
comparison between the data compressor and the Stanford’s
Neural Network for Sentiment Analysis.
The following table shows the results obtained
As you could see from the previous table, 77.20% of movie
reviews were correctly classiﬁed by the PAQ Compressor
whereas 70.93% were well classiﬁcated by the Stanford’s
Neural Network.
There are two main points to highlight according to the
result obtained:
1) Sentiment Analysis could be achieved with a PAQ
compression algorithm with high accuracy ratio.
2) In this particular case, a higher precision can be achieved
using PAQ rather than the Stanford Neural Network for
Sentiment Analysis.
We
observed
that
PAQ
was
very
accurate
to
determine
whether
a
review
was
positive
or
negative,
the missclassiﬁcations were always difﬁcult reviews and in
some particular cases the compressor outdid the human label,
for example consider the following review:
“The piano part was so simple it could have been picked
out with one hand while the player whacked away at the
gong with the other. This is one of the most bewilderedly
trancestate inducing bad movies of the year so far for me.”
This review was labeled positive but PAQ correctly predicted
it as negative, since the review is misslabeled it counted as a
miss in the automated test.
V. AUTOMATIC TEXT GENERATION
This module’s goal is to generate automatic text with a PAQ
series compressor and compare it with RNN’s results, using
speciﬁcs metrics and scenarios.
The ability of good compressors when making predictions is
more than evident. It just requires an entry text (training set) to
be compressed. At compression time, the future symbols will
get a probability of occurrence: The greater the probability, the
better compression rate for success cases of that prediction, on
the other hand, each failure case will take a penalty. At the
end of this process, a probability distribution will be associated
with that entry data.
As a result of that probabilistic model, it could be possible
to simulate new samples, in other words, generate automatic
text.
A. Data Model
PAQ series compressors use arithmetic coding [2], it en-
codes symbols assigned to a probability distribution. This
probability lies in the interval [0,1) and when it comes to
arithmetic coding, there are only two possible symbols: 0 and
1. Moreover, this compressor uses contexts, a main part of
compression algorithms. They are built from the previous his-
tory and could be accessed to make predictions, for example,
the last ten symbols can be used to compute the prediction of
the eleventh.
Figure 1.
we can see that PAQ splits the [0,1) interval giving 1/4 of
probability to the bit 0 and 3/4 of probability to the bit 1. When a random
number is sampled in this interval it is likely that PAQ will generate a 1 bit.
After 8 bits are generated we have a character. Each bit generated is used as
context but is not used to update the PAQ models because PAQ should not
learn from the text it is randomly generating. PAQ learns from the training
test and then generates random text using that model.
PAQ uses an ensamble of several different models to com-
pute how likely a bit 1 or 0 is next. Some of these models are
based in the previous n characters of m bits of seen text, other
models use whole words as contexts, etc. In order to weight
the prediction performed by each model, a neural network is
used to determine the weight of each model [15]:
P(1|c) =
n
X
i=1
Pi(1|c)Wi
Where P(1|c) is the probability of the bit 1 with context
”c”, Pi(1|c) is the probability of a bit 1 in context ”c” for
model i and Wi is the weight of model i
In addition, each model adjusts their predictions based on
the new information. When compressing, our input text is
processed bit by bit. On every bit, the compressor updates the
context of each model and adjusts the weights of the neural
network.
Generally, as you compress more information, the predic-
tions will be better.
B. Text Generation
When data set compression is over, PAQ is ready to generate
automatic text.
A random number in the [0, 1) interval is sampled and
transformed into a bit zero or one using Inverse Transform
Sampling. In other words, if the random number falls within
the probability range of symbol 1, bit 1 will be generated,
otherwise, bit 0.
Once that bit is generated, it will be compressed to reset
every context for the following prediction.
What we want to achieve here is updating models in a way
that if you get the same context in two different samples,
probabilities will be the same, if not, this could compute and
propagate errors. Seeing that, it was necessary to turn off the
training process and the weight adjustment of each model in
generation time. This was also possible because the source
code for PAQ is available.
We observed that granting too much freedom to our com-
pressor could result in a large accumulation of bad predictions
that led to poor text generation. Therefore, it is proposed to
make the text generation more conservative adding a param-
eter called “temperature” reducing the possible range of the
random number.
On maximum temperature, the random number will be
generated in the interval [0,1), giving the compressor maxi-
mum degree of freedom to make errors, whereas when the
temperature parameter turns minimum, the “random” number
will always be 0.5, removing the compressor the degree of
freedom to commit errors (in this scenario, the symbol with
greater probability will always be generated).
Figure 2.
Effect of Temperature in the Jaccard Similarity, very high tem-
peratures produce text that is not so similar to the training test, temperatures
that are too low aren’t also optima, the best value is usually an intermediate
temperature.
When temperature is around 0.5 the results are very legible
even if they are not as similar as the original text using the
proposed metrics. This can be seen in the following fragment
of randomly generated Harry Potter.
”What happened?” said Harry, and she was standing
at him. ”He is short, and continued to take the
shallows, and the three before he did something
to happen again. Harry could hear him. He was
shaking his head, and then to the castle, and the
golden thread broke; he should have been a back at
him, and the common room, and as he should have
to the good one that had been conjured her that the
top of his wand too before he said and the looking
at him, and he was shaking his head and the many
of the giants who would be hot and leafy, its ﬂower
beds turned into the song, and said, ”I can took the
goblet and sniffed it. He saw another long for him.”
C. Metrics
A simple transformation is applied to each text in order to
compute metrics.
It consists in counting the number of occurrences of each
n-gram in the input (i.e. every time a n-gram ”WXYZ” is
detected, it increases its number of occurrences)
Then three different metrics were considered:
1) Pearson’s Chi-Squared: How likely it is that any ob-
served difference between the sets arose by chance.
The chi-square is computed using the following formula:
X 2 =
n
X
i=1
(Oi −Ei)2
Ei
Where Oi is the observed ith value and Ei is the expected
ith value.
A value of 0 means equality.
2) Total Variation: Each n-gram’s observed frequency can
be denoted like a probability if it is divided by the sum of
all frequencies, P(i) on the real text and Q(i) on the generated
one. Total variation distance can be computed according to the
following formula:
δ(P, Q) = 1
2
n
X
i=1
|Pi −Qi|
In other words, the total variation distance is the largest
possible difference between the probabilities that the two
probability distributions can assign to the same event.
3) Generalized Jaccard Similarity: It is the size of the
intersection divided by the size of the union of the sample
sets.
J(G, T) = G ∩T
G ∪T
A value of 1 means both texts are equals.
D. Results
Turning off the training process and the weights adjustment
of each model, freezes the compressor’s global context on the
last part of the training set. As a consequence of this event,
the last piece of the entry text will be considered as a “big
seed”.
For example, The King James Version of the Holy Bible
includes an index at the end of the text, a bad seed for text
generation. If we generate random text after compressing the
Bible and its index we get:
55And if meat is broken behold I will love for the
foresaid shall appear, and heard anguish, and height
coming in the face as a brightness is for God shall
give thee angels to come fruit.
56But
whoso
shall
admonish
them
were
dim
born also for the gift before God out the least was
in the Spirit into the company
[67Blessed shall be loosed in heaven.)
We noticed this when we compared different segments of
each input ﬁle against each other, we observed that in some
ﬁles the last segment was signiﬁcantly different than the rest
of the text. If we remove the index at the end of the ﬁle and
ask PAQ to generate random text after compressing the Bible
we get the following:
12The ﬂesh which worship him, he of our Lord
Jesus Christ be with you most holy faith, Lord,
Let not the blood of ﬁre burning our habitation of
merciful, and over the whole of life with mine own
righteousness, shall increased their goods to forgive
us our out of the city in the sight of the kings of
the wise, and the last, and these in the temple of
the blind.
13For
which
the
like
unto
the
souls
to
the
saints salvation, I saw in the place which when
they that be of the bridegroom, and holy partly, and
as of the temple of men, so we say a shame for a
worshipped his face: I will come from his place,
declaring into the glory to the behold a good; and
loosed.
The difference is remarkable. It was very interesting to
notice that for the RNN the index at the end of the bible
did not result in a noticeable difference for the generated text.
This was the ﬁrst hint that the compressor and the RNN were
proceeding in different ways.
Figure 3. The effect of the chosen seed in the Chi Squared metric. In Orange
the metric variation by temperature using a random seed. In Blue the same
metric with a chosen seed.
In some cases the compressor generated text that was
surprisingly well written. This is an example of random text
generated by PAQ8L after compressing ”Harry Potter”
CHAPTER
THIRTY-SEVEN
-
THE
GOBLET
OF LORD VOLDEMORT OF THE FIREBOLT
MARE!”
Harry looked around. Harry knew exactly who
lopsided, looking out parents. They had happened
on satin’ keep his tables.”
Dumbledore stopped their way down in days
and after her winged around him.
He was like working, his eyes. He doing you
were draped in fear of them to study of your
families to kill, that the beetle, he time. Karkaroff
looked like this. It was less frightening you.
”Sight
what’s
Fred
cauldron
bottle
to
wish
you reckon? Binding him to with his head was
handle.” Once and ask Harry where commands and
this thought you were rolling one stationed to do.
The stone. Harry said, battered.
”The you,” said Ron, and Harry in the doorway.
Come whatever Hagrid was looking from understood
page. ”So, hardly to you,” said Fred, no in the
morning. ”They’re not enough, we’ll to have all
through her explain, and the others had relicious
importance,” said Dumbledore, he wouldn’t say
anything.”
While the text may not make sense it certainly follows the
style, syntax and writing conventions of the training text.
Analyzers based on words like the Stanford Analyzer tend to
have difﬁculties when the review contains a lot of uncommon
words. It was surprising to ﬁnd that PAQ was able to correctly
predict these reviews.
Consider the following review:
”The author sets out on a ”journey of discovery”
of his ”roots” in the southern tobacco industry
because
he
believes
that
the
(completely
and
deservedly forgotten) movie ”Bright Leaf” is about
an ancestor of his. Its not, and he in fact discovers
nothing of even mild interest in this absolutely silly
and self-indulgent gloriﬁed home movie, suitable
for screening at (the director’s) drunken family
reunions but certainly not for commercial - or even
non-commercial release. A good reminder of why
most independent ﬁlms are not picked up by major
studios - because they are boring, irrelevant and of
no interest to anyone but the director and his/her
immediate circles. Avoid at all costs!”
This was classiﬁed as positive by the Stanford Analyzer,
probably because of words such as ”interest, suitable, family,
commercial, good, picked”, the Compressor however was able
to read the real sentiment of the review and predicted a
negative label. In cases like this the Compressor shows the
ability to truly understand data.
E. Metric Results
We show the result of bot PAQ and a RNN for text
generation using the mentioned metrics to evaluate how similar
the generated text is to the original text used for training.
It can be seen that the compressor got better results for all
texts except Poe and Game of Thrones.
PAQ8L
RNN
Game of Thrones
47790
44935
Harry Potter
46195
83011
Paulo Coelho
45821
86854
Bible
47833
52898
Poe
61945
57022
Shakespeare
60585
84858
Math Collection
84758
135798
War and Peace
46699
47590
Linux Kernel
136058
175293
Table I
CHI SQUARED RESULTS (LOWER VALUE IS BETTER)
PAQ8L
RNN
Game of Thrones
25.21
24.59
Harry Potter
25.58
37.40
Paulo Coelho
25.15
34.80
Bible
25.15
25.88
Poe
30.23
27.88
Shakespeare
27.94
30.71
Math Collection
31.05
35.85
War and Peace
24.63
25.07
Linux Kernel
44.74
45.22
Table II
TOTAL VARIATION (LOWER VALUE IS BETTER)
The results of this metric were almost identical to the results
of the Chi-Squared test.
PAQ8L
RNN
Game of Thrones
0.06118
0.0638
Harry Potter
0.1095
0.0387
Paulo Coelho
0.0825
0.0367
Bible
0.1419
0.1310
Poe
0.0602
0.0605
Shakespeare
0.0333
0.04016
Math Collection
0.21
0.1626
War and Peace
0.0753
0.0689
Linux Kernel
0.0738
0.0713
Table III
JACCARD SIMILARITY (HIGHER IS BETTER)
In the Jaccard similarity results were again good for PAQ
except for ”Poe”, ”Shakespeare” and ”Game of Thrones”, there
is a subtle reason why Poe was won by the RNN in all metrics
and we’ll explain that in our conclusions.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In the sentiment analysys task we have noticed an im-
provement using PAQ over a Neural Network. We can argue
then that a Data Compression algorithm has the intelligence
to understand text up to the point of being able to predict
its sentiment with similar or better results than the state of
the art in sentiment analysis. In some cases the precision
improvement was up to 6% which is a lot.
We argue that sentiment analysys is a predictive task, the
goal is to predict sentiment based on previously seen samples
for both positive and negative sentiment, in this regard a
compression algorithm seems to be a better predictor than a
RNN.
In the text generation task the use of a right seed is needed
for a Data Compression algorithm to be able to generate good
text, this was evident in the example we showed about the
Bible. This result is consistent with the sentiment analysis
result because the seed is acting like the previously seen
reviews if the seed is not in sync with the text then the results
will not be similar to the original text.
The text generation task showed the critical difference be-
tween a Data Compression algorithm and a Recurrent Neural
Network and we believe this is the most important result of
our work: Data Compression algorithms are predictors while
Recurren Neural Networks are imitators.
The text generated by a RNN looks in general better than the
text generated by a Data Compressor but if we only generate
one paragraph the Data Compressor is clearly better. The Data
Compressor learns from the previously seen text and creates
a model that is optimal for predicting what is next, that is
why they work so well for Data Compression and that is why
they are also very good for Sentiment Analysis or to create a
paragraph after seeing training test.
On the other hand the RNN is a great imitator of what
it learned, it can replicate style, syntax and other writing
conventions with a surprising level of detail but what the RNN
generates is based in the whole text used for training without
weighting recent text as more relevant. In this sense we can
argue that the RNN is better for random text generation while
the Compression algorithm should be better for random text
extension or completion.
If we concatenate the text of Romeo & Juliet after Shapes-
peare and ask both methods to generate a new paragraph the
Data Compressor will create a new paragraph of Romeo and
Juliet while the RNN will generate a Shakespeare-like piece
of text. Data Compressors are better for local predictions
and RNNs are better for global predictions.
This explains why in the text generation process PAQ and
the RNN obtained different results for different training tests.
PAQ struggled with ”Poe” or ”Game of Thrones” but was
very good with ”Coelho” or the Linux Kernel. What really
happened was that we measured how predictable each author
was!. If the text is very predictable then the best predictor will
win, PAQ defeated the RNN by a margin with the Linux Kernel
and Paulo Coelho. When the text is not predictable then the
ability to imitate in the RNN defeated PAQ. This can be used
as a wonderful tool to evaluate the predictability of different
authors comparing if the Compressor or the RNN works better
to generate similar text. In our experiment we conclude that
Coelho is more Predictable than Poe and it makes all the sense
in the world!
As our ﬁnal conclusion we have shown that Data Compres-
sion algorithms show rational behaviour and that they they are
based in the accurate prediction of what will follow based on
what they have learnt recently. RNNs learn a global model
from the training data and can then replicate it. That’s what
we say that Data Compression algorithms are great predic-
tors while Recurrent Neural Networks are great imitators.
Depending on which ability is needed one or the other may
provide the better results.
VII. FUTURE WORK
We believe that Data Compression algorithms can be used
with a certain degree of optimality for any Natural Language
Processing Task were predictions are needed based on recent
local context. Completion of text, seed based text generation,
sentiment analysis, text clustering are some of the areas where
Compressors might play a signiﬁcant role in the near future.
We have also shown that the difference between a Com-
pressor and a RNN can be used as a way to evaluate the
predictability of the writing style of a given text. This might be
expended in algorithms that can analyze the level of creativity
in text and can be applied to books or movie scripts.
REFERENCES
[1] Graves, Alex. Generating Sequences With Recurrent Neural Networks.
arXiv:1308.0850v5
[2] Mahoney,
Matt.
The
PAQ
Data
Compression
series
http://mattmahoney.net/dc/paq.html
[3] Socher Richard; Perelygin, Alex; Wu, Jean; Chuang, Jason; Manning,
Christopher; Ng, Andrew and Potts, Christopher: Recursive Deep Mod-
els for Semantic Compositionality Over a Sentiment Treebank. EMNLP
(2013)
[4] Matthew Mahoney. Adaptive Weighing of Context Models for Lossless
Data Compression.
[5] Dominique ZiegelMayer, Rainer Schrader. Sentiment polarity classiﬁca-
tion using statistical data compression models.
[6] Graves, Alex. Supervised sequence labelling with recurrent neural
networks. Vol. 385. Springer, 2012.
[7] Gers, F. A., Schmidhuber, J.,Cummins, F. (2000). Learning to forget
Continual prediction with LSTM.
[8] Arthur Franz. Artiﬁcial general intelligence through recursive data
compression and grounded reasoning: a position paper.
[9] Oﬁr David,Shay Moran,Amir Yehudayoff. On statistical learning via the
lens of compression.
[10] Peter Grunwald. A tutorial introduction to the minimum description
length principle.
[11] Rudi Cilibrasi, Paul Vitanyi. Clustering by compression.
[12] Oliver Bown,Sebastian Lexer Continuous-Time Recurrent Neural Net-
works for Generative and Interactive Musical Performance.
[13] Ilya Sutskever,James Martens,Geoffrey Hinton Generating Text with
Recurrent Neural Networks.
[14] Schmidhuber, J¨urgen, and Heil, Stefan, Sequential Neural Text Com-
pression, IEEE Trans. on Neural Networks7(1): 142-146, 1996.
[15] Matthew Mahoney Fast Text Compression with Neural Networks.
[16] Paul Vitanyi. The Kolmogorov Complexity and its Applications.
[17] Maas, Andrew L. and Daly, Raymond E. and Pham, Peter T. and Huang,
Dan and Ng, Andrew Y. and Potts, Christopher. Learning Word Vectors
for Sentiment Analysis.
[18] Karol Gregor, Ivo Danihelka, Alex Graves, Danilo Jimenez Rezende,
Daan Wierstra DRAW: A Recurrent Neural Network For Image Gener-
ation
