Title: Reddit is all you need: Authorship profiling for Romanian
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2410.09907v2
--------------------------------------------------

 
Reddit is all you need: Authorship profiling for Romanian 
 
ECATERINA ȘTEFĂNESCU and ALEXANDRU-IULIUS JERPELEA 
 
“Tudor Vianu” National College of Computer Science, Bucharest, Romania 
ecaterina@stefanescu.eu, alex.jerpelea@gmail.com 
 
Abstract 
Authorship profiling is the process of identifying an author’s characteristics based on their 
writings. This centuries old problem has become more intriguing especially with recent 
developments in Natural Language Processing (NLP). In this paper, we introduce a corpus of short 
texts in the Romanian language, annotated with certain author characteristic keywords; to our 
knowledge, the first of its kind. In order to do this, we exploit a social media platform called 
Reddit. We leverage its thematic community-based structure (subreddits structure), which offers 
information about the author's background. We infer an user's demographic and some broad 
personal traits, such as age category, employment status, interests, and social orientation based on 
the subreddit and other cues. We thus obtain a 23k+ samples corpus, extracted from 100+ 
Romanian subreddits. We analyse our dataset, and finally, we fine-tune and evaluate Large 
Language Models (LLMs) to prove baselines capabilities for authorship profiling using the corpus, 
indicating the need for further research in the field. We publicly release all our resources.1 
1​
Introduction 
Author-specific traits such as demographic characteristics (age, gender, educational background, etc) 
(Akçay, 2017), personality traits (Ahmed and Naqvi., 2015), interests, and disciplinary background (Coffin 
and Hewings, 2003) all influence the way humans communicate and reflect in the language used. This 
includes written text, which this paper aims to study. 
Authorship profiling is one of the three categories within the broader field of authorship analysis 
(the other two being authorship attribution and verification) (Misini et al., 2022) with the purpose of 
building the profile of a text’s author (Lundeqvist and Svensson, 2017). This can be done by analysing the 
information extracted from a text through the following approaches (Pervaz et al., 2015; Reddy et al., 
2016): (1) stylometric (Grivas et al., 2015), which analyses writing style, (2) content-based, (3) 
topic-based, and (4) mixed. The characteristics that one may want to identify about the author can vary, 
depending on the nature of the task. They can range from demographic characteristics (Reddy et al., 2016), 
such as age, gender, and native language, to psychographic characteristics (Pervaz et al., 2015), such as 
extraversion or neuroticism. We deploy a mixed approach that aims to identify as many keywords from the 
described categories (if possible), relying on Large Language Models (LLMs) to extract them. We aim that 
the LLM learns this behaviour from the very nature of our collected dataset. 
Social media has become an essential medium of modern communication, enabling people to 
share opinions and content within specific contexts (Schrape, 2016). In today’s world, it has become a 
vital platform for human interaction, making it easier for people with common interests and traits to 
1 https://huggingface.co/roship-profiling, Accessed: 2024-10-12 
 
 
connect. Among these spaces, Reddit is one of the best at representing these aspects, as users can share 
interests and engage with like-minded individuals (Green and McCann 24-28). This is possible due to the 
platform’s structure, functioning on the basis of subreddits, self-formed communities of users brought 
together by a certain topic, interest, and, most importantly, certain character traits (Medvedev et al., 2019; 
Green and McCann 24-28).  By manually constructing a set of general characteristics that define a certain 
subreddit’s users, we are able to annotate posts with certain keywords that relate to that user, otherwise 
named as the author.  
Through this paper, we aim to advance the capabilities of authorship profiling technology for the 
Romanian language. To our knowledge, no such systems have been specifically designed for the 
Romanian language.   
More than that, we note the scarcity of valuable data in this regard for the Romanian language. We 
have addressed this issue by building our own dataset, based on Reddit posts within subreddits, using their 
corresponding topics to infer useful information about the authors. We have decided to analyse the text 
from the perspective of the following categories: (1)  subdialect of the Daco-Romanian dialect, (2) 
educational or employment status, (3) personal interests, such as computer science and music, and (4) 
personal inclinations, such as social orientation and technological interest.  
We then finetune a LLM for the task. However, given that the attribution of a clear attribute for 
each category is not always possible, the LLM can be rather viewed as an author-related keyword 
generator. 
Our work to fill the existing gap can thus be summarised as follows: 
●​ A corpus of Reddit posts, comments, and other texts in the Romanian language, annotated 
with keywords, that correspond to certain categories, and which relate to their author’s 
background/characteristics. 
●​ A fine-tuned Llama 3.1-8B Instruct model (Dubey et. al., 2024)  that generates such 
keywords from text. 
​
In this paper, we first describe the data collection/annotation process and our baseline LLM 
development. In the end, we discuss the limitations of our low-resource background and the need for 
further research in the emerging field of Romanian authorship profiling.  
2​
Related Work 
With recent technological developments, authorship profiling has evolved in the past years 
(Chinea-Rios et al., 2022), reaching and developing for languages different from English. There are 
various authorship profiling applications for a diverse set of languages, including Arabic (Bassem et al., 
2024), Spanish (Villegas et al., 2014; García-Díaz et al., 2024), Lithuanian (Kapočiūtė-Dzikienė et al., 
2015), and Russian (Litvinova et al., 2016.). In most cases, the tasks involve the determination of age and 
gender (HaCohen-Kerner, 2022) or other demographic traits (Reddy et al., 2016). Usually, if the systems 
target personality traits (Ahmed and Naqvi., 2015), they are usually regarding the five mainly researched 
ones, namely extroverted, stable, agreeable, conscientious, and open (Iqbal et al., 2015). Research 
regarding personal inclinations is not as common. A serious issue impacting all approaches is the lack of 
available data on the correlation between an author’s characteristics and his written text. This causes even 
more concern for less-resourced languages. 
To our knowledge, there are not any approaches that leverage  Reddit for an authorship profiling 
related corpus construction. One of the most notable authorship analysis attempts focuses on the use of 
 
 
other social media platforms related to authorship attribution (Casimiro et al., 2020; Matias and 
Digiampietri, 2023).  
A significant work involving Romanian and Reddit is the first dataset targeting the popularity 
prediction of Romanian Reddit posts (Rogoz et al., 2024). Our corpuses’ building steps share similarities, 
but our approaches differ. For example, when scrapping Reddit, we only used Reddit’s API. This API has 
a limit of 1000 posts per subreddit. Rogoz et al. (2024) have overcome this limitation by using an 
open-source archive. The numbers of data samples of the dataset and our corpus are very close (28107 and 
26517 respectively). However, the ratio between the number of subreddits considered and the number of 
posts extracted per subreddit is very different. Rogoz et al. 's (2024) corpus only targets 5 Romanian 
subreddits, while we tackle 146.  
Another noteworthy development in authorship analysis involving the Romanian language 
involves authorship profiling’s more popular counterpart, authorship attribution (Nitu and Dascalu, 2024).  
Lastly, Ciobanu and Dinu (2016) have tackled automatic dialect identification for Romanian. Our 
LLM, besides other author characteristics, does a similar task. However, we only identify varieties of 
Daco-Romanian and do not approach the broader Romanian dialectal continuum. 
 
3​
Methodology 
3.1 Finding Romanian Subreddits 
Due to the nature of tag attribution to Reddit posts that belong to a certain subreddit, establishing a list of 
valid subreddits is an important step. After the scouting process, we have identified a list of 263 Romanian 
subreddits. Among these, 159 were manually distinguished through general searches or sidebar 
suggestions, while the other 104 were obtained with the help of a Reddit exploration tool that identifies a 
network of subreddits based on an input subreddit name. A chosen subreddit must be relevant and centred 
toward the certain topic(s) or traits that most of its authors have, in order to make the tagging process 
effective. Other criteria were the number and the quality of the posts. Candidates not meeting these 
requirements were removed. This process results in a total of 146 subreddits. 
3.2 Characterising the Subreddits 
3.2.1 Subdialects 
This tag was given to subreddits corresponding to Romanian cities and regions, where upon a manual 
analysis, speakers are likely to write in a region-specific register. We have taken into consideration four 
big varieties of Daco-Romanian: Transilvanian, Moldavian, Oltenian, and Wallachian. As can be seen in 
Table 2, the distribution is somewhat uniform, except for the Oltenian subdialect which has significantly 
fewer posts. In Table 1  are the subreddit names that have been assigned to each subdialect (they mostly 
correspond to cities and regions). 
 
Daco-Romanian variety 
Subreddits 
 
 
Transilvanian subdialect 
albaiulia, Arad, bistrita, cluj, Jobs_Timisoara, 
mures, Oradea, satumare, TarguMures, timisoara, 
Timisoara_night_life, Zalau 
Moldavian subdialect 
Bacau, Botosani, iasi, moldova, Moldoveneste, 
Moldovenii, PiatraNeamt, Suceava 
 
Wallachian subdialect 
bragadiru, brasov, bucuresti, constanta, pitesti, 
Ploiesti 
 
Oltenian subdialect 
 Craiova, Oltenia 
Table 1. Attribution of regional speech variety to various subreddits 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                             
Table 3. The distribution of data samples targeted by 
the status tag within its categories  
        Table 2. The distribution of data samples targeted  
     ​
 by the subdialect tag within its categories 
3.2.1 Status 
This type of tag refers to the author’s education or employment status, and because they account for 
different stages in life, they can be related to some broad age brackets. The characteristics of the subreddits 
assigned with this type of tag were, for each case, the following:  
●​ Pre-university students - subreddits corresponding to a high school or to the Romanian 
baccalaureate, the exam to graduate high school, 
●​ University students - subreddits corresponding to certain academic fields,  universities, and 
educational apps, 
●​ Employed - subreddits corresponding to jobs and employment. 
In this case, the information regarding the first category is not as prevalent as the other two, due to the 
nature of the subreddits taken into consideration for analysing, as Table 3 demonstrates.  
3.2.3 Labels and Field of Interest 
As subreddits are commonly centred around a certain concept, the users within that community share an 
affinity for the topic. Based on almost every subreddit’s context, we have identified one or more labels that 
indicate a certain general interest displayed by the users (authors). We obtain a number of 32 labels that 
 
Subdialect 
Number of data 
samples 
Moldavian 
1744 
Transilvanian 
2632 
Wallachian 
2200 
Oltenian 
361 
Status 
Number of data samples 
Pre-University students 
965 
University students 
2670 
Employed 
2247 
 
are assigned to each post based on the subreddit that it originates from. Together, these topics form a very 
diverse set of subjects, but they can also be closely related, like mathematics and physics, or conservatism 
and liberalism. For such cases, besides the interests of the authors, we have come up with a new category: 
a field of interest. Only 6 in number, their purpose is to group similar labels into broader classes that once 
again indicate a more general interest of the author. Table 4 showcases this grouping. In case the 
attribution of specific labels fails, then we aim to eliminate mischaracterization at least with the field of 
interest broader approach.  
 
 
Table 4.  An illustration showcasing the relations between labels and fields of interest.  
3.2.4 Personal Inclination 
Moreover, with the help of the field of interest category, we can construct personal inclination tags. These 
tags aim to encompass every aforementioned label and are adapted to be more suitable for assigning 
attributes to an author’s profile. Multiple such tags can be assigned to a post, based on how its 
corresponding subreddit has been characterised. This results in 12 types: active lifestyle, arts-oriented, 
hobbyist, interested in economy, interested in games, interested in health, interested in history or politics, 
interested in nature, interested in science, interested in technology, media enthusiast, and socially oriented. 
We have to acknowledge these tags are more related to the text’s content, but their correlation to the 
author’s background is important.  
3.3 Reddit Post Extraction 
The posts were gathered using the Reddit API through the Python Reddit API Wrapper (PRAW) library. 
This method implies a limitation of up to 1000 posts per subreddit or per subreddit category. We aim to 
keep a balanced dataset anyway so this is not an obstacle. The script checks each post for text content. The 
information we extracted for each post consists of the title and the body of the post (if it exists). For posts 
without a body, the title is all that remains. It is added to the dataset only if it has at least 75 characters. We 
settled on this restraint to ensure that it conveyed a message and that it was related to a certain topic. Once 
all the relevant information is collected, it is compiled into a CSV file. The resulting dataset has 29,317 
annotated posts.   
3.4 Dataset Cleaning 
Posts in the English language are one of the main problems we encountered with the first version of the 
dataset, compromising our approach aimed at the Romanian language. To eliminate them, we used 
Google’s langdetect library to separate between different languages through two approaches: (1) 
 
 
identifying Romanian text (25512 rows) and removing the rest (1805 rows), and (2) identifying English 
text (1256 rows) and eliminating them, resulting in a 28060 rows dataset. Reddit posts are informal in 
nature, as Romanian written text can oftentimes be mixed with English words or phrases. We chose to be 
tolerant in this case, and upon manual inspection, the second method yielded better results for our purpose. 
Additionally, we have removed excessive whitespaces and compressed multiple consecutive 
newlines to a maximum of two. Then, we removed URLs, by identifying patterns generally associated 
with web addresses. If the text of the body consisted only of URLs, we checked the length of the title once 
again and kept the row in the dataset only if it had a minimum of 75 characters. Stray symbols and rogue 
parentheses were eliminated as well. After these modifications, the dataset consists of 26,517 data 
samples. In order to preserve as much linguistic information as possible, we chose to not make any more 
changes to the dataset.  
3.5 Final Dataset Construction 
After crawling the Reddit posts, note that sometimes, we are not able to generate keywords for each of the 
presented categories (subdialect, status, interest labels, field of interest, personal inclination). For 
example, it is impossible to infer for certain subreddits what regional speech is used there. 
Seeking to mitigate this issue and provide a more simplistic structure for the LLM to learn, we 
merge all keywords from each category into a single set of author-related keywords. The keywords do 
appear in the same order described in this paper. With this less structured approach, we also shift our 
authorship profiling task from a classification problem to a feature extraction one. 
4​
Authorship Profiling 
Followingly, we use the processed corpus to build a baseline authorship profiling tool that can gather key 
aspects about a text’s author in the form of keywords. As mentioned in Section 3.5, these keywords are 
unorganised, and are generated only when relevant. For example, if there can not be said anything about 
the subdialect a writer uses, such keywords should not be generated. 
4.1 Model Training 
We leverage Large Language Models (LLMs), which have proven useful in numerous NLP tasks (Kocmi 
et al., 2024). Specifically, we seek to utilise their capabilities for feature extraction tasks. The LLM we 
train is given the task of extracting author-specific keywords. 
We experimented with the Llama 3.1-8B-Instruct (Dubey et. al., 2024). It is the most recent 
LLaMA model, and it covers a diverse set of instructions. Romanian language, although not officially 
supported, is covered in about 15% of the multilingual tokens from the dataset used in pre-training. 
Given its zero or few-shot learning capabilities, we expect the model to perform well even in the 
conditions of parameter-efficient finetuning. Specifically, we employ LoRA (Low-Rank Adaptation of 
Large Language Models) fine-tuning  (Hu, Edward J. et al., 2021). Instead of updating all model 
parameters, LoRA focuses on fine-tuning only a small set of parameters through the decomposition of 
low-rank matrices, which are later added to the model weight matrices.  
We are thus able to afford computation, by training around 10% of the number of parameters 
which would usually be updated during a full fine-tune of the Llama 3.1-8B-Instruct. This has both 
benefits, as the model will diverge less from its base version (will not “forget” important pre-trained 
knowledge), and disadvantages, as it is able to adapt less to the given task (Biderman, Dan, et al., 2024). 
 
 
We split out the dataset into three pieces: train, eval, and test with a 95:5:5 ratio respectively. The 
first is used for training our model, the second is used for in-training loss evaluation, and the latter is used 
in the test section, where we showcase the final loss of our model. 
We showcase the prompt format of the LLaMA model in Table 5. The model is trained to 
complete the text in continuation of the “assistant” tag. Hyper-parameters are also available in Table 5. 
Note that we stop training after 1 epoch as loss from measured on the evaluation split converges rather 
quickly, and ultimately plateaus (Figure 1). Also note that we dispense samples with a length of over 2200 
tokens (measured with the model’s BPE tokenizer), because of the limited GPU memory we have 
available.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 5. Prompt format example for Llama 3.1-8B-Instruct (actual text and keywords may vary), and 
hyperparameters used for training 
 
4.2 Model Testing 
On the test split, we employ two ways of measuring our model’s success: exact match and Intersection 
over Union (IoU). 
First, for every evaluated sample, we compare the set of generated keywords by our model, and 
the set of expected keywords (according to the corpus). We obtain an accuracy of 78.5%. 
 
System 
<|start_header_id|>system<|end_hea
der_id|> 
Ești un asistent util care 
analizează texte și autorii 
lor.<|eot_id|> 
User  
<|start_header_id|>user<|end_heade
r_id|>Generează cuvinte-cheie din 
următorul text, care să aibă 
legătură atât cu conținutul 
textului, cât și cu trăsături ale 
autorului. 
Puteți,va rog,sa mi explicați 
teorema cosinusului pe scurt,sunt 
în clasa a 7a și vreau sa învăț 
cât mai repede și eficient 
 
<|eot_id|> 
Model 
<|start_header_id|>assistant<|end_
header_id|>fizica, stiinta, 
interes stiintific 
Hyperparameter 
value 
Value 
Effective Batch 
Size 
8 
Number of epoch 
1 
Learning rate 
0.0002 
Warmup steps 
10 
Weight decay 
0.0 
Maximum 
sequence length 
2200 
LoRA rank 
16 
LoRA alpha 
16 
LoRA dropout 
0.05 
 
Second, we acknowledge that our corpus annotation might be prone to errors, in the sense that 
some keywords may not be evidently related to the text just based on the subreddit section, and thus are 
very hard for our model to infer. Consequently, we apply a more forgiving metric, measuring the ratio 
between the cardinality of the intersection and the union of the two sets of keywords (predicted and 
expected). On average, on the test split, we obtain an 80.4% IoU average. 
 
Figure 1. Loss over time while training, measured on the evaluation split of the dataset 
 
4.3 Other Model Statistics and Behaviours 
We observe the model’s tendency to generate slightly fewer keywords per sample. The reference samples 
yield a 2.31 average of keywords, whilst the generated outputs yield a 2.26 average.  
Moreover, there are 53 unique expected keywords in the test split. Putting together all of our 
model’s predictions, we obtain 52 unique generated keywords; all of them are included in the expected 
corpus keywords, proving that the model is not yet able to generate new types of information (that would 
have not been encountered in the fine-tuning phase, but would have rather been inferred from its 
pre-training phase) about an author. 
Based on this paper’s authors’ manual review, we make the observation that the model tends to 
generate slightly more content-focused keywords, rather than authored-focus. This pattern appears in our 
dataset as well but to a lesser degree. We are unable to quantify this phenomenon, but we note that the 
difference is not major, as authorship profiling remains the model’s main focus. 
Lastly, we observe the model’s inability to combine various scenarios from the training phase. For 
example, in our dataset, most of the samples which flag the author as a speaker of a certain subdialect, do 
not have any other additional keywords included, due to the limitations of our annotation methodology. 
This behaviour is also observed in the model’s generated keywords. Predictions related to the spoken 
subdialect are rarely accompanied by other keywords. For instance, the model generates “grai ardelenesc” 
(English: “Transilvanian subdialect”) about the author of the following text: “Gulas bun in Budapesta. 
Intreb clujenii ca mno e o comunitate mai mare de cunoscatori“ (English: “Good stew in Budapest. I ask 
the people of Cluj because there is a larger community of connoisseurs”). However, the keyword  “food 
 
 
interest”, which is found in some other samples of our dataset, could have been suitable to be generated, 
but it is not. 
All in all, the accuracy and IoU are promising for this baseline approach, and suggest how further 
research about Romanian authorship profiling has a lot of potential if further research is done.  
5​
Conclusion and Future Work 
This paper introduced the first authorship profiling-oriented corpus for the Romanian language, with text 
samples annotated with keywords from various categories. Moreover, we train a baseline LLM for a 
keyword generation task, a problem that can also be viewed as authorship feature extraction. The 
promising, yet limited, capabilities of the model suggest how more research is needed in this field to 
obtain better results. In the future, we aim to obtain a more diverse dataset, that is not only sourced from 
Reddit. More robust methodologies for data annotation should be employed, as our approach is prone to 
some errors (limitations). Lastly, other model architectures, sizes, and fine-tuning methodologies should be 
experimented with. 
6​
Limitations and Ethical Concerns 
First, the tags were manually extracted based on the characteristics of the subreddit. This is a highly 
biassed process, susceptible to personal assumptions and stereotypes. Although not documented, this could 
potentially generate unwanted toxic behaviours in our model. Moreover, the process of annotating almost 
all subreddit posts with the same tags is prone to error. Sometimes, certain tags (specific to a given 
subreddit) are impossible to infer by a model from the given text. More thoroughness, diversity, and 
manual evaluation are needed to mitigate these issues.  
Secondly, although our classification is diverse (tackling demographic traits and personality 
characteristics at the same time),  it comes with its downsides. Keywords much more closely related to the 
characteristics of the author, such as the status, get intertwined with keywords targeting just the text’s 
content. Oftentimes, the line between the two can get blurry and hard to distinguish. 
Lastly, our computing resources are limited, so we were not able to perform extensive experiments 
with other models, or even full fine-tuning. 
References 
Ahmed, Javeria, and Irum Naqvi. "Personality traits and communication styles among university students." Pakistan 
Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology 13.2 (2015): 53-59. 
Akçay, Ahmet. "Examination of the Relationship between Demographic Characteristics of the Family and the 
Language Development of Children." International Journal of Higher Education 6.5 (2017): 168-180. 
Bassem, Bsir, Ajith Abraham, and Zrigui Mounir. "Transformer Models for Authorship Profiling in Arabic Social 
Media Texts." International Journal of Computer Information Systems and Industrial Management Applications 16.3 
(2024): 13-13. 
Biderman, Dan, et al. "Lora learns less and forgets less." arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.09673 (2024). 
Casimiro, Guilherme Ramos, and Luciano Antonio Digiampietri. "Authorship Attribution using data from Reddit 
forum." Proceedings of the XVI Brazilian Symposium on Information Systems. 2020. 
Chinea-Rios, Mara, et al. "Zero and few-shot learning for author profiling." International Conference on Applications 
of Natural Language to Information Systems. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2022. 
Ciobanu, Alina Maria, and Liviu P. Dinu. "A computational perspective on the Romanian dialects." Proceedings of 
the Tenth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC'16). 2016. 
Coffin, Caroline, and Ann Hewings. "Writing for different disciplines." (2003): 45-72. 
Dubey, Abhimanyu, et al. "The llama 3 herd of models." arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783 (2024). 
 
 
García-Díaz, José Antonio, Ghassan Beydoun, and Rafel Valencia-García. "Evaluating Transformers and Linguistic 
Features integration for Author Profiling tasks in Spanish." Data & Knowledge Engineering 151 (2024): 102307. 
Green, Daryl, and Jack McCann. "The Rise of Reddit: A Case Study on Persuasive Technology." American Research 
Journal of Business and Management, vol. 8, no. 1, 2022, pp. 24-28. 
Grivas, Andreas, Anastasia Krithara, and George Giannakopoulos. "Author profiling using stylometric and structural 
feature groupings." CLEF 2015: Conference and Labs of the Evaluation Forum Experimental IR meets 
Multilinguality, Multimodality and Interaction. CEUR-WS, 2015. 
 HaCohen-Kerner, Yaakov. "Survey on profiling age and gender of text authors." Expert Systems with Applications 
199 (2022): 117140. 
 Hu, Edward J., et al. "Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models." arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09685 
(2021). 
Ifrah Pervaz, Iqra Ameer, Abdul Sittar, and Rao Muhammad Adeel Nawab. "Identification of author personality traits 
using stylistic features." Proceedings of CLEF. 2015. 
Iqbal, Hafiz Rizwan, Muhammad Adnan Ashraf, and Rao Muhammad Adeel Nawab. "Predicting an Author's 
Demographics from Text using Topic Modeling Approach." CLEF (Working Notes). 2015. 
Kapočiūtė-Dzikienė, Jurgita, Andrius Utka, and Ligita Šarkutė. "Authorship attribution and author profiling of 
Lithuanian literary texts." The 5th Workshop on Balto-Slavic Natural Language Processing. 2015. 
Kocmi, Tom, et al. "Preliminary WMT24 Ranking of General MT Systems and LLMs." arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2407.19884 (2024). 
Litvinova, Tatiana, et al. "" Ruspersonality": A Russian corpus for authorship profiling and deception detection." 
2016 International FRUCT Conference on Intelligence, Social Media and Web (ISMW FRUCT). IEEE, 2016. 
Lundeqvist, Elias, and Maria Svensson. "Author profiling: A machine learning approach towards detecting gender, 
age and native language of users in social media." (2017). 
 Matias, Vinicius Alves, and Luciano Antonio Digiampietri. "Authorship attribution of comments in Portuguese 
extracted from Reddit." Revista Brasileira de Computação Aplicada 15.2 (2023): 1-10. 
Misini, Arta, Arbana Kadriu, and Ercan Canhasi. "A survey on authorship analysis tasks and techniques." SEEU 
Review 17.2 (2022): 153-167. 
Nitu, Melania, and Mihai Dascalu. "Authorship Attribution in Less-Resourced Languages: A Hybrid Transformer 
Approach for Romanian." Applied Sciences 14.7 (2024): 2700. 
Reddy, T. Raghunadha, B. Vishnu Vardhan, and P. Vijayapal Reddy. "A survey on authorship profiling techniques." 
International Journal of Applied Engineering Research 11.5 (2016): 3092-3102. 
Rogoz, Ana-Cristina, Maria Ilinca Nechita, and Radu Tudor Ionescu. "PoPreRo: A New Dataset for Popularity 
Prediction of Romanian Reddit Posts." arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.04541 (2024). 
Schrape, Jan-Felix. "Social Media, Mass Media and the 'Public Sphere'. Differentiation, Complementarity and 
Co-Existence." (2016). 
Villegas, María Paula, et al. "A Spanish text corpus for the author profiling task." XX Congreso Argentino de 
Ciencias de la Computación (Buenos Aires, 2014). 2014. :3 ^_^ 
 
