Title: Optimisation using Natural Language Processing: Personalized Tour Recommendation for Museums
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1501.01252v1
--------------------------------------------------

Optimisation using Natural Language Processing:
Personalized Tour Recommendation for Museums
Mayeul Mathias ∗, Assema Moussa ∗, Fen Zhou ∗‡, Juan-Manuel Torres-Moreno ∗‡§,
Marie-Sylvie Poli †‡, Didier Josselin ∗‡¶, Marc El-B`eze ∗‡, Andr´ea Carneiro Linhares ∥, Franc¸oise Rigat ∗∗
{mayeul.mathias, assema.moussa}@alumni.univ-avignon.fr
{fen.zhou, juan-manuel.torres, marie-sylvie.poli, didier.josselin, marc.elbeze}@univ-avignon.fr
andrea.linhares@ufc.br, francoise rigat@yahoo.it
∗LIA, Universit´e d’Avignon et des Pays de Vaucluse, France.
†CNE, Universit´e d’Avignon et des Pays de Vaucluse, France.
‡FR 3621 Agorantic - CNRS Universit´e d’Avignon et des Pays de Vaucluse, France.
§ ´Ecole polytechnique de Montr´eal, (Qu´ebec) Canada
¶UMR 7300 ESPACE - CNRS, France
∥Universidade Federal do Cear´a, Brazil.
∗∗Universit`a degli Studi di Torino, Italy.
Abstract—This paper proposes a new method to provide per-
sonalized tour recommendation for museum visits. It combines an
optimization of preference criteria of visitors with an automatic
extraction of artwork importance from museum information
based on Natural Language Processing using textual energy. This
project includes researchers from computer and social sciences.
Some results are obtained with numerical experiments. They
show that our model clearly improves the satisfaction of the
visitor who follows the proposed tour. This work foreshadows
some interesting outcomes and applications about on-demand
personalized visit of museums in a very near future.
I. INTRODUCTION
M
USEUMS are no longer only institutions that acquire,
store and expose our heritage. Going to a museum is a
learning activity but also an enjoyment for visitors. With the
emergence of the Web, curators and cultural mediators decided
to get involved in collaborative and numerical culture to attract
a larger public. Today, almost all museums have a website but
few of them allow the visitors to prepare their visit in the best
conditions.
Some art, science and society museums are collaborating
with research laboratories to develop new technologies that
improve services in museums in response to the desires of
existing and potential visitors.
However, there are still difﬁculties, epistemological barri-
ers, to study the expectations and the intentions of different
publics, including online visitors. Knowing why people want
to come and visit museums could allow automatic systems to
suggests their tour, save their time and give them the best of
the knowledge of the exhibited arts.
Among all possibilities, a recommendation system for per-
sonalized routing is by far one of the best improvements.
Indeed, some museums exhibit thousands of artworks and it is
not conceivable for a visitor to admire all of them because he
might spend time in front of artworks which do not match
his interests and he might not be able to see other more
interesting artworks due to tiredness or a lack of time. A few
museums, as The Louvre, offer a recommendation system1 but
they are limited to the selection of a route in a pre-established
set. Moreover, in this particular case, the personalization is
restricted to the selection of a theme and the duration of the
visit in a set of no more than 10 themes and 4 different
durations.
It is essential to propose a personalized route for each
visitor or group of visitors according to their interests while
taking into account their constraints such as limited schedule,
physical handicap or a list of artworks to include of the tour.
This operation may also reduce unuseful moves (avoid round
trips). But to calculate an optimal tour, we need to assess the
visitor interest for each artwork by asking his preferences.
Modeling the preferences with random distributions may not
reﬂect reality because curators take care of the scenography
(therefore the coherence) of each room. So we worked on
prefered artists (the visitor can select a set of interesting
artists) and we propose to use the artworks description to
highlight a kind of intrinsic interest from the point of view of
the museum. Indeed, the description displayed to the visitor
should show how signiﬁcant is the artwork for the museum.
We valuate each item by analyzing their description (with
Automatic Text Summarization) and use it as a base value,
considering that even without any preference, some artworks
are more interesting than others.
The Mus´ee de l’Orangerie
Due to the time needed to extract and check all the data we
worked on this small museum to test our model.
The Mus´ee de l’Orangerie (Museum of Orangerie), in
Paris (France), regroups 144 artworks from 14 artists in 10
exhibition rooms. The website2 of the museum supplies a
map (shown in Fig. 1) and indexes information about all the
1http://www.louvre.fr/en/parcours
2http://musee-orangerie.fr
arXiv:1501.01252v1  [cs.AI]  6 Jan 2015
Fig. 1.
Map of the Mus´ee de l’Orangerie
artworks including the name of the artist, a description of the
artwork and its date of creation.
Paper organization
The remaining of this paper is organized as follows. We
review the related work in Section II. In Section III, we
present a Natural Language Processing (NLP) based approach
to compute artwork interest. The Personalized Tour Recom-
mendation Problem is presented in Section IV. To solve this
problem, we develop an Integer Linear Programming based
method to solve the tour optimization problem in Section
V and deﬁne a model to represent the visitor preferences
in Section VI. The simulations are conducted and numerical
results are demonstrated in Section VII. Finally, we conclude
the paper in Section VIII.
II. RELATED WORK
A ﬁrst model developed in 2010 [1] proposes to formulate
the visitor routing problem as an extension of the open shop
scheduling problem (in which each visitor group is a job and
each interesting room is a machine). Each visitor group has to
pass through all rooms but it is impossible for two groups of
visitors to be simultaneously in the same room. This restriction
can lead to non optimal or infeasible solutions if there are more
visitor groups than rooms in the museum (which is the case
if we consider each single visitor as a group).
Relying on the constraint programming model [2], we
propose to reduce the number of used variables. In [2], they
generate a route by calculating the smallest number K of
steps required to cross the museum (to visit all the rooms).
This model requires that each artwork is represented as K
variables (one per step). Due to the fact that museums often
have several thousands of artworks, it leads to a huge number
of variables. Moreover they use mathematical distributions to
simulate a visitor proﬁle which does not necessary reﬂect
reality (in museums, artworks are often grouped in a room
because they are related to each other, a conﬁguration that a
random distribution as they used cannot represent).
In 2013, some works [3] used the visiting style of visitors
(the way a visitor go from an artwork to another) but their
model requires two matrices of size N 2 (where N is the
number of artworks). The ﬁrst one indicates the accessibility
to an artwork from another (if they are in the same room or
in two rooms directly connected) and the second one contains
the distance between two artworks. However as the number
of artworks is always greater than the number of rooms,
most of the museums are modeled as two sparse matrices
with duplicated data (in a room, it is often allowed to freely
move between artworks). This makes the use of constraint
programming expensive.
III. ARTWORK DESCRIPTION ANALYSIS USING TEXTUAL
ENERGY
Our idea is to use the description of each artwork as an
independent measure of their interest. Indeed, two similar
artworks (same theme, support, artist) will produce the same
result but may be very different. By analyzing the description
provided by the museum, we tried to differentiate them.
Automatic Text Summarization (ATS) techniques by ex-
traction [4], [5], [6] allow to rank a set of textual segments
(sentences, paragraphs etc.) depending on a measure of sim-
ilarity. Textual Energy algorithm (Enertex) converts a textual
document into a physical object and use Statistical Physics to
measure its energy [7]. This energy, to which we should refer
as Textual Energy, is then computed and apply to summariza-
tion. The physical model of Textual Energy gives rise to a
single non iterative algorithm of low complexity. Therefore
Textual Energy allows to redeﬁne sentence ranking on simple
and efﬁcient matrix operations. The resulting algorithms are
much easier to apply to large texts and give better results
without using any post-processing.
A. Starting point: Hopﬁeld Model
Hopﬁeld’s approach [8], [9] was based on magnetic Ising
model to build a Neural Network (ANN) with pattern learning
capabilities. The capacities and limitations of this ANN (an
associative memory), were well established in a theoretical
framework [8], [9]: the patterns must not be correlated to
obtain free error recovery, the system saturates quickly and
only a little fraction of the patterns can be stored correctly.
Despite these major drawbacks, Hopﬁeld contributed to ANN
theory by introducing the concept of energy by analogy with
magnetic systems. A magnetic system is a set of N spins like
small magnets that can adopt several orientations. The simplest
model is the dipole one or Ising model where there are only
two opposite possible orientations: up (↑or +1) or down (↓or
0). Ising magnetic model was used in a large variety of systems
that can be completely described by a set N of binary variables
[10] with 2N possible conﬁgurations (patterns). The spins are
equivalent to neurons that can interact following Hebb’s rule3:
Ji,j =
P
X
µ=1
(sµ,i × sµ,j)
(1)
sµ,i and sµ,j are the states of neurons i and j in the pattern µ.
The summation concerns the P patterns to store. This rule of
interaction is local, because Ji,j depends only on the states
of the connected unities. It has the capacity to store and
to recover certain number of conﬁgurations of the system,
because the Hebb rule transforms these conﬁgurations into
attractors (minimal local) of the energy function [8]:
Eµ = −1
2
N
X
i=1
N
X
j=1
(si × Ji,j × sj)
(2)
The fundamental concept of magnetic energy is a function
of the system conﬁguration, that is, of the state of activation
or non-activation of its units. The concept of energy induces
a type of interaction. If we present a pattern ν, every spin
will undergo a local ﬁeld: hi = PN
j=1 Ji,jsj induced by the
energy of the others spins. Therefore the total energy of the
new system made of the new pattern inserted into the previous
system reﬂects the interaction between the pattern and the
initial system.
We shall focus on theoretical objects that are usually consid-
ered in Statistical Physics. In magnetic system analysis, these
are energy function distributions [11]. Hopﬁeld himself used
these functions to show that the recovery is convergent. Our
Enertex system is entirely grounded on them.
B. Energy as a document similarity measure
The Vector Space Model (VSM) has also been applied
to texts since [12] following a bag of word representation
of sentences. In this model vectors represent sentences and
3Hebb [9] suggested that synaptic connections change according to the
correlation between neuronal states.
a document gives rise to a matrix. We have used VSM to
represent documents in our model magnetic system: a sentence
(a row vector) is equivalent to a Ising spin chain and a
document (a magnetic system) is represented by a matrix of
P rows × N columns. Therefore, sentences can be studied
as Ising spin chains. More formally, with a vocabulary of
N words (terms) in a document, it is possible to represent
a sentence as a chain of N spins, i = 1, · · · , N. A document
with P sentences is formed of P chains in the vector space
Ξ of dimension N. In this paper, the description of each
artwork is assimilated as a long pseudo-sentence. Therefore,
a document (the collection of a museum) is constituted of a
set of P (pseudo-)sentences.
Documents are preprocessed by removing functional words
(by using a stop list), normalized and lemmatized [13], [14].
This preprocessing reduces considerably the document dimen-
sionality. Let be T
= {t1, . . . , tN} the set of remaining
terms after this preprocessing. Once segmented into units,
usually sentences, the text is represented by a set S
=
{⃗s1, . . . ,⃗sµ, . . . ,⃗sP } where each ⃗sµ is the bag of words in
segment µ. As usual in text vector model, we consider the
matrix S[P ×N] = (sµ,j)1≤µ≤P,1≤j≤N of frequency/absence
associated to H by:
sµ,j
=

tfµ,j
if tj ∈sentence µ
0
otherwise
(3)
where tfµ,j is the term frequency of tj in the sentence µ.
We therefore consider the presence of term tj as a spin sj
↑with magnitude tfµ,j (its absence by a ↓respectively), and
a description of each artwork (text segment) by a chain of N
spins.
It is common to consider that these vectors are correlated
according to the shared words. Here the introduction of the
magnetic model induces moreover indirect interactions. In this
model sentences that do not share any word could however
interact because of the magnetic ﬁeld generated by the other
sentences of the document that form the global magnetic
system.
We have studied the interactions between the terms and the
sentences using Hebb’s rule and Ising energy respectively. To
obtain the matrix J of interactions between the N terms, we
apply Hebb’s rule (equation 1) in its matrix form:
J = ST × S
(4)
where Ji,j is the number of co-occurrences of terms in
sentences. The energy function (equation 2) of a (magnetic)
system S is:
E = S × J × ST = (S × ST )2
(5)
Each element Eµ,ν represents the energy between sentences
µ and ν. The values in the ﬁrst matrix diagonal quantify the
interaction energy between words into a sentence meanwhile
the other values in the rest of the matrix show the interactions
between distinct sentences. The sum of absolute values in one
row gives the total energy of interaction of the corresponding
sentence µ with the document:
Eµ
=
X
ν
|eµ,ν|
(6)
We use this energy value to rank sentences (description
of artwork) by order of decreasing importance. The most
energetic will be considered as the most important.
IV. PERSONALIZED TOUR RECOMMENDATION PROBLEM
The Personalized Tour Recommendation Problem (PTRP)
can be viewed as an optimization problem and solved by
optimization techniques. For this purpose, we ﬁrst model the
museum topology as a graph and then formulate the studied
problem as an Integer Linear Programming (ILP) instance.
Therefore, the optimal personalized tour can be obtained by
solving the ILP model we propose.
A. Museum modeling
A museum is modeled as a 7-tuple G = ⟨V, A, E, X, P, r⟩
where:
• V is the set of vertices, each vertex is an exhibition room,
an entrance or an exit of the museum.
• A is the set of arcs which connect different rooms. There
is an arc aij ∈A between two vertices i and j, if we
can go from room i to room j directly without passing
through other rooms.
• E is the set of entrances of a museum, which is a subset
of V , i.e. E ⊂V .
• X is the set of exits of a museum, which is also a subset
of V , i.e. X ⊂V .
• P is the set of all artworks in the museum.
• r is a mapping function P →V . For each artwork p ∈P,
r(p) is the room containing p.
Some large museums may have several entrances and exits,
that is why E and X are two subsets of V . We also admit
that there is always a path from any entrance to an exit. We
consider directed arcs and not edges because some museums
may impose a ﬂow direction for several reasons (minimizing
congestion, pedagogical tour). Note that by deﬁnition of A,
there is no incoming arc to any entrance and there is no any
outgoing arc from any exit neither.
Application to the Mus´ee de l’Orangerie: The Mus´ee de
l’Orangerie can be represented as the graph presented in Figure
2. We can see that there is only one entrance and one exit in
the museum and they are located at the same place. Therefore,
we consider the entrance and the exit as two different vertices
in the graph to facilitate the model. The mapping between
vertices and rooms is shown in Table I.
B. Personalized tour problem modeling
For the sake of satisfying the visitor maximally, a visit tour
should be proposed according to the visitor’s preferences and
constraints.
A personalized tour problem can be deﬁned as a 6-tuple
⟨G, I, R, u, t, TMAX⟩where:
E
X
H
W1
W2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Fig. 2.
A possible graph for the Mus´ee de l’Orangerie
TABLE I
THE MUS´EE DE L’ORANGERIE: VERTICES AND ROOMS
Vertex
Room
E
Entrance
X
Exit
H
Hall
W1
Water Lilies (ﬁrst part)
W2
Water Lilies (second part)
1
L’Age d’Or
2
Paul Guillaume Room
3
Impressionism
4
Modern primitives
5
Laurencin room
6
Modern classicism
7
Derain room
8
Soutine / Utrillo room
• G is the museum graph representing the museum topol-
ogy as deﬁned above.
• I is the set of artworks which have to be included in the
tour.
• R is the set of artworks which have to be excluded of
the tour.
• u is a mapping u : P →R+. For each artwork p ∈P,
u(p) denotes the interest of the visitor for the artwork p.
• t is a mapping t : A ∪V ∪P →R+. For each room, arc
and artwork, we have a time to spend. It can be the time
needed to cross a room or an arc. It can also be the time
to see an artwork.
• TMAX is the maximum time that a visitor wants to spend
in the museum.
A visit tour may be a simple path without any cycles (an
elementary path) or a sophisticate path including cycles (a
non-elementary path).
We deﬁne a tour as a sequence of pairs ⟨v, Pv⟩where
v ∈V and Pv ⊆r(v) (note that Pv may be ∅because
we can cross a room without seeing any artwork). A tour
T = (⟨v1, Pvi⟩, ..., ⟨vn, Pvn⟩) is a solution to the personalized
tour recommendation problem when:
1) The vertex v in the ﬁrst element of T is an element of
E (the tour starts by an entrance).
2) The vertex v in the last element of T is an element of
X (the tour ends by an exit).
3) All consecutive elements T1 and T2 of T share the same
vertex or an arc aij ∈A must exist from the vertex i of
T1 to the vertex j of T2.
4) The total time required to see all the artworks and pass
through all the rooms (and ways) is not bigger than
TMAX.
Application to the Mus´ee de l’Orangerie: we may have a
visit tour like the following:
(⟨E, ∅⟩, ⟨H, ∅⟩, ⟨W1, p1⟩, ⟨W2, p5⟩, ⟨W1, ∅⟩, ⟨H, ∅⟩,
⟨1, p10⟩, ⟨8, p103⟩, ⟨1, ∅⟩, ⟨H, ∅⟩, ⟨X, ∅⟩)
In this tour, the visitor should cross the receiving hall H
three times, exhibition room W1 and 1 twice respectively.
Although we may traverse a room several times, the visitor
is supposed to visit the room only once. Consider for instance
the exhibition room W1, we may visit the selected artworks
when we reach this room for the ﬁrst time. The second time,
we would just cross the room to visit another one.
V. INTEGER LINEAR PROGRAMMING APPROACH TO SOLVE
THE OPTIMAL PERSONALIZED TOUR RECOMMENDATION
PROBLEM
Before introducing an ILP model to solve the Personalized
Tour Recommendation Problem, we deﬁne several decision
variables:
• xp equals 1 if the artwork p ∈P is included in the
proposed tour, 0 otherwise.
• ya equals 1 if arc a ∈A is crossed in the proposed tour,
0 otherwise.
• fa denotes the number of rooms crossed when we arrive
at arc a ∈A in the visit walk.
• zv equals 1 if room v ∈V is traversed in the proposed
tour (no matter whether we visit an artwork of this room
or not), 0 otherwise.
Given a personalized tour problem (as deﬁned in section
IV), the objective function of the Optimal Personalized Tour
Recommendation Problem (OPTRP) is to maximize the overall
satisfaction of the proposed visit tour for the visitor:
max
X
p∈P
xp × u(p)
OPTRP
(7)
s.t.
X
v∈E
X
a∈δ+(v)
ya = 1
(8)
X
v∈X
X
a∈δ−(v)
ya = 1
(9)
X
a∈δ+(v)
ya =
X
a∈δ−(v)
ya,
∀v ∈V \ (E ∪X)
(10)
fa ≥ya,
∀a ∈A
(11)
fa ≤|V | × ya,
∀a ∈A
(12)
X
a∈δ−(v)
fa =
X
a∈δ+(v)
fa −zv,
∀v ∈V \ (E ∪X)
(13)
X
a∈δ+(v)
ya +
X
a∈δ−(v)
ya ≥zv,
∀v ∈V
(14)
ya ≤zv,
∀v ∈V, ∀a ∈δ+(v) ∪δ−(v)
(15)
xp ≤zv,
∀v ∈V, ∀p ∈{p : r(p) = v}
(16)
xp = 1,
∀p ∈I
(17)
xp = 0,
∀p ∈R
(18)
X
v∈V
zv × tv +
X
a∈A
ya × ta +
X
p∈P
xp × tp ≤TMAX
(19)
Constraints (8) and (9) ensure that the visitor should enter a
museum from a unique entrance and ﬁnish the visit by a unique
exit respectively (this model considers the case of multiple
entrances and exits). Constraint (10) makes sure that a visitor
should exit a room v after crossing or visiting it. Constraint
(11) expresses that a visitor should have crossed at least a room
before arriving at an arc a, while constraint (12) imposes that
no ﬂow is moving on the arc a, if it is not crossed in the
visit tour. Constraint (13) means that if a room v is crossed in
the tour, then the number of rooms crossed before arriving at
this room equals the number of rooms crossed after leaving v
minus one. Otherwise, they should be equal, since the room
will not appear in the tour. Constraint (15) imposes that a
room v should be crossed as long as one input arc or one
outgoing arc is crossed. Constraint (14) ensures that a room
v should not be crossed if none of the input arc or output
link is used during the visit. Constraint (16) indicates that if a
room v is not crossed, none of its artworks will be proposed
for visiting. Constraints (17) and (18) ensure that an artwork
should be included or excluded from the proposed tour if the
visitor asks for it. The last constraint (19) guarantees that the
time spent in front of the artworks and the time required to
pass through rooms (and ways) does not exceed the available
time for the visitor.
The ILP model we propose provides a visit tour starting
from an entrance and terminating at an exit. In [2], authors
also proposed an ILP model to plan the personalized visit.
They divided the studied proposed into two sub-problems: ﬁrst
determine the number of moves (denoted as K) for a complete
walk in the museum graph, and then solve the museum routing
problem while maximizing visitor satisfaction. Since both of
these sub-problems are NP-Hard, authors of [2] proposed to
solve both of them by constraint programming. The complex-
ity of their model depends a lot on K, which is generally
large (at least equals to |V |). To compare the complexity of
our model with the ILP mode in [2], the number of variables
and constraints are listed in Table II.
VI. VISITOR PREFERENCES MODELING
The interest function u should reﬂect the satisfaction of the
visitor for each artwork p ∈P. The nearer to his preferences
is an artwork p, the greater is u(p).
Representation of artworks and the visitor preferences
We deﬁne Cp as the set of all characteristics of an art-
work p and C as the union of all these sets (i.e. C =
{c|c ∈Cp∀p ∈P}). A characteristic may be the theme, the
type of support, the date of creation, the name of the artist or
anything that identify an artwork.
We can represent any artwork p ∈P as a caracteristics
vector vp = (vp1, ..., vpn) in a vector-space of |C| dimensions.
Each element vpi ∈R+ in the vector is a numerical value
measuring the relevance of the artwork p to the associated
characteristic. Additionally we deﬁne a vector v in the same
vector-space as the vector representing the visitor preferences
(where each element of v measures the interest of the visitor
for the associated characteristic).
Measuring the interest for an artwork
To identify the interest for the visitor to an artwork, we
compare v and vp with the cosine similarity which calculate
the angle between two vectors. The formula is the following:
similarity(vp, v) =
Pn
i vpi × vi
qPn
i v2pi ×
q Pn
i v2
i
(20)
The resulting similarity ranges from 0, meaning that the
visitor is not interested at all by the artwork, to 1 meaning
that the artwork exactly matches his preferences.
In our model, we used u(p) = similarity(vp, v) where
vp and v are the vectors of the artwork p and the visitor
preferences respectively.
VII. SIMULATIONS AND NUMERICAL RESULTS
We implemented the ILP model described in section V by
using the IBM CPLEX 12 library4.
The program takes several input parameters:
4http://www-01.ibm.com/software/commerce/optimization/cplex-optimizer/
• The graph modeling the museum as deﬁned in section IV
• The interest function f to use. This function produces
interest vectors as deﬁned in section VI
• The maximum duration that a visitor can spend in the
museum
It outputs the proposed tour (as deﬁned in section IV).
A. Intrinsic interest
As we saw in section III, the Enertex algorithm ranks the
sentences of a document. We used Enertex as the following:
1) From the website of the museum, we created an XML
ﬁle containing the following information for each art-
work: the title, the artist name, the year and the descrip-
tion of the artwork.
2) We extracted data from the XML to produce a ﬁle where
each pseudo sentence is a concatenation of title, artist
and description.
3) The latter ﬁle is used as an input to Enertex with
the query ”mus´ee orangerie peinture impressionniste
postimpressionniste” to drive the balancing process of
the system.
It produces a ranking for artworks depending on the infor-
mation displayed by the museum (for each artwork, the result
is a value ranging from 0 to 1).
Fig. 3 shows the ranking of the artworks in the Mus´ee de
l’Orangerie provided by Enertex.
Fig. 3.
Ranking by Enertex of the artworks in the Mus´ee de l’Orangerie
As we can see, the resulting ranking is in agreement with the
information provided by the museum. Indeed the masterpieces
(according to the website of the museum) represent the most
important artworks (which have the highest scores).
TABLE II
COMPARISON OF ILP MODELS
Terms
OPTRP ILP
ILP [2]
Variables
xp, ya, fa, zv
xp, xp,k, ci,j,k
Number of variables
|P| + 2|A| + |V |
(|P| + |A|) × K + |P|
Constraints
(8)-(19)
(2)-(8) in [2]
Number of constraints
3 + 4|A| + |P| + 3|V | + |I| −2(|E| + |X|)
|A| × (K −1) + |P| × (2K −1) + K + 3
B. Interest functions
Four different interest function were designed to simulate
the visitor preferences.
• f1: produces the same vector v = (1) for each artwork
and visitor preferences
• f2: produces a vector vp = (sp) where sp is the score
given by Enertex for the artwork p and produces a vector
v = (1) as the visitor preferences.
• f3: produces vectors v = (v1, ..., vn) of size n equals to
the number of artists. Each artwork is represented as a
vector where vi = 1 if the artwork is created by the artist
i, 0 otherwise. The visitor preferences are represented as
a vector where vi = 1 if the visitor is interested by the
artist i, 0 otherwise.
• f4: produces vectors v = vf2∥10×vf3 where vf2 and vf3
are the vectors produces by f2 and f3 respectively.
The ﬁrst function deﬁnes the baseline: the visitor has no in-
terest at all. The second uses the ranking provided by Enertex:
the visitor wants to discover the most important artworks of
the museum. The third uses the visitor preferences (a set of
interesting artists). The last combines both visitor preferences
and museum point of view (we multiply by 10 because we
want to give more importance to the visitor preferences than
to the museum point of view).
C. Evaluation
To evaluate the output tour, we measure the relevance
percentage deﬁned as :
rp =
100 ∗P
p∈T f(p)
P
p∈P f(p)
(21)
where T is the set of artworks proposed in the tour (i.e.
T ⊆P) and f the interest function used (as saw above).
The relevance percentage rp denotes a satisfaction rate of the
visitor.
D. Results
For each function f, we ran the program with different time
limits from 30 to 330 minutes (the time required to visit the
entire collection) by steps of 15 minutes. For f2 and f3, we
randomly pre-generated 5,000 combinations of 2, 3, 4 and 5
artists (i.e. the same combinations are used with f2 and f3)
and calculated the arithmetic mean relevance percentage for
each duration.
Figure 4 shows the evolution of rp for each function f.
As expected, the ﬁrst interest function f1 produces a linear
evolution of the relevance percentage (given that all artworks
have the same interest, the tour includes the greatest number of
artworks). With Enertex we are able to propose efﬁcent tours to
visitors who want to discover the museum (without particular
preferences). The combination of both visitor preferences and
intrinsic preferences produces the best results up to 49% of
relevance improvement. It also appears that after 150 minutes,
the improvement is less signiﬁcant, we could assume that,
from the visitor point of view, the optimal tour duration is
about 2 hours and a half.
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
This research tackles the problem of optimizing museum
visits according to visitors preference and artwork importance.
As a ﬁrst milestone for next works taking into account the
individual behavior in museum visits, it sets an original model
combining computational optimisation and automatic learning
via artiﬁcial intelligence. We ﬁrst drew the optimization frame-
work based on graph theory to depict the spatial organization
of the museum (including rooms and paths), that requires an
Integer Linear Programming to maximize the visitor overall
satisfaction and to generate an optimal path, that is to say
a series of rooms and artworks to be seen by the visitor. In
complement, we compute an artwork description analysis by a
natural language processing based on textual energy (using an
algorithm called Enertex). This leads to ranking the different
artworks according to the descriptions given by the museum,
related to their artistic importance. Associating those two
complementary approaches, we are then able to design optimal
paths for visitors according to different interest functions based
on artwork objective values assigned by museums.
Future works concern more subjective behavior of visitors
depending on their proﬁles and leisure practices. Indeed, the
project aims at ﬁnding relevant recommendations for optimal
visit tours that rise a better ﬁtness between the visitor wishes
and the museum artistic supply. We can think about using nat-
ural language processing to generate the set of characteristics
for all the artworks in a museum and calculate better interest
vectors but also produce a summary of the proposed tour.
This information may advantageously be used by existing
and potential visitors to reﬁne the way they get involved in
their cultural pratices. Indeed, it is admitted that the museum
connoiseurs use to develop a critical mind about new services
in a numerical society. Thence, aware visitors become able to
appreciate the personalized routing recommendation system
provided by their prefered museums.
Fig. 4.
Evolution of the relevance percentage
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank the Departement du Vau-
cluse (France) and the FR Agorantic for the ﬁnancial supports
(projects @MUSE and InfoMuse).
REFERENCES
[1] V. F. Yu, S.-W. Lin, and S.-Y. Chou, “The museum visitor routing
problem,” Applied Mathematics and Computation, vol. 216, no. 3, pp.
719–729, 2010.
[2] D. L. Berre, P. Marquis, and S. Roussel, “Planning personalised museum
visits,” in ICAPS, D. Borrajo, S. Kambhampati, A. Oddi, and S. Fratini,
Eds.
AAAI, 2013.
[3] I. Lykourentzou, X. Claude, Y. Naudet, E. Tobias, A. Antoniou,
G. Lepouras, and C. Vassilakis, “Improving museum visitors’ quality
of experience through intelligent recommendations: A visiting style-
based approach,” in Intelligent Environments (Workshops), ser. Ambient
Intelligence and Smart Environments, J. A. Bot´ıa and D. Charitos, Eds.,
vol. 17.
IOS Press, 2013, pp. 507–518.
[4] H. Luhn, “The Automatic Creation of Literature Abstracts,” IBM Journal
of Research and Development, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 159–165, 1958.
[5] T. Sakai and K. Sp¨arck-Jones, “Generic summaries for indexing in
Information Retrieval,” in ACM Special Interest Group on Information
Retrieval (SIGIR’01): 24th International Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval.
New Orleans, LA, USA: ACM,
2001, pp. 190–198.
[6] J.-M. Torres-Moreno, R´esum´e automatique de documents : une approche
statistique.
Hermes-Lavoisier (Paris), 2011.
[7] S. Fern´andez, E. SanJuan, and J. M. Torres-Moreno, “Textual Energy
of Associative Memories: performants applications of ENERTEX algo-
rithm in text summarization and topic segmentation,” in LNAI 4287,
MICAI’07, Mexico, 2007, pp. 861–871.
[8] J. Hopﬁeld, “Neural networks and physical systems with emergent
collective computational abilities,” Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the USA, vol. 9, pp. 2554–2558, 1982.
[9] J. Hertz, A. Krogh, and G. Palmer, Introduction to the theorie of Neural
Computation.
Redwood City, CA: Addison Wesley, 1991.
[10] S. Ma, Statistical Mechanics. Philadelphia, CA: World Scientiﬁc, 1985.
[11] A. Molina, J.-M. Torres-Moreno, E. SanJuan, G. Sierra, and J. Rojas-
Mora, “Analysis and Transformation of Textual Energy Distribution,”
in (MICAI), 2013 12th Mexican International Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence.
IEEE, 2013, p. 203–208.
[12] G. Salton and M. McGill, Introduction to modern information retrieval.
Computer Science Series McGraw Hill Publishing Company, 1983.
[13] M. Porter, “An algorithm for sufﬁx stripping,” Program, vol. 14, no. 3,
pp. 130–137, July 1980.
[14] C. D. Manning and H. Sch¨utze, Foundations of Statistical Natural
Language Processing.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press,
1999. [Online]. Available: citeseer.ist.psu.edu/635422.html
