Title: Understanding scholarly Natural Language Processing system diagrams through application of the Richards-Engelhardt framework
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2008.11785v1
--------------------------------------------------

Understanding scholarly Natural Language
Processing system diagrams through application
of the Richards-Engelhardt framework
Guy Clarke Marshall, Caroline Jay, and Andr´e Freitas
University of Manchester
Abstract. We utilise Richards-Engelhardt framework as a tool for un-
derstanding Natural Language Processing systems diagrams. Through
four examples from scholarly proceedings, we ﬁnd that the application
of the framework to this ecological and complex domain is eﬀective for re-
ﬂecting on these diagrams. We argue for vocabulary to describe multiple-
codings, semiotic variability, and inconsistency or misuse of visual en-
coding principles in diagrams. Further, for application to scholarly Nat-
ural Language Processing systems, and perhaps systems diagrams more
broadly, we propose the addition of “Grouping by Object” as a new vi-
sual encoding principle, and “Emphasising” as a new visual encoding
type.
Keywords: Neural networks; Natural language processing; Visual en-
coding; Graphic language; Nature of diagrams; Systems diagrams
1
Introduction
The framework proposed by Engelhardt and Richards [5] is designed to be ap-
plicable to “all types of visualizations”. Their framework provides a method and
vocabulary for analysing diagrams and diagram components, which they have
tested on a large variety of visualization types. It appears the framework has not
yet been applied to system diagrams. We aim to advance the understanding of
the heterogeneous diagrammatic representations of Natural Language Process-
ing (NLP) systems found in scholarly conference proceedings by applying this
framework. The scholarly NLP systems diagrams domain has been chosen due
to its unusual heterogeneity, and its importance and prevalence in communi-
cating about NLP systems research. Further, we propose modest clariﬁcations
or extensions to the framework in order to ﬁt this domain, which may beneﬁt
the wider domain of system diagrams. Whilst Engelhardt and Richards tested
their framework on a wide variety of information visualisation resources they
did not examine (a) systems diagrams, or (b) “ecological” diagram examples
not conforming to an established standard or grammar. Our method is to:
1. Manually select a variety of natural language processing system diagrams in
recent conference proceedings
arXiv:2008.11785v1  [cs.HC]  26 Aug 2020
2
Guy Clarke Marshall, Caroline Jay, and Andr´e Freitas
2. Apply the Richards-Engelhardt framework in order to analyse these exam-
ples
3. Discuss and make suggestions to improve the applicability of Richards-
Engelhardt framework in this domain
4. Discuss implications of this reﬂection for the scholarly NLP community
In the course of this analysis, we necessarily comment on some existing dia-
grams. Our goal is not to criticise the authors of these diagrams, but rather to
support the community in creating eﬀective diagrams. Our contribution is to:
• Conduct diagram analysis on scholarly NLP system diagrams
• Qualitatively evaluate Richards-Engelhardt framework as a tool for reﬂecting
on scholarly NLP systems diagrams
• Suggest further requirements for the framework in this domain, including
emphasis, language, graphical object schematicity, and semiotic considera-
tions
2
NLP Diagrams
2.1
NLP Systems
Natural Language Processing is a discipline within Computer Science, and is
concerned with creating systems that solve tasks relating to Natural Language
interpretation. NLP systems take a text input, go through data manipulation
steps, and create an output that is usually a classiﬁcation or a prediction, such
as what the next word in a sequence is likely to be. The state-of-the-art systems
are technically complex, requiring application of mathematical and algorithmic
techniques. These NLP systems are often described through diagrams. We have
chosen to examine scholarly NLP system diagrams found in conference proceed-
ings, as a sub-domain of NLP systems diagrams with a well-deﬁned scope.
2.2
NLP System Components
Modern NLP systems are often based on neural networks, and it is these sys-
tems we focus on. A neural network takes an input (in NLP, text), and then pro-
cesses this via a series of layers, to arrive at an output (classiﬁcation/prediction).
Within each layer are a number of nodes that hold information and transmit sig-
nals to nodes in other layers. Speciﬁc mathematical functions or operations are
also used in these systems, such as sigmoid, concatenate, softmax, max pooling,
and loss. The system architecture describes the way in which the components
are arranged. Diﬀerent architectures are used for diﬀerent types of activities. For
example Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), inspired by the human visual
system, are commonly used for processing images. Long Short Term Memory
networks (LSTM), a type of Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) which are de-
signed for processing sequences, are often used for text.
Understanding scholarly NLP system diagrams
3
These neural networks “learn” a function, but have to be trained to do so.
Training consists of providing inputs and expected outputs, allowing the sys-
tem to develop an understanding of how an input should be interpreted. The
system is then tested with unseen inputs, to see if it is able to handle these
correctly. System diagrams almost always depict the training process. A more
detailed introduction to LSTM architectures, including schematics, is provided
by Olah [12].
2.3
NLP scholarly documents
The representation of these systems in conference proceedings is done in nat-
ural language, in pseudocode, and in diagrams which often appear to describe
the system beyond the neural network itself, including inputs, outputs, and the
relationship between components. Code may be shared as a supporting artifact
external to the formal proceedings. System outputs are often shared as tables,
charts, and metrics. In order to consider diagrams separately from the text, we
focus on self-contained diagrams which were deemed to meaningfully exist with
assumed knowledge but without reference to other resources.
2.4
NLP scholarly diagrams
Overview In this domain, representation can be challenging and complex. As
noted by Mahoney [8] in engineering, there are signiﬁcation issues associated
with representing how things work rather than what they are:
“But to show what machines do or how they are assembled is one thing;
to show how they work is quite another. However accurately and fully a
complex mechanism may be portrayed, an understanding of its operation
as a whole rests ultimately on familiarity with the operations of its basic
components. Treatises of the genre under discussion took that familiarity
for granted. Their authors could not do otherwise, given the nature of
their medium. A picture of a windlass, or of a system of pulleys, cannot
in and of itself set forth the laws that deﬁne the device’s mechanical
advantage. A drawing of a closed tube standing in a pool of water and
having a piston with a valve that opens in one direction only will still
not explain a water pump until the readers know the laws (or at least
the rules of thumb) that link the reduction of air pressure to the rise
in the head of a column of liquid. Readers must bring knowledge or
experience of such matters to the illustrations in order then to appreciate
or proﬁt from the ingenuity with which the basic machines are combined
or adapted to particular circumstances.” [8, p.201]
Diagrammatic representation and usage in this context lacks scientiﬁc in-
vestigation. Indeed, scholarly diagrams more broadly have been neglected by
scholarly enquiry, despite their potential to enhance the communicative eﬀec-
tiveness of research outputs. An exception to this is within automated computer
vision, where there is increasing interest in classifying scholarly ﬁgures [17], and
particularly scholarly charts of experimental results [14,15].
4
Guy Clarke Marshall, Caroline Jay, and Andr´e Freitas
Analysing scholarly diagrams in Computer Science In these diagrams,
apart from context related aspects such as diagram usage, two aspects of research
interest are (a) what is represented and (b) how it is represented. For examples,
see Figs. 2, 3, 4 and 5.
We are not aware of research applying existing diagram analysis frameworks
to scholarly communication. One such framework is “Physics of Notations”,
which is highly cited for designing visual notations [10]. This could potentially
be re-purposed as an analytic lens to describe scholarly-NLP-domain-speciﬁc
phenomena, as it has been for investigating the impact of the addition of colour
in UML Activity Diagrams found in Software Engineering [6]. However, Physics
of Notations is fairly abstract, with categories such as “include explicit mecha-
nisms for dealing with complexity”. We choose to progress with the Richards-
Engelhardt framework due to its concreteness, its task-independence, and its
potential for conducting systematic analysis. We also consider further develop-
ment of the framework as part of the analysis process.
3
Application of the Richards-Engelhardt framework to
the NLP systems diagram domain
3.1
Methodology
The Richards-Engelhardt framework consists of three modes, ﬁve types, and 15
principles of visual encoding, and provides a systematic method for analysing
diagrams and visualisations. In its present form the framework focuses on the
principles of visual encoding, which we also focus on in our analysis. Within the
visualisation design space, system diagrams in NLP could broadly be considered
ﬂow diagrams, though they do not conform to a consistent or standard form.
Examining self-contained diagrams found at ACL 2019, a top NLP conference,
we found a visually and semantically heterogeneous set of diagrams across the
proceedings. From this set, we selected four diagrams to investigate further.
They were chosen to be distinct in terms of mode of visual encoding, and the
information they convey.
3.2
Aspects of visual representation in NLP systems diagrams
We apply the Richards-Engelhardt framework in the NLP system diagram do-
main. Our application area falls within Engelhardt and Richard’s scope of 2D
static representations, though this is a novel and more complex area of applica-
tion, as we shall demonstrate. We proceed to consider the three representational
modes, followed by a general discussion of visual encoding types in NLP, and
discuss in depth visual encoding principles of four examples from this domain.
Mode of correspondence In NLP systems diagrams, and indeed all diagrams of
software, all visual encoding is necessarily non-literal, in that the relationship
is conceptual and metaphorical. This is not trivial, since the functions (or code)
Understanding scholarly NLP system diagrams
5
that the system comprises have speciﬁc virtual inputs and outputs. It is also the
case that software architecture diagrams often do not represent how the code is
written, but rather how the system works, being more about signifying function
than about representing code in a “realistic” sense.
Mode of depiction It would be challenging to describe NLP system diagrams on
a realistic/precise to schematic dimension. To highlight this, Fig. 1 shows some
of the diﬀerent graphical components used in visual representations of vectors
(which in this context are indexable lists of elements), a speciﬁc and prevalent
aspect of NLP systems. Some are more “schematic” that others, in the sense
that they use less ink to signify the same thing (a vector of unknown dimension).
There can also be visual concreteness (such as four circles in a vector, seen left
of Fig. 1), which does not necessarily signify precision or semantic relevance (in
the example, there may not be four elements). In this domain, perhaps realistic
and precise are fundamentally diﬀerent: Often where we ﬁnd a precise depiction,
it does not depict precision.
Further speciﬁc discussion of depiction could include whether graphical com-
ponents should include “mathematical symbols”. There are other standard re-
current symbols, such as ellipses or domain speciﬁc iconography, which could be
captured by sub-categories of “depicting”.
Fig. 1. Nine diﬀerent graphical components representing vectors found at ACL 2019.
Left to right: Circles: [Zang et al, ACL 2019]. Vector: [Lee et al, ACL 2019]. Example:
[Wang et al, ACL 2019]. x1 circle: [Ma et al ACL 2019]. w1 square: [Sarkar et al, ACL
2019]. Stacked squares: [Mai et al, ACL 2019]. Horizontal squares: [Mihaylova and
Martins, ACL 2019]. Rectangle: [Barezi and Fung, ACL 2019]. Curved corners, index
plus example [Zhang et al, ACL 2019]
Mode of visual encoding For “depicting”, the NLP system diagram, as a technical
illustration, is picturing (rather than mapping), and this must be the key visual
encoding depiction principle. Again due to the lack of physical location, we
are not in the “mapping” category. With a more metaphorical, less physically
grounded, but equally rational deﬁnition, perhaps an NLP system diagram could
be considered a map of the functionality (cf. [4,13]). In other domains, a “process
map” would not ﬁt naturally within the deﬁnition of either mapping or depicting
categories.
The above domain-level features are applicable throughout diagrams used in
this domain. We proceed to use the guidance in Fig. 1 of [5] to apply the “types
of visual encoding” to our domain. A collection of diagrams can be found at
6
Guy Clarke Marshall, Caroline Jay, and Andr´e Freitas
aidiagrams.com/resources, on which this more general commentary is based.
Examining this larger sample of over 150 scholarly NLP system diagrams allows
for an awareness of the heterogeneity of the domain.
Visual encoding types
Scaling This is variable between and within diagrams. Within a diagram, size can
be used to represent dimensional diﬀerences, often indicating a binary “bigger
or smaller than”, rather than precise scaling (see Fig. 3).
Ordering Often these diagrams are (broadly) read linearly left-right, in chrono-
logical order of data processing at training-time. The diagrams are not usually
of the system at run-time. Some information important for the creation and
operation of the system, including chronological information such as “parame-
ter training process”, intervals, epochs, and updating of parameters are often
omitted.
Grouping Varied, often multiple diﬀerent encodings are used within each dia-
gram. Often, multiple visual encodings are applied to perform the same grouping
(such as nesting, colour, proximity, alignment, and boundary, plus a label and a
caption, as shown in Fig. 2).
Linking This is perhaps the most important part of the NLP system diagrams,
since along with components themselves, the relationship between components
determines the architecture. Arrows and nesting are often used.
It remains to consider visual encoding principles, which we will through anal-
ysis of four example diagrams extracted from scholarly conference proceedings.
3.3
Example diagram prioritising “layers”: Fig. 2
The diagram in Fig. 2 prioritises depiction of the layers of the neural network
architecture, including labelled FC-Layers (Fully Connected layers, used for clas-
siﬁcation).
Colour and boundary are consistently employed simultaneously for group-
ing, together with labels-attached-by-proximity for the red and blue sub-ﬁgures.
Alignment groups the right section as the main components of the system (com-
prised of the FC-Layers). The green component is grouped by proximity to the
other “early-in-the-workﬂow” item of context embedding.
This diagram contains 23 words, and of those ﬁve (over 20%) are “embed-
ding”. That does not include the caption, which (quite unusually) reemphasises
the labels by describing the visual techniques of the diagram, and clarifying a
symbol which is used in an unconventional way (and does not match the same
symbol in the diagram, “+” is neither visually nor semantically equivalent to
“L”). It would be possible to rearrange this diagram with less natural lan-
guage and the same semantic content, for example by making use of the Nesting
Understanding scholarly NLP system diagrams
7
Fig. 2. A layer-centric example [Wang et al, ACL 2019], with labels from the framework
overlaid
visual encoding principle. This is an example of how an awareness of Richards-
Engelhardt framework has the potential to help diagram authors with novel
representations. Engelhardt and Richards have already assessed hundreds of di-
agram types which work well with their framework, so we focus our narrative
on diagrams for which it does not work so well, such as where the author makes
unconventional and internally inconsistent visual encoding choices, where com-
municative language is mixed, or where a visual encoding principle is used for
emphasis.
3.4
Example diagram prioritising data manipulation: Fig. 3
Fig. 3 shows a data centric depiction of a neural network system. The dominating
feature (in terms of both ink and semantic content) are the grids which represent
data ﬂows. Note that two visual techniques (gradient and scaling) are used but
do not mean what the framework suggests. Colour gradient is not ordering (OG),
but rather is descriptive of dilution. Scaling by proportion (SP) occurs in the
concatenate layer, but is not what is meant by the use of Scaling in the local
max-pooling or convolutional layer. This diagram also showcases inconsistent
dual-coding, highlighting the arbitrary dimensions used throughout this domain:
The sizing is not consistent with the dimensional labeling within each layer,
which implies they are diﬀerent widths (such as the convolutional layer, which
has variable dimensions implied by the mathematical notation gm−2 and gm−4).
The framework does not allow us to discuss author-assumed conventions (e.g.
8
Guy Clarke Marshall, Caroline Jay, and Andr´e Freitas
Fig. 3. A data-centric example [Dereli and Saraclar, ACL 2019], with labels from the
framework overlaid
ellipsis, acronyms, subscript notation). Also in this diagram we have arrows for
the last two layers but not elsewhere, and the linking is semantically diﬀerent.
With an implicit axis, it is understandable that the authors did not include
explicit arrows as is usual for system ﬂow. In Fig. 3, we found the caption to be
very helpful in interpreting the overall diagram. This motivates the inclusion of
the caption as part of the scope of the diagram, though they do not have the
spatial relation required of a diagram and were not discussed in Engelhardt and
Richards’ examples.
3.5
Example diagram with picturing and sub-ﬁgures: Fig. 4
We chose Fig. 4 due to its visual appeal, range of visualisation choices, and clear
sub-ﬁgures allowing for easy reference without needing to overlay additional in-
formation. With the depiction of chessboards, this is depiction by mapping, as
well as the dominant depiction by picturing. Fig. 4 has many diﬀerent grouping
by boundary mechanisms, where the visual objects used to establish the bound-
ary are also grouped by colour and shape (wide brush with rounded corners,
thin brush with rounded corners, thick brush with “folded” corner). Grouping is
done by position and alignment, particularly within the labelled sub-ﬁgures (a),
(b) and (c). Additionally, proximity is used to conceptually attach the vectors
(collection of circles) to the chess boards, certainly in the leftmost instance. The
other instances have a dotted yellow boundary (if you look very closely!). It is
not clear why there is this inconsistency.
Understanding scholarly NLP system diagrams
9
Fig. 4. An example with sub-ﬁgures [Zang et al, ACL 2019], similar in size to the
original, with labels from the framework overlaid
There are some visual inconsistencies which do not appear to represent mean-
ing. Indeﬁnite continuity of the process, in this case, is represented by one ellipsis,
that is aligned only with the rightmost chessboard. Other lines simply stop. It
would seem better to have the ellipsis positioned further right. Ellipses are also
used within sub-ﬁgure (b) to indicate arbitrary dimension, which is consistent
with the other use. However, in sub-ﬁgure (a), the 4 circles of vector “ES”, the
implied four overlaid squares of “F”, and the size and number of bars in “D”,
as well as the stacked bar charts v, are precise and arbitrary. In the text it is
made clear that the number of feature planes “F” is 20. It is not clear why dif-
ferent representational choices have been made for the same concept. The yellow
arrows are double-barred, further distinguishing them from the other coloured
arrows. The rightmost two arrows in (a) have a lower weight than any other
arrow, presumably an oversight. The overall ordering of the diagram is slightly
unclear, with no single ﬂow directed by linking or position. This is further compli-
cated by the sub-ﬁgures. The framework does not encompass languages involved,
which can be argued to be a speciﬁc visual encoding, or at very least a special
type of graphical component. With example usage from Fig. 4, we have: English
(“Quality”), mathematical (“ ˆm(0)”), Smith chess notation (“g1e2”). This would
be useful, to facilitate comparison between diagrams, as a diagram with a dif-
ferent language has a diﬀerent set of implicit assumptions made about the prior
knowledge of the reader.
The size of the chessboards and the iconic sub-ﬁgures used within the main
diagram (blue and purple) vary, presumably for pragmatic size-constraint rea-
10
Guy Clarke Marshall, Caroline Jay, and Andr´e Freitas
sons. It is also potentially distracting for readers that the scaling of the (blue,
purple and green) icons preserved the size of the arrowheads (only), and that
purple introduces curvature to arrows.
The framework has allowed a discussion of this multifaceted diagram. Perhaps
a framework omission in describing Fig. 4 is that this is semiotically diﬀerent to
Figs. 2 and 3, in that the diagram shows a speciﬁc example (of the processing
of a single chess move) which is used to signify the entire system.
3.6
Example prioritising a schematic of the contribution: Fig. 5
Fig. 5 can be thoroughly described using the Richards-Engelhardt framework,
which we will brieﬂy do here without going into minutiae sub-ﬁgure discussion.
There is grouping by alignment, by colour and by position. It uses two dif-
Fig. 5. An example of a contribution-oriented schematic [Lebanoﬀet al, ACL 2019],
with labels from the framework overlaid
ferent linking graphical components (dotted lines and arrows). The content is
quite schematic, with omission of details not important to the core contribution,
such as layer labels and operations, as seen in the previous diagrams. Moody
et al. [11] would describe this ﬁgure as demonstrating good “graphic econ-
omy”, whilst in Gestalt theory this would be “Pr¨agnanz” [18], language that
the Richards-Engelhardt framework appears to lack. The framework does not
facilitate discussion of the schematic and relatively minimalist content style, as
the mode of depiction has a physical deﬁnition. Currently, the framework has the
mode of depicting being schematic or realistic/precise, but this does not support
the examination of individual graphic objects which is necessary for comparing
between diagrams (see Fig 1).
Understanding scholarly NLP system diagrams
11
There are some important features that the framework does not currently in-
clude, such as the bracket object being used for grouping, which might be termed
Grouping by Object. The visual encoding here diﬀers from other examples, in that
the set of graphic components is taken from a smaller pallet: This is a simpler
diagram by design. Unusual styling is present, in the graded colouring within the
rectangles (it is not clear if this serves an encoding purpose). The rotated text
also is visually notable, and may require head-tilting which physically changes
the readers interaction with the diagram. The use of an icon to accompany “In-
put Document(s)” is a dual-coding unexpected given the schematic nature of the
rest of the diagram. Note that the system inputs are data rather than physical
pieces of paper, so the mode of correspondence remains non-literal. Moody [10]
would describe this dual-coding as “semiotically unclear”, as there is not a
1:1 mapping between semantic constructs and graphical symbols. The precision
of the diagram is also arbitrary; the numbers are indicative rather than mean-
ingful, as are the number of rectangles. The numbers allow inference that the
highest value is selected. The dotted lines suggest the network is Fully Con-
nected, though there is one connection omitted top left to bottom right in the
red network, perhaps accidentally. We ﬁnd Emphasis by Colour is used as well
as Grouping by Colour. More generally, even within a simple example such as a
pie chart, colour, spatial separation, and orientation or layout techniques can be
used for emphasis. Semiotically, the object being signiﬁed is variable within this
diagram, with sentence-speciﬁc numeric information alongside the system-level
“document(s)”. Indeed more broadly this diagram appears to be representing
the “contribution” rather than the “system”.
Where the authors reference the diagram in the text, it is described as an
“illustration” [7], perhaps reﬂecting that the mode of depiction is schematic
rather than precise.
4
Results and discussion
The scholarly NLP system diagram domain is substantially more complex than
the examples initially considered by Engelhardt and Richards, making intelligi-
ble implementation of the visual methods of their Fig. 2 challenging. This visual
method has a table of visual encoding principles which was used to point at the
instantiation of that principle. To clearly apply to complicated system diagrams
following this visual method would seem to warrant an interactive digital vi-
sualisation rather than static diagram, due to the multiple applications of the
same principles. In particular, unlike our domain, the examples the framework
was tested on do not have extensive “subsets of graphical components” (sub-
ﬁgures), and often employ a fairly limited number of visual encoding principles.
4.1
Strengths of applying the framework
We found it extremely useful to have the vocabulary and breadth of consider-
ations provided by the framework, particularly around the graphical elements.
12
Guy Clarke Marshall, Caroline Jay, and Andr´e Freitas
It has successfully and usefully described how diﬀerent principles are used to
group and link, within diagrams in this domain. In general, we found the visual
encoding principles unambiguous and straightforward to identify.
Applying this framework has also allowed us to discover internal inconsis-
tency in some of the diagrams, and a number of errors in the creation of the
diagrams appear to have been found. Perhaps authors and reviewers would ben-
eﬁt from examining diagrams with a critical eye, using Engelhardt and Richards
Visual Encoding Principles.
4.2
Reﬁnements and extensions to make this a useful tool for
reﬂection on (scholarly NLP) system diagrams
Whilst, as the prior work of this paper attests, applying this framework was
useful, there are a number of items which the framework requires for utility in
our domain. It would be helpful to have standard terminology for some additional
attributes of diagrams as part of the mode of depiction.
Author assumed knowledge and conventions Assumptions made by the author,
such as use of acronyms, mathematical notation, or context-speciﬁc conventions,
are not reﬂected here. This may also usefully be considered as part of visual en-
coding in a general domain. We believe that, even in Engelhardt and Richards’
own example (their Fig. 2) the assumed knowledge of Dutch language, and politi-
cal acronyms, are important parts of the visual encoding. This may be signiﬁcant
enough to require calling out separately as part of “Depicting”.
Internal consistency For complex diagrams, “consistency” may be important.
This does not only apply to how visual encoding principles are used, but also in
natural language, consistency of capitalisation or use of symbols (e.g. Fig. 2 uses
ellipsis sometimes for arbitrary dimension, some lower case ﬁrst letters, and even
the “+” symbol is inconsistent between the caption and the diagram). Regardless
of whether internal inconsistency is cognitively problematic, it is necessary to
capture this in order to describe the diagram, and would provide an entry point
to discussing diﬀerences in representational choice within the diagram.
Language The choice of communication modes such as mathematical symbols,
code, abbreviations, “iconic” symbols, or natural language is signiﬁcant to the
encoding. Whilst these can be considered as a subset of graphic components it
perhaps does not do justice to the cognitive diﬀerence using these makes [16,2].
This could be structured, and consideration made of tone, language etc. This
is a speciﬁc case of “Author assumed knowledge and conventions”, but also is
a diﬀerent modality with diﬀerent perceptual and semiotic considerations, and
therefore seems worthy of speciﬁc attention.
Semiotics of examples vs systems As part of the future work, it would be good
to include semiotic or representational considerations (keeping within the frame-
work’s scope of “meaning represented in a diagram”). For example, if a systems
Understanding scholarly NLP system diagrams
13
diagram includes an example, as in Fig. 4, this shifts the diagrammatic repre-
sentamen to being a speciﬁc instantiation of the system.
Common domain-speciﬁc symbols Graphic components: within either “mode of
depicting” or “visual encoding: depicting”, it would be useful to have graphical
components categorised to describe common symbol choices when comparing di-
agrams. Further, it is noted that for the visual encoding principles, quantitative,
ordinal and nominal attributes are covered. The “depicting: picturing” can be
extended to include other properties of the object that are in a general sense
iconic, which would allow us to describe (for example) the diﬀerences in vector
representations shown in Fig. 1.
Sub-ﬁgures In our domain, sub-ﬁgures (such as the layers) sometimes contain
diﬀerent representational choices to the “macroscopic” diagram. Engelhardt and
Richards consider this (p204), and consider them to be nested visual structures,
which we have been abbreviating as sub-ﬁgures. This indicates the utility of this
framework at diﬀerent levels of granularity. For discussion of complex diagrams,
it might be suitable to add an external axes to indicate position of sub-ﬁgures and
features, rather than overlaying this information onto the diagram. We would
welcome discussion on other ideas for this.
Schematics The framework does not capture the schematic (or otherwise) na-
ture of the diagram, making comparison or discussion on “How much content is
included or omitted” diﬃcult. This applies not only in the mode of depiction,
but also as part of the mode of visual encoding, as demonstrated by the wide
range of graphical elements representing vectors in Fig. 1.
Physical emphasis For non-physical systems, dimensions of discussion are re-
duced to being “non-literal” correspondence with “realistic/precise” depiction.
It would be nice to have more language to help describe the use of non-physical
metaphor and models. This could be part of the content work.
Quantitative analysis Allowing for quantitative discussion of diagrams at scale
is challenging, particularly for complicated diagrams. This capability would be
useful in order to do justice to the heterogeneity of visual encoding techniques
employed, and allow for quantitative comparison (say, between diﬀerent domains
or media). This would seem to be a core beneﬁt of covering the whole design
space of visualisations, and as such an extension to the framework to support
quantitative analysis of visual encoding principles would be helpful.
Grouping by Object In encoding by visual appearance, we found graphical com-
ponents typiﬁed by “{”, and natural language labels, being used to group other
graphical components. Whilst it could be argued this is a grouping by proximity
or boundary, this does not capture that the visual object “{” is used with spatial
grouping to visually encode “nesting” at diﬀerent levels of grouping. The right
brackets of Fig. 5 is one such example of “{” usage. In this example, it is to
14
Guy Clarke Marshall, Caroline Jay, and Andr´e Freitas
group together individual rows by “Input Document(s)”, “1st Summ Sent” or
“2nd Summ Sent”, where spatial grouping is used to link the coloured rectangu-
lar objects with the descriptions. The “1st Summ Sent” grouping would not be
clearly only applied to the last three coloured rectangles without the mediating
“{” symbol. As such, we claim that Grouping by Object is as diﬀerent from other
grouping mechanisms as a sheepdog is from a fence. Note that the “{” symbol
should not be considered a “linking” symbol, as an arrow might be, as it applies
a common property to a set of other objects and is therefore about “category”,
which Engelhardt and Richards have deﬁned to be the goal of grouping (p206).
(This “type” of grouping is often applied only after other visual encoding prin-
ciples have been applied. It may be this is because it does not leverage Gestalt
to the extent of the other Grouping principles.)
Emphasis Principle Additionally we propose “Emphasis” as a worthwhile ex-
tension to the visual encoding principles. It is most similar to the principle
“Ordering”, but fulﬁls a diﬀerent function:
• Emphasising is used to make visually salient particular aspects. Empha-
sising answers questions such as What is most important? and What should
the reader look at ﬁrst?
– Emphasis by colour is a visual encoding principle often utilising bright
or high contrast colours.
– Emphasis by position is done by placing visual primacy to certain
elements, for example with a prominent position (extreme left, right
or central), or providing lower spatial clustering with respect to other
graphic elements or sub-ﬁgures.
– Emphasis by uniqueness is done by using a unique visual encoding
principle for an element (or sub-ﬁgure). This could be a diﬀerent bound-
ary, colour, or graphical elements.
Ambiguities and other observations
• The scope of the framework, in terms of describing diagrams, was quite clear.
We found it easy and clear to apply the visual encoding principles. However,
it was unclear whether the caption should be considered as “part” of the
diagram, and it would be good if that could be clariﬁed as part of the future
content work.
• We found that, even in our ecological setting, this worked well for stan-
dardised diagrams, and novel-but-thoughtful diagrams. The framework lends
itself to diagrams that are consistently assembled. However, it lacks the vo-
cabulary to describe errors or misleading visual encodings, which would be
useful as part of validating this framework and providing feedback to dia-
gram authors, a potential use case of this framework.
• The vocabulary enables standard terminology to describe visual features of
diagrams, and has been useful in describing ﬁgures in our domain. However,
it does not yet provide guidance for semantic-content-focused vocabulary,
Understanding scholarly NLP system diagrams
15
and borderline topics such as graphic economy, and semiotics. The deﬁni-
tion of “mode of depiction” also appears to need clariﬁcation in order to
disambiguate precise/realistic and describe schematics and conventions.
• The framework has facilitated description and discussion of complex systems
diagrams, including sub-ﬁgures. However, the framework is not yet optimised
for sub-ﬁgures, or for describing the layout of the diagram. Sometimes we
have to infer the intention or meaning of the author, and clariﬁcation is only
possible outside of the diagram (e.g. in text or speech).
• For “positioning along an axis”, we have assumed this axis does not need
to be explicitly drawn, though for the infographics domain perhaps this
distinction is useful. Either way, the framework allows for useful discussion
on this topic. More generally, we felt that more precise deﬁnitions would be
helpful for meaningful and unambiguous application of the framework.
• In our domain, Authors sometimes seem to use visual encoding mechanisms
in unconventional ways (cf. colour gradient in Fig. 3). This is perhaps not
unusual in diagrams more broadly, and the framework would beneﬁt from
terminology for this.
• Additional research that could be linked to this framework includes visual
ontologies, which aim to completely describe objects and the relations be-
tween them. Of particular relevance are those from image processing and
machine vision (such as [9]), which have the potential to automate the ap-
plication of this framework.
4.3
Discussion on scholarly NLP system diagrams
There is an overwhelming absence of relevant, established representations or
visual notations for scholarly systems diagrams: As background for this study,
we randomly sampled over 150 diagrams from top NLP conference proceedings.
None utilised standards of UML or Block diagrams, nor used a diagrammatic
output from the software. These established diagrammatic frameworks could, in
principle, be used in the domain. We hypothesise that they are not due to their
inability to express the new representational challenges of neural networks, such
as the dimensional change, embedding, layers, etc.
There is an as yet un-examined semiotic diﬀerence between a system instan-
tiated around an example, and one describing a general system. The former
describes a single operation, rather than a system, though the meaning com-
municated may or may not be similar. Most diagrams we found represent the
system, but some represent data pre-processing, data itself, or an example.
NLP systems can be created through visual programming languages, includ-
ing specialist interfaces such as TensorFlow [1] which has the TensorBoard visu-
alisation tool for automatically creating a system diagram. We did not ﬁnd any
cases of this being used in conference proceedings. We hypothesise this is because
a large proportion of research is done using other tools, and also because the
level of granularity is too low. It may be that an additional, higher-level view on
TensorBoard would facilitate system architecture diagrams that would be suit-
able for immediate export into conference proceedings. Repeatability, the ability
16
Guy Clarke Marshall, Caroline Jay, and Andr´e Freitas
to reproduce work, is a problem in Computer Science [3] and better diagrams
could be part of improving system transparency and lead to better repeatability
and reproducibility.
We found that, even in very visually and semantically diﬀerent diagrams, al-
most every Richards-Engelhardt grouping and ordering technique was deployed.
This makes intuitive sense, as descriptions of software systems are principally
about grouping and ordering. The prevalence of “Repetition”, despite the use of
varying graphic components for vectors and indeed the indeterminate nature of
each one of the repetition uses, was unexpected. In conjunction with repetition,
some diagrams used the ellipsis symbol “. . . ” to indicate continuity.
4.4
Limitations and future work
Using this framework, there are numerous avenues to investigate, including de-
scribing and comparing diagrams. These observations are in addition to the
potentials described by Engelhardt and Richards.
Other system diagrams, such as engineering drawings or those deployed in the
discipline of Systems Theory, may beneﬁt from examination with this framework.
Additionally, there is the potential to investigate other ecological or “organically
created” diagrams, such as biology school textbook diagrams or diagrams used
in journalism, and to examine temporal or evolutionary diﬀerences in diagrams
occurring in diﬀerent domains.
It would be useful to investigate perceptual properties of diﬀerent visual
encoding principles. Speciﬁcally for NLP system diagrams, a useful example to
study would be repetition, including whether an ellipsis or a diﬀerent number
of repeated symbols has an impact on interpretability. Designing an experiment
that respects the need to be distinct from any particular task would make this
more challenging. Another relevant topic for our domain would be the perceptual
and cognitive impact of simultaneous application of multiple visual encodings
for grouping.
Further, contrasting the Richard-Engelhardt framework with domain spe-
ciﬁc tools, such as Physics of Notations for Software Engineering, might provide
justiﬁcation or insight into potential changes to those domain-speciﬁc guidelines.
5
Conclusion
To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work to consider scholarly diagrams, as well as
Natural Language Processing system diagrams, and amongst the ﬁrst to apply
the Richards-Engelhardt framework. We have successfully applied the framework
in order to describe and discuss Natural Language Processing systems diagrams,
identifying unconventional visual encoding choices and inconsistencies in the
diagrams.
We have identiﬁed modiﬁcations and additions that would make the appli-
cation of this framework more useful in our domain, and perhaps for systems
diagrams more generally. We have also demonstrated that scholarly diagrams
are an interesting avenue for investigation by the diagrammatic community.
Understanding scholarly NLP system diagrams
17
References
1. Abadi, M., Agarwal, A., Barham, P., Brevdo, E., Chen, Z., Citro, C., Corrado,
G.S., Davis, A., Dean, J., Devin, M., Ghemawat, S., Goodfellow, I., Harp, A.,
Irving, G., Isard, M., Jia, Y., Jozefowicz, R., Kaiser, L., Kudlur, M., Levenberg,
J., Man´e, D., Monga, R., Moore, S., Murray, D., Olah, C., Schuster, M., Shlens, J.,
Steiner, B., Sutskever, I., Talwar, K., Tucker, P., Vanhoucke, V., Vasudevan, V.,
Vi´egas, F., Vinyals, O., Warden, P., Wattenberg, M., Wicke, M., Yu, Y., Zheng,
X.: TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous systems (2015),
https://www.tensorflow.org/, software available from tensorﬂow.org
2. Boon, M., Knuuttila, T.: Models as epistemic tools in engineering sciences. In:
Philosophy of technology and engineering sciences, pp. 693–726. Elsevier (2009)
3. Collberg, C., Proebsting, T.A.: Repeatability in computer systems research. Com-
munications of the ACM 59(3), 62–69 (2016)
4. Dodge, M., Kitchin, R.: Atlas of cyberspace, vol. 158. Addison-Wesley London
(2001)
5. Engelhardt, Y., Richards, C.: A framework for analyzing and designing diagrams
and graphics. In: International Conference on Theory and Application of Diagrams.
pp. 201–209. Springer (2018)
6. Gopalakrishnan, S., Krogstie, J., Sindre, G.: Adapting uml activity diagrams for
mobile work process modelling: experimental comparison of two notation alterna-
tives. In: IFIP Working Conference on The Practice of Enterprise Modeling. pp.
145–161. Springer (2010)
7. Lebanoﬀ, L., Song, K., Dernoncourt, F., Kim, D.S., Kim, S., Chang, W., Liu, F.:
Scoring sentence singletons and pairs for abstractive summarization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.00077 (2019)
8. Mahoney, M.S.: Diagrams and dynamics: mathematical perspectives on edgerton’s
thesis. Science and the Arts in the Renaissance pp. 198–220 (1985)
9. Maillot, N., Thonnat, M., Boucher, A.: Towards ontology-based cognitive vision.
Machine Vision and Applications 16(1), 33–40 (2004)
10. Moody, D.: The “physics” of notations: toward a scientiﬁc basis for constructing vi-
sual notations in software engineering. IEEE Transactions on software engineering
35(6), 756–779 (2009)
11. Moody, D.L., Heymans, P., Matuleviˇcius, R.: Visual syntax does matter: improv-
ing the cognitive eﬀectiveness of the i* visual notation. Requirements Engineering
15(2), 141–175 (2010)
12. Olah, C.: Understanding lstm networks. https://colah.github.io/posts/2015-08-
Understanding-LSTMs/ (2015), accessed: 2019-10-16
13. Peterson, J.B.: Maps of meaning: The architecture of belief. Routledge (2002)
14. Ray Choudhury, S., Giles, C.L.: An architecture for information extraction from
ﬁgures in digital libraries. In: Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on
World Wide Web. pp. 667–672. ACM (2015)
15. Savva, M., Kong, N., Chhajta, A., Fei-Fei, L., Agrawala, M., Heer, J.: Revision:
Automated classiﬁcation, analysis and redesign of chart images. In: Proceedings of
the 24th annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology. pp.
393–402. ACM (2011)
16. Scanlan, D.A.: Structured ﬂowcharts outperform pseudocode: An experimental
comparison. IEEE software 6(5), 28–36 (1989)
17. Siegel, N., Horvitz, Z., Levin, R., Divvala, S., Farhadi, A.: Figureseer: Parsing
result-ﬁgures in research papers. In: European Conference on Computer Vision.
pp. 664–680. Springer (2016)
18
Guy Clarke Marshall, Caroline Jay, and Andr´e Freitas
18. Wertheimer, M.: Untersuchungen zur Lehre von der Gestalt. II. Psychologis-
che Forschung 4(1), 301–350 (1923). https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00410640, http:
//link.springer.com/10.1007/BF00410640
