Title: Transgender Community Sentiment Analysis from Social Media Data: A Natural Language Processing Approach
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2010.13062v2
--------------------------------------------------

 
 
 
TRANSGENDER COMMUNITY SENTIMENT ANALYSIS FROM SOCIAL 
MEDIA DATA: A NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING APPROACH 
 
 
 
 
Yuqiao Liu 
Northeast Yucai Bilingual School 
Shenyang, Liaoning, China 
hernandolyq@163.com 
 
Yudan Wang 
Northeast Yucai Foreign Language School 
Shenyang, Liaoning, China 
1359414853@qq.com 
 
Ying Zhao 
Department of Engineering Science and Applied Math 
Northwestern University 
Evanston, IL, U.S.A 
yingzhao2018@u.northwestern.edu 
Zhixiang Li 
Department of Biomedical Engineering 
Shenyang Pharmaceutical University 
Shenyang, Liaoning, China 
zhixiangli@gmail.com 
 
ABSTRACT 
Transgender community are experiencing a huge disparity in mental health condition compared with 
the general population. Interpreting the social medial data posted by transgender people may help 
us understand the sentiments of these sexual minority group better and apply early interventions.  
In this study, we manually categorize 300 social media comments posted by transgender people to 
the sentiment of negative, positive and neutral. 5 machine learning algorithms and 2 deep neural 
networks are adopted to build sentiment analysis classifiers based on the annotated data. Results show 
that our annotations are reliable with a high Cohen’s Kappa score over 0.8 across all three classes. 
LSTM model yields an optimal performance of accuracy over 0.85 and AUC of 0.876. Our next step 
will focus on using advanced natural language processing algorithms on larger annotated dataset. 
 
1 Introduction 
Transgender is defined as a person whose gender self-identity differs from their birth sex[1]. Many transgender people 
experience serious gender dysphoria [2], which is a depression feeling due to the sexual mismatch between their self-
identity and assigned sex. Therefore, medical treatments such as hormone replacement therapy or psychotherapy, are 
commonly sought by transgender people. According to research by Amnesty International [3], about 0.3% of the 
EU’s population is transgender, accounting for 1.5 million people.  In Unites States, an estimated proportion of 0.5  
to 0.6% population are identified as transgender. In other countries or regions, the statistics of transgender are less 
reported, due to culture difference, religion reason or other reality obstacles. 
According to the research of National Center for Transgender Equality (NCTE) [4], transgender community experience 
a huge disparity in healthcare access, employment, and criminal justice system. To be detailed, 14% of the transgender 
people are unemployed which is double of the rate in general population; 19% transgender people have been refused 
to be provided health care; approximately one-fifth of the community have reported being harassed by police. Most 
of these huge disparity are caused by the discrimination from people with other sexual orientations. Besides this, 
transgender people are also experiencing serious mental health challenges. Transgender itself is not a mental disorder. 
However, gender dysphoria will make people have depression and distressing feelings. Moreover, the confusion of 
self-identification and misunderstand from others will enhance this disorder. This mental health problem will result 
in unexpected health outcomes even suicide [5]. 41% of transgender individuals have attempted suicide found by the 
study of NCTE. 
Therefore, it is essential to understand the sentiment of transgender community and give appropriate intervention or 
prevention to those people having gender dysphoria or other mental illness. However, transgender people, being a 
2 
 
Kappa 
Table 1: The definition, count, prevalence, example and Cohen’s Kappa score of the sentiments of 300 Reddit comments 
posted by transgender community 
Sentiment    Defination 
Count Prevalence Cohen’s 
Feeling uncomfortable, depressed, unconfident of 
being a transgender person; Experiencing dysphoria; 
 
Example 
I’ve really struggled trying to find a way to express 
how I felt about my own gender issues. 
 
 
 
 
 
getting hormones thru them. and I think I’ve got a basic idea of 
 
 
 
sexual minority, are less represented or spoken out to the public [6]. Due to the anonymous schema, people are more 
willing to express their own opinion to the public on the social media. To this end, social media data is a perfect data 
resource to the research of sentiment analysis of the transgender community. Therefore, we will conduct sentiment 
analysis using natural language processing approach on social media data posted by transgender community. To be 
detailed, our contribution is in 2-fold: 1) To give positive, negative or neural annotations to 500 contexts extracted from 
Reddit data posted by transgender community(sub-reddit:/r/asktransgender); 2) Implement trending natural language 
processing methods on the annotated data to build a automatic sentiment classifier. 
 
2 Related Work 
With the fast development of artificial intelligence (AI) in the last decade, these techniques has been widely applied to 
the research different fields. Particularly in healthcare, AI is used to improve the predictive accuracy of diseases[7, 8], 
to interpret medical images automatically [9, 10], to explore the RNA sequence pattern between co-morbidity [11] and 
so on. In terms of sentiment analysis of social media data, natural language processing is heavily used. Kanakaraj et al. 
[12] apply ensemble classifiers from semantic features to improve the performance of classification tasks compared 
with traditional bag-of-word models. Yadav et al [13] build a convolutional neural networks (CNN) -based model to 
implement a patient assisted system from patient.info data. Broek-Altenburg et al. ][14] analysis consumers’ sentiments 
of purchasing health insurance during enrollment season. These techniques are also applied to the reseach of sexual 
minority groups’ sentiment analysis using social media data. Fitri et al. [15] conduct sentiment analysis of twitter data 
using machine learning algorithms with focus on an anti-LGBT campaign in Indonesia. Khatua et al. [16] explores the 
tweeting attitude in support of LGBT community in India with a deep learning approach. Unlike previous research, we 
find transgender group is less discussed and may have more serious mental health concerns. To these limitations, we 
will apply natural language processing techniques to analyze transgender peoples’ sentiments on social media. 
 
3 Methods 
3.1 Dataset 
We use the dataset pulished at https://github.com/mjtat/Trans-NLP-Project. In this dataset, more than 20 thousand 
comments are crawled from the sub-reddit /r/asktransgender. We can not annotate the sentiments of each comment as it 
requires tremendous labor. Thus, we manually annotated 300 of all extracted comments and apply natural language 
processing to automatic annotate the other comments. Each comment will be categorized as one of the three sentiments: 
negative, positive and neutral. Two annotators are involved in our annotation process. They first discuss the definition 
of each label and then reach a consensus. The Cohen’s kappa [17] score of each label is calculated to evaluate the 
inter-rater reliability. For those comments that both annotators can’t make a consensus, annotator3 is involved to give a 
find result. The definition, statistics and Cohen’s kappa score of each label is shown in Table 1. 
 
3.2 Machine Learning Classifiers 
We apply traditional Bag-of-Words [18] model to tokenize each reddit comment. On tokenizing to spare matrix,  
term frequency–inverse document frequency (TF-IDF) is used to adjust weight of each word in order to highlight the 
keywords of each comment. We will apply conventional machine learning algorithms to build a multi-class (3-class) 
classifier. The algorithms including naive Bayes, random forest, support vector machine with linear kernel [19], logistic 
Negative 
Being   scared   of   receiving   medical   treatments  
and all other negative sentiments caused by transgender. 
72 
24.00% 
0.825 
I’ve had them for years and years now, 
but at the same time I’ve rarely showed outward 
evidence of femininity in my daily life ... 
 
Positive 
Feeling comfortable, confident, and proud of 
being a transgender people; Positively receiving 
medical treatment; Helping other people 
 
85 
 
28.33% 
Reading a lot about gender dysphoria and online tests re: 
0.877 
transgender identity. I realize that while I (AMAB) have recently 
begun intermittently fantasizing about being a woman, 
 
in the community and all other positive feelings 
associated with transgender. 
 
 
I don’t have any negative feelings about my life prior to these... 
 
Neutral 
The posts can’t be categorized to negative or 
positive sentiment ; Or can be categorized 
 
143 
 
47.67% 
So, I’ve got an appointment coming up with my primary care physician, 
0.902 
basically to attempt to suss out whether I could go thru the process of 
 
to both sentiments. 
 
 
what I should be asking, but I’m not sure what to really ask or to expect. 
3 
 
Table 2: Performance of 5 machine learning classifiers and 2 deep neural networks on trangender sentiment analysis 
 
Algorithm 
Accuray 
Averaged AUC 
Naive Bayes 
0.777 
0.720 
Random Forest 
0.821 
0.868 
Support Vector Machine 
0.832 
0.842 
Logistic Regression 
0.829 
0.851 
K-Nearest Neighbour 
0.764 
0.767 
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) 0.861 
0.834 
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) 
0.852 
0.876 
 
regression and k-nearest neighbors. These conventional algorithms will be compared with deep learning models  
mentioned in this section. 
 
3.3 Deep Learning Models 
We adopt convolutional neural networks (CNN) and recurrent neural networks to train a text classifier. Before feeding 
into the deep neural networks, each comment will be represented by a word2vec embedding [20] that is pre-trained 
on large scale social media data. The detailed configuration of CNN is listed as follows: the network is stacked with 
3 convolutional layers with 128, 64, and 32 7-dimension filters; each convolutional layer is activated by a rectifier 
(ReLU) activation function, a global max pooling and a dropout layer (dropout rate is 0.2); a dense layer is added to the 
convolutional features to 3 classes. For RNN network, we stack 3 layer of long short-term memory (LSTM) [21] layers 
with 128, 64 and 32 neurons. Each layer is followed by a sigmoid activation function. Same embedding scheme as CNN 
is applied. For both deep neural networks, we employ Adam optimizer and binary cross-entropy loss function. Batch 
size is set to be 32. We train each model for 100 epochs with early stopping conditioned on the loss of development set. 
 
3.4 Evaluation 
We leave 20% of the entire dataset as the held-out test. Accuracy and averaged AUC across all 3 labels used to evaluate 
the performance of our models. For conventional classifiers, 5-fold cross validation is used to select best configurations. 
For deep neural networks, 10% of the training set is used as the development set to tune hyper parameters. 
 
3.5 Implentation 
All experiments are implemented using Python 3.6. Keras is used to design deep neural networks. Conventional 
machine leanring classifiers are built with scikit-learn package. We used a single GPU to expedite the training of deep 
neural networks. 
 
4 Results 
The annotation results are shown in Table 1. Among the 300 reddit comment, 72 are categorized as negative post, while 
85 are annotated to be positive content. The rest 48% are considered as neutral sentiment. The Cohen’s Kappa score is 
over 0.8 across all classes, which can be considered as a powerful annotation with high inter-rating agreement. 
The performance of our NLP methods is shown in Table 2. Naive Bayes method serves as the baseline performance. 
All other models outperforms baseline by more than 5 percent on accuracy except K-nearest neighbour. Convolutional 
neural network yields the best accuracy of 0.861, followed by Long Short-Term Memory, which has an accuracy of 
0.852. These 2 deep neural networks achieve better performance than all conventional machine learning classifier. 
LSTM also obtains an optimal AUC of 0.876, follwed by random forest, which has an AUC of 0.868. In short, LSTM 
yields the best performance when evaluated both on accuracy and AUC. 
 
5 Discussion and conclusion 
We visualize the single word’s weights in logistic regression to discuss the important words that contribute to classifica- 
tion in Fig. 1. Top 20 words are visualized to a word cloud figure. We can see it is natural that trans and transgender are 
two words of the greatest importance. Besides this dysphoria is also heavily mentioned in the comments. The words: 
question, wondering, anything and anyone are also very important to the classification. These words may related to the 
depression and helpless of transgender community. 
4 
 
 
 
Figure 1: A word cloud of Top 20 important words contribute to classification 
 
In terms of real case use, our classifier can identify negative sentiment from transgender people when they post on 
social media. This may help health providers understand the mental condition of transgender community better. It can 
be also used to detect extreme negative sentiments from these community and send alert to the friends, doctors or social 
media users themselves so that early intervention can be applied. 
Our work also have following limitations. First, we only annotate 300 reddit comments which may not large enough for 
our NLP algorithms to build a solid automatic model. Second, we don’t apply the most trending NLP algorithms such 
as graph convolutional networks [22] and transformer-based BERT model [23]. In the next step, we are planning to 
employ more powerful algorithms on a larger annotated dataset. 
 
6 Author Contribution Statement 
The research idea is discussed by all authors. Y.L. and Y.W annotate all 300 reddit comments. For those annotations 
without agreement between Y.L. and Y.W., Y.Z. is involved to give a final decision. Y.L., Y.W. and Y.Z. complete all 
experiments, error analysis and manuscript draft writing. Z.L. modifies the manuscript to a higher academic standard. 
5 
 
References 
[1] Kristen Schilt and Laurel Westbrook. Doing gender, doing heteronormativity: “gender normals,” transgender 
people, and the social maintenance of heterosexuality. Gender & society, 23(4):440–464, 2009. 
[2] Ray Blanchard, Leonard H Clemmensen, and Betty W Steiner. Heterosexual and homosexual gender dysphoria. 
Archives of sexual behavior, 16(2):139–152, 1987. 
[3] Hanneke Van den Akker, Rozemarijn Van der Ploeg, and Peer Scheepers. Disapproval of homosexuality: 
Comparative research on individual and national determinants of disapproval of homosexuality in 20 european 
countries. International Journal of Public Opinion Research, 25(1):64–86, 2013. 
[4] Jaclyn M White Hughto, Sari L Reisner, and John E Pachankis. Transgender stigma and health: A critical review 
of stigma determinants, mechanisms, and interventions. Social science & medicine, 147:222–231, 2015. 
[5] June Sing Hong Lam and Alex Abramovich. Transgender-inclusive care. CMAJ, 191(3):E79–E79, 2019. 
[6] Alicia Lucksted. Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people receiving services in the public mental health 
system: Raising issues. Journal of Gay & Lesbian Psychotherapy, 8(3-4):25–42, 2004. 
[7] Yikuan Li, Liang Yao, Chengsheng Mao, Anand Srivastava, Xiaoqian Jiang, and Yuan Luo. Early prediction  
of acute kidney injury in critical care setting using clinical notes. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on 
Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM), pages 683–686. IEEE, 2018. 
[8] Hanyin Wang, Yikuan Li, Hongyan Ning, John Wilkins, Donald Lloyd-Jones, and Yuan Luo. Using machine 
learning to integrate socio-behavioral factors in predicting cardiovascular-related mortality risk. In MedInfo, pages 
433–437, 2019. 
[9] Yikuan Li, Hanyin Wang, and Yuan Luo. A comparison of pre-trained vision-and-language models for multimodal 
representation learning across medical images and reports. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.01523, 2020. 
[10] Pranav Rajpurkar, Jeremy Irvin, Kaylie Zhu, Brandon Yang, Hershel Mehta, Tony Duan, Daisy Ding, Aarti Bagul, 
Curtis Langlotz, Katie Shpanskaya, et al. Chexnet: Radiologist-level pneumonia detection on chest x-rays with 
deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05225, 2017. 
[11] Babak Alipanahi, Andrew Delong, Matthew T Weirauch, and Brendan J Frey. Predicting the sequence specificities 
of dna-and rna-binding proteins by deep learning. Nature biotechnology, 33(8):831–838, 2015. 
[12] Monisha Kanakaraj and Ram Mohana Reddy Guddeti. Performance analysis of ensemble methods on twitter 
sentiment analysis using nlp techniques. In Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE 9th International Conference on 
Semantic Computing (IEEE ICSC 2015), pages 169–170. IEEE, 2015. 
[13] Ashima Yadav and Dinesh Kumar Vishwakarma. Sentiment analysis using deep learning architectures: a review. 
Artificial Intelligence Review, 53(6):4335–4385, 2020. 
[14] Eline M van den Broek-Altenburg and Adam J Atherly. Using social media to identify consumers’ sentiments 
towards attributes of health insurance during enrollment season. Applied Sciences, 9(10):2035, 2019. 
[15] Veny Amilia Fitri, Rachmadita Andreswari, and Muhammad Azani Hasibuan. Sentiment analysis of social media 
twitter with case of anti-lgbt campaign in indonesia using naïve bayes, decision tree, and random forest algorithm. 
Procedia Computer Science, 161:765–772, 2019. 
[16] Aparup Khatua, Erik Cambria, Kuntal Ghosh, Nabendu Chaki, and Apalak Khatua. Tweeting in support of lgbt? a 
deep learning approach. In Proceedings of the ACM India Joint International Conference on Data Science and 
Management of Data, pages 342–345, 2019. 
[17] Kenneth J Berry and Paul W Mielke Jr. A generalization of cohen’s kappa agreement measure to interval 
measurement and multiple raters. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 48(4):921–933, 1988. 
[18] Yin Zhang, Rong Jin, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Understanding bag-of-words model: a statistical framework. Interna- 
tional Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics, 1(1-4):43–52, 2010. 
[19] Cho-Jui Hsieh, Kai-Wei Chang, Chih-Jen Lin, S Sathiya Keerthi, and Sellamanickam Sundararajan. A dual 
coordinate descent method for large-scale linear svm. In Proceedings of the 25th international conference on 
Machine learning, pages 408–415, 2008. 
[20] Stephan A Curiskis, Barry Drake, Thomas R Osborn, and Paul J Kennedy. An evaluation of document clustering 
and topic modelling in two online social networks: Twitter and reddit. Information Processing & Management, 
57(2):102034, 2020. 
[21] Felix A Gers, Jürgen Schmidhuber, and Fred Cummins. Learning to forget: Continual prediction with lstm. 1999. 
6 
 
[22] Liang Yao, Chengsheng Mao, and Yuan Luo. Graph convolutional networks for text classification. In Proceedings 
of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pages 7370–7377, 2019. 
[23] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional 
transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018. 
