Title: Developing and Evaluating an AI-Assisted Prediction Model for Unplanned Intensive Care Admissions following Elective Neurosurgery using Natural Language Processing within an Electronic Healthcare Record System
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.09927v1
--------------------------------------------------

 
 
1 
 
Developing and Evaluating an AI-Assisted Prediction Model for Unplanned Intensive Care 
Admissions following Elective Neurosurgery using Natural Language Processing within an Electronic 
Healthcare Record System 
 
Julia Ive1*, Olatomiwa Olukoya2,3*, Jonathan P. Funnell4, James Booker4, Sze H M Lam2, Ugan Reddy5, 
Kawsar Noor 1,6,7, Richard JB Dobson1,6,7,8, Astri M.V. Luoma5**, Hani J Marcus2,3,4**  
1UCL Institute of Health Informatics, University College London, London, UK 
2Department of Neurosurgery, National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, London, UK  
3UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, University College London, London, UK 
4 UCL Hawkes Institute, University College London, London, UK 
5Department of Neuroanaesthesia and Neurocritical Care, National Hospital for Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, London, UK 
6National Institute for Health and Care Research Biomedical Research Centre, University College 
London, London, UK.  
7Health Data Research UK, London, UK.  
8Department of Biostatistics and Health Informatics, King’s College, London, London, UK 
 
*equal contribution and joint first authorship 
**equal contribution and joint senior authorship 
Corresponding Author: Dr Julia Ive, email: j.ive@ucl.ac.uk 
 
 
 
2 
 
Abstract 
Introduction 
National guidelines recommend critical care admissions for those surgical patients with a significant 
30-day mortality risk or those deemed high risk due to age or comorbidities. Timely care in a 
specialised neuro-intensive therapy unit (ITU) reduces mortality and hospital stays, with planned 
admissions being safer than unplanned ones. However, post-operative care decisions remain 
subjective. This study used artificial intelligence (AI), specifically natural language processing (NLP) to 
analyse electronic health records (EHRs) and predict ITU admissions for elective surgery patients. The 
primary goal was to evaluate the effectiveness of AI assistance in minimising decision errors and 
reducing ITU admission costs. 
Methods 
This study analysed the EHRs of elective neurosurgery patients from University College London 
Hospital (UCLH) using NLP. Patients were categorised into planned high dependency unit (HDU) or ITU 
admission; unplanned HDU or ITU admission; or ward / overnight recovery (ONR). Levels of care were 
defined according to literature consensus - critical care was defined as level 2 or level 3 care, with level 
2 care corresponding to HDU care and level 3 corresponding to ITU care; level 1 care was non-critical 
care. The Medical Concept Annotation Tool (MedCAT) – a named-entity-recognition (NER) machine 
learning model available through the CogStack platform – was used to identify Systematised 
Nomenclature of Medical Clinical Terms (SNOMED-CT) concepts within the clinical notes. We then 
explored the utility of these identified concepts for a range of AI algorithms trained to predict ITU 
admission. Finally, we evaluated the results using both performance metrics and interpretability 
algorithms to identify the key concepts influencing AI predictions. Additionally, we assessed the 
model's calibration and fairness. We adhered to the TRIPOD+AI guidance for reporting clinical 
prediction models. 
Results 
The CogStack-MedCAT NLP model, initially trained on hospital-wide EHRs, underwent two 
refinements: first with data from patients with Normal Pressure Hydrocephalus (NPH) and then with 
data from Vestibular Schwannoma (VS) patients, achieving a concept detection F1-score of 0.93. This 
refined model was then used to extract concepts from EHR notes of 2,268 eligible neurosurgical 
patients, categorised into planned HDU or ITU admission (349), unplanned HDU or ITU admission (87), 
and level 1/ward care (1,832). 
We integrated the extracted concepts into AI models, including a decision tree model and a neural 
time-series model. Using the simpler decision tree model, we achieved a recall of 0.87 (CI 0.82 - 0.91) 
for ITU admissions, reducing the proportion of unplanned ITU cases missed by human experts from 
36% to 4%. Our interpretability analysis confirmed that this high performance utilises clinically 
relevant neurovascular, neuro-oncology, and musculoskeletal concepts in the notes. 
Conclusion 
This exploratory study successfully demonstrates the potential of AI and NLP to analyse the EHRs of 
post-operative neurosurgical patients and characterise them based on their post-operative 
destinations (ward or HDU or ITU care). The NLP model, refined for accuracy, has proven its efficiency 
in extracting relevant concepts, providing a reliable basis for predictive AI models to use in clinically 
valid applications. The study highlights the opportunity for AI to aid in allocating resources for 
neurosurgical patients but requires further research and integration into clinical practice.  
 
 
3 
 
Introduction 
Intensive therapy units (ITU) have been developed to provide more detailed observations and invasive 
treatments for patients who typically require single or multiple organ support (1,2). National 
guidelines in the USA, UK and elsewhere recommend that routine critical care admissions be common 
practice for surgical patients with a significant 30-day mortality, or who are deemed to be at a higher 
risk due to their age and / or comorbidities (1,3,4), to improve patient outcomes. Critical care has been 
defined in the literature as those requiring level 2 or 3 care, with level 3 corresponding to ITU care 
where, either advanced respiratory or multi-organ support is required; and level 2 care corresponding 
to High Dependency Unit (HDU) care reserved for more detailed observations or single organ support 
(1). Critical care admission is prevalent in neurosurgery due to the high morbidity and mortality that 
exists. In addition, neurosurgical interventions have significant complications with a 22.2% 
complication rate following cranial surgery and 11.1% following spinal surgery; 4.8% mortality rate 
following cranial surgery and 0.5% following spinal surgery (5). 
It is well-recognised that critically ill neurological and neurosurgical patients benefit from timely care 
in a specialised neuro-ITU in the form of reduced mortality and length of hospital stay (6,7). 
Furthermore, there is evidence that outcomes are better for planned ITU admissions following surgery 
(1,4,8). Conversely, unplanned intensive care admissions, when patients are triaged pre-operatively 
as not requiring ITU, but later do, are more costly and have an increased risk of longer hospital stays, 
morbidity and mortality (10–12). Additionally, due to the aging neurosurgical patient population, the 
consequences of getting the decision wrong are greater (13–15).  
However, there is great variability across centres in how patients are selected for intensive care post-
operatively following elective craniotomy (16). It used to be common practice that all patients 
required intensive care management or monitoring following elective craniotomy (17). However, with 
the development of post-anaesthesia care units (PACU), the adequacy of HDU, and routine post-
operative extubation in the operating room enabling direct ward discharges, there has been a push 
towards discouraging ITU admission as routine practice (16,17). It remains the case that decisions on 
the post-operative destination for elective neurosurgical patients are based on expert opinion rather 
than on robust objective data (17,18). Due to factors such as recency bias, and other human factor 
error, this decision-making process is far more prone to error with 14 – 28% of ITU admissions being 
unplanned (12,19,20).   
The widespread adoption of electronic health records (EHRs) has led to a significant increase in the 
exploration of artificial intelligence (AI) to streamline healthcare processes. Among the most pertinent 
AI subfields in this context are machine learning (ML) and natural language processing (NLP) (6). ML 
empowers computers to learn autonomously and make predictions by recognising patterns in new 
data, without the need for explicit programming. This capability is especially crucial for the large-scale 
analysis of narrative data found in EHRs, where NLP enables computers to extract meaningful 
information from unstructured text entries. 
Predicting unplanned ITU admissions is understudied, with most studies rely on structured data (21).  
Our study is the first to demonstrate that an NLP-driven algorithm can accurately detect unplanned 
ITU admissions using unstructured text from EHRs. 
Study Aims and Objectives 
The aim of this study is to evaluate the effectiveness of NLP algorithms in analysing clinical information 
from EHRs to detect unplanned ITU admissions among elective neurosurgical patients. The intended 
 
 
4 
 
users of this AI assistant are healthcare professionals, including doctors and nurses, to enhance their 
clinical decisions with data-driven insights. 
Our objectives are: 
1. Build a reliable NLP model to accurately extract concepts from the free-text notes of patients 
undergoing elective surgery. 
2. Demonstrate the utility of concept extraction by NLP to support human experts in enhancing 
decision-making for intensive care settings. This includes a proof of concept evaluating the 
importance of these extracted features for predicting ITU admissions, particularly unplanned 
cases. 
3. Conduct a thorough interpretability study to confirm the clinical intuition behind the 
importance scores of the extracted features. 
Methods 
Ethical Considerations 
The study was approved by the University College London Hospital (UCLH) Information Governance 
Board. The study was not registered. No study protocol was prepared for this study. 
Study Design 
This study analyses the clinical records of elective neurosurgical patients at UCLH using NLP. Written 
EHRs, including clinical notes, correspondence, and radiology reports, were collected for patients 
undergoing neurosurgery from April 2019 to September 2021. Patients were categorised into three 
groups: planned HDU or ITU admissions, unplanned HDU or ITU admissions, and all others. 
Planned admissions were defined as post-operative destinations that were pre-booked and agreed 
upon before the surgery. Unplanned admissions were defined as either: a) a decision to admit to 
neurocritical care after the commencement of surgery, or b) admission to ITU or HDU up to 14 days 
post-surgery due to complications (22). 
Patients were identified from a prospectively maintained clinical database. According to the consensus 
statement released by the Intensive Care Society (23), ITU corresponds to level 3 care, HDU to level 2 
care, and "everyone else" to level 1 or ward-level care. 
Eligibility Criteria 
We included all patients who underwent elective neurosurgical procedures at our hospital between 
April 2019 and September 2021. Exclusions were made for patients undergoing interventional 
radiological procedures, those whose electronic health records were unavailable, and patients 
undergoing carpal tunnel or ulnar decompression, nerve and muscle biopsies, or the insertion of sacral 
nerve modulators. Patients whose pre-operative urgency of surgical interventions could not be 
determined according to the NCEPOD (National Confidential Enquiry into Patient Outcome and Death) 
(24) classification or prior post-operative decisions were excluded. To ensure unique entries across 
the cohorts, only the first operation for each patient was included. 
Cohort Characteristics 
 
 
5 
 
From the UCLH databases, 2,268 patients met the eligibility criteria for inclusion. Among these, 349 
were admitted to HDU or ITU in a planned manner, 87 were admitted in an unplanned manner, and 
1,832 required either level 1 or ward-level care post-operatively. 
Demographic information, including age, sex, and ethnicity, was extracted from structured data 
elements within the EHR. Additionally, diagnoses, signs, symptoms, and co-morbidities were also 
recorded. 
The overall median age at the time of operation was 56 years (ranging from 16 to 95 years), with a 
male to female ratio of 1:1.05 (49% males, 51% females). Most patients identified ethnically as White 
(60%). 
Natural Language Processing (NLP) Model: Training and Evaluation 
We used the CogStack information retrieval platform to extract written clinical information for eligible 
patients from the EHR system (Epic Systems, Verona, USA) (25). This extracted information was then 
processed through the CogStack Natural Language Processing platform, enabling analysis with the 
Medical Concept Annotation Tool (MedCAT), a named-entity-recognition (NER) machine learning 
model, which identified Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine Clinical Terms (SNOMED-CT) 
concepts within the clinical notes (25,26). 
The MedCAT model was trained in two distinct phases. The first phase involved unsupervised learning 
to develop a base model using non-specific medical records. During this phase, we pre-trained the 
model on 1 million randomly sampled EHRs from the hospital-wide database. Following this, the 
model was fine-tuned using 500 randomly sampled documents annotated with SNOMED-CT concepts 
by two independent assessors, creating a versatile base model. 
In the second phase, this base model underwent further fine-tuning for specific conditions. Initially, it 
was fine-tuned for Normal Pressure Hydrocephalus (NPH), and subsequently for Vestibular 
Schwannoma (VS). This two-step fine-tuning process resulted in a final model with enhanced 
applicability to elective neurosurgical patients. 
During this second stage the base model pre-annotated 300 documents from NPH patients. These 
annotations were then validated in a blinded manner by two independent assessors using the 
MedCATTrainer interface (27). The assessors reviewed the model's annotations to label terms as 
correct or incorrect or selected a different concept that best represented the written information. 
Discrepancies between the assessors were resolved through discussion or adjudication by a third 
assessor if necessary (see (28) for details). 
This first refinement phase achieved a high inter-annotator agreement of 97%. The validated dataset 
was then used to train the ML model, utilising 80% of the eligible documents. The remaining 20% of 
the documents were reserved for testing, and model accuracy was assessed using cross-validation on 
the test set. Cross-validation on the test set involves dividing the test set into k subsets and evaluating 
the model k times. This approach provides a more reliable estimate of model performance, reducing 
the impact of any one test split that might be unusually easy or difficult. The refined model 
demonstrated high precision and recall, achieving a macro F1-score of 0.92 across identified SNOMED-
CT concepts. Precision measures the proportion of examples that the model correctly identifies as 
relevant out of all the cases it predicts as relevant. Recall measures the proportion of actual relevant 
examples that the model identifies. The F1-score combines precision and recall into their harmonic 
mean, providing a balanced measure of the model's performance.  
 
 
6 
 
The second refinement followed a similar process using records from VS patients. The model 
annotated 300 documents from the VS patient dataset, which were validated by two independent 
assessors using the MedCATTrainer interface. The model achieved an inter-annotator agreement of 
72%, indicating substantial agreement. 80% of the validated dataset was used to train the model, 
while the remaining 20% served as the test set. The model achieved a macro F1-score of 0.93 on the 
test set in a cross-validation setup (29). 
This twice refined and validated base model was then applied to documents from ITU patients meeting 
the eligibility criteria. Due to time constraints, validation of the model's performance on these records 
was not possible. However, given the overlap in patient groups, we expect assessment results to be 
similar to the ones reported above. 
Meta-annotations were employed to enhance the accuracy and relevance of the extracted 
information for our ITU cohort. These annotations are particularly valuable in cases where, despite 
accurately capturing a term's intended meaning, contextual qualifiers render it irrelevant to the 
patient. For instance, a documented diagnosis might be negated, as in "COVID-negative"; it might 
pertain to another individual, as in "family history"; or it might indicate a suspected diagnosis. Terms 
marked with meta-annotations such as "Negation = Yes," "Experiencer = Other," and "Certainty = 
Suspected" were excluded from further analysis, as they were deemed not directly relevant to the 
patient." 
Predictive Models: Training and Evaluation 
We considered the task of predicting ITU admissions or ward stays a binary prediction problem. We 
explored the potential of concepts extracted by CogStack using both time-unaware Random Forests 
(RFs) (30) and time-series Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks (31). We investigated both time-
series and non-time-series approaches to effectively capture the intricacies of patient data. Both RFs 
and LSTM networks are well-established techniques within the AI community, particularly in 
healthcare applications. 
The RF algorithm constructs multiple decision trees using random subsets of the data and combines 
their results to enhance accuracy. Each decision tree classifies data by forming a tree-like structure 
where internal nodes represent decision rules, branches represent outcomes, and leaf nodes 
represent final predictions. This algorithm does not account for patient timelines and uses the counts 
of concepts from each patient's notes as inputs. We employed the K-Best feature selection method, 
based on the Chi-squared statistic, to identify the most relevant features for RFs. This method selects 
the top k features that have the highest Chi-squared scores, indicating their importance in 
distinguishing between different classes. 
In contrast, LSTM networks are designed to handle sequential data, processing patient notes one at a 
time. Following best NLP practices, we encoded patient notes using the BERT (Bidirectional Encoder 
Representations from Transformers) algorithm (32). BERT, based on transformer models, processes 
words in relation to all other words in a text span, providing a deep understanding of context and 
encoding the interdependencies of concepts in clinical notes. 
To ensure the robustness of our outcomes, we trained multiple models with different random seeds 
and employed the cross-validation technique. This technique involves partitioning the dataset into k 
"folds" or subsets (we used k=5 in our case). Each model is trained on a combination of these folds 
and tested on the remaining fold, rotating through all folds to ensure each is used for both training 
and testing. 
 
 
7 
 
We used Scikit-learn (33) and Pytorch (34). The implementation details and hyperparameters for our 
models are detailed in Section A.1 of the Appendix. Hyperparameters were chosen via manual search. 
We used the standard threshold of 0.5 as a decision rule to convert model probabilities into 
classification outcomes. This means that if the predicted probability of an ITU was 0.5 or higher, the 
model classified it as a positive case. Probabilities below 0.5 were classified as ward admissions. 
To assess the quality of ITU admission predictions, we calculated the F1-score, precision, recall and 
False Negative (FN) ratio at the patient level. The False Negative (FN) ratio refers to the proportion of 
times a model fails to identify an admission when it is present. 
We assessed calibration curves to evaluate how well the predicted probabilities matched actual 
outcomes. Calibration curves are computed by dividing predicted probabilities into bins and 
comparing the average predicted probability and actual ITU rate for each bin. Accurate probabilities 
could help healthcare professionals to adequately assess risk levels. Additionally, we assessed fairness 
by evaluating classification parity across sex and ethnicity demographic subgroups. We measured the 
ratios of our performance metrics (precision, recall, etc.) for these subgroups (35). For example, we 
calculated the ratio of each performance metric for the Male group divided by the Female group, and 
similarly, we did the same for the White group divided by the Non-white group. 
To gain deeper insights into how our models make predictions, we employed SHAP (SHapley Additive 
exPlanations) (36) values and LIME (Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations) (37) 
interpretability techniques. SHAP values quantify the overall contribution of each feature to the 
prediction, indicating whether it positively or negatively impacts the outcome for any given input. This 
helps us understand the global behaviour of the model. On the other hand, LIME focuses on individual 
predictions by highlighting the most influential features for a specific patient, thereby elucidating the 
model's decision-making process for that particular case. 
Results 
Having outlined our methodological approach, including the use of ML techniques and interpretability 
tools, we now turn to the results of our analysis. The following section presents the key findings from 
our study, highlighting the performance metrics of our models and the insights gained from the data. 
Demographics 
Table 1 provides a detailed summary of the baseline statistics and demographics for ITU admissions 
and ward stays. Given the small sample size for ITU admissions, we averaged the results across 
subtypes to ensure a more reliable analysis. The data indicates that the median age for both ITU and 
ward patients is similar, at 56 and 57 years respectively, with ward patients exhibiting a slightly 
broader age range (16-95 years). The sex distribution is balanced, with an equal percentage of females 
in both ITU admissions and ward stays (51%). Ethnicity data shows a slightly higher proportion of 
White patients in ward stays (62%) compared to ITU admissions (57%). 
Note that the notes for 58 patients were unavailable from Epic at the time of extraction. 
Table 1. Patient Demographics and Baseline Statistics for ITU Admissions and Ward Patients. 
 
Count of 
patient IDs 
Median age, 
range 
Male/Female, % 
Ethnicity White / Non-
white, % 
Planned 
319 
56 (16-87 years) 
45% / 55% 
51% / 49% 
Unplanned 
79 
57 (19-82 years) 
54% / 46% 
63% / 38% 
Ward 
1812 
56 (16-95 years) 
49% / 51% 
62% / 38% 
 
 
8 
 
Overall 
2210 
56 (16-95 years) 
49% / 51% 
60% / 40% 
 
57,433 documents (47,048 level 1/ ward; 8,687 planned HDU or ITU; 1,698 unplanned HDU or ITU) 
were extracted from the 2,210 patients. All documents contained codable SNOMED-CT concepts and 
were predominantly either progress notes, plan of care notes or nursing notes.  
Overall, 8,300 unique SNOMED-CT concepts were extracted from the medical records. Of these, 6,462 
concepts appeared more than once, with 2,980 unique concepts in planned admissions, 1,369 unique 
concepts in unplanned admissions, and 5,879 unique concepts in level 1 or ward-level care. 
Descriptive Statistics  
Before applying ML to the concepts extracted by NLP, we first analysed the statistical differences in 
concept frequency counts between ITU and ward patients. Due to the limited sample size of 
unplanned ITU admissions, we did not separate the data into planned and unplanned categories. To 
address the significant imbalance in patient counts between groups, we analysed normalized 
frequency counts using the Chi-squared test to determine whether there were significant differences 
between ITU and ward patients. We selected the top 50 concepts based on their highest and lowest 
frequency ratios between ward and ITU patients. This selection allowed us to investigate the concepts 
that are more frequent among ward patients and those that are more common among ITU patients, 
respectively (see A.2 and A.3 in Appendix). 
The results of our analysis show that ward patients exhibit rare neurological disorders, such as 
trigeminal nerve disorder and moyamoya disease (both not seen in ITU patients). They also frequently 
have cardiovascular disorders, like aortic valve disorder (not seen in ITU) or aneurysm of the posterior 
cerebral artery (over 100 times more frequent than in ITU). Endocrine disorders, including central 
hypothyroidism and steroid-induced hyperglycemia (both not seen in ITU), and gastrointestinal 
disorders, such as carcinoma of the esophagus (not seen in ITU) and feeding problems (over 100 times 
more frequent in ward than in ITU), were also very common compared to ITU patients. 
In contrast, ITU patients presented more frequently with infectious diseases (22 times more frequent 
than in ward patients). Pain is another common symptom in ITU (3 times more common). ITU is also 
often associated with conditions like wounds (4 times more frequent) and musculoskeletal findings 
(19 times more common), including osteoporosis (15 times more frequent). 
These trends capture both chronic and acute comorbidities, with a greater representation of dynamic 
comorbidities in the ITU cohort. This may reflect the stability/instability divide, where ITU patients are 
more likely to be frailer and have a lower physiological reserve following an intracranial neurovascular 
event, making them more susceptible to pain and infections. 
Predictive AI Models 
For our predictive models in the binary classification scenario, we first filtered the patient notes in the 
original dataset to include only those within the 30-day window before the operation. This filtering 
reduced the dataset by 33 patients who did not have any notes in that period (see Table 2). After a 
manual inspection, no specific reason was identified for the absence of these notes. For training, most 
samples came from the ward category, resulting in a heavily imbalanced training set with a 10:1 
patient ratio for ward patients versus ITU admissions. In contrast, we designed a balanced test set 
with an equal ratio of ward patients to ITU admissions (1:1) via random sampling. It is important to 
note that all 75 cases of unplanned admissions were excluded from the training data and included in 
 
 
9 
 
the test set. Clinicians miss those 36% of actual HDU/ITU cases (i.e., the unplanned cases). The primary 
goal is to evaluate the effectiveness of automated assistance in minimising decision errors and 
reducing ITU admission costs. 
In the cross-validation setting, our predictive models demonstrated stable performance with relatively 
low standard deviation across different training folds (see A.4 in Appendix). This stability ensures 
reliable and consistent prediction outcomes. 
Table 2. Summary of Training and Test Data Statistics for Predictive Models (30-Day Pre-Operation 
Cutoff for Patient Notes) 
 
Train set, patients 
count 
Test set, patient 
count 
Planned ITU 
155 
135 
Unplanned ITU 
0 
75 
Ward 
1611 
201 
Total 
1766 
411 
 
Table 3. Performance Comparison of RF and BERT+LSTM Models for the ITU Test Set. Results are 
averaged over 100 runs for the RF model and 5 runs for the BERT+LSTM model. We report precision, 
recall, F1-score, and False Negative (FN) ratio for each patient group, with a breakdown of the ITU 
group into planned and unplanned admissions. The best results are highlighted in bold. To estimate 
the mean and 95% confidence intervals, we employed bootstrapping by resampling the test 
examples with replacement 1,000 times. 
 
RFs 
BERT+LSTM 
 
Prec ↑ 
(mean, CI) 
Recall ↑ 
(mean, CI) 
F1↑ 
(mean, CI) 
FN ↓ 
(mean, CI) 
Prec ↑ 
(mean, CI) 
Recall ↑ 
(mean, CI) 
F1↑ 
(mean, CI) 
FN ↓ 
(mean, CI) 
Ward 
0.88 
(0.84-
0.92) 
1.00 (1.00- 
1.00) 
 
0.94 (0.91 
- 0.96) 
- 
0.84 (0.80 
- 0.89) 
1.00 (1.00- 
1.00) 
0.92 (0.89 
- 0.94) 
- 
ITU 
1.00 
(1.00- 
1.00) 
0.87 (0.82 
- 0.91) 
0.93 (0.90 
- 0.95) 
0.13 
(0.09-
0.18) 
1.00 (1.00- 
1.00) 
0.82 (0.77 
- 0.87) 
0.90 (0.87 
- 0.93) 
0.18 (0.13 
- 0.23) 
Planned  
1.00 
(1.00- 
1.00) 
 
0.85 (0.80 
- 0.91) 
 
0.92 (0.88 
- 0.95) 
0.15 (0.09 
- 0.21) 
1.00 (1.00- 
1.00) 
 
0.81 (0.74 
- 0.87) 
0.89 (0.85 
- 0.93) 
0.19 (0.13 
- 0.26) 
Unplanned 
1.00 
(1.00- 
1.00) 
 
0.89 (0.82 
- 0.96) 
 
0.94 (0.90 
- 0.98) 
0.11 
(0.04-
0.18) 
1.00 (1.00- 
1.00) 
 
0.86 (0.77 
- 0.93) 
0.92 (0.87 
- 0.96) 
0.14 (0.07 
- 0.23) 
Prediction Results 
Results of our experiments are presented in Table 3. Both RF and time-series BERT+LSTM models 
achieve high precision (0.93 on average), recall (0.92 on average), and F1-scores (0.92 on average) 
across classes. In terms of performance per class, we observe notable variations: higher precision (1.0) 
and lower recall (0.85) is characteristic for the ITU patients but higher recall (1.0) and lower precision 
(0.86) for the ward patients. This is because ward patients are overrepresented in our training data 
leading to the models that better capture patterns related to this group.  
 
 
10 
 
The table indicates that RFs perform better than BERT+LSTM. The RF model achieves perfect precision 
and a recall of 0.87 for ITU admissions, 0.85 for planned ITU admissions, and 0.89 for unplanned ITU 
admissions. This highlights the model's potential to identify cases that clinicians might otherwise 
overlook. These metrics are, on average, 3 points higher than those for the BERT+LSTM model. The 
FN rates are 0.13 for ITU, 0.15 for planned, and 0.11 for unplanned admissions, averaging 0.04 lower 
than for the BERT+LSTM model. Notably, only 11% of unplanned ITU cases remain undetected, 
significantly reducing the total proportion of ITU cases missed by human experts from 36% to just 4%. 
It is important to note that the RF model does not consider the temporal aspect of patient data; it 
simply aggregates the concept counts from each patient's notes. As described in the Methods section, 
before inputting concept counts into the RF models, we identified the most important concepts using 
a feature selection algorithm based on the Chi-squared statistic. We selected the 20 most significant 
features to build our RF models. The number of features was a hyperparameter we fine-tuned 
manually (see Figure 2). These selected features align with the outcomes of our previous statistical 
analysis of concept distributions. In our previous analysis, we observed that neurological conditions, 
musculoskeletal issues including osteoporosis, pain, and gastrointestinal conditions were important 
in distinguishing between ward and ITU patients. Our feature selection process identifies 
neurovascular, neuro-oncological, and infection concepts (e.g., “Intracranial meningioma,” 
“Intracranial Aneurysm,” and “Fungal Infection of Central Nervous System”). It also highlights 
musculoskeletal concepts such as “Blister of Skin and/or Mucosa” and “Osteoporosis,” gastrointestinal 
concepts like “Carcinoma of Esophagus,” and pain-related concepts such as “Inguinal Pain.” 
Additionally, the external ventricular drain (EVD) is an important concept in ITU. It is essential for 
managing acute conditions that require immediate intervention to control intracranial pressure. In 
this context, "battery" specifically refers to the VNS (Vagus Nerve Stimulator) battery. The proper 
functioning of this device is vital for patients with epilepsy or depression, as it plays a crucial role in 
managing these chronic conditions. "Dry skin" primarily indicates the state of post-operative wounds 
that heal. 
Figure 2. Top 20 Most Important Concepts Selected by the Chi-Squared Statistic for the RF Algorithm 
for ITU Admission Prediction. The selected features align with our statistical analysis, emphasising the 
significance of neurovascular, neuro-oncological, infection and musculoskeletal concepts for ITU / 
ward patients. Note that Battery stands for VNS (vagus nerve stimulation) battery, and EVD refers to 
the external ventricular drain. 
 
 
 
11 
 
In contrast, BERT+LSTM processes each patient note individually and examines the sequential 
dependencies of those notes. This approach might explain the increase in missed ITU cases (0.04 
higher FN rates than for RFs), as the model's complexity may hinder its ability to learn effectively from 
the limited data. 
We attempted to investigate whether RFs and the BERT+LSTM model identify different cases. To do 
so, we averaged the output probabilities of both models and applied a decision rule with a threshold 
of 0.5 to predict ITU admissions. However, we observed that the detected ITU cases overlapped, and 
this ensembling approach did not provide any improvement over using RFs alone (see A.5 in 
Appendix). 
We further evaluated our best RF model by measuring its calibration and fairness. Among the three 
models, RFs demonstrated better calibration, remaining closest to the ideal line, especially in mid-
range probability values. In contrast, the BERT+LSTM and Ensembling models exhibited stronger 
miscalibration, underestimating the probability of ITU due to imbalanced data (see A.6 in Appendix). 
Our RF model demonstrated classification parity across sex and ethnicity groups (0.99 ratio across 
metrics for both Male/Female and White/Non-white subgroups). The only notable difference was a 
slightly lower FN rate for Female and Non-white patients (1.29 ratio on average across demographic 
groups), suggesting better recall for these subgroups (see A.7 and A.8 in Appendix). 
Explainability 
Our models demonstrate very good predictive capabilities.  However, these numerical values alone 
do not provide any insights on whether the model decision-making procedure is correct. Hence, we 
conduct a thorough explainability analysis. We use the two popular interpretability techniques: SHAP 
(Shapley Additive Explanations, (36)) and Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations (LIME, (37)) 
to understand how individual concepts contribute to model predictions and whether those 
contributions could be justified from the clinical perspective. In our interpretability analysis we focus 
on the RF model for simplicity.  
SHAP values provide feature importances across all model predictions. This approach directly links 
back to our feature selection process, enabling us to understand how changes in each concept count 
influence the predicted probability of ITU admission (see Figure 3 for predictions over the training 
data). Positive values on the x-axis indicate an increased chance of ITU admission, while negative 
values reduce this chance. The colour on the y-axis represents concept counts, with red indicating high 
values and blue indicating low values. From Figure 3, we can see that frequent mentions of 
osteoporosis and dry skin decrease the chance of ITU admission, while conditions such as intracranial 
meningioma and aneurysm increase those chances.  
Note that the Chi-squared feature importance plot (Figure 2) and the SHAP feature importance plot 
highlight different aspects of the feature selection process. The Chi-squared test measures the 
statistical dependence between each feature and the target variable. Features with the highest Chi-
squared scores, such as “EVD,“ “Hemangioma,“ and “Intracranial meningioma,“ indicate a significant 
association with the target label. On the other hand, Shapley values measure the contribution of each 
feature to a model's prediction, showing how individual features interact with each other and 
contribute to the model's decision-making process. Here, features like “Osteoporosis“ and “Dry skin“ 
appear at the top. Although statistical analysis showed that “Osteoporosis “ and “Dry skin“ are more 
frequent for ITU patients (see A.3 in Appendix), their presence in combination with other features 
steers the model towards predicting a ward stay. All these differences suggest that some features with 
high statistical correlation may not influence prediction outcomes in the expected way, while others 
 
 
12 
 
with lower Chi-squared scores can have a higher contribution in combination with other features. 
Additionally, features with higher Chi-squared scores may influence the model in unexpected ways 
when considered in complex interactions with other features. 
Figure 3. SHAP Global Feature Importance Outcomes for the RF Model on the ITU Training Set. The 
top features for ITU admission are sorted by their mean absolute SHAP importance values. Each row 
indicates the impact of each concept on predictions, with each data sample represented as a dot. The 
colour of the dots ranges from blue (lower concept frequency values) to red (higher frequency values). 
The horizontal position of a dot (SHAP value) shows the concept’s contribution to the prediction, with 
right indicating ITU admission and left indicating ward. For example, in the top row, less frequent 
mentions of osteoporosis increase the chances of ward stay, while frequent mentions of intracranial 
meningioma increase the probability of ITU admission. 
 
In contrast, the LIME technique offers localised explanations for each individual example (see Figure 
4). By applying LIME to ITU admission predictions, we can examine why the model classified one 
patient as requiring ITU admission while another was not flagged. We have thoroughly investigated 
our LIME explanations and discovered that correct predictions of unplanned admissions rely on 
infectious, pain, and musculoskeletal conditions. False negatives, or missed unplanned cases, are 
frequently associated with mentions of osteoporosis and dry skin.  
To conclude, we observe high coherence between model explainability outcomes and statistical 
observations confirming clinical validity of our high prediction performance. 
Figure 4. LIME Analysis of an Unplanned ITU Case Flagged by our Model (True Positive Prediction). 
The x-axis represents concept importance, where positive values (orange) indicate features that 
contribute to ITU admission, while negative values (blue) indicate concepts that contribute to ward 
stay. The y-axis lists the contributing concepts and their importance scores. In this example, the 
neurological disorders "Congenital arteriovenous malformation" and "Intracranial meningioma" 
contribute to the correct prediction of admission with highest importance scores. The scores of other 
concepts fall below the threshold of floating-point precision. 
 
 
 
13 
 
Discussion 
Principal findings  
This exploratory study serves as a proof of concept and demonstrates the ability of an artificial 
intelligence (AI) natural language processing (NLP) model to analyse the electronic health records 
(EHRs) of post-operative elective neurosurgical patients and effectively characterise their post-
operative destinations.  
This is exciting given the novelty and the potential scope of its application. AI has already 
demonstrated its utility within neurosurgery in various ways, such as in automatic tumour 
segmentation; the prediction of symptomatic vasospasm following subarachnoid haemorrhage; and 
in the prediction of survival in patients with Glioma (38,39). Similarly, NLP, has been utilised in the 
field of spinal surgery to analyse operative notes, radiology reports, and social media to detect 
outcomes such as post-operative infections, venous thromboembolism, and patient satisfaction (40). 
The CogStack NLP model was twice-refined, first using the data of patients with NPH and then with 
the data of Vestibular Schwannoma patients. The model was proven, following these rounds of 
refinement, to be both accurate (substantial or high inter-annotator agreement) and precise (F1-score 
0.93 on average) (28, 29).  Our investigations of the extracted concepts revealed significant differences 
in the prevalence of infectious, pain and musculoskeletal conditions which were much more common 
in ITU patients. In contrast, rare neurological disorders, cardiovascular and endocrine disorders were 
more prevalent in ward patients.  This distinction may reflect the greater frailty and lower 
physiological reserve of ITU patients, making them more susceptible to infections. 
We integrated the extracted concepts into two AI predictive models: Random Forests (RFs) and Long 
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks enhanced with BERT embeddings. The simpler and more 
intuitive RF model was the clear winner, with a recall of 0.89 (CI 0.82 - 0.91) for unplanned ITU, 
reducing the total proportion of ITU cases missed by human experts from 36% to just 4%. Our 
thorough interpretability analysis of the RF model, both at the algorithm level and for individual 
examples, confirmed the importance of neurovascular, neuro-oncological, and musculoskeletal 
concepts in the model's decisions, thereby validating the clinical relevance of the predictions. Our RF 
model demonstrated satisfactory calibration and very good classification parity across sex and 
ethnicity groups. 
Our findings provide promising evidence that using similar AI predictive models in clinical practice 
could improve decision-making, reduce medical errors, and lower hospital admission costs. 
Comparisons to the literature 
Intensive care units account for around 22% - 33% of the total costs within a hospital and are on 
average three to five times greater than the cost of ward level care; as such, there has been a greater 
emphasis on ensuring that care within such units is reserved for those who truly need it.  There is, 
however, currently no standardised criteria for post-operative ITU allocations, with the decision being 
based on expert opinion and with the current model, unplanned ITU admissions remain as high as 14 
– 28% (17–20,41). 
Given the above, there has been recognition of the need to characterise these patients, and to do so 
in a timely manner to improve healthcare outcomes and reduce ITU emergency costs. One such study, 
by Hanak et al identified that age and diabetes are predictive of the ITU admission on multivariate 
analysis (41). Similarly, Memtsoudis et al. characterised critical care requirements in patients 
undergoing lumbar spine fusion and identified that comorbidities such as myocardial infarction, 
 
 
14 
 
peripheral vascular disease, COPD, uncompleted and complicated diabetes, cancer, and sleep apnoea 
as well as older age were all significant predictors of the need for ITU level care, with complicated 
diabetes and sleep apnoea carrying the highest risk (43).  
One of the advantages of AI and machine learning (ML) is the ability to learn without direct 
programming and to recognise patterns in vast quantities of data than can be amassed by a single 
person (38). There has been a growing awareness of the utility of AI in healthcare: AI has been used 
to automatically classify epilepsy with 60% accuracy (62% clinician accuracy); predict tumour type, 
including glioma, with an 86% accuracy; and diagnose cerebral aneurysms with >90% accuracy (38).  
Predicting unplanned ITU admissions remains understudied. A related study of Yao et al. (2) developed 
a prognostic model for unplanned ITU care. Following logistic regression, they identified that the lesion 
type, a Karnofsky performance status <70 at admission, higher fibrinogen and blood glucose levels at 
admission, longer duration of surgery, greater intra-operative blood loss, and post-operative surgical 
bed bleeding on computed tomography were independently predictive of unplanned ITU admissions. 
These parameters were utilised in their model and following external validation, they demonstrated 
good discrimination (c-statistic 0.811) and calibration (Hosmer-Lemeshow P = 0.141) for unplanned 
ITU admissions. This study used only structured tabular data.  
However, a significant proportion of the data within health record systems are unstructured free text 
entries. NLP enables computers to understand human languages and thus make sense of, and extract 
information from these unstructured entries (39). A platform that may provide a way forward is 
CogStack, which functions as an NLP information retrieval platform (25).  
Our study is the first of its kind to demonstrate the ability of an NLP-driven algorithm to accurately 
detect unplanned ITU admissions using unstructured text for post-operative elective neurosurgical 
patients. 
Strengths and Limitations 
We demonstrated that our NLP model (26) effectively and accurately extracts clinical concepts and 
generalises well to new hospital settings, including neurosurgical patients. One of the major strengths 
of this study is the robust final model, which was trained on a large dataset and further refined for 
optimal performance using data from patients with normal pressure hydrocephalus and subsequently 
vestibular schwannoma, increasing its applicability to a broad range of such patients. We have proved 
the utility of the concepts extracted by this model for accurate and transparent automated prediction 
of ITU admission. 
The large dataset is a strength, but the fact that it was obtained retrospectively and from a single 
centre increases the risk of potential overfitting, despite the demonstrated generalisation capacity. 
A further limitation is that, with post-operative destination triage being based on expert opinion, a 
few patients may have been selected for a planned post-operative HDU or ITU admission who may 
not have truly needed HDU or ITU level support or intervention whilst there. This might skew the 
interpretation of the data as the planned HDU or ITU group of patients might be functionally similar 
to the level 1 or ward category of patients. For this reason, future research should aim to define a true 
HDU or ITU, whether planned or unplanned, based on whether ITU/HDU intervention was required. A 
final limitation is the paucity of clinical records prior to the operation date. Analysis of primary care 
data could similarly be a focus of future research. 
When implementing our ITU prediction model, poor quality or missing features should be identified 
and addressed through data imputation techniques (e.g., k-nearest neighbours). 
 
 
15 
 
Conclusions 
Our findings demonstrate the feasibility of developing a natural language processing (NLP) model 
capable of accurately extracting clinical features from unstructured electronic health records (EHRs) 
for post-operative neurosurgical patients. In our study, we evaluated the importance of these 
extracted features and discovered that they are clinically useful, helping to create systems that 
achieve very high performance in predicting ITU admissions, particularly unplanned cases.  
Future research will work towards integrating an AI-assisted “high-risk for HDU or ITU” alert system 
into the local EHR using CogStack (44). 
We adhered to the TRIPOD+AI guidance for reporting clinical prediction models that use regression or 
machine learning methods (45). The completed checklist is available in the Supplementary Material. 
Code and Data Availability 
The code and data could not be publicly shared due to their confidentiality requirement but can be 
made available through collaboration. The code was implemented in Python 3.10. 
Acknowledgments 
HJM is supported by the National Institute for Health and Care Research University College London 
Hospitals Biomedical Research Centre. 
Author contributions statement 
JI: Conceptualisation, Methodology, Software, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing – 
Final draft preparation, Writing - Reviewing and Editing. OO: Conceptualisation, Methodology, Formal 
Analysis, Investigation, Writing – Early draft preparation, Writing - Reviewing and Editing. KN: 
Resources, Data Curation. RD, AL, HM: Conceptualisation, Methodology, Writing - Reviewing and 
Editing. JF, JB, SL, UR: Conceptualisation, Writing - Reviewing and Editing. All authors approved the 
manuscript. 
Competing interests 
We have no competing interests to declare. 
References  
1. Onwochei, D.N., Fabes, J., Walker, D., Kumar, G. and Moonesinghe, S.R., 2020. Critical care 
after major surgery: a systematic review of risk factors for unplanned admission. 
Anaesthesia, 75(Suppl 1), pp.e62–e74. 
2. Smith, G. and Nielsen, M., 1999. Criteria for admission. BMJ, 318(7197), pp.1544–1547. 
3. National Confidential Enquiry into Patient Outcome and Death, 2018. Themes and 
recommendations common to all hospital specialities. [online] Available at: 
https://www.ncepod.org.uk/CommonThemes.pdf [Accessed 16 February 2025]. 
4. Pearse, R.M., Harrison, D.A., James, P., Watson, D., Hinds, C., Rhodes, A., et al., 2006. 
Identification and characterisation of the high-risk surgical population in the United 
Kingdom. Crit Care, 10(3), p.R81. 
5. Rock, A.K., Opalak, C.F., Workman, K.G. and Broaddus, W.C., 2018. Safety Outcomes 
Following Spine and Cranial Neurosurgery: Evidence From the National Surgical Quality 
Improvement Program. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol, 30(4), pp.328–336. 
 
 
16 
 
6. Chen, Y., Chen, H., Sun, Q., Zhai, R., Liu, X., Zhou, J., et al., 2023. Machine learning model 
identification and prediction of patients’ need for ICU admission: A systematic review. Am J 
Emerg Med, 73, pp.166–170. 
7. Varelas, P.N., Eastwood, D., Yun, H.J., Spanaki, M.V., Bey, L.H. and Kessaris, C., et al., 2006. 
Impact of a neurointensivist on outcomes in patients with head trauma treated in a 
neurosciences intensive care unit. J Neurosurg, 104(5), pp.713–719. 
8. Jhanji, S., Thomas, B., Ely, A., Watson, D., Hinds, C.J. and Pearse, R.M., 2008. Mortality and 
utilisation of critical care resources amongst high-risk surgical patients in a large NHS trust. 
Anaesthesia, 63(7), pp.695–700. 
9. Lefrant, J.Y., Garrigues, B., Pribil, C., Bardoulat, I., Courtial, F., Maurel, F., et al., 2015. The 
daily cost of ICU patients: A micro-costing study in 23 French Intensive Care Units. Anaesth 
Crit Care Pain Med, 34(3), pp.151–157. 
10. McLaughlin, A.M., Hardt, J., Canavan, J.B. and Donnelly, M.B., 2009. Determining the 
economic cost of ICU treatment: a prospective “micro-costing” study. Intensive Care Med, 
35(12), pp.2135–2140. 
11. Gold, C.A., Mayer, S.A., Lennihan, L., Claassen, J. and Willey, J.Z., 2015. Unplanned Transfers 
from Hospital Wards to the Neurological Intensive Care Unit. Neurocrit Care, 23(2), pp.159–
165. 
12. Angus, D.C., Shorr, A.F., White, A., Dremsizov, T.T., Schmitz, R.J., Kelley, M.A., et al., 2006. 
Critical care delivery in the United States: distribution of services and compliance with 
Leapfrog recommendations. Crit Care Med, 34(4), pp.1016–1024. 
13. Edlmann, E. and Whitfield, P.C., 2020. The changing face of neurosurgery for the older 
person. J Neurol, 267(8), pp.2469–2474. 
14. Chibbaro, S., Di Rocco, F., Makiese, O., Mirone, G., Marsella, M., Lukaszewicz, A.C., et al., 
2010. Neurosurgery and elderly: analysis through the years. Neurosurg Rev, 34(2), pp.229–
234. 
15. Whitehouse, K.J., Jeyaretna, D.S., Wright, A. and Whitfield, P.C., 2016. Neurosurgical Care in 
the Elderly: Increasing Demands Necessitate Future Healthcare Planning. World Neurosurg, 
87, pp.446–454. 
16. Badenes, R., Prisco, L., Maruenda, A. and Taccone, F.S., 2017. Criteria for Intensive Care 
admission and monitoring after elective craniotomy. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol, 30(5), pp.540–
545. 
17. Rhondali, O., Genty, C., Halle, C., Gardellin, M., Ollinet, C., Oddoux, M., et al., 2011. Do 
Patients Still Require Admission to an Intensive Care Unit After Elective Craniotomy for Brain 
Surgery? J Neurosurg Anesthesiol, 23(2), pp.118–123. 
18. Williamson, C.A., 2022. Shedding a Little Light on the Need for Scheduled ICU Admission 
Following Endovascular Treatment of Unruptured Intracranial Aneurysm. Neurocrit Care, 
36(1), pp.16–17. 
19. Groeger, J.S., Guntupalli, K.K., Strosberg, M., Halpern, N., Raphaely, R.C., Cerra, F., et al., 
1993. Descriptive analysis of critical care units in the United States: patient characteristics 
and intensive care unit utilization. Crit Care Med, 21(2), pp.279–291. 
20. Escobar, G.J., Greene, J.D., Gardner, M.N., Marelich, G.P., Quick, B. and Kipnis, P., 2011. 
Intra-hospital transfers to a higher level of care: contribution to total hospital and intensive 
care unit (ICU) mortality and length of stay (LOS). J Hosp Med, 6(2), pp.74–80. 
21. Yao, H.J., Yuan, Q., Xi, C.H., Yu, C., Du, Z.Y., Chen, L., et al., 2022. Perioperative Risk Factors 
Associated with Unplanned Neurological Intensive Care Unit Events Following Elective 
Infratentorial Brain Tumor Resection. World Neurosurgery, 165, pp.e206–e215. 
 
 
17 
 
22. Haller, G., Bampoe, S., Cook, T., Fleisher, L.A., Grocott, M.P.W., Neuman, M., et al., 2019. 
Systematic review and consensus definitions for the Standardised Endpoints in Perioperative 
Medicine initiative: clinical indicators. Br J Anaesth, 123(2), pp.228–237. 
23. Intensive Care Society, 2022. Levels of Care. [online] Available at: 
https://www.ics.ac.uk/Society/Guidance/PDFs/Levels_of_Care_25_3_21 [Accessed 16 
February 2025]. 
24. National Confidential Enquiry into Patient Outcome and Death, 2023. Classification of 
Intervention. [online] Available at: https://www.ncepod.org.uk/classification.html [Accessed 
16 February 2025]. 
25. Noor, K. et al. (2022) Deployment of a free-text analytics platform at a UK national health 
service research hospital: CogStack at University College London Hospitals, JMIR medical 
informatics, 10(8), p. e38122. 
26. Kraljevic, Z., Searle, T., Shek, A., Roguski, L., Noor, K., Bean, D., et al., 2021. Multi-domain 
clinical natural language processing with MedCAT: The Medical Concept Annotation Toolkit. 
Artif Intell Med, 117, p.102083. 
27. Searle, T., Kraljevic, Z., Bendayan, R., Bean, D. and Dobson, R., 2019. MedCATTrainer: A 
Biomedical Free Text Annotation Interface with Active Learning and Research Use Case 
Specific Customisation. In: Proc EMNLP-IJCNLP: System Demonstrations. Hong Kong, China: 
pp.139–144.  
28. Funnell, J.P., Noor, K., Khan, D.Z., D’Antona, L., Dobson, R.J.B., Hanrahan, J.G., et al., 2022. 
Characterization of patients with idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus using natural 
language processing within an electronic healthcare record system. J Neurosurg, 138(6), 
pp.1731–1739. 
29. Williams, S.C., Noor, K., Sinha, S., Dobson, R.J.B., Searle, T., Funnell, J.P., Hanrahan, J.G., 
Muirhead, W.R., Kitchen, N., Kanona, H., Khalil, S., Saeed, S.R., Marcus, H.J. & Grover, P., 
2024. Concept Recognition and Characterization of Patients Undergoing Resection of 
Vestibular Schwannoma Using Natural Language Processing. J Neurol Surg B Skull Base, 
EFirst, 11 May. 
30. Breiman, L., 2001. Random Forests. Mach Learn, 45(1), pp.5–32. 
31. Hochreiter, S. and Schmidhuber, J., 1997. Long short-term memory. Neural Comput, 9(8), 
pp.1735–1780. 
32. Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K. and Toutanova, K., 2019. BERT: Pre-training of Deep 
Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding. In: Proc NACL. Stroudsburg, PA, 
USA, pp.4171–4186.  
33. Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., Michel, V., Thirion, B., Grisel, O., et al., 2011. 
Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research, [online] 
Available at: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/1953048.2078195 [Accessed 16 February 
2025]. 
34. Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., Lerer, A., Bradbury, J., Chanan, G., et al., 2019. PyTorch: An 
imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01703. 
Available at: http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.01703 [Accessed 16 February 2025]. 
35. Caton, S. and Haas, C. 2024. Fairness in Machine Learning: A survey. ACM computing 
surveys, 56 (7), pp.1–38. 
36. Shapley, L., 1953. A Value for n-Person Games. In: Kuhn, H. and Tucker, A., eds. Contributions 
to the Theory of Games, Volume II. Princeton: Princeton University Press, pp.307–318. 
 
 
18 
 
37. Ribeiro, M., Singh, S. and Guestrin, C., 2016. “Why Should I Trust You?”: Explaining the 
Predictions of Any Classifier. In: Proc NACL: Demonstrations. San Diego, California, pp.97–
101. 
38. Tangsrivimol, J.A., Schonfeld, E., Zhang, M., Veeravagu, A., Smith, T.R., Härtl, R., et al., 2023. 
Artificial Intelligence in Neurosurgery: A State-of-the-Art Review from Past to Future. 
Diagnostics, 13(14), p.2429. 
39. Mofatteh, M., 2021. Neurosurgery and artificial intelligence. AIMS Neuroscience, 8(4), 
pp.477–495. 
40. Huang, B.B., Huang, J. and Swong, K.N., 2022. Natural Language Processing in Spine Surgery: 
A Systematic Review of Applications, Bias, and Reporting Transparency. World Neurosurgery, 
167, pp.156-164.e6. 
41. Hanak, B.W., Walcott, B.P., Nahed, B.V., Muzikansky, A., Mian, M.K., Kimberly, W.T., et al., 
2014. Post-Operative Intensive Care Unit Requirements Following Elective Craniotomy. 
World Neurosurgery, 81(1), pp.165–172. 
42. Paul, J.A., Whittington, R.A. and Baldwin, M.R., 2020. Critical Illness and The Frailty 
Syndrome: Mechanisms and Potential Therapeutic Targets. Anesthesia & Analgesia, 130(6), 
pp.1545–1555. 
43. Memtsoudis, S.G., Stundner, O., Sun, X., Chiu, Y.L., Ma, Y., Fleischut, P., et al., 2014. Critical 
care in patients undergoing lumbar spine fusion: a population-based study. Journal of 
Intensive Care Medicine, 29(5), pp.275–284. 
44. Noor, K. et al. (2024). Detecting clinical intent in electronic healthcare records in a UK 
national healthcare hospital. In: 2024 IEEE 12th International Conference on Healthcare 
Informatics (ICHI). 3 June 2024. IEEE. pp.484–489. [Accessed 12 March 2025]. 
45. Collins, G. S. et al. (2024). TRIPOD+AI statement: updated guidance for reporting clinical 
prediction models that use regression or machine learning methods. BMJ (Clinical research 
ed.), 385, p.e078378. [Accessed 24 February 2025]. 
 
 
 
 
19 
 
Appendix 
A.1 Algorithm Hyperparameters 
Classifier 
Library 
Hyperparameters 
Random 
Forest 
Scikit-learn (32) 
 
num of estimators=300, criterion="gini", max depth=None, 
min samples split=2, min samples leaf=1, CV=5, 100 runs  
LSTM 
Pytorch (33) 
epochs=15, hidden size=128, batch size=4, num of LSTM 
layers=1, dropout rate=0.5, learning rate=1e-3, CV=5, 5 runs  
 
A.2 Statistical Analysis of Concept Counts Between ITU and Ward Patients. This table presents top  50 
SNOMED-CT concepts with statistically significant (p < 0.05) frequency differences in ward and ITU 
patients, identified using the Chi-squared test. To address the class imbalance, we normalised the 
frequency counts and selected the top 50 concepts based on the highest frequency ratio between 
ward and ITU. This indicates that these concepts are more frequent for ward patients, with NA 
signifying that the concept is absent for ITU patients. 
Concepts 
Normalised 
frequency counts 
for ward patients 
 
Normalised 
frequency counts 
for ITU patients 
Frequency 
ratio 
 
neoplasm_of_esophagus 
0.0032 
0 
NA 
steroid_induced_hyperglycemia 
0.0032 
0 
NA 
aortic_valve_disorder 
0.0032 
0 
NA 
quadrantanopia_of_left_eye 
0.0032 
0 
NA 
moyamoya_disease 
0.00319 
0 
NA 
carcinoma_in_situ 
0.0032 
0 
NA 
carcinoid_tumor 
0.0032 
0 
NA 
central_hypothyroidism 
0.0032 
0 
NA 
glasgow_coma_scale_finding 
0.0032 
0 
NA 
embolic_stroke 
0.0032 
0 
NA 
herniation_under_falx_cerebri 
0.00319 
0 
NA 
upshaw_schulman_syndrome 
0.0032 
0 
NA 
hemangioma_of_vertebral_column 
0.0032 
0 
NA 
lagophthalmos 
0.00319 
0 
NA 
hemangioma_of_liver 
0.0032 
0 
NA 
carcinoma_of_esophagus 
0.0032 
0 
NA 
trigeminal_nerve_disorder 
0.0032 
0 
NA 
epidermoid_cyst 
0.00319 
0 
NA 
multiple_malignancy 
0.0032 
0.00001 
529.53 
leptospirosis 
0.0032 
0.00001 
529.53 
pollution 
0.0032 
0.00001 
529.53 
aneurysm_of_posterior_cerebral_artery 
0.0032 
0.00001 
529.53 
mucocele_of_salivary_gland 
0.0032 
0.00001 
529.53 
feeding_problem 
0.0032 
0.00001 
529.53 
cerebellopontine_angle_tumor 
0.0032 
0.00001 
529.53 
langerhans_cell_histiocytosis 
0.0032 
0.00001 
529.53 
 
 
20 
 
severe_vertigo 
0.0032 
0.00001 
529.53 
sensation_of_falling 
0.0032 
0.00001 
529.53 
hypoplasia_of_spleen 
0.0032 
0.00001 
529.53 
congenital_anomaly_of_lung 
0.0032 
0.00001 
529.53 
chronic_kidney_disease_stage_5 
0.0032 
0.00001 
529.53 
transmitted_sounds 
0.0032 
0.00001 
529.53 
chronic_periodontitis 
0.0032 
0.00001 
529.29 
necrosis_caused_by_ionizing_radiation 
0.0032 
0.00001 
529.29 
myelitis 
0.0032 
0.00001 
529.29 
superficial_thrombophlebitis 
0.0032 
0.00001 
529.29 
dental_calculus 
0.0032 
0.00001 
529.29 
dental_phobia 
0.0032 
0.00001 
529.29 
peripheral_venous_cannula 
0.0032 
0.00001 
529.29 
adrenal_adenoma 
0.0032 
0.00001 
529.29 
exposure_keratoconjunctivitis 
0.0032 
0.00001 
529.29 
kyphosis_deformity_of_cervical_spine 
0.0032 
0.00001 
529.29 
infection_caused_by_wuchereria_bancr
ofti 
0.0032 
0.00001 
529.29 
discoloration_of_skin 
0.0032 
0.00001 
529.29 
talipes_equinovarus 
0.0032 
0.00001 
529.29 
oronary_bypass_graft_finding 
0.0032 
0.00001 
529.29 
right_inguinal_hernia 
0.0032 
0.00001 
529.29 
positional_vertigo 
0.00319 
0.00001 
529.05 
hypertrophic_cardiomyopathy 
0.00319 
0.00001 
529.05 
myasthenia_gravis 
0.00319 
0.00001 
529.05 
 
A.3 Statistical Analysis of Concept Counts Between ITU and Ward Patients. This table presents top 50 
SNOMED-CT concepts with statistically significant (p < 0.05) frequency differences in ward and ITU 
patients, identified using the Chi-squared test analysis. To address the class imbalance, we normalised 
the frequency counts and selected the top 50 concepts based on the lowest frequency ratio between 
ward and ITU. This indicates that these concepts are more frequent among ITU patients. 
Concepts 
Normalised 
frequency counts 
for ward patients 
Normalised 
frequency counts 
for ITU patients 
Frequency 
ratio 
musculoskeletal_finding 
0.00051 
0.00951 
0.05 
infectious_disease 
0.00021 
0.00454 
0.05 
osteoporosis 
0.00053 
0.00811 
0.06 
disability 
0.00029 
0.00502 
0.06 
digestive_system_finding 
0.00047 
0.00696 
0.07 
endocrine_finding 
0.00081 
0.00846 
0.1 
postoperative_nausea_and_vomiting 
0.00104 
0.00742 
0.14 
pain_in_throat 
0.00101 
0.00752 
0.14 
allergic_disposition 
0.00081 
0.00544 
0.15 
normal_respiratory_function 
0.00099 
0.00626 
0.16 
 
 
21 
 
glasgow_coma_scale 
0.00048 
0.00274 
0.17 
15 
0.00054 
0.00279 
0.19 
eating_ feeding_drinking_finding 
0.00055 
0.00291 
0.19 
open_mouth 
0.00137 
0.00683 
0.2 
oral_intake 
0.00134 
0.0063 
0.21 
problem 
0.00063 
0.00296 
0.21 
smoker 
0.00093 
0.00429 
0.22 
necking 
0.00133 
0.00566 
0.23 
finding 
0.00073 
0.00317 
0.23 
well_in_self 
0.00086 
0.00375 
0.23 
exsanguination 
0.00144 
0.00637 
0.23 
pressure 
0.00102 
0.00424 
0.24 
wound 
0.00087 
0.0037 
0.24 
face_goes_red 
0.00147 
0.00592 
0.25 
bleeding 
0.00112 
0.00427 
0.26 
spontaneous_rupture_of_membranes 
0.00155 
0.00606 
0.26 
nausea 
0.0012 
0.00438 
0.27 
pupils_equal_and_reacting_to_light 
0.00112 
0.00404 
0.28 
pain 
0.00108 
0.00345 
0.31 
backache 
0.00039 
0.0012 
0.32 
dry_skin 
0.00067 
0.00208 
0.32 
does_mobilize 
0.00094 
0.00299 
0.32 
mentally alert 
0.00112 
0.00356 
0.32 
hematoma 
0.00153 
0.00444 
0.34 
alcoholic_beverage_intake 
0.00155 
0.0045 
0.34 
snomed_ct_to_meddra_simple_map_ref
erence_set 
0.00142 
0.0038 
0.37 
vital_signs_finding 
0.00128 
0.00343 
0.37 
supine_body_position 
0.00171 
0.00465 
0.37 
deep_breathing 
0.0019 
0.00496 
0.38 
skin_appearance_normal 
0.00031 
0.00081 
0.38 
chest_clear 
0.00164 
0.00438 
0.38 
o_e (operational environment) 
0.0016 
0.00406 
0.39 
at_risk_for_falls 
0.00103 
0.00262 
0.39 
minute 
0.0015 
0.00372 
0.4 
chest_pain 
0.00125 
0.00304 
0.41 
breathing_room_air 
0.00153 
0.00368 
0.42 
discharged_from_hospital 
0.00151 
0.00307 
0.49 
unconscious 
0.00214 
0.00424 
0.5 
recommended 
0.00154 
0.00307 
0.5 
orientated 
0.00162 
0.0032 
0.51 
 
A.4. Cross-Validation Stability Results: The table reports mean and standard deviation (std) for F1-
Score, precision, and recall over the validation set across 5 Folds for each algorithm. 
 
 
22 
 
 
RFs 
BERT+LSTMs 
 
Precision, 
mean/std 
Recall, 
mean/std 
F1, 
mean/std 
Precision, 
mean/std 
Recall, 
mean/std 
F1, 
mean/std 
Ward 
0.98 / 0.06 
0.99 / 0.05 
0.99 / 0.04 
0.99 / 0.01 
0.99 / 0.01 
0.99 / 
0.005 
Planned 
ITU 
0.92 / 0.05 
0.85 / 0.05 
0.88 / 0.04 
0.94 / 0.1 
0.85 / 0.09 
0.88 / 0.05 
 
A.5. Performance of the Ensembling (RFs and BERT+LSTM) Method for the ITU Test Set. This table 
presents our investigation into whether RFs and our BERT+LSTM model identify different cases. We 
averaged the output probabilities of both models and applied a decision rule with a threshold of 0.5.  
There was no improvement over using RFs alone, indicating overlap in the cases detected by both 
models. To estimate the mean and 95% confidence intervals, we employed bootstrapping by 
resampling the test examples with replacement 1,000 times. 
 
Ensemble RFs/BERT+LSTM 
 
Prec  
(mean, CI) 
Recall 
(mean, CI) 
F1 
(mean, CI) 
FN Rate 
(mean, CI) 
Ward 
0.87 (0.82-0.91) 
1.00 (1.00- 1.00) 
 
0.93 (0.90 - 0.95) 
- 
ITU 
1.00 (1.00- 1.00) 
0.85 (0.80 - 0.90) 
0.92 (0.89 - 0.95) 
0.15 (0.10 - 0.20) 
Planned  
1.00 (1.00- 1.00) 
0.84 (0.78- 0.89) 
0.91 (0.88 - 0.94) 
0.16 (0.11 - 0.22) 
Unplanned 
1.00 (1.00- 1.00) 
 
0.87 (0.79 - 0.93) 
0.93 (0.88-0.97) 
0.13 (0.07 - 0.21) 
 
A.6. Calibration Curves. This plot compares the predicted probabilities with the actual outcome 
probabilities for three models: Ensembling (blue), BERT+LSTM (orange), and RFs (green). The red 
dashed line represents perfect calibration, where a predicted probability of 70% corresponds to an 
outcome that occurs 70% of the times. RFs (green) exhibit the best calibration, as their curve remains 
closest to the perfect line across probability levels. 
 
 
 
A.7. Classification Parity for Male/Female for RFs. This plot shows the performance metrics and their 
ratios for Male and Female groups for RFs. A ratio greater than 1 suggests better performance for the 
Male subgroup, while a ratio less than 1 indicates better performance for the Female group. 
 
 
RFs 
 
 
23 
 
 
 
Prec Male/Female, 
Ratio 
Recall Male/Female, 
Ratio 
F1 
Male/Female, Ratio 
FN rate  
Male/Female, Ratio 
Ward 
 
0.86/0.89, 
0.97 
1.00/1.00, 
1.00 
0.93/0.94, 0.99 
 
NA 
ITU 
 
1.00/1.00, 
1.00 
0.86/0.87, 0.98 
0.92/0.92, 0.99 
0.14/0.12, 1.14 
 
A.8. Classification Parity for White/Non-white for RFs. This plot shows the performance metrics and 
their ratios for White and Non-white groups for RFs. A ratio greater than 1 suggests better 
performance for the White subgroup, while a ratio less than 1 indicates better performance for the 
Non-white group. 
 
 
RFs 
 
Prec 
White/Non-white, Ratio 
Recall 
White/Non-white, 
Ratio 
F1 
White/Non-white, 
Ratio 
FN rate 
White/Non-white, 
Ratio 
Ward 
0.88/0.86, 1.03 
1.00/1.00, 
1.00 
0.94/0.92, 1.01 
NA 
ITU 
1.00/1.00, 
1.00 
 
0.85/0.89, 0.95 
0.92/0.94, 0.97 
0.15/0.11, 1.43 
 
 
