Title: Mining Meaning from Wikipedia
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/0809.4530v2
--------------------------------------------------

1 
Mining meaning from Wikipedia 
OLENA MEDELYAN, DAVID MILNE, CATHERINE LEGG and IAN H. WITTEN 
University of Waikato, New Zealand 
 
________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Wikipedia is a goldmine of information; not just for its many readers, but also for the growing community of 
researchers who recognize it as a resource of exceptional scale and utility. It represents a vast investment of 
manual effort and judgment: a huge, constantly evolving tapestry of concepts and relations that is being applied 
to a host of tasks. 
 
This article provides a comprehensive description of this work. It focuses on research that extracts and makes 
use of the concepts, relations, facts and descriptions found in Wikipedia, and organizes the work into four broad 
categories: applying Wikipedia to natural language processing; using it to facilitate information retrieval and 
information extraction; and as a resource for ontology building. The article addresses how Wikipedia is being 
used as is, how it is being improved and adapted, and how it is being combined with other structures to create 
entirely new resources. We identify the research groups and individuals involved, and how their work has 
developed in the last few years. We provide a comprehensive list of the open-source software they have 
produced.  
________________________________________________________________________ 
 
1. INTRODUCTION  
Wikipedia requires little introduction or explanation. As everyone knows, it was launched 
in 2001 with the goal of building free encyclopedias in all languages. Today it is easily 
the largest and most widely-used encyclopedia in existence. Wikipedia has become 
something of a phenomenon among computer scientists as well as the general public. It 
represents a vast investment of freely-given manual effort and judgment, and the last few 
years have seen a multitude of papers that apply it to a host of different problems. This 
paper provides the first comprehensive summary of this research (up to mid-2008), which 
we collect under the deliberately vague umbrella of mining meaning from Wikipedia. By 
meaning, we encompass everything from concepts, topics, and descriptions to facts, 
semantic relations, and ways of organizing information. Mining involves both gathering 
meaning into machine-readable structures (such as ontologies), and using it in areas like 
information retrieval and natural language processing. 
Traditional approaches to mining meaning fall into two broad camps. On one side are 
carefully hand-crafted resources, such as thesauri and ontologies. These resources are 
generally of high quality, but by necessity are restricted in size and coverage. They rely 
on the input of experts, who cannot hope to keep abreast of the incalculable tide of new 
discoveries and topics that arise constantly. Even the most extensive manually created 
resource—the Cyc ontology, whose hundreds of contributors have toiled for 20 years—
has limited size and patchy coverage [Sowa 2004]. The other extreme is to sacrifice 
quality for quantity and obtain knowledge by performing large-scale analysis of 
unstructured text. However, human language is rife with inconsistency, and our intuitive 
2 
understanding of it cannot be entirely replicated in rules or trends, no matter how much 
data they are based upon. Approaches based on statistical inference might emulate human 
intelligence for particular purposes and in specific situations, but cracks appear when 
generalizing or moving into new domains and tasks. 
Wikipedia provides a middle ground between these two camps—quality and 
quantity—by offering a rare mix of scale and structure. With two million articles and 
thousands of contributors, it dwarfs any other manually created resource by an order of 
magnitude in the number of concepts covered, has far greater potential for growth, and 
offers a wealth of further useful structural features. It contains around 18 Gb of text, and 
its extensive network of links, categories and infoboxes provide a variety of explicitly 
defined semantics that other corpora lack. One must, however, keep Wikipedia in 
perspective. It does not always engender the same level of trust or expectations of quality 
as traditional resources, because its contributors are largely unknown and unqualified. It is 
also far smaller and less representative of all human language use than the web as a 
whole. Nevertheless, Wikipedia has received enthusiastic attention as a promising natural 
language and informational resource of unexpected quality and utility. Here we focus on 
research that makes use of Wikipedia, and as far as possible leave aside its controversial 
nature. 
This paper is structured as follows. In the next section we describe Wikipedia’s 
creation process and structure, and how it is viewed by computer scientists as anything 
from a corpus, taxonomy, thesaurus, or hierarchy of knowledge topics to a full-blown 
ontology. The next three sections describe different research applications. Section 3 
explains how it is being drawn upon for natural language processing; understanding 
written text. In Section 4 we describe its applications for information retrieval; searching 
through documents, organizing them and answering questions. Section 5 focuses on 
information extraction and ontology building—mining text for topics, relations and 
facts—and asks whether this adds up to Tim Berners-Lee’s vision of the Semantic Web. 
Section 6 documents the people and research groups involved, and the resources they 
have produced, with URLs. The final section gives a brief overall summary. 
2 WIKIPEDIA: A RESOURCE FOR MINING MEANING 
Wikipedia, one of the most visited sites on the web, outstrips all other encyclopedias in 
size and coverage. Its English language articles alone are ten times the size of the 
Encyclopedia Britannica, its nearest rival. But material in English constitutes only a 
quarter of Wikipedia—it has articles in 250 other languages as well. Co-founder Jimmy 
3 
Wales is on record as saying that he aspires to distribute a free encyclopedia to every 
person on the planet, in their own language. 
This section provides a general overview of Wikipedia, as background to our 
discussions in Sections 3–5. We begin with an insight into its unique editing methods, 
their benefits and challenges (Section 2.1); and then outline its key structural features, 
including articles, hyperlinks and categories (Section 2.2). Section 2.3 identifies some 
different roles that Wikipedia as a whole may usefully be regarded as playing—for 
instance, as well as an encyclopedia it can be viewed as a linguistic corpus. We conclude 
in Section 2.4 with some practical information on how to work with Wikipedia data.  
2.1 The encyclopedic wisdom of crowds 
From its inception the Wikipedia project offered a unique, entirely open, collaborative 
editing process, scaffolded by then-new Wiki software for group website building, and it 
is fascinating to see how it has flourished under this system. It has effectively enabled the 
entire world to become a panel of experts, authors and reviewers—contributing under 
their own name, or, if they wish, anonymously.  
In its early days the project attracted widespread skepticism. It was thought that its 
editing system was so anarchic that it would surely fill up with misconceptions, lies, 
vanity pieces and other worse-than-useless human output. A piece in The Onion satirical 
newspaper “Wikipedia Celebrates 750 Years Of American Independence: Founding 
Fathers, Patriots, Mr. T. Honored”1 nicely captures this point of view. Moreover, it was 
argued, surely the ability for anyone to make any change, on any page, entirely 
anonymously, would leave it ludicrously vulnerable to vandalism, particularly to articles 
that cover sensitive topics. What if the hard work of 2000 people were erased by one 
eccentric? And indeed “edit wars” did erupt, though it turned out that some of the most 
vicious raged over such apparently trivial topics as the ancestry of Freddy Mercury and 
the true spelling of yoghurt. Yet this turbulent experience was channeled into developing 
ever-more sophisticated Wikipedia policies and guidelines,2 as well as a more subtle code 
of recommended good manners referred to as Wikiquette.3 A self-selecting set of 
administrators emerged, who performed useful functions such as blocking individuals 
from editing for periods of time—for instance edit warriors, identified by the fact that 
they “revert” an article more than three times in 24 hours. Interestingly, the development 
of these rules was guided by the goal of reaching consensus, just as the encyclopedia’s 
content is. Somehow these processes worked sufficiently well to shepherd Wikipedia 
                                                           
1 http://www.theonion.com/content/node/50902 
2 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Policies_and_guidelines 
4 
through its growing pains, and today it is wildly popular and expanding all the time. 
Section 2.3.1 discusses its accuracy and trustworthiness as an encyclopedia. 
Wikipedia’s editing process can be grounded in the knowledge theory proposed by the 
19th Century pragmatist Pierce. According to Pierce, beliefs can be understood as 
knowledge not due to their prior justification, but due to their usefulness, public character 
and future development. His account of knowledge was based on a unique account of 
truth, which claimed that true beliefs are those that all sincere participants in a 
“community of inquiry” would converge on, given enough time. Influential 20th Century 
philosophers [e.g. Quine 1960] scoffed at this notion as being insufficiently objective. Yet 
Peirce claimed that there is a kind of person whose greatest passion is to render the 
Universe intelligible and will freely give time to do so, and that over the long run, within 
a sufficiently broad community, the use of signs is intrinsically self-correcting [Peirce 
1877]. Wikipedia can be seen as a fascinating and unanticipated concrete realization of 
these apparently wildly idealistic claims. 
In this context it is interesting to note that Larry Sanger, Wikipedia’s co-founder and 
original editor-in-chief, had his initial training as a philosopher—with a specialization in 
theory of knowledge. In public accounts of his work he has tried to bypass vexed 
philosophical discussions of truth by claiming that Wikipedians are not seeking it but 
rather a neutral point of view.4 But as the purpose of this is to support every reader being 
able to build their own opinion, it can be argued that somewhat paradoxically this is the 
fastest route to genuine consensus. Interestingly, however, he and the other co-founder 
Jimmy Wales eventually clashed over the role of expert opinion in Wikipedia. In 2007 
Sanger diverged to found a new public online encyclopedia Citizendium5 in an attempt to 
“do better” than Wikipedia, apparently reasserting validation by external authority—e.g., 
academics. Interestingly, although it is early days, Citizendium seems to lack Wikipedia’s 
popularity and momentum.  
Wikipedia’s unique editing methods, and the issues that surround them, have complex 
implications for mining. First, unlike a traditional corpus, it is constantly growing and 
changing, so results obtained at any given time can become stale. Some research strives to 
measure the degree of difference between Wikipedia versions over time (though this is 
only useful insofar as Wikipedia’s rate of change is itself constant), and assess the impact 
on common research tasks [e.g. Ponzetto and Strube 2007a]. Second, how are projects 
that incorporate Wikipedia data to be evaluated? If Wikipedia editors are the only people 
                                                                                                                                                  
3 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:WQT 
4 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Neutral_point_of_view  
5 http://en.citizendium.org 
5 
in the world who have been enthusiastic enough to write up certain topics (for instance, 
details of TV program plots), how is one to determine ‘ground truth’ for evaluating 
applications that utilize this information? The third factor is more of an opportunity than a 
challenge. The awe-inspiring abundance of manual labor given freely to Wikipedia raises 
the possibility of a new kind of research project, which would consist in encouraging 
Wikipedians themselves to perform certain tasks on the researchers’ behalf—tasks of a 
scale the researchers themselves could not hope to achieve. As we will see in Section 5, 
some have begun to glimpse this possibility, while others continue to view Wikipedia in 
more traditional “product” rather than “process” terms. At any rate, this research area 
straddles a fascinating interface between software and social engineering.  
2.2. Wikipedia's structure 
Traditional paper encyclopedias consist of articles arranged alphabetically, with internal 
cross-references to other articles, external references to the academic literature, and some 
kind of general index of topics. These structural features have been adapted by Wikipedia 
for the online environment, and some new features added that arise from the Wiki editing 
process. The statistics presented below were obtained from a version of English 
Wikipedia released in July 2008. 
2.2.1. Articles: The basic unit of information in Wikipedia is the article. 
Internationally, Wikipedia contains 10M articles in 250 different languages.6 The English 
version contains 2.4M articles (not counting redirects and disambiguation pages, which 
are discussed below). About 1.8M of these are bona fide articles with more than 30 words 
of descriptive text and at least one incoming link from elsewhere in Wikipedia. Articles 
are written in a form of free text that follows a comprehensive set of editorial and 
structural guidelines in order to promote consistency and cohesion. These are laid down in 
the Manual of Style,7 and include the following: 
1. Each article describes a single concept, and there is a single article for each 
concept. 
2. Article titles are succinct phrases that resemble terms in a conventional thesaurus. 
3. Equivalent terms are linked to an article using redirects (Section 2.2.3). 
4. Disambiguation pages present various possible meanings from which users can 
select the intended article. (Section 2.2.2). 
5. Articles begin with a brief overview of the topic, and the first sentence defines the 
concept and its type.  
                                                           
6 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia 
7 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Manual_of_Style  
6 
6. Articles contain hyperlinks that express relationships to other articles (Section 
2.2.4). 
Figure 1 shows a typical article, entitled Library. The first sentence describes the concept: 
A library is a collection of information, sources, resources, and services: it is 
organized for use and maintained by a public body, an institution, or a private 
individual.  
Here the article’s title is the single word Library, but titles are often qualified by 
appending parenthetical expressions. For example, there are other articles entitled Library 
(computing), Library (electronics), and Library (biology). Wikipedia distinguishes 
capitalization when it is relevant: the article Optic nerve (the nerve) is distinguished from 
Optic Nerve (the comic book). 
2.2.2. Disambiguation pages: Instead of taking readers to an article named by the 
term, as Library does, the Wikipedia search engine sometimes takes them directly to a 
disambiguation page where they can click on the meaning they want. These pages are 
identified by invoking certain templates (discussed in Section 2.2.6) or assigning them to 
certain categories (Section 2.2.5), and often contain (disambiguation) in their title.  
The English Wikipedia contains 100,000 disambiguation pages. The first line of the 
Library article in Figure 1 (“For other uses …”) links to a disambiguation page that lists 
Library (computing), Library (electronics), Library (biology), and further senses. Brief 
 
Figure 1. Wikipedia article on Library. 
7 
scope notes accompany each sense to assist users. For instance, Library (computer 
science) is “a collection of subprograms used to develop software.” The articles 
themselves serve as detailed scope notes. Disambiguation pages are helpful sources of 
information concerning homonyms. 
2.2.3. Redirects: A redirect page is one with no text other than a directive in the form 
of a redirect link. There are about a dozen for Library and just under 3M in the entire 
English Wikipedia. They encode pluralism (libraries), technical terms (bibliotheca), 
common misspellings (libary), and other variants (reading room, book stack). As noted 
above, the aim is to have a single article for each concept and define redirects to link 
equivalent terms to the article’s preferred title. As we will see, this helps with mining 
because it is unnecessary to resolve synonymy using an external thesaurus.  
2.2.4. Hyperlinks: Articles are peppered with hyperlinks to other articles. The English 
Wikipedia contains 60M in total, an average of 25 per article. They provide explanations 
of topics discussed, and support an environment where serendipitous encounters with 
information are commonplace. Anyone who has browsed Wikipedia has likely 
experienced the feeling of being happily lost, browsing from one interesting topic to the 
next, encountering information that they would never have searched for.  
Because the terms used as anchors are often couched in different words, Wikipedia’s 
hyperlinks are also useful as an additional source of synonyms not captured by redirects. 
Library, for example, is referenced by 20 different anchors including library, libraries, 
and biblioteca. Hyperlinks also complement disambiguation pages by encoding polysemy; 
library links to different articles depending on the context in which it is found. They also 
give a sense of how well-known each sense is; 84% of library links go to the article 
shown in Figure 1, while only 13% go to Library (computing). Furthermore, since internal 
hyperlinks indicate that one article relates to another in some respect, this fundamental 
structure can be mined for meaning in many interesting ways—for example, to capture the 
associative relations included in standard thesauri (Section 5.1).  
2.2.5. Category structure: Authors are encouraged to assign categories to their 
articles. For example, the article Library falls in the category Book Promotion. Authors 
are also encouraged to assign the categories themselves to other more general categories; 
Book Promotion belongs to Books, which in turn belongs to Written Communication. 
These categorizations, like the articles themselves, can be modified by anyone. There are 
almost 400,000 categories in the English Wikipedia, with an average of 19 articles and 
two subcategories each.  
Categories are not themselves articles. They are merely nodes for organizing the 
articles they contain, with a minimum of explanatory text. Often (in about a third of 
8 
cases), categories correspond to a concept that requires further description. In these cases 
they are paired with an article of the same name: the category Libraries is paired with the 
article Library, and Billionaires with Billionaire. Other categories, such as Libraries by 
country, have no corresponding articles and serve only to organize the content. For clarity, 
in this paper we indicate categories in the form Category:Books unless it is obvious that 
we are not talking about an article.  
The goal of the category structure is to represent information hierarchy. It is not a 
simple tree-structured taxonomy, but a graph in which multiple organization schemes 
coexist. Thus both articles and categories can belong to more than one category. The 
category Libraries belongs to four: Buildings and structures, Civil services, Culture and 
Library and information science. The overall structure approximates an acyclic directed 
graph; all relations are directional, and cycles are rare—although they sometimes occur. 
(According to Wikipedia’s own guidelines, cycles are generally discouraged but may 
sometimes be acceptable. For example, Education is a field within Social Sciences, which 
is an Academic discipline, which belongs under Education. In other words, you can 
educate people about how to educate).  
The category structure is a relatively recent addition to the encyclopedia, and less 
visible than articles. They likely receive much less scrutiny than articles, and have been 
criticized as haphazard, incomplete, inconsistent, and rife with redundancy [Chernov et al. 
2006; Muchnik et al. 2007]. Links represent a wide variety of types and strengths of 
relationships. Although there has been much cleanup and the greatest proportion of links 
now represent class membership (isa), there are still many that represent other semantic 
relations (e.g. parthood), and merely thematic associations between entities—as well as 
meta-categories used for editorial purposes, such as Disambiguation. Thus Category:Pork 
currently contains, among others, the categories Domestic Pig, Bacon Bits, Religious 
Restrictions on the Consumption of Pork, and Full Breakfast. We will see in Section 5 
that these issues have not prevented researchers from innovatively mining the category 
structure for a range of purposes.  
2.2.6. Templates and infoboxes: Templates are reusable structures invoked to add 
information to other pages in an efficient fashion. Wikipedia contains 174,000 different 
templates, which have been invoked 23M times. They are commonly used to identify 
articles that require attention; e.g. if they are biased, poorly written, or lacking citations. 
They can also define pages of different types, such as disambiguation pages or featured 
(high quality) articles. A common application is to provide navigational links, such as the 
for other uses link shown in Figure 1.  
9 
An infobox is a special type of template that 
displays factual information in a structured 
uniform format. Figure 2 shows one from the 
article on the Library of Congress. It was created 
by invoking the Infobox Library template and 
populating its fields, such as location and 
collection size. There are about 3,000 different 
infobox templates that are used for anything from 
animal species to strategies for starting a game of 
chess, and the number is growing rapidly.  
The infobox structure could be improved in 
several simple ways. Standard representations for 
units would allow quantities to be extracted 
reliably. Different attribute names are often used 
for the same kind of content. Data types could be 
associated with attribute values, and language and 
unit tags used when information can be expressed 
in different ways (e.g. Euro and USD). Many 
Wikipedia articles use tables for structured 
information that would be better represented as 
templates [Auer and Lehmann 2007]. Despite 
these problems, much meaningful and machine-
interpretable information can be extracted from 
Wikipedia templates. This is discussed further in Section 5.3. 
2.2.7. Discussion pages: A discussion tab at the top of each article takes readers to its 
Talk page, representing a forum for discussions (often longer than the article itself) as to 
how it might be criticized, improved or extended. For example, the talk page of the 
Library article, Talk:Library, contains the following observations, among many others: 
location? 
Libraries can also be found in churches, prisons, hotels etc. Should there be any 
mention of this? – Daniel C. Boyer 20:38, 10 Nov 2003 
Libraries can be found in many places, and articles should be written and linked. 
A wiki article on libraries can never be more of a summary, and will always be 
expandable – DGG 04:18, 11 September 2006 
  
There are talk pages for other aspects of Wikipedia’s structure, such as templates and 
categories, as well as user talk pages that editors use to communicate with each other. 
These pages are a unique and interesting feature of Wikipedia not replicated in traditional 
 
Figure 2. Infobox for the Library of Congress 
 
10 
encyclopedias. They have been mined to determine quality metrics of Wikipedia edits 
[Emigh et al. 2005; Viégas et al. 2007], but have not been yet employed for any other 
tasks discussed in this survey—perhaps because of their unstructured nature.  
2.2.8. Edit histories: To the right of the discussion tab is a history tab that takes 
readers to an article’s editing history. This contains the name or pseudonym of every 
editor, with the changes they made. We can see that the Library article was created on 9 
November 2001 in the form of a short note—which, in fact, bears little relationship to the 
current version—and has been edited about 1500 times since. Recent edits add new links 
and new entries to lists; indicate possible vandalism and its reversal; correct spelling 
mistakes; and so on.  
Analyzing editing history is an interesting research area in its own right. For example, 
Viégas [2004] mines history pages to discover collaboration patterns. Nelken and 
Yamangil [2008] discuss ways of utilizing them as a corpus for extracting lexical errors 
called eggcorns, e.g. <rectify, ratify>, as well as phrases that can be dropped to compress 
sentences—a useful component of automatic text summarization. It is natural to ask 
whether the content of individual articles converges in some semantic sense, staying 
stable despite continuing edits. Thomas and Amit [2007] call the information in a 
Wikipedia article “justified” if, after going through the community process of discussion, 
repeated editing, and so on, it has reached a stable state. They found that articles do, in 
general, become stable, but that it is difficult to predict where a given article is in its 
journey towards maturity. They also point out that although information in an article’s 
edit history might indicate its likely quality, mining systems invariably ignore it. 
Table 1 breaks down the number of different pages and connections in the English 
version at the time of writing. There are almost 5.5M pages in the section dedicated to 
articles. Most are redirects. Many others are disambiguation pages, lists (which group 
related articles but do not provide explanatory text themselves) and stubs (incomplete 
articles with fewer than 30 words or at least one incoming link from elsewhere in 
Articles and related pages 
5,460,000 
 
Categories 
390,000 
  redirects 
2,970,000 
 
 
 
  disambiguation pages 
110,000 
 
Templates  
174,000 
  Lists and stubs 
620,000 
 
  infoboxes 
3,000 
  bona-fide articles 
1,760,000 
 
  other 
171,000 
 
 
 
 
 
Links 
  between articles 
62,000,000 
  between category and subcategory 
740,000 
  between category and article 
7,270,000 
Table 1. Content of English Wikipedia. 
11 
Wikipedia). Removing all these leaves about 1.8M bona-fide articles, each with an edit 
history and most with some content on their discussion page. The articles are organized 
into 400,000 different categories and augmented with 170,000 different templates. They 
are densely interlinked, with 62M connections—an average of 25 incoming and 25 
outgoing links per article.  
2.3. Perspectives on Wikipedia 
Wikipedia is a rich resource with several different broad functionalities, and subsequent 
sections will show how researchers have developed sophisticated mining techniques with 
which they can identify, isolate and utilize these different perspectives.  
2.3.1 Wikipedia as an encyclopedia: The first and most obvious usage for Wikipedia 
is exactly what it was intended as: an encyclopedia. Ironically, this is the very application 
that has generated most doubt and cynicism. As noted above, the open editing policy has 
led many to doubt its authority. Denning et al. [2005] review early concerns, and conclude 
that, while Wikipedia is an interesting example of large-scale collaboration, its use as an 
information source is risky. Their core argument is the lack of formal expert review 
procedures, which gives rise to two key issues: accuracy within articles, and bias of 
coverage across them.  
Accuracy within articles is investigated by Giles [2005], who compares randomly 
selected scientific Wikipedia articles with their equivalent entries in Encyclopedia 
Britannica. Both sources were equally prone to significant errors, such as 
misinterpretation of important concepts. More subtle errors, however, such as omissions 
or misleading statements, were more common in Wikipedia. In the 41 articles reviewed 
there were 162 mistakes in Wikipedia versus 123 for Britannica. Britannica Inc. attacked 
Giles’ study as “fatally flawed”8 and demanded a retraction; Nature defended itself and 
declined to retract.9 Ironically, while Britannica’s part in the debate has been polemical 
and plainly biased, Wikipedia provides objective coverage on the controversy in its article 
on Encyclopedia Britannica.  
Several authors have developed metrics that evaluate the quality of Wikipedia articles 
based on such features as: number of authors, number of edits, internal and external 
linking, and article size, e.g. Lih [2004] and Wilkinson and Huberman [2007]; article 
stability, e.g. Dondio et al. [2006]; and the amount of conflict an article generates, e.g. 
Kittur [2007]. Emigh and Herring [2005] perform a genre analysis on Wikipedia using 
corpus linguistic methods to determine “features of formality and informality,” and claim 
                                                           
8 http://www.corporate.britannica.com/britannica_nature_response.pdf  
9 http://www.nature.com/press_releases/Britannica_response.pdf  
12 
that its post-production editorial control produces entries as standardized as those in 
traditional print encyclopedias. Viégas et al. [2007] claim that overall coordination and 
organization, one of the fastest growing areas of Wikipedia, ensures great resilience to 
malicious editing despite high traffic; they highlight in particular the role played by 
discussion pages. 
So much for accuracy. A second issue is bias of coverage. Wikipedia is edited by 
volunteers, who naturally apply more effort to describing topics that pique their interest. 
For example, there are 600 different articles dedicated to The Simpsons cartoon. In 
contrast, there are half as many pages about the namesake of the cartoon’s hero, the Greek 
poet Homer, and all the literary works he created and inspired. Some researchers have 
analyzed Wikipedia’s coverage systematically. Halavais and Lackaff [2008], for example, 
investigated whether the particular enthusiasms of volunteer editors produce excessive 
coverage of certain topics by comparing topic-distribution in Wikipedia with that in Books 
In Print, and with a range of printed scholarly encyclopedias. They measure this using a 
Library of Congress categorization of 3000 randomly-chosen articles and find 
Wikipedia’s coverage remarkably representative, except for law and medicine. Milne et 
al. [2006] compare Wikipedia with an agricultural thesaurus and identify a bias towards 
concepts that are general or introductory, and therefore more relevant to “everyman.” Lih 
[2004] shows that Wikipedia’s content, and therefore bias, is driven to a large extent by 
the press. 
2.3.2. Wikipedia as a corpus: Large text collections are useful for creating language 
models that capture particular characteristics of language use. For example, the language 
in which a text is written can be determined by analyzing the statistical distribution of the 
letter n-grams it contains [Cavnar and Trenkle 1994], whereas word co-occurrence 
statistics are helpful in tasks like spelling correction [Mays et al. 1991]. Aligned corpora 
in different languages are extremely useful for machine translation [Brown et al. 1993], 
where extensive coverage and high quality of the corpus are crucial factors for success. 
While the web has enabled rapid acquisition of large text corpora, their quality leaves 
much to be desired due to spamming and the varying format of websites. In particular, 
manually annotated corpora and aligned multilingual corpora are rare and in high demand.  
Wikipedia provides a plethora of well-written and well-formulated articles—several 
gigabytes in the English version alone—that can easily be separated from other parts of 
the website. The Simple Wikipedia is a reduced version that contains easier words and 
shorter sentences, intended for people learning English. The absence of complex 
sentences makes automatic linguistic processing easier, and some researchers focus on 
this version for their experiments [Ruiz-Casado et al. 2005a; Toral and Muñoz 2006]. 
13 
Many researchers take advantage of Wikipedia’s host of definitions for question 
answering (Section 4.3) and automatic extraction of semantic relations (Section 5.1). 
Section 2.2.8 mentions how Wikipedia history pages can be used as a corpus for training 
text summarization algorithms, as well as for determining the quality of the articles 
themselves. 
Wikipedia also contains annotations in the form of targeted hyperlinks. Consider the 
following two sentences from the article about the Formula One team named McLaren. 
1. The [[Kiwi (people)|Kiwi]] made the team’s Grand Prix debut at the 1966 
Monaco race.  
2. Original McLaren [[Kiwi|kiwi]] logo; a New Zealand icon. 
In the first case the word kiwi links to Kiwi (people); in the second to Kiwi, the article 
describing the bird. This mark-up is nothing more or less than word sense annotation. 
Mihalcea [2007] shows that Wikipedia is a full fledged alternative to manually sense-
tagged corpora. Section 3.2 discusses research that makes use of these annotations for 
word sense disambiguation and computing the semantic similarity between words.  
Although the exploration of Wikipedia as a source of multilingual aligned corpora has 
only just begun, its links between description of concepts in different languages have been 
exploited for cross-language question answering [Ferrández et al. 2007] and automatic 
generation of bilingual dictionaries [Erdmann et al. 2008]. This is further discussed in 
Section 3.4, while Section 4.2 investigates Wikipedia’s potential for multilingual 
information retrieval. 
2.3.3 Wikipedia as a thesaurus: There are many similarities between the structure of 
traditional thesauri and the ways in which Wikipedia organizes its content. As noted, each 
article describes a single concept, and its title is a succinct, well-formed phrase that 
resembles a term in a conventional thesaurus. If article names correspond to manually 
defined terms, links between them correspond to relations between terms, the building 
blocks of thesauri. The international standard for thesauri (ISO 2788) specifies four kinds 
of relation: 
• 
Equivalence: USE, with inverse form USE FOR 
• 
Hierarchical: broader term (BT), with inverse form narrower term (NT) 
• 
Any other kind of semantic relation (RT, for related term). 
Wikipedia redirects provide precisely the information expressed in the equivalence 
relation. They are a powerful way of dealing with word variations such as abbreviations, 
equivalent expressions and synonyms. Hierarchical relations (broader and narrower terms) 
are reflected in Wikipedia’s category structure. Hyperlinks between articles capture other 
14 
kinds of semantic relation. (Restricting consideration to mutual cross-links eliminates 
many of the more tenuous associations.)  
As we will see, researchers compare Wikipedia with manually created domain-
specific thesauri and augment them with knowledge from it (Section 3.2.3). Redirects turn 
out to be very accurate and can safely be added to existing thesauri without further 
checking. Wikipedia also has the potential to contribute new topics and concepts, and can 
be used as a source of suggestions for thesaurus maintenance. Manual creation of scope 
notes is a labor-intensive aspect of traditional thesauri. Instead, the first paragraph of a 
Wikipedia article can be extracted as a description of the topic, backed up by the full 
article should more explanation be required. Finally, Wikipedia’s multilingual nature 
allows thesauri to be translated into other languages. 
2.3.4. Wikipedia as a database: Wikipedia contains a massive amount of highly 
structured information. Several projects (notably DBpedia, discussed in Section 5.3) 
extract this and store it in formats accessible to database applications. The aim is two-
fold: to allow users to pose database-style queries against datasets derived from 
Wikipedia, and to facilitate linkage with other datasets on the web. Some projects even 
aim to extract database-style facts directly from the text of Wikipedia articles, rather than 
from infoboxes. Furthermore, disambiguation and redirect pages can be turned into a 
relational database that contains tables for terms, concepts, term concept relationships and 
concept relationships [Gregorowicz and Kramer 2006]. 
Another idea is to bootstrap fact extraction from articles by using the content of 
infoboxes as training data and applying machine learning techniques to extract even more 
infobox-style information from the text of other articles. This allows infoboxes to be 
generated for articles that do not yet have them [Wu and Weld 2007]. Related techniques 
can be used to clean up the underlying infobox data structure, with its proliferation of 
individual templates.  
2.3.5 Wikipedia as an ontology: Articles can be viewed as ontology elements, for 
which the URIs of Wikipedia entries serve as surprisingly reliable identifiers [Hepp et al. 
2006]. Of course, true ontologies also require concept nodes to be connected by 
informative relations, and in Section 5 we will see researchers mine such relations in a 
host of innovative ways from Wikipedia’s structure—including redirects, hyperlinks (both 
incoming and outgoing, as well as the anchor text), category links, category names and 
infoboxes, and even raw text, as well as experimenting with adding relations to and from 
other resources such as WordNet and Cyc. From this viewpoint Wikipedia is arguably by 
far the largest ontological structure available today, with its Wiki technology effectively 
serving as a large-scale collaborative ontology development environment. Some 
15 
researchers are beginning to mix traditional mining techniques with possibly more far-
sighted attempts to encourage Wikipedia editors themselves to develop the resource in 
directions that might bear ontological fruit. 
2.3.6 Wikipedia as a network structure: Wikipedia can be viewed as a hyperlinked 
structure of web pages, a microcosm of the web. Standard methods of analyzing network 
structure can then be applied [Bellomi and Bonato 2005]. The two most prominent 
techniques for web analysis are Google’s PageRank [Brin and Page 1998] and the HITS 
algorithm [Kleinberg 1998]. Bellomi and Bonato [2005] applied both to Wikipedia and 
discerned some interesting underlying cultural biases (as of April 2005). These authors 
conclude that PageRank and HITS seem to identify different kinds of information. They 
report that according to the HITS authority metric, space (in the form of political 
geography) and time (in the form of both time spans and landmark events) are the primary 
organizing categories for Wikipedia articles. Within these, information tends to be 
organized around famous people, common words, animals, ethnic groups, political and 
social institutions, and abstract concepts such as music, philosophy, and religion.  
In contrast, the most important articles according to PageRank include a large cluster 
of concepts tightly related to religion. For example, Pope, God and Priest were the 
highest-ranking nouns, as compared to Television, Scientific classification, and Animal for 
HITS. They found that PageRank seemed to transcend recent political events to give a 
wider historical and cultural perspective in weighting geographic entities. It also tends to 
bring out a global rather than a Western perspective, both for countries and cities and for 
historical events. HITS reveals a strong bias towards recent political leaders, whereas 
people with high PageRank scores tend to be ones with an impact on religion, philosophy 
and society. It would be interesting to see how these trends have evolved since the 
publication of this work. 
An alternative to PageRank and HITS is the Green method [Duffy 2001], which 
Ollivier and Senellart [2007] applied to Wikipedia’s hyperlink network structure in order 
to find related articles. This method, which is based on Markov Chain theory, is related to 
the topic-sensitive version of PageRank introduced by Haveliwala [2003]. Given a target 
article, one way of finding related articles is to look at nodes with high PageRank in its 
immediate neighborhood. For this a topic-sensitive measure like Green’s is more 
appropriate than the global PageRank. 
The Wikipedia category graph also forms a network structure. Zesch and Gurevych 
[2007] showed that it is a scale-free, small-world graph, like other semantic networks 
such as WordNet. They adapted WordNet-based measures of semantic relatedness to the 
Wikipedia category graph, and found that they work well—at least for nouns. They 
16 
suggest that this, coupled with Wikipedia’s multilingual nature, may enable natural 
language processing algorithms to be transferred to languages that lack well-developed 
semantic WordNets. 
2.4. Obtaining Wikipedia data 
Wikipedia is based on the MediaWiki software. As an open source project, its entire 
content is easily obtainable in the form of large XML files and database dumps that are 
released sporadically every several days or weeks.10 The full content (without revision 
history or images) of the English version occupies 18 Gb of uncompressed data at the 
time of writing. Section 6 discusses tools for extracting information from these files.  
Instead of obtaining the database directly, specialized web crawlers have been 
developed. Bellomi and Bonato [2005] scanned the All pages index section, which 
contains a full list of the pages exposed on the website. Pages that do not contain a regular 
article were identified by testing for specific patterns in the URL, and discarded. 
Wikipedia’s administrators prefer the use of the database dumps, however, to minimize 
the strain on their services.  
3 SOLVING NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING TASKS 
Natural language processing applications fall into two major groups: i) those using 
symbolic methods, where the system utilizes a manually encoded repository of human 
language, and ii) statistical methods, which infer properties of language by processing 
large text corpora. The problem with the former is a dearth of high-quality knowledge 
bases. Even the lexical database WordNet, which, as the largest of its kind, receives 
substantial attention [Fellbaum 1998], has been criticized for low coverage—particularly 
of proper names—and high sense proliferation [Mihalcea and Moldovan 2001; Ponzetto 
and Strube 2007a]. Initial enthusiasm with statistical methods somewhat faded once they 
hit an upper performance bound that is hard to beat unless they are combined with 
symbolic elements [Klavans and Resnik 1996]. Several research groups simultaneously 
discovered Wikipedia as an alternative to WordNet. Direct comparisons of their 
performance on the same tasks have shown that Wikipedia can be employed in a similar 
way and often significantly outperforms WordNet [Strube and Ponzetto 2006]. This 
section describes research in the four areas to which Wikipedia has been successfully 
applied: semantic relatedness (Section 3.1), word sense disambiguation (Section 3.2), co-
reference resolution (Section 3.3) and multilingual alignment (Section 3.4). 
                                                           
10 http://download.wikimedia.org/wikipedia 
17 
3.1 Semantic relatedness 
Semantic relatedness quantifies the similarity between two concepts, e.g. doctor and 
hospital. Budanitsky and Hirst [2001] differentiate between semantic similarity, where 
only predefined taxonomic relations are used to compute similarity, and semantic 
relatedness, where other relations like has-part and is-made-of are used as well. Semantic 
relatedness can be also quantified by statistical methods without requiring a manually 
encoded taxonomy, for example by analyzing term co-occurrence in a large corpus 
[Resnik 1999; Jiang and Conrath 1997]. 
To evaluate automatic methods for estimating semantic relatedness, the correlation 
coefficient between machine-assigned scores and those assigned by human judges is 
computed. Three standard datasets are available for evaluation: 
• 
Miller and Charles’ [1991] list of 30 noun pairs, which we denote by M&C; 
• 
Rubenstein and Goodenough’s [1965] 65 synonymous word pairs, R&G, 
• 
[Finkelstein et al. 2002]’s collection of 353 word pairs (WordSimilarity-353), 
WS-353. 
The best pre-Wikipedia result for the first set was a correlation of 0.86, achieved by Jiang 
and Conrath [1997] using a combination of statistical measures and taxonomic analysis 
derived from WordNet. For the third, Finkelstein et al. [2002] achieved 0.56 correlation 
using Latent Semantic Analysis. The discovery of Wikipedia began a new era of 
competition. 
Strube and Ponzetto [2006] and Ponzetto and Strube [2007a] re-calculated several 
measures developed for WordNet using Wikipedia’s category structure. The best 
performing metric on most datasets was Leacock and Chodorow’s [1998] normalized path 
measure: 
lch c1,c2
(
) = −log length c1,c2
(
)
2D
, 
where length is the number of nodes on the shortest path between nodes c1 and c2 and D is 
the maximum depth of the taxonomy. WordNet-based measures outperform Wikipedia-
based ones on the small datasets M&C and R&G, but on WS-353 Wikipedia wins by a 
large margin. Combining similarity evidence from Wikipedia and WordNet using a SVM 
to learn relatedness from the training data yielded the highest correlation score of 0.62 on 
a designated “testing” subset of WS-353.  
Strube and Ponzetto remark that WordNet’s sense proliferation was responsible for its 
poor performance on WS-353. For example, when computing the relatedness of jaguar 
and stock, the latter is interpreted in the sense of animals kept for use or profit rather than 
in the sense of market, which people find more intuitive. WordNet’s fine sense granularity 
18 
has been also criticized in word sense disambiguation (Section 3.2.1). The overall 
conclusion is that Wikipedia can serve AI applications in the same way as hand-crafted 
knowledge resources. Zesch et al. [2007] perform similar experiments with the German 
Wikipedia, which they compare to GermaNet on three datasets including the translated 
M&C. The performance of Wikipedia-based measures was inconsistent, and, like Strube 
and Ponzetto [2006], they obtained best results by combining evidence from GermaNet 
and Wikipedia. 
Ponzetto and Strube [2007a] investigate whether performance on Wikipedia-based 
relatedness measures changes as Wikipedia grows. After comparing February 2006, 
September 2006 and May 2007 versions they conclude that the relatedness measure is 
robust. There was no improvement, probably because new articles were unrelated to the 
words in the evaluation datasets. A Java API is available for those wishing to experiment 
with these techniques [Ponzetto and Strube [2007c].11 
Gabrilovich and Markovitch [2007] developed Explicit Semantic Analysis (ESA) as 
an alternative to the well-known Latent Semantic Analysis. They use a centroid-based 
classifier to map input text to a vector of weighted Wikipedia articles. For example, for 
Bank of Amazon the vector contains Amazon River, Amazon Basin, Amazon Rainforest, 
Amazon.com, Rainforest, Atlantic Ocean Brazil, etc. To obtain the semantic relatedness 
between two terms, they compute the cosine similarity of their vectors. This significantly 
outperforms Latent Semantic Analysis on WS-353, with an average correlation of 0.75 
(with the same technique, the Open Directory Project12 achieves 0.65 correlation, 
indicating that Wikipedia’s quality is greater). This is easily the best result of all of the 
techniques described in this section. It also has the unique advantage of being equally 
applicable to individual words, phrases or even entire documents. The mapping developed 
in this work has been successfully utilized for text categorization (Section 4.5). 
While Gabrilovich and Markovitch [2007] use the full text of Wikipedia articles to 
establish relatedness between terms, Milne [2007] analyses just the internal hyperlinks. 
To compute the relatedness between two terms, they are first mapped to corresponding 
Wikipedia articles, then vectors are created containing the links to other Wikipedia 
articles that occur in these articles. For example, a sentence like Bank of America is the 
largest commercial <bank> in the <United States> by both <deposits> and <market 
capitalization> contributes four links to the vector. Each link is weighted by the inverse 
number of times it is linked from other Wikipedia articles—the less common the link, the 
                                                           
11 http://www.eml-r.org/english/research/nlp/download/jwordnetsimilarity.php 
12 http://www.dmoz.org 
19 
higher its weight. For example, market capitalization receives higher weight than United 
States and thus contributes more to the semantic relatedness.  
Disambiguation is a serious challenge for this technique. Strube and Ponzetto [2006] 
choose the most likely meaning from the order in which entries occur in Wikipedia’s 
disambiguation pages; Gabrilovich and Markovitch [2007] avoid disambiguation entirely 
by simultaneously associating a term with several Wikipedia articles. However, Milne’s 
[2007] approach hinges upon correct mapping of terms to Wikipedia articles. When terms 
are manually disambiguated, a correlation of 0.72 is achieved for WS-353. Automatic 
disambiguation that simply selects whatever meaning produces the greatest similarity 
score achieves only 0.45, showing that unlikely senses often produce greater similarity 
than common ones. 
Milne and Witten’s [2008a] Wikipedia Link-based Measure—an incremental 
improvement over [Milne, 2007]—disambiguates term mappings automatically using 
three features. One is the conditional probability of the sense given the term, according to 
the Wikipedia corpus (discussed further in Section 3.2.1). For example, the term leopard 
more often links to the animal than the eponymous Mac operating system. They also 
analyze how commonly two terms appear in Wikipedia as a collocation. Finally, they 
augment the vector-based similarity metric described above by a measure inspired by 
Cilibrasi and Vitanyi’s [2007] Normalized Google Distance, which is based on term 
occurrences in web pages, but using the links made to each Wikipedia article rather than 
Google’s search results. The semantic similarity of two terms is determined by the sum of 
these three values—conditional probability, collocation and similarity. This technique 
achieves 0.69 correlation with human judgments on WS-353, not far off Gabrilovich and 
Markovitch’s [2007] figure for ESA. However, it is far less computationally intensive 
Method 
M&C 
R&G 
WS-353 
WordNet  
[Strube and Ponzetto, 2006] 
0.82 
0.86 
full: 0.36 
test: 0.38 
WikiRelate! 
[Ponzetto and Strube, 2007] 
0.49 
0.55 
full: 0.49 
test: 0.62 
ESA  
[Gabrilovich and Markovitch, 2007] 
0.73 
0.82 
0.75 
WLVM  
[Milne, 2007] 
n/a 
n/a 
man: 0.72 
auto: 0.45 
Wikipedia Link-based Measure  
[Milne and Witten, 2008a] 
0.70 
0.64 
0.69 
Table 2. Overview of semantic relatedness methods. 
20 
because only links are analyzed, not the entire text. Further analysis shows that 
performance is even higher on terms that are well defined in Wikipedia. 
To summarize, estimating semantic similarity with Wikipedia has been addressed 
from three distinct angles: 
• 
applying WordNet-based techniques to Wikipedia: Ponzetto and Strube 
[2006, 2007a] and Zesch et al. [2007]; 
• 
using vector model techniques to compare similarity of Wikipedia articles, 
similar to Latent Semantic Analysis: Gabrilovich and Markovitch [2007]; 
• 
exploring Wikipedia’s unique feature of hyperlinked article descriptions: 
Milne [2007], Milne and Witten [2008a].  
The approaches are easily compared because they have been evaluated consistently using 
the same data sets. Table 2 summarizes the results for each similarity metric described in 
this section. ESA is best, with WLM not far behind and WikiRelate the lowest. The 
astonishingly high correlation with human performance that these techniques obtain was 
well out of reach in pre-Wikipedia days. Also, Wikipedia provides relatedness measures 
for a far larger vocabulary than resources like WordNet.  
Semantic similarity measures are useful for a host of tasks in information retrieval, 
natural language processing, artificial intelligence and other areas. So far the algorithms 
described here are underutilized, given the large advances in accuracy and vocabulary that 
they offer. Later sections (e.g. 3.2, 3.3 and 4.5) provide a few examples of their use, but 
we expect many more applications in the future. 
3.2 Word sense disambiguation 
Techniques for word sense disambiguation—i.e., resolving polysemy—use a dictionary or 
thesaurus that defines the inventory of possible senses [Ide and Véronis 1998]. Wikipedia 
provides an alternative resource. Each article describes a concept that is a possible sense 
for words and phrases that denote it, whether by redirection via a disambiguation page, or 
 
 
He could see wood around the house. 
Figure 3. What is the meaning of wood? 
21 
as anchor text that links to the article. 
The terms to be disambiguated may either appear in plain text or in an existing 
knowledge base (thesaurus or ontology). The former is more challenging because the 
context is less clearly defined. Consider the example in Figure 3. Even human readers 
cannot be sure of the intended meaning of wood from the sentence alone, but a diagram 
showing semantically related words in WordNet puts it into context and makes it clear 
that the meaning is the trees and other plants in a large densely wooded area rather than 
the hard fibrous lignified substance under the bark of trees. This highlights the main idea 
behind disambiguation: identify the context and analyze which of the possible senses fits 
it best. We first cover techniques for disambiguating phrases in text to Wikipedia articles, 
then examine the important special case of named entities, and finally show how 
disambiguation is used to map manually created knowledge structures to Wikipedia. 
3.2.1. Disambiguating phrases in running text. Discovering the intended senses of 
words and phrases is an essential stage in every natural language application, otherwise 
full “understanding” cannot be claimed. WordNet is a popular resource for word sense 
disambiguation, but success has been mixed [Voorhees 1998]. One reason is that the task 
is demanding because “linguistic [disambiguation] techniques must be essentially perfect 
to help” [Voorhees 1998]; another is that WordNet defines senses with such fine 
granularity that even human annotators struggle to differentiate them [Edmonds and 
Kilgariff 1998]. The two are related, because fine granularity makes disambiguation more 
difficult. In contrast, Wikipedia defines only those senses on which its contributors reach 
consensus, and includes an extensive description of each one rather than WordNet’s brief 
gloss. Substantial advances have been made since it was discovered as a resource for 
disambiguation. 
Mihalcea [2007] uses Wikipedia articles as a source of sense-tagged text to form a 
training corpus for supervised disambiguation. They follow the evaluation methodology 
developed by SIGLEX, the Association for Computational Linguistics’ Special Interest 
Group on the Lexicon.13 For each example they collect its occurrences as link anchors in 
Wikipedia. For example, the term bar is linked to bar (establishment) and bar (music), 
each of which corresponds to a WordNet synset—that is, a set of synonymous terms 
representing a particular meaning of bar. The results show that a machine learning 
approach trained on Wikipedia sentences in which both meanings of bar occur clearly 
outperforms two simple baselines. 
This work uses Wikipedia solely as a resource to disambiguate words or phrases into 
WordNet synsets. Mihalcea and Csomai [2007] go further, using Wikipedia’s content as a 
22 
sense inventory in its own right. They disambiguate terms—words or phrases—that 
appear in plain text to Wikipedia articles, concentrating exclusively on “important” 
concepts. They call this process wikification because it simulates how Wikipedia authors 
manually insert hyperlinks when writing articles. There are two stages: extraction and 
disambiguation. In the first, terms that are judged important enough to be highlighted as 
links are identified in the text. Only terms occurring at least five times in Wikipedia are 
considered, and likelihood of a term being a hyperlink is estimated by expressing the 
number of articles in which a given word or phrase appears as anchor text as a proportion 
of the total number of articles in which it appears. All terms whose likelihood exceeds a 
predefined threshold are chosen, which yields an F-measure of 55% on a subset of 
manually annotated Wikipedia articles. 
In the second stage these terms are disambiguated to Wikipedia articles that capture 
the intended sense. For example, in the sentence Jenga is a popular beer in the bars of 
Thailand the term bar corresponds to the bar (establishment) article. Given a term, those 
articles for which it is used as anchor text in the Wikipedia are candidate senses. The 
number of times a term links to a particular sense quantifies the commonness of this 
sense, a statistic that Mihalcea and Csomai use as a baseline. Their best performing 
disambiguation algorithm uses a machine learning approach in which Wikipedia's 
already-annotated articles serve as training data. Features—like part-of-speech tag, local 
context of three words to the left and right, and their part-of-speech tags—are computed 
for each ambiguous term that appears as anchor text of a hyperlink. A Naïve Bayes 
classifier is then applied to disambiguate unseen terms. Csomai and Mihalcea [2007] 
report an F-measure of 87.7% on 6,500 examples, and go on to demonstrate that linking 
educational material to Wikipedia articles in this manner improves the quality of 
knowledge that people acquire when reading the material, and decreases the time taken.  
In a parallel development, Wang et al. [2007a] use a fixed-length window to identify 
terms in a document that match the titles of Wikipedia articles, eliminating matches 
subsumed by longer ones. They disambiguate the matches using two methods. One works 
on a document basis, seeking those articles that are most similar to the original document 
according to the standard cosine metric between TF×IDF-weighted word vectors. The 
second works on a sentence basis, computing the shortest distance between the candidate 
articles for a given ambiguous term and articles corresponding to any non-ambiguous 
terms that appear in the same sentence. The distance metric is 1 if the two articles link to 
each other; otherwise it is the number of nodes along the shortest path between two 
Wikipedia categories to which they belong, normalized by the maximum depth of the 
                                                                                                                                                  
13 http://www.senseval.org 
23 
category taxonomy. This technique is inspired by WordNet based approaches to 
comparing concepts, and is quite similar to Ponzetto and Strube's [2007a] semantic 
similarity measure (Section 3.1). The result of disambiguation is the average of the two 
techniques (if no unambiguous articles are available, the similarity technique is applied by 
itself). Wang et al. do not compare this method to other disambiguation techniques 
directly. They do, however, report the performance of text categorization before and after 
synonyms and hyponyms of matching Wikipedia articles, and their related terms, were 
added to the documents. The findings were mixed, and somewhat negative. 
Medelyan et al. [2008] use Mihalcea and Csomai’s [2007] wikification strategy with a 
different disambiguation technique. Document terms with just one match are 
unambiguous, and their corresponding articles are collected and used as “context articles” 
to disambiguate the remaining terms. This is done by determining the average semantic 
similarity of each candidate article to all context articles identified for the document. The 
semantic similarity of a pair of articles is obtained from their incoming links as described 
by Milne and Witten [2008a] (Section 3.1). Account is also taken of the prior probability 
of a sense given the term, according to the Wikipedia corpus (proposed by Mihalcea and 
Csomai [2007] as a baseline). For example, the term jaguar links to the article Jaguar 
cars in 466 out of 927 cases, thus its prior probability is 0.5. The resulting mapping is the 
one with the largest product of semantic similarity and prior probability. This achieves an 
F-measure of 93% on 17,500 mappings in manually annotated Wikipedia articles. 
Milne and Witten [2008b] extend both Mihalcea and Csomai [2007] and Medelyan et 
al. [2008] by applying machine learning to the problems of extracting and disambiguating 
terms. Disambiguation is improved by using the conditional probability and semantic 
similarity measures identified in the latter work as features. The use of a decision tree 
learner and a third feature (which measures the quantity and homogeneity of available 
context) produces a scheme that can adjust the relative importance of similarity and prior 
probability from document to document. This raises the F-measure from 93% to 97% on 
the same data. Topic detection is improved by combining Michalcea and Csomai’s link 
likelihood measure with many other features, including relatedness, generality, 
disambiguation confidence, and frequency of occurrence. This raises the F-measure from 
an estimated 48% to 74%. 
It is interesting to compare the strategies in the above approaches. Each needs some 
sort of context to disambiguate a given term to a Wikipedia concept. Some researchers 
(e.g., Medelyan et al. [2008]) use concepts appearing in the same sentence or text, while 
others (e.g., Wang et al. [2007a]) build a vector containing all terms of this document. 
Next, semantic similarity is computed between each candidate meaning and the context 
24 
using techniques like those described in Section 3.1: traversing the category tree, vector or 
link analysis. Mihalcea and Csomai [2007] and Milne and Witten [2008b] combine 
different signals, like similarity, commonness, context and part-of-speech tags, in the final 
disambiguation classifier trained on Wikipedia’s own articles.  
Disambiguating terms in running text to articles in Wikipedia can be viewed from 
another perspective: How can a given text be mapped to a set of relevant Wikipedia 
concepts?—In other words, which Wikipedia articles are most similar to it? Approaches 
like ESA (Sections 3.1, 4.5) adopt this perspective, but have not yet been evaluated in the 
same way as the techniques summarized here. Future research is needed to fill this gap.  
So far, the techniques described here have seen minimal application, apart from some 
explorations into educational support [Mihalcea and Csomai 2007], and topic indexing 
[Medelyan et al. 2008]. Milne and Witten [2008b] argue that they have enormous 
potential, since these algorithms cross-reference documents with what is arguably the 
largest knowledge base in existence, and can provide structured knowledge about any 
unstructured document. Thus any task that is currently addressed using the bag of words 
model, or with knowledge obtained from less comprehensive knowledge bases, could 
likely benefit from these techniques. 
3.2.2. Disambiguating named entities. Phrases referring to named entities, which are 
proper nouns such as geographical and personal names, and titles of books, songs and 
movies, contribute the bulk of our day-to-day vocabulary. Wikipedia is recognized as the 
largest available collection of such entities. It has become a platform for discussing news, 
and contributors put issues into encyclopedic context by relating them to historical events, 
geographic locations and significant personages, thereby increasing the coverage of 
named entities. Here we describe three approaches that focus specifically on linking 
named entities appearing in text or search queries to corresponding Wikipedia articles. 
Section 5.3 summarizes techniques for recognizing named entities in Wikipedia itself. 
Bunescu and Paşca [2006] disambiguate named entities in search queries in order to 
group search results by the corresponding senses. They first create a dictionary of 500,000 
entities that appear in Wikipedia, and add redirects and disambiguated names to each one. 
If a query contains a term that corresponds to two or more entries, they choose the one 
whose Wikipedia article has the greatest cosine similarity with the query. If the similarity 
scores are too low they use the category to which the article belongs instead of the article 
itself. If even this falls below a predefined threshold they assume that no mapping is 
available. The reported accuracies are between 55% and 85% for members of Wikipedia’s 
People by occupation category, depending on the model and experimental data employed. 
25 
Cucerzan [2007] identifies and disambiguates named entities in text. Like Bunescu 
and Paşca [2006], he first extracts a vocabulary from Wikipedia. It is divided into two 
parts, the first containing surface forms and the second the associated entities along with 
contextual information. The surface forms are titles of articles, redirects, and 
disambiguation pages, and anchor text used in links. This yields 1.4M entities, with an 
average of 2.4 surface forms each. Further <named entity, tag> pairs are extracted from 
Wikipedia list pages—e.g., Texas (band) receives a tag LIST_band name etymologies, 
because it appears in the list with this title—yielding a further 540,000 entries. Categories 
assigned to Wikipedia articles describing named entities serve as tags too, yielding 2.6M 
entries. Finally a context for each named entity is collected—e.g., parenthetical 
expressions in its title, phrases that appear as link anchors in the article’s first paragraph 
of the article, etc.—yielding 38M <named entity, context> pairs. 
To identify named entities in text, capitalization rules indicate which phrases are 
surface forms of named entities. Co-occurrence statistics generated from the web by a 
search engine help to identify boundaries between them (e.g. Whitney Museum of 
American Art is a single entity, whereas Whitney Museum in New York contains two). 
Lexical analysis is used to collate identical entities (e.g., Mr. Brown and Brown), and 
entities are tagged with their type (e.g., location, person) based on statistics collected 
from manually annotated data. Disambiguation is performed by comparing the similarity 
of the document in which the surface form appears with Wikipedia articles that represent 
all named entities that have been identified in it, and their context terms, and choosing the 
best match. Cucerzan [2007] achieves 88% accuracy on 5,000 entities appearing in 
Wikipedia articles, and 91% on 750 entities appearing in news stories. 
Kazama and Torisawa [2007] recognize and classify entities but do not disambiguate 
them. Their work resembles the methods described above. Given a sentence, their goal is 
to extract all n-grams representing Wikipedia articles that correspond to a named entity, 
and assign a type to it. For example, in the sentence Rare Jimmy Hendrix song draft sells 
for almost $17,000 they identify Jimmy Hendrix as an entity of type musician. To 
determine the type they extract the first noun phrase following the verb to be from the 
Wikipedia article’s first sentence, excluding phrases like kind of, type of—e.g., guitarist in 
Jimmy Hendrix was a guitarist. Recognition is a supervised tagging process based on 
standard features such as surface form and part of speech tag, augmented with category 
labels extracted from Wikipedia and a gazetteer. An F-measure of 88% was achieved on a 
standard set of 1000 training and 220 development and testing documents.  
To summarize this research on disambiguating named entities, Cucerzan [2007] and 
Kazama and Torisawa [2007] report similar performance, while Bunescu and Paşca’s 
26 
[2006] results seem slightly worse. However, direct comparison may be misleading 
because different datasets are used, and accuracy also depends on the type of the entities 
in question. It is difficult to compare the work described here to that of Section 3.2.1, 
which attempts to disambiguate all types of concepts. Named entity disambiguation 
approaches have distinct and varying goals among themselves, and named entities have 
intrinsic properties that are not shared by common nouns.  
3.2.3. Disambiguating thesaurus and ontology terms. Wikipedia’s category and link 
structure contains the same kind of information as a domain-specific thesaurus, as 
illustrated by Figure 4, which compares it to the agricultural thesaurus Agrovoc [1995]. 
Section 3.1.2 used Wikipedia as an independent knowledge base, but it can also be used to 
extend and improve existing resources. For example, if it were known that cardiovascular 
system and circulatory system in Figure 4 refer to the same concept, the synonym blood 
circulation could be added to Agrovoc. The major problem is to establish a mapping 
between Wikipedia and other resources, disambiguating multiple mappings. 
Ruiz-Casado et al. [2005a] map Wikipedia articles to WordNet. They work with the 
Simple Wikipedia mentioned earlier. WordNet synsets cluster word senses so that 
homonyms can be identified. If a Wikipedia article matches several WordNet synsets, the 
appropriate one is chosen by computing the similarity between the Wikipedia entry word-
bag and the WordNet synset gloss. Dot product similarity of stemmed word vectors 
achieves 84% accuracy. The problem is that as Wikipedia grows, so does ambiguity. Even 
the Simple Wikipedia contains the article Cats (musical), though WordNet does not. The 
 
 
Figure 4. Comparison of organization structure in Agrovoc and Wikipedia. 
27 
mapping technique must be able to deal with missing items as well as polysemy in both 
resources. 
Overell and Rüger [2006] disambiguate place names mentioned in Wikipedia to 
locations in gazetteers. Instead of semantic similarity they develop geographically-based 
disambiguation methods. One uses geographical coordinates from the gazetteer to place a 
minimum bounding box around the location being disambiguated and other place names 
mentioned in the same context. Another analyzes the place name’s referent; for example, 
if the surface form Ontario is mapped to Ontario, Canada, then London, Ontario can be 
mapped to London, Canada. Best results were achieved by combining the minimum 
bounding box method with “importance,” measured by population size. An F-measure of 
80% was achieved on a test set with 1,700 locations and 12,275 non-locations. 
Overell and Rüger [2007] extend this approach by creating a co-occurrence model for 
each place name. They map place names to Wikipedia articles, collect their redirects as 
synonyms, and gather the anchor text of links to these articles. This yields different ways 
of referring to the same place, e.g., {Londinium → London} and {London, UK → 
London}. Next they collect evidence from Wikipedia articles: geographical coordinates, 
and location names in subordinate categories. They also mine Placeopedia, a mash-up 
website that connects Wikipedia with Google Maps. Together, these techniques recognize 
75% of place names and map them to geographical locations with an accuracy of between 
78–90%. 
Milne et al. [2007] investigate whether domain-specific thesauri can be obtained from 
Wikipedia for use in natural language applications within restricted domains, comparing it 
with Agrovoc, a manually built agricultural thesaurus. On the positive side, Wikipedia 
article titles cover the majority of Agrovoc terms that were chosen by professional 
indexers as index terms for an agricultural corpus, and its redirects correspond closely 
with Agrovoc’s synonymy relation. However, neither category relations nor (mutual) 
hyperlinks between articles correspond well with Agrovoc’s taxonomic relations. Instead 
of extracting new domain-specific thesauri from Wikipedia they examine how existing 
ones can be improved, using Agrovoc as a case study [Medelyan and Milne 2008]. Given 
an Agrovoc descriptor, they collect semantically related terms from the Agrovoc 
hierarchy as context terms and map each one to the Wikipedia articles whose conditional 
probability (as explained in Section 3.2.1) is greatest. Then they compute the semantic 
similarity of each candidate mapping to this set of context articles. Manual evaluation of a 
subset with 400 mappings shows an average accuracy of 92%.  
Medelyan and Legg [2008] map 50,000 terms from the Cyc ontology to Wikipedia 
articles using the disambiguation approach proposed by Medelyan and Milne [2008]. For 
28 
each Cyc term, its surrounding ontology is used to gather a context for disambiguation, 
using the taxonomic relations #$genls, #$isa and some specific relations like 
#$countryOfCity and #$conceptuallyRelated. The most common Wikipedia article for 
each context term is identified and compared with all candidates for a mapping. A further 
test is applied when several Cyc terms map to the same Wikipedia article—reverse 
disambiguation. First, mappings that score less than 30% of the highest score are 
eliminated. A common-sense test is applied to the remainder based on Cyc’s ontological 
knowledge regarding disjointness between classes. Evaluation shows that the mapping 
algorithm compares well with human performance. 
In summary, despite the fact that there is still far less research on word sense 
disambiguation using Wikipedia than using WordNet, significant advances have been 
made. Over the last two years the accuracy of mapping documents to relevant Wikipedia 
articles has improved by one third [Milne and Witten 2008b]. Other researchers (such as 
Wang et al. [2007a]) use word sense disambiguation as a part of an application but do not 
provide any intrinsic evaluation. Furthermore, for fair comparison the same version of 
Wikipedia and the same training and test set should be used, as has been done for 
WordNet by SIGLEX (Section 3.2.1).  
It is difficult to compare concept mapping techniques with one another, because each 
method concentrates on a different knowledge resource: WordNet, gazetteers, domain-
specific thesauruses and Cyc. We look forward to more competition in these tasks, and to 
interesting applications of the resulting mappings. 
A similar picture is observed in named entity extraction research, where each research 
group concentrates on different types of entity, e.g. persons or places. Here, extrinsic 
evaluations may be helpful—performance on a particular task like question answering 
before and after integration with Wikipedia. The next section describes an extrinsic 
evaluation of Wikipedia for co-reference resolution and compares the results with 
WordNet.  
3.3 Co-reference resolution 
Natural language understanding tasks such as textual entailment and question answering 
involve identifying which text entities refer to the same concept. Unlike word sense 
disambiguation, it is not necessary to determine the actual meaning of these entities, but 
merely identify their connection. Consider the following example from Wikipedia’s 
article on New Zealand: 
Elizabeth II, as the Queen of New Zealand, is the Head of State and, in her 
absence, is represented by a non-partisan Governor-General. The Queen “reigns 
29 
but does not rule.” She has no real political influence, and her position is 
essentially symbolic. [emphasis added] 
Without knowing that Elizabeth II and the Queen refer to the same entity, which can be 
referred to by the pronouns she and her, the information that can be inferred from this 
paragraph is limited. To resolve the highlighted co-referent expressions requires linguistic 
knowledge and world knowledge—that Elizabeth II is the Queen, and female. Current 
methods often derive semantic relations from WordNet or mine large corpora using 
lexical Hearst style patterns such as X is a Y and Y such as X [Hearst 1992]. The task can 
be modeled as a binary classification problem—to determine, for each pair of entities, 
whether they co-refer or not—and addressed using machine learning techniques, with 
features such as whether they are semantically related, the distance between them, 
agreement in number and gender.  
The use of Wikipedia has been explored in two ways. Ponzetto and Strube [2006, 
2007c] analyze its hyperlink structure and text to extract semantic features; whereas Yang 
and Su [2007] use it as a large semi-structured corpus for mining lexical patterns. Both 
use test data from the Message Understanding Conference organized by NIST. 
Ponzetto and Strube’s [2006, 2007c] goal is to show that Wikipedia can be used as a 
fully-fledged lexical and encyclopedic resource, comparable to WordNet but far more 
extensive. While their work on semantic relatedness (Section 3.1) evaluates Wikipedia 
intrinsically, co-reference is evaluated extrinsically to demonstrate Wikipedia’s utility. As 
a baseline they re-implement Soon et al.’s [2001] method with a set of standard features, 
such as whether the two entities share the same grammatical features or WordNet class. 
Features mined from WordNet and Wikipedia are evaluated separately. The WordNet 
features for two given terms A (Elizabeth II) and B (the Queen) are: 
• 
the highest similarity score from all synset pairs to which A and B belong, 
• 
the average similarity score. 
The Wikipedia analogue to these two features, 
• 
the highest similarity score from all Wikipedia categories of A and B, 
• 
the average similarity score, 
is augmented by further features: 
• 
Does the first paragraph of the Wikipedia article describing A mention B? 
• 
Does any hyperlink in A’s article target B? 
• 
Does the list of categories for A’s article contain B? 
• 
What is the overlap between the first paragraphs of the articles for A and B? 
The similarity and relatedness scores are computed using various metrics. Feature 
selection is applied during training to remove irrelevant features for each scenario. Results 
are presented in Table 3, which we will discuss shortly.  
30 
Yang and Su [2007] utilize Wikipedia in a different way, assessing semantic 
relatedness between two entities by analyzing their co-occurrence patterns in Wikipedia. 
(Pattern matching using the Wikipedia corpus is practiced extensively in information 
extraction; see Section 5). The patterns are evaluated based on positive instances in the 
training data that serve as seeds. For example, given the pair of co-referents Bill Clinton 
and president, and Wikipedia sentences like Bill Clinton is elected President of the United 
States and The US president, Mr Bill Clinton; the patterns [X is elected Y] and [Y, Mr X] 
are extracted. Sometimes patterns occur in structured parts of Wikipedia like lists and 
infoboxes—for example, the bar symbol is the pattern in United States | Washington, D.C. 
An accuracy measure is used to eliminate patterns that are frequently associated with both 
negative and positive pairs. Yang and Su [2007] found that using the 100 most accurate 
patterns as features did not improve performance over the baseline. However, adding a 
single feature representing semantic relatedness between the two entities did improve 
results. Yang and Su use mined patterns to assess relatedness by multiplying together two 
measures of reliability: the strength of association between each positive seed pair and the 
pointwise mutual information between the entities occurring with the pattern and by 
themselves.  
Table 3 shows the results that both sets of authors report for co-reference resolution. 
They use the same baseline, but the implementation was evidently slightly different, for 
Ponzetto and Strube’s yielded a slightly improved F-measure. Ponzetto and Strube’s 
results when features were added from WordNet and Wikipedia are remarkably similar, 
with no statistical difference between them. These features decrease precision over the 
baseline on NWIRE by 5 points but increase recall on both datasets, yielding a significant 
overall gain (1.5 to 2 points on NWIRE and 6 points on BNEWS). Yang and Su improve 
the F-measure on NWIRE and recall on BNEWS by 2 points. Overall, it seems that 
Ponzetto and Strube’s technique performs slightly better. 
These co-reference resolution systems are quite complex, which may explain why no 
other methods have been described in the literature. We expect further developments in 
this area. 
 
 
NWIRE 
BNEWS 
 
 
R 
P 
F 
R 
P 
F
baseline 
56.3 
86.7 
68.3 
50.5 
82.0 
62.
+WordNet 
62.4 
81.4 
70.7 
59.1 
82.4 
68.
Ponzetto and Strube 
[2006, 2007c] 
+Wikipedia 
60.7 
81.8 
69.7 
58.3 
81.9 
68.
baseline 
54.5 
80.3 
64.9 
52.7 
75.3 
62.
Yang and Su [2007] 
+sem. related. 
57.4 
80.8 
67.1 
54.0 
74.7 
62.
Table 3. Performance comparison of two independent techniques on the same datasets. 
31 
3.4 Multilingual alignment 
In 2006, five years after its inception, Wikipedia contained 100,000 articles for eight 
different languages. The closest precedent to this unique multilingual resource is the 
commercial EuroWordNet that unifies seven different languages but covers a far smaller 
set of concepts—8,000 to 44,000, depending on the language [Vossen et al. 1997]. Of 
course, multilingual vocabularies and aligned corpora benefit any application that 
involves machine translation. 
Adafre and de Rijke [2006] began by generating parallel corpora in order to identify 
similar sentences—those whose information overlaps significantly—in English and 
Dutch. First they used a machine translation tool to translate Wikipedia articles and 
compared the result with the corresponding manually written articles in that language. 
Next they generated a bilingual lexicon from links between articles on the same topic in 
different languages, and determined sentence similarity by the number of shared lexicon 
entries. They evaluated these two techniques manually on 30 randomly chosen Dutch and 
English Wikipedia articles. Both identified rather a small number of correct sentence 
alignments; the machine translation had lower accuracy but higher coverage than the 
lexicon approach. The authors ascribed the poor performance to the small size of the 
Dutch version but were optimistic about Wikipedia’s potential. 
Ferrández et al. [2007] use Wikipedia for cross-language question answering (Section 
4.3 covers research on monolingual question answering). They identify named entities in 
the query, link them to Wikipedia article titles, and derive equivalent translations in the 
target language. Wikipedia’s exceptional coverage of named entities (Section 3.2.2) 
counters the main problem of cross-language question answering: low coverage of the 
vocabulary that links questions to documents in other languages. For example, the 
question In which town in Zeeland did Jan Toorop spend several weeks every year 
between 1903 and 1924? mentions the entities Zeeland and Jan Toorop, neither of which 
occurs in EuroWordNet. In an initial version of the system using that resource, Zeeland 
remains unchanged and the phrase Jan Toorop is translated to Enero Toorop because Jan 
is erroneously interpreted as January. With Wikipedia as a reference, the translation is 
correct: ¿En qué ciudad de Zelanda pasaba varias semanas al año Jan Toorop entre 1903 
y 1924? Wikipedia’s coverage allowed Ferrández et al. to increase the number of 
correctly answered questions by 20%. 
Erdmann et al. [2008] show that simply following language links in Wikipedia is 
insufficient for a high-coverage bilingual dictionary. They develop heuristics based on 
Wikipedia’s link structure that extract significantly more translation pairs, and evaluate 
them on a manually created test set containing terms of different frequency. Given a 
32 
Wikipedia article that is available in another language—the target article—they augment 
the translated article name with redirects and the anchor text used to refer to the article. 
Redirects are weighted by the proportion of links to the target article (including redirects) 
that use this particular redirect. Anchors are weighted similarly, by expressing the number 
of links that use this particular anchor text as a proportion of the total number of incoming 
links to the article. The resulting dictionary contains all translation pairs whose weight 
exceeds a certain threshold. This achieves significantly better results than a standard 
dictionary creation approach using parallel corpora.  
We know of only a few disjointed examples that draw on Wikipedia as multilingual 
corpus. Sections 4.2 and 4.3 discuss a few more, but we expect further advances. The data 
mined by these algorithms will continue to grow: between 2001 and 2006 the proportion 
of active Wikipedians contributing to non-English Wikipedias rose from 22% to 55%.14 
With this increasing diversity, it will not be surprising to see Wikipedia become a 
prominent resource for machine translation, multi-lingual information retrieval, and other 
such tasks.  
This section has described several natural language processing techniques that benefit 
from Wikipedia’s immense potential as a repository of linguistic knowledge. Well-
defined tasks such as determining semantic relatedness and word sense disambiguation 
have been significantly improved within just a few years. Many other natural language 
tasks have hardly been touched by Wikipedia research—automatic text summarization, 
text generation, text segmentation, machine translation, parsing. Wikipedia’s rapidly 
growing potential as a multilingual knowledge source has been already explored in cross-
language retrieval (Section 4.2), and we expect accelerating enthusiasm from machine 
translation researchers. The Simple Wikipedia, where concept definitions are expressed 
using basic English phrases and sentences, has unexplored potential for further linguistic 
work such as syntactic parsing and language learning tools. 
4. INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 
Wikipedia is already one of the most popular web sites for locating information. Here we 
ask how it can be used to make information easier to obtain from elsewhere—how to 
apply it to organize and locate other resources.  
Given its applications for natural language processing (Section 3), it is not surprising 
to see Wikipedia leveraged to gain a deeper understanding of both queries and documents, 
and improve how they are matched to each other. Section 4.1 describes how it has been 
                                                           
14 These figures were gathered from http://stats.wikimedia.org. For some reason, statistics for the 
English Wikipedia are not updated beyond October 2006.  
33 
used to expand queries to allow them to return more relevant documents, while Section 
4.2 describes experiments in cross-language retrieval. Wikipedia has also been used to 
retrieve specific portions of documents, such as answers to questions (Section 4.3) or 
important entities (Section 4.4).  
The same Wikipedia-derived understanding has been used to automatically organize 
documents into helpful groups. Section 4.5 shows how Wikipedia has been applied to 
document classification, where documents are categorized under broad headings like 
Sport and Technology. To a lesser extent it has also been used to determine the main 
topics that documents discuss, so that they can be organized under specific keyphrases 
(Section 4.6).  
4.1 Query expansion  
Query expansion aims to improve queries by adding terms and phrases, such as 
synonyms, alternative spellings, and closely related concepts. Such reformulations can be 
performed automatically—without the user’s input—or interactively—where the system 
suggests possible modifications.  
Gregorowicz and Kramer [2006] were among the first to see in Wikipedia a solution 
to “the problem of variable terminology.” Their goal is to construct a comprehensive 
term-concept map that facilitates concept-based information retrieval by resolving 
synonyms in a systematic way. For this they use Wikipedia articles as concepts, and 
establish synonyms via redirects and homonyms via disambiguation pages. This produces 
Figure 5. Using Wikipedia to recognize and expand query topics. 
George W. Bush 
Controversy 
“George W. Bush” OR “George Bush” OR “G.W. Bush” OR 
Bush OR “Bush Junior” OR “Bush government” OR Dubya 
OR Dubyuh OR “Bush administration” OR … 
AND 
( 
) 
 
George H.W. Bush  


controversy OR controversial OR controversies OR 
disagreement OR dispute OR squabble 
( 
) 
34 
a network of 2M concepts linked to 3M terms—a vast and impressive resource compared 
to WordNet’s 115,000 synsets created from 150,000 words. 
Milne et al. [2007] use Wikipedia to provide both forms of expansion in their 
knowledge-based search engine Koru.15 They first obtain a subset of Wikipedia articles 
that are relevant for a particular document collection, and use the links between these to 
build a corpus-specific thesaurus. Given a query they map its phrases to topics in this 
thesaurus. Figure 5 illustrates how the query president bush controversy is mapped to 
potentially relevant thesaurus topics (i.e., Wikipedia articles) George H.W. Bush, George 
W. Bush and Controversy. President Bush is initially disambiguated to the younger of the 
two, because he occurs most often in the document set. This can be corrected manually. 
The redirects from his article and that of Controversy are then mined for synonyms and 
alternative spellings, such as Dubya and disagreement, and quotes are added around 
multi-word phrases (such as Bush administration). This results in a complex Boolean 
query such as an expert librarian might issue. The knowledge base was capable of 
recognizing and lending assistance to 95% of the queries issued to it. Evaluation over the 
TREC HARD Track [Allan 2005] shows that the expanded queries are significantly better 
than the original ones in terms of overall F-measure.  
Milne et al. also provided interactive query expansion by using the detected query 
topics as starting points for browsing the Wikipedia-derived thesaurus. For example, 
George Bush provides a starting point for locating related topics such as Dick Cheney, 
Terrorism, and President of the United States. The evaluation of such exploratory search 
provided little evidence that it assisted users. Despite this, the authors argue that 
Wikipedia should be an effective base for this task, due to its extensive coverage and 
inter-linking. This is yet to be proven, and we know of no other examples of exploratory 
searching with Wikipedia.  
Li et al. [2007a] also use Wikipedia to expand queries, but focus on those that 
traditional approaches fail to improve. The standard method of pseudo-relevance feedback 
works by feeding terms from the highest ranked documents back into the query [Ruthven 
and Lalmas 2003]. This works well in general, so most state-of-the-art approaches are 
variants of this idea. Unfortunately it makes bad queries even worse, because it relies on 
at least the top few documents being relevant. Li et al. avoid this by using Wikipedia as an 
external corpus to obtain additional query terms. They issue the query on Wikipedia to 
retrieve relevant articles, use these articles’ categories to group them, and rank articles so 
that those in the largest groups appear more prominently. Forty terms are then picked 
from the top 20 articles (it is unclear how they are selected) and added to the original 
35 
query. When tested on queries from TREC’s 2005 Robust track [Allan 2005], this 
improved those queries for which traditional pseudo-relevance feedback performs most 
poorly. However, it did not achieve the state of the art in general. The authors attribute 
this to differences in language and context between Wikipedia and the (dated) news 
articles used for evaluation, which render many added terms irrelevant.  
Where the previous two systems departed from traditional bag-of-words relevance 
feedback, Egozi et al. [2008] instead aim to augment it. Their system uses ESA (Section 
3.1) to represent documents and queries as vectors of their most relevant Wikipedia 
articles. Comparison of document vectors to the query vector results in concept-based 
relevance scores, which are combined with those given by state-of-the-art retrieval 
systems such as Xapian and Okapi. Additionally, both concept-based and bag-of-words 
scores are computed by segmenting documents into overlapping 50-word subsections (a 
common strategy), and a document’s total score is the sum of the score obtained from its 
best section and its overall content. One drawback is ESA’s tendency to provide features 
(Wikipedia articles) that are only peripherally related to queries. The query law 
enforcement, dogs, for example, yields not just police dog and cruelty to animals but also 
contract and Louisiana. To counter this documents are ranked according to their bag-of-
words scores and the highest and lowest ranking documents are used to provide positive 
and negative examples for feature selection. When used to augment the four top 
performing systems from the TREC-8 competition [Voorhees and Harman 2000] this 
improved Mean Average Precision by 4–15% depending on the system being augmented.  
Wikipedia seems well suited to query expansion. Bag-of-words approaches stand to 
benefit from its knowledge of what the words mean and how they relate to each other. 
Concept-based approaches that draw on traditional knowledge bases could profit just as 
much from its unmatched breadth. We expect widespread application of Wikipedia in the 
future for both automatic query expansion and exploratory searching, It will improve 
existing techniques and support entirely new ones.  
4.2 Multilingual retrieval 
Multilingual or cross-language information retrieval involves seeking relevant documents 
that are written in a language different to the query. Wikipedia has clear application here. 
Although its language versions grow at different rates and cover different topics, they are 
carefully interwoven. For example, the English article on Search engines is linked to the 
German Suchmaschine, the French Moteur de recherché, and more than 40 other 
translations. These links constitute a comprehensive and rapidly growing cross-lingual 
                                                                                                                                                  
15 Demo at http://www.nzdl.org/koru 
36 
dictionary of topics and terms. Wikipedia is ideal for translating emerging named entities 
and topics, such as people and technologies—exactly the items that traditional 
multilingual resources (dictionaries) struggle with. Surprisingly, we failed to locate any 
papers that use Wikipedia’s cross-language links directly to translate query topics.  
Potthast et al. [2008] jump directly to a more sophisticated solution that uses 
Wikipedia to generate a multilingual retrieval model. This is a generalization of 
traditional monolingual retrieval models like vector spaces and latent semantic analysis 
that assess similarity between documents and text fragments. Multilingual and cross-
language models are capable of identifying similar documents even when written in 
different languages. Potthast et al. use ESA (Section 3.1) as the starting point for a new 
model called Cross-language Explicit Semantic Analysis (CL-ESA). Their approach 
hypothesizes that the relevant concepts identified by ESA are essentially language 
independent, so long as the concepts are sufficiently described in different languages. If 
there were sufficient overlap between the English and German Wikipedias, for example, 
one would get roughly the same list of concepts (and in the same order) from ESA 
regardless of whether the document being represented, or the concept space it was 
projected onto, was in English or German. This makes the language of documents and 
concept spaces largely irrelevant, so that documents in different languages can be 
compared without explicit translation.  
To evaluate this idea, Potthast et al. conducted several experiments with a bilingual 
(German–English) set of 3,000 documents. One test was to use articles in one language as 
queries to retrieve their direct translation in the other language. When CL-ESA was used 
to rank all English documents by their similarity to German ones, the explicit translation 
of the document was consistently ranked highly—it was top 91% of the time, and in the 
top ten 99% of the time. Another test was to use an English document as a query for the 
English document set, and its translation as a query for the German one. The two result 
sets had an average correlation of 72%. These results were obtained with a dimensionality 
of 105; that is, 100,000 bilingual concepts were used to generate the concept spaces. 
Today, only German and English Wikipedias have this degree of overlap. Results degrade 
as fewer concepts are used; 1,000–10,000 concepts were deemed sufficient for reasonable 
retrieval performance. At the time this made CL-ESA capable of pairing English with 
German, French, Polish, Japanese, and Dutch.  
As with the work described in Section 3.4, the results will only become better and 
more broadly applicable. Even if the algorithm itself does not improve, Wikipedia’s 
continued growth will allow this and other techniques to provide more accurate responses 
and be applied to more and more languages over time.  
37 
4.3 Question answering 
Question answering aims to return specific answers to questions, rather than entire 
documents. Approaches range from extracting the most relevant sentences or sections 
from documents, to ensuring that they are in the correct form to constitute an answer, to 
constructing answers on the fly. Wikipedia, a broad corpus filled with numerous facts, is a 
promising source of answers. A simple but well-known example is the fact that Google 
queries prefixed with define, and Ask.com queries starting with What is… or Who is…, 
often return the first sentence from the relevant Wikipedia article.  
Kaisser’s [2008] QuALiM system, illustrated in Figure 6, is more sophisticated.16 
When asked a question (such as Who is Tom Cruise married to?) it mines Wikipedia not 
only for relevant articles, but for the sentences and paragraphs that contain the answer. It 
also provides the exact entity that answers the question—e.g. Katie Holmes. Interestingly, 
this entity is not mined from Wikipedia but obtained by analyzing results from web search 
engines. Questions are parsed to identify the expected class of the answer (in this case, a 
person) and construct valid queries (e.g. Tom Cruise is married to or Tom Cruise’s wife). 
 
Figure 6. The QuALiM system, using Wikipedia to answer Who is Tom Cruise 
married to?
38 
The responses are parsed to identify entities of the appropriate type. Wikipedia is only 
used to supply the supporting sentences and paragraphs.  
The TREC conferences are a prominent forum for investigating question answering.17 
The question-answering track provides ground truth for experiments with a corpus from 
which answers to questions have been extracted manually. The 2004 track saw two early 
uses of Wikipedia for question answering: Lita et al. [2004] and Ahn et al. [2004]. The 
former does not answer questions per se; instead it investigates whether different 
resources provide the answers without attempting to extract them. Wikipedia’s coverage 
of answers was 10 percentage points greater than WordNet’s, and about 30 points greater 
than other resources including Google define queries and gazetteers such as the CIA 
World Fact Book. 
Ahn et al. [2004] seem to be the first to provide explicit answers from Wikipedia. 
They identify the question’s topic—Tom Cruise in our example—and locate the relevant 
article. They then identify the expected type of the answer—in this case, another person 
(his wife)—and scan the article for matching entities. These are ranked by both prior 
answer confidence (probability that they answer any question at all) and posterior 
confidence (probability that they answer the question at hand). Prior confidence is given 
by the entity’s position in the article, the most important facts are covered first. Posterior 
confidence is given by the Jaccard similarity of the question to the sentence surrounding 
the entity. Wikipedia is used as one stream among many from which to extract answers. 
Unfortunately the experiments do not tease out its individual contribution. Overall, 
however, they did not improve upon their previous work. 
The CLEF series of conferences is another popular forum for investigating question 
answering.18 Corpora and tasks in many different languages are provided for monolingual 
and cross-language work, one source of documents being a cross-language crawl of 
Wikipedia. Most competition entries extract answers from Wikipedia, but are not covered 
here because they do not take advantage of its unique properties. 
Buscaldi and Rosso [2007a] use Wikipedia to augment their question answering 
system. They left unchanged the way in which this system extracts answers except for an 
additional step where Wikipedia is consulted to verify the results. They index four 
different views of Wikipedia—titles, full text, first sections (definitions), and the 
categories that articles belong to—and search them differently depending on the question 
type. Answers to definition questions (e.g., Who is Nelson Mandela?) are verified by 
                                                                                                                                                  
16 Demo at http://demos.inf.ed.ac.uk:8080/qualim/  
17 http://trec.nist.gov/ 
18 The homepage for the CLEF series of conferences is at http://www.clef-campaign.org/ 
39 
seeking articles whose title contains the corresponding entity and whose first section 
contains the proposed answer. If the question requires a name (e.g., Who is the President 
of the United States?) the process is reversed: candidate answers (Bill Clinton, George 
Bush) are sought in the title field and query constraints (President, United States) in the 
definition. In either case, if at least one relevant article is returned the answer is verified. 
This yielded an improvement of 4.5% over the original system across all question types. 
Ferrández et al. [2007] also use Wikipedia’s structure to answer questions, but focus on 
cross-lingual tasks (see Section 3.4). 
As well as using Wikipedia as a corpus for standard question answering, CLEF has a 
track specifically designed to assist Wikipedia’s contributors. Given a source article, the 
aim is to extract new snippets of information from related articles that should be 
incorporated into it. Jijkoun and de Rijke [2006] conclude that the task is difficult but 
possible, so long as the results are used in a supervised fashion. The best of seven 
participating teams added an average of 3.4 “perfect” (important and novel) snippets to 
each English article, with a precision of 36%. Buscaldi and Rosso [2007b], one of the 
contributing entries,19 search Wikipedia for articles containing the target article’s title. 
They extract snippets, rank them according to their similarity to the original article using 
the bag-of-words model, and discard those that are redundant (too similar) or irrelevant 
(not similar enough). On English data this yields 2.7 perfect snippets per topic, with a 
precision of 29%. On Spanish data it obtains 1.8 snippets with 23% precision.  
Finally, Higashinaka et al. [2007] extract questions, answers and even hints from 
Wikipedia to automatically generate “Who am I?” quizzes. The first two tasks are simple 
because the question is always the same and the answer is always a person. The 
challenging part is extracting hints (essentially, facts about the person) and ranking them 
so that they progress from vague to specific. They used machine learning based on 
biographical Wikipedia articles whose facts have been manually ranked.  
Overall, research on question answering tends to treat Wikipedia as just another plain-
text corpus. Few researchers capitalize on its unique structural properties (categories, 
links, etc.) or the explicit semantics it provides. For example, standard word-based 
similarity measures continue to be applied, even though concept-based measures such as 
ESA have been proven more effective. There is little overlap between this work and 
research on information extraction from Wikipedia, and no use of Wikipedia-derived 
ontologies, or its infoboxes (Section 5). This reflects an overall philosophy of crawling 
the entire web for answers, requiring techniques that generalize to any textual resource.  
                                                           
19 We were unable to locate papers describing the others. 
40 
4.4 Entity ranking 
It is often expedient to return entities in response to a query rather than full documents as 
in classical retrieval. This resembles question answering, and often fulfils the same 
purpose—for example, the query countries where I can pay in euros could be answered 
by a list of relevant countries. For other queries, however, entity ranking does not provide 
answers but instead generates a list of pertinent topics. For example, as well as Google, 
Yahoo, and Microsoft Live the query search engines would also return PageRank and 
World Wide Web. The literature seems to use ‘entity’ and ‘named entity’ interchangeably, 
making it unclear whether concepts such as information retrieval and full text search 
would also be valid results. 
Section 5.2 demonstrates that Wikipedia offers an exceptionally large pool of 
manually-defined entities, which can be typed (as people, places, events, etc.) fairly 
accurately. The entity ranking track of the Initiative for Evaluation of XML Retrieval 
(INEX) compares different methods for entity ranking by how well they are able to return 
relevant Wikipedia entities in response to queries [de Vries et al. 2007]. Zaragoza et al. 
[2007] use Wikipedia as a dataset for comparing two approaches to entity ranking: entity 
containment graphs and web search based methods—their results are not described here 
because they do not relate directly to Wikipedia. However, they have developed a version 
of Wikipedia in which named entities have been automatically annotated, and are sharing 
it so that others can investigate different approaches to named entity ranking.20  
Wikipedia provides a wealth of information about the entities it contains, which can 
improve ranking. Vercoustre et al. [2008] combine traditional search with Wikipedia-
specific features. They rank articles (which they assume are synonymous with entities) by 
combining the score provided by a search engine (Zettair) with features mined from 
categories and inter-article links. The latter provide a simplified PageRank for entities and 
the former a similarity score for how they relate to each other. The resulting precision 
almost doubles that of the search engine alone. Vercoustre et al. were the only competitors 
for the INEX entity-ranking track we were able to locate,21 and it seems that Wikipedia’s 
ability to improve entity ranking has yet to be evaluated against more sophisticated 
baselines. Moreover, the features that they derive from Wikipedia are only used to rank 
entities in general, not by their significance for the query. Regardless, entity ranking will 
no doubt receive more attention as the INEX competition grows and others use Zaragossa 
et al.’s dataset.  
                                                           
20 The annotated version of Wikipedia is at http://www.yr-bcn.es/semanticWikipedia 
21 It began in 2007 and the Proceedings are yet to be published. 
41 
The knowledge that Wikipedia provides about entities can also be used to organize 
them. This has not yet been thoroughly investigated, the only example being Yang et al.’s 
[2007] use of Wikipedia articles and WikiBooks to organize entities into hierarchical 
topic maps. They search for the most relevant article and book for a query and simply 
strip away the text to leave lists of links—which again they assume to be entities—under 
the headings in which they were found. This is both an entity ranking method and a tool 
for generating domain-specific taxonomies, but has not been evaluated as either.  
Entity ranking is a young field and research is sparse. Overall, it seems that 
researchers view entity ranking over Wikipedia—where entities and the information 
pertaining to them are clearly demarcated—as the low-hanging fruit. It will be interesting 
to see what challenges are involved in generalizing this research to utilize other resources.  
4.5 Text categorization 
Text categorization (or classification) organizes documents into labeled groups, where 
labels come from a pool of pre-determined categories. The traditional approach is to 
represent documents by the words they contain, and use training documents to identify 
words and phrases that are indicative of each category label. Wikipedia allows 
categorization techniques to draw on background knowledge about the concepts the words 
represent. As Gabrilovich and Markovitch [2006] note, traditional approaches are brittle 
and break down when documents discuss similar topics in different terms—as when one 
talks of Wal-Mart and the other of department stores. They cannot make the necessary 
connections because they lack background knowledge about what the words mean. 
Wikipedia can fill the gap.  
As a quick indication of its application, Table 4 compares Wikipedia-based 
approaches with state-of-the-art methods that only use information in the documents 
themselves. The figures were obtained on the Reuters-21578 collection, a set of news 
stories that have been manually assigned to categories. Results are presented as the 
breakeven point (BEP) where recall and precision are equal. The micro and macro 
columns correspond to how these are averaged: the former averages across documents, so 
that smaller categories are largely ignored; the latter averages by category. The first entry 
is a baseline provided by Gabrilovich and Markovitch, which is in line with state-of-the-
 
Micro BEP 
Macro BEP 
Baseline (from Gabrilovich and 
Markovitch [2006]) 
87.7 
60.2 
Gabrilovich and Markovitch [2006] 
88.0 
61.4 
Wang et al. [2007a] 
91.2 
63.1 
Table 4. Performance of text categorization over the Reuters-21578 collection. 
42 
art methods such as [Dumais et al. 1998]. The remaining three entries use additional 
information gleaned from Wikipedia and are described below. The gains may seem slight, 
but they represent the first improvement upon a performance plateau reached by 
established techniques that are now a decade old.  
Gabrilovich and Markovitch [2006] observe that documents can be augmented with 
Wikipedia concepts without complex natural language processing. Both are in the same 
form—plain text—so standard similarity algorithms can be used to compare documents 
with potentially relevant articles. Thus documents can be represented as weighted lists of 
relevant concepts rather than bags of words. This should sound familiar—it is the 
predecessor of ESA (Sections 3.1, 4.1, 4.2), from the same authors. For each document, 
Gabrilovich and Markovitch generate a large set of features (articles) not just from the 
document as a whole, but also by considering each word, sentence, and paragraph 
independently. Training documents are then used to filter out the best of these features to 
augment the original bag of words. The number of links made to each article is used to 
identify and emphasize those that are most well known. This results in consistent 
improvement over previous classification techniques, particularly for short documents 
(which otherwise have few features) and categories with fewer training examples.  
Wikipedia’s ability to improve classification of short documents is confirmed by 
Banerjee et al. [2007], who cluster news articles under feed items such as those provided 
by Google News. They obtained relevant articles for each news story by issuing its title 
and short description (Google snippet) as separate queries to a Lucene index of 
Wikipedia. They were able to cluster documents under their original headings (each feed 
item organizes many similar stories) with 90% accuracy using only the titles and 
descriptions as input. However, this work treats Google’s automatically clustered news 
stories as ground truth, and only compares the Wikipedia-based approach with a baseline 
of their own design.  
Wang et al. [2007a] also use Wikipedia to improve document classification, but focus 
on mining it for terms and phrases to add to the bag of words representation. For each 
document they locate relevant Wikipedia articles by matching n-grams to article titles. 
They augment the document by crawling these articles for synonyms (redirects), 
hyponyms (parent categories) and associative concepts (inter-article links). Though the 
last yields many tenuous semantic relationships, these are refined by selecting linked 
articles that are closely related according to textual content or parent categories. As shown 
in Table 4, this results in the best overall performance.  
As well as a source of background knowledge for improving classification techniques, 
Wikipedia can be used as a corpus for training and evaluating them. Almost all 
43 
classification approaches are machine-learned, and thus require training examples. 
Wikipedia provides millions of them. Each association between an article and the 
categories to which it belongs can be considered as manually defined ground truth for 
how that article should be classified. Gleim et al. [2007], for example, use this to evaluate 
their techniques for categorizing web pages solely on structure rather than textual content. 
Admittedly, this is a well-established research area with well-known datasets, so it is 
unclear why another one is required. Table 4, for example, would be more informative if 
all of the researchers using Wikipedia for document classification had used standard 
datasets instead of creating their own. 
Two approaches that do not compete with the traditional bag-of-words (and will 
therefore be discussed only briefly) are Janik and Kochut [2007] and Minier et al. [2007]. 
The former is one of the few techniques that does not use machine learning for 
classification. Instead, miniature “ontologies”—rough networks of relevant concepts—are 
mined from Wikipedia for each document and category, and the most relevant category 
ontology to each document ontology is identified. The latter approach transforms the 
traditional document-term matrix by mapping it onto a gigantic term-concept matrix 
obtained from Wikipedia. PageRank is run over Wikipedia’s inter-article links in order to 
weight the derived concepts, and dimensionality reduction techniques (latent semantic 
analysis, kernel principle component analysis and kernel canonical correlation analysis) 
are used to reduce the representation to a manageable size. Minier et al. attribute the 
disappointing results (shown in Table 4) to differences in language usage between 
Wikipedia and the Reuters corpus used for evaluation. It should be noted that their Macro 
BEP (the highest in the table) may be misleading; their baseline achieves an even higher 
result, indicating that their experiment should not be compared to the other three.  
Banerjee [2007] observed that document categorization is a problem where the 
goalposts shift regularly. Typical applications are organizing news stories or emails, 
which arrive in a stream where the topics being discussed constantly evolve. A 
categorization method trained today may not be particularly helpful next week. Instead of 
throwing away old classifiers, they show that inductive transfer allows old classifiers to 
influence new ones. This improves results and reduces the need for fresh training data. 
They find that classifiers that derive additional knowledge from Wikipedia are more 
 
Micro BEP 
Macro BEP 
Baseline (from Gabrilovich and 
Markovitch [2006]) 
87.7 
60.2 
Gabrilovich and Markovitch [2006] 
88.0 
61.4 
Wang et al. [2007a] 
91.2 
63.1 
Table 4. Performance of text categorization over the Reuters-21578 collection. 
44 
effective at transferring this knowledge, which they attribute to Wikipedia’s ability to 
provide background knowledge about the content of articles, making their representations 
more stable.  
Dakka and Cucerzan [2008] and Bhole et al. [2007] perform the reverse operation. 
Instead of using Wikipedia to augment document categorization, they apply 
categorization techniques to Wikipedia. Their aim is to classify articles to detect the types 
(people, places, events, etc.) of the named entities they represent. This is discussed in 
Section 5.2 on named entity recognition. Also discussed elsewhere (Section 4.6) is 
Schönhofen [2006], who developed a topic indexing system but evaluated it as a 
document classifier. 
Overall, the use of Wikipedia for text categorization is a flourishing research area. 
Many recent efforts have improved upon the previous state of the art; a plateau that had 
stood for almost a decade. Some of this success may be due to the amount of attention the 
problem has generated (at least ten papers in just three years), but more fundamentally it 
can be attributed to the way in which researchers are approaching the task. Just as we saw 
in Section 4.1, the greatest gains have come from drawing closely on and augmenting 
existing research, while thoroughly exploring the unique features that Wikipedia offers.  
4.6 Topic indexing  
Topic indexing is subtly different from text categorization. Both label documents so that 
they can be grouped sensibly and browsed efficiently, but in topic indexing labels are 
chosen from the topics the documents discuss rather than from a predetermined pool of 
categories. Topic labels are typically obtained from a domain-specific thesaurus—such as 
MESH [Lipscomb 2000] for the Medical domain—because general thesauri like WordNet 
and Roget are too small to provide sufficient detail. An alternative is to obtain labels from 
the documents themselves, but this is inconsistent and error-prone because topics are 
difficult to recognize and appear in different surface forms. Using Wikipedia as a source 
of labels sidesteps the onerous requirement for developing or obtaining relevant thesauri, 
since it is large and general enough to apply to all domains. It might not achieve the same 
depth as domain-specific thesauri, but tends to cover the topics that are used for indexing 
most often [Milne et al. 2006]. It is also more consistent than extracting terms from the 
documents themselves, since each concept in Wikipedia is represented by a single 
succinct manually chosen title. In addition to the labels themselves, Wikipedia provides 
many features about the concepts, such as how important and well known they are and 
how they relate to each other. 
45 
Medelyan et al. [2008] use Wikipedia as a controlled vocabulary and apply 
wikification (Section 3.2.1) to identify the topics that documents mention. For each 
candidate topic they identify several features, including classical ones such as how often 
topics are mentioned, and two Wikipedia-specific ones. One is node degree: the extent to 
which each candidate topic (article) is linked to the other topics detected in the document. 
The other is keyphraseness: the extent to which the topics are used as links in Wikipedia. 
They use a supervised approach that learns the typical distributions of these features from 
a manually tagged corpus [Frank et al. 1999]. For training and evaluation they had 30 
people, working in pairs, index 20 documents. Figure 7 shows key topics for one 
document and illustrates the inherent subjectivity of the task—the indexers achieved only 
30% agreement with each other. Medelyan et al.’s automatic system, whose choices are 
shown as filled circles in the figure, obtained the same level of agreement and requires 
little training.  
Although it has not been evaluated as such, Gabrilovich and Markovitch’s [2007] ESA 
(Section 3.1) essentially performs topic indexing. For each document or text fragment it 
generates a weighted list of relevant Wikipedia concepts, the strongest of which should be 
suitable topic labels. Another approach that has not been compared to manually indexed 
documents is Schönhofen [2006], who uses Wikipedia categories as the vocabulary from 
which key topics are selected. Documents are scanned to identify the article titles and 
redirects they mention, and are represented by the categories that contain these articles—
weighted by how often the document mentions the category title, its child article titles, 
and the individual words in them. Schönhofen did not compare the resulting categories 
with index topics, but instead used them to perform document categorization. Roughly the 
Figure 7. Topics assigned to a document entitled “A Safe, Efficient Regression Test Selection 
Technique” by human teams (outlined circles) and the new algorithm (filled circles). 
46 
same results are achieved whether documents are represented by these categories or by 
their content in the standard way; combining the two yields a significant improvement.  
Like document categorization, research in topic indexing builds solidly on related 
work but has been augmented to make productive use of Wikipedia. Significant gains 
have been achieved over the previous state of the art, although the results have not yet 
been evaluated as rigorously as in categorization. Medelyan et al. [2008] have directly 
compared their results against manually defined ground truth, but used a small dataset. To 
advance further, larger datasets need to be developed for evaluation and training. 
5. INFORMATION EXTRACTION AND ONTOLOGY BUILDING 
Whereas information retrieval aims to answer specific questions, information extraction 
seeks to deduce meaningful structures from unstructured data such as natural language 
text—though in practice the dividing line between the fields is not sharp. These structures 
are usually represented as relations. For example, from: 
Apple Inc.’s world corporate headquarters are located in the middle of Silicon 
Valley, at 1 Infinite Loop, Cupertino, California. 
a relation hasHeadquarters(Apple Inc., 1 Infinite Loop-Cupertino-California) might be 
extracted. The challenge is to extract this relation from sentences that express the same 
information about Apple Inc. regardless of their actual wording. Moreover, given a similar 
sentence about other companies, the same relation should be determined with different 
arguments, 
e.g., 
hasHeadquarters(Google Inc., Google Campus-Mountain View-Cali-
fornia). The next step after determining such relations would be to automatically organize 
them into a connected scheme, building a single machine-readable knowledge structure. 
Such organization attempts vary from producing simple thesauri through more complex 
taxonomies to comprehensive ontologies.  
Section 5.1 begins with traditional information extraction approaches that apply 
methods developed before Wikipedia was recognized as something more than just a 
corpus: for them, any text represents a source of relations. The extraction process benefits 
from the encyclopedic nature of Wikipedia and its uniform writing style. Section 5.2 
treats the determination of named entities and their type as a task of its own. Such work 
extracts information such as isA(Portugal, Location) and isA(Bob Marley, Person).  
Section 5.3 turns to more ambitious approaches that see in Wikipedia’s semi-
structured parts and internal hyperlink structure (Sections 2.2.3, 2.2.4 and 2.2.5) the 
skeleton of a unified knowledge scheme. Ultimately, these researchers aspire to build a 
machine-readable ontology such as Cyc22 [Lenat and Guha, 1990, Lenat, 1995] that 
                                                           
22 http://www.opencyc.org  
47 
captures the meaning of natural language as a whole using explicitly coded facts and 
rules, and/or a principled taxonomy that enables knowledge inheritance.  
There is dispute concerning just what characterizes an ontology. What distinguishes it 
from (on the IT side) a mere database or (on the linguistic side) a mere controlled 
vocabulary? Some authors [e.g. Wilks, 2006] divide ontology research into two distinct 
areas: i) the field of ‘knowledge representation’, which descends from classical AI and 
aspires to make every aspect of the knowledge represented accessible to further inference, 
often resulting in major challenges with respect to inferential tractability; and ii) ‘ontology 
engineering’ understood merely as the development of shared conceptual schemes, for 
instance within a particular professional knowledge domain (biomedical ontologies23 are a 
good example). Nevertheless, most agree that a formal ontology is a codification of the 
meanings of a set of concepts that is machine-readable to at least some extent. Building 
such a resource manually involves naming the concepts, representing and categorizing 
links between them, and (often) encoding key facts about them. Thus an ontologization of 
the concept tree should i) name it as a first-class object (to which equivalent terms such as 
the French arbre may be attached), ii) link it to closely-related concepts such as leaf, 
preferably with some indication that a leaf is part of a tree, and iii) be capable of 
representing facts like “There are no trees in the Antarctic.”  
Finally, Section 5.4 discusses attempts to use Wikipedia by Semantic Web 
researchers, whose goal is to transform knowledge sharing across the Internet. 
5.1 Deriving relations from article text 
Extracting semantic relations from raw text takes known relations as seeds, identifies 
patterns in their text—X’s * headquarters are located in * at Y in the above example—
and applies them to a large corpus to identify new relations. Phrase chunkers or named 
entity recognizers are applied to identify entities that appear in a sentence; intervening 
patterns are compared to the seed patterns; and when they match, new semantic relations 
are discovered. Culotta et al. [2006] summarize difficulties in this process:  
• 
Enumeration over all pairs of entities yields a low density of correct relations, 
even when restricted to a single sentence. 
• 
Errors in the entity recognition stage create inaccuracies in relation classification. 
Wikipedia’s structure helps combat these difficulties. Each article represents a particular 
concept that serves as a clearly recognizable principal entity for relation extraction from 
that article. Its description contains links to other, secondary, entities. All that remains is 
to determine the semantic relation between these entities. For example, the description of 
                                                           
23 See for instance Open Biomedical Ontologies at http://www.obofoundry.org/  
48 
the Waikato River, shown in Figure 8, links to entities like river, New Zealand, Lake 
Taupo and many others. Appropriate syntactic and lexical patterns can extract a host of 
semantic relations between these items. 
Ruiz-Casado et al. [2005b] use WordNet for mining such patterns. Given two co-
occurring semantically related WordNet nouns, the text that appears between them in 
Wikipedia articles is used to find relations missing from WordNet. But first the text is 
generalized. If the edit distance falls below a predefined threshold—i.e., the strings nearly 
match—those parts that do not match are replaced by a wildcard (*). For example, a 
generalized pattern X directed the * famous|well-known film Y is obtained from X directed 
the famous film Y and X directed the well-known film Y. Using this technique Ruiz-Casado 
et al. identify 1200 new relations with a precision of 61–69% depending on the relation 
type. In later work, Ruiz-Casado et al. [2006] extend this experiment by restricting 
Wikipedia pages to particular categories (prime ministers, authors, actors, football 
players, and capitals) before applying the patterns. Results vary wildly when the pages 
are combined into a single corpus, from 8% precision on the player-team relation to 90% 
for death-year, because of heterogeneity in style and mark-up of articles. But restricting to 
relevant categories yields a marked improvement, increasing to 93% when player-team 
patterns are applied solely to articles about football players. 
Later approaches combine pattern extraction with syntactic parsing to improve 
coverage, because the same semantic relation can be expressed in different ways, i.e. 
Chopin was great among the composers of his time and Chopin is a 19th Century 
composer. Such patterns call for syntactic rather than lexical generalization. Herbelot and 
Copestake [2006] use a dependency parser to identify subject, object and their 
relationship in a sentence, regardless of word order. Their parser re-organizes a sentence 
into a series of minimal semantic trees whose roots correspond to lemmas in the sentence 
Figure 8. Wikipedia’s description of the Waikato River. 
49 
(see Figure 9). The same tree may be obtained for similar sentences. The results, which 
were restricted to articles describing animal species, are evaluated manually on a subset of 
100 articles and automatically using a thesaurus. With three manually defined patterns 
recall was low: 14% at precision 92%. When patterns are extracted automatically recall 
improves to 37%; however precision drops to 65%. 
Suchanek et al. [2006] use a context-free grammar for parsing. A pattern is defined by 
a set of syntactic links between two given concepts, called a bridge. For example, the 
bridge in Figure 10 matches sentences like the one above about Chopin, where Chopin=X 
and composers=Y. Machine learning techniques are applied to determine and generalize 
patterns that describe relations of interest from manually supplied positive and negative 
examples. The approach is evaluated on article sets with different degrees of 
heterogeneity: articles about composers, geography, and random articles. As expected, the 
more heterogeneous the corpus the worse the results, with best results achieved on 
composers for the relations birthDate (F-measure 75%) and instanceOf (F-measure 79%). 
Unlike Herbelot and Copestake [2006], Suchanek et al. show that their approach 
outperforms other systems, including a shallow pattern matching resource TextToOnto 
and the more sophisticated scheme of Chimiano and Volker [2005]. 
 
Figure 9. Output of the Robust Minimal Recursion Semantics analyzer for the sentence  
Xanthidae is one of the families of crabs [Herbelot and Copestake, 2006]. 
 
 
Figure 10. Example bridge pattern used in Suchanek et al. [2006]. 
50 
Nguyen et al. [2007a, 2007b], like Herbelot and Copestake [2006], use a dependency 
parser, but increase coverage using the OpenNLP toolkit’s anaphora resolution.24 For 
example, in an article about the software company 3PAR, phrases like 3PAR, 
manufacturer, it and company are tagged as the same principal entity. All links are tagged 
as its secondary entities. Sentences with at least one principal and one secondary entity 
are analyzed by the parser. Like Suchanek et al. [2006], Nguyen et al. apply machine 
learning to generalize the trees, a task they call subtree mining. The dependency tree of 
Figure 11a is extracted from David Scott joined 3PAR as CEO in January 2001 and is 
then generalized to match similar sentences (Figure 11b). The subtrees are extracted from 
a set of training sentences containing positive examples and applied as patterns to find 
new semantic relations. The scheme was evaluated using 3,300 manually annotated 
entities, 200 of which were reserved for testing. 6,000 Wikipedia articles, including 45 
test articles, were used as the corpus. The approach achieved an F-measure of 38%, with 
precision much higher than recall, significantly outperforming two simple baselines. 
Wang et al. [2007b] use selectional constraints in order to increase the precision of 
regular expressions without reducing coverage. They also extract positive seeds from 
infoboxes automatically. For example, the infobox field Directed by describes relation 
hasDirector(FILM, DIRECTOR) with positive examples <Titanic, James Cameron> and 
<King Kong (2005), Peter Jackson>. They collect patterns that intervene between these 
entities in Wikipedia’s text and generalize them into regular expressions like: 
X (is|was) (a|an) * (film|movie) directed by Y. 
Selectional constraints restrict the types of subject and object that can co-occur within 
such patterns. For example, Y in the pattern above must be a director—or at least a 
person. The labels specifying the types of entities implemented as features are derived 
from words that commonly occur in articles describing these entities. For example, 
instances of ARTIST extracted from a relation hasArtist(ALBUM, ARTIST) often co-occur 
                                                           
24 http://opennlp.sourceforge.net/ 
 
Figure 11. Example dependency parse in Nguyen et al. [2007a]. 
51 
with terms like singer, musician, guitarist, rapper, etc. To ensure better coverage, Wang 
et al. cluster such terms hierarchically. The relations hasDirector and hasArtist are 
evaluated independently on a sample of 100 relations extracted automatically from the 
entire Wikipedia, and were manually assessed by three human subjects. An unsupervised 
learning algorithm was applied, and the features were tested individually and together. 
The authors report precision and accuracy values close to 100%. 
The same authors investigate a different technique that does not rely on patterns at all 
[Wang et al. 2007c]. Instead, features are extracted from two articles before determining 
their relation: 
• 
The first noun phrase and its lexical head that follows the verb to be in the 
article’s first sentence (e.g., comedy film and film in Annie Hall is a romantic 
comedy film). 
• 
Noun phrases appearing in corresponding category titles and the lexical heads. 
• 
Infobox predicates, e.g. Directed by and Produced by in Annie Hall. 
• 
Intervening text between two terms in sentences that use them both as a link. 
For each pair of articles the distribution of these feature values is compared with that of 
positive examples. Unlike Wang et al. [2007b], no negative instances are used. A special 
learning algorithm (B-POL) designed for situations where only positive examples are 
available is applied. It identifies negative examples in unlabeled data automatically using 
a combination of a quick classifier and a more rigorous one. Four relations (hasArtist, 
hasDirector, isLocatedIn and isMemberOf) between 1,000 named entity pairs were 
evaluated by three human subjects. Best results were an F-measure of 80% on the 
hasArtist relation, which had the largest training set; the worse was 50% on isMemberOf.  
Wu and Weld [2007, 2008] extract relations in order to improve Wikipedia infoboxes. 
Like Wang et al. [2007b, 2007c] they use their content as training data. Their system first 
maps infobox attribute-value pairs to sentences in the corresponding Wikipedia article 
using simple heuristics. Next, for each attribute it creates a sentence classifier that uses the 
sentence’s tokens and their part of speech tags as features. Given an unseen Wikipedia 
article, a document classifier analyzes its categories and assigns an infobox class, e.g. 
‘U.S. counties’. Next, a sentence classifier is applied to assign relevant infobox attributes. 
Extracting values from sentences is treated as a sequential data-labeling problem, to 
which Conditional Random Fields are applied. Precision and recall are measured by 
comparing generated infoboxes against existing ones. The authors manually judged the 
attributes produced by their system and by Wikipedia authors. Precision ranged from 74 
to 97% at recall levels of 60 to 96% respectively, depending on the infobox class. 
Precision was around 95% on average and more stable across the classes; recall was 
52 
significantly better on most classes but far worse on others. This paper will be discussed 
further in Section 5.4 on the Semantic Web.   
In later work Wu et al. [2008] address problems in their approach in the following 
way. To generate complete infobox schemata for articles of rare classes, they refer to 
WordNet’s ontology and aggregate attributes from parents to their children classes. For 
example, knowing that isA(Performer, Person), the infobox for Performers receives the 
formerly missing field BirthPlace. To provide additional positive examples, they seek 
new sentences describing the same attribute-values pairs by applying TextRunner [Banko 
et al. 2007] to the web. Given a new entity for which an infobox is to be generated, 
Google search is used to retrieve additional sentences describing it. The combination of 
these techniques improves recall by 2–9 percentage points while maintaining or 
increasing precision. These results are the most complete and impressive so far. 
Most of these approaches capitalize on Wikipedia’s encyclopedic nature, using it as a 
corpus for extracting semantic relations. Simple pattern matching is improved by the use 
of parsing [Suchanek et al. 2006], anaphor resolution [Nguyen et al. 2007a, 2007b], 
selectional constraints [Wang et al. 2007b] and lexical analysis [Wu and Weld 2007, 
2008]; however, the exact contribution of each is unclear. Many of the methods seem 
complementary and could be combined into a single approach, but experiments have not 
yet been reported. There is a clear shift from using patterns to the use of features in 
machine learning approaches [Nguyen et al. 2007b, Wang et al. 2007c, Wu and Weld. 
2007, 2008]. Wikipedia itself is used as a source of training examples [Wang et al. 2007b, 
Wu and Weld 2007], instead of defining them manually. Wu et al. [2008] demonstrate 
that performance can be boosted by retrieving additional content from the web.  
It would be helpful to compare the approaches on the same data set. Of course, the 
researchers would have to reach a consensus on what relations to extract, and at this point 
there are merely arbitrary overlaps in some relations (isMemberOf, instanceOf, 
hasDirector). There is little cross-pollination between this research and that in Section 
5.3, where semantic relations are extracted directly from Wikipedia’s structure—like 
category links and infoboxes. Section 5.3 will show that these contain a wealth of 
semantic relations, outnumbering those appearing in the article text. On the positive side, 
unlike those in Section 5.3 the techniques surveyed in this section generalize to the entire 
web. Article text is the primary source of relations, and infoboxes are used to enhance the 
extraction of meaningful nuggets. It is easy to imagine bootstrapping these results to the 
rest of the web, which we return to in Section 5.4.  
53 
5.2 Typing named entities 
Infoboxes for entities of the same kind share similar characteristics—for example, Apple 
Inc, Microsoft and Google share the fields Founded, Headquarters, Key People and 
Products—but Wikipedia does not state that they belong to the same type of named 
entity, in this case company. This would greatly help tasks such as information retrieval 
and question answering (Section 4). This section covers research that classifies articles 
into predefined classes representing entity types. The results are semantic relations of a 
particular kind, e.g. isA(London, Location), whose subject is a named entity and object the 
particular type of entity. 
Toral and Muñoz [2006] extract named entities from the Simple Wikipedia using 
WordNet’s noun hierarchy. Given an entry—Portugal—they extract the first sentence of 
its definition—Portugal is a country in the south-west of Europe—and tag each word with 
its part of speech. They assign nouns their first (i.e., most common) sense from WordNet 
and move up the hierarchy to determine its class, e.g., country → location. The most 
common class appearing in the sentence determines the class of the article (i.e., entity). 
The authors achieve 78% F-measure on 400 locations and 68% on 240 persons. They do 
not use Wikipedia’s structural features but mention this as future work. 
Buscaldi and Rosso [2007b] address the same task but concentrate on geographical 
locations. Unlike Toral and Muñoz [2006], they analyze the entire text of each article. To 
determine whether it describes a location they compare its content with a set of keywords 
extracted from glosses of locations in WordNet using the Dice metric and cosine 
coefficient; they also use a multinomial Naïve Bayes classifier trained on the Wikipedia 
XML corpus [Denoyer and Gallinari 2006]. When evaluated on data provided by Overell 
and Rüger [2007] (Section 3.2.2) they find that cosine similarity outperforms both the 
WordNet-based Dice metric and Naïve Bayes, achieving an F-measure of 53% on full 
articles and 65% on first sentences. However, the results fall short of Overell and Rüger’s 
[2006], and the authors conclude that the content of articles describing locations is less 
discriminative than other features like geographical coordinates.  
Section 3.2.2 discussed how Overell and Rüger [2006, 2007] analyze named entities 
representing geographic locations, mapping articles to place names listed in a gazetteer. It 
also described another group of approaches that recognize named entities in raw text and 
map them to articles. Apart from these, little research has been done on determining the 
semantic types of named entities. It is surprising that both techniques described above use 
WordNet as a reference for the entities’ semantic classes instead of referring to 
Wikipedia’s categories. For example, three companies mentioned above belong to 
subcategories of Category:Companies and Portugal is listed under Category:Countries. 
54 
Some of the approaches described in the following section use exactly this information to 
mine isA relations, but are not restricted to named entities. Moreover, neither of the 
techniques discussed here utilizes the shared infobox fields. Annotating Wikipedia with 
entity labels looks like low-hanging fruit: we expect more advances in the future.  
5.3 Ontology building 
We have described how to extract facts and relations from Wikipedia individually. The 
present section goes farther, using Wikipedia as the source of a single comprehensive 
knowledge base, an ontology that gives an alternative to manually created resources such 
as Cyc and WordNet. The three main approaches we see so far are i) extracting and/or 
labeling Wikipedia’s category relations, ii) extracting and organizing its infobox 
assertions, iii) adding information mined from Wikipedia to existing manually-built 
resources. We discuss these approaches and compare their coverage and depth.  
Chernov et al. [2006] were among the first to investigate whether links between 
Wikipedia categories bear semantic meaning. They found that the hyperlink connectivity 
between the articles in two categories correlates with the semantic relatedness of those 
categories. Nakayama et al. [2007a, 2007b, 2008] extend this idea by building a large 
general-purpose thesaurus solely from the hyperlink structure. The result contains 1.3M 
concepts with a semantic relatedness weight assigned to every concept pair. They suggest 
that the thesaurus may easily be upgraded to a full-blown ontology by ‘typing’ the generic 
relatedness measures between concepts into more traditional ontological relations such as 
isA and part of, though details are sketchy.  
An ontology project closer to classical knowledge representation is YAGO, Yet 
Another Great Ontology [Suchanek et al. 2007]. This creates a giant taxonomy by 
mapping Wikipedia’s leaf categories onto the WordNet taxonomy of synsets and adding 
the articles belonging to those categories as new elements. Each category’s lexical head is 
extracted—people in Category:American people in Japan —then sought in WordNet. If 
there is a match, it is chosen as the class for this category. This scheme extracts 143,000 
subClass relations—in this case, subClass(American people in Japan, person/human). If 
more than one match is possible, word sense disambiguation is required (Section 3.2). The 
authors experimented with mapping a category’s subcategories to WordNet and choosing 
the sense that corresponds to the smallest resulting taxonomic graph. However, they claim 
that this technique does not perform as well as choosing the most frequent WordNet 
synset for a given term (the frequency values are provided by WordNet), an observation 
that seems inconsistent with findings by other authors [e.g. Medelyan and Milne 2008] 
that the most frequent sense is not necessarily the intended one (Section 3.2.3). YAGO’s 
55 
use of the manually-created WordNet taxonomy neatly bypasses the poor ontological 
quality of Wikipedia’s category structure. It also avoids Ruiz-Casado et al.’s [2005b] 
problem of omitting Wikipedia concepts whose titles do not appear in WordNet, although 
it still misses proper names with WordNet synonyms—e.g. the programming language 
Python and the movie The Birds. 
The authors define a mixed suite of heuristics for extracting further relations to 
augment the taxonomy. For instance, a name parser is applied to all personal names to 
identify given and family names, adding 440,000 relations like familyNameOf(Albert 
Einstein, “Einstein”). Many heuristics make use of Wikipedia category names, extracting 
relations such as bornInYear from subcategories of categories ending with birth (e.g., 
1879 birth), or locatedIn from a category like Cities in Germany. This yields 370,000 
non-hierarchical, non-synonymous relations. Manual evaluation of sample facts shows 
91–99% accuracy, depending on the relation.  
From an ontology-building perspective, parsing category names is a real step forward, 
though only a tiny subset have so far been resolved. For instance, YAGO does not 
recognize widespread patterns such as “X by Y” (e.g., Persons by continent, Persons by 
company) as Ponzetto and Strube [2007b] do (below). Also added are 2M synonymy 
relations generated from redirects, 40M context relations generated from cross-links 
between articles, and 2M type relations between categories considered as classes and their 
articles considered as entities (though this constitutes a questionable ontological short-
cut—Article:Cat and Category:United Nations are just two negative examples). Overall 
YAGO claims to know 20M facts about 2M entities (Table 5). 25 
                                                           
25 YAGO can be queried online: http://www.mpi-inf.mpg.de/~suchanek/downloads/yago/  
Relation 
Domain 
Range 
Number of facts 
subClassOf 
class 
class 
143,210 
type (isA) 
entity 
class 
1,901,130 
context 
entity 
entity 
40,000,000 
describes 
word 
entity 
986,628 
bornInYear 
person 
year 
188,128 
diedInYear 
person 
year 
92,607 
establishedIn 
entity 
year 
13,619 
locatedIn 
object 
region 
59,716 
writtenInYear 
book 
year 
9,670 
politicianOf 
organization 
person 
3,599 
hasWonPrize 
person 
prize 
1,016 
means 
word 
entity 
1,598,684 
familyNameOf 
word 
person 
223,194 
givenNameOf 
word 
person 
217,132 
Table 5. Size of YAGO (facts). 
56 
Another notable feature of YAGO considered from a knowledge representation 
perspective is that it includes a logic-based representation language and a basic data 
model of entities and binary relations, with a small extension to represent relations 
between facts (such as transitivity). This gives it formal rigor—the authors even provide a 
model-theoretic semantics—and the expressive power of a rich version of Description 
Logic. In terms of inferential tractability it compares favorably with the hand-crafted 
(higher-order logic) Cyc. An online SPARQL interface allows logically complex queries. 
For instance, when asked for billionaires born in the USA it produced two (though it 
missed Bill Gates—the system does not cover Wikipedia’s structured data fully). The 
project will be integrated with the latest version of OWL. The authors claim to have 
already noticed a positive feedback loop whereby as more facts are added, word senses 
can be disambiguated more effectively in order to correctly identify and enter further 
facts. This was a long-standing ambition of researchers in knowledge representation 
[Lenat 1995], though claims of its achievement often turned out to be premature. 
An even larger scale, but less formally structured, relation extraction project is 
DBpedia [Auer et al. 2007; Auer and Lehmann 2007]. This transforms Wikipedia’s 
structured and semi-structured information (most notably infoboxes) into a vast set of 
RDF triples. Figure 12 shows the infobox from the New Zealand article; on the right is the 
 
{{ Infobox Country or territory | 
 
native_name = New Zealand | 
… 
capital = [[Wellington]] | 
 
latd = 41 | latm = 17 | latNS = S |  
longd = 174 | longm = 27 | longEW = E |  
 
largest_city = [[Auckland]] | 
 
official_languages =  
[[New Zealand English|English]] (98%) 
[[Māori language|Māori]] (4.2%) 
[[New Zealand Sign Language|NZ Sign 
Language]] (0.6%) | 
 
demonym = [[New Zealand People|New 
Zealander]],[[Kiwi (people)|Kiwi]] | 
 
government_type =  
[[Parliamentary democracy]] and 
[[Constitutional monarchy]] 
…}} 
Figure 12. Wikipedia infobox on New Zealand. 
57 
Wiki mark-up used to create it. Extracting information from infoboxes is not trivial. There 
are many different templates, with a great deal of redundancy—for example, 
Infobox_film, Infobox Film, and Infobox film. Recursive regular expressions are used to 
parse relational triples from all commonly used Wikipedia templates containing several 
predicates. The templates are taken at face value; no heuristics are applied to verify their 
accuracy. The Wikipedia URL of each entity is recorded as a unique identifier.  
Unlike YAGO there is no attempt to place facts in the framework of an overall 
taxonomic structure of concepts. Links between categories are merely extracted and 
labeled with the relation isRelatedTo. As with YAGO, Wikipedia categories are treated as 
classes and articles as individuals. In DBPedia’s case this is particularly problematic 
given that many articles have corresponding categories (e.g. New Zealand), so presumably 
the two receive entirely different identifiers and their semantic relationship is obscured. 
(Auer and Lehmann do not say what happens in this case.) The resulting DBpedia dataset 
contains 115,000 classes and 650,000 individuals sharing 8,000 different types of 
semantic relations. A total of 103M triples are extracted, far surpassing any other scheme 
in size.26 Like YAGO, the dataset can be queried via SPARQL and Linked Data, and 
connects with other open datasets on the web. Table 6 summarizes its content. 
                                                           
26 Further information, and the extracted data, can be downloaded from http://www.dbpedia.org 
Dataset 
Description 
Triples 
Page links 
Internal links between DBpedia instances derived 
from the internal pagelinks between Wikipedia articles 
62 M 
Infoboxes 
Data attributes for concepts that have been extracted 
from Wikipedia infoboxes 
15.5 M 
Articles 
Descriptions of all 1.95M concepts within the English 
Wikipedia. Includes titles, short abstracts, thumbnails 
and links to the corresponding articles 
7.6 M 
Languages 
Additional titles, short abstracts and Wikipedia article 
links in 13 other languages. 
5.7 M 
Article categories 
Links from concepts to categories using SKOS 
5.2 M 
Extended abstracts 
Additional, extended English abstracts 
2.1 M 
Language abstracts 
Extended abstracts in 13 languages 
1.9 M 
Type information  
Inferred from category structure and redirects by the 
YAGO (“yet another great ontology”) project 
[Suchanek et al. 2007] 
1.9 M 
External links 
Links to external web pages about a concept 
1.6 M 
Categories 
Information which concept is a category and how 
categories are related 
1 M 
Persons 
Information about 80,000 persons (date and place of 
birth etc.) represented using the FOAF vocabulary 
0.5 M 
External links 
Links between DBpedia and Geonames, US Census, 
Musicbrainz, Project Gutenberg, the DBLP 
bibliography and the RDF Book Mashup 
180 K 
Table 6. Content of DBpedia [Auer et al. 2007].
58 
The unsurpassed quantity of information in DBpedia is a wonderful resource for the 
research community, particularly given its multilingual character, and it is becoming 
something of a hub for free large-scale data-repositories. (This will be discussed further in 
section 5.4 on the Semantic Web.) However, it’s worth noting that as an ontology 
DBpedia falls short on some traditional expectations. First, since as mentioned there is 
little or no connection between its facts, such as would be provided by an inheritance 
hierarchy of concepts and/or a formally defined ontology language, it would seem that 
many semantic relations amongst its triples will go unrecognized. 
Second, although no formal evaluation of quality is provided, a quick manual 
inspection reveals that large sections of the data have limited ontological value taken as-
is. For instance, 60% of the RDF triples are relatively trivial semantic relations derived 
from Wikipedia’s link structure (e.g. hasCategory, Book, Category:Documents); only 
15% are taken directly from infoboxes. Amongst those are the many obviously redundant 
relations. Finally, some individual infobox-derived relations contain very poor quality 
data, presumably caused by erroneous parsing of inconsistent values—for instance, 
keyPeople assertions contain values such as “CEO”, which is a role rather than a person, 
or “Bob”, which is underspecified. Unlike other approaches, DBpedia relies entirely on 
the accuracy of Wikipedia’s contributors, and Auer and Lehmann suggest guidelines for 
authors to improve the quality of infoboxes with time. 
Lately (November 2008) the project has attempted to remedy the lack of formal 
structure by releasing the DBpedia Ontology,27 which has been “manually created based 
on the most commonly used infoboxes within Wikipedia.” It currently includes around 
170 classes, which form a subsumption hierarchy and have 940 properties and about 
882,000 instances—much smaller than YAGO’s claimed 2M. Its creators have addressed 
the redundancy in the raw DBpedia data—thus 350 Wikipedia templates have 
been reduced to 170 ontology classes and 2350 template relations have been mapped 
to just 940 ontology relations. They also endeavour to produce clearly defined datatypes 
for all property values. Again this is valuable new resource, although quick manual 
inspection reveals some inaccuracies. For instance, template names seem to be used to 
generate isa assertions on the entities described by articles that contain the template, 
which leads to errors such as asteroids being categorized as Planet. No formal evaluation 
of this resource has so far been reported. 
Work at the European Media Lab Research Institute (EMLR) takes another approach 
to building an ontology from Wikipedia, where the basic building block is Wikipedia’s 
category links. Ponzetto and Strube [2007] begin by identifying and isolating isA relations 
59 
from the rest of the category links (which they call notIsA). Here isA is thought of as 
subsuming relations between two classes—isSubclassOf(Apples, Fruit)—and between an 
instance and its class—isInstanceOf(New Zealand, Country). Several steps are applied. 
One of the most accurate matches the lexical head and modifier of two category names. 
Sharing the same head indicates isA, e.g., isA(British computer scientist, Computer 
scientist). Modifier matching indicates notIsA, e.g., notIsA(Islamic mysticism, Islam). 
Another method uses co-occurrence statistics of categories within patterns to indicate 
hierarchical and non-hierarchical relations. For noun phrases A and B, A such as B (e.g., 
fruit such as apples) indicates isA, and the intervening text can be generalized to like, “, 
especially”, and so on. Similarly, A are used in B (fruit are used in cooking) indicates 
notIsA. This technique induces 100,000 isA relations from Wikipedia. Comparison with 
relations manually assigned to concepts with the same lexical heads in ResearchCyc 
shows that the labeling is highly accurate, depending on the method used, and yields an 
overall F-measure of 88%. Ponzetto and Strube [2007a] apply the induced taxonomy to 
natural language processing tasks such as co-reference resolution.  
Zirn et al. [2008] divide the derived isA relations into isSubclassOf and isInstanceOf, 
the two types mentioned in the previous paragraph. Instead of YAGO and DBpedia’s 
assumption that all categories are classes and all articles are instances, the EMLR group 
seeks automated methods to determine their status on a case-by-case basis. Two of their 
methods assume that all named entities are instances and thus related to their categories 
by isInstanceOf. One uses a named entity recognizer, the other a heuristic based on 
capitalization in the category title (though this only works for multi-word titles). 
Pluralization is also considered. Further methods include heuristics such as: If a category 
has at least one hyponym that has at least two hyponyms, it is a class. Evaluation against 
8,000 categories listed in ResearchCyc as individuals (instances) and collections (classes) 
shows that the capitalization method is best, achieving 83% accuracy; however, 
combining all methods into a single voting scheme improves this to 86%. The taxonomy 
derived from this work is available in RDF Schema format.28 
Nastase and Strube [2008] begin to address the notIsa domain, extracting non-
taxonomic relations from Wikipedia by parsing category titles. It is worth noting that they 
are no longer merely labeling links in the category network but deriving entirely new 
relations between categories, articles and terms extracted from category titles. Explicit 
unitary relations are extracted—for example, from the category title Queen (band) 
members they infer the memberOf relation from articles in that category to the article for 
                                                                                                                                                  
27 http://wiki.dbpedia.org/Ontology  
28 http://www.eml-r.org/english/research/nlp/download/wikitaxonomy.php 
60 
the band, e.g. memberOf(Brian May, Queen (band)). Explicit binary relations are also 
extracted—for example, if a category title matches the pattern X [VBN IN] Y (e.g. Movies 
directed by Woody Allen), the verb phrase is used to ‘type’ a relation between all articles 
assigned to the category and the entity Y (directedBy(Annie Hall, Woody Allen)), while 
the class X is used to further type the articles in the category (isA(Annie Hall, Movie)).  
Particularly sophisticated is their derivation of entirely implicit relations from the 
common X by Y pattern in Wikipedia category names, which facets much of the category 
structure (e.g. Writers By Nationality, Writers by Genre, Writers by Language). Given the 
category title Albums By Artist, they not only label all articles in the category isA(X, 
Album), but also find subcategories pertaining to particular artists (e.g. MilesDavis, 
Albums), locate the article corresponding to the artist, label the entity as an artist, 
(isA(MilesDavis, Artist)) and label all members of the subcategory accordingly 
(artist(KindOfBlue MilesDavis)) as illustrated in Figure 13. They identify a total of 3.4M 
isA and 3.2M spatial relations, along with 43,000 memberOf relations and 44,000 other 
relations such as causedBy and writtenBy. Evaluation with ResearchCyc was not 
meaningful because of little overlap in extracted concepts—particularly named entities. 
Instead, human annotators analyzed four samples of 250 relations; precision ranged from 
84–98% depending on relation type. Overall Nastase and Strube claim to add 9M new 
facts to their existing taxonomy of 105,000 categories, about twice the size of YAGO. 
They promise to release a new ontology containing these facts soon.  
Another resource worth mentioning is Freebase,29 the collaborative knowledge base 
produced by Metaweb. Like the previous structures, it contains many concepts and 
relations that have been automatically mined from Wikipedia. These are merged with 
other resources such as MusicBrainz (an extensive ontology of musicians, albums, and 
songs) and the Notable Names Database. Registered users can also contribute directly. 
Unlike the previous structures, it contains many images, and is loosely organized as a set 
                                                           
29 http://www.freebase.com 
 
 
Figure 13. Relations inferred from BY categories [Nastase and Strube 2008]. 
61 
of 4M ‘topics’ to which users add links associatively (thus creating a mixture of strict and 
informal relations). While the knowledge in Freebase is freely available (via browsable 
interfaces, database dumps, and APIs), it is intended to generate revenue through potential 
applications to advertising and search. We could find little information on the algorithms 
that generate it. Neither can we comment on its accuracy and coverage, because we know 
of no formal evaluation. Regardless, it is encouraging to see a large-scale knowledge base 
courting an active community of contributors. Freebase is used in a growing number of 
projects, notably the natural language search engine PowerSet. 
The resources presented in this section—YAGO, DBpedia, EMLR's taxonomy, and 
FreeBase—all have the same goal: to create an extensive, accurate, general knowledge 
base. The techniques used differ radically. YAGO combines Wikipedia’s leaf categories 
(and their instances) with WordNet’s taxonomy, embellishing this structure with further 
relations. DBpedia dumps Wikipedia’s structured and semi-structured information with 
little further analysis. EMLR perform a sophisticated differentiation or ‘typing’ of 
category links, followed by an analysis of category titles and the articles contained by 
those categories to derive further relations.  
As a result, the information extracted varies. Whereas Suchanek et al. [2007] extract 
the relation writtenInYear, Nastase and Strube [2008] detect writtenBy and Auer and 
Lehmann [2007] generate written, writtenBy, writer, writers, writerName, coWriters, as 
well as their case variants. Table 7 compares the sizes of sufficiently formally structured 
ontologies. Evaluation is still patchy and ad hoc, and quality is a major concern for the 
cruder automated ontology-building methods. For instance, distinguishing between 
instances and classes amongst Wikipedia concepts is difficult to solve automatically, but 
difficult to avoid given the widespread use of class hierarchies to structure ontologies. 
There has so far been little comparison of these approaches or attempts to integrate them, 
and no cross-pollination with the clearly complementary work described in Section 5.1.  
 
Ontology 
Entities 
Facts 
SUMO 
20,000 
60,000 
WordNet 
117,597 
207,016 
OpenCyc 
47,000 
306,000 
Manually 
created 
ResearchCyc 
DBpedia Ontology 
250,000 
820,000 
2,200,000 
Est. ~1M 
YAGO 
2M 
20M 
DBpedia 
2.6M 
103M 
Automatically 
derived 
EMLR[2008] 
1.7M 
11M 
Table 7. Relative size of ontologies (January 2009). 
62 
5.4 Wikipedia and the Semantic Web 
Here we consider research projects which seek to contribute to the broad-ranging and 
ambitious research project known as the Semantic Web, spearheaded by the World Wide 
Web Consortium (W3C). Its goal is to add metadata to Web documents to enable Web 
searches to access semantically enriched rather than unstructured material, thereby 
allowing computers to “become much better able to process and ‘understand’ the data that 
they merely display at present” [Berners-Lee et al. 2001]. (For an overview of the 
project’s original goals, see also [Fensel et al. 2002].) A crucial plank of the project is 
getting the world involved in marking up web pages semantically, and this ‘political’ 
challenge has proved as much of an obstacle as the many technical challenges its 
developers have confronted [Legg 2007].  
Wikipedia can be seen as the largest available semantically marked up corpus. For 
example: important phrases that appear in the definition of articles in Wikipedia are 
explicitly linked to other articles that describe their meaning; each article is assigned to 
one or more semantic categories and infobox templates encode typical attributes of 
concepts of the same kind. With such characteristics, Wikipedia can be seen not only as a 
mini-model of the Semantic Web, but also as a prototype of a tool designed to mark up at 
least some of the meaning in the entire web. Several methods have been proposed to 
evolve Wikipedia into a more structured and fully machine-readable repository of 
meaning.  
Krötzsch et al. [2005, 2007] and Völkel et al. [2006] develop the idea of ‘link typing’ 
in greater detail than Nakayama et al. [2007a, 2007b, 2008] in Section 5.3. Rather than 
creating a new stand-alone resource, they plan to label Wikipedia’s own hyperlink 
structure. Noting the profusion of links between articles, all indicating some form of 
semantic relatedness, they claim that categorizing them would be a simple, unintrusive 
way of rendering large parts of Wikipedia machine-readable. For instance, the link from 
leaf to plant would be labeled partOf, that from leaf to organ kindOf, and so on. As 
categorizing all hyperlinks would be a significant task, they recommend introducing a 
system of link types and encouraging Wikipedia editors to start using them, and to suggest 
further types. This raises interesting usability issues. Given that ontology is specialist 
knowledge (at least as traditionally practiced by ontological engineers), it might be argued 
that disaster could result from Wikipedia’s uniquely democratic editing model. On the 
other hand, one might ask why this is any different to other specialist additions to 
Wikipedia (e.g. cell biology, Scottish jazz musicians), whose contributors show a 
remarkable ability to self-select, yielding surprising quality control. Perhaps the most 
tricky characteristic of ontology is that, unlike specialist topics such as cell biology, 
63 
people think they are experts in it when in fact they are not. At any rate, as this research is 
essentially a proposal for Wikipedia’s developers to add further functionality, its results 
cannot yet be evaluated.  
Wu and Weld [2007, 2008] hope to kick-start the Semantic Web by marking up 
Wikipedia semantically using a combination of automated and human processes. They 
explore machine-learning techniques for completing infoboxes by extracting data from 
article text, constructing new infoboxes from templates where appropriate, rationalizing 
tags, merging replicated data using microformats, disambiguating links, adding additional 
links, and flagging items for verification, correction, or the addition of missing 
information. As with Krötzsch et al., it will be interesting to see whether Wikipedia 
editors will be eager to work on the collaborative side of this project, and also how 
effective they are. 
Yet how much nearer does this bring us to Tim Berners Lee’s original goal of 
allowing computers to understand the data that they merely display at present? It depends 
what is meant by ‘understand’. If we only require that the terms within web documents 
are tagged with an appropriate Wikipedia article, then the wikification (discussed in 
Section 3.1) already qualifies. However many researchers have in mind a deeper 
understanding which would enable inferencing over marked-up data to deduce further 
consequences. This was certainly part of Tim Berners-Lee’s original vision. From that 
perspective, an intimidating amount of work on extracting and analyzing Wikipedia’s 
semantics remains. To be more precise, great progress towards the Semantic Web vision 
has been made with respect to named entities, for all that is needed to establish shared 
meaning for them is a shared URI. General concepts like tree are more tricky. Wikipedia 
certainly contains a wealth of semantic information regarding such concepts, but we have 
seen throughout this survey that there is little consensus on how to extract and analyze it, 
let alone inference over it.  
As a semi-structured resource, Wikipedia sits somewhere between the chaotic and—as 
far as machines are concerned—utterly incomprehensible Web of today and the one 
envisioned by Tim Berners-Lee. In some sense, most of the work described in this survey 
aims to push this small subset of the web towards the imagined ideal, or to pragmatically 
make use of what we have already. Comparatively little has been done to generalize and 
bootstrap Wikipedia with the aim of understanding the rest of the web. In short, 
Wikipedia is long way from giving us the Semantic Web in miniature, let alone in full.   
64 
6. PEOPLE, PLACES AND RESOURCES 
Wikipedia began with the goal of distributing a free encyclopedia to every person on the 
planet, in their own language. It is reassuring to see the research community that benefits 
so much from Wikipedia maintaining the same international perspective. The research 
described in this survey is scattered across the globe. Figure 14 shows prominent 
countries and institutions at the time of writing (mid-2008, as stated at the outset).  
US and Germany are the largest contributors. In the US, research is spread across 
many institutions. The University of North Texas, who work with entity recognition and 
disambiguation, produced the wikify system. In the Pacific Northwest, Microsoft Research 
focuses on named entity recognition, while the University of Washington extracts 
semantic relations from Wikipedia’s infoboxes. German research is more localized 
geographically. EMLR works on relation extraction, semantic relatedness, and co-
reference resolution; Darmstadt University of Technology on semantic relatedness and 
analyzing Wikipedia’s structure. The Max Planck Institute produced the YAGO ontology; 
they collaborate with the University of Leipzig, who produced DBpedia. The University 
 
Figure 14 Countries and institutions with significant research on mining meaning from Wikipedia
65 
of Karlsruhe have focused on providing users with tools to add formal semantics to 
Wikipedia.  
Spain is Europe’s next largest contributor. Universidad Autonoma de Madrid extract 
semantic relations from Wikipedia; Universidad Politecnica de Valencia and Universidad 
de Alicente both use it to answer questions and recognize named entities. The 
Netherlands, France, and UK are each represented by a single institution. The University 
of Amsterdam focusses on question answering; INRIA works primarily on entity ranking, 
and Imperial College on recognizing and disambiguating geographical locations.  
The Israel Institute of Technology have produced widely cited work on semantic 
relatedness, document representation and categorization. They developed the popular 
technique of Explicit Semantic Analysis.  
Hewlett Packard’s branch in Bangalore puts India on the map with document 
categorization research. In China, Shanghai’s Jiatong University works on relation 
extraction and category recommendation. In Japan, the University of Osaka has produced 
several open source resources, including a thesaurus and a bilingual (Japanese–English) 
dictionary. The University of Tokyo, in conjunction with the National Institute of 
Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, has focused on relation extraction.  
New Zealand and Australia are each represented by a single institution. Research at 
the University of Waikato covers entity recognition, query expansion, topic indexing, 
semantic relatedness and augmenting existing knowledge bases. RMIT in Melbourne have 
collaborated with INRIA’s work on entity ranking. 
Table 8 summarizes tools and resources, along with brief descriptions and URLs. This 
is split into tools for accessing and processing Wikipedia, demos of Wikipedia mining 
applications, and datasets that have been generated from Wikipedia.  
Processing tools  
JWPL Java 
Wikipedia 
Library 
API for structural access of Wikipedia parts such as redirects, categories, 
articles and link structure. [Zesch et al. 2008] 
http://www.ukp.tu-darmstadt.de/software/jwpl/ 
WikiRelate! 
API for computing semantic relatedness using Wikipedia [Strube and Ponzetto 
2006; Ponzetto and Strube 2006] 
http://www.eml-research.de/english/research/nlp/download/ 
wikipediasimilarity.php 
Wikipedia 
Miner 
API that provides a simplified access to Wikipedia and models its structure 
semantically [Milne et al. 2008] 
http://sourceforge.net/ projects/wikipedia-miner/ 
WikiPrep 
A Perl tool for preprocessing Wikipedia XML dumps [Gabrilovich and 
Markovitch 2007] 
http://www.cs.technion.ac.il/ ~gabr/resources/ code/wikiprep/ 
W.H.A.T. 
Wikipedia 
An analytic tool for Wikipedia with two main functionalities: an article 
network and extensive statistics. It contains a visualization of the article 
66 
Hybrid 
Analysis Tool 
networks and a powerful interface to analyze the behavior of authors. 
http://sourceforge.net/ projects/ w-h-a-t/ 
 
 
Wikipedia mining demos 
DBpedia 
Online Access 
Online access of DBpedia data (103M facts extracted from Wikipedia) via a 
SPARQL query endpoint and as Linked Data. [Auer et al. 2007] 
http://wiki.dbpedia.org/ OnlineAccess 
YAGO 
Demo of the Yet Another Ontology YAGO, containing 1.7M entities and 14M 
facts [Suchanek et al. 2007] 
http://www.mpii.mpg.de/~suchanek/yago 
QuALiM 
A Question Answering system. Given a question in a natural language returns 
relevant passages from Wikipedia. [Kaisser 2008]  
http://demos.inf.ed.ac.uk:8080/ qualim/ 
Koru 
A demo of a search interface that maps topics involved in both queries and 
documents to Wikipedia articles. Supports automatic and interactive query 
expansion. [Milne et al. 2007] 
http://www.nzdl.org/koru 
Wikipedia 
Thesaurus 
A large scale association thesaurus containing 78M associations [Nakayama et 
al. 2007a and 2008] 
http://wikipedia-lab.org:8080/WikipediaThesaurusV2/ 
Wikipedia 
English-
Japanese 
dictionary 
A dictionary returning translations from English into Japanese and vise versa, 
enriched with probabilities of these translations [Erdmann et al. 2007] 
http://wikipedia-lab.org:8080/WikipediaBilingualDictionary/ 
Wikify 
Automatically annotates any text with links to Wikipedia articles [Mihalcea 
and Csomai 2007] 
http://wikifyer.com/ 
Wikifier 
Automatically annotates any text with links to Wikipedia articles describing 
named entities  
http://wikifier.labs.exalead.com/ 
Location 
query server 
Location data accessible via REST requests returning data in a SOAP 
envelope. Two requests are supported: A bounding box or a Wikipedia Article. 
The reply is the number of references made to locations within that bounding 
box, and a list of Wikipedia articles describing those locations. Or none, if the 
request is not a location. [Overell and Rüger 2006 and 2007] 
http://www.doc.ic.ac.uk/~seo01/wiki/demos 
 
Datasets 
DBpedia 
Facts extracted from Wikipedia infoboxes and link structure in RDF format. 
[Auer et al. 2007] 
http://wiki.dbpedia.org 
Wikipedia 
Taxonomy 
Taxonomy automatically generated from the network of categories in 
Wikipedia (RDF Schema format) [Ponzetto and Strube 2007; Zirn et al. 2008] 
http://www.eml-research.de/ english/research/ nlp/download/ 
wikitaxonomy.php 
Semantic 
Wikipedia 
A snapshot of Wikipedia automatically annotated with named entity tags. 
[Zaragossa et al. 2007] 
http://www.yr-bcn.es/semanticWikipedia 
Cyc to 
Wikipedia 
50,000 automatically created mappings from Cyc terms to Wikipedia articles. 
[Medelyan and Legg 2008] 
67 
mappings 
http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ ~olena/cyc.html 
Topic indexed 
documents 
A set of 20 Computer Science technical reports indexed with Wikipedia 
articles as topics. 15 teams of 2 senior CS undergraduates have independently 
assigned topics from Wikipedia to each article. [Medelyan et al. 2008] 
http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ ~olena/wikipedia.html 
Locations in 
Wikipedia, 
ground truth 
A manually annotated sample of 1000 Wikipedia articles. Each link in each 
article is annotated, whether it is a location or not. If yes, it contains the 
corresponding unique id from the TGN gazetteer. [Overell and Rüger 2006 
and 2007] 
http://www.doc.ic.ac.uk/ ~seo01/wiki/data_release 
Table 8. Wikipedia tools and resources. 
 
7. SUMMARY 
A whole host of researchers have been quick to grasp the potential of Wikipedia as a 
resource for mining meaning: the literature is large and growing rapidly. We began this 
article by describing Wikipedia’s creation process and structure (Section 2). The unique 
open editing philosophy, which accounts for its success, is subversive. Although regarded 
as suspect by the academic establishment, it is a remarkable concrete realization of the 
American pragmatist philosopher Peirce’s proposal that knowledge be defined through its 
public character and future usefulness rather than any prior justification. Wikipedia is not 
just an encyclopedia but can be viewed as anything from a corpus, taxonomy, thesaurus, 
hierarchy of knowledge topics to a full-blown ontology. It includes explicit information 
about synonyms (redirects) and word senses (disambiguation pages), database-style 
information (infoboxes), semantic network information (hyperlinks), category information 
(category structure), discussion pages, and the full edit history of every article. Each of 
these sources of information can be mined in various ways. 
Section 3 explains how Wikipedia is being exploited for natural language processing. 
Unlike WordNet, it was not created as a lexical resource that reflects the intricacies of 
human language. Instead, its primary goal is to provide encyclopedic knowledge across 
subjects and languages. However, the research described here demonstrates that it has, 
unexpectedly, immense potential as a repository of linguistic knowledge for natural 
language applications. In particular, its unique features allow well-defined tasks such as 
word sense disambiguation and word similarity to be addressed automatically—and the 
resulting level of performance is remarkably high. ESA [Gabrilovich and Markovitch, 
2007] and Wikipedia Link-based Measure [Milne and Witten, 2008a], for example, take 
advantage of the extended and hyperlinked description of concepts that in WordNet were 
restricted to short glosses. Furthermore, whereas in WordNet the sense frequency was 
defined by a simple ranking of meaning, Wikipedia implicitly contains conditional 
68 
probabilities of word meanings [Mihalcea and Csomai, 2007], which allows more 
accurate similarity computation and word sense disambiguation. While the current 
research in this area has been mostly restricted to English, the approaches are general 
enough to apply to other languages. Researchers on co-reference resolution and mining of 
multilingual information have only recently discovered Wikipedia; significant 
improvements in these areas can be expected. To our knowledge, its use as a resource for 
other tasks such as natural language generation, machine translation and discourse 
analysis, has not yet been explored. These areas are ripe for exploitation, and exciting 
discoveries can be expected.  
Section 4 describes applications in information retrieval. New techniques for 
document classification and topic indexing make productive use of Wikipedia for 
searching and organizing document collections. These areas can take advantage of its 
unique properties while grounding themselves in—and building upon—existing research. 
In particular, document classification has gathered momentum and significant advances 
have been obtained over the state of the art. Question answering and entity ranking are 
less well addressed, because current techniques do not seem to take full advantage of 
Wikipedia—most simply treat it as just another corpus. We found little evidence of cross-
pollination between this work and the information extraction efforts described in Section 
5. Given how closely question answering and entity ranking depend on the extraction of 
facts and entities, we expect this to become a fruitful line of enquiry.  
In Section 5 we turn to information extraction and ontology building; mining 
Wikipedia for topics, relations and facts and then organizing them into a single resource. 
This task is less well defined than those in Sections 3 and 4. Different researchers focus 
on different kinds of information: we have reviewed projects that identify movie directors 
and soccer players, composers, corporate descriptions and hierarchical and ontological 
relations. Techniques range from those developed for standard text corpora to ones that 
utilize Wikipedia-specific properties such as hyperlinks and the category structure. The 
extracted resources range in size from several hundred to several million relations, but the 
lack of a common basis for evaluation prevents any overall conclusions as to which 
approach performs best. We believe that an extrinsic evaluation would be most 
meaningful, and hope to see these systems compete on a well-defined task in an 
independent evaluation. It will also be interesting to see to what extent these resources are 
exploited by other research communities in the future. 
Some authors have suggested using the Wikipedia editors themselves to perform 
ontology-building, an enterprise that might be thought of as mining Wikipedia’s people 
rather than its data. Perhaps they understand the underlying driving force behind this 
69 
massively successful resource better than most! Only time will tell whether the 
community is amenable to following such suggestions. The idea of moving to a more 
structured and ontologically principled Wikipedia raises an interesting question: how will 
it interact with the public, amateur-editor model? Does this signal the emergence of the 
Semantic Web? We suspect that, like the success of Wikipedia itself, the result will be 
something new, something that experts have not foreseen and may not condone. That is 
the glory of Wikipedia. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We warmly thank Evgeniy Gabrilovich, Rada Mihalcea, Dan Weld, Sören Auer, Fabian 
Suchanek and the YAGO team for their valuable comments on a draft of this paper. We 
are also grateful to Enrico Motta and Susan Wiedenbeck for guiding us in the right 
direction. Medelyan is supported by a scholarship from Google, Milne by the New 
Zealand Tertiary Education Commission. 
References 
ADAFRE, S.F., JIJKOUN, V., AND M. DE RIJKE. [2007] Fact Discovery in Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 2007 
IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web Intelligence. 
ADAFRE, S.F., AND M. DE RIJKE. [2006] Finding Similar Sentences across Multiple Languages in Wikipedia. In 
Proceedings of the EACL 2006 Workshop on New Text–Wikis and Blogs and Other Dynamic Text Sources. 
ADAFRE, S.F., AND M. DE RIJKE. [2005] Discovering Missing Links in Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 
LinkKDD 2005, August 21, 2005, Chicago, IL. 
AGROVOC [1995] Multilingual agricultural thesaurus. Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations. 
http://www.fao.org/agrovoc/ 
AHN, D., JIJKOUN, V., MISHNE, G., MÜLLER, K., DE RIJKE, M., AND S. SCHLOBACH. [2004] Using Wikipedia at 
the TREC QA Track. In Proceedings of the 13th Text Retrieval Conference (TREC 2004). 
ALLAN, J. [2005] HARD track overview in TREC 2005: High accuracy retrieval from documents. In 
Proceedings of the 14th Text Retrieval Conference (TREC 2005).  
AUER, S., BIZER, C., LEHMANN, J., KOBILAROV, G., CYGANIAK, R., AND Z. IVES [2007] DBpedia: A Nucleus 
for a Web of Open Data. In Proceedings of the 6th International Semantic Web Conference and 2nd Asian 
Semantic Web Conference (ISWC/ASWC2007), Busan, South Korea, 4825: 715–728, 2007. 
AUER, S. AND J. LEHMANN. [2007] What have Innsbruck and Leipzig in common? Extracting Semantics from 
Wiki Content. In Franconi et al. (eds), Proceedings of European Semantic Web Conference (ESWC’07), 
LNCS 4519, pp. 503–517, Springer, 2007. 
BAADER, F., CALVANESE, D., MCGUINESS, D. AND D. NARDI. [2007] The Description Logic Handbook: 
Theory, Implementation and Applications. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
BAKER, L. [2008] Professor Bans Google & Wikipedia: Encourages Critical Thinking & Research. Search 
Engine Journal, January 14th, 2008.  
BANERJEE, S. [2007] Boosting Inductive Transfer for Text Classification Using Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 
6th International Conference on Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA), pp. 148–153. 
BANERJEE, S., RAMANATHAN, K. AND A. GUPTA. [2007] Clustering Short Texts using Wikipedia. In 
Proceedings of the 30th Annual International ACM SIGIR conference on Research and Development in 
Information Retrieval. Amsterdam, Netherlands. pp. 787–788. 
BANKO, M., CAFARELLA, M. J., SODERLAND, S., BROADHEAD, M. AND O. ETZIONI. [2007] Open information 
extraction from the Web. In Proceedings of the 20th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence 
IJCAI’07, pp. 2670–2676, January 2007. 
BHOLE, A., FORTUNA, B., GROBELNIK, B. AND D. MLADENIĆ. [2007] Extracting Named Entities and Relating 
Them over Time Based on Wikipedia. Informatica. 
BELLOMI, F. AND R. BONATO. [2005] Network Analysis for Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 1st International 
Wikimedia Conference, Wikimania 2005. Wikimedia Foundation. 
BERNERS-LEE, T., HENDLER, J, AND O. LASSILA. [2001]. The Semantic Web. Scientific American 284 (5), 34–
43. 
70 
BERNERS-LEE, T. [2003]. Foreword. In D. Fensel, J. Hendler, H. Lieberman, and W. Wahlster (Eds.) Spinning 
the Semantic Web: Bringing the World Wide Web to its Full Potential. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
BRIN, S. AND L. PAGE. [1998] The Anatomy of a Large-Scale Hypertextual Web Search Engine. Computer 
Networks and ISDN Systems, Vol. 33, pp. 107–117. 
BROWN, P., DELLA PIETRA, S., DELLA PIETRA, V., AND R. MERCER. [1993] The mathematics of statistical 
machine translation: parameter estimation. Computational Linguistics, 19(2), 263–311. 
BUDANITSKY, A. AND HIRST, G. [2001] Semantic distance in WordNet: An experimental, application-oriented 
evaluation of five measures. Workshop on WordNet and Other Lexical Resources, Second meeting of the 
North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Pittsburgh, PA. 
BUITELAAR, P., CIMIANO, P., MAGNINI, B. (eds). [2005] Ontology Learning from Text: Methods, Evaluation 
and Applications. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: IOS Press.  
BUNESCU, B. AND PAŞCA, M. [2006] Using Encyclopedic Knowledge for Named Entity Disambiguation. In 
Proceedings of the11th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, pp. 9–16. 
BUSCALDI, D. AND P. A. ROSSO. [2007a] A Bag-of-Words Based Ranking Method for the Wikipedia Question 
Answering. Task Evaluation of Multilingual and Multi-modal Information Retrieval, pp. 550–553. 
BUSCALDI, D. AND P. A. ROSSO. [2007b] Comparison of Methods for the Automatic Identification of Locations 
in Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 4th ACM workshop on Geographical information retrieval, GIR’07. 
Lisbon, Portugal, pp. 89–92. 
BUSSLER, C, D. FENSEL, AND A. MAEDCHE [2002]. A Conceptual Architecture for Semantic Web-enabled Web 
Services. ACM SIGMOD Record, 34 (4), 24-29.  
CAVNAR, W. B. AND J. M. TRENKLE. [1994] N-Gram-Based Text Categorization. In Proceedings of 3rd Annual 
Symposium 
on 
Document 
Analysis 
and 
Information 
Retrieval, 
Las 
Vegas, 
NV, 
UNLV 
Publications/Reprographics, pp. 161-175. 
CHERNOV, S., IOFCIU, T., NEJDL, W. AND X. ZHOU. [2006] Extracting Semantic Relationships between 
Wikipedia Categories. In Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop: SemWiki’06—From Wiki to 
Semantics. Co-located with the 3rd Annual European Semantic Web Conference ESWC’06 in Budva, 
Montenegro, June 12, 2006. 
CILIBRASI, R.L. AND VITÁNYI, P.M.B. [2007] The Google Similarity Distance. In IEEE Transactions on 
Knowledge and Data Engineering 19(3) pp. 370-383. 
CIMIANO, P. AND J. VOLKER. [2005] Towards large-scale, open-domain and ontology-based named entity 
classification. In Proceedings of the Internatioal Conference on Recent Advances in Natural Language 
Processing, RANLP’05, pp. 166–172. INCOMA Ltd., Borovets, Bulgaria, September 2005. 
CSOMAI, A. AND R. MIHALCEA. [2007] Linking Educational Materials to Encyclopedic Knowledge. Frontiers in 
Artificial Intelligence and Applications, v.158, pp. 557–559. IOS Press, Netherlands. 
CUCERZAN, S. [2007] Large-Scale Named Entity Disambiguation Based on Wikipedia Data. In Proceedings of 
the 2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and Computational 
Natural Language Learning, pp. 708–716, Prague, Czech Republic, June 2007. 
CULOTTA, A., MCCALLUM, A. AND J. BETZ. [2006]. Integrating Probabilistic Extraction Models and Data 
Mining to Discover Relations and Patterns in Text. In Proceedings of the main conference on Human 
Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association of Computational 
Linguistics. New York, NY, pp. 296–303. 
CURRAN, J. AND MOENS, M. [2002] Improvements in automatic thesaurus extraction. In Proceedings of the ACL 
2002 Workshop on Unsupervised Lexical Acquisition, Philadelphia, P.A. 
DAKKA, W. AND S. CUCERZAN. [2008]. Augmenting Wikipedia with Named Entity Tags. In Proceedings of the 
3rd International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (IJCNLP 2008), Hyderabad. 
DENNING, P., HORNING, J., PARNAS, D., AND WEINSTEIN, L. [2005]. Wikipedia Risks. In Communications of 
the ACM 48(12), pp. 152–152. 
DENOYER, L. AND GALLINARI, P. [2006] The Wikipedia XML corpus. SIGIR Forum, 40(1), pp. 64–69, ACM 
Press. 
DONDIO, P., BARRETT, S., WEBER, S., AND SEIGNEUR, J. [2006] Extracting Trust from Domain Analysis: A 
Case Study on the Wikipedia Project. Autonomous and Trusted Computing, pp. 362-373.  
DUFFY, D.G. [2001] Green's Functions With Applications. CRC Press. 
DUMAIS, S., PLATT, J., HECKERMAN, D. AND M. SAHAMI. [1998] Inductive learning algorithms and 
representations for text categorization. In Proceedings of the 7th international conference on Information and 
knowledge management, pp. 148–155. 
EDMONDS, P. AND KILGARRIFF, A. [1998] Introduction to the special issue on evaluating word sense 
disambiguation systems. Journal of Natural Language Engineering, 8(4), pp. 279–291. Cambridge University 
Press, New York, NY, USA. 
EGOZI, O. AND GABRILOVICH, E. AND MARKOVITCH, S. [2008] Concept-Based Feature Generation and 
Selection for Information Retrieval. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence (AAAI-08), Chicago, I.L. 
EMIGH, W. AND HERRING, S. [2005] Collaborative Authoring on the Web: A Genre Analysis of Online 
Encyclopedias. In Proceedings of the 38th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, p.99a. 
ERDMANN, M., NAKAYAMA, K., HARA, T., AND S. NISHIO. [2008] An Approach for Extracting Bilingual 
Terminology from Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Database Systems for 
Advanced Applications (DASFAA, To appear). 
71 
FELLBAUM, C. (editor). [1998] WordNet An Electronic Lexical Database. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
FENSEL, D., J. HENDLER, H. LEIBERMAN, AND W. WAHLSTER (Eds.) [2002] Spinning the Semantic Web: 
Bringing the World Wide Web to its Full Potential. Cambridge: MIT Press.  
FERRÁNDEZ, F., TORAL, A., FERRÁNDEZ, Ó., FERRÁNDEZ, A., AND R. MUÑOZ. [2007] Applying Wikipedia’s 
Multilingual Knowledge to Cross–Lingual Question Answering. In Proceedings of the 12th International 
Conference on Applications of Natural Language to Information Systems, Paris, France, pp. 352–363. June 
2007 
FINKELSTEIN, L., GABRILOVICH, E., MATIAS, Y., RIVLIN, E., SOLAN, Z., WOLFMAN, G., AND E. RUPPIN. [2002] 
Placing search in context: The concept revisited. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, 20(1), pp. 
116–131. 
FRANK, E., PAYNTER, G. W., WITTEN, I. H., GUTWIN, C. AND C. G. NEVILL-MANNING. [1999] Domain-Specific 
Keyphrase Extraction. In Proceedings of the 16th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 
IJCAI’99, Stockholm, Sweden, pp. 668–673. 
GABRILOVICH, G. AND S. MARKOVITCH. [2007] Computing Semantic Relatedness using Wikipedia-based 
Explicit Semantic Analysis. In Proceedings of the 20th International Joint Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence, IJCAI’07, Hyderabad, India, January 2007, p.1606–1611. 
GABRILOVICH, G. AND MARKOVITCH, S. [2006] Overcoming the Brittleness Bottleneck using Wikipedia: 
Enhancing Text Categorization with Encyclopedic Knowledge, Proceedings of The 21st National 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), pp. 1301–1306, Boston, July 2006 
GILES, J. [2005] Internet Encyclopaedias Go Head to Head. In Nature 138(15), 14 December 2005.  
GLEIM, R., MEHLER, A. AND M. DEHMER. [2007] Web Corpus Mining by Instance of Wikipedia. In Kilgarriff, 
Adam; Baroni, Marco (eds.) Proceedings of the EACL 2006 Workshop on Web as Corpus, Trento, Italy, 
April 3–7, 2006, pp. 67–74. 
GREGOROWICZ, A. AND M. A. KRAMER. [2006] Mining a Large-Scale Term-Concept Network from Wikipedia. 
Mitre Technical Report 06–1028, October 2006. 
GUHA, R., AND R. MCCOOL [2003] TAP: A Semantic Web Platform. Journal of Network Computing 42, 557–
577. 
HALAVAIS, A. AND LACKAFF, D. [2008] An Analysis of Topical Coverage of Wikipedia. Journal of Computer-
Mediated Communication, 13(2), pp. 429–440. 
HALLER, H., KRÖTZSCH, M., VÖLKEL, M., AND D. VRANDECIC. [2006] Semantic Wikipedia (software demo). In 
Proceedings of the 2006 International Symposium on Wikis, pp. 137–138. ACM Press, August 2006. 
HATCHER, E. AND O. GOSPODNETIC. [2004] Lucene in Action. Manning Publications, Greenwich, CT. 
HAVELIWALA, T. H. [2003] Topic-sensitive PageRank: A context-sensitive ranking algorithm for web search. 
IEEE transactions on knowledge and data engineering, 15(4), pp. 784–796. 
HEARST, M. A. [1992] Automatic acquisition of hyponyms from large text corpora. In Proceedings of the 14th 
International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Nantes, France, pp. 539–545. 
HERBELOT, A. AND A. COPESTAKE. [2006] Acquiring Ontological Relationships from Wikipedia Using RMRS. 
In Proc. International Semantic Web Conference 2006 Workshop on Web Content Mining with Human 
Language Technologies, Athens, GA. 
HEPP, M., BACHLECHNER, D., AND K. SIORPAES. [2006] Harvesting Wiki Consensus—Using Wikipedia Entries 
as Ontology Elements. In Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop: SemWiki’06—From Wiki to 
Semantics. Co-located with the 3rd Annual European Semantic Web Conference ESWC’06 in Budva, 
Montenegro, June 12, 2006. 
HIGASHINAKA, R., DOHSAKA, K., AND H. ISOZAKI. [2007] Learning to Rank Definitions to Generate Quizzes for 
Interactive Information Presentation, in Companion Volume to the Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting 
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 117–120 
HUANG, W.C., TROTMAN, A., AND S. GEVA. [2007] Collaborative Knowledge Management: Evaluation of 
Automated Link Discovery in the Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Focused Retrieval at 
SIGIR 2007, July 27, 2007, Amsterdam. 
IDE, N. AND J. VÉRONIS (editors). [1998] Word Sense Disambiguation. Special issue of Computational 
Linguistics, 24(1). 
JIANG, J. J. AND D. W. CONRATH, D. W. [1997] Semantic similarity based on corpus statistics and lexical 
taxonomy. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Research in Computational Linguistics, 
ROCLING’97. Taiwan. 
JIJKOUN, V. AND M. DE RIJKE. [2006] Overview of the WiQA task at CLEF 2006. In: C. Peters et al. (editors). 
Evaluation of Multilingual and Multi-modal Information Retrieval. 7th Workshop of the Cross-Language 
Evaluation Forum, CLEF 2006, Alicante, Spain, September 20–22, 2006, Revised Selected Papers, LNCS 
4730, pp. 265–274, September 2007  
JANIK, M. AND K. KOCHUT. [2007] Wikipedia in Action: Ontological Knowledge in Text Categorization, 
University of Georgia, Computer Science Department Technical Report no. UGA-CS-TR-07-001. 
KAISSER, M. [2008] The QuALiM Question Answering Demo: Supplementing Answers with Paragraphs drawn 
from Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the ACL-08 HLT Demo Session, Columbus, Ohio, pp. 32–35. 
KASNECI, G., SUCHANEK, F.M., IFRIM, G., RAMANATH, M. AND G. WEIKUM. [2007] NAGA: Searching and 
Ranking Knowledge. In Proceedings of the 24th IEEE International Conference on Data Engineering, 
ICDE’08, Cancun, Mexico, 7–12 April 2008, pp. 953–962. 
KASSNER, L., NASTASE, V., AND M. STRUBE. [2008] Acquiring a Taxonomy from the German Wikipedia. To 
appear in Proceedings of LREC 2008.  
72 
KAZAMA, J. AND K. TORISAWA. [2007] Exploiting Wikipedia as External Knowledge for Named Entity 
Recognition. In Proceedings of the Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing 
and Computational Natural Language Learning, pp. 698–707. 
KINZLER, D. [2005] WikiSense: Mining the Wiki, v 1.1. In Proceedings of the 1st International Wikimedia 
Conference, Wikimania 2005. Wikimedia Foundation. 
KITTUR, A., SUH., B., PENDLETON, B.A. AND CHI, E.H. [2007] He says, she says: Conflict and Coordination in 
Wikipedia. In CHI, pp. 453-462.  
KLEINBERG, J. [1998] Authoritative Sources in a Hyperlinked Environment. Journal of the ACM, 46, pp. 604–
632. 
KLAVANS, J. L. AND P. RESNIK. [1996] The balancing act: combining symbolic and statistical approaches to 
language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
KRIZHANOVSKY, A. [2006] Synonym Search in Wikipedia: Synarcher. In Proceedings of the 11th International 
Conference “Speech and Computer” SPECOM’06. Russia, St. Petersburg, June 25–29, 2006, pp. 474–477. 
KRÖTZSCH, M., VRANDECIC, D. AND M. VÖLKEL. [2005] Wikipedia and the Semantic Web—The Missing 
Links. In Proceedings of the 1st International Wikimedia Conference, Wikimania 2005. Wikimedia 
Foundation. 
KRÖTZSCH, M., VRANDECIC, D., VÖLKEL, M., HALLER, H., AND R. STUDER. [2007] Semantic Wikipedia. 
Journal of Web Semantics, 5, pp. 251–261. 
LEACOCK, C., AND M. CHODOROW. [1998] Combining local context and WordNet similarity for word sense 
identification. In Fellbaum, C. (editor), WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database. Chapter 11, pp. 265–283. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
LEHTONEN, M. AND A. DOUCET. [2007] EXTIRP: Baseline Retrieval from Wikipedia. Comparative Evaluation 
of XML Information Retrieval Systems, pp. 115–120. 
LEGG, C. [2007] Ontologies on the Semantic Web. Annual Review of Information Science and Technology 41, 
pp. 407–452. 
LENAT, D. B. [1995] Cyc: A Large-Scale Investment in Knowledge Infrastructure. Communications of the ACM 
38(11), pp. 33-38. 
LENAT, D.B., AND GUHA, R.V. [1990] Building Large Knowledge Based Systems. Reading, Mass.: Addison 
Wesley. 
LIPSCOMB, C.E. [2000] Medical Subject Headings (MeSH). In Bulletin of the Medical Library Association 
88(3), p. 265. 
LI, Y., LUK, R. W. P., HO, E. K. S., CHUNG, K. F. [2007a] Improving weak ad-hoc queries using Wikipedia as 
external corpus. In Kraaij et al. (editors) Proceedings of the 30th Annual International ACM SIGIR 
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, SIGIR’07, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands, July 23–27, 2007, pp. 797–798. ACM Press. 
LI, B., CHEN, Q., YEUNG, D.S., NG, W.W.Y., WANG, X. [2007b] Exploring Wikipedia and Query Logs Ability 
for Text Feature Representation. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning and 
Cybernetics, Hong Kong, 19–22 August 2007, v. 6, pp. 3343–3348. 
LIH, A. [2004] Wikipedia as Participatory Journalism: Reliable Sources? Metrics for Evaluating Collaborative 
Media as a News Source. In Proceedings of the 5th International Symposium on Online Journalism. 
LITA, L.V. AND HUNT, W.A. AND NYBERG, E. [2004] Resource analysis for question answering. In Proceedings 
of the 42nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2004), Barcelona, 
Spain. 
MAEDCHE, A., B. MOTIK, AND L. STOJANOVIC [2003] Managing Multiple and Distributed Ontologies on the 
Semantic Web. VLDB Journal 12, 286-302. 
MAGNUS, P. D. [2006] Epistemology and the Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the North American Computing and 
Philosophy Conference, Troy, New York, August 2006.  
MAYS, E., DAMERAU, F. J. AND R. L. MERCER. [1991] Context-based spelling correction. Information 
Processing and Management 27(5), pp. 517–522. 
MCCOOL, R. [2006]. Rethinking the Semantic Web, Part 2. IEEE Internet Computing 10(1), pp. 93–96. 
MCGUINNESS, D. [2003]. Ontologies Come of Age. In D. Fensel, et al. (editors) Spinning the Semantic Web: 
Bringing the World Wide Web to Its Full Potential. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
MCGUINNESS, D. 
AND F. 
VAN HARMELEN. [2004] OWL Web Ontology Language: Overview. 
http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-features/ 
MEDELYAN, O. AND D. MILNE. [2008] Augmenting domain-specific thesauri with knowledge from Wikipedia. 
In Proceedings of the NZ Computer Science Research Student Conference, Christchurch, NZ. 
MEDELYAN, 
O., 
WITTEN, 
I. 
H., 
AND 
D. 
MILNE. 
[2008] 
Topic 
Indexing 
with 
Wikipedia.  
To appear in Proceedings of the WIKI-AI: Wikipedia and AI Workshop at the AAAI’08 Conference, 
Chicago, US. 
MEDELYAN, O. AND C. LEGG. [2008] Integrating Cyc and Wikipedia: Folksonomy meets rigorously defined 
common-sense. To appear in Proceedings of the WIKI-AI: Wikipedia and AI Workshop at the AAAI’08 
Conference, Chicago, US. 
MIHALCEA, R. [2007] Using Wikipedia for Automatic Word Sense Disambiguation. In Proceedings of the 
Human Language Technologies 2007: The Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics, Rochester, New York, April 2007 
MIHALCEA, R. AND D. MOLDOVAN. [2001] Automatic generation of a coarse grained WordNet. In Proceedings 
of the NAACL Workshop on WordNet and Other Lexical Resources. Pittsburgh, PA. 
73 
MIHALCEA, R. AND A. CSOMAI. [2007] Wikify! Linking Documents to Encyclopedic Knowledge. In 
Proceedings of the 16th ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, CIKM’07, Lisbon, 
Portugal, November 6–8, 2007, pp. 233–241. 
MILLER, E. [1998] An Introduction to the Resource Description Framework. Bulletin of the American Society 
for Information Science 25(1), pp. 15–19. 
MILLER, G. A., AND W. G. CHARLES. [1991] Contextual correlates of semantic similarity. Language and 
Cognitive Processes 6(1), pp. 1–28. 
MILNE, D., MEDELYAN, O. AND I. H. WITTEN. [2006] Mining domain-specific thesauri from Wikipedia: A case 
study. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Web Intelligence (IEEE/WIC/ACM WI'2006), 
Hong Kong. 
MILNE, D., WITTEN, I. H. AND D. M. NICHOLS. [2007] A Knowledge-Based Search Engine Powered by 
Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, 
CIKM’07, Lisbon, Portugal, November 6–8, 2007, pp. 445–454. 
MILNE, D. [2007] Computing Semantic Relatedness using Wikipedia Link Structure. In Proceedings of the New 
Zealand Computer Science Research Student Conference, NZ CSRSC’07, Hamilton, New Zealand. 
MILNE, D. AND WITTEN, I.H. [2008a] An effective, low-cost measure of semantic relatedness obtained from 
Wikipedia links. In Proceedings of the first AAAI Workshop on Wikipedia and Artificial Intelligence 
(WIKIAI'08), Chicago, I.L.  
MILNE, D. AND WITTEN, I.H. [2008b] Learning to link with Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference 
on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM'2008), Napa Valley, C.A. 
MINIER, Z., ZALAN, B. AND L. CSATO. [2007] Wikipedia-Based Kernels for Text Categorization. In Proceedings 
of the International Symposium on Symbolic and Numeric Algorithms for Scientific Computing, 
SYNASC’07, IEEE Computer Society Washington, DC, USA. pp. 157–164. 
MOTTA, E., SHADBOLT, N., AND STUTT, A. [2004] Engineering Knowledge in the Age of the Semantic Web: 
Proceedings, 14th International Conference, EKAW 2004, Whittlebury Hall, UK, October 5-8, 2004. 
MUCHNIK, L., ITZHACK, R., SOLOMON, S. AND Y. LOUZOUN. [2007] Self-emergence of Knowledge Trees: 
Extraction of the Wikipedia Hierarchies, in Physical Review E 76(1). 
NAKAYAMA, K., HARA, T., AND S. NISHIO. [2007a] Wikipedia: A New Frontier for AI Researches. Journal of 
the Japanese Society for Artificial Intelligence 22(5), pp. 693–701. 
NAKAYAMA, K., HARA, T., AND S. NISHIO. [2007b] A Thesaurus Construction Method from Large Scale Web 
Dictionaries. In Proceedings of the 21st IEEE International Conference on Advanced Information 
Networking and Applications, AINA’07, May 21–23, 2007, Niagara Falls, Canada, pp. 932–939. IEEE 
Computer Society.  
NAKAYAMA, K., ITO, M., HARA, T. AND S. NISHIO. [2008] Wikipedia Mining for Huge Scale Japanese 
Association Thesaurus Construction. In Workshop Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on 
Advanced Information Networking and Applications, AINA’08, GinoWan, Okinawa, Japan, March 25–28, 
2008, pp. 1150–1155. IEEE Computer Society. 
NASTASE, V. AND M. STRUBE. [2008] Decoding Wikipedia Categories for Knowledge Acquisition. To appear in 
Proceedings of the AAAI’08 Conference, Chicago, US. 
NELKEN, R. AND E. YAMANGIL. [2008] Mining Wikipedia’s Article Revision History for Traning 
Computattional Lingustic Algorithms. In Proceedings of the WIKI-AI: Wikipedia and AI Workshop at the 
AAAI’08 Conference, Chicago, US. 
NGUYEN, D. P. T., MATSUO, Y., AND M. ISHIZUKA. [2007a] Relation Extraction from Wikipedia Using Subtree 
Mining. In Proceedings of the AAAI’07 Conference, pp. 1414–1420, Vancouver, Canada, July 2007. 
NGUYEN, D. P. T., MATSUO, Y., AND M. ISHIZUKA. [2007b] Exploiting Syntactic and Semantic Information for 
Relation Extraction from Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the IJCAI Workshop on Text-Mining and Link-
Analysis, TextLink’07. 
OLLIVIER, Y. UND P. SENELLART. [2007] Finding Related Pages Using Green Measures: An Illustration with 
Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the AAAI’07 Conference, pp. 1427–1433, Vancouver, Canada, July 2007. 
OVERELL, S. E. AND S. RÜGER. [2006] Identifying and grounding descriptions of places. In Proceedings of the 
3rd ACM workshop on Geographical Information Retrieval at SIGIR. 
OVERELL, S. E. AND S. RÜGER. [2007] Geographic co-occurrence as a tool for GIR. In Proceedings of the 4th 
ACM Workshop on Geographical Information Retrieval. Lisbon, Portugal. 
PEIRCE, C.S. [1877] The Fixation of Belief. Popular Science Monthly 12 (Nov. 1877), pp. 1–15. 
PEI, M., NAKAYAMA, K., HARA, T. AND NISHIO, S. [2008] Constructing a Global Ontology by Concept 
Mapping using Wikipedia Thesaurus. In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Advanced 
Information Networking and Applications, AINA’08, GinoWan, Okinawa, Japan, March 25–28, 2008, pp. 
1205–1210. IEEE Computer Society. 
PONZETTO, S. P. AND M. STRUBE. [2006]. Exploiting Semantic Role Labeling, WordNet and Wikipedia for 
Coreference Resolution. In Proceedings of HLT-NAACL '06, pp.192–199. 
PONZETTO, S. P. AND M. STRUBE. [2007a]. Knowledge Derived from Wikipedia for Computing Semantic 
Relatedness. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 30, pp. 181–212 
PONZETTO, S. P. AND M. STRUBE. [2007b]. Deriving a Large Scale Taxonomy from Wikipedia. In Proceedings 
of AAAI '07, pp.1440–1445. 
PONZETTO, S. P. AND M. STRUBE. [2007c]. An API for Measuring the Relatedness of Words in Wikipedia. In: 
Companion Volume of the Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, Prague, Czech Republic, 23–30 June, 2007, pp. 49–52. 
74 
PONZETTO, S. P. [2007] Creating a knowledge base from a collaboratively generated encyclopedia. In: 
Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics Doctoral Consortium, Rochester, NY, 22–27 April, 2007, pp. 9–
12. 
POTTHAST, M. [2007] Wikipedia in the pocket: indexing technology for near-duplicate detection and high 
similarity search. In Proceedings of the 30th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and 
Development in Information Retrieval. 
POTTHAST, M., STEIN, B., AND M. A. ANDERKA [2008] Wikipedia-Based Multilingual Retrieval Model. In 
Proceedings of the 30th European Conference on IR Research, ECIR’08, Glasgow. 
QUINE, W.V.O. [1960] Word and Object. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
RANSDELL, J. [2003] The Relevance of Peircean Semiotic to Computational Intelligence augmentation. SEED 
Journal (Semiotics, Evolution, Energy, and Development).  
RESNIK, P. [1999] Semantic similarity in a taxonomy: An information-based measure and its application to 
problems of ambiguity in natural language. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 11, pp. 95–130. 
RUBENSTEIN, H., AND J. GOODENOUGH. [1965] Contextual correlates of synonymy. Communications of the 
ACM 8(10), pp. 627–633. 
RUIZ-CASADO, M., ALFONSECA, E., AND P. CASTELLS. [2005a] Automatic assignment of Wikipedia 
Encyclopedic Entries to WordNet synsets. In Proceedings of AWIC’05. 
RUIZ-CASADO, M., ALFONSECA, E., AND P. CASTELLS. [2005b] Automatic Extraction of Semantic Relationships 
for WordNet by Means of Pattern Learning from Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 10th International 
Conference on Applications of Natural Language to Information Systems, NLDB’05, pp. 67–79, Alicante, 
Spain, June 15–17, 2005. 
RUIZ-CASADO, M., ALFONSECA, E., AND P. CASTELLS. [2006] From Wikipedia to Semantic Relationships: a 
Semi-automated Annotation Approach. In Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop: SemWiki’06—
From Wiki to Semantics. Co-located with the 3rd Annual European Semantic Web Conference ESWC’06 in 
Budva, Montenegro, June 12, 2006. 
RUIZ-CASADO, M., ALFONSECA, E., AND P. CASTELLS. [2007] Automatising the learning of lexical patterns: An 
application to the enrichment of WordNet by extracting semantic relationships from Wikipedia. Data 
Knowledge and Engineering 61(3), pp. 484–499. 
RUTHVEN, I. AND M. LALMAS. [2003] A survey on the use of relevance feedback for information access 
systems. Knowledge Engineering Review 18(2), pp. 95–145. 
SCHÖNHOFEN, P. [2006] Identifying Document Topics Using the Wikipedia Category Network. In Proceedings 
of the International Conference on Web Intelligence (IEEE/WIC/ACM WI'2006), Hong Kong. 
SMITH, B., WILLIAMS, J., AND S. SCHULZE-KREMER. [2003]. The Ontology of the Gene Ontology. In 
Proceedings of AMIA Symposium, pp. 609–613. 
SOON, W. M., NG, H. T., AND D. C. Y. LIM [2001]. A machine learning approach to coreference resolution of 
noun phrases. Computational Linguistics 27(4), pp. 521–544. 
SOWA, J. [2004]. The Challenge of Knowledge Soup. http://www.jfsowa.com/pubs/challenge.pdf. 
STVILIA, B., TWIDALE, M. B., GASSER, L., AND L. SMITH. [2005]. Information Quality Discussions in 
Wikipedia. Graduate School of Library and Information Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign. Technical Report ISRN UIUCLIS–2005/2+CSCW  
STRUBE, M. AND PONZETTO, S.P. [2006]. WikiRelate! Computing Semantic Relatedness Using Wikipedia. In: 
AAAI '06, pp.1419–1424. 
SUCHANEK, F. M, IFRIM, G., AND G. WEIKUM. [2006] Combining Linguistic and Statistical Analysis to Extract 
Relations from Web Documents. In Proceedings of the Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining Conference, 
KDD’06. 
SUCHANEK, F. M., KASNECI, G., AND G. WEIKUM. [2007] Yago: a core of semantic knowledge. Proc 16th 
World Wide Web Conference, WWW’07. New York, NY: ACM Press. 
SUH, S., HALPIN, H., AND E. KLEIN. [2006] Extracting Common Sense Knowledge from Wikipedia. In 
Proceedings of the ISWC’06 Workshop on Web Content Mining with Human Language technology. 
SYED, Z., FININ, T., AND A. JOSHI. [2008] Wikipedia as an Ontology for Describing Documents. In Proceedings 
of the 2nd International Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, AAAI, March 31, 2008 
THOM, A., PEHCEVSKI, J., AND A. M. VERCOUSTRE. [2007] Use of Wikipedia Categories in Entity Ranking. In 
Proceedings of the 12th Australasian Document Computing Symposium, Melbourne, Australia. 
THOMAS, C.S., AND P. AMIT. [2007] Semantic Convergence of Wikipedia Articles. In Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Web Intelligence, IEEE/WIC/ACM WI’07, Hong Kong. 
TORAL, A. AND R. MUÑOZ. [2006] A proposal to automatically build and maintain gazetteers for Named Entity 
Recognition by using Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the Workshop on New Text at the 11th EACL’06. 
Trento, Italy. 
TORAL, A. AND R. MUÑOZ. [2007] Towards a Named Entity WordNet (NEWN). In Proceedings of the 6th 
International Conference on Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing, RANLP’07, Borovets, 
Bulgaria. pp. 604–608. 
TYERS, F. AND J. PIENAAR. [2008] Extracting bilingual word pairs from Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 
SALTMIL Workshop at Language Resources and Evaluation Conference, LREC’08. 
VERCOUSTRE, A. M., PEHCEVSKI, J., AND J. A. THOM [2007]. Using Wikipedia Categories and Links in Entity 
Ranking. In Pre-proceedings of the 6th International Workshop of the Initiative for the Evaluation of XML 
Retrieval, INEX’07, December 17, 2007. 
75 
VERCOUSTRE, A. M., THOM, J. A., AND J. PEHCEVSKI [2008] Entity Ranking in Wikipedia. In Proceedings of 
SAC’08, March 16–20, 2008, Fortaleza, Ceara, Brazil. 
VIÉGAS, F.B., WATTENBERG, M., AND D. KUSHAL. [2004] Studying cooperation and conflict between authors 
with history flow visualizations. In Proceedings of SIGCHI’04, Vienna, Austria, pp. 575–582. New York, 
NY: ACM Press. 
VIÉGAS, F., WATTENBERG, M., KRISS, J., AND F. VAN HAM. [2007] Talk before You Type: Coordination in 
Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences.  
VÖLKEL, M., KRÖTZSCH, M., VRANDECIC, D., HALLER, H. AND R. STUDER. [2006] Semantic Wikipedia. In 
Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on World Wide Web, WWW’06, Edinburgh, Scotland, 
May 23–26, 2006.  
VOORHEES, E. M. [1999] Natural Language Processing and Information Retrieval. In Pazienza, M. T. (editor) 
Information Extraction: Towards Scalable, Adaptable Systems, New York: Springer, pp. 32–48. 
VOORHEES, E. M., AND HARMAN, D. [2000]. Overview of the eighth text retrieval conference (trec-8). In TREC, 
pp. 1–24. 
VOSSEN, P., DIEZ-ORZAS, P., AND W. PETERS. [1997] The Multilingual Design of EuroWordNet. In Vossen, P. 
et al. (editors) Proceedings of the ACL/EACL’97 Workshop on Automatic Information Extraction and 
Building of Lexical Semantic Resources for NLP Applications, Madrid, July 12, 1997. 
VRANDECIC, D., KRÖTZSCH, M., AND M. VÖLKEL. [2007] Wikipedia and the Semantic Web, Part II. In P. Ayers 
and N. Boalch (editors) Proceedings of the 2nd International Wikimedia Conference Wikimania’06. 
Wikimedia Foundation, Cambridge, MA, USA. 
DE VRIES, A. P., THOM, J. A., VERCOUSTRE, A. M., CRASWELL, N., AND M. LALMAS. [2007] INEX 2007 Entity 
ranking track guidelines. In Workshop Pre-Proceedings of INEX 2007. 
WANG, P., HU, J., ZENG H., CHEN, L., AND Z. CHEN. [2007a] Improving Text Classification by Using 
Encyclopedia Knowledge. In Proceedings of the 7th IEEE International Conference on Data Mining, 
ICDM’07, 8–31 October 2007, pp.332–341. 
WANG, G., ZHANG, H., WANG, H. AND Y. YU [2007b] Enhancing Relation Extraction by Eliciting Selectional 
Constraint Features from Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the Natural Language Processing and Information 
Systems Conference, pp. 329–340. 
WANG, G., YU, Y., AND H. ZHU. [2007c] PORE: Positive-Only Relation Extraction from Wikipedia Text. In 
Proceedings of the 6th International Semantic Web Conference and 2nd Asian Semantic Web Conference, 
ISWC/ASWC’07, Busan, South Korea. 
WANG, Y., WANG, H., ZHU, H., AND Y. YU. [2007d] Exploit Semantic Information for Category Annotation 
Recommendation in Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the Natural Language Processing and Information 
Systems Conference, pp. 48–60. 
WATANABE, Y., ASAHARA, M., AND Y. A. MATSUMOTO. [2007] Graph-based Approach to Named Entity 
Categorization in Wikipedia Using Conditional Random Fields. In Proceedings of the Joint Conference on 
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and Computational Natural Language Learning, 
EMNLP-CoNLL. 
WILKINSON, D.M., AND HUBERMAN, B.A. [2007] Cooperation and Quality in Wikipedia. In Proceeedings of the 
International Symposium on Wikis, pp. 157-164.  
WILKS, Y. [2006] Ontotherapy, or How to stop Worrying about What There Is. In Knowledge Representation 
With Ontologies: Present Challenges, Future Possibilities (C. Brewster and K. O'Hara, eds.), International 
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 2006.  
WU, F. AND D. WELD. [2007] Autonomously Semantifying Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM 
Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, CIKM’07, Lisbon, Portugal, November 6–8, 2007, 
pp. 41–50.  
WU, F. AND D. WELD. [2008] Automatically Refining the Wikipedia Infobox Ontology. In Proceedings of the 
17th International World Wide Web Conference, WWW’08. 
WU, F., HOFFMANN, R., AND D. WELD. [2008] Information Extraction from Wikipedia: Moving Down the Long 
Tail. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM SigKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data 
Mining (KDD-08), Las Vegas, NV, August 24-27, 2008, pp. 635-644. 
YANG, X. F. AND J. SU [2007] Coreference Resolution Using Semantic Relatedness Information from 
Automatically Discovered Patterns. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics, ACL’07, Prague, Czech Republic, pp. 528–535. 
YANG, J., HAN, J., OH, I., AND M. KWAK. [2007] Using Wikipedia technology for topic maps design. In 
Proceedings of the ACM Southeast Regional Conference, pp. 106–110. 
YU, J., THOM, J. A., AND A. TAM. [2007] Ontology evaluation using Wikipedia categories for browsing. In 
Proceedings of the 16th ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, CIKM’07, Lisbon, 
Portugal, November 6–8, 2007, pp. 223–232. 
ZARAGOZA, H., RODE, H., MIKA, P., ATSERIAS, J., CIARAMITA, M., AND G. ATTARDI. [2007] Ranking Very 
Many Typed Entities on Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM Conference on Information and 
Knowledge Management, CIKM’07, Lisbon, Portugal, November 6–8, 2007, pp. 1015–1018. 
ZESCH, T. AND I. GUREVYCH. [2007] Analysis of the Wikipedia Category Graph for NLP Applications. In 
Proceedings of the TextGraphs-2 Workshop at the NAACL-HLT’07, pp. 1–8. 
ZESCH, T., GUREVYCH, I., AND M. MÜHLHÄUSER. [2007] Comparing Wikipedia and German WordNet by 
Evaluating Semantic Relatedness on Multiple Datasets. In Proceedings of Human Language Technologies: 
76 
The Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 
NAACL-HLT’07, pp. 205–208. 
ZESCH, T., GUREVYCH, I., AND M. MÜHLHÄUSER. [2008] Analyzing and Accessing Wikipedia as a Lexical 
Semantic Resource. In Proceedings of the Biannual Conference of the Society for Computational Linguistics 
and Language Technology, pp. 213–221. 
ZLATIC, V., BOZICEVIC, M., STEFANCIC, H., AND M. DOMAZET. [2006] Wikipedias: Collaborative Web-based 
Encyclopedias as Complex Networks. Physical Review E, 74:016115. 
ZIRN, C., NASTASE, V., AND M. STRUBE. [2008] Distinguishing between Instances and Classes in the Wikipedia 
Taxonomy. In Proceedings of The 5th European Semantic Web Conference (ESWC’08), Tenerife, Spain, 
June 2008. 
. 
