Title: Leveraging Natural Language Processing For Public Health Screening On YouTube: A COVID-19 Case Study
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2306.01164v1
--------------------------------------------------

Leveraging Natural Language Processing For
Public Health Screening On YouTube: A
COVID-19 Case Study
Ahrar Bin Aslam 1*, Zafi Sherhan Syed 2*,
Muhammad Faiz Khan 3†, Asghar Baloch 4†,
Muhammad Shehram Shah Syed 5†
1*Department of Telecommunication, Mehran University of Engineering
and Technology, Jamshoro, Pakistan.
2*Department of Telecommunication, Mehran University of Engineering
and Technology, Jamshoro, Pakistan.
3Department of Telecommunication, Mehran University of Engineering
and Technology, Jamshoro, Pakistan.
4Department of Telecommunication, Mehran University of Engineering
and Technology, Jamshoro, Pakistan.
5Department of Software Engineering, Mehran University of Engineering
and Technology, Jamshoro, Pakistan.
*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): 18tl04@students.muet.edu.pk;
zafisherhan.shah@faculty.muet.edu.pk;
Contributing authors: 18tl116@students.muet.edu.pk;
18tl76@students.muet.edu.pk; shehram.shah@faculty.muet.edu.pk;
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
Background: Social media platforms have become a viable source of medi-
cal information, with patients and healthcare professionals using them to share
health-related information and track diseases. Similarly, YouTube, the largest
video-sharing platform in the world contains vlogs where individuals talk about
their illnesses. The aim of our study was to investigate the use of Natural Lan-
guage Processing (NLP) to identify the spoken content of YouTube vlogs related
to the diagnosis of Coronavirus disease of 2019 (COVID-19) for public health
screening.
1
arXiv:2306.01164v1  [cs.CL]  1 Jun 2023
Methods: COVID-19 videos on YouTube were searched using relevant keywords.
A total of 1000 videos being spoken in English were downloaded out of which 791
were classified as vlogs, 192 were non-vlogs, and 17 were deleted by the channel.
The videos were converted into a textual format using Microsoft Streams. The
textual data was preprocessed using basic and advanced preprocessing methods.
A lexicon of 200 words was created which contained words related to COVID-19.
The data was analyzed using topic modeling, word clouds, and lexicon matching.
Results: The word cloud results revealed discussions about COVID-19 symptoms
like “fever”, along with generic terms such as “mask” and “isolation”. Lexical
analysis demonstrated that in 96.46% of videos, patients discussed generic terms,
and in 95.45% of videos, people talked about COVID-19 symptoms. LDA Topic
Modeling results also generated topics that successfully captured key themes and
content related to our investigation of COVID-19 diagnoses in YouTube vlogs.
Conclusion: By leveraging NLP techniques on YouTube vlogs public health
practitioners can enhance their ability to mitigate the effects of pandemics and
effectively respond to public health challenges.
Keywords: Natural Language Processing, COVID-19, Public Health Screening, Topic
Modeling, Word Clouds, Lexicon
1 INTRODUCTION
Coronavirus is an infectious disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus [1] which was
first identified in December 2019 in Wuhan, China. Since then, it started spreading
all around the world and was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization
(WHO) on 11th March 2020 [2]. This disease was termed COVID-19 by the WHO [3].
COVID-19 transmits when people breathe in air contaminated by droplets and small
airborne particles. Individuals afflicted with this ailment experience a diverse array of
symptoms [4] such as fever, cough, shortness of breath, headache, sore throat, muscle
ache, congestion, loss of sense of taste and smell, fatigue, nausea, and diarrhea.
The preventive measures for COVID-19 are getting vaccinated, wearing a mask,
maintaining at least a 1-meter distance from others, and keeping good hygiene [5]. As
of 24 May 2023, there have been 766,895,075 confirmed cases since the start of the
pandemic, out of which 6,935,889 cases have resulted in deaths of the patients [6]. The
COVID-19 pandemic has presented numerous challenges for public health worldwide,
with a significant burden on healthcare systems. The demand for basic healthcare
materials such as ICU beds, ventilators, and personal protective equipment (PPE)
has outpaced the supply in many hospitals and medical facilities. In addition, the
pandemic has resulted in a shortage of healthcare personnel, including doctors and
nurses, as they work tirelessly to combat the virus [7]. In global response to the pan-
demic, ensuring enough availability and adequate distribution of COVID-19 vaccines
have emerged as a critical concern. Notably, developing countries have faced serious
challenges in accessing vaccines, which has resulted in big differences in immunization
coverage among different populations. This has resulted in healthcare professionals
being exposed to the virus and dying [8].
2
This pandemic also affected the mental health of the public, Vindegaard et al. [9]
explored the influence of COVID-19 on the mental well-being of both, individuals
who had been infected with the virus and the public, which also includes healthcare
professionals and people who had preexisting mental health issues. It was found that
the infected patients had an elevated level of post-traumatic stress symptoms (PTSS)
and an increasingly higher level of depressive symptoms. Whereas the public includ-
ing healthcare workers and people with preexisting mental health issues also observed
an increased level of anxiety and depressive symptoms. Qiu et al. [10] revealed the
psychological distress caused by COVID-19 on individuals in China. The study aimed
to investigate the impact of the pandemic on the mental health of the Chinese popu-
lation. In our prior study [11], we examined the influence of COVID-19 on emotions
and sentiments. Our findings indicate that there was a rise in negative emotions at
the beginning of the pandemic when it was officially declared. We did observe that it
took several months for emotions to return to their pre-pandemic levels. This suggests
that the psychological impact of the pandemic was long-lasting and had a considerable
effect on the emotional health of the individuals.
Lately, there has been a rise in the utilization of social media for obtaining cru-
cial information about public health given that the public uses social media platforms
every day to share their health-related information [12]. Due to COVID-19 being a
pandemic in this digital age, there is a large amount of data available on different
social media platforms where users are sharing their experiences and journey related
to the pandemic. Social media platforms have proved to be pivotal in spreading infor-
mation regarding this pandemic [13]. In the recent past, one finds several studies which
have proposed leveraging social media posts to understand and analyze disease-related
information for public health purposes. For example, posts on Reddit were used by
Park et al. [14] to discern mental health trends in patients suffering from rheumatoid
arthritis. Similarly, Lian et al. [15] identified adverse effects of the COVID-19 vaccine
from Twitter data. In addition, researchers have also used YouTube to analyze the
content quality of different diseases [16–18].
Since the pandemic first began, people have utilized social media platforms to
share their experiences, symptoms, and recovery process related to this virus. A large
amount of data available on people’s experiences presents us with an opportunity to
analyze the methods of COVID-19 treatments and care. As YouTube is the largest
video-sharing platform in the world, having over 2 billion monthly logged-in users [19],
it offers significant potential for research in the field of public health. We argue and
show that it can be utilized for public health screening of COVID-19.
1.1 Motivation
The COVID-19 pandemic has attracted a lot of public interest, with people sharing
their experiences of symptoms and recovery from this virus on social media platforms
such as YouTube. This offers an opportunity to contribute to present and future public
health screening efforts aimed at fighting pandemics. Leveraging COVID-19 related
data on YouTube, an automatic system could be created using Automatic Speech
Recognition (ASR) tools to analyze speech and match symptoms with those in this
data to determine if an individual has COVID-19. This approach could potentially
3
detect COVID-19 at an early stage, enabling prompt public health response to stop the
spread of this virus. Overall, content analysis of COVID-19 related vlogs on YouTube
and ASR tools could prove to be a productive means of enhancing public health
surveillance efforts during the COVID-19 pandemic.
1.2 Research Questions
Around the world, anxiety and depression have risen substantially because of the
COVID-19 pandemic [20], and initially, even the health care workers (HCW) faced
a shortage of reliable information about this virus [21]. As more information became
available, knowledge about COVID-19 symptoms and their impact on public health
has been gained through patient history. Our research seeks to investigate whether
natural language processing (NLP) methods can be used to examine transcripts of
COVID-19 related YouTube vlogs, which may contain similar patient histories. Specif-
ically, we seek to address the following questions.
RQ1: Can we use NLP to facilitate the identification of COVID-19 symptoms from
such vlogs?
RQ2: Which traits can NLP identify from YouTube vlogs that can be utilized for
public health screening of viral diseases?
1.3 YouTube as a Source of Public Health Surveillance
Our research aspires to contribute to the present efforts to combat the COVID-19 pan-
demic by analyzing YouTube vlogs of people’s personal experiences of being infected
with this virus. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study that has explored
the potential of analyzing COVID-19 related YouTube vlogs for identifying patterns
and themes related to symptoms experienced by individuals with COVID-19. This rep-
resents an important contribution to the field of public health surveillance, as YouTube
is a widely used platform for people to share their personal experiences and knowl-
edge of COVID-19, and the analysis of such vlogs could provide valuable insights for
public health officials and practitioners.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents a brief overview
of the related work. Section 3 provides a detailed description of the dataset used in
this research and the preprocessing steps implemented to clean the data. The NLP
methods used in extracting key information regarding COVID-19 are described in
Section 4. The results obtained from these experiments are presented in Section 5.
The discussion, key takeaways and insights, limitations, implications of this research,
and directions for future work are presented in Section 6.
2 RELATED WORK
Natural Language Processing (NLP) is a branch of artificial intelligence that deals
with the interactions between computers and human language. It is concerned with the
understanding and interpretation of human language, and how to program computers
to analyze, understand, and derive meaning from what humans are speaking. Recent
4
developments in NLP technologies are opening new possibilities for health research
and decision-making based on the analysis of large volumes of text quickly.
Utilizing the data available in scientific literature, health records, technical reports,
social media, surveys, etc. can help to facilitate the public health system and improve
the current surveillance systems by identifying the diseases faster, whether or not there
are any risk factors associated with the disease, to get the before-hand knowledge
in-case the disease could turn out be an outbreak or a pandemic, disease prevention
strategies and getting accurate answers regarding various health issues and queries.
NLP is becoming recognized as a crucial tool that public health officials can use to help
lessen the burden of health inequality and unfairness in the population [22]. A study
was conducted by Al-Garadi et al. [23] to identify the applications and usefulness of
natural language processing in present and forthcoming pandemics. By applying NLP
to many pandemic specific problems their research highlighted that its methods can
serve as a useful tool to improve pandemic preparedness and response.
In the recent past, one finds several studies in which scientists have utilized NLP
methods to analyze social media data for public health [24]. Since the outbreak of
this virus, the world went into lockdown and people were not able to meet their
friends, colleagues, and relatives. As a result, people started to feel alone and uncertain
regarding the outcome of the pandemic [25]. Having ample time in their homes and
with the hysteria surrounding this disease, e.g. How deadly is it? What effects would
it have on our lives? People started sharing their experiences related to COVID-19 in
the form of videos, posts, and tweets on different social media platforms. Because of
that, we have a large amount of data on social media of COVID-19 available.
It has been shown that NLP can be used to investigate various aspects of COVID-
19 through data acquired from different social media platforms
[26–30]. Our study
draws inspiration from the following papers, as we have also used NLP in examining
COVID-19 related content, however, our study focused on videos available on YouTube
distinguishing it from others that examined COVID-19 related content on other social
media platforms.
A study by Liu et al. [26] aimed to assess the effectiveness of Reddit as a platform
for COVID-19 pandemic surveillance, with an emphasis on North Carolina. They used
natural language processing techniques such as Bidirectional Encoder Representa-
tions from Transformers (BERT)-based sentence clustering, named-entity recognition,
cosine similarity measures, and Latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) topic modeling to
analyze Reddit posts from March to August 2020. The dataset was broken down into
two periods, and LDA topic modeling was used to identify 5 topics for each period.
To preprocess the data URL removal, tokenization, punctuation, stop-word removal,
part-of-speech tagging, and lemmatization were performed. The study shed light on
people’s concerns and behaviors in North Carolina during the COVID-19 pandemic.
In [27], Low et al. employed natural language processing on Reddit posts from 2018
to 2020 to investigate changes in non-mental health communities and major mental
health support groups during the initial stages of the pandemic. They used supervised
machine learning to classify posts into appropriate support groups and unsupervised
techniques like topic modeling and clustering to identify issues throughout Reddit.
Posts from fifteen subreddits were analyzed, and data from both pre-pandemic and
5
mid-pandemic periods were used for classification, clustering, and topic modeling.
Pre-processing involved removing stop words and tokenization using NLTK (Natural
Language Toolkit) Tweet Tokenizer, while LDA topic modeling was used to analyze
the topics in the textual dataset. The study found an increase in the distribution of the
Health Anxiety topic across mid-pandemic posts, along with changes in other topics
between pre- and mid-pandemic periods.
An experimental analysis was conducted by Philipp Wicke and Marianna M. Bolog-
nesi [28] on how the conversation on Twitter surrounding COVID-19 developed during
the initial wave of the pandemic. They utilized topic modeling on a large corpus of
tweets created between 20 March and 1 July 2020 to show the evolution of subjects
associated with the spread of the pandemic over time. The language used in tweets also
shifted from positive to negative valence in response to reopening, while the average
subjectivity of tweets increased linearly. Additionally, they examined how the widely
used metaphor for war was altered by actual riots and street clashes. To create a
sub-corpus of COVID-19 related tweets, they used the resource of Lamsal [31], which
contained 3-4 million tweets per day in English from Twitter based on more than 90
keywords related to COVID-19.
To investigate how the COVID-19 pandemic affected people’s physical and mental
health, Patel et al. [29] collected data from three online health forums with a wide
audience and regular activity. Using lemmatization, 28 keywords were categorized into
three groups: physical symptoms, intensive care terms, and mental health symptoms.
Posts were searched for these keywords and their prevalence throughout the pandemic
was analyzed. Data was standardized for unicode, whitespace, date, time, and loca-
tion of posters. The study aimed to determine changes in the prevalence of worries
about physical and mental health symptoms and intensive care terms throughout the
pandemic. Analysis was done using bespoke Python software.
The study conducted by Bose et al. [30] aimed to examine the effects of COVID-19
on various aspects of society, such as social and economic factors, by utilizing natural
language processing techniques on research literature. They collected 10,000 abstracts
from PubMed on four diseases, namely COVID-19, Influenza, Middle East Respiratory
Syndrome (MERS), and Ebola, and characterized them into ten topics relating to
several aspects of the diseases. The study compared COVID and non-COVID abstracts
and discovered that PubMed abstracts contain a significant amount of extraneous
information that needs to be removed. After cleaning and processing the data, word
clouds were generated for each disease, and common words were compared. Latent
semantic analysis was also applied to identify the co-occurrence of MERS and COVID-
19 in scientific studies. The study highlights the need for achieving herd immunity and
problems relating to drugs.
2.1 Limitations of Existing Approaches
Several limitations were found in the studies discussed in the above section. In the
research of Lui et al. [26], the data collection was limited to a specific period between
March 3, 2020, and August 31, 2020, and only included English language postings
from six North Carolina communities, which may not be representative of all areas.
Additionally, the authors were unable to ensure that the posters were residents of the
6
region at the time of posting. In Low et al. study [27], the lack of formally documented
clinical diagnosis was a limitation, as well as the inability to establish a relationship
between language changes and events during the pandemic. The research of Patel
et al. [29] was limited in its ability to determine whether posters had COVID-19 or
preexisting mental health issues, and it was concluded that the usefulness of online
health forums is up to individual discretion. In the study of Bose et al. [30], the search
was limited to the first 10,000 results for each search topic, which may not have been
representative of all relevant literature. Additionally, the similarity between disease
terms and the lack of research on COVID-19 vaccines were identified as challenges.
Lastly, the topic modeling results did not highlight topics related to the impact of
COVID-19 on mental, social, and economic issues.
3 DATASET
3.1 Data Source and Collection
The data collection process for this study spanned from January 2022 to September
2022 and involved three team members. To gather relevant COVID-related videos
from YouTube, a set of keywords was used, including “I got COVID”, “My COVID
experience”, “My coronavirus experience”, “My COVID story”, “I survived COVID”,
“COVID got me”, “My day-by-day COVID symptoms”, “My Omicron experience”,
“My Delta variant experience”, and “My COVID recovery.” The search included videos
posted since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in January 2020, up until September
2022. No specific criteria were established for the length of the videos, so both short
(less than 5 minutes) and long (more than 30 minutes or 1 hour) videos were included.
An online YouTube video downloader [32] was used to download the videos in 360p
and 720p format.
Notably, this data collection process was done carefully and diligently to ensure
that the videos had relevant information to the topic. This approach allowed the team
to compile videos that provide key insights into the personal experiences of individuals
with COVID-19.
3.2 Dataset Size and Composition
Based on the method of data collection for this study, 1000 videos were downloaded
from YouTube. These videos were then classified into three distinct categories: vlogs,
non-vlogs, and deleted videos. Out of these 1000 videos, 791 belonged to the vlog cat-
egory, 192 were identified as non-vlogs, and 17 videos were deleted by their respective
channels after they were downloaded. The categorization of the downloaded videos is
presented in a tabular format in Table 1.
To ensure the quality and relevance of the data for analysis, only vlogs were
included for further processing as vlogs are most likely to have a person’s relevant
experience with the pandemic and would supply more valuable insights as compared
to an interview which would also contain dialogues from the interviewer. By selecting
vlogs, a rich source of information could be used to derive meaningful insights into the
experiences of individuals with COVID-19.
7
Table 1: Categorization of downloaded
COVID-19 videos
Categories
Number of videos
Vlogs
791
Non-Vlogs
192
Videos which were deleted
17
3.3 Automatic Speech Recognition
The videos were converted into a textual format using the Automatic Speech Recogni-
tion tool, Microsoft Streams. In our recent study [33], we found that Microsoft Streams
is an effective tool to generate transcripts from video files. This tool converts videos
in .MP4 format into .VTT files, which are text files saved in the Web Video Text
Tracks format. VTT files include additional information about a web video, includ-
ing chapters, subtitles, captions, and metadata. They are commonly used for video
subtitling [34]. The downloaded transcript files from Microsoft Stream contained the
keyword Autogenerated Caption at the end of their filename, which was then removed
from all the transcripts in the dataset.
3.4 Data Annotation
To label the data, data annotation was performed using Microsoft Excel. Each video
was described, including what the speaker was saying, the name of the channel, the link
of the video, and classified into three categories: vlogs, non-vlogs, and videos that were
deleted by the channel after being downloaded. The criteria for a video to be considered
a vlog was that it should feature a person sharing their COVID-19 experience in
their home, office, or park without any irrelevant information from a second speaker.
Whereas interviews and podcasts where news anchors and Youtubers were asking
questions from individuals about their experience with this virus were considered as
non-vlogs. Throughout the data collection process, 17 videos were downloaded during
our data collection process, however, they were deleted afterward from YouTube by
the user, mainly because they felt shy about sharing their personal information.
3.5 Data Preprocessing
The transcript files before preprocessing contained irrelevant information that did not
contribute to our analysis. These included parameters such as note duration, note rec-
ognizability, note language, and note confidence. It also displayed the time span of the
sentences being spoken. As we only needed the text for further processing, we excluded
such irrelevant parameters. We used two types of preprocessing settings, Basic Pre-
processing and Advanced Preprocessing. The two methods have been described in the
following sections.
8
3.5.1 Basic Preprocessing
In this setting, we started by converting all characters in the transcripts to lowercase.
After that contractions package [35] was used to expand words that had contractions
within them. This step was used before the removal of all types of punctuation since
the latter would have removed punctuations that are otherwise part of contractions.
After these three steps, the next step was to remove time and date information from
the transcripts. We noticed through data analysis that several YouTube vloggers had
mentioned such information in their vlogs. Since this information was not useful for
the task at hand, we removed it. Similarly, we also removed information about cities
and countries from the transcripts since that too was not deemed to be useful. In
addition to these steps, we also remove stop words from the transcripts. This is a
common preprocessing step for topic modeling where the aim is to reduce the vocab-
ulary size of the corpus with the added benefit of increasing the specificity of the
words to the task at hand within the corpus. The flow diagram of basic preprocessing
is represented in Figure 1.
Figure 1: Basic Preprocessing
3.5.2 Advanced Preprocessing
In addition to the steps involved in basic preprocessing, we only retained tokens that
belong to one of the four Parts-of-Speech tags i.e., ”ADJ” (adjective), ”VERB” (verb),
”ADV” (adverb), and ”INTJ” (interjection) as presented in Figure 2. We surmised
that adjectives, adverbs, interjections, and verbs may carry the most semantic infor-
mation when a text document is processed for public health screening. As an example,
consider the following fictitious transcript: ”covid was quite bad for me since I was first
unsure about the virus, and everyone was going into lockdown. I got sick and I thought
9
I was not going to make it. I took painkillers and other medicine and eventually recov-
ered thank goodness”. Here, the adjectives ”sick” and ”unsure” provide information
about the vloggers’ health and emotional state, respectively, and the verbs ”got” and,
”thought” provides information about actions performed, and the adverb ”eventually”
provides information about a time. Based on this understanding, one can surmise that
topic modeling is more likely to correctly identify the themes that are relevant to pub-
lic health screening. We aimed to retain the most semantically rich information about
the text. The flow diagram for advanced preprocessing is illustrated in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Advanced Preprocessing
Our secondary motivation for exploring the Advanced Preprocessing setting was
that it will retain only relevant words thereby reducing the size of the corpus. As
illustrated in Figure 3, the number of tokens in the Advanced Preprocessing method
is significantly smaller than in the Basic Preprocessing setting.
10
Figure 3: Histogram of Preprocessing Methods
4 METHODS
4.1 Overall Approach
Now we shall define the methodology for various aspects of our experiments that
includes dataset collection, curation, and preprocessing. We shall also talk about how
we analyzed the data using various natural language processing methods. The process
flow diagram of the methodology is presented in Figure 4.
11
Figure 4: Process Flow Diagram of the Methodology
4.2 COVID-19 Lexicon Matching
Lexicon is a specialized vocabulary for a particular topic and is essential for retriev-
ing and interpreting text-based clinical information [36]. It contains semantic and
grammatical data about specific words or word groups and is part of the NLP sys-
tem [37]. Since the start of the pandemic, there have been several terms associated
with COVID-19, for instance, isolation, quarantine, immunity, etc. In the data that
we have collected, people, healthcare professionals, and government officials have used
such terms while sharing their experiences with this disease. To analyze what sort
of words most people speak related to this pandemic, we have created a lexicon of
COVID-19 consisting of 200 words. The lexicon includes words that have been com-
monly used during the pandemic and is intended to be a valuable resource for future
research on this topic. These terms have been grouped into 6 categories as shown in
Table 2. We matched our lexicon with our processed transcripts to inspect what per-
centage of words in the transcripts belong to how many categories. We shall provide
this lexicon for future research on this topic.
Table 2: Categorization of Lexicon
Terms
Categories
Number of words
Generic Terms
113
Symptoms
33
Variants and Names
15
Medical Equipment’s
14
Medicines
11
Vaccines
8
12
The inclusion criteria for the lexical terms were that they had to be in English,
relevant to COVID-19, and released by well-known health or governmental websites.
Table 3 displays the listing of words and their links.
Table 3: Lexicon terms and their links
Sources
Number of Words
WebMD
92
relief.unboundmedicine
28
TMC Houston
19
UVA Health
11
Mayo Clinic
10
covid19.trackvaccines.org/Pakistan
7
Yale Medicine
6
CDC
6
CDHN Ireland
3
Healthdirect.gov.au
3
ec.europa.eu
3
nps.org.au
2
centerforhealthsecurity.org
2
apps.who.int
2
Ominia-Health
2
rochester.edu
1
BBC
1
FDA
1
metaqil
1
4.3 Word Cloud Generation
Word clouds are a visual representation of textual data, it contains a cloud of words
from processed text files, and the more frequently a word occurs the bigger and bolder
it would show up. These are excellent methods for extracting the most important
portions of textual material, including blog posts and databases, and are also referred
to as tag clouds or text clouds.
To compute the word clouds, we used Python programming language. A package
of word clouds was installed and various NLP libraries i.e., Spacy, NLTK, Scikit-
learn were imported. To ensure the accuracy of our analysis, we removed stop words,
which are commonly used in the English language and do not contribute to our anal-
ysis, using the list spacy.lang.en.stop words from the Spacy library The text was then
cleaned by converting it into a list by using the Text.tolist() function, and emojis were
removed as they do not provide significant information in the text-based analysis.
We imported the Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK) library suite which is a collec-
tion of libraries and applications for statistical language processing [38]. Being one of
the most prominent NLP libraries, it includes tools that allow computers to under-
stand human language and respond appropriately when it is used. Further, we used
the WordNetLemmatizer().lemmatize method from the NLTK library to lemmatize
the text. For computing the word clouds, we employed a statistical technique called
Term Frequency Inverse Document Frequency (TFIDF) which assesses how pertinent
13
a word is to a document within a collection of documents [39]. We created a func-
tion that took input and tokenized it using the output of the lemmatized method. We
then used TfidfVectorizer, a class in the scikit-learn library to convert a collection of
raw documents into a matrix of TF-IDF features. This class included the ngram range
which specified the order of the word cloud that needed to be computed for instance,
(2,2), (3,3), (4,4) referred to as bi-gram, tri-gram, and tetra-gram respectively. To fit
the vectorizer to the input text and transform the text into a matrix of TF-IDF fea-
tures, we used the fit transform method of the vectorizer object. We calculated the
list of TF-IDF weights containing the word and their respective weights, which was
created by iterating over the vocabulary of the vectorizer object and adding up the
TF-IDF weights of each word across all the documents. This list gives an idea of the
importance of each word in the input text, with higher weights indicating more impor-
tance. By using this method, we computed n-gram word clouds. The results of these
computations are discussed in the experiments and results section.
4.4 Topic Modeling using LDA
Topic Modeling is an unsupervised machine learning technique that can scan a group
of documents, find word and phrase similarities among them, and then automati-
cally group words and phrases into topics that best describe the group of documents.
There are various methods of performing topic modeling and for our project, we have
employed Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) [40]. It is used for text analysis to dis-
cover hidden topics by assuming potential topics from words in the documents. It uses
Dirichlet distributions and a generative probabilistic model to map documents to a
list of topics and assigns each word in a document to a separate topic. The algorithm
computes a predefined number of topics, assigns probabilities to each word for each
topic, and identifies the top words with the highest probabilities to represent those
topics. Various research has been conducted in the past that has implemented LDA
topic modeling for extracting disease [26], [27] and health-related information [41] from
social media platforms.
In our study for LDA topic modeling computation, we employed the use of
Gensim [42], an open-source Python library that specializes in unsupervised topic
modeling. This library has been designed to extract semantic topics from a corpus of
documents and can handle large text datasets efficiently. To distinguish between basic
and advanced preprocessing techniques, we generated separate topic models for each
setting. We calculated topics for different values of n (namely, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35,
and 40) for both the basic and advanced preprocessing approaches. The topic models
were visualized using word clouds and the pyLDAvis library in Python. The pyL-
Davis is an interactive web-based visualization tool that displays the topics deduced
from a Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) model, developed using a combination of
the programming languages R and D3 [43]. It offers a graphical user interface that
makes it straightforward to understand the topic models and explore various visual
representations of the data.
14
5 EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
In this section, we present the results generated from the analysis of our dataset
using the NLP techniques outlined in the methodology which are, word clouds, topic
modeling, and lexical analysis.
5.1 Hyperparameters or Design Choices
The coherence score indicates how closely related words occur within a topic, whereas
the perplexity score indicates how effectively the model can predict previously unseen
data using the trained model. A higher value of coherence score and a lower value of
perplexity score is preferred, however, due to the data-driven nature of topic modeling,
it is most important to consider the topics that have been discovered by the model
and whether they are relevant for the task at hand.
Table 4 presents the coherence and perplexity values for basic and advanced pre-
processing with varying numbers of computed topics. From the table, it can be inferred
that as the number of topics increases, the coherence value consistently rises for basic
preprocessing, except for a slight dip when computed for 30 topics. However, for
advanced preprocessing, the coherence value fluctuates for all topics. In contrast, the
perplexity value consistently declines for both settings, indicating desirable results.
The findings suggest that computing more topics increases the correlation between
words within a specific topic and enhances the model’s predictability when new data
is introduced. Overall, the coherence and perplexity values for basic and advanced
preprocessing, along with the number of computed topics, are presented in Table 4
and Figure 5, in tabular and graphical formats, respectively.
Table 4: Coherence and Perplexity Scores of Preprocessing
Methods
# Topics
Basic Preprocessing
Advanced Preprocessing
Coherence
Perplexity
Coherence
Perplexity
5
0.298
-8.626
0.349
-7.096
10
0.331
-8.761
0.334
-7.206
15
0.359
-8.848
0.419
-7.289
20
0.354
-8.912
0.344
-7.356
25
0.435
-8.963
0.381
-7.397
30
0.412
-8.964
0.370
-7.418
35
0.466
-8.971
0.406
-7.420
40
0.476
-9.009
0.432
-7.445
15
Figure 5: Perplexity and Coherence Score
Given the wide variety of topics usually discussed in YouTube vlogs, with a smaller
number of topics it may be difficult to adequately capture the entirety of the content.
This in turn leads to a lower coherence score. However, if the number of topics is
increased, there may not be sufficient data to fit this larger number of topics, thus
diminishing the semantic value of the topics. Thus, it is critical to carefully evaluate
the visual output of the topic models to determine the optimal number of topics that
will capture the rich and diverse content present in YouTube vlogs.
5.2 Lexical Analysis
The lexicon of 200 words was categorized into 6 categories. From Table 5 one can
determine that words lying in the symptoms, generic terms, medical equipment’s and
variants, and names of the virus category appeared at least in more than 50% of the
videos. The words in symptoms and generic terms categories appeared more promi-
nent having 95.45% and 96.46% occurrences, respectively. It gives us the idea that
most people were talking about symptoms and generic terms of COVID-19 in their
videos. The words lying in the medicines and vaccines categories appeared with low
percentages of 2.78% and 4.42%. We can assume that most of the videos we have gath-
ered, date from a period when neither the public nor healthcare organizations were
aware of what COVID-19 was, how harmful it could be to humans, which medications
would be effective against it, and the vaccine had not yet been fully developed. Since
there did not seem to be a remedy, the speakers in our data did not discuss much
about the medications and vaccinations they were receiving. We also evaluated the
percentage of transcripts in which the speakers were using words from the categories
16
we have classified. From Table 6 one can specify that there were only 0.76% of videos
in our dataset in which not a single word from our COVID-19 lexicon was used by the
patients. In 37.17% and 36.66% of the transcripts, people were using terms of at least
3 and 4 categories, respectively. It shows us that our COVID lexicon provides great
hindsight that the people in their videos were talking about coronavirus.
Table
5:
Percentage
of
tran-
scripts containing words from the
following categories
Categories
Percentage
Generic Terms
96.46%
Symptoms
95.45%
Medical Equipments
65.11%
Variants and Names
52.59%
Vaccines
4.42%
Medicines
2.78%
Table 6: Percentage of transcripts
containing words from a different
number of categories
Number of categories
Percentage
0 categories
0.76%
1 category
2.91%
2 categories
18.96%
3 categories
37.17%
4 categories
36.66%
5.3 Word Clouds Results
To better understand the information contained in the COVID-19 related YouTube
vlogs, we computed uni-gram, bi-gram, tri-gram, tetra-gram, and penta-gram word
clouds. Figure 6 illustrates the uni-gram word cloud in which single words are extracted
from the COVID-19 vlogs data set. It includes relevant words such as ”symptoms,”
”body,” ”COVID,” ”test,” and ”positive.” In word clouds, the more used a word is
in the data set the bigger its font would be, therefore in the uni-gram we can still see
some words that do not supply us the necessary information but are large in size such
as “day”, “thing”, “think”, “will”. Such words are called stop words and were removed
to enhance the accuracy of the results and uni-gram word clouds were computed again
as displayed in Figure 7.
17
Figure 6: Uni-gram Word Cloud including Stop Words
Figure 7: Uni-gram Word Cloud after removing Stop Words
Next, we generated the bi-gram word clouds as uni-gram does not provide substan-
tial information. Figure 8 displays a bi-gram word cloud that includes a combination
of two words and provides a more thorough analysis of the topics people were dis-
cussing in their vlogs. One can see words such as “covid 19”, “test positive”, “sore
18
throat”, “body ache”, “wear mask”, the frequency of stop words has decreased and
more information can be interpreted from the bi-gram as compared to the uni-gram.
Figure 8: Bi-gram Word Cloud
We further calculated the tri-gram which is a combination of three words and
from Figure 9 one can elucidate that there are phrases that are relevant to our study
such as “test positive covid”, “feel much well”, “come back positive”, “come back
negative”. We went ahead computing tetra-gram word clouds (a group of four words)
and Figure 10 has terms that are pertinent to our research, such as “test positive
covid 19”, “test come back positive”, and “loss sense taste smell” but the words are
repeating as compared to those to the lower order word clouds. The penta-gram word
cloud is presented in Figure 11, however, it contains a lot of repetitive phrases and
redundant information.
19
Figure 9: Tri-gram Word Cloud
Figure 10: Tetra-gram Word Cloud
20
Figure 11: Penta-gram Word Cloud
We found that the information included in the word clouds starts to lose signif-
icance as we increase their order. While the uni-gram provides an initial overview,
the bi-gram and tri-gram word clouds offer more detailed insights. However, beyond
tri-gram, the word clouds tend to become repetitive and redundant, diminishing the
significance of the information presented.
5.4 Topic Modeling Results
For topic modeling, a well-known technique called Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA)
was employed. We computed topics ranging from 5 to 40 with an increment of 5 using
both basic and advanced preprocessing methods. We analyzed all the computations
and interpreted that using a lower number of topics does not adequately capture the
entirety of the textual data and increasing topics beyond a certain point causes a loss
of information as there will not be enough data to support that many topics. As a
result, we found that using a moderate number of topics provided valuable insights
into the textual data which are illustrated in Figure 12.
We analyzed that the results from basic preprocessing topics (n=20) provide a com-
prehensive understanding of the topics related to the COVID-19 pandemic, as shown
in Figure 16. Topic 0 revealed that people discussed general symptoms associated with
their experiences with COVID-19, such as “shiver”, “cough”, “fatigue”, and “dizzy”.
On the other hand, topic 8 is specifically related to the coronavirus, with terms like
“virus”, “symptom”, “negative”, and “covid” being prevalent. Furthermore, topics 9
and 17 were associated with hospitals and medical terms such as “ward”, “blood”,
“oxygen level”, “doctor”, “appointment”, “call”, and “insurance”, indicating that the
21
public was concerned about their health during the pandemic and was coordinating
with medical professionals and insurance companies. In addition, topic 18 revealed
that people were also relying on home remedies for relief from their symptoms due
to the misinformation surrounding the pandemic, with terms like “onion”, “lemon”,
“honey”, “oil”, “tea”, “ginger”, and “steam” being commonly discussed.
Figure 12: Basic Preprocessing LDA Topic Modeling (n=20)
To assess the potential benefits of increasing the number of topics analyzed, we
expanded our calculations to include 25 topics. The results of this analysis are shown
in Figure 13. From topic 7 one can see generic terms related to COVID-19 such as
“symptom”, “recover”, “virus”, “people”, and “doctor”. Topic 9 is associated with
getting tested and being in isolation as terms like “pcr test”, “isolation”, “testing”,
22
and “netflix” manifest our idea. Moreover, topic 13 seems connected with what people
were eating during their period of isolation, as in this topic one can see terms such
as “blueberry”, “ice”, “noodle”, and “jar”. The interpretation from the Figure 13
suggests that although the model with 25 topics offers valuable information, their
quality is not as good as the earlier set with 20 topics. This is mainly because many
words in most of the topics do not seem to have any significant connection with each
other, and repetition of words is also seen.
Figure 13: Basic Preprocessing LDA Topic Modeling (n=25)
The results extracted from advanced preprocessing with 20 topics are illustrated
in Figure 14. If we increase the number of topics in the advanced preprocessing frame-
work, we tend to lose the desired information, while a lesser number also does not
23
provide us with valuable insights. Therefore, we chose 20 topics as it allows us to
get a better understanding of people’s experiences related to the virus. The results
reveal that topics 2 and 3 contain general terms related to the pandemic that people
in their vlogs such as “coronavirus”, “say positive”, “quite tired”, “feel ill”, “infect”,
“immune”, “find positive”, and “shiver”. Moreover, topic 9 presents terms related
to the spreading and extent of the virus like “contagious”, “horrible”, “intense”,
“expose”, “likely”, and “everywhere”. The public’s concern about the virus spread is
evident from this result. However, we believe basic preprocessing yields better results
as compared to advanced preprocessing.
Figure 14: Advanced Preprocessing LDA Topic Modeling (n=20)
24
The intertopic distance map is illustrated in Figure 15 and it was computed using
the pyLDAvis library. This map provides a comprehensive analysis of the topics under
consideration. These maps were computed for both basic and advanced preprocessing
settings. However, the advanced preprocessing setting was examined to provide more
distinct topics. This is attributed to the fact that it only included significant words
such as verbs, adjectives, adverbs, and interjections while eliminating all other types
of words that were considered irrelevant. The largest topic on the map is Topic 1,
which consists of common terms related to the study. While topics 13, 18, 15, and 3
overlap, indicating a correlation between their terms, the remaining topics are distinct
from one another, with their respective topic numbers being separated by distance.
Overall, the intertopic distance map is a useful method for visualizing and analyzing
the relationships between topics and their associated terms.
Figure 15: Intertopic Distance Map (Advanced Preprocessing)
25
Figure 16 displays the 30 most significant terms in all 40 topics. It reveals that
terms such as “positive”, “recover”, “sick”, “mild”, “cold”, and “feel” are relevant to
our research and frequently appear in the topics. This supports our idea that individ-
uals in their vlogs were discussing their experiences of testing positive for the virus,
recovering from it, and its impact on their health.
Figure 16: Top 30 Salient Terms in Advanced Preprocessing
6 CONCLUSION
6.1 Discussion
These days, people often use social media platforms for sharing their health experi-
ences and gaining medical information. In our research, we proposed a natural language
processing based method for analyzing the content related to COVID-19 videos avail-
able on YouTube. The topic modeling, lexicon analysis, and word clouds results were
generated automatically and provided a comprehensive overview of what people were
talking about and experiencing when this deadly virus affected them. As one can see
in our LDA topic modeling results, the individuals in the vlogs were discussing their
COVID-19 information and the related words have been grouped into specific topics.
People shared information about the symptoms they experienced and discussed the
26
precautions and home remedies they used to reduce the impact of the virus. The topic
modeling results also highlight the public’s worries about scheduling appointments
with doctors and their health insurance, providing crucial information about the pub-
lic’s response to COVID-19. Our lexicon results signify the accuracy of our methods,
as only 0.76% of the videos we downloaded did not contain a term from the 200 words
COVID-19 lexicon we created. The word cloud results provide valuable insight into
the most used terms related to the virus which individuals shared in the YouTube
vlogs, as illustrated in the n-grams presented above.
We believe that our results can be used as a motivation to create and test an auto-
matic system where people would share their symptoms related to COVID-19, and the
system using an automatic speech recognition tool would convert their speech into a
textual format and find whether they are suffering from COVID-19. This study high-
lights the potential of NLP as a tool for public health screening and disease surveillance
on YouTube. Utilizing NLP would also relieve us from the time-consuming way of
manually keeping health records of individuals, usually done by health organizations.
The findings of our research provide a conclusive response to our first research ques-
tion demonstrating that NLP can be a useful tool in identifying COVID-19 symptoms
from YouTube vlogs. The results from our NLP techniques including topic model-
ing, and word clouds revealed that people in the vlogs were discussing a wide range
of COVID-19 symptoms such as fever, flu, cough, sore throat, etc. Additionally, our
lexical analysis results showed that COVID-19 symptoms were discussed in 95.45%
of transcript files generated from YouTube vlogs. Moreover, our results address our
second question that by using NLP through YouTube vlogs, one can identify the
symptoms, general terms, medicines, medical equipment, and vaccines that would be
vital for public health professionals and policymakers in controlling and mitigating
the spread and effect of viral diseases.
6.2 Key Takeaways and Insights
When COVID-19 officially became a pandemic, there were a lot of rumors and misin-
formation circling around the extent of this virus and what effects it could have on the
public. One way to understand viral infections is through patient history, but hospitals
manually record patient symptoms, which can be time-consuming. Our study reveals
that an automatic system could be created to check the symptoms of COVID-19
by automatically analyzing the transcripts using Natural Language Processing tech-
niques. This information could be used for the social benefit and policymaking of the
world to be prepared if it hinders people in the future. Our findings reveal that the
transcripts of people’s personal experiences of COVID-19 provide a reliable source of
information on the symptoms, general terms, medicines, and precautions associated
with this pandemic. We believe that NLP is effective in understanding human commu-
nication in an automatic manner and could be a vital tool for public health screening
of COVID-19 and other infectious diseases.
27
6.3 Limitations
Since anyone can upload videos on YouTube, it is possible there may have been people
who were making up their symptoms and spreading false information. Also, for a
clearer and more comprehensive view of COVID-19, we could have created a larger
dataset. In addition, there is a large volume of videos on YouTube, therefore it is
possible we overlooked some of them that would have been useful for our research.
Some of the videos we downloaded were deleted by the users which created a loss of
useful information in our study as then we were not certain that the videos were from
a channel that contains vlogs.
6.4 Implications for Practitioners and Policymakers
The findings of our study could have practical applications for practitioners and pol-
icymakers who are tasked with keeping track of and responding to trends in public
discourse around infectious diseases. Our dataset and methods could prove to be vital
for policymakers and practitioners who can use them for public health screening of
COVID-19 and to combat the spread of the virus. Through the suggested methods
public health practitioners could figure out the most common symptoms met by the
patients and create targeted public health campaigns to increase awareness about
these symptoms and motivate individuals to seek medical aid if they experience them.
In addition, by using our dataset they could set up strategies to address the misin-
formation which has been spread among the public about this virus and make sure
that accurate information is readily available to them. Overall, our study underscores
the importance of NLP on YouTube vlogs for public health screening of COVID-19
and infectious diseases and how it could be employed in minimizing the effects of such
diseases.
6.5 Directions for Future Work
For speech-to-text conversion, currently, we have only used Microsoft Streams as an
ASR tool. Future research could be aimed at examining the usage of other ASR tools
such as IBM Watson, Microsoft Azure, and Google Speech to Text. By comparing the
accuracy and quality of textual data generated by these tools, the most effective ASR
tool could be identified. In addition, our dataset could be enlarged by including flu
videos, to compare the similarities and differences between COVID-19 and flu datasets.
The research could be conducted in assessing whether certain symptoms or behaviors
are mentioned more frequently in one dataset compared to another. The discovery of
such differences may offer valuable information about distinctive features of COVID-
19 discussion, which could guide future research on the subject. In addition, we would
share our lexicon and transcripts files after removing identifiable information for future
research on this topic.
28
Declarations
Ethical Approval
Ethical approval was not required for the use of YouTube originated data, as it is
publicly available.
Competing Interests
We declare that we have no known competing financial interests or personal relation-
ships that are directly or indirectly related to this paper.
Author Contributions
Ahrar Bin Aslam collected data, conceived and designed the experiments, conducted
the experiments, analyzed the data, created figures and/or tables, contributed to writ-
ing and reviewing drafts of the paper, and approved the final version of the draft. Zafi
Sherhan Syed conceived and designed the experiments, conducted the experiments,
analyzed the data, created figures and/or tables, contributed to writing and reviewing
drafts of the paper, and approved the final version of the draft. Muhammad Shehram
Shah Syed conceived and designed the experiments, conducted the experiments, ana-
lyzed the data, created figures and/or tables, contributed to writing and reviewing
drafts of the paper, and approved the final version of the draft. Muhammad Faiz
Khan collected data, conducted the experiments, created figures and/or tables, con-
tributed to writing and reviewing drafts of the paper, and approved the final version
of the draft. Asghar Baloch collected data, conducted the experiments, created figures
and/or tables, contributed to writing and reviewing drafts of the paper, and approved
the final version of the draft.
Funding
Not Applicable.
Availability of Data and Materials
To ensure privacy of individuals, we shall not distribute audio or video recordings. If
required, we shall release anonymised transcripts for academic research.
References
[1] Organtization, W.H.: Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) (2023). https://www.who.
int/health-topics/coronavirus#tab=tab 1 Accessed 2023-4-16
[2] Organtization, W.H.: Coronavirus disease (COVID-19 Pandemic Declaration)
(2023). https://shorturl.at/uIK35 Accessed 2023-4-16
[3] Organtization, W.H.: Coronavirus disease (COVID-19 Naming) (2023). https://
www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/technical-guidance/
29
naming-the-coronavirus-disease-(covid-2019)-and-the-virus-that-causes-it
Accessed 2023-4-16
[4] CDC: Symptoms of COVID-19
(2023). https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/
2019-ncov/symptoms-testing/symptoms.html Accessed 2023-4-16
[5] Organization,
W.H.:
Advice
for
Public
for
COVID-19
(2023).
https:
//www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/advice-for-public
Accessed 2023-4-16
[6] Organization, W.H.: WHO COVID-19 Dashboard (2023). https://covid19.who.
int/ Accessed 2023-4-16
[7] El Bcheraoui, C., Weishaar, H., Pozo-Martin, F., Hanefeld, J.: Assessing covid-19
through the lens of health systems’ preparedness: time for a change. Globalization
and Health 16, 1–5 (2020)
[8] Singh, B., Chattu, V.K.: Prioritizing ‘equity’in covid-19 vaccine distribution
through global health diplomacy. Health Promotion Perspectives 11(3), 281
(2021)
[9] Vindegaard, N., Benros, M.E.: Covid-19 pandemic and mental health con-
sequences: Systematic review of the current evidence. Brain, behavior, and
immunity 89, 531–542 (2020)
[10] Qiu, J., Shen, B., Zhao, M., Wang, Z., Xie, B., Xu, Y.: A nationwide survey of
psychological distress among chinese people in the covid-19 epidemic: implications
and policy recommendations. General psychiatry 33(2) (2020)
[11] Abro, H.U., Shah, Z.S., Abbasi, H.: Analysis of covid-19 effects on wellbeing
- study of reddit posts using natural language processing techniques. In: 2022
International Conference on Emerging Trends in Electrical, Control, and Telecom-
munication Engineering (ETECTE), pp. 1–7 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1109/
ETECTE55893.2022.10007300
[12] Kass-Hout, T.A., Alhinnawi, H.: Social media in public health. British medical
bulletin 108(1) (2013)
[13] Gonz´alez-Padilla, D.A., Tortolero-Blanco, L.: Social media influence in the covid-
19 pandemic. International braz j urol 46, 120–124 (2020)
[14] Park, J.Y., Howren, A.M., Davidson, E., De Vera, M.A.: Insights on mental health
when living with rheumatoid arthritis: a descriptive qualitative study of threads
on the reddit website. BMC rheumatology 4, 1–9 (2020)
[15] Lian, A., Du, J., Tang, L.: Using a machine learning approach to monitor covid-
19 vaccine adverse events (vae) from twitter data. Vaccines 10, 103 (2022) https:
30
//doi.org/10.3390/vaccines10010103
[16] Onder, M.E., Zengin, O.: Youtube as a source of information on gout: a quality
analysis. Rheumatology International 41(7), 1321–1328 (2021)
[17] Godskesen, T., Frygner Holm, S., H¨oglund, A.T., Eriksson, S.: Youtube as
a source of information on clinical trials for paediatric cancer. Information,
Communication & Society, 1–14 (2021)
[18] Szmuda, T., Syed, M.T., Singh, A., Ali, S., ¨Ozdemir, C., S loniewski, P.: Youtube
as a source of patient information for coronavirus disease (covid-19): a content-
quality and audience engagement analysis. Reviews in Medical Virology 30(5),
2132 (2020)
[19] Youtube: Youtube Statistics (2023). https://blog.youtube/press/ Accessed 2023-
4-16
[20] Organization, W.H.: COVID-19 pandemic triggers 25% increase in prevalence of
anxiety and depression worldwide (2023). https://shorturl.at/fwQR9 Accessed
2023-4-16
[21] Bhagavathula, A.S., Aldhaleei, W.A., Rahmani, J., Mahabadi, M.A., Bandari,
D.K.: Knowledge and perceptions of covid-19 among health care workers: cross-
sectional study. JMIR public health and surveillance 6(2), 19160 (2020)
[22] Baclic, O., Tunis, M., Young, K., Doan, C., Swerdfeger, H., Schonfeld, J.: Artifi-
cial intelligence in public health: Challenges and opportunities for public health
made possible by advances in natural language processing. Canada Communicable
Disease Report 46(6), 161 (2020)
[23] Al-Garadi, M.A., Yang, Y.-C., Sarker, A.: The role of natural language processing
during the covid-19 pandemic: Health applications, opportunities, and challenges.
In: Healthcare, vol. 10, p. 2270 (2022). Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing
Institute
[24] Conway, M., Hu, M., Chapman, W.W.: Recent advances in using natural lan-
guage processing to address public health research questions using social media
and consumergenerated data. Yearbook of medical informatics 28(01), 208–217
(2019)
[25] Polˇsek, D.: Huremovi´c d, editor. psychiatry of pandemics: a mental health
response to infection outbreak: Springer international publishing 2019; 185
pages; isbn978-3-030-15346-5 (e-book), isbn978-3-030-15345-8 (softcover). Croat-
ian Medical Journal 61(3), 306 (2020)
[26] Liu, Y., Whitfield, C., Zhang, T., Hauser, A., Reynolds, T., Anwar, M.: Monitor-
ing covid-19 pandemic through the lens of social media using natural language
31
processing and machine learning. Health Information Science and Systems 9(1),
1–16 (2021)
[27] Low, D.M., Rumker, L., Talkar, T., Torous, J., Cecchi, G., Ghosh, S.S.: Natural
language processing reveals vulnerable mental health support groups and height-
ened health anxiety on reddit during covid-19: Observational study. Journal of
medical Internet research 22(10), 22635 (2020)
[28] Wicke, P., Bolognesi, M.M.: Covid-19 discourse on twitter: How the topics,
sentiments, subjectivity, and figurative frames changed over time. Frontiers in
Communication 6, 651997 (2021)
[29] Patel, R., Smeraldi, F., Abdollahyan, M., Irving, J., Bessant, C.: Analysis of
mental and physical disorders associated with covid-19 in online health forums:
a natural language processing study. BMJ open 11(11), 056601 (2021)
[30] Bose, P., Roy, S., Ghosh, P.: A comparative nlp-based study on the current trends
and future directions in covid-19 research. IEEE Access 9, 78341–78355 (2021)
[31] Lamsal, R.: Coronavirus (COVID-19) Tweets Dataset. IEEE Dataport (2020).
https://doi.org/10.21227/781w-ef42 . https://dx.doi.org/10.21227/781w-ef42
[32] SaveFrom.net, Online Video Downloader . https://en.savefrom.net/263/ (2022)
[33] Syed, Z.S., Syed, M.S.S., Lech, M., Pirogova, E.: Tackling the adresso chal-
lenge 2021: The muet-rmit system for alzheimer’s dementia recognition from
spontaneous speech. (2021)
[34] FileExt: VTT File Extension
(2023). https://filext.com/file-extension/VTT
Accessed 2023-4-16
[35] Index, P.P.: Python Contractions Package
(2023). https://pypi.org/project/
contractions/ Accessed 2023-4-16
[36] Liu, H., Wu, S.T., Li, D., Jonnalagadda, S., Sohn, S., Wagholikar, K., Haug, P.J.,
Huff, S.M., Chute, C.G.: Towards a semantic lexicon for clinical natural language
processing. In: AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings, vol. 2012, p. 568 (2012).
American Medical Informatics Association
[37] Guthrie, L., Pustejovsky, J., Wilks, Y., Slator, B.M.: The role of lexicons in
natural language processing. Communications of the ACM 39(1), 63–72 (1996)
[38] Loper, E., Bird, S.: Nltk: The natural language toolkit. arXiv preprint cs/0205028
(2002)
[39] Ramos, J., et al.: Using tf-idf to determine word relevance in document queries.
In: Proceedings of the First Instructional Conference on Machine Learning, vol.
242, pp. 29–48 (2003). Citeseer
32
[40] Blei, D.M., Ng, A.Y., Jordan, M.I.: Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of machine
Learning research 3(Jan), 993–1022 (2003)
[41] Shaw Jr, G., Zimmerman, M., Vasquez-Huot, L., Karami, A.: Deciphering latent
health information in social media using a mixed-methods design. In: Healthcare,
vol. 10, p. 2320 (2022). MDPI
[42] Gensim: Gensim Python Library
(2023). https://radimrehurek.com/gensim/
intro.html#what-is-gensim Accessed 2023-4-16
[43] Sievert, C., Shirley, K.: Ldavis: A method for visualizing and interpreting topics.
In: Proceedings of the Workshop on Interactive Language Learning, Visualization,
and Interfaces, pp. 63–70 (2014)
33
