Title: Natural Language Processing tools for Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Information Extraction from Patents
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20598v2
--------------------------------------------------

 
 
 
 
 
 
Natural Language Processing (NLP) tools for Pharmaceutical 
Manufacturing Information Extraction from Patents  
Diego Alvarado-Maldonado*, Blair Johnston and Cameron J. Brown 
Abundant and diverse data on medicines manufacturing and other lifecycle components has been made easily accessible in 
the last decades. However, a significant proportion of this information is characterised by not being tabulated and usable 
for machine learning purposes. Thus, natural language processing (NLP) tools have been used to build databases in domains 
such as biomedical and chemical to address this limitation. This has allowed the development of artificial intelligence (AI)  
applications, which have improved drug discovery and treatments.  In the pharmaceutical manufacturing context,  some 
initiatives and datasets for primary processing can be found, but the manufacturing of drug products is an area which is still 
lacking, to the best of our knowledge. This works aims to explore and adapt NLP tools used in other domains to extract 
information on both primary and secondary manufacturing, employing patents as the main source of data. Thus, two 
independent, but complementary, models were developed comprising 1) a method to select fragments of text that contain 
manufacturing data, and 2) a named entity recognition system that enables extracting information on operations, materials, 
and conditions of a process. For the first model, the identification of relevant sections was achieved using an unsupervised 
approach combining Latent Dirichlet Allocation and k-Means clustering. The performance of this model measured as a 
Cohen’s kappa between model output and manual revision was higher than 90%.  NER model consisted of a deep neural 
network, and an f1-score micro average of 84.2% was obtained which is comparable to other works.  Some considerations 
for these tools to be used in data extraction are discussed throughout this document.
1. Introduction 
Over time, information on the design and development of 
medicines 
have 
undergone 
an 
intensive 
process 
of 
democratization. During this process, a vast amount of data has 
been made accessible by the private sector, regulatory agencies 
and academic institutions. As a result, a massive amount of 
information is available to be consulted in digital sources1. The 
available information covers all pharmaceutical product 
lifecycle, ranging from design and development of new 
chemical entities up to pharmacovigilance and safety aspects1–
3. Consequently, pharmaceutical information can be said to be 
varied and abundant. However, another important feature is 
that much of this information is unstructured1,3. This means that 
data is not usually found in a tabulated and organized way. 
Therefore, it cannot be easily used for analysis and machine 
learning applications. This leads to the capture and selection of 
relevant information on a large scale cannot be done manually, 
instead, require certain degree of automation. It is at this point 
that natural language processing (NLP) comes into play.  
In the last decades, there have been many initiatives to use 
NLP to mine data from unstructured documents and build 
usable databases for diverse fields. In particular, biomedical 
field can be highlighted to have numerous related datasets 
obtained through text mining4. For instance, Roche Diagnostics 
constructed a disease marker dataset upon extracting 
information from 50 million abstracts5. Other examples are the 
development 
of 
drug-drug 
interactions 
datasets 
and 
methodologies to extract drug side effects6,7. In turn, all these 
datasets have provided comprehensive access to the 
information and enable the use of artificial intelligence (AI) to 
boost the discovery of new molecules and improve therapies for 
patients5,8,9. In pharmaceutical manufacturing, most works 
building databases have focused on primary processing for the 
extraction of chemical reactions and materials10–13. In all these 
examples can be noticed how information extraction (IE), seen 
as an NLP task, provides a vast contribution in pharmaceutical 
data mining. 
Information extraction (IE) aims to identify and summarise 
information of interest from documents of a specific domain14. 
This task is a multistep process that usually requires the 
deployment of several components. A first step usually involves 
preprocessing, which prepares text to be used downstream15,16. 
Nonetheless, preprocessing steps may also include methods to 
filter out irrelevant data to improve obtained information 
reliability16. Then, components like a part-of-speech (POS) 
tagger can be applied to individual words to assign semantic 
functions (verb, noun, or adjective). In a similar way, named 
entity recognition (NER) systems categorise words into a class, 
that hints at the type of data provided by each token16,17. 
Contrary to POS tagger, NER component is more domain-
specific. Thus, the development of an IE system involves the 
design and elaboration of several components depending on 
the field of application. 
In this regard, several workflows have been developed to 
extract information in the chemical domain. O. Kononova et al 
proposed a methodology to mine inorganic synthesis 
procedures from papers18. In this work, the authors developed 
methods that, firstly, identified paragraphs that contained the 
information on certain types of inorganic reactions. Then, these 
EPSRC Future Manufacturing Research Hub for Continuous Manufacturing and 
Advanced Crystallisation (CMAC), University of Strathclyde, Technology and 
Innovation Centre, 99 George Street, Glasgow G1 1RD, UK.  
E-mail: diego.alvarado-maldonado@strath.ac.uk. 
 
 
2 | 
 
paragraphs in turn were input into other components to 
recognize materials, operations and conditions18.  Continuing 
with primary manufacturing, Lowe’s work developed a 
framework to extract chemical reactions and structures from 
patents12, where the NER models are highlighted to play a key 
role. Similar to the aforementioned examples, many others 
have as a common factor the emphasis on the development of 
NER models19–24.  
NER systems can be considered the core of IE task15. This 
component identifies and enables the extraction of key 
information (entities). Depending on the methodology applied, 
NER can be based rules, or machine learning (ML) approaches17. 
Rule-based NER utilises dictionaries or semantic/syntactic 
patterns to label entities17. It has been shown that this approach 
offers very good precision but low recalls, due to the 
requirement of exhaustive dictionaries and the need for a wide 
variety of rules to cover all the possible variations in word 
patterns17. Owing to these limitations, ML methods have 
become more popular since they provide greater flexibility, 
achieving good recall and precision for several applications, 
particularly when deep learning is used17. In the pharmaceutical 
context, the development of NER models has been focused on 
biomedical and primary processing domain10,12,13,19–23,25. In the 
latter case, models for the recognition of materials, operations 
or both can be found. However, to the best of our knowledge, 
models for secondary processing have not been designed. 
Getting back to IE workflows, pharmaceutical patents have 
special considerations to extract manufacturing data. Contrary 
to what happens in papers, patents are written in such a way 
that their procedures are difficult to reproduce and/or do not 
have well-defined sections which indicate whether or not a 
particular piece of information is available11. Moreover, the 
entire document does not necessarily cover a specific area, 
instead, involves several aspects of an invention that may 
include data of clinical studies, analytics, manufacturing 
procedures, etc. Therefore, the first step for data extraction 
should revolve around the selection of relevant sections or text 
fragments. Subsequently, these sections can be inputted into a 
NER model.  
Nonetheless, as mentioned previously, current available NER 
models are mostly applied to primary processing data 
extraction for pharmaceutical manufacturing applications. 
Considering that secondary processing is out of the scope of 
these models, it would be needed to develop a model that 
enables to mine drug product fabrication data. An additional 
aspect to contemplate would be efficiency given a high volume 
of data. A unique model capable of performing the recognition 
of entities for both primary and secondary domains would allow 
extracting simultaneously all the targeted information. It would 
also facilitate distinguishing between synthesis/purification 
procedures and drug product manufacturing. In this manner, 
this work aims to explore and adapt tools that aid to the 
extraction of pharmaceutical manufacturing data of small 
molecules from patents. Understanding by pharmaceutical 
manufacturing, 
the 
fabrication 
of 
either 
active 
pharmaceutical ingredients (API) or drug products. In 
particular, this work focuses on two components 1) a 
relevant section selector and 2) a NER model for both 
primary and secondary processing using deep learning.  
2. Methods 
2.1. Collection of documents 
Pharmaceutically relevant patents were identified, in first 
instance, by searching on the websites Bulk Search and 
Download API (uspto.gov) and PatentsView. As search terms, 
synonyms of drug substances obtained from drugbank database 
and dosage forms defined by Food Drug Administration (FDA) 
were employed9,26. There was a total of 43,538 search terms. 
From the search results, the patents with Cooperative Patent 
Classification (CPC) corresponding to the following groups were 
selected: A61K Preparations for Medical, Dental, or Toilet 
Purposes, A61P Specific Therapeutic Activity of Chemical 
Compounds or Medicinal Preparations, and A61Q Specific Use of 
Cosmetics or Similar Toilet Preparations. For those patents 
without CPC available, a deep neural network was used to 
identify whether these contained pharmaceutical data based on 
the abstracts. In the end, the detailed descriptions of the 
patents were retrieved from XML or TXT files, downloaded from 
United States Patent and Trademark Office (uspto.gov) website. 
This resulted in 208,596 patents being collected.  
 
2.2. Relevant sections identification 
2.2.1. 
Text preprocessing 
To discriminate those sections that contained specific 
information on manufacturing of small molecules, text 
clustering techniques were used. At this stage, the sections 
were identified based on headings, finding 5,542,816. The texts 
were then tokenized. Identified numbers were tagged as 
“[NUM]”. Stop-words and punctuation were removed, and the 
remaining tokens were lemmatized. Tokenization was achieved 
using chemdataextractor 1.3, while the remaining steps were 
performed with spacy 3.3.  
 
Afterwards, the sections were vectorised using a bag-of-words 
(BoW) representation. In this vectorization method, texts are 
represented by the token frequency considering a set of terms.   
For word counts, the terms that met the criteria shown in Table 
1 were excluded. In the end, a vocabulary with approximately 
62 thousand tokens was built. Subsequently, the sections with 
a number of tokens greater than 𝑄𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑛𝑐  were truncated to this 
length. 𝑄𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑛𝑐 was calculated making use of IQR rule for 
outliers, as indicated in Equation (1)27, where 𝑄1 and 𝑄3 were 
the first and third quantile in text length distribution. This was 
done to ensure that very long texts did not affect clustering. The 
obtained representation was lastly used as an input in the next 
step. 
 
𝑄𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑛𝑐= 𝑄3 + 1.5 (𝑄3 −𝑄1) 
 
(1) 
 
| 3 
Table 1. Exclusion criteria for token in vocabulary for BoW representation. 
Criteria 
Regular expression 
Present in less than 200 hundred 
sections, 
N/A 
Present in more than 70% of all 
the sections, 
N/A 
Less than 3 characters, 
N/A 
Containing digits or punctuation, 
“\d" and "(?u)\b\w\w+\b" 
2.2.2. 
 Topic modelling 
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) was used to categorize and 
represent sections based on latent topics. LDA is an 
unsupervised 
and 
probabilistic 
model 
that 
represents 
documents as a mixture of latent topics founded on word 
distribution28. This model has been widely applied for topic 
modelling and is particularly recommended when a large 
number of topics is suspected in the corpus (more than 20)29. 
LDA provides two major outputs, which are numeric 
representations for document-topics and topic-words28,30. The 
document representation is a vector where each element may 
be interpreted as the probability of membership to a certain 
latent topic or the contribution of each topic in document 
generation29,30. Regarding the topic-words distribution, the 
algorithm also assigns a probability to words depending on the 
topic, thereby being able to visualise the most likely words in 
each case31. Thus, this output can be used to associate latent 
topics with a particular subject by analysing the most important 
words in each. 
In this manner, the preprocessed sections were split into 90% 
and 10% to train and test LDA models, respectively. Several LDA 
models were built varying the expected number of topics. In 
addition, models were run with and without shuffling and 
truncation of the training set. For every model, perplexity was 
calculated over the test set to select the optimal. Perplexity is 
defined as the inverse of the per-word likelihood geometric 
mean as shown in Equation (2)28. For a sample of 𝑀 documents, 
log 𝑝(𝐰𝑑) equals to per-word likelihood of the document 𝑑, 
and 𝑁𝑑 is the number of words in 𝑑. A lower perplexity is related 
to a model with a better generalization capability28. Thus, the 
model with the lowest perplexity for the test set was chosen as 
the best. The hyperparameters employed in the development 
of LDA models are summarised in Table 2. 
 
𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑡𝑦= exp [−Σ𝑑=1
𝑀
log 𝑝(𝐰d)
Σ𝑑=1
𝑀
𝑁𝑑
]
 
(2) 
. 
Table 2. Hyperparameters assessed for LDA model development. 
Hyperparameter 
Tested values 
Alpha 
Asymmetric  
Iterations 
50 
Number of topics 
5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 50, 
60, 70, 80, 90, 100 
Passes 
1 
Chunk size 
4096 
Python library 
Gensim 4.1 
 
Moreover, the top 10 most important words per topic were 
determined for the best model. These words were firstly revised 
to identify meaningful associations within the topics and to 
validate how coherent the model outputs were. On the other 
hand, keywords were also employed to assign arbitrary topic 
labels for the cluster analysis which is detailed below. 
2.2.3. 
Text clustering 
LDA yielded the latent topics and their contributions for each 
section, by which the next step was to group documents that 
shared similar ideas. Therefore, to define clusters and allocate 
documents to a group, k-Means algorithm was employed, 
inputting the document representations obtained. k-Means is 
an iterative clustering technique. The algorithm works by 
generating k centroids, where k is a pre-set number of 
clusters30. Subsequently, the documents are assigned to a 
particular cluster based on the distance between documents 
and centroids, in such a way that every document is allocated 
to the cluster whose centroid is the closest30. Once all the 
documents have been assigned, centroids are recalculated by 
averaging 
document 
representations30. 
Subsequently, 
documents are reassigned using the updated centroids. This 
process is repeated until no significant changes in the centroids 
are observed or after a predefined number of iterations is 
completed30.  
In this work, due to the large number of data, a variation called 
minibatch k-Means was applied. In this version, instead of using 
all the data in every iteration, subsamples known as mini-
batches are employed32. However, as in k-Means, the optimal 
number of clusters must be selected. Thus, various models were 
trained with k ranging from 5 to 60. To choose the best model, 
Davies-Bouldin 
(DB) 
and 
Silhouette 
(S) 
scores 
were 
calculated33,34.  For the calculation of these metrics, random 
samples of 10 thousand documents were drawn. The 
calculations were replicated six times in different samples to 
estimate the variability of the scores. In the case of DB score, 
the optimal number of clusters is reached when the minimum 
value is found, whereas the opposite applies for S score 33,34.  
As for the implementation of Minibatch k-Means, scikit learn 
library was employed. However, one of the limitations of this 
implementation is that only works with Euclidean distance. In 
this case, LDA document representations 
consists of 
probabilities.  In this regard, Euclidean distance has been 
proven not to provide the best results for this type of data30. 
Alternatively, distances like cosine and Hellinger have been 
shown to measure document similarity better for clustering 
analysis 30,35. Accordingly, data were previously transformed. As 
proxies of cosine and Hellinger distance, two transformations 
were assessed: L2-normalization and element-wise square root. 
The chosen distances are strongly related to Euclidean distance 
as illustrated in Equations (3) - (5)35. 
 
𝐷𝑒2(𝐱, 𝐲) = ∑(𝑥𝑖−𝑦𝑖)2
𝑛
𝑖=1
 
(3) 
 
𝐷ℎ
2(𝐩, 𝐪) = ∑(√𝑝𝑖
2 −√𝑞𝑖
2 )
2
𝑛
𝑖=1
 
 
(4) 
 
 
4 | 
 
 
𝐷𝑐(𝐱, 𝐲) = 𝐷𝑒2(𝐱, 𝐲)
2
, 𝑖𝑓 ||𝐱|| = 1 𝑎𝑛𝑑 ||𝐲|| = 1 
 
(5) 
Where 𝐷𝑒, 𝐷𝑐, 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝐷ℎ are Euclidean, cosine and Hellinger 
distances. 𝐷𝑒= 𝐷ℎ if 𝑥𝑖= √𝑝𝑖2
⁄  and 𝑦𝑖= √𝑞𝑖2
⁄ . 
With the centroids of the best model, the latent topic with the 
highest contribution was selected in each cluster. Keywords 
obtained from LDA were thus revised, and a label that fitted 
with the keyword information was set. Afterwards, all the 
sections were assigned to a cluster. To validate the model, a 
random sample of 5 sections per cluster was drawn and each 
section was revised. If the section was clearly related to the 
arbitrary label, this was marked as 1 or, otherwise, 0. In the case 
there was no absolute certainty about the content, a value of 
0.5 was given. At the same time, those sections whose content 
was more related to pharmaceutical manufacturing, for 
instance, having information on operations, methods, dosage 
forms or composition, were separately labelled with 1, whereas 
0 was assigned if the documents did not meet this condition.  
Lastly, the agreement between the results of the algorithm and 
the manual assessment of relevant documents was estimated 
using Cohen's kappa and percentage of agreement. The former 
metric 
was 
used 
to 
measure 
agreement 
between 
manufacturing 
information 
and 
the 
latter 
to 
assess 
concordance between assigned label and actual section 
content. It is worth mentioning that two percentage of 
agreement were calculated, one for the worst case and another 
for the best. In the worst case, those sections with an assigned 
values of 0.5 were rounded to 0, while 1 was used for the other 
case. 
2.3. Named entity recognition (NER) 
2.3.1. 
Training set preparation 
A sample of 2069 paragraphs expected to contain relevant 
data were selected. These paragraphs were segmented into 
sentences and then tokenized using chemdataextractor v 1.3. 
Subsequently, using IOB scheme, every token was labelled 
manually using entity classes defined in ESI. IOB scheme is a 
label methodology employed in named entity recognition 
applications and stands for inside (I), outside (O), and beginning 
(B)36. This is particularly helpful to identify entities that are 
composed of more than one token. In this approach, irrelevant 
tokens are labelled as O. As for the remaining, the token that 
begins the entity is marked with B followed by the respective 
label. Then, the rest of the entity tokens are marked with I-
[Label].  
In the end, the training set consisted of 7440 sentences. As a 
final step, sentences with one token and duplicates were 
removed to obtain 7215 (221.257 tokens). These sentences 
were further corrected by comparing actual and predicted 
labels by the models and manually amending. The correction 
procedure was repeated twice randomising the examples order 
during training stage 
Finally, the examples were split into training, development 
and test set, where sentences were distributed in the following 
percentages 80, 10 and 10, respectively. For the selection of the 
best model, the performance of NER model in the development 
set was monitored during training.  
2.3.2. 
Model training and validation 
In the literature, various approaches for NER have been 
reported, however, with no doubts, methods based on deep 
learning (DL) have provided the best performance17. DL-based 
NER consists of a system of three components: an input 
representation, a contextualiser encoder and a label decoder17. 
The input representation generates a numerical depiction of 
each word or token. As representations, word embeddings such 
as word2vec, fasttext or transformers-based models are 
frequently used. In addition to word embeddings, other 
features can also be included such as character embeddings or 
part-of-speed information17. Then, the contextualiser processes 
information from inputs as a sequence, thereby considering the 
tokens order, to generate a contextual representation that 
feeds a decoder17. Typically, this component corresponds to 
bidirectional (Bi) recurrent neural networks with long short-
term memory (LSTM) or gated recurrent unit (GRU) cells17. At 
last, the latter component translates inputs into entity types, 
assigning a label to each token. This task is normally achieved 
by using a conditional random field (CRF) layer17. This 
architecture is illustrated in Fig. 1. 
 
As a base architecture in this work, fasttext embeddings-
BiLSTM-CRF was employed. Word embeddings were pre-
trained using gensim package with vector size and windows size 
of 
300 
and 
5, 
respectively. 
As 
for 
the 
remaining 
hyperparameters, gensim default settings were used. For 
pretraining, all the collected descriptions were tokenized and 
Fig. 1 Common architecture for NER using DL.
 
| 5 
used. This information fed a BiLSTM, whose results input a CRF 
layer. In addition, some variations were assessed which 
included the use of a multihead attention (MHA) layer after the 
embeddings. This latter layer was included as some works in this 
area have reported to provide good results23,37. Another was 
the application of convolutions after the embeddings (Conv1D). 
Finally, character embeddings (CE) were also evaluated, along 
with variations of dropout rates, as suggested elsewhere36.  
Deep neural networks were then trained using Tensorflow 2. 
AdamW was selected as the optimizer. As a performance 
measurement, f1-score micro average was utilised. The 
hyperparameters for the model were chosen based on 
preliminary experiments and these can be found in ESI. For 
training, early stopping strategy was used, where the training 
stopped when there was no improvement in the development 
set f1-score after 20 epochs. The best performing model was 
finally selected based on the highest f1-score micro average for 
both development and test set. With the chosen model, an 
error analysis was carried out to evaluate the most common 
mistakes 
3. Results and discussion 
3.1. Selection of relevant sections 
3.1.1. 
Optimal number of latent topics for LDA 
LDA models were trained to determine the potential topics. 
During this process, the effect of examples order and inclusion 
of long texts were assessed. As for the former, it has been 
reported that LDA may suffer from “order” effect, which means 
that the order of the examples in the training set may affect the 
results38. This was confirmed in Fig. 2B where perplexity tended 
to increase every time the number of topics was greater. In 
contrast, when the order was randomized, the opposite 
behaviour was exhibited. Perplexity tends to decrease as a 
function of the number of topics, whereby shuffled data 
provided a behaviour that fits more with theory28. In this way, 
the results suggested that shuffling data is necessary to have 
reliable LDA models. 
Regarding the effect of text length on model performance, the 
distribution for the number of words per preprocessed section 
and the effect of truncation can be seen in Fig. 2A and C. Nearly 
87% of all the sections contained 425 tokens or fewer. This point 
corresponded to the superior limit of the boxplot, by which 
based on the IQR rule, values greater than this threshold. Thus, 
texts whose length was higher than 𝑄𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑛𝑐 were defined as 
long. By observing Fig. 2C, truncated texts showed lower 
perplexities throughout the assessed range, compared to texts 
without truncation. This difference even led to a different 
optimal number of topics, with values of 60 and 90 for truncated 
and non-truncated models, respectively. Furthermore, apart 
from the difference in perplexity, the outputs quality was also 
affected, impacting on the topic interpretability as illustrated in 
Fig. 3. 
Overall, when texts were not truncated, very specific words 
were found within the most important words. For instance, 
active ingredients or uncommon operations seemed to have a 
greater relevance (Topic 49 and 73 - Fig. 3B). Another aspect 
observed in the sections without truncation was that the LDA 
model yielded topics with keywords that were difficult to 
Fig. 2 Distribution of the number of tokens per section (A) and Perplexities determined for LDA models evaluating 
shuffling (B) and truncation effect (C).
 
 
6 | 
 
interpret more often (Fig. 3B – Topic 23). Lastly, whereas there 
were topics with a distribution which clearly favour certain 
words, some groups had keywords with more uniform 
probabilities (Fig. 3 – Topics 32 and 73). In consequence, it is 
possible that these keywords did not generalise well the topics, 
by which the documents in these groups might not necessarily 
be related to what keywords suggested, reducing model 
interpretability and reliability. Once again, although this 
happened in both models, these kinds of topics were less 
frequent for truncated data. In this manner, the truncated 
model was concluded to be the best, with 60 latent topics. 
Furthermore, section truncation was also demonstrated to 
generate more understandable topics. Keywords for both 
models can be found in Appendices A and B. 
3.1.2. 
Optimal number of clusters for k-Means 
The results of the scores for the selection of the optimal 
number of clusters can be found in ESI. The first factor analysed 
was the effect of data transformation. Across the assessed 
range and for both metrics, L2-norm outperformed square root 
transformation. Knowing this, the analysis next focused on 
selecting the optimal number of clusters for normalised data. 
The optimal points given by DB and S scores differed. However, 
one of the main differences between both scores was the 
variability. S score showed values with a higher scattering 
compared to DB score. Therefore, the differences in S score 
might have not been as significant as with DB index. Due to this 
consideration, the selected number of clusters for k-Means was 
60, which was the optimal considering DB index. 
3.1.3. 
Algorithm performance and outputs interpretability 
Fig. 4 depicts LDA representation for a sample of 2000 
sections, using t-distributed stochastic neighbour embedding (t-
SNE) to reduce dimensionality. A total of 17 labels were 
assigned to the clusters. It was possible to visualise how 
documents belonging to the same cluster and label tend to be 
close to each other. An example of this can be seen in the 
references 1 and 2 (black points) in Fig. 4, whose texts can be 
seen in Fig. 5. These two sections were about to synthesis 
procedures, and it can be seen how the algorithm correctly 
classified them into a primary manufacturing topic, having 
similar values. In the same manner, upon selecting labels 
related to manufacturing, LDA representations allowed to 
agglomerate documents into two clearly defined regions about 
pharmaceutical manufacturing. These results supported that 
LDA enabled to compare numerically documents which are 
semantically similar. In addition, LDA + k-Means enabled to 
separate information into interpretable topics, considering this 
work scope. 
The results of performance assessment are found in ESI. In this 
case, the agreement between sections and labels assigned can 
be seen for the best and worst case. The overall percentage of 
agreement in the worst case was around 81%. The lowest 
degree of agreement was found for the cluster assigned with 
Fig. 3 Top 10 keywords for truncated (A) and non-truncated (B) LDA models.
 
| 7 
spectrometric data label. The LDA topic most important for this 
label corresponded to the number 32, which was characterised 
for having keywords with uniform probabilities, as shown in Fig. 
3A. As discussed previously, this fact results in keywords with a 
poor power of characterisation, that results in low 
generalization. As a result, these keywords were not helpful to 
define a reliable label. Another unique aspect of the documents 
classified into this label was that LDA representations were 
widely spread with respect to the others. This could be 
evidenced in Fig. 4 where documents belonging to analytical 
topics were very sparse, and it was difficult to appreciate a 
dense cluster. In this manner, this cluster in particular was not 
reliable and grouped sections non-related with the assigned 
label. Nonetheless, despite this cluster behaviour, it is 
important to highlight the cluster did not contain sections on 
manufacturing considering the revised sample. Likewise, the 
label was assigned as non-relevant since it is focused on 
spectrometric 
results. 
Therefore, 
for 
manufacturing 
information retrieval, the sections belonging to this cluster 
were not considered for the subsequent data extraction step, 
whereby this should not affect final results. 
The remaining labels presented values greater than or equal 
to 50%, leading to an overall performance greater than 80% for 
both cases. This suggests that there is a high agreement 
between the information provided by the documents and the 
interpretation provided by the topic keywords and clusters, at 
least being better than a random guess. Given there was a good 
level of agreement between the cluster interpretation and the 
grouped sections, it was possible to generalise to a higher level 
by relating directly the labels with the possibility of containing 
information on manufacturing, with a special emphasis on small 
molecules. It was thus all the clusters with a label about 
manufacturing was marked as relevant. The list of labels with 
relevant and irrelevant information can be seen in Error! R
Ref. 1 (Patent Number US10590109B2) 
Ref. 2 (Patent Number US8324225B2) 
 
Fig. 5 Example documents with similar content and classified in the same cluster (primary manufacturing) referenced in Fig. 4. 
Fig. 4 t-SNE visualization of document representations generated using LDA. 
 
 
8 | 
 
eference source not found.. In this manner, this methodology 
enabled to indirectly determine what sections were of interest. 
In the end, 22 out of 60 clusters were considered relevant. 
Although, there were a few labels considered irrelevant that still 
mentioned aspects about fabrication and composition, these 
were discarded as pharmaceutically relevant because they only 
provided generic information, for instance, some sections listed 
all the possible dosage forms. Interestingly, when the 
agreement was calculated by relevancy, the group of 
manufacturing had a greater level with 88.1% for the worse 
case, whereas 77.8% was obtained for the other group. Some 
possible reason behind that were the presence of few sections 
that were related to manufacturing, and perhaps the most 
frequent, sections that could be associated with other similar 
labels. Finally, with the model output and manual revision, 
agreement 
was 
measured 
using 
Cohen’s 
kappa 
for 
manufacturing data. This resulted in a value of 91.1%, which can 
be considered an acceptable39. In this way, the results 
suggested that the algorithm was able to distinguish sections 
with information of interest from those which were irrelevant. 
Nonetheless, it is worth to highlight that even though this 
approach may help to distinguish relevant information in an 
efficient manner, there still sections in the sample which were 
difficult to define thereby the final selection might still contain 
a reduced number of irrelevant information. 
 
3.2. NER 
3.2.1. 
Selection of Best architecture  
The summary of the results can be seen in Table 3. Using as a 
base model the architecture without convolution or attention 
layers (BiLSTM), it can be seen that the self-attention layer did 
not enhance f1-score in any case. Instead, a reduction of 2.6% 
on average when used was observed. On the other hand, 
Conv1D seems to have a significant improvement in model 
performance, helping to filter relevant semantic features40. A 
similar effect was expected for the attention layer; however, 
this was not the case. In this manner, for the best model, the 
attention layer was discarded, whereas the Conv1D layer was 
demonstrated to be needed to obtain the best possible 
performance. 
In addition to the inclusion or exclusion of specific layers, the 
confirmatory test also comprised the evaluation of the use of 
additional features like characters embeddings (CE). CE have 
proven to enhance NER performance in several domains36. To 
some extent, this is achieved by modelling other features not 
considered by word embeddings such as word morphology and 
spelling36. However, the effect of CE might be obscured by the 
effect of word features36. Due to this, some authors recommend 
adjusting dropout to maximise the effect of CE and model 
performance.  Therefore, tests using CE with several levels of 
dropout were also assessed36. As observed in Table 3, the 
Fig. 6. Confusion matrix for NER
 
| 9 
additional features increased model performance independent 
of the rates of dropout used, with f1-scores surpassing 83.0% in 
all cases. Upon comparing the behaviour of performance 
metrics using different dropouts, a disparity in trends were 
observed. For the development set, the higher the dropout, the 
better the performance, while the test set resulted in the 
opposite. Nonetheless, on average, the former trend was 
dominant, whereby the model with the highest dropout was 
selected as the best. The best model architecture is illustrated 
in ESI. 
Table 3. F1-scores (micro-average) for confirmatory models in development and test 
sets. BiLSTM: Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory, Conv1D: unidimensional 
convolution, Attention: multihead self-attention, CE: Character embeddings. 
Model 
Dev 
Test 
Average 
BiLSTM 
81.7% 
79.6% 
80.6% 
BiLSTM + Conv1D 
84.6% 
82.0% 
83.3% 
BiLSTM + Attent 
ion 
79.4% 
76.7% 
78.0% 
BiLSTM + Attention + Conv1D 
83.8% 
82.0% 
82.9% 
BiLSTM + Conv1D + CE + 
Dropout (0.3) 
84.7% 
83.5% 
84.1% 
BiLSTM + Conv1D + CE + 
Dropout (0.5) 
84.9% 
83.2% 
84.0% 
BiLSTM + Conv1D + CE + 
Dropout (0.7) 
85.4% 
83.0% 
84.2% 
3.2.2. 
Recognition performance and error analysis 
The performance of the final model for each entity is broken 
down in Table 4. The overall performance, in terms of precision 
and recall, was 84.9% and 83.5%. These values were 
comparable to other works in similar domains, where results 
revolved around 60 and 98%16. To highlight, the top 3 most 
difficult entities to recognize were related to packaging 
materials, excipient type, and targets, having the lowest values 
for the different metrics. A key aspect of these types of entities 
is the low recall, which is translated into a loss of information 
during extraction. From the confusion matrix shown in Fig. 6, 
the most common error for these entities was not to be 
recognized or classified as irrelevant (“O”). In addition, this error 
was also the most frequent among the other types of entities. 
Interestingly, in the specific cases of material-related entities 
such as targets or packaging, these were also misclassified into 
another material class such as reactant or dosage form, 
respectively. It was noticed that this behaviour could be 
extrapolated to any other similar type of entity, for instance, 
API, excipients or solvents. Consequently, it can be concluded 
the model was associating the materials with material-concept 
tags. Going to other types of entities such as amount, 
composition and yield, these tended to be classified into one 
another, when misclassified. However, despite the error, the 
model was still associating entities with similar concepts. In 
contrast, this trend was not observed in operations or 
conditions. 
Operations 
were 
sometimes 
tagged 
as 
intermediates or dosage forms were classified as operations. 
Nonetheless, these cases were marginal compared to 
operations falling into “O” class, representing 0.8% and 1.5% of 
the predictions, respectively. Furthermore, other types of 
errors were even less frequent. Thus, overall, the model yielded 
errors which could be considered reasonable in most cases. 
However, for information retrieval and machine learning 
development, further processing and cleaning steps may be 
required to mitigate the effect of these errors on extracted data 
reliability. As for the possible causes of these errors, these might 
be explained by two sources: context modelling and training set 
size. 
Table 4. Breakdown best model performance. 
Entity 
Precision 
Recall 
F1-Score 
AMOUNT 
94.1% 
95.0% 
94.5% 
API 
88.1% 
88.2% 
88.1% 
BIOLOGICAL_MATERIAL 
87.2% 
83.6% 
85.3% 
COMPOSITION 
75.8% 
81.1% 
78.1% 
CONDITION 
89.3% 
83.3% 
86.2% 
DOSAGE_FORM 
80.7% 
82.4% 
81.5% 
EQUIPMENT 
80.2% 
81.3% 
80.6% 
EXCIPIENT 
83.3% 
79.1% 
81.1% 
EXCIPIENT_TYPE 
70.9% 
64.6% 
67.6% 
INTERMEDIATES 
78.5% 
75.5% 
76.9% 
OPERATION 
89.6% 
89.1% 
89.4% 
PACKAGING 
66.5% 
58.0% 
61.8% 
REACTANT 
81.2% 
83.4% 
82.3% 
SOLVENT 
88.7% 
88.6% 
88.7% 
TARGET 
73.2% 
72.9% 
72.6% 
YIELD 
97.4% 
94.4% 
95.7% 
micro avg 
84.9% 
83.5% 
84.2% 
In the first instance, sentences were used as inputs for NER 
model and, for this type of input, the surrounding words might 
have not sufficed to know whether or not a token belongs to a 
specific category, occasionally. An example of this was seen 
with materials which can be used as excipient or reactant like 
Sodium Hydroxide or Hydrochloride Acid, where in a synthesis 
procedure, the model recognized them as EXCIPIENT. Another 
possible reason may be that the employed embeddings are not 
capturing completely the differences between the entities. In 
this regard, the embeddings deployed for the present work 
generate a unique representation for each token. Recent 
developments 
have 
provided 
embeddings 
based 
on 
transformers that generate representations for tokens 
considering the context10,16. In this way, the same word may 
have several representations depending on the other 
surrounding words. This approach has shown good results in 
other domains 10,16,41, whereby can be worth exploring as an 
opportunity for improvement in future works. 
Going back to the cases of targets and packaging materials, a 
characteristic of these types of entities was that there were not 
many examples in the training set. Nearly 2.0% of the sentences 
had terms related to packaging materials, while around 2.6% 
contained tokens about targets. In this manner, the inclusion of 
examples containing this type of entity with a greater diversity 
of terms might help the model learn to identify these better. 
Although it was observed that these entities were not 
 
 
10 | 
 
mentioned very often throughout the patents compared to not 
being identified. In particular, the main focus in the studied 
patents was formulations, whereby packaging materials were 
not usually mentioned. In the case of targets, a common pattern 
in the analysed document was to reference implicitly and 
chemical structure or name was described in different sections. 
Thus, these entities are not expected to be abundant in the 
corpus, hindering found more training data. 
4. Conclusions  
In this work, a set of tools to aid information extraction of 
primary and secondary manufacturing from pharmaceutical 
patents were developed. The first component comprises a 
sections selector. This model filters sections that potentially 
contains information on manufacturing, with special emphasis 
on small molecules. In the end, LDA + k-Means method grouped 
documents, and provided good interpretability for the majority 
of clusters based on keywords. The validation yielded an overall 
agreement between assigned topic labels based on cluster 
keywords and the actual section topic was 81.7%, in the worst 
case. For the identification of manufacturing relevant 
documents, the agreement was measured using Cohen’s kappa, 
obtaining a value of 91.1% between the outputs of the model 
and the actual section topic, which can be considered a good 
level of agreement. This suggests the applied approach has can 
be useful to select relevant fragments of text.  
On the other hand, once the fragments of text containing the 
relevant information have been filtered, it is necessary to apply 
another algorithm that recognizes the specific information we 
are interested in extracting. To accomplish this, a NER model 
was trained. This model consisted of a deep neural network 
with a base architecture comprising word embeddings, a 
contextualiser (BiLSTM) and a decoder (CRF). The overall 
performance for the NER model, measured using F1-score micro 
average, was 84.2%. The most common errors were associated 
with the inability to detect certain entities, followed by the 
confusion between recognized entities, to a lesser extent. For 
instance, a material which is a final product of a synthesis 
(TARGET) could be confused with a reactant. However, these 
types of errors seem to be occasional. Future work focused on 
improving the NER algorithm may focus on using word 
embeddings based on transformers. However, the developed 
model showed to be able to recognize the required information 
with a level of accuracy comparable to analogous works. Finally, 
another aspect to be covered in future works is the integration 
and application of the developed tools to build a dataset for 
secondary manufacturing processes. Some consideration to 
bear in mind when applying these tools is the need of post-
processing to mitigate the effect of errors on extraction 
reliability.  
 
 
Data Availability Statement 
All data underpinning this publication are openly available at 
https://github.com/Diego-
Alvarado/nlp_for_pharma_manufacturing.git: 
• 
Preprocessed patents for unsupervised model 
development (LDA+k-Means). 
• 
Annotated 
sentences 
for 
pharmaceutical 
manufacturing NER. 
• 
Scripts for the training of the model. 
• 
Sections used to validate LDA+k-Means. 
Conflicts of interest 
The authors declare no competing financial interest. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors would like to thank EPSRC and the Future 
Continuous Manufacturing and Advanced Crystallisation 
Research Hub (Grant Ref: EP/P006965/1) for funding this work.  
References 
1. Adnan, K., Akbar, R., Khor, S. W. & Ali, A. B. A. Role and 
Challenges of Unstructured Big Data in Healthcare. Advances in 
Intelligent Systems and Computing 1042, 301–323 (2020). 
2. Žagar, J. & Mihelič, J. Big data collection in pharmaceutical 
manufacturing and its use for product quality predictions. 
Scientific Data 2022 9:1 9, 1–11 (2022). 
3. Alemayehu, D. & Berger, M. L. Big Data: transforming drug 
development and health policy decision making. Health Services 
and Outcomes Research Methodology 2016 16:3 16, 92–102 
(2016). 
4. Huang, C. C. & Lu, Z. Community challenges in biomedical 
text mining over 10 years: success, failure and the future. Brief 
Bioinform 17, 132–144 (2016). 
5. Hardin, S. Text and Data Mining Meets the Pharmaceutical 
Industry: Markus Bundschus Speaks. Bulletin of the Association 
for Information Science and Technology 43, 42–44 (2017). 
6. Ayvaz, S. et al. Toward a complete dataset of drug-drug 
interaction information from publicly available sources. J Biomed 
Inform 55, 206 (2015). 
7. Harpaz, R. et al. Text Mining for Adverse Drug Events: the 
Promise, Challenges, and State of the Art. Drug safety : an 
international journal of medical toxicology and drug experience 
37, 777 (2014). 
8. Gaulton, A. et al. ChEMBL: a large-scale bioactivity database 
for drug discovery. Nucleic Acids Res 40, D1100 (2012). 
9. Wishart, D. S. et al. DrugBank 5.0: a major update to the 
DrugBank database for 2018. Nucleic Acids Res 46, D1074–
D1082 (2018). 
10. He, J. et al. ChEMU 2020: Natural Language Processing 
Methods Are Effective for Information Extraction From Chemical 
Patents. Front Res Metr Anal 0, 12 (2021). 
11. Habibi, M., Wiegandt, D. L., Schmedding, F. & Leser, U. 
Recognizing chemicals in patents: a comparative analysis. J 
Cheminform 8, 1–15 (2016). 
12. Lowe, D. M. Extraction of chemical structures and reactions 
from the literature. (2012) doi:10.17863/CAM.16293. 
13. Vaucher, A. C. et al. Automated extraction of chemical 
synthesis actions from experimental procedures. Nature 
Communications 2020 11:1 11, 1–11 (2020). 
 
| 11 
14. Cardie, C. Empirical Methods in Information Extraction. AI 
Mag 18, 65–65 (1997). 
15. Olivetti, E. A. et al. Data-driven materials research enabled 
by natural language processing and information extraction. Appl 
Phys Rev 7, 041317 (2020). 
16. Kononova, O. et al. Opportunities and challenges of text 
mining in materials research. iScience 24, 102155 (2021). 
17. Li, J., Sun, A., Han, J. & Li, C. A Survey on Deep Learning for 
Named Entity Recognition. http://neuroner.com/ (2020). 
18. Kononova, O. et al. Text-mined dataset of inorganic 
materials synthesis recipes. Sci Data 6, 1–11 (2019). 
19. Perera, N., Dehmer, M. & Emmert-Streib, F. Named Entity 
Recognition and Relation Detection for Biomedical Information 
Extraction. Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology vol. 8 673 
Preprint at https://doi.org/10.3389/fcell.2020.00673 (2020). 
20. Huang, M. S. et al. Biomedical named entity recognition and 
linking datasets: survey and our recent development. Brief 
Bioinform 21, 2219–2238 (2020). 
21. Leaman, R., Wei, C. H. & Lu, Z. TmChem: A high performance 
approach for chemical named entity recognition and 
normalization. J Cheminform 7, S3 (2015). 
22. Zhang, Y. et al. Chemical named entity recognition in patents 
by domain knowledge and unsupervised feature learning. 
Database 2016, 49 (2016). 
23. Luo, L. et al. Data and text mining An attention-based 
BiLSTM-CRF approach to document-level chemical named entity 
recognition. (2017) doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btx761. 
24. Giorgi, J. M. & Bader, G. D. Towards reliable named entity 
recognition in the biomedical domain. 
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/xxxxxx. 
25. Saad, F., Aras, H. & Hackl-Sommer, R. Improving named 
entity recognition for biomedical and patent data using bi-lstm 
deep neural network models. Lecture Notes in Computer Science 
(including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and 
Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 12089 LNCS, 25–36 (2020). 
26. Dosage Forms | FDA. 
https://www.fda.gov/industry/structured-product-labeling-
resources/dosage-forms. 
27. Salgado, C. M., Azevedo, C., Proença, H. & Vieira, S. M. Noise 
versus outliers. Secondary Analysis of Electronic Health Records 
163–183 (2016) doi:10.1007/978-3-319-43742-2_14/TABLES/5. 
28. Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y. & Edu, J. B. Latent Dirichlet Allocation 
Michael I. Jordan. Journal of Machine Learning Research vol. 3 
(2003). 
29. Rüdiger, M., Antons, D., Joshi, A. M. & Salge, T. O. Topic 
modeling revisited: New evidence on algorithm performance 
and quality metrics. PLoS One 17, e0266325 (2022). 
30. Bui, Q. V., Sayadi, K., Amor, S. ben & Bui, M. Combining 
Latent Dirichlet Allocation and K-Means for Documents 
Clustering: Effect of Probabilistic Based Distance Measures. in 
(eds. Nguyen, N. T., Tojo, S., Nguyen, L. M. & Trawiński, B.) vol. 
10191 248–257 (Springer International Publishing, 2017). 
31. Xie, P. & Xing, E. P. Integrating Document Clustering and 
Topic Modeling. (2013). 
32. Sculley, D. Web-scale k-means clustering. in Proceedings of 
the 19th international conference on World wide web - WWW 
’10 1177 (ACM Press, 2010). doi:10.1145/1772690.1772862. 
33. Davies, D. L. & Bouldin, D. W. A Cluster Separation Measure. 
IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell PAMI-1, 224–227 (1979). 
34. Rousseeuw, P. J. Silhouettes: A graphical aid to the 
interpretation and validation of cluster analysis. J Comput Appl 
Math 20, 53–65 (1987). 
35. Yu, H., Inoue, K., Hara, K. & Urahama, K. A Robust K-Means 
for Document Clustering. Journal of the Institute of Industrial 
Applications Engineers 6, 60–65 (2018). 
36. Lample, G., Ballesteros, M., Subramanian, S., Kawakami, K. & 
Dyer, C. Neural Architectures for Named Entity Recognition. 
(2016). 
37. Luo, L. et al. An attention-based BiLSTM-CRF approach to 
document-level chemical named entity recognition. 
Bioinformatics 34, 1381–1388 (2018). 
38. Agrawal, A., Fu, W. & Menzies, T. What is wrong with topic 
modeling? And how to fix it using search-based software 
engineering. Inf Softw Technol 98, 74–88 (2018). 
39. McHugh, M. L. Interrater reliability: the kappa statistic. 
Biochem Med (Zagreb) 22, 276 (2012). 
40. Jacovi, A., Shalom, O. S. & Goldberg, Y. Understanding 
Convolutional Neural Networks for Text Classification. EMNLP 
2018 - 2018 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and 
Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, Proceedings of the 1st 
Workshop 56–65 (2018) doi:10.48550/arxiv.1809.08037. 
41. Zhu, Y. et al. A Survey on Deep Graph Generation: Methods 
and Applications. (2022) doi:10.48550/arxiv.2203.06714. 
  
 
