Title: CVSS-BERT: Explainable Natural Language Processing to Determine the Severity of a Computer Security Vulnerability from its Description
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2111.08510v1
--------------------------------------------------

CVSS-BERT: Explainable Natural Language
Processing to Determine the Severity of a Computer
Security Vulnerability from its Description
Mustaﬁzur R. Shahid
SAMOVAR, T´el´ecom SudParis
Institut Polytechnique de Paris
France
mustaﬁzur.shahid@telecom-sudparis.eu
Herv´e Debar
SAMOVAR, T´el´ecom SudParis
Institut Polytechnique de Paris
France
herve.debar@telecom-sudparis.eu
Abstract—When a new computer security vulnerability is
publicly disclosed, only a textual description of it is available.
Cybersecurity experts later provide an analysis of the severity
of the vulnerability using the Common Vulnerability Scoring
System (CVSS). Speciﬁcally, the different characteristics of the
vulnerability are summarized into a vector (consisting of a set
of metrics), from which a severity score is computed. However,
because of the high number of vulnerabilities disclosed everyday
this process requires lot of manpower, and several days may pass
before a vulnerability is analyzed. We propose to leverage recent
advances in the ﬁeld of Natural Language Processing (NLP) to
determine the CVSS vector and the associated severity score
of a vulnerability from its textual description in an explainable
manner. To this purpose, we trained multiple BERT classiﬁers,
one for each metric composing the CVSS vector. Experimental
results show that our trained classiﬁers are able to determine
the value of the metrics of the CVSS vector with high accuracy.
The severity score computed from the predicted CVSS vector is
also very close to the real severity score attributed by a human
expert. For explainability purpose, gradient-based input saliency
method was used to determine the most relevant input words for
a given prediction made by our classiﬁers. Often, the top relevant
words include terms in agreement with the rationales of a human
cybersecurity expert, making the explanation comprehensible for
end-users.
I. INTRODUCTION
A computer security vulnerability can be a bug, a ﬂaw or a
weakness that can be exploited by a malicious actor to cause
a failure of the conﬁdentiality, the availability or the integrity
of the system. A zero-day vulnerability is a computer security
ﬂaw known to a limited number of parties (the software vendor
or cybercriminals) but unknown to the general public. When
the existence of a vulnerability is disclosed to the public,
software patches might not be available yet. In fact, it is not
uncommon to have a signiﬁcant delay between the disclosure
of a vulnerability and the moment a patch or a security ﬁx is
made available by the vendor. Even when a security patch is
available at disclosure, it might not have been deployed to all
the affected systems. Early vulnerability scoring might also be
approximative.
Thousands of vulnerabilities are disclosed every year. Most
organizations do not have the resources (time, manpower, etc.)
to address all the disclosed vulnerabilities that affect their
systems immediately. Instead, they must prioritize their efforts.
Moreover, patching complex enterprise systems might cause
signiﬁcant downtime and unwanted side effects. Therefore,
it is necessary for system administrators to determine which
vulnerabilities should be addressed ﬁrst. Knowing the severity
of a vulnerability might help them to prioritize their efforts
and allocate resources accordingly.
New vulnerabilities are disclosed through the Common Vul-
nerabilities and Exposures (CVE) [1] system. CVE is a list of
records of publicly disclosed computer security vulnerabilities,
operated and maintained by MITRE. An entry in the CVE list
contains an identiﬁcation number (CVE ID), a description of
the vulnerability, and at least one public reference (links to
vulnerability reports, advisories, etc.). Next, the NIST National
Vulnerability Database (NVD) [2] builds upon the information
provided by CVE records to provide enhanced information for
each record such as ﬁx information, severity scores, and im-
pact ratings. Those additional knowledge about vulnerabilities
found in NVD are provided by human security experts. An
example of additional information provided by NVD is an
analysis of the severity of a vulnerability in the form of a
vector and a score using the Common Vulnerability Scoring
System (CVSS) [3]. The CVSS provides a way to summarize
the principal characteristics of a vulnerability through a vector
that contains a set of metrics on how easy it is to exploit
the vulnerability (exploitability metrics) and the impact of
a successful exploit (impact metrics). A numerical score is
computed from the CVSS vector to assess the severity of
a vulnerability relative to other vulnerabilities. The process
of assessing a newly disclosed vulnerability, and attributing a
CVSS vector to it, requires expert knowledge. Because of the
high number of vulnerabilities disclosed everyday, this process
might require a lot of time and manpower. In some cases, it can
take days before a newly disclosed vulnerability is analyzed
by NVD security experts and attributed a CVSS vector.
Our contribution leverages recent advances in the ﬁeld of
Natural Language Processing (NLP) to determine the CVSS
base vector and the associated severity score of a vulnerability
arXiv:2111.08510v1  [cs.CL]  16 Nov 2021
from its textual description provided by CVE, in an automated
and explainable way. We use BERT (Bidirectional Encoder
Representations from Transformers) [4], a transformer-based
language representation model. Multiple BERT classiﬁers are
trained, each to determine the value of a speciﬁc metric
composing the CVSS base vector (AC, AV, PR, UI, S, C, I,
A see Section IV for detailed information about each metric).
The severity score of the vulnerability is then computed from
the predicted CVSS vector. Explainability is an important re-
quirement for our system. It allows the end-users to understand
the decision of our model and justify the predicted CVSS
vectors and severity scores. It is also useful to debug the
model and for knowledge discovery. Hence, we propose to
use gradient-based input saliency method to ﬁnd out which
words in the textual description of a vulnerability were the
most relevant for a given prediction made by our model. We
also use this method to discover which words are most often
associated by our trained models with speciﬁc values of the
metrics composing the CVSS vector. For example, for the
classiﬁer trained to predict the Conﬁdentiality Impact metric
of the CVSS vector, we determine which words and bigrams in
vulnerability descriptions most often lead it to predict HIGH,
LOW or NONE.
II. RELATED WORK
A limited number of works on vulnerability severity predic-
tion exists.
C. Elbaz et al. [5] propose to predict the metrics of the
CVSS base vector as well as the associated severity score
from the description of a vulnerability. The description of a
vulnerability is transformed into a bag of words. A bag of
words is a vector with each dimension corresponding to the
number of occurrences of a given word (0 indicating absence).
Irrelevant words are removed to reduce the dimension of the
vulnerability vector. Linear regression models are trained to
predict a score for each metric of the CVSS vector. The
value of each metric of the CVSS vector are then inferred
from the predicted numerical scores. The use of simple linear
regression models has the advantage of maintaining some level
of explainability, as the weight of each word in the prediction
can help to determine the most relevant words. However, linear
regression assumes linear relationship between the input and
the output. Therefore, it fails to properly model the complexity
of natural language, limiting the performance of the model.
Moreover, bag of words representation ignores context and
discards words ordering, resulting in a poor representation of
text data.
A. Khazaei et al. [6] propose to predict discretized approx-
imate CVSS severity sores from vulnerability descriptions.
The input data is created as follows: stop words are removed
from the descriptions, the remaining words are stemmed, the
TF-IDF (Term Frequency–Inverse Document Frequency) value
of each word is calculated. The output of the model is a
discretized CVSS score: the continuous CVSS score interval
range [0, 10] is divided into 10 equal sub intervals, each
corresponding to a different class. Hence, the problem is a 10-
class classiﬁcation problem. Three different models are trained
and tested, SVM and Random Forest with a dimensionality
reduction step, and a fuzzy system. The presented approach
does not reconstruct the full CVSS vector and attempts only
to provide an approximate severity score. The authors also do
not provide any way to explain the results predicted by the
model.
Z. Han et al. [7] propose to predict qualitative CVSS
severity ratings (Low, Medium, High, Critical) from vulner-
ability description. First, to represent words in a vector space,
word embeddings are trained using a continuous skip-gram
models. Word embeddings attempt to encode the meaning
of words and are a type of word representation that allows
words with similar meaning to be close in the vector space. A
vulnerability description is transformed into a set of vectors
consisting of the concatenation of word embeddings of words
present in the description. The obtained representation is fed
to a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) to determine the
severity ratings of the vulnerability. The work does not aim at
reconstructing the full CVSS vector. It only attempts to provide
a categorical severity rating (and not a precise numerical
severity score). The proposed model is a black-box and the
authors do not provide any way to explain the predictions.
Other related works worth mentioning include [8]–[12]. S.
Zong et al.
[8] analyze the perceived cybersecurity threat
reported on social media in an attempt to predict the real
severity of a vulnerability. In [9] the severity of a vulnerability
is determined based on attack process (the corresponding
proof of concept exploit and vulnerable software). N. Tavabi
et al. [10] analyze darkweb/deepweb discussions to predict
whether vulnerabilities will be exploited. Similarly,
[12]
describes a method to determine the probability that a vul-
nerability will be exploited in the wild within the ﬁrst twelve
months after its public disclosure. [11] presents an approach
able to automatically generate summaries of daily posted
vulnerabilities and categorize them according to a taxonomy
modeled for the industry.
III. ATTENTION BASED NLP MODELS
We ﬁrst present the Transformer architecture and attention
mechanisms. Then, we describe BERT and how it can be used
for classiﬁcation task.
A. Transformers
Vaswani et al. [13] proposed the Transformer, which signif-
icantly improved the performance of Neural Machine Trans-
lation (NMT) applications, and is faster to train and easier
to parallelize. As illustrated in Figure 1, to process an input
sentence, represented by a sequence of words, Transformers
do not use any recurrent or convolutional layers but rely on
attention mechanisms. As, the Transformer was designed for
NMT, it consists of an encoder and a decoder. Actually,
the encoder is a stack of N=6 encoders, and the decoder
is also a stack of N=6 decoders. Lets consider an NMT
application that translates English sentences (inputs) to their
Fig. 1. The Transformer - model architecture
French equivalents (outputs). The stack of encoders encode
each English input words into an internal representation. The
stack of decoders outputs the translated French sentence word
by word. To output the next word, it takes as input the encoded
representation of the original English sentence, along with the
words translated so far.
The Transformer architecture is composed of modules like
fully connected feed-forward networks, residual connections
or layer normalizations that are commonly found in other
neural network architectures. The main novelty introduced are
the different types of attention layers described hereafter.
An encoder consists of a multi-head self-attention layer.
The role of a self-attention layer is to quantify the interde-
pendence within the words of an input sentence. It encodes
the relationship between each word of a sentence, with every
other words of the same sentence. For example, in the sentence
“The animal didn’t cross the street because it was too tired”,
self-attention attention allows the model to associate the word
“it” with the word “animal”. Put another way, the word “it”
will pay more attention to the word “animal” than to any other
words of the sentence.
A decoder consists of a masked multi-head self-attention
layer and an multi-head encoder-decoder attention layer. A
masked self-attention layer does the same thing as the self-
attention layer used in an encoder, except that each word
is allowed to only attend the words before it. The role of
an encoder-decoder attention layer is to quantify the inter-
dependence between the words of an input sentence and
Fig. 2. BERT pretraining
Fig. 3. BERT for classiﬁcation task
the words of an output sentence. It encodes each output
word’s relationship with every words of the input sentence.
For example, when translating the English sentence “how are
you?” into its French equivalent “Comment allez-vous?” , the
encode-decoder attention allows the model to associate the
French word “Comment” to the English equivalent “How”.
Put another way, when translating the word “Comment”, the
decoder will pay more attention to the word “How” than to
any other words in the original English sentence.
B. BERT
In [4], J. Devlin et al. proposed BERT (Bidirectional En-
coder Representations from Transformers) designed to learn
bidirectional representations from unlabeled text by jointly
conditioning on both left and right context (instead of read-
ing text sequentially, from left-to-right or from right-to-left).
BERT has been pretrained on two tasks: masked language
model (MLM) and next sentence prediction (NSP). As shown
in Figure 2, BERT is basically a Transformer encoder stack.
Sentences are tokenized before being fed to the model. Tokens
can represent words or subwords. For example, some long
words or words that are uncommon might be represented using
TABLE I
CVSS BASE METRICS
Description
Possible Values
Exploitability
Metrics
Attack Vector
(AV)
Reﬂects the context by which vulnerability exploitation is possible. This
metric value will be larger the more remote an attacker can be in order
to exploit the vulnerable component.
Network (N)
Adjacent (A)
Local (L)
Physical (P)
Attack
Complexity
(AC)
Describes the conditions beyond the attacker’s control that must exist in
order to exploit the vulnerability. Such conditions may require the collection
of more information about the target, or computational exceptions.
Low (L)
High (H)
Privileges
Required (PR)
Describes the level of privileges an attacker must possess before
successfully exploiting the vulnerability.
None (N)
Low (L)
High (H)
User Interaction
(UI)
Captures the requirement for a human user, other than the attacker, to
participate in the successful compromise of the vulnerable component.
None (N)
Required (R)
Scope (S)
Captures whether a vulnerability in one vulnerable component impacts
resources in components beyond its security scope.
Changed (C)
Unchanged (U)
Impact
Metrics
Conﬁdentiality (C)
measures the impact to conﬁdentiality of a successfully exploited
vulnerability. Conﬁdentiality refers to limiting information access and
disclosure to only authorized users, as well as preventing access by, or
disclosure to, unauthorized ones.
High (H)
Low (L)
None (N)
Integrity (I)
Measures the impact to integrity of a successfully exploited vulnerability.
Integrity refers to the trustworthiness and veracity of information.
High (H)
Low (L)
None (N)
Availability (A)
measures the impact to availability of a successfully exploited vulnerability.
This metric refers to the loss of availability of the impacted component
itself, such as a networked service (e.g., web, database, email).
High (H)
Low (L)
None (N)
multiple tokens. The ﬁrst input token is a special token [CLS]
that will be used for the NSP task. The model outputs vectors,
one for each input token. For the MLM task, some input tokens
are masked and the model is trained to predict them. This
is accomplished by feeding the output vector corresponding
to a masked token to a fully connected feed-forward neural
network that output a softmax over the vocabulary. For the
NSP task the model is fed with two sentences A and B and
it has to predict whether or not sentence B follows sentence
A. This is done by feeding the output vector corresponding
to the special [CLS] token to a fully connected feed-forward
neural network that performs binary classiﬁcation. BERT was
pretrained using text extracted from English Books (800M
words) and Wikipedia pages (2,500M words). The pretrained
BERT model is able to represent input sentences in a way
that captures the underlying syntax, semantics, meanings and
relationships between the words. The pretrained BERT model
has been open-sourced and made publicly available. It can be
easily reused for other tasks such as classiﬁcation. Figure 3
shows how BERT can be used for sentiment classiﬁcation. The
output at the ﬁrst position (corresponding to the [CLS] token)
can be used as the input of a classiﬁer to determine whether
the input textual description is positive or negative. If we have
a multiclass classiﬁcation problem, we can tweak the classiﬁer
so that it has more output neurons.
IV. COMMON VULNERABILITY SCORING SYSTEM
Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS) [3] is a
standard to describe the principal characteristics of a vulner-
ability and assess its severity relative to other vulnerabilities.
Multiple versions of the standard have been released CVSS
v2, v3.0 and v3.1. For our work, we use CVSS v3.1, the
latest version of the standard at the time of writing. For the
rest of this paper CVSS refers to CVSS v3.1, unless speciﬁed
otherwise. CVSS captures and summarizes the characteristics
of a vulnerability in a vector composed of three metric groups:
Base, Temporal, and Environmental.
The Base metrics reﬂects the severity of a vulnerability
according to its intrinsic characteristics which are constant
over time and across different environments. The Temporal
metrics adjust the Base severity of a vulnerability based on
factors that change over time, such as the availability of
exploit code. The Environmental metrics adjust the Base and
Temporal metrics to a speciﬁc computing environment (taking
into account factors such as the presence of mitigations in
that environment). In fact, temporal and environmental metrics
are rarely used in practice. Only the CVSS Base metrics are
adopted by NVD to provide severity analysis of vulnerabilities.
For the rest of this paper, when we refer to CVSS vectors
or metrics, we speciﬁcally refer to CVSS Base vectors and
metrics.
The CVSS Base vector consists of two sets of metrics: the
Exploitability metrics and the Impact metrics. Exploitability
metrics characterize the ease and technical means by which
a vulnerability can be exploited. Impact metrics reﬂect the
consequences of a successful exploit of the vulnerability
on the impacted component. Table I describes the different
Exploitability and Impact metrics that compose the CVSS
Base vector. It also provides the value that each of these metric
can take.
A vulnerability is publicly disclosed through the CVE
system. It is identiﬁed by an ID and added to the CVE list.
For each new CVE entry, NVD analysts assign values to
the different metrics of the CVSS Base vector. The assigned
values then goes through different equations to calculate a
severity score ranging from 0.0 to 10.0. The details of how
Fig. 4. CVSS vector and severity score prediction pipeline
to compute severity scores from Base vectors is described
in the CVSS speciﬁcation document [3]. For example, the
CVSS vector assigned to CVE-2018-4878, a use-after-free
vulnerability discovered in Adobe Flash Player [14], is:
AV:N/AC:L/PR:N/UI:N/S:U/C:H/I:H/A:H
Where AV:N stands for Attack Vector metric is equal to
Network, AC:L stands for Attack Complexity metric is equal
to Low, and so on (See Table I for further detail about the
different metrics). The severity score corresponding to this
vector is 9.8 (critical).
V. CVSS VECTOR AND SEVERITY SCORE PREDICTION
A. Model Description
To predict the Base CVSS vector from the description of a
vulnerability, we propose to train multiple BERT classiﬁers,
one for each metric composing the CVSS vector (AV, AC,
PR, etc). As illustrated in Figure 4, the textual description of
a vulnerability (provided by the CVE system) is passed to each
trained BERT classiﬁer to determine the value of the different
metrics that compose the CVSS vector. The individual values
predicted by each classiﬁer are then concatenated to get the
full predicted CVSS vector. From the predicted CVSS vector
we can infer the severity score (using the equations provided
by the CVSS speciﬁcation document).
B. Experimental Setup
We use data provided by the NVD database [2]. NVD
database is fully synchronized with the MITRE CVE list and
each vulnerability is identiﬁed by a CVE ID. For each CVE
vulnerability the database includes a textual description (that
we use as input of our BERT classiﬁers), a CVSS vector (that
we use as outputs to train our BERT classiﬁers), and a severity
score. Our full dataset consists of 3 years of CVE vulnerability
data, from 2018 to 2020, corresponding to a total of 45,926
samples. The full dataset is split randomly into a training set
and a test set, containing 22,963 CVE vulnerabilities each.
We use BERT-small, a lighter version of BERT proposed in
[15], consisting of 4 transformer encoder layers (instead of 12
for the original BERT Base model) and a hidden embedding
size of 512 (instead of 768 for BERT Base). With fewer
parameters than the original BERT Base model, BERT-small
TABLE II
PERFORMANCE OF THE BERT CLASSIFIERS ON THE TEST SET
Accuracy
Precision
(weighted)
Recall
(weighted)
F1-score
(weighted)
AV
0.9115
0.9090
0.9115
0.9089
AC
0.9607
0.9570
0.9607
0.9574
PR
0.8379
0.8392
0.8379
0.8378
UI
0.9321
0.9318
0.9321
0.9319
S
0.9545
0.9553
0.9545
0.9548
C
0.8704
0.8714
0.8704
0.8681
I
0.8735
0.8736
0.8735
0.8731
A
0.8894
0.8868
0.8894
0.8863
is less computationally expensive and faster to train. The
vulnerability descriptions are tokenized using the pretrained
BERT-small tokenizer. Padding and truncation are used so as
to have token sequences of length 128.
We train multiple BERT models for classiﬁcation tasks,
one for each individual metric of the CVSS Base vector. As
explained in Section III-B, BERT is a pretrained model. That
is, it was trained on huge corpus of textual data to effectively
model texts written in English (underlying syntax, semantics,
meanings, relationships between words, etc.). To have a BERT
classiﬁer, we add a classiﬁer on top of the pretrained BERT
model. We have to be careful during training because the
added classiﬁer is randomly initialized. Hence, very large
weight updates will be propagated through the network, and
the representation learned by the pretrained BERT model will
be destroyed. To avoid this issue, the weights of the pretrained
BERT model are frozen for the ﬁrst 3 epochs and only the
weights of the classiﬁer are ﬁne-tuned. After the weights of the
classiﬁer reach reasonable values, the weights of the pretrained
BERT model are unfrozen. The classiﬁer and the BERT model
are jointly trained for another 3 epochs.
C. Experimental Results
Table II presents the performance of the different BERT
classiﬁers on the test set. In order to take class imbalance into
account, weighted average is used to compute precision, recall
and F1-score. All classiﬁers achieve relatively high accuracy,
ranging from 83.79% to 96.07%. The easiest CVSS metrics
to predict are Attack Complexity (AC) and Scope (S), with
an achieved accuracy on the test set of 96.07% and 95.45%
respectively. Note however that the high performance for AC
metric can be partly explained by the highly imbalanced
classes for this speciﬁc metric, with 93% of the samples be-
longing to one class. The CVSS metric most difﬁcult to predict
is Privileges Required (PR) with an accuracy of 83.79%.
From the predicted CVSS Base vectors, we compute the
CVSS severity scores for each CVE vulnerability in the test
set. The Mean Squared Error (MSE) and Mean Absolute
Error (MAE) between the predicted severity scores and the
true severity scores is of 1.79 and 0.73 respectively. The
predicted severity scores exactly match the true severity scores
(MAE = 0) for 55.3% of the CVE vulnerabilities in the test
set. The MAE is also less than 1 for 75% of the vulnerabilities
in the test set.
VI. EXPLAINABILITY
Interpretability of a machine learning model refers to the
ability to determine the cause and effect relationship between
the inputs of a model and its prediction. It allows a human
user to understand and explain the decision of a model [16].
It also allows knowledge discovery (spot speciﬁc patterns
in the data) and helps debug the model, for example, to
better understand incorrect predictions. Depending on the
context, interpretability and explainability might refers to
slightly different concepts. In this paper, we use both terms
interchangeably.
A. Gradient-based input saliency
Gradient-based input saliency methods can be used to ﬁnd
out which input tokens (sub-words) are the most important for
a given prediction made by the model [17], [18]. Note that it is
also possible to determine the importance of each token based
on the attention weights [19]. The assumption is that input
tokens accorded high attention are responsible for the model
output. However recent studies cast doubts to the degree to
which attention weights provide meaningful explanations for
predictions [18], [20]. In [18], J. Bastings et al. argue that
saliency methods are better suited to determine what inputs
are the most relevant to predictions. In [21], P. Atanasova et
al. compare different explainability techniques and show that
gradient-based input saliency methods perform the best.
To predict each metric of the CVSS vector, we trained
different BERT models for classiﬁcation task. That is, the
output layer of our models consist of a set of logits, each
corresponding to a speciﬁc class, and a softmax function is
used to transform those logits into probabilities that sum up
to one. The class with the highest probability is predicted by
the model.
For a given prediction, we can determine how important
each input token is to the prediction by calculating the gradient
of the score (value of the output logit) corresponding to the
predicted class, with respect to the inputs. Speciﬁcally, the
smallest change in the input token with the highest gradient-
based saliency value will result in a large change in the output
of the model. We use the Gradient X Input method in which
the computed gradient vector per token is multiplied by the
TABLE III
EXAMPLES OF PREDICTIONS ALONG WITH THE TOP 5 MOST RELEVANT
TOKENS (AS DETERMINED BY GRADIENT BASED INPUT SALIENCY) IN
BOLD AND UNDERLINED
CVE-2020-9804
Predicted Attack Vector (AV): PHYSICAL (P)
A logic issue was addressed with improved restrictions.
This issue is fixed in macOS Catalina 10.15.5. Inserting
a USB device that sends invalid messages may cause a
kernel panic.
CVE-2018-15611
Predicted Privileges Required (PR): HIGH (H)
A vulnerability in the local system administration
component of Avaya Aura Communication Manager can
allow an authenticated, privileged user on the local
system to gain root privileges. Affected versions include
6.3.x and all 7.x version prior to 7.1.3.1.
CVE-2019-12773
Predicted User Interaction (UI): REQUIRED (R)
An issue was discovered in Verint Impact 360 15.1. At
wfo/help/help_popup.jsp, the help URL parameter can
be changed to embed arbitrary content inside of an
iFrame. Attackers may use this in conjunction with
social engineering to embed malicious scripts or
phishing pages on a site where this product is
installed, given the attacker can convince a victim to
visit a crafted link.
CVE-2019-16278
Predicted Confidentiality Impact (C): HIGH (H)
IBM Financial Transaction Manager for SWIFT Services
for Multiplatforms 3.2.4 could allow an remote attacker
to obtain sensitive information, caused by a man in the
middle attack. By SSL striping, an attacker could
exploit this vulnerability to obtain sensitive
information.
CVE-2019-9964
Predicted Availability Impact (A): HIGH (H)
XnView MP 0.93.1 on Windows allows remote
attackers to cause a denial of service (application crash)
or possibly have unspecified other impact via a crafted
file, related to ntdll!RtlpNtMakeTemporaryKey.
input embedding of the token. Taking the L2 norm of the
resulting vector gives the token’s feature importance score, a
measure of how sensitive the model is to that speciﬁc input
token. More formally, the importance of the token at the ith
position in the input sequence is given by:
∥∇Xifc(X1:n) · Xi∥2
where:
• Xi is the embedding vector of the ith input token
• X1:n is the list of embedding vectors of all the tokens in
the input sequence (of length n)
• fc(X1:n) is the score of the predicted class after a forward
pass through the model.
• ∇Xifc(X1:n) is the back-propagated gradient of the score
of the predicted class.
Table III presents examples of predictions made by our
trained BERT classiﬁers on samples from the test set, along
with the top 5 most important tokens (as determined by
gradient based input saliency) for each prediction. Note that
tokens can be sub-words and also include punctuation marks.
It is interesting to see that the top 5 most relevant tokens for
each prediction include terms in agreement with the rationales
of a human cybersecurity expert. For example, to determine
TABLE IV
TOKENS MOST OFTEN ASSOCIATED TO SPECIFIC VALUES OF THE CVSS METRICS
Unigrams
Bigrams
AV
N
’remote’, ’xss’, ’php’, ’web’, ’network’, ’http’, ’script’, ’ﬁle’, ’ur’, ’site’
’network access’, ’site script’, ’with network’, ’google chrome’, ’remote attacker’
A
’adjacent’, ’attacker’, ’cisco’, ’network’, ’via’, ’route’, ’same’, ’access’, ’intel’,
’allows’
’adjacent attacker’, ’via adjacent’, ’same network’, ’adjacent access’,
’adjacent attackers’
L
’local’, ’privilege’, ’windows’, ’privileges’, ’ﬁle’, ’kernel’, ’elevation’, ’remote’,
’access’, ’attacker
’local attacker’, ’local access’, ’local users’, ’local information’,
’infrastructure where’
P
’physical’, ’access’, ’usb’, ’device’, ’allows’, ’physically’, ’intel’, ’attacker’, ’via’,
’lock’
’physical access’, ’via physical’, ’usb device’, ’allows physical’,
’allows physically’,’malicious usb’
AC
L
’xss’, ’ﬁle’, ’crafted’, ’web’, ’user’, ’site’, ’needed’, ’server’, ’easily’, ’exploit’
’easily exploit’, ’. easily’, ’user interaction’, ’site script’, ’successful exploitation’
H
’engine’, ’difﬁcult’, ’exploit’, ’vulnerability’, ’script’, ’to’, ’race’, ’middle’, ’man’,
’memory’
’difﬁcult to’, ’to exploit’, ’race condition’, ’. difﬁcult’, ’exploit vulnerability’
PR
H
’privileged’, ’high’, ’allows’, ’attacker’, ’admin’, ’user’, ’authentic’, ’administrator’,
’privileges’, ’oracle’
’high privileged’, ’privileged attacker’, ’allows high’, ’privileged user’,
’system execution’
L
’authenticated’, ’local’, ’user’, ’users’, ’allows’, ’attacker’, ’low’, ’elevation’,
’privileged’, ’privilege’
’low privileged’, ’allows low’, ’local users’, ’authenticated user’, ’allows local’
N
’unauthenticated’, ’remote’, ’attackers’, ’attacker’, ’exploitation’, ’code’,
’corruption’, ’vulnerability’, ’network’, ’successful’
’remote attackers’, ’successful exploitation’, ’unauthenticated attacker’,
’remote code’, ’remote attacker’
UI
R
’xss’, ’site’, ’script’, ’cross’, ’crafted’, ’malicious’, ’interaction’, ’ﬁle’, ’csrf’, ’php’
’site script’, ’human interaction’, ’crafted html’, ’html page’, ’xss via’
N
’local’, ’network’, ’user’, ’server’, ’oracle’, ’sql’, ’allows’, ’devices’, ’php’,
’injection’
’sql injection’, ’not needed’, ’contract implementation’, ’linux kernel’,
’network access’
S
C
’xss’, ’script’, ’site’, ’cross’, ’impact’, ’products’, ’attacks’, ’stored’, ’may’, ’has’
’site script’, ’xss via’, ’attacks may’, ’stored xss’, ’has xss’
U
’code’, ’memory’, ’execution’, ’information’, ’buffer’, ’function’, ’can’, ’denial’,
’sql’, ’password’
’code execution’, ’can result’, ’information disclosure’, ’arbitrary code’,
’sql injection’
C
H
’code’, ’execution’, ’arbitrary’, ’execute’, ’disclosure’, ’privilege’, ’privileges’,
’injection’, ’information’, ’bounds’
’code execution’, ’arbitrary code’, ’execute arbitrary’, ’remote code’,
’information disclosure’
L
’xss’, ’script’, ’arbitrary’, ’html’, ’site’, ’stored’, ’unauthorized’, ’allows’, ’web’,
’code’
’site script’, ’stored xss’, ’unauthorized read’, ’allows xss’, ’read access’
N
’denial’, ’service’, ’contract’, ’cause’, ’dos’, ’crash’, ’result’, ’balance’, ’set’,
’function’
’frequently repeat’, ’complete dos’, ’contract implementation’, ’null pointer’,
’service attack’
I
H
’code’, ’execution’, ’arbitrary’, ’execute’, ’privilege’, ’injection’, ’privileges’,
’remote’, ’vulnerability’, ’sql’
’code execution’, ’arbitrary code’, ’execute arbitrary’, ’remote code’,
’sql injection’
L
’xss’, ’script’, ’site’, ’html’, ’insert’, ’update’, ’unauthorized’, ’php’, ’stored’, ’result’
’site script’, ’unauthorized update’, ’stored xss’, ’update ,’, ’, insert’
N
’denial’, ’disclosure’, ’information’, ’read’, ’service’, ’crash’, ’vulnerability’, ’dos’,
’sensitive’, ’and’
’information disclosure’, ’sensitive information’, ’read vulnerability’,
’disclosure vulnerability’, ’bounds read’
A
H
’code’, ’service’, ’execution’, ’denial’, ’execute’, ’arbitrary’, ’buffer’, ’crash’, ’of’,
’privilege’
’code execution’, ’arbitrary code’, ’denial of’, ’of service’,
’execute arbitrary’, ’buffer over’
L
’partial’, ’cause’, ’denial’, ’service’, ’dos’, ’consume’, ’entity’, ’processing’, ’restart’,
’injection’
’partial denial’, ’entity injection’, ’undeﬁned behavior’, ’temporarily unavailable’,
’or consume’
N
’xss’, ’disclosure’, ’information’, ’script’, ’site’, ’read’, ’data’, ’accessible’, ’ﬁles’,
’arbitrary’
’site script’, ’information disclosure’, ’accessible data’, ’stored xss’,
’sensitive information’
that the Attack Vector (AV) for CVE-2020-9804 is Physical
(P), the most important terms for a human expert are ’USB
device’. Those terms are also the top most relevant tokens
as determined by gradient based input saliency. Similarly, to
predict that User Interaction (UI) is Required (R) for CVE-
2019-12773, the top most relevant tokens include terms like
’convince’, ’visit’, ’crafted link’. Those terms are in line with
what a human expert would consider important to correctly
classify the vulnerability. Because top most relevant tokens
as determined by gradient based input saliency often include
terms that are also important for a human expert, it is easy for
an end-user to make sense of it.
B. Tokens Most Often Associated with Speciﬁc Values of the
CVSS Metrics
Table IV lists for the different values of each CVSS metric,
the most relevant input tokens. That is, the input tokens that are
most often associated by the classiﬁers to a speciﬁc prediction.
The methodology to determine those tokens for each classiﬁer
is as follows:
• Keep only samples in the test set for which the classiﬁer
predicts the class with high conﬁdence (the output after
softmax for the predicted class is greater than 0.9).
• For each vulnerability description determine the top 5
input tokens in terms of their importance to the predicted
class using the gradient-based input saliency method.
• For each possible class, create a list of the most important
tokens by concatenating the top 5 tokens of all vulnera-
bilities belonging to that class.
• Compute the number of occurrences of each token in that
list to determine the top 10 tokens that are most often
associated by the classiﬁer to that speciﬁc class.
Some tokens corresponding to sub-words were completed to
represent valid meaningful words. For example, the word ’xss’
(shorthand for cross-site scripting, a type of vulnerability
usually found in web applications) is represented by two
tokens ’x’ and ’ss’.
Table IV also shows bigrams most often associated by a
classiﬁer to a speciﬁc class. A bigram is a pair of consecutive
tokens. A relevant bigram occurs in a vulnerability description
if two consecutive tokens are both among the top 5 most im-
portant tokens. For example, if in a description both ’network’
and ’access’ are among the top 5 input tokens in terms of their
importance to the prediction (as determined by gradient-based
input saliency) and they also form two consecutive tokens,
then ’network access’ is counted as a bigram relevant to the
prediction. As with individual input tokens (unigrams), we
count the number of occurrences of each relevant bigram over
all the vulnerability descriptions and all classes in the test set
to determine the top 5 bigrams most often associated by a
classiﬁer with a speciﬁc class.
The tokens most often associated with the different values
of the CVSS metrics are in agreement with the reasoning of
a human cybersecurity expert. For example, for the Attack
Vector (AV) metric, the terms ’adjacent attacker’ are correctly
associated with the class Adjacent (A), while the terms ’phys-
ical’ and ’usb’ are associated with the class Physical (P). For
Attack Complexity (AC) metric, the expression ’easily exploit’
is associated with Low (L), while ’difﬁcult to’ is associated
with High (H). Similarly, for the Privileges Required (PR)
metric, the expressions ’high privileged’ and ’low privileges’
are precisely associated with High (H) and Low (L) respec-
tively. For the User Interaction (UI) metric, the terms ’xss’,
’site script’ (vulnerability that requires the victim to visit a
compromised website) and ’human interaction’ are accurately
associated with Required (R). The expression ’information
disclosure’ is related to a Conﬁdentiality impact (C) metric
equal to High (H). For the Availability impact (A) metric, the
terms ’denial’ and ’crash’ are correctly associated with High
(H). Often, the tokens most often associated with a particular
value of a CVSS metric include terms that are in line with
the rationales of a human cybesecurity expert, making the
explanations provided by gradient-based input saliency method
comprehensible for end-users.
VII. CONCLUSION
Each year, thousands of computer security vulnerabilities
are disclosed. To address the security threat posed by those
vulnerabilities organisations must prioritize their efforts and
allocate their limited resources effectively. Knowing the sever-
ity of a vulnerability might help them to determine which
vulnerabilities should be addressed ﬁrst. However, when a
new vulnerability is disclosed, only a textual description of
it is available. Cybersecurity experts later provide an analysis
of the severity of the vulnerability using the CVSS standard.
The characteristics of a vulnerability are summarized into a
CVSS vector from which a severity score can be computed.
The process of attributing a CVSS vector and severity score
to a vulnerability requires lot of time and manpower.
We proposed to leverage recent advances in NLP to auto-
matically determine the CVSS vector and severity score of a
vulnerability from its description. To this purpose we trained
multiple BERT classiﬁers, one for each metric composing the
CVSS vector. Experimental results show that the classiﬁers
achieve high accuracy. The values predicted by each individual
classiﬁer are concatenated to construct the CVSS vector, from
which a numerical severity score is computed. The predicted
severity score is very close to the real severity score provided
by human experts. For explainability purpose, gradient-based
input saliency method was used to determine the most relevant
input words for a given prediction made by our classiﬁers.
The top relevant words often include terms in agreement with
the rationales of a human cybersecurity expert, making the
explanation comprehensible for end-users.
REFERENCES
[1] Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE), (accessed July 27,
2021). [Online]. Available: https://cve.mitre.org/
[2] National Vulnerability Database (NVD), (accessed July 27, 2021).
[Online]. Available: https://nvd.nist.gov/
[3] Common
Vulnerability
Scoring
System
version
3.1:
Speciﬁcation
Document,
2019
(accessed
July
27,
2021).
[Online].
Available:
https://www.ﬁrst.org/cvss/speciﬁcation-document
[4] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “Bert: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
[5] C. Elbaz, L. Rilling, and C. Morin, “Fighting n-day vulnerabilities with
automated cvss vector prediction at disclosure,” in Proceedings of the
15th International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security,
2020, pp. 1–10.
[6] A. Khazaei, M. Ghasemzadeh, and V. Derhami, “An automatic method
for cvss score prediction using vulnerabilities description,” Journal of
Intelligent & Fuzzy Systems, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 89–96, 2016.
[7] Z. Han, X. Li, Z. Xing, H. Liu, and Z. Feng, “Learning to predict severity
of software vulnerability using only vulnerability description,” in 2017
IEEE International conference on software maintenance and evolution
(ICSME).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 125–136.
[8] S. Zong, A. Ritter, G. Mueller, and E. Wright, “Analyzing the per-
ceived severity of cybersecurity threats reported on social media,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1902.10680, 2019.
[9] D. Zou, J. Yang, Z. Li, H. Jin, and X. Ma, “Autocvss: An approach for
automatic assessment of vulnerability severity based on attack process,”
in International Conference on Green, Pervasive, and Cloud Computing.
Springer, 2019, pp. 238–253.
[10] N. Tavabi, P. Goyal, M. Almukaynizi, P. Shakarian, and K. Lerman,
“Darkembed: Exploit prediction with neural language models,” in Pro-
ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol. 32, no. 1,
2018.
[11] E. R. Russo, A. Di Sorbo, C. A. Visaggio, and G. Canfora, “Summariz-
ing vulnerabilities’ descriptions to support experts during vulnerability
assessment activities,” Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 156, pp.
84–99, 2019.
[12] J. Jacobs, S. Romanosky, B. Edwards, M. Roytman, and I. Ad-
jerid, “Exploit prediction scoring system (epss),” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.04856, 2019.
[13] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in Advances
in neural information processing systems, 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[14] CVE-2018-4878 Detail, (accessed July 27, 2021). [Online]. Available:
https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/cve-2018-4878
[15] I. Turc, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “Well-read students
learn better: On the importance of pre-training compact models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1908.08962, 2019.
[16] C. Molnar, Interpretable machine learning.
Lulu. com, 2020.
[17] J.
Alammar,
“Interfaces
for
explaining
transformer
language
models,”
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://jalammar.github.io/
explaining-transformers/
[18] J. Bastings and K. Filippova, “The elephant in the interpretability room:
Why use attention as explanation when we have saliency methods?”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.05607, 2020.
[19] S. Wiegreffe and Y. Pinter, “Attention is not not explanation,” in
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), 2019, pp. 11–20.
[20] S. Jain and B. C. Wallace, “Attention is not explanation,” in Proceedings
of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), 2019, pp. 3543–3556.
[21] P. Atanasova, J. G. Simonsen, C. Lioma, and I. Augenstein, “A di-
agnostic study of explainability techniques for text classiﬁcation,” in
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP), 2020, pp. 3256–3274.
