Title: CLEVR Parser: A Graph Parser Library for Geometric Learning on Language Grounded Image Scenes
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2009.09154v2
--------------------------------------------------

CLEVR Parser: A Graph Parser Library for Geometric Learning on
Language Grounded Image Scenes
Raeid Saqur1,2
1University of Toronto Computer Science
2Vector Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
raeidsaqur@cs.toronto.edu
Ameet Deshpande
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
asd@cs.princeton.edu
Abstract
The CLEVR dataset has been used exten-
sively in language grounded visual reasoning
in Machine Learning (ML) and Natural Lan-
guage Processing (NLP) domains. We present
a graph parser library for CLEVR, that
provides functionalities for object-centric at-
tributes and relationships extraction, and con-
struction of structural graph representations
for dual modalities. Structural order-invariant
representations enable geometric learning and
can aid in downstream tasks like language
grounding to vision, robotics, compositional-
ity, interpretability, and computational gram-
mar construction. We provide three extensible
main components – parser, embedder, and
visualizer that can be tailored to suit speciﬁc
learning setups. We also provide out-of-the-
box functionality for seamless integration with
popular deep graph neural network (GNN) li-
braries. Additionally, we discuss downstream
usage and applications of the library, and how
it accelerates research for the NLP research
community1.
1
Introduction
The CLEVR dataset (Johnson et al., 2017a) is a
modern 3D incarnation of historically signiﬁcant
shapes-based datasets like SHRDLU (Winograd,
1970), used for demonstrating AI efﬁcacy on lan-
guage understanding (Ontanon, 2018; Winograd,
1980; Hudson and Manning, 2018). Although origi-
nally aimed at the visual question answering (VQA)
problem (Santoro et al., 2017; Hu et al., 2018), its
versatility has seen its use in diverse ML domains,
including extensions to physics simulation engines
for language augmented hierarchical reinforcement
learning (Jiang et al., 2019) and causal reasoning
(Yi et al., 2019).
1Code is available at - https://github.com/
raeidsaqur/clevr-parser
(a) Question on image (Figure 2): ‘Is the color of the metal
block that is right of the yellow rubber object the same as the
large metal cylinder?’
obj1
block
metal
obj2
object
yellow
rubber
obj3
cylinder
metal
large
spatial re
matching re
(b) Image (Figure 2) scene graph parsed representa-
tion
obj
obj2
obj3
obj4
obj5
obj6
obj7
obj8
Figure 1: A question about a CLEVR image visualized
as multimodal parsed graphs
Parallelly, research interest in geometric learning
and GNN (Kipf and Welling, 2016; Schlichtkrull
et al., 2018; Hamilton et al., 2017) based techniques
have seen a dramatic surge in recent deep learning
zeitgeist. In this focused paper, we present a library
that allows easy integration and application of geo-
metric representation learning on CLEVR dataset
arXiv:2009.09154v2  [cs.CL]  1 Oct 2020
tasks - enabling the NLP research community to
apply GNN based techniques to their research (see
4).
The library has three main (extensible) compo-
nents: 1. Parser: allows extraction of graph struc-
tured relationships among objects of the environ-
ment – both for textual questions, and semantic
image scene graphs, 2. Embedder: allows gen-
eration of latent embeddings using any models or
desired backend of choice (like PyTorch2), 3. Vi-
sualizer: provides tools for visualizing structural
graphs and latent embeddings.
2
Background
CLEVR Environment
The dataset consists of
images with rendered 3D objects of various shapes,
colors, materials, and sizes, along with correspond-
ing image scene graphs containing visual semantic
information. Templated question generation on
the images allows the creation of complex ques-
tions that test various aspects of scene understand-
ing. The original dataset contains ≈1M questions
generated from ≈100k questions with 90 question
template families that can be broadly categorized
into ﬁve question types: count, exist, numerical
comparison, attribute comparison, and query.
Figure 2: A CLEVR image
The dataset also comes with a deﬁned domain-
speciﬁc-language (DSL) function library F, con-
taining primitive functions that can be composed
together to answer questions on CLEVR images
(Johnson et al., 2017b). We delegate further details
of this dataset to (Johnson et al., 2017a) and the
appendix A.
3
CLEVR-PARSER
Here we describe each of the main library compo-
nents in detail.
2https://pytorch.org/
3.1
Parser
Text
The parser takes a language utterance,
which can be a question, caption or command,
that is valid in the CLEVR environment, and
outputs a structural graph representation – Gs,
capturing object attributes, spatial relationships
(spatial re), and attribute similarity based
matching predicates (matching re) in the tex-
tual input.
This is implemented by adding a
CLEVR object entity recognizer (NER) in the NLP
parse pipeline as depicted by Figure 3. Note that
the NER is permutationally equivariant to the ob-
ject attributes – i.e. a ‘large red rubber ball’ will be
detected as an object by any of these spans: ‘red
large rubber ball’, ‘large ball’, ‘ball’ etc.
Figure 3: Entity visualization
Images
The parser takes image scene graphs as
input and outputs a structural graph – Gt. The syn-
thesized image scenes accompanying the original
dataset can be used as input. Alternatively, parsed
image scenes generated using any modern seman-
tic image segmentation method (for e.g. ‘Mask-
RCNN’ (He et al., 2017)) can also be used as input
(Yi et al., 2018). A visualized example of a parsed
image is shown in ﬁgure 4a. For the ease of repro-
ducibility, we also include a curated dataset ‘1obj’
with parsed image scenes using Mask-RCNN se-
mantic segmentation (AppendixA).
While we provide a concrete implementation us-
ing the SpaCy3 NLP library, any other library like
the Stanford Parser4, or NLTK5 could be used in
its place. The output of the parser from a question
and image is depicted in Figure 1.
3.2
Embedder
The
embedder
provides
‘word-embedding’
(Mikolov et al., 2017) based representation of
input text utterances and image scenes using a
pre-trained language model (LM). The end-user
can instantiate the embedder with a preferred LM,
which could be a simple one-hot representation
of the CLEVR environment vocabulary, or a
large transformer based SotA LMs like BERT,
GPT-2, XLNet (Peters et al., 2018; Devlin et al.,
3https://spacy.io/
4https://nlp.stanford.edu/software/lex-parser.shtml
5https://www.nltk.org/
2018; Radford et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019).
The embedder uses the parser (see section 3.1)
generated graphs Gs, Gt – where graph Gs and Gt
are deﬁned as generic graph G = (V, E, A), where
V is the set of nodes {1,2,..}, E is the set of edges,
and A is the adjacency matrix – and returns X,
E, the feature matrices of the nodes and edges
respectively:
Xs, As, Es ←EMBED(S)
Xt, At, Et ←EMBED(T),
(1)
The output signature of the embedder is a tuple:
(X, A, E), which matches the fundamental data-
structure of popular geometric learning libraries
like PyTorch Geometric (Fey and Lenssen, 2019),
thus allowing seamless integration. We show a
concrete implementation of this use case using Py-
Torch Geometric (Fey and Lenssen, 2019) and
Pytorch in 3.3.2.
3.3
Visualizer
We provide multiple visualization tools for analyz-
ing images, text, and latent embeddings.
3.3.1
Visualizing Structural Graphs
This visualizer sub-component enables visualiza-
tion of the multimodal structural graph outputs –
Gs, Gt – by the parser (see 3.1) using Graphviz
and matplotlib.
Visualizing Images
Image graphs (Gt) can have
a large number of objects and attributes. For ease of
viewing, attributes like size, shape (e.g. cylinder),
color (e.g. yellow), and material (e.g. metallic) are
displayed as nodes of the graph (Figure 4a). We ex-
plain elements of Figure 4a to describe the legend
in greater detail. The double circles represent the
objects, and the adjacent nodes are their attributes.
The shape is depicted using the actual shape (e.g.
the cyan cylinder – obj2), and the other attributes
are depicted as diamonds. The size of one of the
diamonds depicts if the object is small or large, e.g.
the large cyan diamond attached to obj2 means that
it is large. The color of all the attribute nodes de-
picts the color of the object (e.g. the cyan color of
obj2). The presence of a gradient in the remaining
diamond depicts the material of the object. For
example, the gradient in the diamond attached to
obj4 means that it is metallic, and the solid ﬁll for
obj2 means that it is rubber. While this legend is
a little lengthy, we found that it makes visualiza-
tion easier, but the user can choose to revert to the
simpler setting of using text to depict the attributes.
Visualizing Text
Text corresponding to an image
is a partially observable subset of objects, their rela-
tionships, and attributes. The dependency graph of
the text is visualized just like the images, with only
the observable information being depicted (Figure
4b).
Composing image and text
We also provide an
option to view an image and the text in the same
graph. By connecting corresponding object nodes
from the image and text, we create a bipartite graph
that allows us to visualize all the information that
an image-text pair contains (Figure 4c). Additional
examples from the visualizer are presented in ap-
pendix A.4.
3.3.2
Visualizer - Embeddings
We also provide a visualizer to analyze the embed-
dings produced by using methods in section 3.2.
We use t-SNE (Maaten and Hinton, 2008), which
is a method used to visualize high-dimensional
data on 2 or 3 dimensions. We also offer cluster-
ing support to allow grouping of similar embed-
dings together. Both image (Frome et al., 2013)
and word embeddings (Mikolov et al., 2013) from
learned models have the nice property of capturing
semantic information, and our visualizers capture
this semantic similarity information in the form of
clusters.
Figure 5 plots the embeddings for questions
drawn from two different distributions train and
test, which represent semantically different se-
quences, and they separate out into distinct clusters.
Figure 5: Questions from two different distributions
which form separate clusters
Similarly, Figure 6 analyzes embeddings drawn
from 7 different templates. Questions that corre-
(a) Visualizing image graph – Gt
(b) Visualizing text graph – Gs
(c) Visualizing joint (image and text) graph – Gu for the above
two ﬁgures
Figure 4: Visualizing Gs, Gt, Gu
spond to the same templates form tight clusters
while being far away from other questions.
Figure 6: Questions from 7 different templates forming
tight clusters
4
Related Work and Applications
Some lines of work attempt to generate scene
graphs for images. The Visual Genome library
(Krishna et al., 2017), in a real-world image setting,
is a collection of annotated images (from Flickr,
COCO) and corresponding knowledge graph asso-
ciations. The work of (Schuster et al., 2015) and the
corresponding library which is a part of the Stan-
ford NLP library6, allows scene graph generation
from text (image caption) as input.
Our work is orthogonal to these in that our target
dataset is synthetic, which allows full control over
the generation of images, questions, and ground
truth semantic program chains. Thus, coalesced
with our library’s functionalities, it allows end-
to-end (e2e) control over experimenting on ev-
ery modular aspect of research hypotheses (see
4.1). Further, our work premises on providing mul-
timodal representations – including ground-truth
paired graph (joint graph Gu ←(Gs, Gt)) – which
has interesting downstream research applications.
4.1
Usages and Applications
Applications of language grounding in ML/NLP
research are quite broad. To avoid sounding overly
grandiose, we exemplify possible applications cit-
ing work that pertains to the CLEVR dataset.
Recent work by (Bahdanau et al., 2019) has
shown lack of distributional robustness and compo-
sitional generalization (Fodor et al., 1988) in NLP.
Permutation equivariance within local linguistic
component groups has been shown to help with
language compositionality (Gordon et al., 2020).
Graph-based representations are intrinsically or-
6https://nlp.stanford.edu/software/
scenegraph-parser.shtml
der invariant – thus, may help with language com-
positionality research. Language augmented re-
ward mechanisms are a dense topic in concurrent
(human-in-the-loop) reinforcement learning (Knox
and Stone, 2012; Grifﬁth et al., 2013), robotics
(Knox et al., 2013; Kuhlmann et al., 2004), long-
horizon, hierarchical POMDP problems in general
(Kaplan et al., 2017) – like command completion
in physics simulators (Jiang et al., 2019). Other
applications could be in program synthesis and in-
terpretability (Mascharka et al., 2018), causal rea-
soning (Yao, 2010), and general visually grounded
language understanding (Yu et al., 2017).
In general, we expect and hope that any existing
line or domain of work in NLP using the CLEVR
dataset (a signiﬁcant number), will beneﬁt from
having graph-based representational learning aided
by our proposed library.
References
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Philippe Beaudoin, and Aaron
Courville. 2019. CLOSURE : Assessing Systematic
Generalization of CLEVR Models.
Technical Re-
port 2016.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2018. Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understand-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805.
Matthias Fey and Jan Eric Lenssen. 2019.
Fast
graph representation learning with pytorch geomet-
ric. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.02428.
Jerry A Fodor, Zenon W Pylyshyn, et al. 1988. Connec-
tionism and cognitive architecture: A critical analy-
sis. Cognition, 28(1-2):3–71.
Andrea Frome, Greg S Corrado, Jon Shlens, Samy Ben-
gio, Jeff Dean, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, and Tomas
Mikolov. 2013. Devise: A deep visual-semantic em-
bedding model. In Advances in neural information
processing systems, pages 2121–2129.
Jonathan Gordon, David Lopez-Paz, Marco Baroni,
and Diane Bouchacourt. 2020. Permutation equiv-
ariant models for compositional generalization in
language. In International Conference on Learning
Representations.
Shane Grifﬁth, Kaushik Subramanian, Jonathan Scholz,
Charles L Isbell, and Andrea L Thomaz. 2013. Pol-
icy shaping: Integrating human feedback with rein-
forcement learning. In Advances in neural informa-
tion processing systems, pages 2625–2633.
William L Hamilton, Rex Ying, and Jure Leskovec.
2017. Representation learning on graphs: Methods
and applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.05584.
Kaiming He, Georgia Gkioxari, Piotr Doll´ar, and Ross
Girshick. 2017. Mask r-cnn. In Proceedings of the
IEEE international conference on computer vision,
pages 2961–2969.
Han Hu, Jiayuan Gu, Zheng Zhang, Jifeng Dai, and
Yichen Wei. 2018.
Relation Networks for Object
Detection. Technical report.
Drew A. Hudson and Christopher D. Manning. 2018.
Compositional attention networks for machine rea-
soning. Technical report.
Yiding Jiang, Shixiang Shane Gu, Kevin P Murphy,
and Chelsea Finn. 2019.
Language as an abstrac-
tion for hierarchical deep reinforcement learning. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
pages 9414–9426.
Justin Johnson, Bharath Hariharan, Laurens van der
Maaten, Li Fei-Fei, C Lawrence Zitnick, and Ross
Girshick. 2017a.
Clevr: A diagnostic dataset for
compositional language and elementary visual rea-
soning.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
2901–2910.
Justin
Johnson,
Bharath
Hariharan,
Laurens
Van Der Maaten,
Judy Hoffman,
Li Fei-Fei,
C Lawrence Zitnick, and Ross Girshick. 2017b.
Inferring and executing programs for visual rea-
soning. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision, pages 2989–2998.
Russell Kaplan, Christopher Sauer, and Alexander
Sosa. 2017.
Beating atari with natural language
guided reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.05539.
Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. 2016.
Semi-
supervised classiﬁcation with graph convolutional
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907.
W Bradley Knox and Peter Stone. 2012.
Reinforce-
ment learning from simultaneous human and mdp
reward.
In Proceedings of the 11th International
Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
Systems-Volume 1, pages 475–482. International
Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
Systems.
W Bradley Knox, Peter Stone, and Cynthia Breazeal.
2013.
Training a robot via human feedback: A
case study. In International Conference on Social
Robotics, pages 460–470. Springer.
Ranjay Krishna, Yuke Zhu, Oliver Groth, Justin John-
son, Kenji Hata, Joshua Kravitz, Stephanie Chen,
Yannis Kalantidis, Li-Jia Li, David A Shamma,
et al. 2017. Visual genome: Connecting language
and vision using crowdsourced dense image anno-
tations. International Journal of Computer Vision,
123(1):32–73.
Gregory Kuhlmann, Peter Stone, Raymond Mooney,
and Jude Shavlik. 2004. Guiding a reinforcement
learner with natural language advice: Initial results
in robocup soccer.
In The AAAI-2004 workshop
on supervisory control of learning and adaptive sys-
tems. San Jose, CA.
Laurens van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. 2008.
Visualizing data using t-sne.
Journal of machine
learning research, 9(Nov):2579–2605.
David Mascharka, Philip Tran, Ryan Soklaski, and Ar-
jun Majumdar. 2018. Transparency by design: Clos-
ing the gap between performance and interpretabil-
ity in visual reasoning. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-
tion, pages 4942–4950.
Tomas Mikolov, Edouard Grave, Piotr Bojanowski,
Christian Puhrsch, and Armand Joulin. 2017. Ad-
vances in pre-training distributed word representa-
tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.09405.
Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their compositional-
ity. In Advances in neural information processing
systems, pages 3111–3119.
Santiago Ontanon. 2018. Shrdlu: A game prototype
inspired by winograd’s natural language understand-
ing work. In Fourteenth Artiﬁcial Intelligence and
Interactive Digital Entertainment Conference.
Matthew E Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt
Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2018. Deep contextualized word repre-
sentations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05365.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan,
Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. 2019. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI
Blog, 1(8):9.
Adam Santoro, David Raposo, David G.T. Barrett, Ma-
teusz Malinowski, Razvan Pascanu, Peter Battaglia,
and Timothy Lillicrap. 2017. A simple neural net-
work module for relational reasoning.
Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017-
Decem(Nips):4968–4977.
Michael Schlichtkrull, Thomas N Kipf, Peter Bloem,
Rianne Van Den Berg, Ivan Titov, and Max Welling.
2018. Modeling relational data with graph convolu-
tional networks. In European Semantic Web Confer-
ence, pages 593–607. Springer.
Sebastian Schuster, Ranjay Krishna, Angel Chang,
Li Fei-Fei, and Christopher D Manning. 2015. Gen-
erating semantically precise scene graphs from tex-
tual descriptions for improved image retrieval. In
Proceedings of the fourth workshop on vision and
language, pages 70–80.
Terry Winograd. 1970. Shrdlu.
Terry Winograd. 1980. What does it mean to under-
stand language? Cognitive science, 4(3):209–241.
Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime Car-
bonell, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Quoc V Le. 2019.
Xlnet: Generalized autoregressive pretraining for
language understanding. In Advances in neural in-
formation processing systems, pages 5754–5764.
Shuiying Yao. 2010. Stage/individual-level predicates,
topics and indeﬁnite subjects. In Proceedings of the
24th Paciﬁc Asia Conference on Language, Informa-
tion and Computation, pages 573–582, Tohoku Uni-
versity, Sendai, Japan. Institute of Digital Enhance-
ment of Cognitive Processing, Waseda University.
Kexin Yi, Chuang Gan, Yunzhu Li, Pushmeet Kohli,
Jiajun Wu, Antonio Torralba, and Joshua B Tenen-
baum. 2019.
Clevrer: Collision events for video
representation and reasoning.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.01442.
Kexin Yi, Antonio Torralba, Jiajun Wu, Pushmeet
Kohli, Chuang Gan, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum.
2018. Neural-symbolic VQA: Disentangling reason-
ing from vision and language understanding.
Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
2018-Decem(NeurIPS):1031–1042.
Yanchao Yu, Arash Eshghi, and Oliver Lemon. 2017.
Training an adaptive dialogue policy for interactive
learning of visually grounded word meanings. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1709.10426.
A
Appendices
A.1
CLEVR Dataset
Figure 7 shows a topological overview the dataset
with sample image, corresponding questions, pro-
gram chains using the function catalogue.
For detailed information about the function li-
brary accompanying the dataset release, please re-
fer to CLEVR VQA (Johnson et al., 2017b). The
functions and signatures were kept unaltered from
the original speciﬁcations 7.
Figure 7: Overview of the CLEVR dataset
A.2
Data
The regular CLEVR dataset can be downloaded
from the project page of (Johnson et al., 2017a).
We also include a curated dataset‘1obj’ which con-
tains synthetic data created for a single CLEVR ob-
ject. In addition to synthetically created questions,
images, image scenes, this dataset also contains the
images parsed through a semantic image segmen-
tation layer (Mask-RCNN) and a compositional
dataset ‘1obj-CoGenT’ which uses distributionally
shifted object attributes for training and test data
(for the compositional CoGenT test).
A.3
Structural Graph Visualizations from
Parser
This section contains additional visualizations for
the parser.
Figure 8: Entity visualization
7https://github.com/facebookresearch/clevr-dataset-
gen/blob/master/question generation/metadata.json
A.4
Additional Samples
This section contains additional examples from the
visualizer.
Figure 9: An Image from the CLEVR dataset
obj
obj2
obj3
obj4
obj5
obj6
obj7
obj8
obj9
Figure 10: Corresponding structural graph representa-
tion of the image
How many spheres in front of the red metal cube and to the right of purple sphere
obj
obj2
obj3
Figure 11: An example question for the corresponding
image
obj
obj2
obj3
obj
obj2
obj3
obj4
obj5
obj6
obj7
obj8
obj9
Figure 12: Visualizing both the image and the question
in a bipartite graph. Orange nodes represent the text
nodes, and the aquamarine nodes represent the image
nodes
