Title: Natural Language Processing for Information Extraction
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1807.02383v1
--------------------------------------------------

Natural Language Processing for Information Extraction
Sonit Singh
Department of Computing, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Macquarie University, Australia
Abstract
With rise of digital age, there is an explosion of information in the form of news, articles, social
media, and so on. Much of this data lies in unstructured form and manually managing and effectively
making use of it is tedious, boring and labor intensive. This explosion of information and need for more
sophisticated and efﬁcient information handling tools gives rise to Information Extraction(IE) and In-
formation Retrieval(IR) technology. Information Extraction systems takes natural language text as input
and produces structured information speciﬁed by certain criteria, that is relevant to a particular applica-
tion. Various sub-tasks of IE such as Named Entity Recognition, Coreference Resolution, Named Entity
Linking, Relation Extraction, Knowledge Base reasoning forms the building blocks of various high end
Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks such as Machine Translation, Question-Answering System,
Natural Language Understanding, Text Summarization and Digital Assistants like Siri, Cortana and
Google Now. This paper introduces Information Extraction technology, its various sub-tasks, highlights
state-of-the-art research in various IE subtasks, current challenges and future research directions.
1
Introduction to Information Extraction
Data is now a kind of capital, on par with ﬁnancial and human capital in creating new digital products
and services. With the explosion of information in the form of news, corporate ﬁles, medical records,
government documents, court hearing and social media, everyone is ﬂooded with information overload.
Most of this information is unstructured i.e. free text and thus makes hard to have reasoning and inter-
pretation. Natural Language Processing (NLP) refers to the use of computational methods to process
spoken or written form of such free text which acts as a mode of communication commonly used by
humans(Assal et al., 2011). There are lot many processes involved in the pipeline of NLP. At the syn-
tactic level, statements are segmented into words, punctuation (i.e. tokens) and each token is assigned
with its label in the form of noun, verb, adjective, adverb and so on (Part of Speech Tagging). At the
semantic level, each word is analyzed to get the meaningful representation of the sentence. Hence, the
basic task of NLP is to process the unstructured text and to produce a representation of its meaning.
The higher level tasks in NLP are Machine Translation (MT), Information Extraction (IE), Information
Retrieval (IR), Automatic Text Summarization (ATS), Question-Answering System, Parsing, Sentiment
Analysis, Natural Language Understanding (NLU) and Natural Language Generation (NLG). Informa-
tion Extraction (IE) refers to the use of computational methods to identify relevant pieces of information
in document generated for human use and convert this information into a representation suitable for com-
puter based storage, processing, and retrieval (Wimalasuriya and Dua, 2010). The input to IE system
is a collection of documents (email, web pages, news groups, news articles, business reports, research
papers, blogs, resumes, proposals, and so on) and output is a representation of the relevant information
from the source document according to some speciﬁc criteria. The ability of human beings to effectively
make use of this vast amount of information is low as this task is quite boring, tedious and consume lot
of time. This explosion of information and need for more sophisticated and efﬁcient information han-
dling tools highlighted the need of information extraction and retrieval technology (Neil et al., 1998).
Information Extraction technologies helps to efﬁciently and effectively analyze free text and to discover
valuable and relevant knowledge from it in the form of structured information. Hence, the goal of IE is to
extract salient facts about pre-speciﬁed types of events, entities, or relationships, in order to build more
meaningful, rich representations of their semantic content, which can be used to populate databases that
provide more structured input.
1
arXiv:1807.02383v1  [cs.CL]  6 Jul 2018
2
Information Extraction Tasks
Information Extraction is often an early stage in pipeline for various high level tasks such as Question
Answering Systems (Molla et al., 2006), Machine Translation, event extraction, user proﬁle extraction ,
and so on. IE is very useful for many commercial applications such as Business Intelligence, automatic
annotation of web pages, text mining, and knowledge management (Muludi et al., 2011). Various sub-
tasks involved in IE are: Named Entity Recognition (NER), Named Entity Linking (NEL), Coreference
Resolution (CR), Temporal Information Extraction, Relation Extraction (RE), Knowledge Base Con-
struction and Reasoning. Shared Tasks in these various sub-tasks of IE have signiﬁcantly contributed to
their progress and provides the fair evaluation of state of the art models. These Shared Tasks include bio-
information retrieval (bio-IR), bio-Named Entity Recognition (bio-NER), bio-Information Extraction
(bio-IE), bio-Natural Language Processing (bio-NLP), CoNLL Multilingual Shallow Discourse Parsing
shared task, SemEval (task on Semantic Evaluation)to name a few. As per (Luo et al., 2015), various low
level tasks in NLP such as Parts-of-Speech Tagging (POST), chunking, parsing, Named Entity Recogni-
tion, are fundamental building blocks of complex NLP tasks such as Knowledge Base construction, text
summarization, Question-Answering systems, and so on. Hence, the effectiveness of these low level
tasks highly determine the performance of high end tasks. Error in low level tasks get propagated to
high level tasks and degrading their overall performance. In this section, we will discuss about various
sub-tasks in the ﬁeld of Information Extraction.
Fig.1 General Information Extraction Architecture. Adapted from (Costantino et al., 1997)
The effectiveness of various Information Extraction tasks down the pipeline highly depends upon
pre-processing stages such as Tokenizer, Stemmer, Part-Of-Speech tagger, and parser. Tokenizer extracts
tokens from the text. Tokenizer can be treated as a classiﬁer which classify tokens into 24 orthographic
classes. Stemming process ﬁnd the root (stem) of the word e.g. stem(reading)=read. Part-of-Speech
tagger (POS-T) assigns tag to each word from various POS classes. e.g. Sam is a ¡proper-noun¿ and
they is ¡personal-pronoun¿. Noun Phrase Recognizer ﬁnds the noun phrases from the text. For e.g. ”the
president of USA”, the president is noun phrase and it refers to a person, whereas USA represents noun
phrase and refers to name of the country. Named Entity Recognizer, ﬁnally assigns particular named
2
entity class from various classes such as: person, organization, location, date, time, money, percent,
e-mail address and web-address. As Part-of-Speech tagging and Syntactic Parsing forms the building
block and initial phase in the pipeline of various Information Extraction tasks, it is important to look at
their role, state-of-the-art systems and how they effect downstream IE tasks.
2.1
Parts-of-Speech (POS) tagging
Part-of-Speech tagging labels unannotated words in natural language with Parts-of-Speech labels
such as noun, verb, adjective, preposition,etc. (Chengyao Lv et al., 2016). Part-of-Speech tagging is
fundamental step in various NLP tasks such as speech recognition, speech synthesis, machine trans-
lation, information retrieval, information extraction, and so on. Two factors that determine the tag of
word are its lexical probability and its contextual probability (Voutilainen, 2003; Sun et al., 2008).
Part-of-Speech tagging approaches can generally fall into two categories: Rule based approaches and
statistical approaches. Rule based approaches apply language rules to improve the accuracy of tagging.
The limitation of this approach lies in requirement of large annotated data which require expert lin-
guistic knowledge, labor and cost. In order to overcome the shortcoming of this approach, (Brill,1995)
proposed ”transformation based approach” in which rules are automatically learned from corpora. On
the other hand, statistical methods use Decision Trees (Magerman, 1995), Hidden Markov Model (Ra-
biner, 1989), Maximum Entropy classiﬁer (Ratnaparkhi, 1996), Support Vector Machine (Gimenez and
Marquez, 2004). Recently, deep learning based Part-of-Speech tagging has gained momentum.
2.2
Parsing
Numerous parser have been proposed by the Computational Linguistics community. These parsers
can generally be divided into two broad categories based on their underlying grammatical formalism:
Constituency parsers and dependency parsers.
Constituency parsers (also known as tree bank parsers) produce syntactic analysis in the form of
a tree that shows the phrases comprising the sentence and the hierarchy in which these phrases are
associated. Constituency parsers have been used for pronoun resolution, labeling phrases with semantic
roles and assignment of functional category tags.Constituency parsers overlook functional tags when
training. Therefore, they cannot use them when labeling unseen text.
Dependency parsers analyze the sentence as a set of pairwise word-to-word dependencies. Each
dependency has a type that reﬂects its grammatical function. Dependency parsers model language as a
set of relationships between words and construct a graph for each sentence, and each arc in the graph
represents a grammatical dependency connecting the words of the sentence to each other.
2.3
Named Entity Recognition (NER)
In the Named Entity Recognition (NER) task, systems are required to recognize the Named Entities
occurring in the text. More speciﬁcally, the task is to ﬁnd Person (PER), Organization (ORG), Location
(LOC) and Geo-Political Entities (GPE). For instance, in the statement ”Michael Jordan lives in United
States”, NER system extracts Michael Jordan which refers to name of the person and United States
which refers to name of the country. NER serves as the basis for various crucial areas in Information
Management, such as Semantic Annotation, Question Answering, Ontology Population and Opinion
Mining.
2.4
Named Entity Linking (NEL)
Named Entity Linking (NEL) also known as Named Entity Disambiguation (NED) or Named Entity
Normalization (NEN) is the task of identifying the entity that corresponds to particular occurrence of a
3
noun in a text document. References to entities in natural text is quite ambiguous, because particular
entity can refer to many mentions and on the other hand, particular mention can refer to many entities.
For example, ”Paris” can refer to entity mention location (GPE) i.e. city (Capital of France), or it
can refer to entity mention person (PER) i.e. Paris Hinton (an actress). Hence, Entity Linking is the
task of resolving named entity mentions to entries in structured Knowledge Base (KB) (Hackey et al.,
2012). Named Entity Linking is quite important when information extracted from one document is to
be integrated with information of same entity coming form various other sources.
2.5
Coreference Resolution (CR)
Coreference Resolution is the task which determines which noun phrases (including pronouns,
proper names and common names) refer to the same entities in documents (Kong et al., 2010). For
instance, in the sentence, ”I have seen the annual report. It shows that we have gained 15% proﬁt in this
ﬁnancial year”. Here, ”I” refers to name of the person, ”It” refers to annual report and ”we” refers to
the name of the company in which that person works. Hence, coreference resolution plays vital role in
tasks as natural language understanding, text summarization, information extraction, textual entailment,
and so on.
2.6
Temporal Information Extraction (Event Extraction)
Temporal information extraction or event extraction refers to the task of identifying events (i.e in-
formation which can be ordered in a temporal order)in free text and deriving detailed and structured
information about them, ideally identifying who did what to whom, where, when and why. Hence,
temporal expression (also called timex)refers to the task of detecting phrases in natural language text
that denote a unit of temporal entity in the form of an interval, a particular instance of time or certain
frequency related to particular event. For instance, in the statement, ”President Barack Obama yesterday
addressed the issue of nuclear deals at White House”. Here yesterday is a noun phrase which refers to
temporal information. Temporal information is important where we want to extract structured informa-
tion from natural language text according to some temporal criteria such as news, organization of events
date-wise or biographies.
2.7
Relation Extraction (RE)
Relation Extraction is the task of detecting and classifying pre-deﬁned relationships between en-
tities identiﬁed in the text.
In other words, it is way of transforming unstructured (free) text into
structural form which can be used in web-search, question answering and lot more (Gardner et al.,
2015). Given a sentence in free text "Jodie Foster is an American acress who won
Academy Award for movie The Silence of the Lambs", we can extract a fact such as
won(Jodie Foster, Academy Award). Pre-deﬁned relations can be in the form of employee-
of, Born-In, and Spouse-of where employee-of relation holds between particular person and an organi-
zation, Born-In relation holds between a person and a particular place where that person is born, and
Spouse-of relation holds between two persons.
2.8
Knowledge Base Reasoning and Completion
There has been growing trend of constructing large Knowledge Bases(KBs) such as Freebase(Bollacker
et al., 2008), DBpedia (Auer et al., 2007), YAGO (Suchanek et al., 2007), YAGO2 (Hoffart et al., 2011),
Google Knowledge Graph (Dong et al., 2014), NELL (Mitchell et al., 2015). These KBs are currently
in use for varied applications such as web-search, question-answering, decision support systems, digital
assistants like Siri, Cortanan and Google Now. Though these KBs are large in size (having million of
4
facts, billion of entities and million of relations), but they are error-prone and have lot many facts that
are still missing. For instance, 71% of the persons described in Freebase have no known place of birth
and 75% of them have no known nationality (Dong et al., 2014). Link prediction in Knowledge Bases
(KBs) or Knowledge Graphs (KGs) aims at discovering new facts.
The goal of link prediction (also known as Knowledge Base Completion) is to determine the relation-
ship between entities. There are various applications based on link prediction such as recommendation
systems, Knowledge base completion and ﬁnding links between users in social networks. In recommen-
dation systems, goal is to predict the rating of the movies which are not already rated and recommending
it to users to have better user experience. Similarly, in Knowledge Base Systems, the goal is to check
whether a particular triple not in the KB is likely to be true or not (Socher et al., 2011; Taskar et al,
2004). For instance, (Jodie Foster, LivesIn, ?) is a link prediction task where head (h) and relation (r) is
given and we need to ﬁnd the missing tail (t) from the triples already present in the KB. Hence, it make
KB more robust to use for various applications such as question-answering, web/mobile search, social
media analysis, recommendation systems, co-reference resolution, information retrieval and semantic
parsing.
3
State-of-the-art-methods in Information Extraction
The most important IE systems competitions are Message Understanding Conferences (MUC) start-
ing with MUC-6 competition (Morgan et al., 1995).Current IE research seems to be heading in several
directions, including partial parsing and automated knowledge acquisition (Riloff Ellen, 1997). The
various approaches used in IE are broadly categorized into three main categories:
3.1
Pattern matching based approach
In this approach, extraction patterns are deﬁned using a formalism called Regular Expressions (RE).
These patterns can be easily matched directly with the given input text and the matched text is extracted,
which corresponds to an occurrence of that entity. For example, if we want to extract corporate news,
then we deﬁne simple Regular expressions with cue words such as Inc., Co., Company, Limited, Bank,
Pty limited, Pvt. limited, and so on.
Though it provides quick and easy process, but this approach has limitations as it is not possible
to provide all the cue words related to particular domain. Moreover, company names such as ALDI,
Woolworths, do not correlate with cue words. In order to make it more exploratory, Regular Expressions
patterns are enriched by incorporating lexical information and incorporating special cases and domain
knowledge. Despite its apparent limitations, this approach is widely used in practice.
3.2
Gazetteer based approach
Another approach is to make use of a pre-deﬁned list of all possible values of an named entity, called
a gazette or gazetteer. Gazette is only possible for only those named entities which have ﬁnite number of
possible values. Though this approach is fast and accurate, but the limitations lies in preparing complete
and accurate gazette.
3.3
Machine Learning based approach
In this approach, Machine Learning algorithms automatically learn the IE patterns by generaliz-
ing from a given set of examples. First we have to create a training data-set, which is a collection of
documents in which all occurrences of named entities of interest are manually marked or tagged. ML
algorithms such as Decision Trees, Naive Bayes classiﬁer, Support Vector Machine (SVM), Conditional
5
Random Fields (CRFs), Maximum Entropy (MaxEnt)use features such as word surrounding an occur-
rence of named entity. These supervised ML approach have limitations in terms of time and efforts
required to create sufﬁciently large labeled training data-set.
3.4
Information Extraction Tools
There are various publicly and commercially available tools for Information Extraction.
• Public IE tools:GATE(General Architecture for Text Engineering), JULIE, OpenNLP (Apache
OpenNLP -Java machine learning toolkit for NLP), Stanford NER, GExp, Mallet (Machine learn-
ing for language toolkit), Natural Language Toolkit (Suite of Python libraries for NLP), DBpedia
Spotlight (Open source tool for Named Entity Recognition and Named Entity Linking) and Open-
Calais (Automated IE web service from Thomson Reuters).
• Commercial IE tools:Altensity, Open Calais, ClaraBridge, SAS Text Analytics, Business Ob-
jects, IBM Intelligent Minerand, Lingpipe.
• Specialized IE tools:Ariadne Genomics Medscan Reader for biomedical documents, RINX for
resumes.
4
State-of-the-art-methods in various IE tasks
4.1
State-of-the-art in Named Entity Recognition (NER)
Named Entity Recognition can be seen as a word-level tagging problem where each word in a sen-
tence is mapped to a named entity tag. Features in the form of afﬁx, capitalization, punctuation, output
of syntactic analyzers (i.e. POS taggers, chunkers) and external resources in the form of gazetteers, word
embeddings, and word cluster ids (Turian et al., 2010; Ratinov and Roth, 2009) are fed to classiﬁer and
output is the labeled tag in the form of person (PER), organization (ORG), location (GPE), etc.
Eary NER systems were based on hand-crafted features. These hand-crafted features are fed to
supervised Machine Learning (ML) systems in the form of rule-based systems or sequence labeling
algorithms. Supervised ML approaches in NER task include: Hidden Markov Models (HMM), Support
Vector Machines (SVM), Maximum Entropy models (MaxEnt), Decision Trees (DT), and Conditional
Random Fields (CRFs). Among these, CRF provides better results as it takes context of near-by words
into account. Then, research shifted towards using orthographic and language speciﬁc resources such
as gazetteers. As these resources are costly to develop, requires expertise knowledge of linguistics, not
transferable to new languages and domains, which limits their use.
Recently, focus has been shifted on the use of semi-supervised learning (weakly supervised) for
NER task. One such technique is ”bootstrapping” which involves initial small degree of supervision in
the form of providing set of seeds for starting the learning process (Burges et al., 1998).Siencnik et al.,
2015 proposed NER using Word2Vec features. Qu et al., 2016 proposed transfer learning based NER in
domains having quite less annotated data such as tweet messages. Kuru et al., 2016 proposed CharNER
i.e. Character based named entity recognition. In this approach, instead of considering entire word as
basic input feature, they took characters as the primary representation as in (Klein et al., 2003; Gillick
et al., 2016). Secondly, they use a stacked bidirectional LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997)for
ﬁnal labeling task.
Tsai et al., 2016, proposed a cross-lingual NER model that is trained on annotated documents of
one or more languages and applied to all languages in Wikipedia. Lample et al., 2016 proposed two
neural architectures for NER based on bidirectional Long Short Term Memory (bidirectional LSTMs)
and Conditional Random Fields (CRFs)and other model based constructs and labels segments using
6
transition based approach inspired by shift-reduce parsers. The experimental results shows that LSTM-
CRF model outperforms all state-of-the-art systems giving 90.94 F1-score on English NER task.
4.2
State-of-the-art in Named Entity Linking (NEL)
The Named Entity Linking (NEL) also known as Named Entity Disambiguation or Named Entity
Normalization task aims at automatically linking each named entity mention in a source text document
to its unique referent in a target Knowledge Base (KB). For instance, from the statement: ”Where would
Pitt be without Jolie?”, a named entity linker should link the entity mentions ”Pitt” and ”Jolie” to Brad
Pitt and Angelina Jolie respectively which serves as a unique identiﬁer for real people.
Two evaluations in particular has driven comparative work in the task of NEL: the TAC KBP (Knowl-
edge Base Population)shared tasks and YAGO2 annotation of CoNLL-2003 NER data.
Early work on entity linking focused on treating as a separate task which was performed after the
NER step. Typically, ﬁrst NER system is run to extract entity mentions and then run an entity link-
ing model to link mentions to a KB. As these two models are optimized separately, they are tractable
and do not leverage information provided by one model to another. Hence, Luo et al., 2015 proposed
JERL-Joint Entity Recognition and Linking, to jointly model Named Entity Recognition and linking
tasks and capture the mutual dependency between them. The SemEval-2015 multilingual Word Sense
Disambiguation (WSD) and Linking task (Moro and Navigli, 2015) aims to promote joint research in
the WSD and Entity Linking.
Recently, NEL systems uses both local and global information (Cucerzan, 2007; Ratinov et al.,
2011; Alhelbawy and Gauzauskas, 2014). The local information measures the similarity between the
text mention and an entity candidate in Knowledge Base, and global information measures how well the
candidate entities in a document are connected to each other; with assumption that entities appearing in
the same document should be coherent. Pershina et al., 2015 proposed Personalized Page Rank based
random walk algorithm to disambiguate named entities. Avirup and Radu, 2016 proposed language
independent entity linking (LIEL) system which trained on one language works for number of different
languages.
Although, Named Entity Recognition (NER), Coreference Resolution (CR), Cross-Document Coref-
erence Resolution (CCR), and Named Entity Linking (NEL) involve close relations but they were not
explored jointly. Chen and Roth, 2013; Zheng et al., 2013 shows that tight integration among these
single sub-tasks provides promising results. Recently, several joint models have been proposed for CR-
NER (Haghighi and Klein, 2010; Singh et al., 2013), CR-NEL (Hajishirzi et al., 2013), NER-CR-NEL
(Durrett and Klein, 2014) and CCR-NEL (Dutta et al., 2015).
4.3
State-of-the-art in Coreference Resolution (CR)
Coreference Resolution (CR) is the process of linking together multiple expressions of a given en-
tity. Coreference Resolution plays signiﬁcant role in making Information Extraction, text summarization
and Question-Answering systems more robust. Coreference Resolution plays vital role in Relation Ex-
traction (RE) task which aims at ﬁnding pairs (tuples) of entities that satisfy some deﬁned relation. For
instance, ”Sam is a man of great talent. He works for Macquarie University”. Here, if we ask question:
”Where does Sam work?”, we can’t ﬁnd a direct statement that answers it. But if we establish relation
¡work¿ between He and Macquarie University, and if we ﬁnd that Sam and He are in coreference, we
can conclude that works(Sam, Macquarie University) and we get the answer to the query.
Early work in coreference resolution started with levaraginng lexical and syntactic attributes of the
noun phrases such as string matching, the distance between coreferent expressions, name alias (Soon
et al., 2001; Ng and Cardie, 2002). Shane Bergsma et al., 2006 presented approach based on syntactic
paths for pronoun resolution. Young et al., 2006 proposed a kernel based method to mine syntactic
information from parse trees. Zhou et al., 2008 proposed context-sensitive convolution tree kernel for
7
pronoun resolution. Heuristic rule-based approaches which concentrate on designing heuristic rules to
identify the anaphoric relation between noun phrases were also used for coreference resolution (Lappin
et al., 1994; Kennedy et al., 1996; and vieira et al., 2000).
After this, machine learning approaches became more prevalent which considers it as binary classi-
ﬁcation task (Cardine et al., 2008). At ﬁrst, ML approaches focused on exploiting lexical, grammatical
and syntactic features, then researchers shifted focus on using semantic information. Huang et al., 2010,
proposed coreference resolution in biomedical full-text articles with domain dependent features. They
showed that using appropriate domain dependent features can improve coreference resolution results.
Results showed 76.2% Precision, 66% Recall and 70.7% F1-measure which is 13.8% improvement
against not using domain dependent features. Among the ML approaches, one aspect of coreference
resolution is to directly utilize the parse trees as a structured feature and use a kernel based method to
automatically mine the knowledge embedded in the parse trees. Kong et al., 2010 proposed a depen-
dency driven scheme to dynamically determine the syntactic parse tree structure for tree kernel based
anaphoricity determination in coreference resolution. Experiments on ACE-2003 Corpus demonstrates
that this approach yield improved F1-score by 2.4, 3.1 and 4.1 on NWIRE, NPAPER and BNEWS
domains.
Currently, several supervised entity coreference resolution systems can be categorized into three
classes: mention pair models (McCarthy et al., 1995), entity-mention models (Yang et al., 2008; Haghighi
and Klein, 2010; Lee et al., 2011) and ranking models (Yang et al., 2008; Durrett and Klein, 2013; Fer-
nandes et al., 2014). Among all the three main approaches, ranking models provides state-of-the-art
performance for coreference resolution. Recently, trend is shifting towards using unsupervised learning
algorithms for coference resolution. Haghighi and Kelin, 2007 presented a mention pair non-parameteric
fully-generative Bayesian model for unsupervised coreference resolution. Ng et al., 2008 proposed
probabilistic induced coreference partitions via Expectation Maximization (EM) clustering. Poon and
Domingos, 2008 proposed an entity-mention model to perform joint inference across mentions using
Markov Logic. Ma et al., 2016 proposed an unsupervised generative ranking model. Until 2015, all state-
of-the-art coreference systems operate solely by linking pairs of mentions together (Durrett and Klein,
2013; Martschat and Strube, 2015; Wiseman et al., 2015). Recently, Kevin Clark and Chris D.Manning,
2016 use agglomerative clustering approach which treats each mention as a singleton cluster at the out-
set and then repeatedly merging clusters of mentions deemed to be referring to the same entity. Such
system takes advantage of entity level information i.e. features between cluster of mentions instead of
between just two mentions. Moreover, Cross-document coreference resolution (Gao et al., 2010) is at the
research forefront in research community. Event Coreference Resolution can be applied within a single
document or across multiple documents and is crucial for various NLP tasks including topic detection
and tracking, IE, Question-Answering, and textual entailment (Bejan and Harabagiu, 2010). In compar-
ison to entity coreference resolution i.e. identifying and grouping noun phrases that refers to the same
discourse entity, event coreference resolution is more complex as single event can be described using
multiple event mentions. More recently, SemEval-2010 Task 1 was dedicated to coreference resolution
in multiple languages. In CoNLL-2011 shared task, participants had to model unrestricted coreference
in the English language OntoNotes corpora and CoNLL-2012 shared task involved predicting corefer-
ence in three languages-English, Chinese and Arabic. Recent work is dominated by machine learning
approaches. There are many open-source platforms based on machine learning for coreference resolu-
tion such as BART (Verseley et al., 2008), the Illinois Coreference Package (Bengston et al., 2008) and
the Stanford CoreNLP (Manning et al., 2014).
4.4
State-of-the-art in Temporal Expression Extraction
Often we ﬁnd that information in newspaper stories, stories, biographies, corporate news and docu-
mentaries is temporally ordered. Temporal information extraction (also known as event extraction) ﬁnds
8
applications in temporal Question-Answering systems, Machine Translation and document summariza-
tion. Temporal information extraction involves the identiﬁcation of event-time, event-document and
event-event relations from free text (Kolya et al., 2010). Most of the event extraction systems consists
of three sub-tasks (Amami et al., 2012): (1). Pre-Processing: It provides syntactic and semantic analysis
of text as an input to event detector module. Steps include sentence splitting, tokenizing, Part-of-Speech
tagging, and parsing. (2). Trigger detection: It assigns each token to an event class. Here the task is
to identify individual words in the sentence that acts as an event trigger word and assigning the correct
event class to each of the determined trigger. (3). Argument detection: This step consists of ﬁnding all
participants in an event and assigning the functional role to each of the determined participants in an
event.
Shared tasks in the form of TempEval which aims at ﬁnding temporal relations (Verhagen et al.,
2007) promote research in event extraction. Several methods have been proposed to extract events
from text. Early approaches include Pattern-matching which try to use context information for ﬁnding
relations between entities. Boguraev et al., 2005; Mani et al., 2006; and Chambers et al., 2007 proposed
machine learning based approaches for temporal relation identiﬁcation. Kolya et al., 2010 used CRF
based approach for event-event relation identiﬁcation. They used some of the gold standard TimeBank
features for events and times for training the CRF. Various features used were: Event class, Event stem,
Event and time string, POS of event terms (Adjective, Noun, Verb, Adverb, Prep), event tense (Present,
Past, Future, Indeﬁnite, None), event aspect (e.g. progressive, perfective, prefective-progressive, or
none), event polarity (positive,negative, neutral), event modality, type of temporal expression, temporal
signal and temporal relation between document creation time and the temporal expression in the target
sentence(greater than, less than, equal, or none). They reported Precision, Recall and F-score values
of 55.1%, 55.1% and 55.1% respectively under strict evaluation scheme and 56.9%, 56.9% and 56.9%
respectively under relaxed evaluation scheme. TimeBank Corpus (Pustejovsky et al., 2003) has largely
promoted the development of temporal relation extraction. Recently, hybrid approaches based on hand
coded rules along with supervised classiﬁcation models using lexical relation, semantic and discourse
features are proposed by D’Souza and Ng, 2013;and Chambers et al., 2014. Mirza et al., 2016 proposed
sieve based system to perform temporal and causal relation extraction and classiﬁcation.
4.5
State-of-the-art in Relation Extraction
Relation Extraction enables broad range of applications including Question-Answering, Knowledge
Base Population, and so on. The relation extraction task can be divided into two steps: detecting if
a relation utterance corresponding to some entity mention pair of interest occurs and classifying the
detected relation mentions into some predeﬁned classes. There are two types of Relation Extraction
systems: Closed domain relation extraction systems consider only a closed set of relationships between
two arguments. On the other hand, Open-domain relation extraction systems use an arbitrary phrase
to specify a relationship. In order to extract relations, the sentences in the free text are analyzed using
Parts-of-Speech tagger a dependency parser and a Named Entity Recognizer. Early RE approaches
can be broadly divided into two categories: feature based methods (Kambhatla, 2004; Boscher et al.,
2005; Zhou et al., 2005; Grisham et al., 2005; Jiang and Zhia, 2007; Chan and Roth, 2010; Sun et
al., 2011; Nguyen and Grisham,2014) and kernel-based methods (Zelensko et al., 2003; Culotta and
Sorensen, 2004; Bunescu and Mooney, 2005; Sun and Han, 2014). Lexico-Syntactic Patterns (LSP) or
Hearst Patterns at word level, phrase level and sentence level as syntactic features for relation extraction.
Alternate approach is to use semantic features (Alicia,2007; Hendrickx et al., 2007)of a pair of words
extracted from lexical resources like WordNet(Fellbaum, 1998). Hybrid approaches combines syntactic
patterns with semantic features of the constituent words(Claudio, 2007; Girju et al., 2005). Tesfaye
et al., 2016 proposed such hybrid approach getting semantic information extracted from the Wikipedia
hyperlink hierarchy of the constituent words. Relation extraction systems (Feldman et al., 2008; Etzioni
9
et al., 2008) utilize pipeline of processes such as Part-of-Speech tagging, phrase detection, Named Entity
Recognition and Coreference Resolution. Recently, (Boden,et al., 2011)shows that higher precision on
RE task is ensured with deep dependency parsing or semantic role labeling/analysis.
Many approaches to relation extraction use supervised machine learning techniques (Soderland et
al., 1995; Califf and Mooney, 1997; Lafferty et al., 2001), but these methods require large human an-
notated training corpus. In order to overcome the problem of labeled data-set, researchers developed
Distant Supervision (DS) in which a knowledge base such as Wikipedia or Freebase is used to automat-
ically tag training examples from the text corpora(Mintz et al., 2009).Speciﬁcally, distant supervision
uses the KB to ﬁnd pair of entities E1 and E2 for which a relation R holds. Distant Supervision then
makes assumption that any sentence that contains a mention of both E1 and E2 is a positive training
instance for R(E1, E2). Unfortunately, distant supervision technique leads to large proportion of false
positive training instances. To address this shortcoming, there have been attempts to model the relation
dependencies as Multi-Instance Multi-Class (Bunescu and Mooney, 2007; Riedel et al., 2010) leading
to state-of-the-art relation extraction results. Based on this approach, Hoffmann et al., 2011 proposed
MultiR system for relation extraction and Surdeanu et al., 2012 proposed MIML-RE (Multi-Instance
Multi-Labeling Relation Extraction) system. Additionaly, other relation extraction techniques include
Universal Schemas (Riedel et al., 2013; Deep learning (Nguyen and Grisham, 2014).
Recently, researchers have explored the idea of augmenting distant supervision with a small amount
of crowdsourced annotated data in order to improve relation extraction performance (Angeli et al., 2014;
Zhang et al., 2012; Pershina et al., 2014). With the growing popularity of Word2Vec model , Hashimoto
et al., 2015 proposed embedding based model for relation extraction. Recent trend in relation extraction
is to use deep learning techniques such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) (dos Santos et al.,
2015), Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) (Socher et al., 2012), tree structured LSTM-RNN (Tai et al.,
2015),and LSTM (Miwa et al., 2016). Lin et al., 2016 proposed attention based model in distant supervi-
sion relation extraction which proves to provide better state-of-the-art results in relation extraction.There
has been growing interest in multi-lingual relation extraction. Gamallo et al., 2012 presented a depen-
dency parser based on Open Relation Extraction system for Spanish, Portugese and Galician. Recently,
Tseng et al., 2014 proposed an Open RE (Open Relation Extraction) for Chinese that employs word seg-
mentation, POS tagging and dependency parsing. Lewis and Steedman, 2013 learn clusters of semanti-
cally equivalent relations across French and English by creating a semantic signature of relationship by
entity-typing. These relations are extracted using CCG (Combinatory Categorical Grammar)parsing in
English and dependency parsing in French. Gerber and Ngomo, 2012 described a monolingual pattern
extraction system for RDF predicates that uses pre-existing KB for different languages.
Past two decades have witnessed a signiﬁcant advancement in extracting binary domain-dependent
relations, but modern question-answering and summarization systems have triggered interest in captur-
ing detailed information in a structured and semantically coherent fashion, thus motivating the need for
complex n-ary relation extraction systems (Khirbat et al., 2016). McDonald et al., 2005 proposed n-ary
relation extraction system that factorize complex n-ary relation into binary relations, representing them
in a graph, and tried to reconstruct the complex relation by making tuples from selected maximal cliques
in the graph. Then, each relation is classiﬁed using Maximum Entropy (MaxEnt) classiﬁer. Recently, Li
et al., 2015 make use of lexical semantics to train a model based on distant supervision for n-ary rela-
tion extraction. Khirbat et al., 2016 proposed algorithm for extracting n-ary relations from biographical
data which extracts entities using Conditional Random Fields (CRF) and n-ary relations using Support
Vector Machine (SVM)from two manually annotated data-sets which contains biography summaries of
Australian researchers.
Recently, relation extraction models based on deep learning have achieved better performance than
conventional relation extraction models that rely on hand-crafted features. Li et al., 2016 proposed a
pre-training method that generalizes well known Seq2Seq model for deep relation extraction models in
order to reduce the need of annotated data. Shen et al., 2016 proposed attention based Convolutional
10
Neural Network (CNN) architecture which uses word embedding, part-of-speech tag embedding and
position embedding information. They showed that word level attention mechanism is able to better
determine parts of the sentence which are most inﬂuential w.r.t two entities of interest.
4.6
State-of-the-art in Knowledge Base Reasoning and Completion
Most of the real-world data we see around us is inherently relational. Whether it is social networks,
gene-protein interactions, hyper linking pages for world wide web, clustering of documents based on
particular topic, or author-publication citations. Relational machine learning (SRL) refer to set of meth-
ods which are used for statistical analysis of relational or graph-structured data (Nickel et al., 2015).
SRL aims at processing data in the form of sets, graphs or similarity complex structures, where the stan-
dard representation are not used (Blockeel et al., 2006). SRL is well applied in many specialized areas
such as web-mining, social network analysis, temporal and spatial analysis which are highly inherently
relational in nature. Prior work on multi-relational learning can be categorized into three categories:
(1) statistical relational learning (SRL), such as Markov-logic networks, which directly encode multi-
relational graphs using probabilistic models; (2) path ranking methods, which explicitly explore the
large relational feature space of relations with random walk; and (3) embedding-based models, which
embed multi-relational knowledge into low-dimensional representations of entities and relations via ten-
sor/matrix factorization, Bayesian clustering framework, and neural networks. SRL models try to predict
unseen or future relations between entities based on the data already present in the Knowledge Bases
(KBs).
4.6.1
Probabilistic Latent Variable models
Probabilistic latent variable models conditions the probability distribution of the relations between
two entities on the latent attributes entities and all relations are considered conditionally independent
given the latent attributes (Minervini et al., 2016). These models are quite similar to Hidden Markov
Models (Xu et al., 2006; Koller and Friedman,2009) which allows the information to propagate through
the network of interconnected latent variables. Wang and Wong (1987) proposed Stochastic Block
Model(SB) which associates a latent class variable with each entity. The SB model is further improved
using Bayesian non-parametrics in order to ﬁnd the optimal number of latent class as given in Inﬁnite
Relational model (Kemp et al., 2006; Xu et al., 2006). These models are further extended in Inﬁnite
Hidden Semantic Model (Rettinger et al., 2009), Mixed Membership Stochastic Block Model (Airoldi
et al., 2008) and Non-parametric Latent Feature Relational Model (Miller et al., 2009) which was based
on Bayesian non-parametrics.
Though probabilistic latent variable models gave promising link prediction results, but showed lim-
itations on scaling on large Knowledge Graphs because of the complexity of the probabilistic inference
and learning (Koller and Friedman, 2009). As a consequence, these models do not result to be fully
appropriate for modeling large KBs.
4.6.2
Embedding models
Embedding models learns vector space representation for the entities and relations in the KB and use
these representations to predict the missing facts. Latent feature models do reasoning over the Knowl-
edge Bases (KBs) via latent features of entities and relations. The intuition behind such models is that the
relationship between two entities can be derived from the interactions of their latent features.Early work
focused on Matrix Factorization approaches. Recently, trend is moving towards using tensors for KB
completion task. Tensors are multidimensional arrays which represents multi-relational data quite easily.
Tensor decomposition have been widely used in the ﬁelds of Chemo-metrics and psycho- metrics but
11
now they are receiving huge attention by machine learning community as tensors have capability to rep-
resent social analytics data, genomic data, seismic data, brain signals and other multi-dimensional data.
Similar to matrix factorization, tensor decomposition approaches use component matrices to represent
the latent space of the corresponding dimension and a core tensor to represent the interactions among
these component matrices. Predictions are made via generalized matrix operations to reconstruct the
tensor from the latent factors. Though tensors provide greater descriptive ﬂexibility of multi-relational
data but this ﬂexibility comes at the cost of huge computation which is quite low in matrices. Tensors are
sometimes quite similar to extending Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) approach from 2-D matrices
to higher dimensions. Nickel et al., (2013) represents knowledge base having n entities and m binary
relations in the form of a three-way tensor K of size n × n × m. This method approximates each slice
of the KB tensor K as a product of an entity matrix, a relation matrix, and the entity matrix transposed.
Various other tensor decomposition methods such as CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) Decomposition
and Tucker Decomposition (see Kolda and Bader, 2009) are also employed for various information ex-
traction tasks. Following RESCAL model, lot many extensions were proposed which takes weighted
tensor decomposition (London et al., 2013), coupled matrix and tensor factorization (Papalexakis et al.,
2014) as well as collective matrix factorization approaches (Singh et al., 2008). In order to further ex-
tend the functionality, leveraging relational domain knowledge along with tensor decomposition (Chang
et al., 2014) has been proposed.
One of the promising breakthroughs for link prediction in KBs is embedding a knowledge graph
into a continuous vector space while preserving certain information of the graph (Socher et al., 2013,
Bordes et al., 2013a, Weston et al., 2013, Chang et al., 2013). All of these models differ in their pro-
jection of embeddings in vector space, score function f(h,r,t) and algorithms to optimize their margin
based objective function. One of the most important model which leads to hundreds of paper in the ﬁeld
of KBC is TransE (Bordes et al., 2013). The basic idea of TransE is to represent relationship between
two entities corresponds to translation between the embeddings of the entities, i.e h + r t when the triple
(h,r,t) holds true. This indicates that the tail entity (t) should be the nearest neighbor of (h, r). Hence,
TransE assumes the score function high if (h,r,t) holds and low if (h,r,t) do not holds true. In order to ad-
dress issues for N-to-1, 1-to-N and N-to-N relations in TransE, various extensions TransH model (Wang
et al., 2014), STranE (Nguyen et al., 2016), TransR/CTransR(Lin et al., 2015)were proposed. For each
relation r, TransH models the relation as a vector on a hyperplane with Wr as a normal vector. Thus,
entity embeddings h and t are ﬁrst projected to the hyperplane of Wr, denoted as h⊥and t⊥. Also,
STransE model integrates SE model with TransE model to have two relation speciﬁc matrices Wr,1 and
Wr,2 to identify relation-dependent aspects of both h and t. TransR/CTransR model projects entities
and relations in different embedding space in order to capture various contexts of the same relation with
different entities. PTranE(Lin et al., 2015a)takes multiple step relation paths between entities indicating
their semantic relationships. TransD(Ji et al.,2015) considers the multiple types of entities and relations
simultaneously, and replaces transfer matrix by the product of two projection vectors of an entity rela-
tion pair. TransG(Xaio et al., 2015)addresses the issue of multiple relation semantics that a relation may
have multiple meanings revealed by the entity pairs associated with the corresponding triples. KG2E
(He et al., 2015) uses Gaussian embedding to model the data uncertainty. Though it has good results on
1-to-N and N-to-1 relations but it do not provide reasonable good results on 1-to-1 and N-to-N relations.
Recently, (Minervini et al., 2016) found that adaptive learning rate plays signiﬁcant role for learning
model parameters. They tried various optimization algorithms such as SGD, AdaGrad (Duchi et al.,
2011), AdaDelta (Zeiler, 2012, Adam (Kingma et al., 2015) and found that AdaGrad with its adaptive
learning rate provides the best link prediction results.
Completeness, accuracy and data quality are important parameters that determine the usefulness of
knowledge bases and are inﬂuenced by the way knowledge bases are constructed (Nickel et al., 2015).
12
Recent work based on modeling relation paths between entities by (Neelakantan et al., 2015; Gardner
and Mitchell, 2015; Luo et al., 2015; Lin et al., 2015a; Guu et al., 2015; Garcia-Duran et al., 2015;
and Toutanova et al., 2016) showed richer information and improved relation prediction. TransE-NMM
(Nguyen et al., 2016) takes account of neighborhood entities and relation information of both head and
tail entities in each triple. Experiment results on TransE-NMM model gives better results on triple
classiﬁcation and link prediction. Moreover, RTransE (Garcia-Duran et al., 2015), PTransE (Lin et al.,
2015a) and TransE-COMP(Guu et al., 2015) are all extensions of TransE model.
Link prediction or Knowledge Base Completion and relation extraction are complementary to each
other. Recent approaches in information extraction combine text-based extraction models with link
prediction models to infer new relational facts to achieve signiﬁcant improvement over the individual
approaches. In (Weston et al., 2013), TransE link prediction model and text based relation extraction
model are combined to rank candidate facts and promising improvement in relation extraction task is
achieved. Similar improvement has been seen over TransH (Wang et al., 2014) as well as TransR(Lin et
al., 2015). Link prediction techniques on KB can make prediction given a single textual predicate as an
example, and thus can be used directly on the relation extraction task as shown by (Riedel et al., 2013)
using matrix factorization for relation extraction. Apart from this, current research in Knowledge Bases
aims at constructing a KB that is sufﬁciently accurate, has broad coverage, and gets evolved over time.
There are three main challenges at the forefront of Knowledge Base reasoning and completion research.
These are: (1). How to create a KB from scratch with good accuracy and coverage by leveraging pages
on the web. (2). How to solve the performance challenges at the web-scale, and (3). How to merge
knowledge extracted from different sources or using different methods, to achieve both higher coverage
and better quality.
5
Integrating Information Extraction (IE) with Information Retrieval (IR)
Systems
The task of Information Retrieval (IR) system is to provide a list of documents which are most
relevant in response to user query. Search engines like Google or Bing, use web crawlers to gather docu-
ments and create a massive index of these documents by noting which words occur in which document,
and answer queries by identifying documents that contains these keywords. Then it uses intelligent
ranking algorithms (like PageRank) to put most likely ones at the top (i.e. in decreasing order). But still
these search engines have limitations as they provide only documents and no speciﬁc answer to the query.
Moreover, IR systems are still keyword (string matching)based. To overcome these limitations, NLP re-
search community has moved towards integrating Information Extraction technology with Information
Retrieval technology to make search engines more reliable, accurate, speciﬁc to user queries and having
high semantic understanding. Though, user queries can be answered as a Question-Answering problem
where we can provide direct answer to user queries, but in order to accomplish this goal, we need highly
structured Knowledge Base and better reasoning/inference techniques (Paik et al., 1997). Thus it seems
that that the ”Semantic Web” paradigm presented by Tim Berners Lee (Lee et al., 2001), according to
which the Internet should become a structured container for semantic, machine interpretable model of
knowledge and information is still far to be achieved.
6
Applications of IE
Information Extraction acts as a key technology in various Natural Language Processing (NLP)
applications such as Machine Translation, Question-Answering, Text Summarization, Opinion mining,
etc. The research in the ﬁeld of IE is in infancy and it is of great signiﬁcance to information end-user
industries such as ﬁnance, banks, publishers, governments, etc.
13
• Question-Answering System:Recent advances in constructing large scale Knowledge Bases (KBs)
have enabled new Question-Answering systems to return exact answer from a KB. State-of-the-art
methods in Question-Answering Systems are divided broadly into three main categories: Seman-
tic parsing, information retrieval and embedding based. Semantic parsing (Cai and Yates, 2013;
Berant et al., 2013; Kwiatkowski et al., 2013; Berant et al., 2014; Fader et al., 2014) aim to learn
semantic parsers which parse natural language questions into logical forms and then query KB to
lookup answers. Though, this approach put constraint on training as it is difﬁcult to train model
at large scale because of their complexity of their inference, they tend to provide deep interpreta-
tion of the question. Information retrieval based systems retrieve a set of candidate answers and
then conduct further analysis to rank them according to some speciﬁc criteria. Embedding based
approaches (Bordes et al., 2014b; Bordes et al., 2014a) learn low dimensional vectors for words
and knowledge base constituents, and use sum of these vectors to represent questions and their
candidate answers.
• User Proﬁle Extraction:With the rise of social media platforms such as Twitter, Facebook, In-
stagram and Tumblr. They provide fast source of information as compared to traditional sources
such as news, articles, and magazines. Information Extraction technology is used to extract infor-
mation from these social media in the form of personal information (proﬁle, age, gender, address,
political orientation, business afﬁnity, user interests), social information (family members, friends,
co-workers, communities involved) and travel information (current location, travel history, vaca-
tion, etc.)
• Auto E-mail reply and Auto-Calender:We send are receive large number of emails on daily ba-
sis. Majority of these emails have to be replied in Yes/No mode and rest of the emails contains
information about various upcoming events (like upcoming meetings, seminars, showcases, con-
ferences, etc.). Reading, indexing, replying and putting all the information in the calender format
and ﬁnally adding to calender is quite tedious and time consuming task. Information Extraction
technology, speciﬁcally event extraction techniques automatically extract events from emails and
add them to the calender.
• Resume Processing:Extraction of information from resumes is quite important for job/placement
agencies. Manually reading individual resume, checking their prospects as per job requirements
and replying for interview call to every individual is really messy. Using Information Extraction
technology, resume are processed and replied automatically. As the format of resume is not ﬁxed
and each job seeker makes it as per its interest and requirement of industry, it makes this task more
difﬁcult. Agencies use ”resume ﬁlters” to ﬁlter out unwanted resumes and make their task easier.
Simple keyword search (string matching) based techniques may result in ignoring prospective
candidates and hence, high level information extraction technology is used to have more robust
systems.
• Classiﬁed Advertisements:The advertisements posted in newspapers, news bulletin, websites
and shopping stores (both online and ofﬂine) have unstructured format in the form of natural
text. Extracting attributes using Information Extraction technology to have structured information
depending upon desired attributes is highly beneﬁcial as compared to searching through natural
text. Hence, IE technology is used to populate the rows in a relational database with values for
certain attributes of interest as well as to classify various advertisements into some pre-deﬁned
classes like cars, shoes, kitchenware, electronic, apparel, and so on.
• Customer Services: Companies receives lot of unstructured information in the form of emails,
chat transcripts, support forum discussions, and daily transactions reports. So, companies use IE
14
tools to retrieve relevant information from these sources, classifying them and forming structured
database which makes the task much easier as compared to searching and retrieving manually.
• Business Intelligence: Due to dynamic nature of businesses and to remain ahead from competi-
tors, organizations acquire market information in the form of competitors pricing, public opinion,
market study, promotions by competitors, and business strategies using web information extrac-
tion technology. Top Business Intelligence tools available in the market are: SAS Analytics Pro,
IBM Cognos, Microsoft Power BI, Tableau, and SAP. These BI tools acts as a data management
tools by collecting data from various sources, cleaning data, organizing data in proper format
and structure and preparing databases for better visualization and reporting. Hence, better data
management helps companies to have better decision making which is vital to remain in business.
• Building citation database: With increasing number of scientiﬁc papers online, linking refer-
ences automatically without manual intervention is quite necessary. Citations helps the scientiﬁc
community to properly credit the information they use. Building database of citations helps user
to search, count number of citations and cross-referencing of scientiﬁc papers. Hence, IE tech-
nology is used to build various citation building systems such as Citeseer, Google Scholar, DBLP,
Scopus, Thomson Reuter, etc.
• Social Analysis: Social media platforms such as Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and blogs are
acting as new style of sharing and exchanging information. Extracting information from social
media poses various challenges as text is noisy, quite informal, and short in context. To make use
of this vast information, we need better IE tools which meet the listed challenges. Social media
analysis has gained lot of attention in IE research community as it provides up-to-date information
compared to conventional sources such as news.
7
Current challenges and future research
7.1
Open Information Extraction (OpenIE)
OpenIE have been drawing more and more attention from research community to enhance and scale
IE systems by utilizing large, complex and heterogenous data; and extracting all meaningful relations
and events without any restrictions. Current challenges includes extending the capability of OpenIE to
handle n-ary relations and even nested extractions, dealing with multiple languages, extraction of tem-
porarily changing information and to distinguish between facts, opinions and misinformation on the web.
Moreover, research is in the direction of integrating IE and summarization. IE extracts important infor-
mation in the form of named entities, events, relations, and then this information is fed to summarization
template which provides summary of the actual text.
7.2
BioIE
Though lot of progress has been made in NLP to handle common unstructured text, less attention
has been given to bio-medical text. Bio-medical text in the form of patient discharge summaries, doc-
tor’s prescriptions, scientiﬁc publications provides various challenges to standard IE techniques. Hence,
BioIE is important to various applications in healthcare industry including clinical decision support,
integrative biology, bioinformatics, biocuration assistance, and pharmacovilance. State-of-the-art IE
techniques still lack upto human level performance in health-care industry. Hence, future research is to
explore and develop IE techniques for health-care industry.
15
7.3
Business Analytics
Business Intelligence and Analytics refers to set of tools and systems that analyses data to help
an organization to better understand its business and markets, and provides a way of better decision
making. Business Analytics heavily relies on various advanced data collection, extraction, analysis and
summarization technologies. Current state-of-the-art business analytics tools can work on clean and
stored data. As, text generated by users is often grammatically wrong, error-prone, and abbreviated,
future research is in the direction to have IE techniques that can work on noisy unstructured data and
having capability to handle stream data in order to have processing in real time.
7.4
Text IE in Images and Videos
Images and videos contains lot of text data which acts as an useful information for automatic an-
notation, indexing and structuring of images and videos. Text data present in images and videos can
acts as a cue stating what image or video is about. Hence, extracting text data from images and videos
can greatly help in retrieval systems and indexing. Text information extraction from images and videos
involve various steps such as detection, localization, tracking, extraction, enhancement and recognition
of text. Each step poses various challenges as there lies lot of variations in text due to differences in size,
style, orientation, contrast, and complex background. The research in this area is still in its nascent stage
and scientists are working to apply better computer vision and natural language processing techniques
to improve its performance.
7.5
Web Harvesting
As the amount of information on the web grows, it becomes harder to keep track of and to effectively
make use of this information. How one can ﬁnd the information one is looking for in a useful format,
easily and quickly is the current challenge. Search engines scan the documents and return the URLs.
They also ﬁnd and return meta description and meta keywords embedded in web pages, but do not
provide the exact information as per user requirements. The general process of ﬁnding information by
a user is: (1). Scan the content until we ﬁnd the information, (2). Mark the information by selecting or
highlighting it, (3). Switching to another program such as spreadsheet, word processor or database, and
(4). Pasting the information into that application. Web Harvesting tools automate the reading, copying
and pasting necessary to collect information for analysis. Hence, future research is to develop web
harvesting tools which acts as an end-to-end information extraction systems.
8
Conclusion
Information Extraction ﬁeld has progressed with variety of information extraction techniques such
as Open Information Extraction (OpenIE), semi-structured extraction via infoboxes and various KBs
such as Google Knowledge Graph, Microsoft Satari, YAGO, DBPedia, NELL and Probase.
There is considerable excitement in NLP community at the prospects of Information Extraction
technology due to rise of social media platforms such as Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, and so on.
Social media reacts to world events faster than traditional news sources, and its sub-communities play
close attention to topics that other sources might ignore. But analyzing the text in social media is
challenging as the text is short, language is informal, capitalization is inconsistent, spelling variations
and abbreviations run rampant. Moreover, research is shifting towards joint models that learn two or
more tasks. McCallum et al., 2003 proposed joint POS tagging and chunking, Finkel and Manning, 2009
proposed joint model for parsing and NER together, Yu et al., 2011 worked on jointly entity identiﬁcation
and relation extraction from Wikipedia, Sil, 2013 proposed joint NER and Entity Linking, Surdeanu et
al., 2008 jointly optimized parsing and semantic role labeling, Wang et al., 2015 proposed joint model for
16
Information Extraction and KB completion based on statistical relational learning (Getoor and Taskar,
2007).
Recently, deep learning has been widely used in various areas including Computer Vision, Speech
Recognition, and Natural Language Processing. In NLP tasks, deep learning has been successfully
applied to Part-of-Speech tagging (Collobert et al., 2011), Sentiment Analysis (dos Santos and Gatti,
2014), Parsing (Socher et al., 2013), Machine Translation (Sutskever et al., 2014). Moreover, attention
based models based on deep learning has attracted lot of interest in research community. It has been
successfully applied to Image Classiﬁcation (Mnih et al., 2014), Speech Recognition (Chorowski et al.,
2014), Image Captioning (Xu et al., 2015), Machine Translation (Bahdanau et al., 2014), and Part-of-
Speech tagging (Barrett et al., 2016). Future research is in direction to have web harvesting tools for
end-to-end information extraction as well as improving existing techniques to handle noisy data from
social media.
References
[Costantino et al., 1997] Marco Costantino, Richard G Morgan, Russell J. Collingham, Roberto
Garigliano, Natural Language Processing and Information Extraction: qualitative analysis of ﬁnancial
news articles, 1997.
[Morgan et al., 1995] R.Morgan, R.Garigliano, P.Callaghan, S.Poria, M.Smith, A.Urbanowicz,
R.Collingham, M.Costantino, C.Cooper, and the LOLITA group, University of Durham: Description
of the LOLITA system as used in MUC-6, in Sixth Message Understanding Conference (MUC-6), Mor-
gan Kaufman, November, 1995.
[Neil et al., 1998] Paul O’ Neil and Woojin Paik, The Chronological Information Extraction System
(CHESS), IEEE, 1998.
[Ellen Riloff, 1997] Riloff Ellen, Information Extraction as a stepping stone toward story under-
standing, in Understanding Language Understanding: Computational models of Reading, edited by
Ram and Moorman, MIT Press, 1997.
[Dzunic et al. 2006] Zoran Dzunic, Svetislav Momcilovic, Branimir Todorovic and Miomir Stankovic,
Coreference Resolution Using Decision Trees, 8th Seminar on Neural Network Applications in Electri-
cal Engineering, NEUREL-2006.
[Bikel et al., 1997] M.D.Bikel, S.Miller, R.Schwartz and R.Weischedel, Nymble: A high perfor-
mance learning name-ﬁnder, In Proceedings of the Fifth Conference on Applied Natural Language Pro-
cessing, 1997, pp. 194-201.
[Fang et al., 2008] Kong Fang, Liyancui, Zhou Guodong, Zhu Qiaoming, Qian Peide, Using Se-
mantic Roles for Coreference Resolution, International Conference on Advanced Language Processing
and Web Information Technology, IEEE, 2008.
[Soon et al., 2001] W.M Soon, H.T. Ng and Lim, A Machine Learning approach to coreference
resolution of noun phrase, Computational Linguistics, 2001.
[Ng and Cardie, 2002] V.Ng and C. Cardie, Improving machine learning approaches to coreference
resolution, Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
2002.
[Bergsma and Lin, 2006] S.Bergsma and D.K.Lin, Bootstrapping path-based pronoun resolution,
COLING-ACL, 2006.
[Yang and Su, 2007] X.F.Yang and J.Su, Coreference Resolution using Semantic Relatedness In-
formation from Automatically Discovered Patterns, ACL, Prague, Czech Republic, June, 2007.
[Zhou et al., 2008] G.D.Zhou, F.Kong and Q.M.Zhu, Context-sensitive convolution tree kernel for
pronoun resolution, IJCNLP, 2008.
17
[Gao et al., 2010] Sanyuan Gao, Si Li, Weiran Xu, Jun Guo, Cross-Document Coreference Resolu-
tion based on Automatic Text Summary, IEEE, 2010.
[Kolya et al., 2010] Anup Kumar Kolya, Asif Ekbal and Sivaji Bandyopadhyay, Event-Event Rela-
tion Identiﬁcation: A CRF based Approach, IEEE, 2010.
[Verhagen et al., 2007] M.Verhagen, R.Gaizauskas, F.Schilder, M.Hepple, G.Katz and J.Pustejovsky,
SemEval-2007 Task 15: TempEval Temporal Relation Identiﬁcation, In Proceedings of the 4th Interna-
tional Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval-2007), pages 75-80, Prague, June, 2007, Associa-
tion of Computational Linguistics.
[Boguraev and Ando, 2005] B.Boguraev and R.K.Ando, TimeMLCompliant Text Analysis for
Temporal Reasoning, In Proceedings of Nineteenth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence (IJCAI-05), pages 997-1003, Edinburgh, Scotland, August, 2005.
[Mani et al., 2003] I.Mani, B.Wellner, M.Verhagen, C.M.Lee, J.Pustejovsky, Machine Learning for
Temporal Relation, In Proceedings of the 44th Annual meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, Sydney, Australia, 2003.
[Chamber et al., 2007] N.Chambers, S.Wang and D.Jurafsky, Classifying Temporal Relations be-
tween Events, In Proceedings of the Association for Computational Linguistics Demo and Poster Ses-
sions, pages 173-176, Prague, Czech Republic, June, 2007.
[Huang et al., 2010] Cuili Huang, Yaqiang Wang, Yongmei Zhang, Yu Jin and Zhongua Yu, Coref-
erence Resolution in biomedical full-text articles with domain dependent features, 2nd International
Conference on Computer Technology (ICCTD), 2010.
[Shalom and Leass, 2004] Lappin Salom and J.Herbert Leass, An algorithm for pronominal anaphora
resolution, Computational Linguistics, 2004.
[Kennedy and Boguraev, 1996] Christopher Kennedy and Branimir Boguraev, Pronominal Anaphora
Resolution without a Parser, In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics, 1996.
[Renata and Massimo, 2000] Vieira Renata and Poesio Massimo, An Empirically based system for
processing Deﬁnite Descriptions, Computational Linguistics, pages 525-579, 2000.
[Caroline and Ted, 2008] Gasperin Caroline and Briscoe Ted, Statistical anaphora resolution in
biomedical texts, In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Computational Linguistics
(COLING), pages 257-264, Manchester, 2008.
[Kong et al., 2010] Fang Kong, Jianmei Zhou, Guodong Zhou and Qiaoming Zhu, Dependency
tree based Anaphoricity determination for Coreference Resolution, International Conference on Asian
Language Processing, 2010.
[Etzioni et al., 2008] O.Etzioni, M.Banko, S.Soderland and D.S.Weld, Open Information Extraction
from the Web, ACM Communications, pages 68-74, 2008.
[Feldman et al., 2008] R.Feldman, Y.Regev and M.Gorodetsky, A modular Information Extraction
System, Journal of Intelligent Data Analytics, pages 51-71, 2008.
[Bodem et al., 2011] Christoph Boden, Thomas Hafele and Alexander Loser, Classiﬁcation Algo-
rithms for Relation Prediction, ICDE Workshop, 2011.
[Muludi et al., 2011] Kurnia Muludi, Dwi H.Widyantoro, Kuspriyanto and Oerip S. Santoso, Multi-
Inductive Learning Approach for Information Extraction, International Conference on Electrical Engi-
neering and Informatics, Bandung, Indonesia, 17-19 July, 2011.
[Amami et al., 2012] Maha Amami, Aymen Elkhliﬁand Rim Faiz, BioEv: A System for Learning
Biological Event Extraction, International Conference on Information Technology and e-Services, 2012.
18
[Burges, 1998] C.J.C Burges, A tutorial on Support Vector Machines for Pattern Recognition, Data
Mining and Knowledge Discovery, pages 121-167, 1998.
[Lee et al., 2001] T. Berners-Lee, J.Hendler and O.Lassila, The Semantic Web, In Scientiﬁc Ameri-
can, pp. 29-37, May, 2001.
[Yang et al., 2015] Bishan Yang, Claire Cardie and Peter Frazier, A Hierarchical Distance-dependent
Bayesian Model for Event Coreference Resolution, Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, Vol. 3, pp.517-528, 2015.
[Bejan and Harabagiu, 2014] Cosmin Adrian Bejan and Sanda Harabagiu, Unsupervised Event
Coreference Resolution, Computational Linguistics, pp. 311-347, 2014.
[Cardie and Wagstaff, 1999] Claire Cardie and Kiri Wagstaff, Noun Phrase coreference as cluster-
ing, In Proceedings of the 1999 Joint SIGDAT Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and Very Large Corpora, pages 82-89, 1999.
[Raghunathan et al., 2010] Karthik Raghunathan, Heeyoung Lee, Sudarshan Rangarajan, Nathanael
Chambers, Mihai Surdeanu, Dan Jurafsky, and Christopher Manning, A multi-pass sieve for coreference
resolution, pages 492-501, In EMNLP, 2010.
[Lee et al., 2011] Heeyoung Lee, Yves Peirsman, Angel Chang, Nathanael Chambers, Mihai Sur-
deanu and Dan Jurafsky, Stanford’s multi-pass sieve coreference resolution system at the CoNLL-2011
shared task, In Proceedings of the Fifteenth Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning:
Shared Task, pages 28-34, 2011.
[Stoyanov et al., 2009] Veselin Stoyanov, Nathan Gilbert, Claire Cardie, and Ellen Riloff, Conun-
drums in noun phrase coreference resolution: Making sense of the state-of-the-art, In Proceedings of the
Joint Conference of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing of the AFNLP, Vol. 2, pages 656-664, 2009.
[Rahman and Ng, 2011] Altaf Rahman and Vincent Ng, Coreference resolution with world knowl-
edge, In Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 814-824, 2011.
[Durrett and Klein, 2010] Greg Durrett and Dan Klein, Coreference resolution in a modular, entity-
centered model, in NAACL, pages 385-393, 2010.
[Haghighi and Klein, 2013] Aria Haghighi and Dan Klein, Easy victories and uphill battles in
coreference resolution, In EMNLP, pages 1971-1982, 2013.
[Zelaia et al., 2015] Ana Zelaia, Olatz Arregi and Basilio Sierra, A Multi-classiﬁer Approach to
support Coreference Resolution in a Vector Space Model, Proceedings of NAACL-HLT, 2015, pages
17-24, Denver, Colorado, Association for Computational Linguistics, 2015.
[Orasan et al., 2008] Constantin Orasan, Dan Cristea, Ruslan Mitkov and Antonio Branco, Anaphora
Resolution Exercise: an Overview, Proceedings of the LREC, 2008.
[Versley et al., 2008] Yannick Versley, Simone Paolo Ponzetto, Massimo Poessio, Vladimir Eidel-
man, Alan Jern, Jason Smith, Xiaofeng Yang, and Alessandro Moschitti, Bart: a modular toolkit for
coreference resolution, Proceedings of the HLT-Demonstrations, pp. 9-12, 2008.
[Bengtson and Roth, 2008] Eric Bengtson and Dan Roth, Understanding the value of features for
coreference resolution, Proceedings of the EMNLP, pages. 294-303, 2008.
[Manning et al., 2014] Christopher D. Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer, Jenny Finkel, Steven
J. Bethard and David McClosky, The Stanford CoreNLP Natural Language Processing Toolkit, Proceed-
ings of 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations,
pp. 55-60, 2014.
[Soderland et al., 1995] S.Soderland, D.Fisher, J.Aseltine, and W.Lehnert, CRYSTAL: Inducing
a conceptual dictionary, In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, pages 1314-21, 1995.
19
[Califf and Mooney, 1997] M.Califf and R.Mooney, Relational Learning of pattern-match rules
for Information Extraction, In Workshop in Natural Language Learning, Association for Computational
Linguistics, 1997.
[Lafferty et al., 2001] John D.Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando C.N.Pereira, Conditional
Random Fields: Probabilistic models for segmenting and labeling sequence data, In Proceedings of the
Eighteenth International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2001.
[Mintz et al., 2009] Mike Mintz, Steven Bills, Rion Snow, and Dan Jurafsky, Distant Supervision for
relation extraction without labeled data, In Proceedings of Association for Computational Linguistics,
2009.
[Bunescu and Mooney, 2007] Razvan Bunescu and Raymond Mooney, Learning to extract relations
from the web using minimal supervision, In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2007.
[Riedel et al., 2010] Sebastian Riedel, Limin Yao, and Andrew McCallum, Modeling relations and
their mentions without labeled text, In Proceedings of the Sixteenth European Conference on Machine
Learning (ECML), pages 148-163, 2010.
[Hoffman et al., 2011] Raphael Hoffman, Congle Zhang, Xiao Ling, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Daniel
S.Weld, Knowledge based weak supervision for information extraction of overlapping relations, In Pro-
ceedings of Association for Computational Linguistics, 2011.
[Surdeanu et al., 2012] Mihai Surdeanu, Julie Tibshirani, Ramesh Nallapati, and Christopher
D.Manning, Multi-Instance Multi-Label learning for relation extraction, In Proceedings of EMNLP,
pages 455-465, Association for Computational Linguistics, 2012.
[Riedel et al., 2013] Sebastian Riedel, Limin Yao, Andrew McCullum, and Benjamin M.Marlin,
Relation extraction with matrix factorization and universal schemas, pages 74-84, NAACL-HLT, 2013.
[Nguyen and Grisham, 2014] Thien Huu Nguyen and Ralph Grisham, Employing word representa-
tions and regularization for domain adaptation of relation extraction, In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, volume 2, pages 68-74, 2014.
[Angeli et al., 2014] Gabor Angeli, Julie Tibshirani, Jean Y.Wu, and Christopher D.Manning, Com-
bining distant and partial supervision for relation extraction, In EMNLP, 2014.
[Zhang et al., 2012] Ce Zhang, Feng Niu, Christopher Re, and Jude Shavlik, Big data versus the
crowd: Looking for relationships in all the right places, In Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, Long papers, volume 1, pages 825-834, Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2012.
[Pershina et al., 2014] Maria Pershina, Bonan Min, Wei Xu, and Ralph Grisham, Infusion of labeled
data into distant supervision for relation extraction, In Proceedings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2014.
[Alicia and Fahlman, 2007] Alicia T. and Scott E. Fahlman, CMU-AT: Semantic Distance and
Background Knowledge for Identifying Semantic Relations, Proceedings of the 4th International Work-
shop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval-2007), pages 121-124, Prague, 2007.
[Hendrickx et al., 2007] I. Hendrickx, R.Morante, C.Sporleder, Antal V.D.Bosch, ILK: Machine
Learning of semantic relations with shallow features and almost no data, Proceedings of the 4th In-
ternational Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval-2007), pages 121-124, Prague, June, 2007.
[Fellbaum, 1998] C.Editor.Fellbaum, WordNet: An electronic lexical database and some of its ap-
plications, MIT Press, 1998.
[Claudio et al., 2007] G.Claudio, L.Alberto, P.Daniele, and R.Lorenza, FBK-IRST: Kernel Methods
for Semantic Relation Extraction, Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Semantic Evalua-
20
tions (SemEval-2007), pages 121-124, Prague, June, 2007.
[Girju et al., 2005] R.Girju, D.Moldovan, M.Tatu and D.Antohe, Automatic discovery of Part-
Whole relations, Association for Computing Machinery, 2005.
[Tesfaye et al., 2016] Debela Tesfaye, Michael Zock, and Solomon Teferra, Combining syntactic
patterns and Wikipedia’s hierarchy of hyperlinks to extract meronym relations, Proceedings of NAACL-
HLT 2016.
[Hashimoto et al., 2015] Kazuma Hashimoto, Pontus Stenetorp, Makoto Miwa, and Yoshimasa Tsu-
ruoka, Task Oriented learning of word embeddings for semantic relation classiﬁcation. In Proceedings
of the Nineteenth Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning, pages 268-278, Beijing,
China, ACL, 2015.
[dos Santos et al., 2015] Cicero dos Santos, Bing Xiang, and Bowen Zhou, Classifying relations by
ranking with convolutional neural networks, In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics and the 7th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing, volume 1, pages 626-634, ACL, 2015.
[Socher et al., 2012] Richard Socher, Bordy Huval, Christopher D.Manning and Andrew Y.Ng, Se-
mantic compositionality through recursive matrix-vector spaces, In Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and Computational Natural Language
Learning, pages 1201-1211, ACL, 2012.
[Xu et al., 2015a] Kun Xu, Yansong Feng, Songfang Huang, and Dongyan Zhao, Semantic relation
classiﬁcation via convolutional neural networks with simple negative sampling, In Proceedings of the
2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 536-540, ACL, 2015.
[Xu et al., 2015b] Yan Xu, Lili Mou, Ge Li, Yunchuan Chen, Hao Peng, and Zhi Jin, Classifying
relations via LSTM networks along shortest dependency paths, In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1785-1794, ACL, 2015.
[Tai et al., 2015] Kai Sheng Tai, Richard Socher, and Christopher D.Manning, Improved semantic
representations from tree-structured LSTM networks, In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1556-1566, Beijing, China, ACL, July, 2015.
[Lin et al., 2016] Yankai Lin, Shiqi Shen, Zhiyuan Liu, Huanbo Luan, and Maosong Sun, Neural
Relation Extraction with Selective Attention over Instances,Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1105-1116, August 7-12, 2016.
[Gamallo et al., 2012] Pablo Gamallo, Marcos Garcia, and Santiago Fernandez-Lanza, Dependency
based open information extraction, In Proceedings of ROBUS-UNSUP, 2012.
[Tseng et al., 2014] Yuan-Hsein Tseng, Lung-Hao Lee, Shu-Yen Lin, Boshun Liao, Mei-Jun Liu,
Hsin-Hsi Chen, Oren Etzioni, and Anthony Fader, Chinese Open relation extraction for knowledge
acquisition, In Proceedings of EACL, 2014.
[Lewis and Steedman, 2013] Mike Lewis and Mark Steedman, Unsupervised Induction of cross-
lingual semantic relations, In Proceedings of EMNLP, 2013.
[Gerber and Ngomo, 2012] Daniel Gerber and Alex-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo, Extracting multilin-
gual natural language patterns for RDFs predicates, In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference
on Knowledge Engineering and Knowledge Management, 2012.
[Khirbat et al., 2016] Gitansh Khirbat, Jianzhong Qi, and Rui Zhang, N-ary Biographical Rela-
tion Extraction using shortest path dependencies, In Proceedings of Australasian Language Technology
Association Workshop, pages 74-83, 2016.
[McDonald et al., 2005] Ryan McDonald, Fernando Pereira, Seth Kulick, Scott Winters, Yang Jin,
and Pete White, Simple algorithms for complex relation extraction with applications to bio-medical
21
information extraction, In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Associations for the Compu-
tational Linguistics, 2005.
[Li et al., 2015] Hong Li, Sebastian Krause, Feiyu Xu, Andrea Moro, Hans Uszkoreit ,and Roberto
Navigli, Improvement of n-ary relation extraction by adding lexical semantics to distant supervision rule
learning, In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Agents and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2015.
[Li et al., 2016] Zhuang Li, Lizhen Qu, Qiangkai Xu, and Mark Johnson, Unsupervised pre-training
with Seq2Seq reconstruction loss for deep relation extraction models, In Proceedings of Australasian
Language Technology Association Workshop, pages 54-64, 2016.
[Shen and Huang, 2016] Yatian Shen and Xuanjing Huang, Attention based Convolutional Neural
Network for Semantic Relation Extraction, Proceedings of the COLING, 26th Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics, Technical papers, pages 2526-2536, December, 2016.
[Mirza and Tonelli, 2016] Paramita Mirza and Sara Tonelli, CATENA: CAusal and TEmporal
relation extraction from NAtural language texts, Proceedings of the COLING,26th Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics, Technical papers, pages 64-75, December, 2016.
[D’Souza and Ng, 2013] Jennifer D’Souza and Vincent Ng, Classifying temporal relations with
rich linguistic knowledge, In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 918-927, ACL,
2013.
[Chamber et al., 2014] Nathanael Chambers, Taylor Cassidy, Bill McDowell, and Steven Bethard,
Dense event ordering with a multi-pass architecture, Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2014.
[Bollacker et al. 2008] Kurt Bollacker, Colin Evans, Praveen Paritosh, Tim Sturge, and Jamie
Taylor. 2008. Freebase: A Collaboratively Created Graph Database for Structuring Human Knowledge.
In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data, pages
1247-1250.
[Bordes et al. 2011] Antoine Bordes, Jason Weston, Rnan Collobert, and Yoshua Bengio. 2011.
Learning Structured Embeddings of Knowledge Bases. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth AAAI Con-
ference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pages 301-306.
[Bordes et al. 2012] Anotoine Bordes, Xavier Glorat, Jason Weston, and Yoshua Bengio. 2012. A
Semantic Matching Energy Function for Learning with Multi-relational Data. Machine Learning, 94(2):
233-259.
[Bordes et al. 2013] Antoine Bordes, Nicolas Usunier, Alberto Garcia-Duran, Jason Weston, and
Oksana Yakhnenko. 2013. Translating Embeddings for Modeling Multi-relational Data. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 26, pages 2787-2795.
[Carlson et al. 2010] Andrew Carlson, Justin Betteridge, Bryan Kisiel, Burr Settles, Estevam R Hr-
uschka, Jr, and Tom M.Mitchell. 2010. Towards an Architecture for Never Ending Language Learning.
In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pages 1306-1313.
[Guu et al. 2015] Kelvin Guu, John Miller, and Percy Liang. 2015. Traversing Knowledge Graphs
in Vector Space. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 318-327.
[Miller 1995] George A Miller. 2015. WordNet: A Lexical Database for English. Communications
of the ACM, 38(11):39-41
[Mikolov et al. 2013] Tomas Mikolov, Wen-tau Yih, and Geoffrey Zweig. 2013. Linguistic Regu-
larities in Continuous Space Word Representations. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
22
pages 746-751.
[Yang et al. 2015] Bishan Yang, Wen-tau Yih, Xiaodong He, Jianfeng Gao, and Li Deng. 2015.
Embedding Entities and Relations for Learning and Inference in Knowledge Bases. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Learning Representations.
[Wang et al. 2014] Zhen Wang, Jianwen Zhang, Jianlin Feng, and Zheng Chen. 2014. Knowl-
edge Graph Embedding by Translating on Hyperplanes. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth AAAI
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pages 1112-1119.
[Toutanova et al. 2016] Kristina Toutanova, Xi Victoria Lin, Wen-tau Yih, Hoifung Poon, and Chris
Quirk. 2016. Compositional Learning of Embeddings for Relation Paths in Knowledge Bases and Text.
In Proceedings of the 54 th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, June.
2016.
[Socher et al. 2013] Richar Socher, Danqi Chen, Christopher D Manning, and Andrew Ng. 2013.
Reasoning with Neural Tensor Networks for Knowledge Base Completion. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, pages 926-934.
[Suchanek et al. 2007] Fabian M Suchanek, Gjergji Kasneci, and Gerherd Weikum. 2007. YAGO:
A Core of Semantic Knowledge. In Proceedings of the 16 th International Conference on World Wide
Web, pages 697-706.
[Nickel et al. 2011] Maxmilian Nickel, Volker Tresp, and Hans-Peter-Kriegel. 2011. A Three-
Way Model for Collective Learning on Multi-Relational Data. In Proceedings of the 28 th International
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 809-816.
[Nickel et al. 2015] Maxmilian Nickel, Kevin Murphy, Volker Tresp, and Evgeniy Gabrilovich.
2015. A Review of Relational Machine Learning for Knowledge Graphs. Proceedings of the IEEE,
2016.
[Chang et al. 2014] Kai-Wei Chang, Wen-tau Yih, Bishan Yang, and Christopher Meek. 2014.
Typed Tensor Decomposition of Knowledge Bases for Relation Extraction. In Proceedings of the 2014
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing(EMNLP), pages 1568-1579.
[Nguyen et al. 2016] Dat Quoc Nguyen, Kairit sirts, Lizhen Qu, and Mark Johnson. 2016. StransE:
a novel embedding model of entities and relationships in knowledge bases. In Proceedings of the 15 th
Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies.
[Lin et al. 2015a] Yankai Lin, Zhiyuan Liu, Huanbo Luan, Maosong Sun, Siwei Rao, and Song Liu.
2015a. Modeling Relation Paths for Representation Learning of Knowledge Bases. In Proceedings of
the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 705-714.
[Nguyen et al. 2016] Dat Quoc Nguyen, Kairit Sirts, Lizhen Qu, and Mark Johnson. 2016. Neigh-
borhood Mixture Model for Knowledge Base Completion. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on
Natural Language Learning (CoNLL), 2016.
[Xiao et al. 2016] Han Xiao, Minlie Huang, and Xiaoyan Zhu. 2016. TransG: A Generative Model
for Knowledge Graph Embedding. In Proceedings of the 54 th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 2316-2325.
[Lin et al. 2015] Yankai Lin, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong Sun, Yang Liu, and Xuan Zhu. 2015. Learning
Entity and Relation Embeddings for Knowledge Graph Completion. In Proceedings of the Association
of the Advancement of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2015.
[Bolla M, 1993] M. Bolla. Spectra, Euclidean representations and clusterings of hypergraphs. Dis-
crete Mathematics, 117(1-3), 1993.
[Zien et al., 1999] J. Y. Zien, M. D. F. Schlag, and P. K. Chan. Multi-level spectral hypergraph
partitioning with arbitrary vertex sizes. IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated
23
Circuits and Systems, 18(9):13891399, 1999.
[Wimalasuriya and Dou, 2010] C.Daya Wimalasuriya and Dejing Dou, Ontology based informa-
tion extraction: An Introduction and a survey of current approaches, Journal of Information Science,
June 2010, 36:306-323
[Assal et al., 2011] Hisham Assal, John Seng, Franz Kurfess, Emily Schwarz, and Kym Pohl,
Semantically-Enhanced Information Extraction, IEEE, 2011.
[Miwa and Bansal, 2016] Makoto Miwa and Mohit Bansal, End-to-End Relation Extraction using
LSTMs on Sequences and Tree Structures, Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 1105-1116, August 7-12, 2016.
24
