Title: Modeling the Sacred: Considerations when Using Religious Texts in Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2404.14740v3
--------------------------------------------------

Modeling the Sacred: Considerations when Using Religious Texts
in Natural Language Processing
Ben Hutchinson
Google Research, Australia
benhutch@google.com
Abstract
This position paper concerns the use of reli-
gious texts in Natural Language Processing
(NLP), which is of special interest to the Ethics
of NLP. Religious texts are expressions of cul-
turally important values, and machine learned
models have a propensity to reproduce cultural
values encoded in their training data. Further-
more, translations of religious texts are fre-
quently used by NLP researchers when lan-
guage data is scarce. This repurposes the trans-
lations from their original uses and motivations,
which often involve attracting new followers.
This paper argues that NLP’s use of such texts
raises considerations that go beyond model bi-
ases, including data provenance, cultural con-
texts, and their use in proselytism. We argue
for more consideration of researcher position-
ality, and of the perspectives of marginalized
linguistic and religious communities.
1
Introduction
“a particular string of speech may be
viewed as data by a researcher but as
sacred incantation by language users”
— Holton et al. (2022)
The Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL) is a secular institution. Its constitution, res-
olutions and policies make no mention of religion
other than forbidding harassment on the basis of
religion.1 Nevertheless the Christian Bible and
the Islamic Quran2 are often used in the scientific
and professional activities of ACL, as measured by
papers published in the ACL Anthology (see Sec-
tion 3). Some of the reasons that NLP researchers
use the Bible are aptly expressed by Resnik et al.
(1999). The Bible is the world’s most translated
book, with translations in over 2,000 languages,
1www.aclweb.org, accessed September 2023
2This paper follows several style guides in using “Quran”,
although mentions of the alternate Latinization “Koran” are
also considered in the corpus studies we report on.
and often multiple translations per language. Fur-
thermore, great care is taken with the translations,
so from an NLP perspective data quality is high.
It is often easily available in electronic form, and
is in the public domain, hence free to use. It has
a standard structure which allows parallel align-
ment verse-by-verse. For these reasons, as recently
as 2006 it was said to be “perhaps surprising that
the Bible has not been more widely used as a mul-
tilingual corpus by the computational linguistics
and information retrieval community” (Chew et al.,
2006).
Despite the use of religious texts in NLP, the eth-
ical considerations of such use have not previously
received much attention. Religious texts have gen-
erally been treated as just data, overlooking their
sacred dimensions, their cultural significance, and
their histories, which are sometimes entwined with
colonial projects. This position paper contends that
responsible secularism demands engaging with the
ethical considerations of the use of these texts. We
take the position that it is important to contextu-
alize religious texts within not just their religious
but also their broader cultural and historical con-
texts. We argue that it is important to acknowledge
the motivations, goals, and positionalities of re-
searchers using religious texts, particularly as it
is difficult to have intimate first-hand knowledge
of the moral and cultural concerns of a religion
beyond one’s own (if any).
Section 2 provides relevant background mate-
rial, including discussing the relationship between
academic linguistics and missionary linguistics. In
Section 3, we present an empirical study of NLP
papers using sacred texts. Section 4 discusses vari-
ous ethical considerations when using sacred texts
in NLP. In doing so, we consider a range of ap-
proaches to the topic, including ethical theories,
Indigenous perspectives,3 human rights, and the AI
3Following style guides such as (Younging, 2018), this
paper capitalizes the first letter of “Indigenous”.
arXiv:2404.14740v3  [cs.CL]  22 Jul 2025
Religion
Sacred texts
Est. 2020 population
Proselytizing
Christianity
Bible, New Testament, Old Testament
2,382,750,000
Yes
Islam
Quran (alt. spellings include Koran)
1,907,110,000
Yes
Hinduism
Vedas, Upanishads, Puranas
1,161,440,000
No
Buddhism
Tripitaka, Mahayana Sutras, Tibetan Book of the Dead
506,990,000
Yes
Traditional Chinese Religion
Zhuangzi, Tao-te Ching, Daozang
310,000,000
No
Judaism
Talmod, Torah, Tanakh, Old Testament
14,660,000
No
Table 1: Some major world religions and their texts. Population estimates are from the US-based Pew Research
Center (www.pewresearch.org), which conducts demographic and other research.
principles commonly espoused by institutions. Our
goal in doing so is not to evaluate past NLP projects
that use religious texts, but rather to encourage
more reflecting in and on future work. Based on
these considerations, we then make some recom-
mendations for the NLP community in Section 5.
2
Background
2.1
Religion
Precisely defining what constitutes a religion might
be notoriously difficult (see, e.g.,
Spiro, 2013;
Neville, 2018), and lies beyond the scope of this
paper. Typical properties of religions center around
giving meaning to existence, and include moral val-
ues, spiritual beliefs, theistic beliefs, rituals, stories
and mythologies, kinship systems and marriage
practices, artistic practices, significant locations,
and in some cases a language which plays a spe-
cial role. These are all closely related to questions
concerning values.
Like languages, religions may exhibit regional
variation and incorporate local practices, so think-
ing of them as discrete entities may be somewhat
misleading. Some widely cited estimates put the
number of worldwide religions at several thou-
sand, although these claims are disputed. What
seems more certain is that the imminent extinction
of thousands of Indigenous languages will accom-
pany an “impending loss of so many religions and
worldviews” (Harrison, 2007, p. 153). Acknowl-
edging these challenges, we nevertheless provide
a summary of some of the world’s most populous
religions in Table 1. Surveying or defining each
of these religions is beyond the scope of this pa-
per. Also not included here are the various sects
and branches within each religion, nor texts which
might be important only to specific branches.
One important distinction is that between prose-
lytizing and non-proselytizing religions. The for-
mer attempt to convert new populations, whereas
the latter do not. The former are more intricately
related to historical practices of colonialism—
especially in Africa, the Americas, Asia, Australia,
and the Pacific—and hence also to neocolonial lega-
cies. Some religions hold that a certain language
is privileged for communicating sacred texts to the
faithful, while on the other hand Protestant Chris-
tianity exemplifies a commitment to communicat-
ing in vernacular languages. (Article XXIV of the
Articles of Religion of the Anglican Church calls
for “such a Tongue as the people understandeth”.)
Although originally in Ancient Greek, Christian
texts have been widely distributed in many Euro-
pean languages since the Protestant Reformation,
and the global reach of Christianity is associated
with European colonial practices.
2.2
The academy and Bible translation
The September 2009 issue of the journal Language
has a special feature of five articles by anthropolo-
gists and linguists concerning the relationships be-
tween the US-based Bible translation organization
SIL International (SIL) and academic linguistics.
In this issue, Dobrin and Good (2009) explore how
academic linguists have at times become reliant
on, and benefitted from, the technological infras-
tructures of SIL, in part because creating and main-
taining these infrastructures have not been valued
by the academy. This “partnership of convenience”
causes tensions between differing objectives, and
raises questions about what kind of relationships
secular research institutions ought to have with
organizations with very different agendas. These
practices presage similar ways in which some ar-
eas of NLP research have become reliant on Bible
translations.
Many linguists and NLP practitioners working
on Indigenous languages see their research as ad-
dressing issues of human rights and cultural ex-
tinction. However, as Dobrin and Good point out,
languages which are most endangered are least
likely to receive SIL’s attention. Handman (2009)
draws attention to how SIL ideology separates lin-
guistic identity from religious identity, differing
from UNESCO’s position that sustaining endan-
gered languages entails sustaining cultural world-
views, knowledge systems, and identity practices.
Epps and Ladley (2009) argue that evangelical suc-
cess entails the displacement or transformation of
traditional beliefs, often leading to social upheaval,
and argues that the academy has a moral interest
in supporting local self-determination which is at
odds with evangelical agendas.
3
The Use of Sacred Texts in NLP
This section presents empirical data on the use of
religious texts in the field of NLP.
3.1
Sacred texts in the ACL Anthology
In this section we consider four research questions:
i) which sacred texts are used in NLP?, ii) how
does NLP characterize those sacred texts?, iii) for
what purposes does NLP use sacred texts?, and
iv) are there any trends over time? To explore
these, we use the Anthology of the Association of
Computational Linguistics4 (henceforth, the ACL
Anthology) (Bird et al., 2008), which we consider
to represent the research publications of the NLP
community.
Regarding which sacred texts are used in NLP,
the number of ACL Anthology entries for sacred
texts are shown in Table 2.5 Thousands of papers
in the ACL Anthology seem to use religious texts.
There is a strong bias towards the texts of the Ju-
daism, Christianity, and Islam.
To understand how sacred texts are character-
ized in NLP, we analysed ACL Anthology papers
containing the phrases “the Bible is” or “the Quran
is”. Thematic analysis of the results reveal that de-
scriptions of the Bible mostly emphasize its avail-
ability, convenience, size, and multilingual char-
acter (see Appendix A). The religious nature of
the Bible is only mentioned infrequently, in stark
contrast with how Christian websites describe the
Bible. These findings agree with the claim that
NLP has a dominant ideology of “language as data”
(Bird and Yibarbuk, 2024). One paper describes
the Bible as “one of the most familiar documents”.
NLP papers are more likely to mention religious
aspects of the Quran. No ACL anthology papers
4www.aclanthology.org, accessed August 2023.
5Non-deterministic result counts seem to be an artefact of
the ACL Anthology’s use of Google’s Programmable Search
Engine (Bollmann et al., 2023).
Search term/phrase
Results [min, max]
bible
[1920, 3890]]
quran
[291, 547]
new testament
[294, 294]
koran
[131, 248]
old testament
[73, 206]
torah
[25, 153]
talmud
[21, 22]
vedas
[22, 51]
tripitaka
[7, 7]
upanishads
[6, 6]
mahayana sutras
[4, 4]
tanakh
[3, 4]
zhuangzi
[3, 3]
puranas
[3, 3]
tibetan book of the dead
[0, 0]
tao-te ching
[0, 0]
daozang
[0, 0]
Table 2: Number of search results for religious texts in
the ACL Anthology on August 10, 2023. Since search
result counts are non-deterministic, we report the min
and max of 10 searches for each term.
mention “the Koran is”, nor related appositions
“Koran, a[n]”; presumably the papers mentioning
‘Koran’ felt it needed no explanation.
To understand how NLP uses sacred texts, we
examined the first 100 results (sorted by relevance)
from the ACL Anthology for each of the terms
‘bible’ and ‘koran’. We manually looked at each
of the 200 search results in order to verify its rele-
vance to our study, and omitted 48 search results for
not being relevant (see Appendix B). We manually
coded the 88 papers mentioning the Bible for their
application domain. The most common applica-
tion domain was machine translation (23%), while
many (18%) introduced a new corpus or lexical
resource. Three papers were concerned specifically
with Bible translation, and four with literary analy-
sis of the Bible. A variety of other application do-
mains were represented, including various morpho-
syntactic analysis tasks, and language modeling or
pretraining (see Appendix C). 48% of the 88 papers
concerned one or more Indigenous languages.6 The
64 ACL papers mentioning ‘koran’ were less varied
and largely (73%) were concerned with machine
translation, typically using verses from the Quran
in evaluation datasets (see Appendix D).
To get a sense of trends in the use of sacred texts
by the NLP community, we examined the year of
publication of the 150 of the 152 papers described
6These categorizations were done by the author, taking
into account historical and social context, however an ideal
approach might engage with language communities to under-
stand whether they consider themselves to be Indigenous.
Figure 1: Trend sparklines for counts of papers in the
ACL Anthology mentioning ‘bible’ or ‘koran’ (see §3).
above which were published between Jan 2004 and
July 2023 (just 2 were published prior to 2004). Of
these, we see increasing use over time of mentions
of the Bible, and especially of mentions of ‘Koran’
(see Figure 1)7, including over 60% of papers be-
ing published between 2019 and 2023 alone. Of
course, the number of papers published in the ACL
anthology has also been increasing, for example
ACL 2023 accepted about 12 times as many papers
as ACL 2004 did. We are not necessarily seeing
an increase in terms of the fraction of NLP papers
using the Bible, and thus there may only be weak
evidence of trends within NLP research. We do
however hypothesize that the absolute counts of
papers using religious texts may be a better proxy
for the externalities (both positive and negative) of
NLP research on linguistic and religious communi-
ties, and thus relevant to this paper’s topic of ethical
considerations. There also seems to be a trend to-
wards papers using sacred texts handling very large
numbers of languages, with ten papers since 2014
in our sample handling over 500 languages.
3.2
Four case studies
To complement the broad analysis of NLP research
above, we also report here on some recent notewor-
thy cases which have attracted acclaim and atten-
tion. These illustrate in more detail ways in which
the NLP community is encountering and using reli-
gious texts.
Our first example is a paper which aims to im-
prove Speech Recognition and Speech Synthesis
for over a thousand languages (Pratap et al., 2023).
It was uploaded to arXiv, a popular online archive
for computer science papers, in May 2023. The
researchers train their model using translations of
the New Testament, as well as audio of readings
of those translations, obtained from Faith Comes
by Hearing (faithcomesbyhearing.com),
goto.bible and bible.com. They also use
7Since our 2023 sample was limited to Jan-July, pa-
per counts for 2023 are multiplied by 12/7 when creating
sparklines, to make them comparable with previous years.
spoken recordings in many languages, without
paired texts, of Bible stories, evangelistic messages,
scripture readings, and songs, obtained from Global
Recordings
Network
(globalrecordings.
net), whose mission is to communicate “the Good
News of Jesus Christ” via a strategy of recording,
distribution, and promotion.
Our second example aims to scale language mod-
els to 500 languages (Imani et al., 2023), and was
awarded the ACL Area Chair Award for best Mul-
tilingualism and Cross-Lingual NLP paper in July
2023. The researchers “crawl or download” data
from 150 sources, including religious texts and ob-
serve a “higher proportion of religious data” com-
pared to previous comparable work. Parallel verses
from Bible translations are used for model train-
ing and testing, and performance is reported for
Sentence Retrieval from the Bible.
Our third example concerns the use of JW300
(Agi´c and Vuli´c, 2019), a dataset of around 100k
sentences in each of 300 languages crawled from
jw.org, a website run by the US-based Jeho-
vah’s Witnesses, a Christian denomination. A ma-
jority of the texts come from the Jehovah’s Wit-
nesses’ magazines Awake! and Watchtower. Re-
leased as a corpus in 2019, JW300 has been cited
over 180 times as of March 2024. The African
grassroots open-source NLP project Masakhane
(masakhane.io) had been using JW300 to train
Machine Translation models, until receiving legal
advice in 2023 that this was breaching copyright.
A subsequent request by Masakhane to the Jeho-
vah’s Witnesses for permission to use the data was
declined.8
Our final recent example concerns the release of
MADLAD-400, a new text dataset containing 3T
tokens in 419 languages (Kudugunta et al., 2023).
It uses 2022 snapshots of the CommonCrawl web
crawl (commoncrawl.org) and the paper was
uploaded to arXiv in September 2023. Auditing of
a preliminary version of the dataset, spanning 498
languages, revealed that for 141 languages there
were “significant amounts” of Bible data. Signifi-
cant amounts of Jehovah’s Witnesses data was also
found for 37 languages, and of Church of Jesus
Christ of the Latter Day Saints (LDS) data for 2
languages. (No Quran data was reported to be
found in significant amounts.)
8See
https://infojustice.org/archives/
45258.
4
Considerations around Sacred Texts
Having demonstrated above that religious texts
have been used in thousands of NLP papers, we
now discuss some of the ethical considerations.
This topic has not received much prior attention,
although it is touched upon by Mager et al. (2023,
sec. 3) and Pratap et al. (2023, sec. 8). Our goal is
not to critique the works identified in the previous
section, but rather to provide a toolbox for assist-
ing critical thinking in the future. In this section
we lay out our positions that relevant considera-
tions include not just technological outcomes, but
also cultural standpoints, cultural inclusion, and
relationships between global and marginalized cul-
tures. With this in mind, we now consider the use
of sacred texts in NLP from a range of lenses.
4.1
Ethical theories
Ethical theories are attempts at explaining why ac-
tions might be called right or wrong. In this section
we consider the use of sacred texts through just two
ethical theories, however our broader point is that if
analyses of NLP projects focus narrowly on using
a single theory then they risk minimizing concerns
which other theories bring more focus to.
The term consequentialism refers to a family
of normative theories which emphasize the impor-
tance of considering the consequences of actions,
including analysis of risks and benefits. One exam-
ple of a consequentialist theory is utilitarianism,
which holds that the best action is one that max-
imizes wellbeing and minimizes suffering. One
challenge with applying these theories in an NLP
research context is that in practice research activ-
ities are often far removed from applications, and
any eventual path between the two can be unknow-
able or uncertain. Even if the impacts on users of
NLP applications can be known, challenges arise
in calculating aggregate benefits across disparate
stakeholders with different objectives. Perhaps the
easiest consequences to reason about are the im-
pacts of NLP research and applications on the lives
of the researchers and developers themselves, since
research papers and software bring rewards in the
forms of measurable kudos, citations, career pro-
gression, etc. How can such benefits be weighed
against uncertain risks of causing serious offense
to religious communities? If translations of re-
ligious texts are purchased from a proselytizing
organization, what are the downstream impacts of
the organization’s re-investing those payments into
their projects?
The term deontology refers to a normative the-
ory which posits that there are rules or principles
which determine the rightness of wrongness of ac-
tions, rather than the consequences. Within an NLP
context, this might lead to a focus on the upstream
actions such as sourcing of data, rather than down-
stream actions such as usage of NLP applications.
Within the context of religious texts and their trans-
lations, this might lead to questions such as: Were
the appropriate people involved in the creation of
a dataset of sacred texts? Did they have the right
roles and relationships from within the perspec-
tive of followers of the religion? Do translators
of sacred texts have the right specialist linguistic,
religious, and and cultural knowledge? Were the
translators paid fairly, both individually and collec-
tively? Were consent practices around voice record-
ings followed? Generally, was the dataset collected
in a manner aligned with best research practices,
e.g., as operationalized by research ethics boards?
Prabhumoye et al. (2020) discuss the importance of
informed consent for deontological approaches to
NLP ethics, and community-level consent might be
an appropriate lens for thinking about communities
of religious practice.
4.2
AI principles
We use the term AI principles here to refer broadly
to the hundreds of sets of principles for responsible
and ethical AI that have been released by compa-
nies and governments in recent years. Unlike the
ethical theories described above, these are focused
on AI technologies. Although all unique in their
own way, the various sets of principles also have
many facets in common (Floridi and Cowls, 2022),
such as safety, privacy, bias, fairness, accountabil-
ity, and transparency. We expect the AI Principles-
related concerns to be highly dependent on NLP
system functionality and thus on the application
domain.
Given the frequent use of sacred texts for training
and evaluating MT systems, we provide a sketch in
Table 3 of how AI Principles might raise different
flavors of considerations.9 Relevant to the potential
for MT bias, Evans and Sasse (2004, p. 4) observe
that parallel Bibles will provide signal on how to
translate “arise!” and “Cain fought with Abel”, but
will not help with translating culture-specific con-
9Mager et al. (2023) also provide a useful discussion of
Ethics and Machine Translation.
AI Principle
Example possible considerations
Safety
Could the errors made by an MT model trained on sacred texts perpetuate harmful
misinformation and hate speech about religiously significant topics?
Privacy
In speech-to-speech translation, could spoken recordings of religious texts (cf. Sec-
tion 3.2) enable speakers to be identified and their religious beliefs compromised?
Bias and fairness
In what specific ways are religious texts not representative of other domains (cf.
Mayhew et al., 2017; Adelani et al., 2021; Evans and Sasse, 2004)? Do these biases
cause MT models to have unfair impacts? What are the specific limitations of MT
eval sets which are largely constituted by religious texts?
Accountability
What mechanisms exist for non-English speaking religious communities to report
and escalate offensive translations resulting from the use or religious texts? Who is
responsible for responding to such reports and mitigating the harms?
Transparency
Do we have accessible evidence that religious communities were consulted when
building corpora of parallel religious texts to use for MT?
Table 3: Non-exhaustive list of possible AI Principles considerations related to using religious texts for MT.
cepts of the world’s diverse languages. Similarly,
MT evaluation will have limitations whenever eval
sets are largely constituted by parallel religious
texts.
4.3
Cultural considerations
Authors of NLP publications do not represent
global diversity (Rungta et al., 2022), and hence
special consideration needs to be given to cultural
standpoints. A useful starting premise might be
that ethical consideration of ACL papers should
not be biased either against nor towards any re-
ligions. This might seem to suggest that Rawls’
Veil of Ignorance could provide a guide (Rawls,
1971). That is, one’s consideration of the use of
sacred texts within NLP should proceed as if we
are each in ignorance of which is our own reli-
gion (if any). For example, how would I feel about
NLP’s reliance on texts from major religions if my
own culture and religion might be ones which are
marginalized and endangered?
Although the Veil of Ignorance might seem at-
tractive at face value, we take the position that our
ability in practice to truly avoid being informed
by our own cultural backgrounds and affiliations
is extremely questionable. We must instead accept
that we have cultural standpoints. The emic/etic
distinction originated in linguistics in the 1950s
for describing different standpoints for language
research (Mostowlansky and Rota, 2020). Emic is
commonly used to describe research on a culture
from the perspective of people of that culture. This
contrasts with etic research, which takes an out-
sider’s perspective. When NLP handles religious
texts, we can distinguish research problems and
applications which are within the researcher’s own
religious context, from those applications which
impact those having other religious beliefs (e.g.,
translation for the purpose of proselytizing).
4.3.1
On relativism and the ACL community
One possible objection to the argument that greater
consideration of NLP’s use of sacred texts is
needed is based on an argument of cultural rela-
tivism. Such an argument would contend that by
using sacred texts for an extended period, the ACL
community has demonstrated that such practices
are judged as acceptable by the norms of the ACL
community.
We counter that such an argument would be
stronger if the ACL community both had a stronger
history of reflexive practices, and was more cultur-
ally diverse. Compared to many other disciplines,
we find that ACL’s interest in ethics to be relatively
recent (see Appendix E). The ACL adopts the ACM
Code of Ethics,10 a general code for computing
professionals which makes no mention of work-
ing with cultural data such as language. Unlike
some other disciplines, positionality statements are
rare in ACL papers, with “researcher positional-
ity” and “author positionality” each having only a
single (and recent) result in the ACL Anthology
as of September 2023. We also find that the ACL
community does not represent the diversity of the
world’s local languages and religions; in fact dis-
parities in sources of ACL publications might be
10https://www.aclweb.org/portal/
content/acl-code-ethics
increasing (Rungta et al., 2022).
4.4
Power and marginalization
The more different that a culture is from the global
cultures which dominate NLP research, the less
we should expect the NLP community to under-
stand local concerns. Consideration of marginal-
ized local cultures might bring our focus to ques-
tions of how NLP technologies serve to re-arrange
power. Which actions are encouraged or discour-
aged by NLP technologies, and by who? Blodgett
has called for NLP researchers to focus their ethical
considerations on power relations between technol-
ogists and communities (Blodgett et al., 2020). As
discussed in Section 3, many NLP papers using the
Bible use translations of its texts into Indigenous
languages. In this section we give special attention
in this section to concerns of local Indigenous com-
munities. Their voices are among the least likely
to be represented in ACL’s prestigious conferences
and journals. And their relationships with global
projects are likely to involve large power disparities
such that “the asymmetry of power is the cause of
domination” (Mager et al., 2023).
4.4.1
Indigenous perspectives
Indigenous concerns regarding data sovereignty
describe the importance of data governance and In-
digenous Cultural and Intellectual Property (ICIP),
but also a broader set of concerns regarding prac-
tices for projects involving Indigenous data (e.g.,
Carroll et al., 2020; National Health and Medical
Research Council (Australia), 2018; Taiuru, 2021;
Janke, 2021; Smith, 2021). Surveying the plural-
ity of perspectives is beyond the scope of this pa-
per, however they share common themes around re-
spect, cooperative relationships which include con-
sultation and negotiation, shared control, and pro-
viding benefits to community (Mager et al., 2023;
Cooper et al., 2024).
4.4.2
Human rights
As tools of colonizing projects, translations of sa-
cred texts into Indigenous languages have been
described as a “well documented example of the
non-ethical misuse of translation” (Mager et al.,
2023). One consideration for NLP is whether us-
ing such translations constitutes complicity with,
and promotion of, projects which might violate in-
ternational human rights to maintain Indigenous
cultures.
Kenyan human rights scholar Makua Mutua de-
scribes the “basic contradictions” between prose-
lytizing religions and Indigenous cultures (Mutua,
2004). Observing that religion is woven into every
aspect of Indigenous social and cultural life, includ-
ing dances, storytelling, and marriage practices,
Mutua argues that such cultures’ meeting with pros-
elytizing Christian and Islam faiths amounts to cul-
tural genocide. In some cases, this characterization
seems valid. In other cases, it might perhaps be
too strong for the complex realities of syncretic
responses by Indigenous communities to prosely-
tizing cultures.
Mutua argues that the right to freedom of re-
ligious belief cannot be considered to exist in a
level playing field in which local cultures can com-
pete with global ones. Rather, the contexts of cul-
tural invasion unfairly privilege global religions,
including histories of missionaries making access
to education and health services conditional on the
“salvation” of “infidels”. This echoes arguments
by legal scholars that the power and sovereignty
dynamics between source and target cultures con-
stitute important factors between proper and im-
proper proselytism (Stahnke, 1999). The Human
Rights Committee has acknowledged that the cul-
tural rights protected under Article 27 depend on
the ability of a minority group “to maintain its cul-
ture, language or religion”.11 As such, Prof. Mutua
argues that the (then Draft) UN Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous People appears to prohibit
proselytizing by agents external to the the Indige-
nous culture in order to create space for Indigenous
peoples to maintain their cultures amidst external
threats.
5
Discussion and Recommendations
We take the position that the ACL should strive to
be aware of risks of harms to religious communi-
ties, including dignitive harms, that NLP research
may cause or be complicit with. It is beyond the
scope of this paper to weigh possible benefits of
NLP technologies developed using religious texts
against the ethical considerations of such use, and
any such benefits may be context- and application-
specific. However, we note that benefits are of-
ten asserted for languages for which NLP has few
resources, and we advocate that such claims of
benefits should be evaluated paying attention to
11General
Comment
No˙23,
UN
Doc.
IC-
CPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.5 (1994), para. 6.2.
local language ecologies (Bird, 2022), to the roles
of technology in supporting minority languages
(Holton, 2011), and to the real technology needs of
communities (e.g., Liu et al., 2022).
We now suggest five specific actions for the NLP
community to mitigate the risks of consequential,
procedural, and dignitive harms.
1. Discuss ethical considerations.
If one should
never speak of religion in polite company, then
perhaps ACL forums should be less polite. We
suggest that discussion of ethical considerations in
NLP papers using religious data should be much
more prevalent than it currently is. We propose
that Section 4 provides a good starting point for
NLP researchers to think about possible concerns,
however, building on HCI best practices we also
encourage researchers to talk to members of rele-
vant religious communities in order to understand
concerns which might lie outside the researchers’
domains of lived experience.
2. Consider different ethical theories.
It has
been argued that NLP research often implicitly
adopts a utilitarian lens, in the process minimiz-
ing other ethical considerations (e.g., Hutchinson
et al., 2022b). We encourage NLP researchers us-
ing sacred texts to contemplate approaching ethical
considerations from numerous angles, including
not just deontology (discussed in Section 4.1), but
also alternatives such as virtue ethics and ethics of
care.
3. Delve into domain specifics.
We encourage
more work on specific AI principle risks of dif-
ferent NLP domains when using religious texts
(cf. Section 4.2). What are the specific ways in
which various religious texts are not representative
of other domains? What are the model biases that
result? Are there specific risks around offensive
misinformation on religious topics? Have datasets
incorporating sacred texts followed best practices
around transparency (e.g. Bender and Friedman,
2018; Gebru et al., 2021; Pushkarna et al., 2022)?
4. Situate NLP work culturally.
When should
an NLP practitioner tread more carefully? We sug-
gest that when handling sacred data from other
cultures and religions there will be more risks,
since the NLP practitioner will have almost cer-
tainly have gaps in their knowledge, and will likely
also have differing values (Hershcovich et al., 2022;
Prabhakaran et al., 2022b). We suggest it is useful
to talk of etic NLP and emic NLP (cf. Section 4.3),
according to whether the language technology is
for the own linguistic and religious cultures of the
NLP practitioner vs. those of others. Linguistic
positionality statements have been recommended
by researchers who are aware of how different pri-
orities and agendas between researchers and lan-
guage communities can impact projects (e.g., Rol-
land et al., 2023; Cormier, 2018). Similarly, we
suggest that religion positionality statements, for
NLP research working with religious data, can also
provide a useful signal for the NLP community
concerning agendas. For example, hypothetically,
would non-Muslim researchers understand the Mus-
lim community’s concerns regarding automated
mis-translations of the Quran?
5. Attend to concerns of marginalized cultures.
Given the NLP community’s skew towards the
West (Rungta et al., 2022), the values of, and pos-
sible harms to, local communities of diverse cul-
tures are not known by most NLP researchers. For
Indigenous language NLP projects using transla-
tions of sacred texts, we echo calls for more con-
sideration of local colonial contexts, to consider
community opinions, and for research to prioritize
the needs of Indigenous communities (Bird, 2020;
Schwartz, 2022; Alvarado Garcia et al., 2021).
Mager et al. (2023) demonstrate one way in which
community opinions can be sought regarding NLP
projects, and deeper relationships with communi-
ties will provide more insights (Bird and Yibarbuk,
2024; Cooper et al., 2024). NLP researchers work-
ing with Indigenous languages should become fa-
miliar with Indigenous perspectives mentioned in
Section 4.4, and with codes of conduct such as that
of the Endangered Languages Project.12 With the
imminent extinction of many Indigenous languages
and religions, we also suggest there may be a role
for NLP to play in documenting and maintaining
“first-person accounts of what people once believed
in and how they talked to and about their gods”
(Harrison, 2007, p, 153).
One pertinent question is how often the papers
surveyed in Section 3 adhere to these recommen-
dations. Regarding discussing ethical consider-
ations, Pratap et al. (2023, sec. 8.3) do include a
section, albeit short, on Ethical Considerations of
the use of religious texts, although we found that
doing so is rare. Kudugunta et al. (2023) and Imani
12https://fpcc.ca/wp-content/uploads/
2023/02/CodeOfConduct_Web.pdf
et al. (2023) both have short ethics statements, but
neither mentions religion. Despite translation of the
Quran being a “problematic and controversial is-
sue for Muslims” (Fatani, 2006), none of the many
papers surveyed in Section 3.1 that evaluate MT
systems discuss ethical considerations.
Regarding ethical theories, papers using reli-
gious texts do not seem to break the general NLP
trend of adopting a utilitarian mindset (Hutchin-
son et al., 2022b) and focusing ethical discussion
on narrow questions such as decontextualized bias
measurement (Blodgett et al., 2020).
Regarding domain specifics, (Pratap et al., 2023)
attempt to understand biases in their data, although
the details are scarce, and their comparison is
limited to a dataset based on English language
Wikipedia. Kudugunta et al. (2023) and Imani et al.
(2023) have no discussions of biases, although the
latter do include a datasheet (Gebru et al., 2021).
Regarding situating work culturally, position-
ality statements are extremely rare in the ACL An-
thology papers. Some rare examples of NLP papers
mentioning author positionality or standpoint are
(McMillan-Major et al., 2021; Hutchinson et al.,
2022a; Santy et al., 2023; Yoder et al., 2023; Ghosh
and Caliskan, 2023). Only half of ACL papers even
mention the language(s) they study (Ducel et al.,
2022), giving a false veneer of independence (Ben-
der, 2019).
Regarding attending to concerns of marginal-
ized cultures, this is rarely done in NLP research.
NLP papers that consider ethical topics tend to fo-
cus on English, and most papers on languages other
than English focus on model accuracy (Ruder et al.,
2022). Pratap et al. (2023) mention how their bias
analysis was constrained by lack of easily available
native speakers for most languages, which also pre-
cluded the possibility of discovering community
concerns beyond bias.
6
Conclusion
Thousands of NLP research papers have used reli-
gious texts, due to their availability, convenience,
and multilinguality. However these papers rarely
acknowledge the religious significance of these
texts, nor their cultural contexts, and the ethical
considerations of such use have not previously
been explored. This position paper presented the
first detailed study of the use of religious texts in
NLP research, finding that common scenarios in-
clude machine translation and dataset creation. We
have argued that responsible secularism requires
the NLP community to engage with concerns about
how such NLP activities might impact religious
communities—especially the most marginalized
ones—or might be complicit with projects which
do. We provided a detailed account of some of the
considerations, with a focus on ethical theories, AI
principles, cultural considerations, and marginal-
ized communities. We suggested that the field of
NLP would benefit from more discussion of the di-
verse and specific concerns around using religious
texts. We proposed that the NLP community en-
gage more with questions of researcher positional-
ity and cultural standpoints, especially with regards
to marginalized cultures.
7
Researcher Positionality
I live and work in a secular, multicultural, ma-
jority English-speaking, colonized country of the
Global North. I am linguistically competent only
in English. My experiences include studies and
employment in linguistics and NLP, but I have no
background in religious studies. I grappled while
writing this paper with my lack of first-hand experi-
ential understanding of religion, and thus too with
my personal role in arguing for more consideration
of global and marginalized religious communities.
Limitations
Any position paper is limited by the experiences of
the authors. A Researcher Positionality statement
is included partly to address this.
We acknowledge that the ACL Anthology used
in Section 3 might not be representative of the en-
tire field of NLP, e.g., missing relevant work such
as (Chandra and Ranjan, 2022; Bashir et al., 2023),
and NLP projects in industry might not be well rep-
resented in the ACL Anthology. Another limitation
is that we exclude publications in languages other
than English. Our reliance on keyword searches,
rather than more sophisticated analyses of the ACL
corpus, is a limitation. We also acknowledge that
the ACL Anthology’s non-determinate search re-
sult counts are a limitation, seemingly an artefact of
the use under the hood of Google’s Programmable
Search Engine, however reproducing the ACL An-
thology’s search functionality is beyond the scope
of this position paper.
This paper was unable to accommodate lengthy
discussion of religious texts in specific NLP do-
mains or specific NLP projects. As the topic of
religious texts in NLP has not previously received
attention, we took the position that focusing on
breadth was most useful. However in Section 5 we
do suggest that future work focus more on ethical
considerations of using religious texts in specific
NLP domains.
This paper does not do justice to the complexi-
ties of many of the topics it touches upon. Perhaps
chief among these are the histories of Indigenous
communities, proselytizing religions and colonial
projects. Colonial missionaries saw their own roles
in a positive way despite the accompanying cul-
tural destruction (Nakata, 2007). However in recent
decades, there have at times been apologies from
some church bodies for histories of religious domi-
nation which marginalized Indigenous languages
and religious practices (Bush, 2015). Indigenous
communities have at times, facing many colonial
pressures including threats of language extinction,
used Bible translations as tools for language main-
tenance (e.g., Davis, 2015). Cultural protocols can
also be maintained, for example spoken recordings
of Bible translations in Kanien’kéha are still sub-
ject to cultural practices around speakers who have
passed away (Pine et al., 2022), while on Groote
Eylandt, in Northern Australia, the Anindilyakwa
people reinterpreted Christianity of the missions
in their own ways leading to a “hybridisation of
cultures” (Rademaker, 2014).
This paper also does not fully consider relevant
topics concerning human rights. While we agree
with scholars such as Prabhakaran et al. (2022a)
that human rights provide a useful framework for
considering AI ethics, we note that agreement on
how to interpret collective and cultural rights is not
universal; for some perspectives from human rights
scholars see (Jakubowski, 2016; Sanders, 1991;
Ramcharan, 1993).
References
David I Adelani, Dana Ruiter, Jesujoba O Alabi,
Damilola Adebonojo, Adesina Ayeni, Mofe Adeyemi,
Ayodele Awokoya, and Cristina España-Bonet. 2021.
The effect of domain and diacritics in Yorùbá-English
neural machine translation. Proceedings of Machine
Translation Summit XVIII: Research Track.
Željko Agi´c and Ivan Vuli´c. 2019. JW300: A wide-
coverage parallel corpus for low-resource languages.
In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages 3204–
3210.
Mark Alfano, Dirk Hovy, Margaret Mitchell, and
Michael Strube. 2018. Proceedings of the second
acl workshop on ethics in Natural Language Process-
ing. In Proceedings of the Second ACL Workshop on
Ethics in Natural Language Processing.
Adriana Alvarado Garcia, Juan F Maestre, Manuhuia
Barcham,
Marilyn
Iriarte,
Marisol
Wong-
Villacres, Oscar A Lemus, Palak Dudani, Pedro
Reynolds-Cuéllar,
Ruotong Wang,
and Teresa
Cerratto Pargman. 2021. Decolonial pathways: Our
manifesto for a decolonizing agenda in HCI research
and design.
In Extended Abstracts of the 2021
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, pages 1–9.
Muhammad Huzaifa Bashir, Aqil M Azmi, Haq Nawaz,
Wajdi Zaghouani, Mona Diab, Ala Al-Fuqaha, and
Junaid Qadir. 2023. Arabic natural language pro-
cessing for Qur’anic research: A systematic review.
Artificial Intelligence Review, 56(7):6801–6854.
Emily Bender. 2019. The #BenderRule: On naming the
languages we study and why it matters. The Gradient,
14:34.
Emily M Bender and Batya Friedman. 2018.
Data
statements for Natural Language Processing: Toward
mitigating system bias and enabling better science.
Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 6:587–604.
Steven Bird. 2020. Decolonising speech and language
technology. In Proceedings of the 28th international
conference on computational linguistics, pages 3504–
3519.
Steven Bird. 2022. Local languages, third spaces, and
other high-resource scenarios. In 60th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
ACL 2022, pages 7817–7829. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (ACL).
Steven Bird, Robert Dale, Bonnie J Dorr, Bryan R Gib-
son, Mark Thomas Joseph, Min-Yen Kan, Dongwon
Lee, Brett Powley, Dragomir R Radev, Yee Fan Tan,
et al. 2008. The ACL anthology reference corpus: A
reference dataset for bibliographic research in com-
putational linguistics. In LREC.
Steven Bird and Dean Yibarbuk. 2024. Centering the
speech community. In Proceedings of the 18th Con-
ference of the European Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-
pers), pages 826–839.
Su Lin Blodgett, Solon Barocas, Hal Daumé III, and
Hanna Wallach. 2020.
Language (technology) is
power: A critical survey of "bias" in NLP. Proceed-
ings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Marcel Bollmann, Nathan Schneider, Arne Köhn, and
Matt Post. 2023. Two decades of the ACL Anthol-
ogy: Development, impact, and open challenges. In
Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop for Natural Lan-
guage Processing Open Source Software (NLP-OSS
2023), pages 83–94.
Peter G Bush. 2015. The Canadian churches’ apologies
for colonialism and residential schools, 1986-1998.
Peace research, pages 47–70.
Stephanie Russo Carroll, Ibrahim Garba, Oscar L
Figueroa-Rodríguez, Jarita Holbrook, Raymond
Lovett, Simeon Materechera, Mark Parsons, Kay
Raseroka, Desi Rodriguez-Lonebear, Robyn Rowe,
et al. 2020. The CARE principles for Indigenous
data governance. Data Science Journal, 19:43–43.
Rohitash Chandra and Mukul Ranjan. 2022. Artificial
intelligence for topic modelling in Hindu philosophy:
Mapping themes between the Upanishads and the
Bhagavad Gita. Plos one, 17(9):e0273476.
Peter A Chew, Steve J Verzi, Travis L Bauer, and
Jonathan T McClain. 2006. Evaluation of the Bible
as a resource for cross-language information retrieval.
In Proceedings of the workshop on multilingual lan-
guage resources and interoperability, pages 68–74.
Ned Cooper, Courtney Heldreth, and Ben Hutchinson.
2024. “It’s how you do things that matters”: Attend-
ing to process to better serve Indigenous communities
with language technologies. In Proceedings of the
18th Conference of the European Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2:
Short Papers), pages 204–211, St. Julian’s, Malta.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Gail Cormier. 2018.
The language variable in edu-
cational research: An exploration of researcher po-
sitionality, translation, and interpretation. Interna-
tional Journal of Research & Method in Education,
41(3):328–341.
Jenny L Davis. 2015. Intersections of religion and lan-
guage revitalization. The Changing World Religion
Map: Sacred Places, Identities, Practices and Poli-
tics, pages 1091–1101.
Lise M. Dobrin and Jeff Good. 2009. Practical lan-
guage development: Whose mission?
Language,
85(3):619–629.
Jesse Dodge, Suchin Gururangan, Dallas Card, Roy
Schwartz, and Noah A Smith. 2019.
Show your
work: Improved reporting of experimental results. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th
International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing.
Fanny Ducel, Karën Fort, Gaël Lejeune, and Yves Lep-
age. 2022. Do we name the languages we study?
the #BenderRule in LREC and ACL articles. In Pro-
ceedings of the Thirteenth Language Resources and
Evaluation Conference, pages 564–573.
Patience Epps and Herb Ladley. 2009. Syntax, souls, or
speakers? On SIL and community language develop-
ment. Language, 85(3):640–646.
Nicholas Evans and Hans-Jürgen Sasse. 2004. Search-
ing for meaning in the Library of Babel: field se-
mantics and problems of digital archiving. Open
Conference Systems, University of Sydney, Faculty
of Arts.
Afnan Fatani. 2006. Translation and the Qur’an. In
Oliver Leaman, editor, The Qur’an: an encyclopae-
dia, pages 657––669.
Luciano Floridi and Josh Cowls. 2022. A unified frame-
work of five principles for AI in society. Machine
learning and the city: Applications in architecture
and urban design, pages 535–545.
Timnit Gebru,
Jamie Morgenstern,
Briana Vec-
chione, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, Hanna Wallach,
Hal Daumé III, and Kate Crawford. 2021. Datasheets
for datasets. Communications of the ACM, 64(12):86–
92.
Sourojit Ghosh and Aylin Caliskan. 2023. ChatGPT
perpetuates gender bias in machine translation and ig-
nores non-gendered pronouns: Findings across Ben-
gali and five other low-resource languages. Proceed-
ings of the 2023 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics,
and Society.
Courtney Handman. 2009.
Language ideologies,
endangered-language linguistics, and Christianiza-
tion. Language, 85(3):635–639.
K David Harrison. 2007. When languages die: The
extinction of the world’s languages and the erosion
of human knowledge. Oxford University Press.
Daniel Hershcovich, Stella Frank, Heather Lent,
Miryam de Lhoneux, Mostafa Abdou, Stephanie
Brandl, Emanuele Bugliarello, Laura Cabello Pi-
queras, Ilias Chalkidis, Ruixiang Cui, Constanza
Fierro, Katerina Margatina, Phillip Rust, and Anders
Søgaard. 2022. Challenges and strategies in cross-
cultural NLP. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 6997–7013,
Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Gary Holton. 2011. The role of information technology
in supporting minority and endangered languages.
In Peter K Austin and Julia Sallabank, editors, The
Cambridge handbook of endangered languages. Cam-
bridge University Press.
Gary Holton, Wesley Y Leonard, and Peter L Pulsifer.
2022. Indigenous peoples, ethics, and linguistic data.
In Andrea L. Berez-Kroeker, Bradley McDonnell,
and Eve Koller, editors, The Open Handbook of Lin-
guistic Data Management, pages 49–60.
Dirk Hovy, Shannon L Spruit, Margaret Mitchell,
Emily M Bender, Michael Strube, and Hanna Wal-
lach. 2017. Proceedings of the first ACL workshop
on ethics in Natural Language Processing. In Pro-
ceedings of the First ACL Workshop on Ethics in
Natural Language Processing.
Ben Hutchinson, Jason Baldridge, and Vinodkumar
Prabhakaran. 2022a. Underspecification in scene
description-to-depiction tasks. In Proceedings of the
2nd Conference of the Asia-Pacific Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics and the 12th
International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1172–
1184, Online only. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Ben Hutchinson, Negar Rostamzadeh, Christina Greer,
Katherine Heller, and Vinodkumar Prabhakaran.
2022b. Evaluation gaps in machine learning prac-
tice. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on
Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pages
1859–1876.
Ayyoob Imani, Peiqin Lin, Amir Hossein Kargaran,
Silvia Severini, Masoud Jalili Sabet, Nora Kassner,
Chunlan Ma, Helmut Schmid, André FT Martins,
François Yvon, et al. 2023. Glot500: Scaling mul-
tilingual corpora and language models to 500 lan-
guages. Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers).
Andrzej Jakubowski. 2016. Cultural Rights as Collec-
tive Rights: an international law perspective, vol-
ume 7. Brill.
Terri Janke. 2021. True tracks: Indigenous cultural
and intellectual property principles for putting self-
determination into practice. University of New South
Wales Press.
Sneha Kudugunta, Isaac Caswell, Biao Zhang, Xavier
Garcia, Christopher A Choquette-Choo, Katherine
Lee, Derrick Xin, Aditya Kusupati, Romi Stella,
Ankur Bapna, et al. 2023. MADLAD-400: A mul-
tilingual and document-level large audited dataset.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.04662.
Zoey Liu, Crystal Richardson, Richard Hatcher Jr, and
Emily Prud’hommeaux. 2022. Not always about
you: Prioritizing community needs when developing
endangered language technology. In Proceedings
of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers).
Manuel Mager, Elisabeth Mager, Katharina Kann, and
Ngoc Thang Vu. 2023. Ethical considerations for
machine translation of Indigenous languages: Giving
a voice to the speakers.
Proceedings of the 61st
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics Volume 1: Long Papers.
Stephen Mayhew, Chen-Tse Tsai, and Dan Roth. 2017.
Cheap translation for cross-lingual named entity
recognition. In Proceedings of the 2017 conference
on empirical methods in natural language processing,
pages 2536–2545.
Angelina McMillan-Major, Salomey Osei, Juan Diego
Rodriguez, Pawan Sasanka Ammanamanchi, Sebas-
tian Gehrmann, and Yacine Jernite. 2021. Reusable
templates and guides for documenting datasets and
models for natural language processing and gener-
ation: A case study of the HuggingFace and GEM
data and model cards. In Proceedings of the 1st Work-
shop on Natural Language Generation, Evaluation,
and Metrics (GEM 2021), pages 121–135, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Till Mostowlansky and Andrea Rota. 2020. Emic and
etic. In Felix Stein, editor, The Open Encyclopedia
of Anthropology. University of Cambridge.
Makau Mutua. 2004. Proselytism and cultural integrity.
In Facilitating Freedom of Religion or Belief: A Desk-
book, pages 651–668. Brill Nijhoff.
Martin N Nakata. 2007. Disciplining the savages, sav-
aging the disciplines. Aboriginal Studies Press.
National Health and Medical Research Council (Aus-
tralia). 2018. Ethical conduct in research with Abo-
riginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples and com-
munities: Guidelines for researchers and stakehold-
ers. National Health and Medical Research Council.
Robert Cummings Neville. 2018. Defining religion:
Essays in philosophy of religion. State University of
New York Press.
Aidan Pine, Dan Wells, Nathan Brinklow, Patrick Lit-
tell, and Korin Richmond. 2022. Requirements and
motivations of low-resource speech synthesis for lan-
guage revitalization. In Proceedings of the 60th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 7346–
7359.
Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Margaret Mitchell, Timnit
Gebru, and Iason Gabriel. 2022a. A human rights-
based approach to responsible AI. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.02667.
Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Rida Qadri, and Ben Hutchin-
son. 2022b. Cultural incongruencies in Artificial
Intelligence. In Proceedings of the NeurIPS 2022
Workshop on Cultures in AI/AI in Culture.
Shrimai Prabhumoye, Brendon Boldt, Ruslan Salakhut-
dinov, and Alan W Black. 2020. Case study: De-
ontological ethics in NLP. Proceedings of the 2021
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies.
Vineel Pratap, Andros Tjandra, Bowen Shi, Paden
Tomasello, Arun Babu, Sayani Kundu, Ali Elkahky,
Zhaoheng Ni, Apoorv Vyas, Maryam Fazel-Zarandi,
et al. 2023. Scaling speech technology to 1,000+
languages. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13516.
Mahima Pushkarna, Andrew Zaldivar, and Oddur Kjar-
tansson. 2022. Data cards: Purposeful and transpar-
ent dataset documentation for responsible AI. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness,
Accountability, and Transparency, pages 1776–1826.
Laura Rademaker. 2014. Language and Australian Abo-
riginal history; Anindilyakwa and English on Groote
Eylandt. History Australia, 11(2):222–239.
Bertrand G Ramcharan. 1993. Individual, collective and
group rights: History, theory, practice and contem-
porary evolution. International Journal on Minority
and Group Rights, 1(1):27–43.
John Rawls. 1971. A theory of justice. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Philip Resnik, Mari Broman Olsen, and Mona Diab.
1999. The Bible as a parallel corpus: Annotating the
‘book of 2000 tongues’. Computers and the Humani-
ties, 33:129–153.
Anna Rogers, Timothy Baldwin, and Kobi Leins. 2021.
‘Just what do you think you’re doing, Dave?’ a check-
list for responsible data use in NLP. In Findings
of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
EMNLP 2021, pages 4821–4833, Punta Cana, Do-
minican Republic. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Louise Rolland, Hannah M King, and Pernelle Lorette.
2023. Methodological implications of participant
and researcher multilingualism: making language
dynamics visible. Journal of Multilingual and Multi-
cultural Development, 44(8):645–656.
Sebastian Ruder, Ivan Vuli´c, and Anders Søgaard.
2022. Square one bias in NLP: Towards a multi-
dimensional exploration of the research manifold.
In Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: ACL 2022, pages 2340–2354, Dublin,
Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Mukund Rungta, Janvijay Singh, Saif M Mohammad,
and Diyi Yang. 2022. Geographic citation gaps in
NLP research. Proceedings of the 2022 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing.
Douglas Sanders. 1991.
Collective rights.
Human
Rights Quarterly, 13:368.
Sebastin Santy, Jenny Liang, Ronan Le Bras, Katharina
Reinecke, and Maarten Sap. 2023. NLPositionality:
Characterizing design biases of datasets and models.
In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
1: Long Papers), pages 9080–9102, Toronto, Canada.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Lane Schwartz. 2022. Primum Non Nocere: Before
working with Indigenous data, the ACL must con-
front ongoing colonialism. In Proceedings of the
60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, volume 2.
Linda Tuhiwai Smith. 2021. Decolonizing methodolo-
gies: Research and Indigenous peoples. Bloomsbury
Publishing.
Melford E Spiro. 2013. Religion: Problems of definition
and explanation. In Anthropological approaches to
the study of religion, pages 85–126. Routledge.
Tad Stahnke. 1999. Proselytism and the freedom to
change religion in international human rights law.
BYU L. Rev., page 251.
Karaitiana Taiuru. 2021.
Kaitiakitanga M¯aori
data
sovereignty
licences.
Retrieved
from
https://www.taiuru.maori.nz/
maori-data-sovereignty-licences/.
Michael Yoder, Ahmad Diab, David Brown, and Kath-
leen Carley. 2023. A weakly supervised classifier and
dataset of white supremacist language. In Proceed-
ings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Pa-
pers), pages 172–185, Toronto, Canada. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Gregory Younging. 2018. Elements of Indigenous style:
A guide for writing by and about Indigenous peoples.
Brush Education.
Appendix A: Characterizations of the Bible
and the Quran
To select NLP papers for the purposes of examin-
ing how they describe the Bible and the Quran, we
searched the ACL Anthology for papers mention-
ing “the bible is” or “the quran is”. The Bible is
characterized by NLP papers in the ACL Anthol-
ogy using phrases such as:
• ‘available in electronic form’, ‘most available’,
‘only available’, ‘readily available’, ‘available
online’ and ‘often the only resource available
for many languages’;
• ‘parallel’, ‘natural source of parallel data’,
‘ideal source of parallel texts’, and ‘aligned’;
• ‘short’, ‘large’, and ‘[comparatively] small’;
• ‘massively multilingual’, and ‘most trans-
lated’;
• ‘central religious text’;
• other descriptions including ‘narrative of a
reasonably straightforward kind’, ‘represen-
tative of core vocabulary’, ‘one of the most
familiar documents’.
The Quran is characterized by NLP papers in the
ACL Anthology using phrases such as:
• ‘significant religious text’, ‘[believed by Mus-
lims to be] God’s word’, ‘[believed by Mus-
lims to be] God’s divine words’;
• ‘fully diacritized’;
• ‘written in a unique literary style, close to very
poetic language’.
Appendix B: Selection of ACL Papers
To select papers to analyze for NLP application
domain, we took the first 100 search results on
the ACL Anthology for the searches ‘bible’ and
‘koran’. We omitted 12 ‘bible’ search results from
our analysis due to either:
• not being in English (2);
• not being research papers (6, e.g., book re-
views, invited talks, or proceedings);
• or being duplicates (4)
We omitted 36 ‘koran’ search results from our anal-
ysis due to either:
• not being research papers (16);
• being false positive search results (13, e.g., 10
had typos for ‘Korean’);
• only using the word ‘koran’ in references (3);
• only using the word ‘koran’ in footnotes (2);
• only using the word ‘koran’ in content gener-
ated by a model (2).
Appendix C: Application Domains of ACL
Papers using the Bible
Application domain
count
Machine translation
20
New corpus or resource
16
Morpho-syntactic tasks other than POS-
tagging and dependency parsing
9
POS tagging
6
Language modeling/pretraining
5
Literary analysis of the bible
4
Bible translation
3
Identify text re-use
2
Dependency parsing
2
Other, including sentiment analysis,
named entity, CLIR, patronizing lan-
guage detection
21
Total in selected sample
88
Filtered out (see Appendix B)
12
Total in sample
100
Table 4: Application domains of ACL papers using the
Bible.
Appendix D: Application Domains of ACL
Papers using the Quran
Application domain
count
Machine translation
47
Text generation
2
Language models
2
NER
2
Other, including hate speech and dia-
logue act classification
11
Total in selected sample
64
Filtered out (see Appendix B)
36
Total in sample
100
Table 5: Application domains of ACL papers mention-
ing ‘koran’.
Appendix E: A Brief Recent History of
Ethics in ACL
• 2017: The First Workshop on Ethics in NLP
is held, at EACL (Hovy et al., 2017).
• 2018: The Second Workshop on Ethics in
NLP is held, at NAACL-HLT (Alfano et al.,
2018).
• 2018: “Ethics and Fairness in NLP” is a pos-
sible submission topic for EMNLP.
• 2019: NAACL-HLT has a theme track of data
privacy and model bias.
• 2020: “Ethics and NLP” becomes a possi-
ble submission topic for the ACL conference.
This topic, or slight variations of it, are then
regular in *ACL and EMNLP conferences
from 2021 onwards.
• 2020: EMNLP introduces an Ethics Policy,
reserving the right to reject papers on ethical
grounds. ACL and NAACL follow in 2021,
and EACL in 2023. (There was no EACL in
2022.)
• 2021: ACL, NAACL and EMNLP begin al-
lowing extra space in papers for discussions
of ethical considerations. Reviewers are asked
to consider Ethics Review Questions. EACL
follows in 2023.
• 2021: EACL has a track on “Green and Sus-
tainable NLP”. NAACL has a submission
topic “Green NLP”.
• 2022: ACL Rolling Review (ARR) emerges
as a centralized reviewing service for ACL
conferences. It incorporates a Responsible
Research Checklist which includes a section
on Ethics and is based on the NeurIPS 2021
paper checklist as well as the work of Rogers
et al. (2021) and Dodge et al. (2019).
Corrections
A previous version of this paper stated that the Old
Testament is a sacred text of Islam.
