Title: On the validity of pre-trained transformers for natural language processing in the software engineering domain
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2109.04738v2
--------------------------------------------------

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
1
On the validity of pre-trained transformers for
natural language processing in the software
engineering domain
Julian von der Mosel, Alexander Trautsch, and Steffen Herbold
Abstract—Transformers are the current state-of-the-art of natural language processing in many domains and are using traction within
software engineering research as well. Such models are pre-trained on large amounts of data, usually from the general domain.
However, we only have a limited understanding regarding the validity of transformers within the software engineering domain, i.e., how
good such models are at understanding words and sentences within a software engineering context and how this improves the
state-of-the-art. Within this article, we shed light on this complex, but crucial issue. We compare BERT transformer models trained with
software engineering data with transformers based on general domain data in multiple dimensions: their vocabulary, their ability to
understand which words are missing, and their performance in classiﬁcation tasks. Our results show that for tasks that require
understanding of the software engineering context, pre-training with software engineering data is valuable, while general domain
models are sufﬁcient for general language understanding, also within the software engineering domain.
Index Terms—natural language processing, transformers, software engineering
!
1
INTRODUCTION
T
HE introduction of the transformer model [1] has per-
manently changed the ﬁeld of Natural Language Pro-
cessing (NLP) and paved the way for modern language rep-
resentation models such as BERT [2], XLNet [3], and GPT-2
[4]. These models have in common that they use transfer
learning in the form of pre-training to learn a general
representation of language, which can then be ﬁne-tuned
to various downstream tasks. Pre-training is expensive and
requires large text corpora. Therefore, most of the available
models are pre-trained by large companies on vast amounts
of general domain data such as the entire English Wikipedia
or the Common Crawl News dataset [5]. While these models
achieve remarkable results in a variety of NLP tasks, the
learned word representations (embeddings) still reﬂect the
general domain. This is a problem because the meaning of
words varies based on context and is therefore domain de-
pendent. Hence, there is a considerable interest in adapting
language representation models to different domains. For
example, SciBERT [6], BioBERT [7] and ClinicalBERT [8] are
BERT models adopted to the bio-medical domain.
In Software Engineering (SE) there are many technical
terms that do not exist in other domains and words that
have a different meaning within the domain. For example,
the word “bug” in the general domain refers to an insect, but
within the SE domain it refers to a defect. Similarly, “ant”
is an insect in the general domain, but a build tool within
SE. Words such as “”bug” and “ant” are called polysemes,
i.e., words that have different meanings depending on
•
J. von der Mosel and A. Trautsch were with the Institute of Computer
Science, University of Goettingen, Germany. GA, 30332.
E-mail: alexander.trautsch@cs.uni-goettingen.de
•
S. Herbold was with the Institute of Software and System Engineering,
TU Clausthal, Germany.
E-mail: steffen.herbold@tu-clausthal.de
Manuscript received XXX, 2021; revised XXX.
their context. The notion that pre-trained natural language
models should be adopted for the SE domain is not new
and was already considered by other, e.g., for word2vec
embeddings [9] and Named Entity Recognition (NER) with
BERT models [10].1
A gap within the previous research is the larger context.
The work by Efstathiou et al. [9] only established a difference
for the by now dated word2vec approach and not for
transformer models. Moreover, the focus is solely on the
position of a small set of terms within a vector space. This
ignores the ability of transformer models to account for the
context, which may be able to infer the correct meaning
of polysemes. And while Tabassum et al. [10] successfully
demonstrated that pre-training with SE data is also useful
with transformer models, they used a small variant of the
BERT model and did not explore why the model yielded
better results. Thus, it is unclear how much better such a
model is at capturing the correct meaning of words and if
larger transformer models, as they are usually used within
the state-of-the-art of NLP, would perform.
Within this work, we want to close this gap through
an exploratory study that aims to answer the following
research questions.
RQ1:
Are large pre-trained NLP models for SE able to
capture the meaning of SE vocabulary correctly?
RQ2:
Do large pre-trained NLP models for SE outper-
form models pre-trained on general domain data
and smaller NLP models that do not require pre-
training in SE applications?
We study these research questions using seBERT, a
BERTLARGE model we pre-trained on textual data from Stack
Overﬂow, GitHub, and Jira Issues and BERToverﬂow, a
1. Pre-trained models for source code are outside of our scope.
arXiv:2109.04738v2  [cs.SE]  12 May 2022
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
2
BERTBASE model that was pre-trained by Tabassum et al. [10]
on data from Stack Overﬂow.
For the ﬁrst research question, we evaluate the capability
of the models to correctly determine the meaning of terms
in three ways: the comparison of the vocabularies of the
models; their capability to infer missing words in a list of
curated sentences; and the capabilities to infer missing pol-
ysemes both in a SE domain corpus and a general domain
corpus. Inferring missing words is a task typically referred
to as Masked Language Modeling (MLM). Through this, we
complement the study by Efstathiou et al. [9] to understand
the ability of NLP models for SE to not only create valid
embeddings, but even predict the correct words given the
context. Such a prediction goes beyond similarity of single
words and would be a strong indicator that NLP models
for the SE domain should outperform general domain mod-
els because they are demonstrably better at capturing the
correct meaning.
For the second research question, we study the capability
of these models to improve the performance of prediction
tasks. We use several classiﬁcation tasks for this purpose.
1) The prediction of bug issues, similar to Herbold et al. [11].
This task allows us to study how well the models perform
with relatively long text for a task that is, in fact, often per-
formed inaccurately by humans [12]. 2) The identiﬁcation of
quality improving commits [13], i.e., a task with very short
texts. 3) Sentiment mining, a tasks where it is was already
shown that general domain transformers perform well [14].
Through our study, we provide the following contribu-
tions to the literature.
•
An analysis of the validity of NLP models for SE
through a combination of comparison of vocabular-
ies and the prediction of missing words. We show
that BERT models trained with SE data are able to
capture the correct meaning of SE terminology, at
the cost of the correct modeling of some general
domain concepts like geographical locations. We fur-
ther show that larger models trained with more di-
verse data are better at capturing nuanced meanings
than smaller domain speciﬁc models.
•
We advance the state of issue type prediction and
commit intent prediction by improving the model
performance signiﬁcantly with the ﬁne-tuned SE spe-
ciﬁc BERToverﬂow and seBERT models. Our data
indicates that the improvement is only possibly be-
cause the model was pre-trained on SE data and also
that larger NLP models outperform smaller models
in the SE domain similar to the differences that can
be observed between general domain models.
•
We found that sentiment mining was not strongly
affected by domain speciﬁc pre-training and that
SE domain transformers perform similar to general
domain transformers for this task.
•
A basic ethical evaluation of the models revealed that
the SE domain models should only be used with care,
because they may to have some troubling properties,
especially with respect to gender bias. This warrants
further research and until these aspects are better
understood, such models should not be used for any
tasks that may be negatively affected by gender bias,
though this also warrants caution regarding other
biases such as racial bias.
The remainder of this article is structured as follows.
We provide some background on transformers in Section 2,
followed by a discussion of related work on domain speciﬁc
NLP models in Section 3. Then, we outline the creation
of the SE domain model seBERT in Section 4. Based on
these foundations, we introduce our method for validating
transformers within the SE domain in Section 5, present
the results of this validation in Section 6, and discuss these
results in Section 7. Finally, we conclude in Section 8.
2
BACKGROUND ON TRANSFORMERS
NLP is a broad ﬁeld composed of various disciplines such
as computational linguistics, machine learning, artiﬁcial in-
telligence, computer science, and speech processing [15].
Modern NLP models have a variety of applications, includ-
ing text classiﬁcation, NER, machine translation, sentiment
analysis, and natural language generation. In recent years,
transformer models, e.g., BERT [2], BART [16], ALBERT [17],
RoBERTa [18], GPT-3 [19], and Switch-C [20] established
themselves at the state-of-the-art of NLP within the general
domain. Since the focus of our article is on the validity
of transformer models within the SE domain, we avoid
an in-depth technical discussion of the underlying neural
network architectures of these models and refer for this
to the literature instead (e.g., [21]). Instead, we outline the
concept of such models on a high level in natural language
without mathematical details.
Transformers can be described in a single sentence: they
are sequence-to-sequence networks with self-attention. Now we
only need to understand what the highlighted aspects mean.
A sequence-to-sequence network takes as input a sequence
and generates a new sequence of the same length. For NLP,
the input sequence is usually a tokenized text, possibly aug-
mented with additional tokens, e.g., to represent classes. The
input sequence is then encoded, such that each input token
is represented by a numeric vector, which means that we
have a sequence of vectors through these embeddings. This
transformation relies on the self-attention, which means that
the tokens are not considered in isolation, but together.
Consider this paragraph: the self-attention would consider
this whole paragraph at once and, for each word, model
how the contextual meaning depends on all other words in
the paragraph. This is shown in Figure 1. The ﬁgure shows,
e.g., that the meaning of “bug” is strongly inﬂuenced by
the words “not” and “feature”, and that the meaning of
“s” is deﬁned by the apostrophe. Thus, there is no ﬁxed
meaning of each word and the meaning depends on the
context: “bug” actually means “not bug” or “feature”, “s” is
only a contraction of “is”.
That the whole sequence is used as context for each
word to understand the contextual meaning is the major
difference to previously used NLP models. For example,
word embeddings organize words such that words with
similar meanings are close to each other [23]. However,
while the context is taken into account when the embedding
is calculated, each word only gets a single position. If words
are polysemes, the meaning depends on the context, which
cannot be accurately encoded with such a ﬁxed embedding.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
3
Fig. 1. Visualization of self-attention that shows how the different words
in the context on the left side inﬂuence the meaning of the words on the
right side. The ﬁgure shows the attention of the ﬁrst transformer layer of
seBERT calculated with BertViz [22].
Either one contextual meaning is lost, e.g., “bug” is only
close to other insects, but not to words like “defect”. Or
different concepts become similar to each other, e.g., “bug”
is close to both insects and defects, which means that insects
in general are now similar to defects. Moreover, since the
embedding does not take the position of a word in an actual
sentence into account, the interpretation of sentences based
on the grammatical relationship between words is also not
possible. Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) without self-
attention, such as Long-Short-Term-Memory (LSTM) net-
works, can also not take the complete context accurately
into account. While such models can also be sequence-to-
sequence networks, the relationship between a word at a
speciﬁc position, and all other words, is linear. Simpliﬁed,
this means that the inﬂuence on the context depends mostly
on the distance to a speciﬁc word. In comparison, the
self-attention learns how each word inﬂuences the context,
depending on the position without a ﬁxed inﬂuence of the
distance. For our example from Figure 1, this means that
the long distance between the ﬁrst “it’s” and the last word
“feature” does not mean that there cannot be a strong direct
relationship.
Due to these differences, transformers quickly became
the most powerful architecture for neural network based
NLP. Models based on transformers are the current state
of the art. The revolution was spear-headed by BERT [2],
followed by similar models such as RoBERTa [18], GPT-
3 [19] that were pre-trained with more data, used larger
neural networks, and/or optimized the efﬁciency of the self-
attention mechanisms. Such models already gained traction
within the SE domain: Zhang et al. [14], who recently estab-
lished transformers as state-of-the-art for sentiment mining
within the SE domain, clearly outperforming smaller senti-
ment mining models like SentiStrength [24], including mod-
els tailored speciﬁcally to the SE domain like SentiStrengh-
SE [25], SentiCR [26], and Senti4SD [27]. Biswas et al. [28]
also found a strong performance of BERT for sentiment
mining.
The drawback of transformer models is the size of
the neural networks. Even a relatively small model like
BERTBASE [2] already has 110 million parameters. The
largest currently discussed transformer architectures like
GPT-3 [19] and Switch-C [20] have more than 100 billion
parameters. Thus, the training of such models requires
dedicated hardware and huge amounts of data. To reduce
the burden, these models are pre-trained in a self-supervised
setting. This means that the neural networks are trained on a
large corpus of NLP data, such that the structure of text and
meaning of words is known by the network. Self-supervised
means that this understanding of the language is trained
in a supervised way (i.e., with labels), but that the labels
are generated directly from the training data. We will show
how this works for the BERT pre-training in Section 4.3.
Researchers and practitioners who then want to apply NLP
to solve a problem, use these pre-trained models and ﬁne-
tune the models for a speciﬁc task on a labeled data set. This
works with less data and requires only few training steps
and is, therefore, usually not computationally expensive.
However, this may still require dedicated hardware, due to
the size of the models.
3
RELATED WORK ON DOMAIN-SPECIFIC NLP
In recent years there has been considerable interest in adapt-
ing pre-trained language models such as word2vec [23],
ELMo [29] and BERT to different domains. However, most
of the related work concerns the biomedical or ﬁnancial
domain. Pyysalo et al. [30] were among the ﬁrst to provide
domain-speciﬁc word2vec embeddings based on biomed-
ical corpora. Since then, recent biomedical adaptions of
word2vec and BERT include Dis2Vec [31], BioBERT [7], Clin-
icalBERT [8] and to some extent SciBERT [6], which has been
pre-trained on biomedical and computer science papers.
Models such as BioBERT and SciBERT have been shown
to outperform BERT in biomedical tasks and achieve state-
of-the-art results [6], [7]. The same is true for FinBERT [32]
which achieved state-of-the-art results in ﬁnancial sentiment
analysis. However, except for SciBERT, the domain-speciﬁc
BERT models are not pre-trained from scratch, but use the
same vocabulary as BERT or are further pre-trained using
BERTs weights.
Efstathiou et al. [9] pre-trained a general-purpose word
representation model for the software engineering do-
main. They trained the so word2vec on 15GB of textual
data from Stack Overﬂow posts. The authors compare
the so word2vec model with the original Google news
word2vec model and show that it performs well in captur-
ing SE speciﬁc meanings and analogies. The main difference
with our work is that we consider contextual embeddings
and provide a more extensive evaluation of the validity of
the resulting embeddings. In addition, our seBERT model
was trained using 119GB of data from multiple sources,
i.e., we also use GitHub issues and commit messages in
addition to data from Stack Overﬂow. Ferrari and Esuli [33]
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
4
used word embeddings to identify terms that are shared
between domains, but which may have different meanings.
While their work was not on the difference between the SE
domain and the general domain, they showed that word
embeddings trained on corpora from different domains
indeed yield different embeddings for polysemous word,
which provides another indication that general domain
models may have problems when used for domain-speciﬁc
purposes.
Recently, Tabassum et al. [10] proposed a similar ap-
proach to ours, in which GloVe, ELMo, and BERT models
are pre-trained on 152M sentences from Stack Overﬂow.
In addition, the authors propose a novel attention based
SoftNER model designed for code and NER. Their BERT
model BERToverﬂow was pre-trained using a cased 64000
WordPiece vocabulary with the same conﬁguration as origi-
nal BERTBASE with 110 million parameters. The results show
that BERToverﬂow clearly outperforms the other models,
inluding BERTBASE, on NER tasks. In contrast, we pre-train
seBERT with about six times more data, including data
from GitHub and Jira. Morover, seBERT uses an uncased
30522 WordPiece vocabulary and the same conﬁguration
as BERTLARGE, resulting in a much larger model with 340
million parameters. Additionally, our focus is different and
not on NER tasks, but rather on the general validity of the
NLP models and their usefulness for classiﬁcation tasks in a
pure NLP setting without considering source code.
While our focus is on pure NLP, we also want to mention
similar models from the SE domain for code. Theeten et
al. [34] proposed import2vec, a word2vec based approach
for learning embeddings for software libraries. The em-
beddings are trained on import statements extracted from
source code of Java, JavaScript and Python open source
repositories. In their work, they show that their embeddings
capture aspects of semantic similarity between libraries and
that they can be clustered by speciﬁc domains or platform
libraries. A more general source code based pre-training was
conducted by Alon et al. [35] who proposed code2vec to
represent code snippets as word embeddings. The authors
show that such embeddings are a powerful tool to predict
method names based on the code. Another source code
based approach is CodeBERT [36], a bimodal pre-trained
bidirectional transformer for natural language and program-
ming languages. CodeBERT is pre-trained using a hybrid
objective function combining the default MLM task and a
Replaced Token Detection (RTD) [37] task. For the training
data, the authors use both bimodal data pairs comprising
a function (code) and its documentation (natural language),
as well as unimodal data consisting of only of the function.
The data was collected from GitHub code repositories in six
different programming languages. Their results show that
CodeBERT achieves state-of-the-art performance in natu-
ral language code search and code-to-document generation
tasks.
4
SEBERT
Within this section we describe how we trained seBERT,
a large-scale transformer model for the SE domain that
complements BERToverﬂow, because it is larger, was trained
on more data diverse data with a larger volume, and is
uncased (see Section 3).
4.1
Data
We identiﬁed four data sources for our domain-speciﬁc
corpus of SE textual data:
1)
Stack Overﬂow posts: With millions of questions,
answers and comments, Stack Overﬂow posts are a
rich source of textual data from the SE ﬁeld. Same as
the prior work, this is one of our main data sources.
The Stack Exchange Data Dump [38] contains Stack
Overﬂow posts from 2014 to 2020 and is hosted on
the Internet Archive [39]. A Stack Overﬂow speciﬁc
mirror is available as a public dataset on the Google
Cloud Platform [40]. Using BigQuery, we extracted
62.8 Gigabyte of questions, answers and comments.
2)
GitHub issues: GitHub is more than a code hosting
environment. For many users, GitHub issues are the
ﬁrst place to give feedback or report software bugs
and thus provide valuable insight into the com-
munication between users and developers. GitHub
issues consist of a title, a description and comments
and are available through the GitHub Archive [41].
Using Google BigQuery [42] we extracted 118.5 Gi-
gabyte of issue descriptions and comments from the
years 2015 to 2019.
3)
Jira issues: Similar to GitHub issues, Jira issues pro-
vide valuable insights into software team commu-
nication regarding bug and issue tracking. In 2015,
Ortu et al. published the Jira Repository Dataset
[43], which contains 700K Jira issue reports and
more than 2M Jira issue comments. With 1.4 Giga-
byte of unprocessed textual data, they make up the
smallest part of our corpus. However, the overall
amount of data is still fairly large, and provides
a perspective beyond Stack Overﬂow and GitHub.
This includes language regarding the committing
solutions to Subversion, or the submission of textual
diffs as patches.
4)
GitHub commit messages: Git commit messages
are used to communicate the context of changes to
other developers. Commit messages consist of two
parts, a subject line and a message body, the latter
being optional. Similar to the GitHub issues, we
extracted 21.7 Gigabyte of GitHub commit messages
from the GitHub Archive using BigQuery.
In total, our data set consists of 204.4 Gigabyte of un-
processed textual data. To the best of our knowledge, this
the largest and most diverse corpus of textual data in the
SE domain. Prior work on pre-training focused only on
data from Stack Overﬂow. However, this ignores important
aspects of the SE domain. A key aspect of natural language
communication is the description of feature requests and
bugs. Such data is typically not available on Stack Overﬂow,
with the exception of users asking how they could work
around a speciﬁc issue. Through the inclusion of GitHub
issues and Jira issues, we enhance the corpus with such data.
Moreover, commit messages are often short and on point
natural language summaries of development activities and,
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
5
consequently, different from the often longer discussions
within issues and on Stack Overﬂow.
4.2
Preprocessing
The textual data is mostly unstructured and needs to be
preprocessed. Overall, we conducted eight different prepro-
cessing steps.
1)
Basic preprocessing: We convert all documents to
lowercase, remove control characters (newline, car-
riage return, tab) and normalize quotation marks
and whitespaces.
2)
English: Since we are training a model for the
English language, we use the fastText2 library to
remove all non-English documents.
3)
HTML: We remove HTML tags and extract text
using the BeautifulSoup library 3.
4)
Markdown: We use regular expressions to greedily
remove Markdown formatting.
5)
Hashes: Hashes such as SHA-1 or md5 do not
provide any contextual information and should be
removed. We detect hashes by checking whether
alphanumeric words with a length of 7 characters
or more can be cast to a hexadecimal number and
replace them with [HASH] tokens.
6)
Code: Source code is not natural language and
should be removed. However, ﬁnding code frag-
ments within text is a non-trivial task. We use
HTML <code> tags, Markdown code blocks and
other formatting to identify source code and replace
it with [CODE] tokens. Code that is not within such
environments is not ﬁltered.
7)
User mentions: For privacy reasons, we replace
usernames and mentions (@user) with [USER] to-
kens.
8)
Special formatting: We remove special formatting
and content such as Jira speciﬁc formatting, Git
sign-off, or references to SVN.
The preprocessing steps differ for the data sources. For
example, removal of Markdown does not make sense for
Stack Overﬂow posts or commit messages. Table 1 shows
which steps we applied to which data and Table 2 shows the
amount of data from each data source after preprocessing.
After preprocessing, a total of 119.7 Gigabyte of text or 20.9
billion words remain.
4.3
Pre-training
The BERT implementation by Devlin et al. [2] uses Word-
Piece embeddings with a 30522 token vocabulary. We train
a new SE domain-speciﬁc vocabulary of the same size using
all our data and the BertWordPieceTokenizer by Hugging-
Face.4
An important parameter in BERT pre-training is the
maximum sequence length. Training sequences shorter than
the maximum sequence length are padded with [PAD]
tokens, while longer sequences are truncated. Since the self-
attention mechanism of BERT has a quadratic complexity
2. https://fasttext.cc/
3. https://beautiful-soup-4.readthedocs.io/
4. https://huggingface.co/
with respect to the sequence length [2], the parameter sig-
niﬁcantly affects the training time and the memory require-
ments. Therefore, the authors recommend training 90% of
the training steps with a sequence length of 128 and 10%
of the steps with a sequence length of 512 to learn longer
contexts [2]. We analyzed the sequence length for all our
data through histograms, which are shown in Figure 2. The
sequence lengths follow exponential distribution and 96.7%
of all training sequences are shorter than 256 and 90.1% are
shorter than 128. Therefore, since most of our data is short-
sequence data, we train with a sequence length of 128 for all
steps at the cost of a possible small disadvantage with very
long contexts.
BERT pre-training is self-supervised based on MLM and
Next Sentence Prediction (NSP) tasks. For the NSP task, we
format the data using the NLTK library5 so that each line
contains a sentence and documents are separated by blank
lines. For the NSP task, the input data is then prepared
such that each subsequent pairs of sentences makes up one
input sequence of the form [CLS] sentence_1 [SEP]
sentence_2 [SEP]. We re-use code from the original
BERT to prepare the data for the MLM task.6 The provided
script duplicates the input sequences by a dupe factor and
creates training samples by randomly masking 15% of the
whole words. Whole word masking was not part of the
original BERT implementation and only added later by the
authors as improvement of the preprocessing. With whole
word masking all tokens of a word are masked at once,
which means that it is not possible that words are only
partially masked. Figure 3 shows this for a document with
three sentences. As a result of this data preparation, we have
2.4 Terabyte of data which we can use as input for the pre-
training of BERT with TensorFlow.
We pre-train seBERT using the same conﬁguration as
BERTLARGE, i.e., with 24 layers, a hidden layer size of 1024,
and 16 self-attention heads, which leads to a total of 340 mil-
lion parameters. Pre-training of BERT is expensive, e.g., the
original BERTLARGE was pre-trained on 16 Cloud TPUs for 3
days. Since then, several optimizations have been proposed
to reduce the training time of BERT. You et al. [44] proposed
a Layer-wise Adaptive Moments Based (LAMB) optimizer
that allows the use of larger minibatches compared to the
originally used ADAMW optimizer. NVIDIA then imple-
mented their own version NVLAMB and combined it with
Automatic Mixed Precision (AMP) [45], which accelerates
training time and reduces memory usage by autocasting
variables to 16 bit ﬂoating point numbers upon retrieval,
while storing variables with the usual 32 bit precision.
We used this NVIDIA implementation of the BERT pre-
training to facilitate the effective usage of the system we
had available with 2x24 CPU cores, 384 GB RAM and 8x
NVIDIA Tesla V100 32G GPUs. The pre-training of seBERT
required about 4.5 days.
5
VALIDATION OF SE DOMAIN MODELS
The evaluation of pre-trained language models is usually
performed with benchmarks such as the GLUE bench-
mark [46], its successor SuperGLUE [47] or SQuAD [48].
5. https://www.nltk.org/
6. https://github.com/google-research/bert
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
6
Processing
GitHub issues
Commit messages
Stack Overﬂow
Jira issues
Basic
X
X
X
X
English
X
X
HTML
X
Markdown
X
Hashes
X
X
X
X
Code
X
X
X
User mentions
X
X
Special formatting
X
X
TABLE 1
The applied preprocessing steps for each data source.
GitHub
Stack Overﬂow
Jira
Issues
29.7 Gigabyte
Comments
39.3 Gigabyte
Commit messages
18.2 Gigabyte
Questions
10 Gigabyte
Answers
10.1 Gigabyte
Comments
11.3 Gigabyte
Issues
502 Megabyte
Comments
613 Megabyte
TABLE 2
The size of the data after preprocessing.
Fig. 2. Histograms of sequence length for each data source and all data combined.
Document with three
sentences.
Two input sequences
with sentence pairs.
Duplicates of the input
sequences with 15%
randomly masked
words.
i need to run a method every 5 seconds using mono for android.
is there a scheduled timer in android?
i have tried this code, however, it fails to start: [CODE]
[CLS] i need to run a method every 5 seconds using mono for android
[SEP] is there a scheduled timer in android? [SEP]
[CLS] is there a scheduled timer in android?
[SEP] i have tried this code, however, it fails to start: [CODE] [SEP]
[CLS] i need to run a [MASK] every 5 seconds using mono [MASK] android
[SEP] is there a [MASK] timer in android? [SEP]
[CLS] i [MASK] to run a method every 5 seconds using [MASK] for android
[SEP] is there a scheduled [MASK] in android? [SEP]
[CLS] is there a scheduled [MASK] in android?
[SEP] i have tried this [MASK], however, it fails to start: [CODE] [SEP]
[CLS] is there a [MASK] timer in android?
[SEP] i have tried this code, [MASK], it fails to start: [CODE] [SEP]
Fig. 3. Example for preparation of data for training with BERT.
However, these benchmarks require ﬁne-tuning and are
designed for the general domain and therefore not suit-
able for the evaluation of NLP models for the SE domain.
Moreover, while the evaluation on benchmark data is useful
to evaluate the overall predictive capabilities of a model,
they are not suitable to understand the reasoning within a
model. Therefore, we propose a different approach for the
evaluation of transformer models within the SE domain that
considers the validity from three different perspectives: the
vocabulary, context sensitive prediction of masked words,
and a ﬁne-tuned benchmarks using a limited amounts of
data for classiﬁcation.
5.1
Vocabulary
One of the main differences between a domain-speciﬁc lan-
guage model and a general domain language model should
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
7
be the vocabulary. We expect that the SE speciﬁc models
should gain words from the SE domain, while lost words
should be from other domains. Since alphanumeric words
are more prevalent in the domain, a larger proportion of
words should be alphanumeric.
We take pattern from Beltagy et al. [6] and perform a
vocabulary analysis by computing the WordPiece overlap,
i.e., the percentage of identical tokens between vocabularies.
Additionally, we examine the vocabularies for differences
in structure, tokenization, and the types of words gained
or lost through a manual analysis of the differences. The
manual analysis was conducted by two authors who both
read the word lists and took notes about differences. The
notes were then compared and discussed during a virtual
meeting, which resulted in the qualitative assessment of the
differences we provide in Section 6.1.
5.2
Contextual embeddings
Transformer models such as BERT go beyond word similar-
ities and instead consider the complete context to infer the
meaning. This goes beyond the context-free ﬁnding of simi-
lar words that was used by Efstathiou et al. [9] to determine
if word embeddings from the SE domain are valid. Instead,
we suggest to use MLM tasks to evaluate the validity of
the embeddings, i.e., the evaluation of understanding how
good the model is at predicting missing words in a text [2],
[6]. We devise three categories of sentences suitable for
validating language representation models for the software
engineering domain with the goal to understand if seBERT
and BERToverﬂow behave as expected due to the differences
in training data from the original BERT. The three categories
are the following.
1)
Positive examples: Prediction of masked words
within a software engineering context, i.e., where
the missing word or context words are polysemuous
or from the SE domain. We expect domain-speciﬁc
models to produce accurate predictions, while the
original BERT may struggle because of the SE con-
text.
2)
Negative examples: Prediction of masked words
outside a software engineering context, where the
missing word or context words are polysemous.
Given the polysemy of the negative examples,
domain-speciﬁc models should produce domain-
speciﬁc predictions, which are not suitable for the
sentences from the general domain.
3)
Neutral examples: Prediction of masked words out-
side a SE context, where the missing word can be
inferred from general language understanding (e.g.
idioms, opposites, antimetaboles). General language
understanding should be preserved across domains,
we expect all models to perform well.
Since sentences of these categories can only demonstrate
the validity by way of example, we refer to them as validation
examples. We deﬁned ten examples per category. Due to
space restrictions, we only list the sentences together with
the predictions by the models in Section 6.2 in tables 4-6.
For each category, we deﬁned ten validation examples. To
deﬁne these examples, one author created a list of candidate
sentences including the word that should be masked and
the expectation. These candidates were prepared based on
the polysemous terms from Efstathiou et al. [9]. Then, all
authors discussed and reﬁned these candidates together in
a virtual meeting to deﬁne the ten examples per category.
After this process, we can then compare how the different
models complete the sentences and how this matches our
expectation.
The drawback of our validation examples is that while
they provide valuable insights, they are not an unbiased
large sample, but rather a small and manually designed
sample with a speciﬁc purpose. This raises potential issues
regarding the generalizability of the effects we ﬁnd to real
world data. We deﬁne the following experiment with the
goal to compare the differences of contextual embeddings
within the SE domain on a large scale. The general idea is to
conduct a MLM experiment in which polysemes are masked
and then compare how good the models are at predicting
the polysemes.
•
Determine the overlap between the vocabularies of
all involved models and discard all subwords.
•
Manually extract a list of polysemes from the over-
lapping words, i.e., words that have a different mean-
ing in the SE domain and the general domain (e.g.,
shell, bug, root).
•
Collect two large corpora of text data: one from the
SE domain and one from the general domain. Both
corpora must not have been used during the pre-
training of the models. In our case, we collected the
Stack Overﬂow posts from 2021 as SE domain corpus
(2.9 GB) and used the CC-News corpus (2.6 GB)7 as
general domain corpus.
•
For each of the polysemes, randomly sample 100
sentences from both corpora. If there are less than
100 such sentences, drop the polysemes from the
analysis.
•
Mask the polyseme in each sentence and query the
model for the ﬁve most likely words.
We can then evaluate the different models with respect to
their capability to ﬁnd the masked word. We would expect
that models from the SE domain perform better on the Stack
Overﬂow corpus and, vice versa, models from the general
domain perform better on the CC-News corpus.
5.3
Fine-tuned Prediction Tasks
The ﬁrst check regarding the validity is to analyze the pre-
trained model directly. However, it is unclear if the actual
use of these models in ﬁne-tuned applications would also
be affected. We propose to evaluate the validity of the
models by applying them to a classiﬁcation task within
the SE domain, for which only a limited amount of data is
available. We propose to always use (at least) three different
tasks to evaluate the capabilities of the ﬁne-tuning.
•
The ﬁrst type of task should have longer texts. This
task is suitable to evaluate how good the model is at
understanding longer texts and contexts.
7. https://huggingface.co/datasets/cc news
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
8
•
The second type of task should have shorter text, to
evaluate how good the model is for short texts.
•
The third task should be sentiment mining, as a gen-
eral domain use case that is already well understood
in the SE domain [49], incl. strong, already existing
results that general domain transformer models are
the current state-of-the-art for sentiment mining in
the SE domain [14]. Since the work by Novielli et
al. [49] suggests that SE domain models for sentiment
mining do not yet work very well because their
results are unstable, and Novielli et al. [50], Lin et
al. [51], and Zhang et al. [14] showed that smaller
general domain models frequently outperform SE-
speciﬁc models,8 this task allows us to evaluate if
pre-trained SE domain transformer models are also
better on SE domain data for use cases that may not
require domain knowledge.
For all ﬁne-tuning tasks, we propose to simply re-use
the classiﬁcation implementation for BERT from Hugging-
Face:9 this implementation adds a single fully connected
layer which produces the classiﬁcation based on the output
sequence of the BERT model. We then train each model for
ﬁve epochs on the issue, commit, respectively, sentiment
data for the ﬁne-tuning. We use 80% of the training data
for the ﬁne-tuning and 20% as validation data to determine
when the models start to overﬁt.
We note that we use different ﬁne-tuning tasks than
the NER task that was used by Tabassum et al. [10]. Our
rationale for using a classiﬁcation task instead is that the
NER task is very speciﬁc, especially with the respect that
the exploitation of casing and special characters like the
underscore is a major aspect of NER within natural lan-
guage models. Thus, this task does not aim to understand
the meaning, but rather the inference of a speciﬁc language
construct. In comparison, our tasks require the interpreta-
tion of the meaning of natural language.
In the following, we discuss how we implement and
evaluate each of the ﬁne tuning tasks in detail.
5.3.1
Prediction of Bug Issues
We propose to use the prediction if issues are bugs [11] as
task with longer sequences. This task has several properties
that make it a good candidate to evaluate the validity
and beneﬁts of transformer models. Issues are among the
longer texts within SE data (see Figure 2), Moreover, there
is an established baseline performance which shows that a
simple neural network approach without pre-training based
on fastText [52] with built-in automated hyperparameter
tuning performs well [11]. Thus, we can not only compare
pre-trained models to each other, but also their beneﬁt over
simpler models that can be trained in minutes without any
special hardware. Second, the task is hard and often not
8. While this is not the core conclusion of Novielli et al.and Zhang et
al., their results in terms of the class imbalance insensitive macro
average show the following: SentiStrength outperforms SentiStrength-
SE and SentiCR on the Stack Overﬂow data by Novielli et al. [50].
SentiStrength outperforms SentiStrength-SE, Senti4SD for the API and
SO data, as well as only Senti4SD on the App data by Zhang et al. [14]
9. https://huggingface.co/transformers/v4.2.2/model doc/bert.
html
solved correctly by humans, unless careful manual valida-
tion is used [12], [53], [54].
We use the ﬁve projects with validated issue type data
from from Herzig et al. [12] together with the 38 validated
projects from Herbold et al. [54] together as a single data set
with 43 projects and conduct a leave-one-project-out cross
validation experiment. This means that one project is used
for testing and the remaining 42 projects for the training of
the classiﬁer, i.e., of the a fastText model as baseline and for
the ﬁne-tuning of the BERT models. Since there are 38,219
issues in the data and the largest project has 2,399 issues, we
create 43 ﬁne-tuned models trained with at least 35,820 issue
descriptions. Following Herbold et al. [11], we conduct a
statistical comparison based on the F1 score which is deﬁned
as
recall =
tp
tp + fn
precision =
tp
tp + fp
F1 score = 2 · recall · precision
recall + precision
where tp are true positives, i.e., bugs that are classiﬁed
as bugs, tn true negatives, i.e., non bugs classiﬁed as non
bugs, fp bugs not classiﬁed as bugs and fn non bugs clas-
siﬁed as bugs. Additionally, the recall and precision should
be reported to allow us to understand the nature of the
errors made by the models. We use a Bayesian approach
for the statistical comparison following the guidelines by
Benavoli et al. [55]. The authors suggest to use a Bayesian
signed rank test for a comparison of results on multiple
data sets, as is the case here. The advantage of the Bayesian
approach is that the number of models that are compared
does not inﬂuence the results, as this directly estimates that
one approach performs better, which does not require an
adjustment of the signiﬁcance level [55].
5.3.2
Commit Intent Classiﬁcation
As second ﬁne-tuning task with shorter sequences, we use
the automated classiﬁcation of commits based on commit
messages. Commit messages are usually very short (see Fig-
ure 2). Unfortunately, we are not aware of a solid benchmark
for the machine-learning based classiﬁcation of commit
messages. Due to the good results for issues, we assume
that fastText is also a good baseline for the classiﬁcation
of commit messages. As data, we use manually validated
data from Trautsch et al. [13], i.e., we have a sample with
a total size of 2533 commit messages that has as class
label whether a commit is perfective or not. We follow the
approach outlined by Benavoli et al. [55] for the comparison
of classiﬁers on a single data set: we conduct 10x10 cross-
validation and obtain 100 results for each classiﬁer. We then
use the Bayesian correlated t-test to compare the results.
Same as above, we use the F1 score as foundation for the
statistical comparison and report the recall and precision to
understand the nature of the errors made by the models.
5.3.3
Sentiment Mining
As third ﬁne-tuning task we propose sentiment mining [14],
[49]. We use three data sets that were also used by Zhang et
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
9
al. [14] in a prior benchmark: the SO [51] and API [56] data
with 4522 resp. 1500 sentences from Stack Overﬂow posts
and the GH data [57] with 7122 sentences from GitHub
pull requests and commit messages. All three data sets have
three labels, i.e., positive, neutral, and negative sentiment.
For each of these data sets, we use the same experimental
setting as for the second ﬁne-tuning task, i.e., we conduct
10x10 cross-validation. Since Zhang et al. [14] also the F1
score, we follow this approach and report the macro averages
of the F1 score, recall, and precision, same as for the other use
cases.
6
EXPERIMENTS
We conducted an experiment to evaluate the validity of
the SE models seBERT and BERToverﬂow in comparison
to the general domain BERT models. Since seBERT is based
on BERTLARGE and BERTBASE, we use both of these models
within our comparison. We follow the procedure outlined
in Section 5. This means we ﬁrst compare the vocabularies.
Then, we proceed to look at the validity of the models
without ﬁne-tuning through their ability to infer the correct
meaning of terms. Finally, we evaluated how the different
models perform when ﬁne-tuned with a limited amount of
labeled data for a prediction task.
All results, as well as the required scripts and link to
the data for pre-training seBERT are available as part of our
replication kit.10 Additionally, we prepared a playground,
which can be used to ﬁll in masked words using the mod-
els.11
We restrict our comparison to BERT, as this is the most
similar general domain model and, therefore, most suitable
to explore the need for SE-speciﬁc models for SE domain
tasks. Please note that we also exclude CodeBERT from
this comparison, because CodeBERT is not natural language
model, but rather a bi-modal “natural language - program-
ming language” model, i.e., for working with source code.12
Additionally, we use fastText for the comparison with re-
spect to classiﬁcation tasks, to understand if smaller NLP
models may be sufﬁcient.
6.1
Vocabulary Comparison
The vocabularies of BERTBASE and BERTLARGE are equal, and
we refer to them as BERT vocabulary in the following. The
WordPiece overlap between BERT and seBERT is 38.3%. A
major difference between the vocabularies is the number
of “##” sub-word WordPieces, with seBERT (7430) having
almost twice as many as BERT (3285). Most of the words
added to the seBERT vocabulary are from the SE domain
(e.g. “bugzilla”, “jvm”, “debug”) or internet slang (e.g.
“fanboy”). Lost words are mainly from the geographical
(e.g. “madrid”, “switzerland”, “egypt”), religious (e.g. “je-
sus”, “buddha”) or political (e.g. “president”, “minister”,
“clinton”) domain.
10. https://github.com/smartshark/seBERT
11. https://smartshark2.informatik.uni-goettingen.de/sebert/index.
html
12. Nevertheless, because CodeBERT has a natural language part, we
included CodeBERT in our playground for ﬁlling in masked words,
for those interested in the suitability of CodeBERT for language under-
standing.
For words that occur in only one of the two vocabularies,
we use the tokenizer of the other model to break them down
into their respective WordPieces. We have presented the
results for a small subset of words in Table 3. As we can
see, BERT tokenizes SE domain words inconsistently, e.g.
“bugzilla” is tokenized into “bug ##zil ##la”, but ”debug”
into “de ##bu ##g”, showing that there is no WordPiece
for “##bug”. In addition, in-domain abbreviations such as
JVM are unknown and broken down into their individual
characters. In contrast, seBERT breaks down general out-
of-domain words into in-domain WordPieces, e.g., “drama”
into dynamic random-access memory (DRAM) or “infantry”
into “inf” and “ant”. Since the vocabularies are frequency-
based, an interesting ﬁnding is that “woman” is not in the
seBERT vocabulary and is tokenized into “wo ##man”. This
implies that “woman” is used less frequently within the
domain, highlighting the ethical issues that can arise in ma-
chine learning. The full lists of out-of-vocabulary words and
their tokenizations are available as supplemental material in
the seBERT replication repository.
Since the BERToverﬂow vocabulary is cased, a direct
comparison of the overlap without further processing is
not feasible. Instead, we lower case the vocabulary of
BERToverﬂow and remove duplicates. Since the vocabu-
lary of BERToverﬂow is larger than that of (se)BERT,13
we still cannot directly compute the overlap, because this
is a ratio with respect to the vocabulary size. The larger
BERToverﬂow should contain more words from the other
vocabularies (larger ratio), while in turn the smaller the
(se)BERT vocabularies should cover a smaller ratio of terms
in the BERToverﬂow vocabulary. Instead, we calculate i)
the ratio of WordPieces of the (se)BERT vocabulary within
the uncased BERToverﬂow vocabulary and ii) the ratio of
uncased BERToverﬂow WordPieces within the BERT vocab-
ulary. Thus, consider the direction of the comparison, when
considering ratios.
After lower casing, there are 58,854 unique WordPiece
tokens. 24,263 of these tokens are also in the seBERT vocab-
ulary. This means seBERT covers about 40% of the uncased
BERToverﬂow vocabulary and the uncased BERToverﬂow
covers about 80% of the seBERT vocabulary. That BERTover-
ﬂow has more tokens is not surprising, due to the larger
vocabulary size. While the overlap of 80% of the seBERT
tokens with BERToverﬂow is substantial, we would have
expected an even larger overlap, given that BERToverﬂow
has about twice the amount of uncased tokens. This should
be sufﬁcient to more or less cover the seBERT vocabulary,
assuming that the textual data from Stack Overﬂow on
which BERToverﬂow is pre-trained, is representative for
the SE domain. A manual check revealed that many of
the missing tokens are related to tools, e.g., “matplot“,
“xenial” or “hashicorp”. We can only speculate regarding
the reason for this. One possible explanation is that tools
are less frequently discussed on Stack Overﬂow than, e.g.,
programming languages. However, while this may the case
to a certain degree, questions regarding the usage of spe-
ciﬁc tools are common in Stack Overﬂow. Another possible
explanation is the casing that is used when writing tools.
13. We write (se)BERT to highlight that these statements are true for
both BERT and seBERT, which have vocabularies of the same size.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
10
BERT
seBERT
BERToverﬂow
Word
Tokenization
Word
Tokenization
Tokenization
bugzilla
bug ##zil ##la
catholic
cat ##hol ##ic
cath ##olic
chromium
ch ##rom ##ium
drama
dram ##a
drama
debug
de ##bu ##g
infantry
inf ##ant ##ry
inf ##ant ##ry
jvm
j ##v ##m
palace
pal ##ace
pal ##ace
refactoring
ref ##act ##orin ##g
woman
wo ##man
woman
TABLE 3
Example words not included in the BERT or seBERT vocabulary broken down into their WordPieces using the respective tokenizer. ## indicates
the start of a subword token.
For example, users may write “HashiCorp”, “Hashicorp”,
or “hashicorp”. Within the uncased seBERT vocabulary, this
would not make a difference and all occurrences would be
counted together, possibly leading to larger importance and
the inclusion in the vocabulary.
We also manually evaluated which additional terms are
within the BERToverﬂow vocabulary that are not within
the seBERT vocabulary. In addition to more terms from
the general domain (see the comparison to BERT below),
we noticed two additional aspects. First, there were many
Unicode tokens, such as special characters only used in non-
English texts. Second, there were many terms that seem to
come from code snippets, such as “strftime”.
The BERT vocabulary has an overlap of 15,926 Word-
Piece tokens with the uncased BERToverﬂow vocabulary.
This means that about 50% of the BERT tokens are within the
BERToverﬂow vocabulary, which is slightly more than the
overlap of 38% between seBERT and BERT. However, this
increase is plausible, given the overall larger vocabulary size
of BERToverﬂow. This is also visible in the tokenization, e.g.,
the terms “women” and “drama” are within BERToverﬂow
vocabulary, meaning that is covers more general domain
concepts that seBERT.
6.2
Contextual Comparison
Next, we use the capability of the models to predict masked
words. Tables 4-6 show ten examples of sentences for the
positive, negative, and neutral category.
The positive examples in Table 4 show that while the
general domain BERT models are not as accurate with
the identiﬁcation of words from the within-domain context
as the in-domain models BERToverﬂow and seBERT. This
does not mean that BERT outright fails, but rather that the
inferred are not completely unrelated, but also not directly
on point. In comparison, BERToverﬂow and seBERT both
almost always suggest reasonable completions. However,
we also observe that either the larger set of training data or
the larger model also allows seBERT to be more accurate in
some cases. Our sensitivity analysis with a smaller version
of seBERT shows that likely both play a role, as the smaller
model is almost equal, but worse in some nuances, i.e., han-
dling of emoticons and opposites. The sensitivity analysis
can be found in the supplemental material. The last example
gives the strongest indication of the impact of using more
data: since BERToverﬂow was not trained on issue data, but
only on Q&A data from Stack Overﬂow, seBERT performs
better in this context. For this sentence, the general domain
results from BERT are actually better than BERToverﬂow.
Our interpretation of this is that this is caused by the context
of the BERToverﬂow data: the criticality of issues is usually
not discussed on Stack Overﬂow. Instead, users may ask
regarding a certain problem, with other users responding
that the bug is known. Thus, the association of “This is a
[MASK] bug” with “known” makes sense. However, the
second part of the sentence further clariﬁes this context
as “please address this asap”. Such a direct request to the
developers does not make sense within the Q&A context
and could, therefore, not be considered by BERToverﬂow.
In comparison, the seBERT data is aware of such direct
communication with a development team and correctly
infers that the missing word is likely the criticality of the
issue, because it should be addressed as soon as possible.
The negative examples in Table 5 highlight that models
trained with SE data fail, when it comes to understanding
pure general domain context. All words are interpreted
within the SE context, even if this does not make sense. In
comparison, the general domain models were a lot closer to
the performance of the SE domain models for the positive
examples. When we consider the training corpus, this makes
sense: topics like dentists, actual snakes, or the weather are
extremely unlikely in our SE corpus, so it is plausible that
this does not work at all. On the other hand, Wikipedia also
covers software engineering topics. Thus, while this is not
the focus of the general domain corpus, it also contains some
software engineering data.
The neutral examples in Table 6 reveal some nuanced
differences between all four models. This is the ﬁrst time
that we clearly observe that the BERTLARGE model is better a
capturing the context than the BERTBASE model. In Sentence
28, the smaller models fail to correctly understand the
context, while all other models understand this perfectly.
The same sentence also reveals a nuanced difference: since
we often start to count from zero in computer science,
this is also proposed by BERToverﬂow and seBERT, while
BERTLARGE says to start at one. We also note that the SE-
speciﬁc models sometimes misjudge these neutral concepts,
e.g, with sentence 23. While the sentence clearly indicates
that the context is voting, the term “raise” is so strongly
associated with opinions within the SE domain that hands
are not suggested. This set of sentences also contains the
strangest association within our data in Sentence 30: we
have no idea why seBERT believes that running out of
pokemon is likely. The only explanation we can think of
is the tokenization by seBERT of “poker” as “poke##r”. It is
possible that the subword “poke” has a strong association
with “pokemon”, which leads to this mistake.
Figure 4 shows the results of our experiments of masking
polysemes in the Stack Overﬂow corpus and CC-News
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
11
BERTBASE
BERTLARGE
BERToverﬂow
seBERT
Sentence
Expectation
Prediction
Prob.
Prediction
Prob.
Prediction
Prob.
Prediction
Prob.
1) The [MASK] is thrown
when an application at-
tempts to use null in a case
where an object is required.
NullPointer-
Exception
rule
exception
coin
ﬂag
penalty
0.2407
0.0742
0.0659
0.0245
0.0216
value
exception
coin
ball
ﬂag
0.2356
0.0804
0.0342
0.0318
0.0312
exception
error
Null-
Pointer-
Exception
NPE
Illegal-
Argument-
Exception
0.4718
0.1229
0.1161
0.0995
0.0403
exception
error
null-
pointer-
exception
npe
illegal-
argument-
exception
0.5473
0.2188
0.1158
0.0291
0.0144
2) [MASK] is a proprietary
issue tracking product de-
veloped by Atlassian that
allows bug tracking and
agile project management.
Jira
it
agile
eclipse
ﬂex
snap
0.0382
0.0104
0.0041
0.0035
0.0031
it
bug
eclipse
echo
spark
0.0148
0.0074
0.0052
0.0046
0.0035
Jira
Redmine
JIRA
It
There
0.4914
0.1834
0.099
0.0398
0.0281
jira
there
zenhub
it
bugzilla
0.4954
0.0837
0.0763
0.0488
0.0463
3) [MASK] is a software
tool for automating soft-
ware build processes.
build
automation
tools
it
agile
this
build
gem
0.1437
0.0071
0.0062
0.0055
0.0055
it
build
eclipse
builder
agile
0.0396
0.0294
0.0107
0.0075
0.0067
CMake
make
Make
Ant
Maven
0.1541
0.0898
0.0644
0.0595
0.0558
jenkins
make
ninja
it
ant
0.1907
0.0891
0.0676
0.058
0.0536
4) Pathlib is a python li-
brary used for handeling
[MASK].
paths
applications
systems
programs
software
data
0.0699
0.0431
0.0359
0.0351
0.0296
applications
software
programs
languages
systems
0.1509
0.1505
0.078
0.0631
0.052
paths
ﬁles
urls
URLs
pathnames
0.429
0.0789
0.0664
0.0391
0.0384
paths
path
directories
ﬁlenames
strings
0.8727
0.0338
0.0237
0.0168
0.0088
5) The solution posted by
[USER] is [MASK] helpful.
:)
positive ad-
verb
very
extremely
quite
always
more
0.5632
0.0656
0.0424
0.0313
0.0273
very
not
always
also
most
0.3407
0.1755
0.0624
0.0593
0.0429
very
really
also
more
quite
0.5488
0.1374
0.0734
0.027
0.0237
very
really
quite
also
super
0.5719
0.1533
0.0729
0.0458
0.0166
6) The solution posted by
[USER] is [MASK] helpful.
:(
negative
adverb
very
extremely
quite
also
always
0.5254
0.0659
0.0418
0.0349
0.0338
very
not
also
always
most
0.2764
0.1767
0.0829
0.0782
0.0455
not
very
really
never
also
0.9182
0.0331
0.0087
0.0031
0.0031
not
no
very
really
never
0.9761
0.0075
0.0038
0.0011
0.0009
7) [MASK], is a provider
of
Internet
hosting
for
software development and
version control using Git.
github, git-
lab
microsoft
net
oracle
org
apache
0.0158
0.0136
0.0134
0.0127
0.0122
net
apache
parallels
foundry
radius
0.0127
0.011
0.0097
0.0073
0.0061
Github
GitHub
Bitbucket
BitBucket
Assembla
0.222
0.2186
0.0568
0.0509
0.0413
github
gitlab
git
sourceforge
bitbucket
0.3096
0.0397
0.0382
0.0309
0.0302
8) In object-oriented pro-
gramming, a [MASK] is an
extensible
program-code-
template for creating ob-
jects.
class
template
class
object
model
gui
0.1027
0.0391
0.0356
0.0219
0.0145
template
prototype
module
class
construct
0.6763
0.0533
0.0258
0.0136
0.0106
constructor
class
factory
prototype
Factory
0.3849
0.2664
0.1435
0.038
0.0182
class
constructor
factory
metaclass
template
0.4991
0.221
0.0669
0.0487
0.0316
9) I have to discuss this
with the other [MASK].
developers
elders
girls
men
ofﬁcers
council
0.0703
0.0677
0.0622
0.0526
0.0453
men
members
elders
ofﬁcers
people
0.0913
0.0407
0.0399
0.0265
0.024
guys
people
developers
person
users
0.1364
0.1074
0.0918
0.0533
0.0497
developers
team
maintainers
people
devs
0.1159
0.1114
0.0797
0.0796
0.0744
10) This is a [MASK] bug,
please address it asap.
critical, ma-
jor
serious
new
major
persistent
big
0.286
0.1166
0.0699
0.0473
0.031
security
serious
minor
major
nasty
0.0956
0.0807
0.0458
0.0397
0.0298
known
know
chrome
browser
common
0.5999
0.029
0.02
0.014
0.0118
critical
serious
major
big
real
0.6915
0.1491
0.0412
0.0270
0.0099
TABLE 4
Prediction of words for [MASK] tokens. Results for the positive category, i.e., sentences where we expect that BERToverﬂow and seBERT perform
better than BERT.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
12
BERTBASE
BERTLARGE
BERToverﬂow
seBERT
Sentence
Expectation
Prediction
Prob.
Prediction
Prob.
Prediction
Prob.
Prediction
Prob.
11) A [MASK] crawled
across her leg, and she
swiped it away.
bug
spider
tear
hand
bug
mosquito
0.1417
0.1277
0.0841
0.0834
0.0534
bug
spider
tear
ﬂea
ﬂy
0.2087
0.1676
0.1463
0.048
0.0447
person
car
dog
bird
fox
0.1068
0.0561
0.0559
0.0405
0.0397
man
person
friend
girl
monkey
0.1042
0.0518
0.0472
0.0299
0.0248
12) Can you open the
[MASK], please? It’s hot
in here.
window,
door
door
window
windows
blinds
curtains
0.7435
0.1227
0.0349
0.0171
0.0113
door
window
fridge
doors
gate
0.8776
0.0619
0.0058
0.0057
0.0055
link
ﬁle
site
page
url
0.3264
0.0699
0.0411
0.0395
0.0307
pr
issue
door
ﬁle
link
0.2829
0.1386
0.0576
0.0466
0.0352
13)
The
reticulated
python
is
among
the
few [MASK] that prey
on humans.
snakes
snakes
species
reptiles
animals
lizards
0.6433
0.1645
0.1055
0.0278
0.0269
snakes
reptiles
animals
species
mammals
0.803
0.0779
0.0696
0.0223
0.0075
languages
things
tools
people
programmers
0.7376
0.0836
0.0087
0.0084
0.0073
things
languages
tools
packages
programs
0.5227
0.1625
0.0632
0.0348
0.0255
14) “I have a [MASK] re-
quest for you.” He said
to the waiter.
special
special
business
personal
new
speciﬁc
0.4258
0.0859
0.0809
0.0318
0.0225
special
speciﬁc
new
small
simple
0.8448
0.0198
0.017
0.0166
0.0128
new
special
test
friend
support
0.115
0.0361
0.0257
0.0224
0.0213
pull
feature
change
similar
merge
0.7016
0.0432
0.0171
0.0146
0.0139
15) He was admitting
to a [MASK] he didn’t
commit, knowing it was
somebody else who did
it.
crime
crime
murder
sin
lie
suicide
0.7861
0.1162
0.0484
0.0084
0.0056
crime
murder
sin
felony
lie
0.9565
0.0358
0.005
0.0008
0.0005
commit
change
mistake
fact
ﬁle
0.1497
0.1223
0.0844
0.0629
0.044
change
commit
ﬁx
ﬁle
code
0.2475
0.0974
0.0833
0.0464
0.0372
16) It’s an incurable, ter-
minal [MASK].
disease
disease
condition
illness
death
cancer
0.4208
0.3208
0.125
0.0201
0.0193
disease
illness
condition
cancer
disorder
0.8134
0.0879
0.0579
0.0203
0.0049
error
operation
command
problem
)
0.0777
0.0639
0.0517
0.0336
0.0288
issue
problem
bug
character
effect
0.0605
0.0523
0.0443
0.0377
0.0273
17) The dentist said I
need
to
have
a
root
[MASK].
canal
canal
beer
problem
out
cellar
0.8847
0.0307
0.0167
0.005
0.003
canal
beer
stop
break
problem
0.9827
0.01
0.0009
0.0005
0.0005
account
certiﬁcate
user
node
access
0.1919
0.0959
0.0825
0.0588
0.0474
password
user
account
access
certiﬁcate
0.1476
0.1431
0.089
0.0522
0.0475
18) Everything was cov-
ered with a ﬁne layer of
[MASK].
dust, snow
dust
dirt
snow
paint
powder
0.4895
0.1035
0.0625
0.0432
0.01
dust
snow
dirt
ice
sand
0.7656
0.0813
0.0283
0.0199
0.0122
transparency
abstraction
code
complexity
conﬁdence
0.0518
0.0417
0.0408
0.0323
0.032
abstraction
coverage
testing
detail
documentation
0.1231
0.095
0.0894
0.0671
0.0636
19) There was not a sin-
gle cloud in the [MASK].
sky
sky
air
distance
skies
room
0.9009
0.0748
0.003
0.0021
0.0017
0.0032
sky
heavens
distance
air
east
0.9425
0.0104
0.0076
0.0041
0.0032
list
cloud
world
center
database
0.0797
0.0361
0.0333
0.027
0.0263
database
list
dataset
ﬁle
cloud
0.0686
0.0663
0.0391
0.0358
0.0357
20) What does it say in
your [MASK] cookie?
fortune
fortune
chocolate
little
next
sugar
0.4846
0.0534
0.0289
0.0207
0.0206
fortune
favorite
next
chocolate
sugar
0.295
0.2597
0.0484
0.0284
0.0261
browser
session
ﬁrebug
ﬁrefox
debug
0.1262
0.083
0.07
0.0508
0.032
session
browser
auth
cookie
login
0.4255
0.0994
0.0572
0.0318
0.0195
TABLE 5
Prediction of words for [MASK] tokens. Results for the negative category, i.e., sentences where we expect that BERToverﬂow and seBERT perform
worse than BERT.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
13
BERTBASE
BERTLARGE
BERToverﬂow
seBERT
Sentence
Expectation
Prediction
Prob.
Prediction
Prob.
Prediction
Prob.
Prediction
Prob.
21) We can [MASK] in
person if you have any
speciﬁc questions.
meet
talk
speak
meet
chat
visit
0.4357
0.207
0.0971
0.0746
0.0266
meet
speak
talk
discuss
communicate
0.695
0.1173
0.1026
0.0208
0.0057
help
be
edit
assist
answer
0.2649
0.066
0.0566
0.0553
0.0477
chat
talk
discuss
meet
speak
0.5492
0.1941
0.1025
0.0913
0.0064
22) [MASK] its name,
vitamin D is not a vita-
min. Instead, it is a hor-
mone that promotes the
absorption of calcium in
the body.
despite
despite
whatever
unlike
in
notwith-
standing
0.999
0.0002
0.0002
0.0001
0.0001
despite
unlike
notwithstanding
like
whatever
0.998
0.0016
0.0002
0.0001
0.0
Despite
despite
by
By
In
0.7482
0.1184
0.0387
0.0212
0.01
despite
in
from
unlike
by
0.9396
0.0169
0.0099
0.0095
0.0068
23) Would all those in
favour please raise their
[MASK]?
hands
hands
hand
voices
arms
ﬁsts
0.5325
0.122
0.1177
0.031
0.0124
hands
hand
voices
voice
arms
0.537
0.1543
0.128
0.11
0.0121
opinion
opinions
concerns
points
views
0.2422
0.1803
0.0982
0.0704
0.0444
opinion
concerns
priority
opinions
interest
0.1235
0.0798
0.057
0.0531
0.043
24) She surprised him
with a [MASK].
something
positive
smile
look
laugh
kiss
grin
0.4748
0.1623
0.0604
0.0588
0.0502
smile
laugh
kiss
question
grin
0.4086
0.2211
0.105
0.0673
0.0369
surprise
mistake
message
bug
warning
0.1815
0.0606
0.0551
0.034
0.0322
bug
question
comment
problem
joke
0.0604
0.0485
0.0197
0.0191
0.019
25) Whoever is happy
will
make
others
[MASK] too.
happy
happy
happier
,
smile
sad
0.989
0.0025
0.0012
0.0012
0.0007
happy
unhappy
happier
,
smile
0.9716
0.0104
0.0053
0.0042
0.002
happy
unhappy
,
pleased
sad
0.9968
0.0003
0.0003
0.0002
0.0002
happy
,
complain
sad
comfortable
0.9866
0.0027
0.0007
0.0005
0.0003
26) If there are night
owls, are there [MASK]
owls too?
day
night
day
other
morning
bird
0.3312
0.2063
0.0275
0.0175
0.0158
day
night
morning
other
evening
0.5414
0.2378
0.0671
0.0143
0.0085
day
night
power
weather
evening
0.1331
0.0527
0.0352
0.0178
0.0149
day
evening
afternoon
morning
night
0.6346
0.1119
0.0899
0.0484
0.0302
27)
Never
forget,
always
remember.
Always
forget,
never
[MASK].
remember
forget
remember
forgot
forgotten
know
0.979
0.007
0.0018
0.0015
0.0015
forget
remember
forgive
know
forgot
0.9271
0.0666
0.0007
0.0005
0.0004
remember
forget
trust
know
read
0.4836
0.3044
0.0355
0.0102
0.0077
remember
forget
recall
bother
guess
0.881
0.0997
0.0113
0.0009
0.0006
28) If you are count-
ing things, start from
[MASK].
1, one
scratch
there
bottom
one
here
0.5561
0.0836
0.0511
0.0425
0.0286
one
here
zero
three
ten
0.1389
0.1222
0.0731
0.064
0.0497
0
1
zero
2
there
0.3938
0.293
0.164
0.0156
0.0102
zero
0
1
there
2
0.34
0.2834
0.2587
0.021
0.0132
29)
Soccer
has
really
simple
rules.
It’s
not
[MASK] science.
rocket
a
rocket
really
just
pure
0.7412
0.0334
0.0227
0.0225
0.0147
rocket
about
a
even
like
0.9125
0.0356
0.032
0.0021
0.0015
rocket
computer
a
exact
perfect
0.8597
0.0513
0.0317
0.0071
0.0049
computer
rocket
a
game
about
0.4413
0.3927
0.0483
0.0146
0.0132
30)
He
ran
out
of
[MASK], so he had to
stop playing poker.
money,
time
money
time
food
funds
cash
0.8096
0.0285
0.0126
0.0113
0.0094
money
cash
cards
time
patience
0.7833
0.0579
0.0213
0.0187
0.0074
cards
players
hands
money
memory
0.4876
0.0369
0.0309
0.0294
0.0221
pokemon
memory
ram
money
mana
0.1655
0.0767
0.0649
0.0618
0.0455
TABLE 6
Prediction of words for [MASK] tokens. Results for the neutral category, i.e., sentences where we expect that BERToverﬂow and seBERT perform
worse than BERT.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
14
1
2
3
4
5
Miss
Position
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
Count
seBERT
1
2
3
4
5
Miss
Position
BERToverflow
1
2
3
4
5
Miss
Position
BERTBASE
1
2
3
4
5
Miss
Position
BERTLARGE
Corpus
Stack Overflow
CC-News
Fig. 4. Results of the MLM experiment on unknown data. The histograms show the position of the masked word in the top ﬁve predicted words of
each model, or if the word was missed.
corpus. Overall, we identiﬁed 503 words, which appear
in at least 100 sentences in each corpus.14 Thus, we have
503 · 100 = 50, 300 masked word predictions for each
corpus. Overall, the results are in line with our expectation:
seBERT and BERToverﬂow are better for the Stack Overﬂow
corpus, the BERT models are better for CC-News. More-
over, the larger models (seBERT, BERTLARGE) perform a bit
better than the smaller models (BERToverﬂow, BERTBASE).
An interesting aspect of the models is that the results are
symmetric: the seBERT results on Stack Overﬂow are similar
to the BERTLARGE results on CC-News and the seBERT
results on CC-News are similar to the BERTLARGE results
on Stack Overﬂow. The same relationship can be observed
between BERToverﬂow and BERTBASE. This could mean that
the contextual understanding of the SE domain models for
the general domain is about as good as that of the general
domain models for the SE domain, and vice versa.
6.3
Prediction Task Comparison
Table 7 and ﬁgures 5-9 summarize the results of the predic-
tion task comparison. In the following, we look at the results
of the individual tasks in detail.
6.3.1
Issue Type Prediction
The results show that seBERT and BERToverﬂow achieve
the best performance for the issue type prediction tasks,
outperforming both fastText and the general-domain BERT
models. The improvement over fastText is very large with
an about 11% higher F1 score for the issue type prediction.
The violin plot in Figure 5 indicates that the performance
improvement in F1 score is due to an improvement of both
recall and precision, which means the models reduced both
false positives and false negatives in comparison to fastText.
The Bayesian signed rank test determined that this improve-
ment of the SE-speciﬁc models over the other models is
signiﬁcant.15 The difference between seBERT and BERTover-
ﬂow is not signiﬁcant The comparison between fastText
and BERTBASE shows that the general-domain models may
be better than smaller text processing models without pre-
training on the issue type prediction. BERTBASE signiﬁcantly
outperforms fastText on the issue type prediction task. The
BERTLARGE model from the general domain has severe prob-
lems with this use case, i.e., there are several cases where the
14. The full list of polysemes can be found in the supplemental
material.
15. Posterior probabilities determined by the Bayesian signed rank
test can be found in the supplemental material.
models completely failed. This happened with none of the
other models and may be an indication that the amount of
data is too small to ﬁne-tune such a large model from the
general domain on a domain-speciﬁc corpus.
6.3.2
Commit Intent Prediction
The results for the commit intent prediction are mostly in
line with the results for the issue type prediction. seBERT
has a 9% larger F1 score than the non-SE models, BERTover-
ﬂow is 6% better. The violin plots in Figure 6 also indicate
a stable improvement in both recall and precision and the
Bayesian signed rank test determined that the improvement
is signiﬁcant. In comparison to the issue type prediction,
seBERT is signiﬁcantly better than BERToverﬂow with an
absolute difference of about 3% in the F1 score. Moreover,
we note that the general domain BERT models fail to out-
perform fastText and that BERTLARGE has the same stability
issues as for the issue type prediction.
6.3.3
Sentiment Mining
The results for the sentiment mining show that there are
only small differences between the SE domain and general
domain BERT models on all three data sets. The absolute
performance on the API and GH data is almost equal. The
difference on the SO data is slightly larger, where BERTover-
ﬂow and seBERT outperform the BERTBASE and BERTLARGE
by about 3%, with a statistically signiﬁcant difference. We
observe that, same as before, the BERTLARGE model is some-
times unstable, likely for the same reasons as above. The
difference between the transformer models and fastText is
huge for this task, i.e., at least 20% in F1 score on all data
sets.
7
DISCUSSION
We now discuss our results with respect to our research
questions, consider the ethical implications of our work,
discuss the limitations and open issues, as well as the threats
to the validity.
7.1
Interpretation of SE Terminology
Our results indicate that SE domain models are better at
modeling natural language within the SE domain than gen-
eral domain models. The vocubalaries contain more tokens
from the SE domain. Especially the focus of the vocabu-
lary is interesting. Both seBERT and BERToverﬂow have
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
15
Model
Issue Type
Commit Intent
Sentiment (SO)
Sentiment (API)
Sentiment (GH)
fastText
0.69
0.75
0.44
0.37
0.47
BERTBASE
0.77
0.75
0.73
0.57
0.91
BERTLARGE
0.62
0.71
0.73
0.55
0.91
BERToverﬂow
0.81
0.81
0.77
0.58
0.92
seBERT
0.80
0.84
0.76
0.57
0.92
TABLE 7
Median F1 score of the models for the ﬁne-tuning tasks. Macro-average over the three classes for the sentiment mining.
fastText
BERTbase
BERTlarge
BERToverflow
seBERT
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F-Measure
fastText
BERTbase
BERTlarge
BERToverflow
seBERT
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Recall
fastText
BERTbase
BERTlarge
BERToverflow
seBERT
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Precision
Results for Issue Type Classification Classification
Fig. 5. Results of the prediction of bug issues.
fastText
BERTbase
BERTlarge
BERToverflow
seBERT
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F-Measure
fastText
BERTbase
BERTlarge
BERToverflow
seBERT
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Recall
fastText
BERTbase
BERTlarge
BERToverflow
seBERT
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Precision
Results for Commit Message Classification
Fig. 6. Results of the prediction of quality improving commits.
fastText
BERTbase
BERTlarge
BERToverflow
seBERT
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F-Measure
fastText
BERTbase
BERTlarge
BERToverflow
seBERT
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Recall
fastText
BERTbase
BERTlarge
BERToverflow
seBERT
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Precision
Results for Sentiment Mining (SO)
Fig. 7. Results of the sentiment mining on the SO data.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
16
fastText
BERTbase
BERTlarge
BERToverflow
seBERT
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F-Measure
fastText
BERTbase
BERTlarge
BERToverflow
seBERT
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Recall
fastText
BERTbase
BERTlarge
BERToverflow
seBERT
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Precision
Results for Sentiment Mining (API)
Fig. 8. Results of the sentiment mining on the API data.
fastText
BERTbase
BERTlarge
BERToverflow
seBERT
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F-Measure
fastText
BERTbase
BERTlarge
BERToverflow
seBERT
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Recall
fastText
BERTbase
BERTlarge
BERToverflow
seBERT
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Precision
Results for Sentiment Mining (Github)
Fig. 9. Results of the sentiment mining on the GH data.
the names of many tools such as programming languages,
libraries, build tools, and operating systems. Such words are
mostly missing in the BERT vocabulary.
That domain speciﬁc words replace terms from other
domains is not surprising. However, the magnitude of the
difference between the vocabularies is larger than we would
have expected: only half of the words from BERT are within
the BERToverﬂow vocabulary, for the smaller seBERT vo-
cabulary this drops further to 38%. Thus, less then half of
the commonly used terminology from the general domain
is among the commonly used terminology within the SE
domain. In comparison, the lexical similarity between En-
glish and German is about 60% [58]. While this comparison
is a bit unfair and likely an overstatement, because the
vocabularies require exact matches of word pieces, while
the lexical similarity requires only a “similarity in both
form and meaning” [59], this highlights how different texts
from the SE domain are from the general domain. This
also demonstrates that NLP models with a ﬁxed vocabulary
should always be retrained from scratch for the SE domain
to maximize the performance, instead of basing them on
general domain models with additional pre-training steps,
as is, e.g., done for BioBERT [7] and ClinicalBERT [8].
The MLM task demonstrates that the better representa-
tion of the SE context goes beyond the vocabulary. With SE
domain statements, the general domain models often under-
stand that they should suggest a word from the SE domain,
but often do not really understand the exact meaning, which
leads to unsuitable suggestions. The SE-speciﬁc models are
much better at understanding the complete context of the
missing word and provide suitable suggestion. However,
the examples also show that for a SE domain NLP model,
data from Stack Overﬂow alone is not sufﬁcient, as this
only represents the domain within a Q&A context. At least
some other aspects of the NLP aspects of the SE domain
are not sufﬁciently captured by the BERToverﬂow model
within our examples. E.g., the lack of issue handling on
Stack Overﬂow translated into a problem with identifying
the correct meaning of a missing term. This demonstrates
that a larger amount of training data is beneﬁcial and that
data should be selected from a diverse range of sources.
This also shows that we should be careful, when we use
NLP models for tasks, where the text may be different from
the pre-training texts. The additional MLM examples con-
ﬁrm what we expected about the SE domain models: their
general language understanding is okay, but they are clearly
inferior to general domain models for anything beyond the
SE domain.
Answer to RQ1: Transformer models trained with
general domain data have trouble understanding SE
domain terminology. SE speciﬁc models are very good
at understanding sentences within the SE context and
in general language understanding, but do not perform
well in contexts beyond the SE domain.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
17
7.2
Impact on Applications
The results of the ﬁne-tuned predictions show that SE do-
main transformer models easily are state-of-the-art for the
two domain speciﬁc NLP tasks we considered, i.e., the issue
type prediction and the commit intent prediction. In both
tasks, seBERT and BERToverﬂow clearly outperform the
competition and the absolute improvement is huge. Even
more importantly, these models are decreasing both false
negatives and false positives, i.e., they do not achieve this
performance improvement through a trade-off between the
errors, which indicates that this is really due to a better
understanding of the language. Thus, the high validity of
the domain understanding we found through the manual
inspection of the vocabularies and the MLM task also trans-
lates into a better performance in relevant NLP use cases.
This improvement is not explainable by the model size
alone. This is demonstrated by the lower performance of
the general domain BERT models. These models have the
same size as our in domain-models16, but do not show the
same improvement over the smaller fastText model.
Moreover, our results show that the SE domain trans-
formers are not always better when SE data is used: we
could not ﬁnd notable differences between the general
domain BERT models and the SE domain models for the
sentiment mining tasks. Thus, SE speciﬁc pre-training only
seems valuable, if the use case is speciﬁc to the SE domain
and requires the interpretation of text with a SE background,
which based on recent research does not seem to be the case
for sentiment mining [49].
The impact of our choice to use a sequence length of
only 128, in comparison to the sequence lengths of 512
from the other models is also visible in the ﬁne-tuning. For
the short commit messages of the commit intent prediction
task, the seBERT model outperforms all other models, in-
cluding BERToverﬂow. This is reasonable, because of the
seBERT is the overall larger model and commit messages
were used for the pre-training. We do not observe such
a difference in performance for the issue type prediction
task. Here, seBERT and BERToverﬂow are very similar to
each other. This could mean that the F1 score of 0.8 is
the performance ceiling and a better result is not possible
without additional data, e.g., more training data or addi-
tional information about the issues. Alternatively, seBERT
is penalized by the short sequence length of 128, which
gives BERToverﬂow an advantage for longer issues. This
could compensate the difference in model size and data
for pre-training. A subgroup analysis of the predictions for
issues with less than or equal to 128 tokens and longer
issues did not provide conclusive evidence for this. Instead,
we observed an instance of Simpson’s paradox [60], i.e.,
seBERT outperformed BERToverﬂow on both subgroups,
even though the overall performance is about equal. While
we could consider this as an indication that the sequence
length was not problematic, we cannot provide a deﬁnitive
answer to this question without extending seBERT to a
sequence length of 512 tokens. However, such an extension
is, at this time, from our perspective not warranted due
the required energy consumption (see Section 7.3) and we
16. Reminder: BERToverﬂow is a BERTBASE model and seBERT is a
BERTLARGE model.
believe that the computational effort for this should only be
spent if there is a clear expected advantage of considering
longer sequences.
The difference between the BERTBASE and BERTLARGE
model further shows that general-domain models – es-
pecially large general domain models – should be used
with caution: often, this model converged to a trivial result
where all instances were classiﬁed as negative. The logs
of the training showed that this happened when the ﬁne-
tuned model was still very bad after the ﬁrst epoch. In the
subsequent epochs, the optimization found that a trivial
model was actually better in terms of accuracy and cross-
entropy than the ﬁrst attempts. Unfortunately, we cannot
determine the exact reason for this. However, we believe
that this may be due to the combination of a small data
set for ﬁne-tuning and a lack of SE domain understanding
of the general model. As a result, the training did not
converge towards a reasonable solution within one epoch.
Subsequently, the optimizer got stuck in the local optimum
of the trivial model.17 That this did not happen with the
equally large seBERT provides another indication that the
SE speciﬁc pre-training, in fact, the opposite happened: since
the pre-training already captured the domain very well,
seBERT usually achieved the optimal result within one, at
most two epochs, regardless of the model size.
Together with the results from Tabassum et al. [10] for the
NER task that showed that the BERToverﬂow model was
also better than a BERTBASE model, we have a clear answer
for RQ2.
Answer to RQ2: Transformer models pre-trained with
SE domain data consistently outperform other models
on SE use cases and should be considered as the state-
of-the-art. Pre-trained models from the general domain
should be used with care, especially if only a small
amount of data is available for the ﬁne-tuning. How-
ever, we also found that SE domain models perform
similar to general domain models for sentiment mining
on SE data, i.e., a use case that does not require SE
speciﬁc knowledge.
7.3
Ethical Considerations
Large deep learning models for NLP, like the transformer
models we consider within this work, are associated with
several ethical challenges, as is, e.g., highlighted in the
famous stochastic parrots paper by Bender et al. [61]. Due to
impact of Bender et al. [61] and the direct relation to BERT
models, we structure our consideration of ethical aspects
following the four major ethical concerns highlighted in
their work.
The ﬁrst aspect highlighted by Bender et al. [61] is the
energy consumption that large transformer models require.
We actively considered methods to reduce the training
time, e.g., by using a version of the BERT pre-training that
was optimized for the hardware we were using and by
restricting the sequence length to 128 tokens. Based on the
17. We cannot rule out that other training parameters (e.g., batch size,
learning rate), would yield better results with BERTLARGE or any other
of our models. However, this does not affect our conclusions, as we
discuss in the threats to validity (see Section 7.5).
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
18
energy consumption of the system we used for training
that requires between 2.5 kW and 3.5 kW when utilized
fully, we estimate that we required between 270 kWh and
378 kWh for the 4.5 days of pre-training. Under load the
cooling of the data center, where the compute nodes are
located, has a Power Usage Effectiveness (PUE) of about
1.23. Additional overhead regarding storage and network
has also to be taken into account, so we are calculating with
an overhead of approximately 30%. Hence, we estimate that
we consumed at most 378 kWh · 1.30 = 491.4 kWh. Based
on the 366 g CO2 that is generated per kWh in 2020 in
Germany [62], this means the pre-training produced up to
180 kg of CO2. This is roughly the amount of the CO2 for
one tank ﬁlling of an average family car, which we believe is
not unreasonable from an ecological perspective for a one-
time effort. In comparison, Strubell et al. [63] estimate that
they required about 1507 kWh for the training of a BERTBASE
model. This means that we could train the seBERT model
with only one third of the environmental impact than a
normal BERTBASE model, even though we use a BERTLARGE
architecture and 119.7 Gigabyte instead of 16 Gigabyte of
textual data for training.
The second aspect highlighted by Bender et al. [61] is
the quality of the training data. The authors highlight that
the size of the training data does not guarantee diversity,
data collected from the past can, by deﬁnition, capture how
language evolves, and that there is a risk that models,
therefore, capture and enforce existing biases. We did not
systematically evaluate BERToverﬂow and seBERT for such
biases. One aspect we found regardless is that “women”
was not in the dictionary of seBERT. Thus, we can be quite
sure, even without an in depth consideration that there is at
least a severe gender bias within the data, and, consequently,
within seBERT. Since BERToverﬂow was trained on less,
but similar data, we believe that there should be a similar
gender bias. We cannot comment on other biases, e.g., racial
bias or similar. We also note that we cannot exclude that
men is only included in the seBERT vocabulary because it is
polysemous (man page). Tasks like NER or classiﬁcation of
bugs should not be affected by such biases and can safely be
used. Tasks where bias is be relevant, e.g., sentiment mining
of developers, the development of chat bots or automated
answering of SE questions should only be conducted after
a detailed consideration of such ethical considerations. For
tasks where the impact of bias is unclear, e.g., the summa-
rizing existing texts within the SE domain, could possibly
be used but we still recommend to at least conduct a basic
check for such biases.
The third aspect that Bender et al. [61] consider is that
time may be better spent than on the exploration of ever
larger language models. When we transfer this to our work,
this means that SE researchers should not invest too much
effort into the development of NLP models for the SE
domain, but rather focus on the SE data and use cases.
For us, this means that we should only provide SE domain
models, when machine-learning driven NLP research has
major advances, instead of, e.g., trying to directly ﬁnd new
transformer architectures for SE benchmarks with SE data.
Currently, it seems like the SE community is already using
such an approach, as there are only few domain speciﬁc
models and they are all re-using architectures that were
developed by researchers for the general domain (see Sec-
tion 3).
The fourth issue raised by Bender et al. [61] is that, in the
end, such large NLP models are nothing more than stochastic
parrots, i.e., models that repeat what they have seen in the
data, with some random component. This is due to our lack
of understanding about the internal structure and reasoning
within models with millions of parameters. This is also a
property of SE domain models that should be respected for
any later use of these models in an ethical way. For example,
we found that the SE domain models are very good at
suggesting technologies. When we use the sentence “You
can use [MASK] for code coverage in java.”, seBERT and
BERToverﬂow predict tools like Cobertura, gcov, Emma, or
Jacoco. We found that this works with different languages
and different kinds of tools. However, using the models
within a chat bot or Q&A system to recommend suitable
tools means that the past is encoded and developers of
new tools would not have a chance, unless the model is
retrained. In comparison, humans learn continuously about
new tools, i.e., there would not be such an ethical problem.
The consequence of this issue is similar to the impact of
potential biases: we recommend to be careful when using
the NLP models to generate responses to actual queries,
unless it was determined that the possible responses are
carefully validated for the given use case.
7.4
Open Issues
Our work demonstrates that NLP models pre-trained with
SE domain data are useful. However, there are also limi-
tations to the understanding of transformers that we es-
tablished. Since we used BERT both as general domain
reference model, as well as the architecture for our models,
it is unclear how the results generalize to other transformer
models. While the difference to models that have a similar
size like RoBERTa [18] should be relatively small, it is
unclear if extremely large models like GPT-3 [19] may be
able to correctly understand the meaning of texts both in
the SE and general domain, same as human experts. While
there is no reason that this should be the case, there is also no
strong argument against this. However, currently the scale
of these models is beyond almost anyone, except the largest
labs and companies of the globe [64]. Therefore, even if this
were the case, such improvements could currently only be
harnessed by a small elite. Thus, we believe that for the
majority of SE researchers and vendors who may consider
building NLP capabilities into their tools, models like BERT
are a more realistic, current alternative.
A related limitation is the impact of the context length
on the results. Within this work, we work with a maximum
context length of 512 tokens (BERT, BERToverﬂow) and 128
tokens (seBERT). While we argue that most SE texts in our
data are shorter anyways, this is also due to the type of
text we consider. If we were to, e.g., consider README
ﬁles instead, we would likely have many examples of longer
texts. Thus, while our results show that even the relatively
short context of 128 tokens is sufﬁcient and actually leads to
the best results in both domain-dependent ﬁne-tuning ex-
amples we consider, this may not generalize to NLP tasks on
longer inputs. Especially generative tasks, like summarizing
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
19
long documents, may beneﬁt from a longer context that is
sufﬁcient to capture the meaning of the whole text at once.
In case studies ﬁnd that models with shorter contexts, like
BERT, do not generate suitable results for longer documents,
other transformer models, like Big Bird [65], which achieves
a sequence length of 4096 tokens, could be used.
Another limitation is a corollary from our statement
regarding longer documents: while our corpus is already
relatively diverse, with Stack Overﬂow, issues, and commit
messages, this still does not capture the whole SE domain
and, most notably, lacks examples with longer texts. Thus,
even if we wanted to train a model with a longer sequence
length, this could only make a difference on a small frac-
tion of this type of SE data and the available data would
likely not be sufﬁcient to correctly model longer contextual
relationships. Unfortunately, there is neither a suitable data
set that could be exploited for pre-training, nor is there a
benchmark task for NLP within the SE domain that requires
longer texts. Thus, to advance NLP for the SE domain for
tasks with long sequences, our community would ﬁrst need
to solve the associated data challenge, both with respect
to data for pre-training, as well as through a curated data
set that is suitable for the benchmarking of a ﬁne-tuned
application. These limitations are not only restricted to
length, but also to tasks that actively exploit the capability
of BERT models to compare two sentences by exploiting the
semantics of the [SEP] token. Thus, further ﬁne-tuning tasks
that evaluate the utility of BERT for such problems, e.g., the
identiﬁcation of related Stack Overﬂow posts [66], still need
to be considered. Additionally, similar ﬁne-tuning tasks to
the ones we considered to evaluate the generalization of the
results to similar tasks, e.g., app review classiﬁcation [67],
which is similar to sentiment mining.
Finally, we already highlighted the lack of an evaluation
of the SE models from an ethics perspective. While this
was not within the scope of our work, future work must
deal with potential biases in SE domain models, unless their
usage is restricted to few and possibly uncritical use cases,
as is, e.g., the case in our ﬁne-tuned examples. We note
that this does not only affect seBERT and BERToverﬂow,
but also models like CodeBERT [68], in case this is used to
generate texts, e.g., automated documentation generation.
From our perspective, this is a precursor of any type of
generative NLP application, i.e. NLP models that actively
generate texts, e.g., to answer questions like “what does this
code do” or “summarize this README ﬁle”, but also for
any application like sentiment mining, which is known to
encode biases [69].
7.5
Threats to Validity
We report the threats to the validity of our work following
the classiﬁcation by [70] suggested for software engineering
by [71]. Additionally, we discuss the reliability as suggested
by [72].
7.5.1
Construct Validity
The construct of our validation of NLP models may be
unsuitable. The direct comparison of WordPiece vocabu-
laries neglects to account for the internal structure of the
models. For example, the internal structure could achieve
that the combination of tokens “wo##men” is the same as
having the token “women” directly in the vocabulary. We
address this issue by not only considering the overlap and
tokenization, but also through a qualitative analysis of the
non-overlapping words. Our data indicates that these are
mostly domain speciﬁc terms, which makes sense given the
training data and also means that an effect where these
words are known by the model, regardless of them missing
in the vocabulary. Similarly, our study of the contextual in-
terpretation of sentences and words through the MLM task
may be unsuitable. Our lack of consideration of different
parameters for training (batch sizes, learning rates, etc.) may
lead to sub-optimal models after ﬁne-tuning, which could
affect our conclusions.
7.5.2
Internal Validity
While we have good reason to believe that the differences
between the models we observe are due to the difference in
the data used for pre-training the models, we cannot rule
out that there may be other reasons for these differences,
due to the black box nature of the models. Most threats
to the internal validity should be mitigated by our con-
struct: a pure analysis of the vocabulary may show artiﬁcial
differences, but this would not explain the differences we
observe with the MLM and ﬁne-tuning tasks. And while
few random differences for the MLM and ﬁne-tuning may
be explainable by alternative hypotheses, we observe clear
patterns that match our expectations, including the lack
of big differences between the models when general lan-
guage understanding is required. We also did not conduct
an extensive hyperparameter search for the ﬁne-tuning of
the models. This means we potentially underestimate the
models performance, such that differences between the
models could potentially increase or decrease, with other
parameters, e.g., learning rates. However, since all models
use similar architectures (BERT), it is likely that they work
best with similar hyperparameters for the same problem.
Thus, even if our hyperparameters should be suboptimal, it
is likely that the differences we observe would be preserved
with different hyperparameters. Consequently, we believe
that we mitigated most notable threats to the internal valid-
ity, other than the limitations of our study we acknowledge
in Section 7.4.
There is one notable threat to the internal validity of
our ﬁne-tuning results, due to the way seBERT was created.
The corpus used for pre-training included commit messages
from Github, data from Stack Overﬂow, and Jira issues,
some of which may be part of the test data we use for
ﬁne-tuning tasks. Since the pre-training was self-supervised
based on MLM and NSP, no information about labels was
part of the creation of the models. Thus, there cannot be
an information leak that affects our results. However, we
cannot rule out the possibility that the ﬁne-tuning works
better with data seen during the pre-training, because it is
more likely that the language structure is already known by
the model. However, we believe that the threat is relatively
small, due to the following reasons. First, having seen the
data could also be a problem as well: beyond language
understanding, having seen data without the labels before
can only help with memorization, not with generalization.
Consequently, results on test data could actually be worse
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
20
due to this. Second, while some data may have been during
the pre-training, we also have ﬁne-tuning tasks, where none
(API sentiments), or only little data was part of the pre-
training (prediction of bug issues18). Third, BERToverﬂow
used different data and can only have such an overlap for
the sentiment mining on SO task, but there is no indication
that this is an advantage for seBERT for the other tasks.
Fourth, note that the data we used for ﬁne-tuning is tiny (a
couple of Megabytes) compared to the data used for pre-
training (e.g., 2.4 Terabyte for seBERT). Thus, it is unlikely
that the pre-training was signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by this
data, making advantages unlikely.
7.5.3
Conclusion Validity
The statistical tests we used for the comparison of the ﬁne-
tuned models were suitable for the data and there is no
threat to the conclusion validity of our study.
7.5.4
External Validity
Since our consideration of ﬁne-tuning only considers ﬁve
classiﬁcation tasks, we cannot with certainty conclude that
the SE domain models are also better than the general
domain models for other SE tasks, e.g., summarizing content
or comparing sequences. However, since our results indicate
that SE-speciﬁc models are better at capturing SE speciﬁc
aspects and because prior work also found a similar results
regarding the NER task [10], we believe that this is unlikely.
Moreover, as already discussed in Section 7.4, our results
may not generalize to extremely large models, as they may
be able to capture multiple domains correctly, due to their
size. We note that our pre-training and evaluations are lim-
ited to data collected from open source projects. While many
open source projects are developed professionally, there
may still be issues due to unknown in-house terminology
when these models are used within a proprietary context
that requires such knowledge. Our results do not allow for
conclusions regarding the question if ﬁne-tuning of open
source models would be sufﬁcient for such use cases.
7.5.5
Reliability
The deﬁnition of the positive, neutral, and negative sen-
tences for the assessment of the contextual embeddings may
inﬂuence our results, i.e., other researchers would almost
certainly not have selected exactly the same sentences as us
and, therefore, may have a different view on the capability
of the models with respect to understanding the context of
statements. However, while other sentences could always
lead to differences, we note that we did not conduct any
cherry picking to show the most differences, but rather
ﬁrst deﬁned the sentences and then applied the models.
Moreover, our playground provides anyone with the ability
to evaluate the differences in the predictions of masked
words between the models.19 Additionally, we augmented
the analysis on the curated corpus with a pure empirical
analysis, in which we randomly sampled sentences with
words with special meaning in the SE domain and then
18. The Jira Issues only contain data until 2014 and the difference in
performance of predictions is only later data is considered is small [11]
19. https://smartshark2.informatik.uni-goettingen.de/sebert/index.
html
evaluated the ability of the models to predict the missing
words. While this does not give us insights into the inner
workings of the models, these empirical results provide
further evidence that our results are not biased by our
selection.
8
CONCLUSION
Within our work, we ﬁnd that NLP for SE can beneﬁt from
transformer models pre-trained with SE data. While this
was already known for applications that include source
code, there was only little evidence for other natural lan-
guage tasks. Through our work we not only explored the
differences in the expected performance of applications,
but also the tried to understand if the models really have
a better understanding of the SE domain. For this, we
manually compared the vocabularies of general domain and
SE domain BERT models and compared how these mod-
els completed sentences with masked words. This analysis
showed that while general domain models have a rough but
imprecise understanding of the SE domain, the SE models
are more precise. This improved understanding also led
to signiﬁcantly better results in ﬁne-tuned within the SE
domain, but not in a general task like sentiment mining
applied to SE data. In conclusion, we recommend to ensure
that a large amount of SE data was used for pre-training
large NLP models, when these models are used for SE tasks.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank the GWDG for their sup-
port regarding the usage of the GPU resources required for
this article.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N.
Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,”
Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 30, 2017.
[2]
J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT:
Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language
understanding,” in Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the
North
American
Chapter
of
the
Association
for
Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short
Papers).
Minneapolis, Minnesota: Association for Computational
Linguistics,
Jun.
2019,
pp.
4171–4186.
[Online].
Available:
https://aclanthology.org/N19-1423
[3]
Z. Yang, Z. Dai, Y. Yang, J. Carbonell, R. Salakhutdinov, and
Q. V. Le, XLNet: Generalized Autoregressive Pretraining for Language
Understanding. Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates Inc., 2019.
[4]
A. Radford, J. Wu, R. Child, D. Luan, D. Amodei, and I. Sutskever,
“Language models are unsupervised multitask learners,” 2019.
[5]
S.
Nagel,
“Cc-news,”
2016.
[Online].
Available:
https://
commoncrawl.org/2016/10/news-dataset-available/
[6]
I. Beltagy, K. Lo, and A. Cohan, “Scibert: Pretrained language
model for scientiﬁc text,” in EMNLP, 2019.
[7]
J.
Lee,
W.
Yoon,
S.
Kim,
D.
Kim,
S.
Kim,
C.
H.
So,
and J. Kang, “BioBERT: a pre-trained biomedical language
representation model for biomedical text mining,” Bioinformatics,
vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 1234–1240, 09 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btz682
[8]
K. Huang, J. Altosaar, and R. Ranganath, “Clinicalbert: Mod-
eling
clinical
notes
and
predicting
hospital
readmission,”
arXiv:1904.05342, 2019.
[9]
V. Efstathiou, C. Chatzilenas, and D. Spinellis, “Word embeddings
for the software engineering domain,” in Proceedings of the 15th
International Conference on Mining Software Repositories, ser. MSR
’18.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
2018, p. 38–41. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/
3196398.3196448
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
21
[10] J. Tabassum, M. Maddela, W. Xu, and A. Ritter, “Code and
named entity recognition in StackOverﬂow,” in Proceedings of the
58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
Online: Association for Computational Linguistics, Jul. 2020,
pp. 4913–4926. [Online]. Available: https://www.aclweb.org/
anthology/2020.acl-main.443
[11] S. Herbold, A. Trautsch, and F. Trautsch, “On the feasibility
of automated prediction of bug and non-bug issues,” Empirical
Software Engineering, vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 5333–5369, Sep. 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-020-09885-w
[12] K. Herzig, S. Just, and A. Zeller, “It’s not a bug, it’s a feature:
How misclassiﬁcation impacts bug prediction,” in Proceedings of
the International Conference on Software Engineering, ser. ICSE ’13.
Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2013, pp. 392–401. [Online].
Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2486788.2486840
[13] A. Trautsch, J. Erbel, S. Herbold, and J. Grabowski, “On the
differences between quality increasing and other changes in open
source java projects,” 2021.
[14] T. Zhang, B. Xu, F. Thung, S. A. Haryono, D. Lo, and L. Jiang, “Sen-
timent analysis for software engineering: How far can pre-trained
transformer models go?” in 2020 IEEE International Conference on
Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME), 2020, pp. 70–80.
[15] J. Eisenstein, Introduction to Natural Language Processing, ser. Adap-
tive Computation and Machine Learning series.
MIT Press, 2019.
[16] M. Lewis, Y. Liu, N. Goyal, M. Ghazvininejad, A. Mohamed,
O.
Levy,
V.
Stoyanov,
and
L.
Zettlemoyer,
“BART:
Denoising
sequence-to-sequence
pre-training
for
natural
language
generation,
translation,
and
comprehension,”
in
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Online: Association for Computational
Linguistics,
Jul.
2020,
pp.
7871–7880.
[Online].
Available:
https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.703
[17] Z.
Lan,
M.
Chen,
S.
Goodman,
K.
Gimpel,
P.
Sharma,
and
R.
Soricut,
“Albert:
A
lite
bert
for
self-supervised
learning of language representations,” in International Conference
on
Learning
Representations,
2020. [Online].
Available: https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=H1eA7AEtvS
[18] Y. Liu, M. Ott, N. Goyal, J. Du, M. Joshi, D. Chen, O. Levy,
M. Lewis, L. Zettlemoyer, and V. Stoyanov, “Roberta: A robustly
optimized bert pretraining approach,” 2019.
[19] T. B. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. Kaplan, P. Dhari-
wal, A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam, G. Sastry, A. Askell, S. Agarwal,
A. Herbert-Voss, G. Krueger, T. Henighan, R. Child, A. Ramesh,
D. M. Ziegler, J. Wu, C. Winter, C. Hesse, M. Chen, E. Sigler,
M. Litwin, S. Gray, B. Chess, J. Clark, C. Berner, S. McCandlish,
A. Radford, I. Sutskever, and D. Amodei, “Language models are
few-shot learners,” 2020.
[20] W. Fedus, B. Zoph, and N. Shazeer, “Switch transformers: Scaling
to trillion parameter models with simple and efﬁcient sparsity,”
2021.
[21] L. Tunstall, L. von Werra, and T. Wolf, Natural Language Processing
with Transformers.
O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2021 (early access).
[22] J. Vig, “A multiscale visualization of attention in the transformer
model,” in Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations, 2019, pp. 37–
42.
[23] T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Efﬁcient estimation
of word representations in vector space,” 2013.
[24] M. Thelwall, K. Buckley, G. Paltoglou, D. Cai, and A. Kappas,
“Sentiment strength detection in short informal text,” Journal
of the American Society for Information Science and Technology,
vol.
61,
no.
12,
pp.
2544–2558,
2010.
[Online].
Available:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/asi.21416
[25] M. R. Islam and M. F. Zibran, “Sentistrength-se: Exploiting
domain speciﬁcity for improved sentiment analysis in software
engineering text,” Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 145, pp.
125–146, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0164121218301675
[26] T. Ahmed, A. Bosu, A. Iqbal, and S. Rahimi, “Senticr: A cus-
tomized sentiment analysis tool for code review interactions,” in
2017 32nd IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering (ASE), 2017, pp. 106–111.
[27] F. Calefato, F. Lanubile, F. Maiorano, and N. Novielli, “Sentiment
polarity detection for software development,” Empirical Softw.
Engg., vol. 23, no. 3, p. 1352–1382, jun 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-017-9546-9
[28] E. Biswas, M. E. Karabulut, L. Pollock, and K. Vijay-Shanker,
“Achieving reliable sentiment analysis in the software engineer-
ing domain using bert,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference on
Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME), 2020, pp. 162–173.
[29] M. E. Peters, M. Neumann, M. Iyyer, M. Gardner, C. Clark, K. Lee,
and L. Zettlemoyer, “Deep contextualized word representations,”
in Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers).
New Orleans, Louisiana:
Association for Computational Linguistics, Jun. 2018, pp. 2227–
2237. [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/N18-1202
[30] S. Pyysalo, F. Ginter, H. Moen, T. Salakoski, and S. Ananiadou,
“Distributional semantics resources for biomedical text process-
ing,” in Proceedings of LBM 2013, 2013, pp. 39–44.
[31] S. Ghosh, P. Chakraborty, E. Cohn, J. S. Brownstein, and N. Ra-
makrishnan, “Characterizing diseases from unstructured text: A
vocabulary driven word2vec approach,” 2016.
[32] D. Araci, “Finbert: Financial sentiment analysis with pre-trained
language models,” arXiv:1908.10063, 2019.
[33] A. Ferrari and A. Esuli, “An NLP approach for cross-domain
ambiguity detection in requirements engineering,” Automated
Software Engineering, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 559–598, Jun. 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10515-019-00261-7
[34] B. Theeten, F. Vandeputte, and T. Van Cutsem, “Import2vec
learning embeddings for software libraries,” in Proceedings of
the 16th International Conference on Mining Software Repositories,
ser. MSR ’19.
IEEE Press, 2019, p. 18–28. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/MSR.2019.00014
[35] U. Alon, M. Zilberstein, O. Levy, and E. Yahav, “Code2vec:
Learning
distributed
representations
of
code,”
Proc.
ACM
Program. Lang., vol. 3, no. POPL, Jan. 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3290353
[36] Z. Feng, D. Guo, D. Tang, N. Duan, X. Feng, M. Gong, L. Shou,
B. Qin, T. Liu, D. Jiang, and M. Zhou, “Codebert: A pre-trained
model for programming and natural languages,” 2020.
[37] K. Clark, M.-T. Luong, Q. V. Le, and C. D. Manning, “Electra: Pre-
training text encoders as discriminators rather than generators,”
2020.
[38] Stack Exchange, “Stack Exchange Data Dump,” 2014. [Online].
Available: https://archive.org/details/stackexchange
[39] Internet Archive, “Internet Archive,” 2010. [Online]. Available:
https://archive.org/index.php
[40] Stack Exchange, “Stack Overﬂow public dataset,” 2016. [On-
line]. Available: https://console.cloud.google.com/marketplace/
product/stack-exchange/stack-overﬂow
[41] I. Grigorik, “The GitHub Archive,” 2012. [Online]. Available:
https://www.gharchive.org/
[42] Google Cloud, “BigQuery - Google Cloud Platform.” 2011.
[Online]. Available: https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/
[43] M. Ortu, G. Destefanis, B. Adams, A. Murgia, M. Marchesi,
and R. Tonelli, “The jira repository dataset: Understanding social
aspects of software development,” in Proceedings of the 11th
International Conference on Predictive Models and Data Analytics in
Software Engineering, ser. PROMISE ’15.
New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2015. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/2810146.2810147
[44] Y. You, J. Li, S. Reddi, J. Hseu, S. Kumar, S. Bhojanapalli, X. Song,
J. Demmel, K. Keutzer, and C.-J. Hsieh, “Large batch optimization
for deep learning: Training bert in 76 minutes,” in International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=Syx4wnEtvH
[45] P. Micikevicius, S. Narang, J. Alben, G. Diamos, E. Elsen,
D. Garcia, B. Ginsburg, M. Houston, O. Kuchaiev, G. Venkatesh,
and
H.
Wu,
“Mixed
precision
training,”
in
International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=r1gs9JgRZ
[46] A.
Wang,
A.
Singh,
J.
Michael,
F.
Hill,
O.
Levy,
and
S. R. Bowman, “GLUE: A multi-task benchmark and analysis
platform for natural language understanding,” in International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=rJ4km2R5t7
[47] A. Wang, Y. Pruksachatkun, N. Nangia, A. Singh, J. Michael,
F. Hill, O. Levy, and S. R. Bowman, SuperGLUE: A Stickier Bench-
mark for General-Purpose Language Understanding Systems.
Red
Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates Inc., 2019.
[48] P. Rajpurkar, J. Zhang, K. Lopyrev, and P. Liang, “SQuAD:
100,000+ questions for machine comprehension of text,” in
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
22
Proceedings
of
the
2016
Conference
on
Empirical
Methods
in
Natural Language Processing.
Austin, Texas: Association for
Computational Linguistics, Nov. 2016, pp. 2383–2392. [Online].
Available: https://aclanthology.org/D16-1264
[49] N.
Novielli,
F.
Calefato,
F.
Lanubile,
and
A.
Serebrenik,
“Assessment
of
off-the-shelf
SE-speciﬁc
sentiment
analysis
tools:
An
extended
replication
study,”
Empirical
Software
Engineering,
vol.
26,
no.
4,
Jun.
2021.
[Online].
Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-021-09960-w
[50] N. Novielli, D. Girardi, and F. Lanubile, “A benchmark study
on sentiment analysis for software engineering research,” in 2018
IEEE/ACM 15th International Conference on Mining Software Reposi-
tories (MSR), 2018, pp. 364–375.
[51] B. Lin, F. Zampetti, G. Bavota, M. Di Penta, M. Lanza, and
R. Oliveto, “Sentiment analysis for software engineering: How
far can we go?” in Proceedings of the 40th International Conference
on Software Engineering, ser. ICSE ’18.
New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2018, p. 94–104. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3180155.3180195
[52] Facebook AI Research, “fasttext - library for efﬁcient text classi-
ﬁcation and representation learning,” https://fasttext.cc/, 2019,
[accessed 14-November-2019].
[53] G. Antoniol, K. Ayari, M. Di Penta, F. Khomh, and Y.-G.
Gu´eh´eneuc, “Is it a bug or an enhancement?: A text-based
approach to classify change requests,” in Proceedings of the 2008
Conference of the Center for Advanced Studies on Collaborative
Research: Meeting of Minds, ser. CASCON ’08.
New York,
NY, USA: ACM, 2008, pp. 23:304–23:318. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1463788.1463819
[54] S. Herbold, A. Trautsch, and F. Trautsch, “Issues with szz: An
empirical assessment of the state of practice of defect prediction
data collection,” 2020.
[55] A. Benavoli, G. Corani, J. Demˇsar, and M. Zaffalon, “Time
for a change: a tutorial for comparing multiple classiﬁers
through bayesian analysis,” Journal of Machine Learning Research,
vol.
18,
no.
77,
pp.
1–36,
2017.
[Online].
Available:
http:
//jmlr.org/papers/v18/16-305.html
[56] G. Uddin and F. Khomh, “Automatic mining of opinions ex-
pressed about apis in stack overﬂow,” IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering, vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 522–559, 2021.
[57] N. Novielli, F. Calefato, D. Dongiovanni, D. Girardi, and
F. Lanubile, Can We Use SE-Speciﬁc Sentiment Analysis Tools in
a Cross-Platform Setting?
New York, NY, USA: Association for
Computing Machinery, 2020, p. 158–168. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3379597.3387446
[58] “Ethnologue entry for english, 24th edition,” 2021. [Online].
Available: https://www.ethnologue.com/language/eng
[59] “Ethnologue, 24th edition,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.ethnologue.com/about/language-info
[60] C. R. Blyth, “On simpson’s paradox and the sure-thing principle,”
Journal of the American Statistical Association, vol. 67, no. 338, pp.
364–366, 1972.
[61] E. M. Bender, T. Gebru, A. McMillan-Major, and S. Shmitchell,
“On the dangers of stochastic parrots: Can language models be
too big?” in Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness,
Accountability, and Transparency, ser. FAccT ’21.
New York, NY,
USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2021, p. 610–623.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3442188.3445922
[62] P. Icha, T. Lauf, and G. Kuhs, “Entwicklung der speziﬁschen
Kohlendioxid-Emissionen des deutschen Strommix in den Jahren
1990 - 2019,” 2021.
[63] E. Strubell, A. Ganesh, and A. McCallum, “Energy and policy
considerations for deep learning in NLP,” in Proceedings of
the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Florence,
Italy:
Association
for
Computational
Linguistics,
Jul.
2019,
pp.
3645–3650.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P19-1355
[64] V. J. Hellendoorn and A. A. Sawant, “The growing cost of deep
learning for source code,” Commun. ACM, vol. 65, no. 1, p. 31–33,
dec 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3501261
[65] M. Zaheer, G. Guruganesh, K. A. Dubey, J. Ainslie, C. Alberti,
S. Ontanon, P. Pham, A. Ravula, Q. Wang, L. Yang, and
A. Ahmed, “Big bird: Transformers for longer sequences,” in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, H. Larochelle,
M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin, Eds.,
vol.
33.
Curran
Associates,
Inc.,
2020,
pp.
17 283–17 297.
[Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/
ﬁle/c8512d142a2d849725f31a9a7a361ab9-Paper.pdf
[66] B. Xu, A. Shirani, D. Lo, and M. A. Alipour, “Prediction
of relatedness in stack overﬂow: Deep learning vs. svm: A
reproducibility study,” in Proceedings of the 12th ACM/IEEE
International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and
Measurement, ser. ESEM ’18.
New York, NY, USA: Association
for
Computing
Machinery,
2018.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3239235.3240503
[67] W. Maalej, Z. Kurtanovi´c, H. Nabil, and C. Stanik, “On the
automatic classiﬁcation of app reviews,” Requirements Engineering,
vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 311–331, May 2016. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00766-016-0251-9
[68] Z. Feng, D. Guo, D. Tang, N. Duan, X. Feng, M. Gong,
L. Shou, B. Qin, T. Liu, D. Jiang, and M. Zhou, “CodeBERT: A
pre-trained model for programming and natural languages,” in
Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
2020.
Online: Association for Computational Linguistics, Nov.
2020, pp. 1536–1547. [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.
org/2020.ﬁndings-emnlp.139
[69] S. Kiritchenko and S. Mohammad, “Examining gender and
race bias in two hundred sentiment analysis systems,” in
Proceedings
of
the
Seventh
Joint
Conference
on
Lexical
and
Computational Semantics.
New Orleans, Louisiana: Association
for Computational Linguistics, Jun. 2018, pp. 43–53. [Online].
Available: https://aclanthology.org/S18-2005
[70] T. D. Cook, D. T. Campbell, and A. Day, Quasi-experimentation:
Design & analysis issues for ﬁeld settings.
Houghton Mifﬂin Boston,
1979, vol. 351.
[71] C. Wohlin, P. Runeson, M. H¨ost, M. C. Ohlsson, B. Regnell, and
A. Wesslen, Experimentation in Software Engineering.
Springer
Publishing Company, Incorporated, 2012.
[72] P. Runeson and M. H¨ost, “Guidelines for conducting and reporting
case study research in software engineering,” Empirical Software
Engineering, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 131–164, 2009.
PLACE
PHOTO
HERE
Julian von der Mosel Julian von der Mosel is
currently working as a data engineer and re-
ceived his B.Sc. degree from the University of
Goettingen.
PLACE
PHOTO
HERE
Alexander Trautsch Alexander Trautsch is a
PhD candidate at the University of Goettingen.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
23
PLACE
PHOTO
HERE
Steffen Herbold Steffen Herbold is professor for
Methods and Applications of Machine learning at
the TU Clausthal.
