Title: Corpora deduplication or duplication in Natural Language Processing of few resourced languages ? A case of study: The Mexico's Nahuatl
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2604.07015v1
--------------------------------------------------

CORPORA DEDUPLICATION OR DUPLICATION IN NATURAL
LANGUAGE PROCESSING OF FEW RESOURCED LANGUAGES ? A
CASE OF STUDY: THE MEXICO’S NAHUATL ∗
Juan-José Guzmán-Landa1, Juan-Manuel Torres-Moreno1,2, Graham Ranger3
{1LIA; 3LCTT}, Université d’Avignon. Avignon, France
2LIFAT, Université de Tours. Tours, France
{juan-jose.guzman-landa, juan-manuel.torres, graham.ranger}@univ-avignon.fr
Miguel Figueroa-Saavedra5, Martha-Lorena Avendaño-Garrido4
4Facultad de Matemáticas, 5Instituto de Investigaciones en Educación,
Universidad Veracruzana, Xalapa, Mexico; {migfigueroa, maravendano}@uv.mx
Elvys Linhares-Pontes7
7Trading Central, France; elvys.linharespontes@tradingcentral.com
Luis-Gil Moreno-Jiménez6
6Independent Researcher, France; lmoreno30470@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
In this article, we seek to answer the following question: could data duplication be useful in Natural
Language Processing (NLP) for languages with limited computational resources? In this type of
languages (or π-languages) (Berment, 2004; Abdillahi et al., 2006), corpora available for training
Large Language Models are virtually non-existent. In particular, we will study the impact of corpora
expansion in Nawatl, an agglutinative and polysynthetic π-language spoken by over 2 million people,
with a large number of dialectal varieties (Lastra de Suárez, 1986; Canger, 1988). The aim is to
expand the new π-YALLI corpus, which contains a limited number of Nawatl texts (Guzmán-Landa
et al., 2025a), by duplicating it in a controlled way. In our experiments, we will use the incremental
duplication technique. The aim is to learn embeddings that are well-suited to NLP tasks. Thus, static
embeddings were trained and evaluated in a sentence-level semantic similarity task (Guzmán-Landa
et al., 2025b). Our results show a moderate improvement in performance when using incremental
duplication compared to the results obtained using only the corpus without expansion. Furthermore,
to our knowledge, this technique has not yet been used in the literature.
Key words: Nawatl; Corpora expansion; Large Language Models; Sentence Semantic Similarity.
1
Introduction
Large Language Models (LLM) require corpora containing vast amounts of textual data in order to capture the deep
structure of a language. These amounts often run into the hundreds of millions or even billions of words. Furthermore,
it has been found that performance increases logarithmically with corpus size (Kaplan et al., 2020). This massive data
requirement poses a major problem for the development of LLMs for languages with few computational resources, or
∗Citation: Guzman-Landa et al. Corpora deduplication or duplication in Natural Language Processing of few resourced
languages ? A case of study: The Mexico’s Nahuatl, ArXiv cs.CL 8 pages.
arXiv:2604.07015v1  [cs.CL]  8 Apr 2026
J.J. GUZMAN-LANDA ET AL.
π-languages, as opposed to τ-languages or languages with abundant resources (Berment, 2004; Abdillahi et al., 2006).
Indeed, π-languages suffer from a severe lack of textual corpora that are both representative and large-scale, making it
impossible to train LLMs. Consequently, these languages remain under-represented in Natural Language Processing
(NLP), perpetuating a linguistic bias that limits their usefulness for the communities that speak them.
One example of the Americas’ π-languages is Nawatl (or Nahuatl), one of Mexico’s indigenous national languages.
In this country, Nawatl has been recognised as the second national language, after Spanish, with approximately 1.65
million Nawatl speakers (INEGI, 2020). This language exhibits great dialectal diversity, with 29 recognised varieties
spread across four major regions in Mexico: Western, Central, Eastern and Huasteca2. This linguistic diversity poses
enormous challenges for the development of NLP tools, as it involves correctly handling significant variations in
spelling and lexical choices (Zimmermann, 2019; Olko and Sullivan, 2016; Hansen, 2024). To this end, a symbolic
unifier for Nawatl spellings has recently been proposed (Guzmán-Landa et al., 2025c). Although the publication of
digital content in Nawatl is constantly increasing, its dispersion and great dialectal diversity have not allowed for a clear
presence and accessibility to be established within the few available corpora. Nevertheless, the availability of digital
Nawatl documents and their written use are essential for the current revitalisation of the language (Pugh et al., 2025).
Our approach to addressing the problem of a lack of corpora involves the controlled duplication of available textual
data. Combined with other techniques, this strategy could serve as a basis—in the case of π-languages—for expanding
corpora on a larger scale. These corpora, in turn, could be used for training contextualised or static LLMs (Tunstall
et al., 2022; Goyal et al., 2018). More specifically, our objective is to sufficiently expand the Nawatl π-YALLI corpus4,
which should have a positive impact on learning models producing static embeddings.
The structure of the paper is as follows: Section 2 provides a review of corpus expansion techniques in under-resourced
languages. Section 3 introduces the Nawatl language and the π-YALLI corpus. Section 4 presents the incremental
duplication technique. Section 5 presents experiments with the expanded corpus in the context of a semantic similarity
task. Finally, section 6 concludes the paper and suggests avenues for future research.
2
State-of-the-art
In the literature, duplicate data is primarily addressed as a problem in languages rich in computational resources (or
τ-languages) (Abdillahi et al., 2006), rather than as a technique for increasing corpus size. Indeed, the vast amount of
data available on the internet leads to significant redundancy in collected corpora, which hinders model training (Lee
et al., 2022; Penedo et al., 2024). Consequently, most research focuses on the detection and removal of duplicates (or
deduplication), particularly in the context of corpora intended for LLMs training.
This problem is particularly pronounced in τ-languages, for which the volume of available textual data is quite
substantial, but also highly redundant. For this reason, most research aims to produce large-scale corpora whilst
minimising duplicates as much as possible. Thus, FineWeb (Penedo et al., 2024) and CCNet (Wenzek et al., 2020)
demonstrate filtering and deduplication techniques to produce high-quality, non-redundant corpora.
However, the situation is different in the case of π-languages, where the problem is not an excess of data, but a scarcity
of it. In this context, data augmentation (DA) could be a promising strategy for expanding currently available corpora to
compensate for the lack of resources (Feng et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2023). The data augmentation techniques proposed
in the literature can be classified into two main approaches:
Lexical level. The EDA (Easy Data Augmentation) method (Wei and Zou, 2019) performs simple operations such as
synonym substitution, as well as the insertion, deletion or random replacement of words. It has been applied
solely in the context of text classification, and the results show performance ranging from 87.8% to 88.6%,
representing improvements of less than 1%. These techniques use dictionaries to work with synonyms. EDA
has not been applied to π-languages.
Syntagmatic level. For languages lacking dictionaries, there are techniques such as EDDA (Easy Distributional Data
Augmentation) and TSSR (Type Specific Similar word Replacement) (Mahamud et al., 2023), which utilise
distributional context and morphosyntactic labels to address this shortcoming. TSSR requires the data to be
annotated with POS5 tags. EDDA relies on the latent space generated by Word2Vec instead of a dictionary.
These techniques have been used on Swedish corpora.
In this article, we propose an approach aimed at incrementally duplicating a corpus identically, without the need for
lexical resources such as POS taggers or dictionaries. In the case of Nawatl, these resources (which are sometimes
2See Ethnologue, 20253 and (Lastra de Suárez, 1986)
4This corpus is available on the website: https://demo-lia.univ-avignon.fr/pi-yalli
5Part-Of-Speech.
2
CORPORA DEDUPLICATION OR DUPLICATION IN NLP OF FEW RESOURCED LANGUAGES ? THE NAWATL OF MEXICO
non-existent) are difficult to use directly due to the language’s high degree of agglutination and poly-synthesism.
Furthermore, the few dictionaries available do not cover all dialectal varieties. Finally, we believe that EDA-type
techniques and their random mechanism may introduce syntactic and semantic biases. For these reasons, our aim is to
avoid them in our proposal.
3
The Nawatl language and the π-YALLI corpus
3.1
Nawatl language
The Nawatl language is a polysynthetic and agglutinative language. In other terms, to form words and convey meaning,
it attaches various morphemes to a nominal or verbal root. At the syntactic level, Nawatl sentences follow a basic
verb–subject–object (VSO) word order, although this can be flexible. Thus, there are VO, VS, VOS and, less frequently,
SV, SVO and SOV word orders (Guzmán-Landa et al., 2025b), which meet the needs of speakers. Furthermore, the
syntactic and semantic relationships between words and clauses are established through the valency of the verb and the
use of conjunctive particles. These particles may also function as markers and discourse connectors.
Another distinctive feature of Nawatl is that words can be regarded as complete sentences, and this is particularly true
of verbal words. We therefore refer to them as phrase-words or ‘single-word phrases’, as their morphology includes the
subject and predicate, as well as information on the actants, and modal, directional and relational elements (Launey,
1978; Charles, 2016; Flores Nájera, 2019; Sasaki, 2022).
Given its oral nature, there are very few written resources available for this language6. Combined with the lack of
standardised writing systems, this makes automated processing extremely difficult.
3.2
Available Resources and the π-YALLI corpus
There are very few tools and resources available for Nawatl language. To our knowledge, only one machine translation
tool has been available for the Huasteca variety7 since 2024. Meanwhile, in 2017, the Instituto de Ingeniería at
the Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM) launched Axolotl, a corpus of bilingual Spanish/Nawatl
documents8. Furthermore, a spelling unifier (Guzmán-Landa et al., 2025c) and the new π-YALLI corpus have recently
been introduced in France. However, many varieties and texts remain inaccessible. This has a negative impact on the
development of machine learning-based tools, thereby preventing widespread use and adoption by Nahua-speaking
communities.
The Nawatl π-YALLI corpus (Guzmán-Landa et al., 2025a) is a resource available for machine learning and NLP
algorithms. It is a heterogeneous corpus in terms of topics (around 20) and dialectal varieties (around 25) of Nawatl,
spoken mainly in Mexico and El Salvador. It contains a limited number of words (around 6.6 million) and sentences,
but it has been used successfully in various NLP tasks (Guzmán-Landa et al., 2025a; Guzmán-Landa et al., 2026). It
is, however, useful for training language models such as statistical or vector models: TF-IDF (Manning and Schütze,
1999), BM25 (Robertson et al., 2004), TF-PDF (Bun and Ishizuka, 2002) or static embedding models such as Word2Vec
(Mikolov et al., 2013b), FastText (Bojanowski et al., 2017) or Glove (Pennington et al., 2014b), but clearly unsuitable
for training contextualised vector models using BERT-style transformers (Devlin et al., 2019).
Indeed, it has been reported that contextual LLMs require between 10 and 100 million tokens to obtain stable
embeddings (Micheli et al., 2020). This is why we decided to expand the π-YALLI corpus by duplicating it in a
controlled manner in order to assess the impact of this technique on learning algorithms.
4
Corpora Duplication
Given the scarcity of computational resources available for π-languages, we adopted a specific strategy: to incrementally
augment the size of the available corpus by reusing the same textual content. At first glance, such a strategy might
appear to have no positive impact on the training of embeddings.
In fact, it would run against current recommendations. Indeed, it has been found that corpus deduplication is a crucial
step in achieving effective embedding learning (Lee et al., 2022). This is particularly true in the case of languages with
extensive computational resources, or τ-languages, where there is no need to duplicate corpora. Indeed, sentences that
6See (Guzmán-Landa et al., 2025a) on this subject.
7See Google Translate (https://translate.google.com.mx/?hl=es&sl=nhe&tl=es&op=translate)
8The Axolotl corpus is available at the following address: http://www.corpus.unam.mx/axolotl
3
J.J. GUZMAN-LANDA ET AL.
appear 60,000 times or more pose a real problem for dense word representation, as they often lead to over-fitting in
neural models.
In addition to the lack of resources, it must be considered that Nawatl is an agglutinative language and, as a result, the
frequent use of phrase-words reduces the number of what we normally understand as ‘words’, compared to other types
of languages. That is to say, what in non-agglutinative languages might be expressed in five or six words is expressed in
a single word in Nawatl. This phenomenon is very evident in translation. All of this has consequences for the number
of words (tokens) available in the corpora. However, our hypothesis is that a controlled increase in the number of
occurrences could facilitate the learning of embeddings in the case of π-languages, and in particular we have studied
this in the case of Mexican Nawatl.
We decided to test our hypothesis regarding the impact of corpora expansion on learning algorithms through empirical
means. The aim, of course, is to have a positive impact on the learning of static word embeddings.
To do this, we duplicated the corpus π-YALLI ρ times, creating identical copies; where ρ = [1, 2, 4,..., 26, 28, 30]
times its original size. We thus incrementally generated corpora of approximately: 6.6 million (original), 13.2 million,
19.8 million, ..., 198 million words (duplicated 30× times). These quantities represent a considerable volume of text,
enabling the size of the π-YALLI corpus to be significantly expanded. The corpus data has been processed through data
cleaning, paragraph and sentence segmentation, and the removal of some stopwords (Guzmán-Landa et al., 2025b).
The experiments on a semantic task and the results relating to this duplication strategy will be detailed in the following
section.
5
Experiments
Semantic similarity, a classic task in NLP, involves evaluating various models (statistical, neural networks, etc.) using
appropriate evaluation protocols (Francis-Landau et al., 2016). In our study, the aim is to calculate the semantic
similarity between reference sentences and sets of candidate sentences, which may be semantically close to or distant
from the references. This results in rankings of the candidate sentences, which will be compared to rankings produced
by native Nawatl speakers, via a statistical estimator.
5.1
Semantic Similarity Task using static embeddings
In this study, we adopted the same semantic evaluation protocol used in the literature (Guzmán-Landa et al., 2025a):
30 reference sentences and a set of 5 candidate sentences per reference to be semantically ranked. This allows us to
estimate the impact of incremental duplication on embedding learning and also to measure their quality on a semantic
proximity task.
Static embeddings have been widely used in NLP tasks (classification, analogies, semantic similarity, etc.), but they
have been replaced by transformer-type contextual embedding models (such as the BERT model), whose popularity is
due to their excellent performance (Devlin et al., 2019). Although transformers have demonstrated their superiority
in NLP tasks, this has only been possible in τ-languages, which are rich in computational resources. Indeed, these
types of models require large amounts of text data to train effectively. The situation changes completely when it comes
to processing π-languages. Under this scenario, static embeddings are still competitive, as they can be generated
from scratch, are quick to train and, most importantly, non-contextualised models require very small corpora to learn
effectively.
Among the most popular algorithms for generating static embeddings are: Word2vec (Mikolov et al., 2013a), FastText
(Bojanowski et al., 2017) and Glove (Pennington et al., 2014a). We therefore trained and compared them for word
embedding learning on duplicate, large-scale corpora. The quality of the embeddings obtained was assessed by using
them in a semantic similarity task involving Nawatl sentences. This established a ranking. The similarity between the
rankings was estimated using Kendall’s τ coefficient. Kendall’s τ is a suitable non-parametric measure of correlation
that assesses the ordinal association between two variables, i.e. the degree of agreement between two rankings (Kendall,
1938).
5.2
Results and Discussion
The results obtained enable us to assess the performance of the static models trained on identical duplicate corpora.
Firstly, we observed a significant difference between the CBow and SkipGram versions of the FastText and Word2Vec
algorithms. According to the literature, CBow is an architecture that focuses on predicting an unknown word X based
on its context (the set E(X) of words surrounding X). X is then predicted based on the information provided by the
4
CORPORA DEDUPLICATION OR DUPLICATION IN NLP OF FEW RESOURCED LANGUAGES ? THE NAWATL OF MEXICO
context E. On the other hand, in Skipgram mode, it is the context (the words surrounding X) that is predicted based on
the word X. Furthermore, the Word2Vec architecture generates one vector (embedding) per word in the vocabulary,
whereas FastText generates one embedding per n-gram of characters (token). This allows vectors containing more
information to be constructed thanks to the n-grams. For these reasons, FastText in Skipgram mode generally achieves
better results than Word2Vec. We have corroborated this in our experiments, where the FastText Skipgram versions
perform significantly better than the others.
Figure 1 illustrates our results. Each curve shows the performance of models trained on corpora ranging in size from
1× (without duplication) to 30× duplications. Each point represents the mean Kendall’s τ across 5 runs, and each band
represents their standard deviation. The FastText algorithm in Skipgram mode achieves the best performance in most
runs.
However, it must be said that Word2Vec, also in Skipgram mode, benefited significantly from the proposed duplication
technique, with steady improvements in rank as the number of duplications increased from 1× to 16×. In contrast, the
Glove algorithm generally stagnated and produced rather disappointing results as the number of duplications increased.
Figure 1: Sentence semantic similarity task: Kendall’s coefficient ⟨τ⟩. Learning on incrementally duplicated corpora
π-YALLI, using three static models: Glove, FastText (Cbow=FTcb, Skipgram=FTsg) and Word2vec (Cbow=W2Vcb,
Skipgram=W2Vsg). We have performed five runs per duplication point ρ.
Further details of our results are shown in Table (1): the maximum values of τ, the improvement and the learning
time. With the exception of Glove —which achieves only a small improvement— exact replication yields moderate or
significant benefits. We have observed that Word2Vec performs better when the duplication ratio ρ = [20,22]. On the
other hand, FastText achieves its maximum values when ρ = [8,10]. This shows that FastText, with a lower duplication
ratio ρ, generates higher-quality static embeddings.
To compare our results using the same algorithms but trained on different corpora – without duplication – we used three
commonly available pre-trained embedding models:
1. FastText trained on the Common Crawl corpus9 ;
2. FastText trained on Nawatl Wikipedia corpus10 ;
3. Word2Vec also trained on Nawatl Wikipedia corpus11.
Their results are shown at the bottom of the Table (1).
9https://commoncrawl.org/
10FastText has been trained on 157 languages; see the website: https://fasttext.cc/docs/en/crawl-vectors.html
11Available on the website: https://sparknFastTexthasbeentrainedon157languages;seethewebsite:lp.org/2022/
03/16/w2v_cc_300d_nah_3_0.html
5
J.J. GUZMAN-LANDA ET AL.
Model
τ (1×)
max τ (ρ×)
ρ
Improvement %
Time (min)
FastText Skipgram
0.459
0.495
10
7,8
46,6
Word2Vec Skipgram
0.357
0.483
22
35,3
39,3
FastText Cbow
0.345
0.393
8
13,9
43,7
Word2Vec Cbow
0.220
0.257
20
16,8
14,9
Glove
0.209
0.216
6
3.4
6.5
FastText/Wikipedia
0.242
-
-
-
-
FastText/Common Crawl
0.240
-
-
-
-
Word2Vec/Wikipedia
0.240
-
-
-
-
Table 1: The average Kendall’s τ across five runs of the models. 1×: without duplication, and the maximum τ obtained
with ρ× duplications of the π-YALLI corpus. % = percentage improvement in τ. The time is approximate for a single
run relative to ρ. The runs were carried out on a cluster of machines, with a requirement of [8, 12] cores and [16, 64]
GB of RAM, running under GNU/Linux in SLURM (Simple Linux Utility for Resource Management) mode.
6
Conclusions and Future Works
Although the results are not spectacular, the technique of corpora duplication applied on agglutinative languages with
few resources seems to facilitate the training of certain models based on static embeddings. Indeed, the embeddings
trained in this way capture the structure of the language even more effectively. In particular, exact duplication ρ× times
has enabled us to significantly outperform the results obtained with the authentic π-YALLI corpus without duplication.
Indeed, we have shown that controlled corpora duplication from its original size enabled the FastText and Word2Vec
algorithms, in their Skipgram mode, to improve their performance in this semantic similarity task. This was measured
using Kendall’s average τ, which increased from τ=0.459 to τ=0.495 (an increase of approximately 8%) when using the
FastText algorithm. On the other hand, Word2Vec Skipgram improved from τ=0.357 to τ=0.483, i.e. an increase of over
35%. In contrast, the Glove algorithm showed, overall, a drop in performance that remains to be explained.
In future work, we will explore the normalisation of textual data and its impact on duplication techniques. We
therefore plan to investigate different ways of expanding the Nawatl π-YALLI corpus: either through various types
of normalisation, or through duplications focused on specific subjects and dialectal varieties. Similarly, we intend to
evaluate the contribution of the expanded corpora to the tasks of Automatic Text Summarisation (Torres-Moreno, 2014)
and Named Entity recognition —such as place names— in Nawatl.
Acknowledgments
This research was funded by an Intermedius PhD grant from Université d’Avignon (AU France), and partially funded
by grants from the Laboratoire Informatique d’Avignon (LIA) and the Agorantic Research Federation (AU France).
References
Abdillahi, N., Nocera, P., and Torres, J. M. (2006). Boites a outils TAL pour les langues peu informatisées : Le cas du
Somali. In Journées d’Analyses des Données Textuelles, Besançon, France.
Berment, V. (2004). Méthodes pour informatiser les langues et les groupes de langues “peu dotées”. PhD thesis,
Université Joseph-Fourier - Grenoble I.
Bojanowski, P., Grave, E., Joulin, A., and Mikolov, T. (2017). Enriching word vectors with subword information.
Transactions of the ACL, 5:135–146.
Bun, K. K. and Ishizuka, M. (2002). Topic extraction from news archive using tf* pdf algorithm. In 3rd International
Conference on Web Information Systems Engineering (WISE’02), pages 73–82. IEEE.
Canger, U. (1988). Nahuatl dialectology: A survey and some suggestions. International Journal of American Linguistics,
54:28 – 72.
Charles, W.-C. D. (2016). Lectura del náhuatl. Instituto Nacional de Lenguas Indígenas.
Chen, J., Tam, D., Raffel, C., Bansal, M., and Yang, D. (2023). An empirical survey of data augmentation for limited
data learning in NLP. Transactions of the ACL, 11:191–211.
Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., and Toutanova, K. (2019). BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for
language understanding. In Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL: Human Language Technologies,
Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. ACL.
6
CORPORA DEDUPLICATION OR DUPLICATION IN NLP OF FEW RESOURCED LANGUAGES ? THE NAWATL OF MEXICO
Feng, S. Y., Gangal, V., Wei, J., Chandar, S., Vosoughi, S., Mitamura, T., and Hovy, E. (2021). A survey of data
augmentation approaches for NLP. In Zong, C., Xia, F., Li, W., and Navigli, R., editors, Findings of the ACL:
ACL-IJCNLP 2021, pages 968–988, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Flores Nájera, L. (2019). La gramática de la clausula simple en el náhuatl de Tlaxcala. PhD thesis, CIESAS.
Francis-Landau, M., Durrett, G., and Klein, D. (2016). Capturing semantic similarity for entity linking with con-
volutional neural networks. In Knight, K., Nenkova, A., and Rambow, O., editors, NAACL: Human Language
Technologies, pages 1256–1261, San Diego, California. ACL.
Goyal, P., Pandey, S., and Jain, K. (2018). Deep Learning for Natural Language Processing. Springer.
Guzmán-Landa, J.-J., Torres-Moreno, J.-M., Avendaño-Garrido, M.-L., Figueroa-Saavedra, M., Quintana-Torres, L.,
Ranger, G., González-Gallardo, C.-E., Linhares-Pontes, E., Velázquez-Morales, P., and Moreno-Jiménez, L.-G.
(2025a). π-YALLI : un nouveau corpus pour des modèles de langue nahuatl / Yankuik nawatlahtolkorpus pampa
tlahtolmachiotl. In 32ème TALN, volume 1, pages 802–816, Marseille, France. ATALA.
Guzmán-Landa, J. J., Torres-Moreno, J.-M., Ranger, G., Figueroa-Saavedra, M., Quintana-Torres, L., and Avendaño-
Garrido, M. L. (2025b). Two cfg nahuatl for automatic corpora expansion. ArXiv, abs/2512.14239.
Guzmán-Landa, J.-J., Vázquez-Osorio, J., Torres-Moreno, J.-M., Ranger, G., Garrido-Avendaño, M. L., Figueroa-
Saavedra, M., Quintana-Torres, L., Velázquez Morales, P., and Sierra-Martínez, G. (2025c). A symbolic algorithm
for the unification of nawatl word spellings. In MICAI’25, page 12p. SMIA.
Guzmán-Landa, J.-J., Torres-Moreno, J.-M., Figueroa-Saavedra, M., González-Gallardo, C.-E., Ranger, G., and
Lorena-Avendaño-Garrido, M. (2026). Classifying several dialectal nawatl varieties.
Hansen, M. P. (2024). Nahuatl Nations: Language Revitalization and Semiotic Sovereignty in Indigenous Mexico.
Oxford University Press.
INEGI (2020). Censo de población y vivienda 2020. In CENSO 2020. https://www.inegi.org.mx/rnm/index.
php/catalog/632/study-description.
Kaplan, J., McCandlish, S., Henighan, T., Brown, T. B., Chess, B., Child, R., Gray, S., Radford, A., Wu, J., and Amodei,
D. (2020). Scaling laws for neural language models.
Kendall, M. G. (1938). A new measure of rank correlation. Biometrika, 30(1/2):81–93.
Lastra de Suárez, Y. (1986). Las áreas dialectales del náhuatl moderno. UNAM, Instituto de Investigaciones
Antropológicas, Mexico.
Launey, M. (1978). Introduction à la langue et à la littérature aztèques, volume 1. L’Harmattan, Paris.
Lee, K., Ippolito, D., Nystrom, A., Zhang, C., Eck, D., Callison-Burch, C., and Carlini, N. (2022). Deduplicating
training data makes language models better. In Muresan, S., Nakov, P., and Villavicencio, A., editors, 60th Annual
Meeting of the ACL (V1), pages 8424–8445, Dublin, Ireland. ACL.
Mahamud, M., Lee, Z., and Samsten, I. (2023). Distributional data augmentation methods for low resource language.
Manning, C. D. and Schütze, H. (1999). Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Processing. MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA.
Micheli, V., d’Hoffschmidt, M., and Fleuret, F. (2020). On the importance of pre-training data volume for compact
language models. In Webber, B., Cohn, T., He, Y., and Liu, Y., editors, Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 7853–7858, Online. ACL.
Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., and Dean, J. (2013a). Efficient estimation of word representations in vector space.
Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G., and Dean, J. (2013b). Distributed representations of words and phrases
and their compositionality. In NIPS - Vol 2, NIPS, page 3111–3119, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran Associates Inc.
Olko, J. and Sullivan, J. (2016). Bridging gaps and empowering speakers: An inclusive, partnership-based approach to
nahuatl research and revitalization. Integral strategies for language revitalization, pages 347–386.
Penedo, G., Kydlíˇcek, H., Ben Allal, L., Lozhkov, A., Mitchell, M., Raffel, C., Von Werra, L., and Wolf, T. (2024).
The FineWeb datasets: Decanting the web for the finest text data at scale. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems. NeurIPS 2024 Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Spotlight).
Pennington, J., Socher, R., and Manning, C. (2014a). GloVe: Global vectors for word representation. In Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1532–1543, Doha, Qatar. ACL.
Pennington, J., Socher, R., and Manning, C. D. (2014b). Glove: Global vectors for word representation. In 2014
EMNLP, pages 1532–1543. ACL.
7
J.J. GUZMAN-LANDA ET AL.
Pugh, R., Wing, C., Juárez Huerta, M. X., Márquez Hernandez, Á., and Tyers, F. (2025). Ihquin tlahtouah in
tetelahtzincocah: An annotated, multi-purpose audio and text corpus of western sierra Puebla Nahuatl. In Chiruzzo,
L., Ritter, A., and Wang, L., editors, Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the ACL: Human
Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 3549–3562, Albuquerque, New Mexico. ACL.
Robertson, S., Zaragoza, H., and Taylor, M. (2004). Simple bm25 extension to multiple weighted fields. In Proceedings
of the thirteenth ACM international conference on Information and knowledge management, pages 42–49.
Sasaki, M. (2022). Divide y entenderás: El papel de la polarización sintáctica en el náhuatl moderno y colonial. In
Coloquio de Investigación Lingüística, Universidad de Sonora (Mexico).
Torres-Moreno, J.-M. (2014). Automatic Text Summarization. Wiley, London.
Tunstall, L., von Werra, L., and Wolf, T. (2022). Natural Language Processing with Transformers: Building Language
Applications with Hugging Face. O’Reilly Media.
Wei, J. and Zou, K. (2019). EDA: Easy data augmentation techniques for boosting performance on text classification
tasks. In Inui, K., Jiang, J., Ng, V., and Wan, X., editors, EMNLP-IJCNLP, pages 6382–6388, Hong Kong, China.
ACL.
Wenzek, G., Lachaux, M.-A., Conneau, A., Chaudhary, V., Guzmán, F., Joulin, A., and Grave, E. (2020). CCNet:
Extracting high quality monolingual datasets from web crawl data. In 20th Language Resources and Evaluation
Conf, pages 4003–4012, Marseille, France. European Language Resources Association.
Zimmermann, K. (2019). Estandarización y revitalización de lenguas amerindias: funciones comunicativas e ideológicas,
expectativas ilusorias y condiciones de la aceptación. Revista de Llengua i Dret, Journal of Language and Law,
71:111–122.
8
