Title: Natural language processing on customer note data
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.02029v1
--------------------------------------------------

Natural language processing on customer note data
Andrew Hilditcha, David Webbb, Jozef Baˇcab, Tom Armitageb, Matthew
Shardlowa, Peter Applebyb
aManchester Metropolitan University, Manchester, M15 6BH, UK
bAuto Trader Group, 1 Tony Wilson Place, Manchester, M15 4FN, UK
Abstract
Automatic analysis of customer data for businesses is an area that is of
interest to companies. Business to business data is studied rarely in academia
due to the sensitive nature of such information. Applying natural language
processing can speed up the analysis of prohibitively large sets of data. This
paper addresses this subject and applies sentiment analysis, topic modelling
and keyword extraction to a B2B data set. We show that accurate sentiment
can be extracted from the notes automatically and the notes can be sorted by
relevance into diﬀerent topics. We see that without clear separation topics
can lack relevance to a business context.
Keywords:
Natural language processing, Sentiment analysis, Topic
modelling, Keyword extraction, Transformers
1. Introduction
To foster customer loyalty and provide assistance, companies frequently
communicates with and collect feedback from their customers. Feedback is
gathered in form of notes, that call handlers make after a conversation with a
customer. Multiple studies have shown the impact of eﬃciently assessing cus-
tomer feedback and implementing change, increasing customer satisfaction
and loyalty (Lam et al., 2013); (Azzam, 2014) ; (Mulyono and Situmorang,
2018) as well as company revenues (Phan and Vogel, 2010). This study fo-
Email addresses: andrew.hilditch@mmu.ac.uk (Andrew Hilditch),
dave.webb@autotrader.co.uk (David Webb), jozef.baca@autotrader.co.uk (Jozef
Baˇca), tom.armitage@autotrader.co.uk (Tom Armitage), m.shardlow@mmu.ac.uk
(Matthew Shardlow), peter.appleby@autotrader.co.uk (Peter Appleby)
Preprint submitted to Expert Systems with Applications
May 4, 2023
arXiv:2305.02029v1  [cs.CL]  3 May 2023
cusses on the customer notes collected by AutoTrader, a UK company that
provides an online marketplace for UK car dealers. Currently, analysis is done
manually on a subset of the notes with the intent to extract information that
would be valuable for the company.
These insights would be provided with Natural Language Processing
(NLP). NLP refers to the branch of computer science concerned with giving
computers the ability to understand text and spoken words in much the same
way human beings can (IBM, 2023). The areas of interest were sentiment
analysis, topic modelling and keyword extraction.
2. Related work
The ﬁeld of note analysis with NLP is well researched, with work being
done on medical notes (Sheikhalishahi et al., 2019), (Juhn and Liu, 2020) and
on data from social media networks like Twitter (Sanders et al., 2021) and
Reddit (Okon et al., 2020). Note analysis data is typically available in large
quantities but requires pre-cleaning to remove irrelevant entries. It tends to
include more errors than formal text and is typically not examined in great
detail by hand. Work has been done to analyse the notes of those attempting
suicide (Pestian et al., 2010). This work classiﬁed the notes to attempt to
predict repeated suicide attempts.
2.1. Industrial applications of NLP
Work has been done to look at NLP applications in industry. (Kalyanatha
et al., 2019) looked at diﬀerent applications in areas such as ﬁnance and retail.
Many of the current applications focus on chat bots (Khan and Rabbani,
2021), (Sari et al., 2020). They look at banking and social media networks.
Work has also been done to examine the use of NLP in the construction
sector (Ding et al., 2022). This worked examined the use of NLP for risk
management and building information modelling among other uses.
2.2. Sentiment analysis
Sentiment analysis is a subject of huge importance in data science that
has gained signiﬁcantly in prevalence over the last decade or so, with more
than 99% of papers published on the subject coming after 2004 due to the
vast expansion of unstructured text based datasets available (Mantyla et
al., 2018). Sentiment analysis can be performed using both supervised and
unsupervised methodologies, we will focus on the unsupervised approach.
2
Many papers that study sentiment using NLP have been published. One
is the aforementioned study looking at Twitter sentiment (Okon et al., 2020).
There are many other papers looking at Twitter data (Kanakaraj and Gud-
deti, 2015), (Hasan et al, 2019). Previous researchers in the area have used
lexicon approaches to study sentiment for topics within a document (Na-
sukawa and Li, 2003). The work on sentiment in this paper is in section
three.
2.3. Transformers
NLP has changed since the introduction of the Transformer architec-
ture (Vaswani et al., 2017). It led to a number of papers that utilised and
developed the architecture such as Bidirectional Encoder Representations
from Transformers (BERT) (Devlin et al., 2018) and RoBERTa (Liu et al.,
2019). Like a neural network, Transformers work by utilising a deep learn-
ing model where all output elements are connected to all input elements,
with the weightings between them calculated dynamically based on the con-
nection. BERT diﬀers however in that the text is read by the algorithm
both forwards and backwards at the same time, allowing text to attenuate
with itself rather than an output layer. This feature drastically increases
the speed at which BERT can train and allows entire sentences to be used
as inputs rather than tokenized data, meaning BERT is capable of contex-
tualising words within their sentence structure. This last point has proved
revolutionary in the world of NLP research as prior to Transformers all works
had to be performed with word tokens taken in isolation, severely limiting
their use to the speciﬁc data they were trained upon.
BERT was made open source by Google in 2018 having been trained on
the entire content of the English language version of Wikipedia (Devlin et
al., 2018). Since then BERT has been converted into libraries capable of a
wide range of NLP tasks such as sentiment analysis, sentence completion and
text summarisation. Additionally, these libraries come with added advantage
of being able to ﬁne tune the algorithm with relatively small datasets to
increase the speciﬁcity to a corpus of choice (such as the AutoTrader note
data), although classiﬁcation tasks such as sentiment analysis will require
labelled data. Utilisation of these libraries is easy to implement but can be
computationally expensive, often requiring access to a GPU to run in eﬃcient
time frames which should also be considered before use. Many of these new
Transformer models can now be found on the HuggingFace (Wolf et al., 2019)
website where the Transformers library is located (Brasoveanu and Andonie.,
3
2020). The models used in this paper were obtained from the HuggingFace
library (Hugging Face, 2023).
2.4. Topic modelling
Topic modelling provides an unsupervised approach to topic allocation in
texts, with a broad range of complexities. It will be explored in sections four
and ﬁve of this paper Simple approaches such as Latent Semantic Indexing
(LSI) (Hofmann, 1999) involve the vectorisation of texts within a corpus and
grouping together based on co-sine similarity (an eﬀective measure used to
compare similarity of vectors (Han et al., 2001)). Such methods are quick to
implement and require little resources but come with the large disadvantage
that the nature of the topic groupings remains unknown, making the results
very diﬃcult to interpret. More sophisticated methods tend to be based on
more complex algorithms such as neural networks, such as the work from
(Gavval et al., 2019) which explores the use of self-organising maps (SOMs)
to reduce dimensionality within the data and create an interpretable 2D map
of topics. But whilst having the advantage of interpretability these methods
are often computationally expensive and can tie up valuable resources within
an organisation.
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (Blei et al., 2003) provides a middle
ground between overly simply non-interpretable and overly-complex resource
heavy topic modelling techniques, and is one of the most commonly used
methods in the ﬁeld (Jelodar et al., 2019). LDA involves creating a latent
layer of topics within a dataset where words that are likely to be found
near each other within texts are grouped. Each text within a corpus is then
evaluated for a percentage match with each of the topics in the latent layer
to allow allocation. One of the drawbacks with LDA is that as a statistical
approach, interpretation of the topics is still required to achieve sensible
results, just because words are statistically found near each other does not
necessarily mean they will be considered related by a human observer. This
means LDA topic modelling can require extensive hyperparameter tuning
to produce good results but having a sector expert on the texts at hand to
perform this can add a built-in sanity check step to the evaluation. This is
one of the methods used in section four of this paper.
2.5. Keyword extraction
Keyword extraction (KE) has been used to improve the eﬃciency of other
NLP methods, most notably Information Retrieval (Yang et al., 2019). These
4
methods then don’t have to processes the whole text of a document, but only
text that carries the subject of the document. Use with other NLP appli-
cations implies that the KE algorithm should be quick, eﬃcient, robust and
easily applied to new domains. This led to a new method being created called
Rapid Automatic Keyword Extraction (RAKE) (Rose et al., 2010). RAKE
is an unsupervised, language-independent document-oriented method for ex-
tracting keywords from individual documents. RAKE’s creators observed
that keywords often appear as a combination of multiple words rather than a
single word, and almost never contain any stop words or punctuation. RAKE
considers these non-stop words as the main candidates then uses a graph-
based approach to capture the co-occurrences of these candidates, which are
used to calculate a score to choose the best keywords.
Deep learning approaches of KE are not common, as Deep neural networks
(DNNs) require large annotated datasets. The introduction of transformers
has inspired scientists to propose new methods utilising the self-attention
layers without the need of labelled datasets. In 2019 a new approach was
proposed, called the Self-supervised Contextual Keyword and Keyphrase Re-
trieval with Self-labelling (SCKKRS) (Sharma and Li., 2019). The aim of
SCKKRS is for it to be useful for both long as well as short text inputs to
extract keywords and keyphrases. SCKKRS uses feature vectors to obtain a
keyword that is most similar to the meaning of the sentence. It obtains the
feature vectors using BERT.
KeyBERT is an implementation of SCKKRS approach, which combines
the feature vectors containing the meanings from BERT with statistical n-
gram approach. KeyBERT works by extracting groups of words, which have
the highest similarity between their embeddings and the sentence embedding
(Rao et al., 2022). This approach will be used in section ﬁve of this paper.
2.6. Clustering
Generic K-Means algorithm, as described by in 2013 (Kodinariya and
Makwana, 2013), is an unsupervised learning algorithm that does not have
high computational complexity. It has been utilised in many ﬁelds of NLP.
The process of K-Means provides an easy solution to a classiﬁcation problem
of classifying data into known number of clusters. The main downside of the
K-Means algorithm is the need to know the number of clusters. There are
several approaches to ﬁnd the best k value, but they don’t generally produce
an answer without running the algorithm several times with diﬀerent values,
costing time and computational resources. K-Means clustering is commonly
5
used in the NLP problem of Topic Modelling (TM). The method ﬁrst applies
a NLP function, which captures the textual content and then uses the K-
Means algorithm to categorise data into clusters (Curiskis et al., 2020). In
the same study (Curiskis et al., 2020), a combination of Doc2Vec feature
representation and K-Means clustering gave the best performance across two
datasets.
3. Sentiment analysis
3.1. Introduction
Sentiment analysis is an important feature of the note analysis for Auto-
Trader as it provides a measure on customer opinion towards product and
policy changes implemented by the company.
Current sentiment analysis
works within AutoTrader are done manually by dedicated sector experts,
but this method is problematic for three reasons.
1. The process is labour intensive and requires full reading and compre-
hension of the notes from a sector expert, and with thousands of notes
received a month processing every one is not realistic, meaning arbi-
trary prioritisation methods such as selection based on anecdotal evi-
dence must be used.
2. Individual sector experts may carry inherent bias in their assessment
of note sentiment leading to added variation in the results.
3. Manual sentiment analysis is very diﬃcult to classify in a granular scale
(i.e. a scored value rather than simply positive or negative), a feature
which has been highlighted of importance by the AutoTrader team in
allowing them to identify an underlying baseline sentiment for their
customer feedback.
These issues can all be solved by automated unsupervised sentiment analysis
techniques which allow for eﬃcient processing in a non-biased fashion with
the option for continuous scoring depending on the approach used.
Automated unsupervised sentiment analysis approaches do come with
an issue for the AutoTrader note data. Unsupervised techniques will still
be trained on available datasets to the creator, which whilst not making
them speciﬁc to that dataset will provide a better accuracy for similarly
structured data. A literature search has found few examples of techniques
that are tuned on B2B customer feedback data similar to the AutoTrader
notes. We hypothesise that this is due to B2B customer feedback containing
6
sensitive data which companies would be reluctant to disclose for academic
publishing. Most unsupervised techniques are therefore trained on publicly
available B2C data where customer feedback is collected from open access
public sources such as Amazon or Yelp. B2B data diﬀers from B2C (business
to customer) data as it is typically collected using dyadic (person to person)
rather than automated (person to device) techniques (Murphy and Sashi,
2018). Dyadic conversation tends to more personable than automated, with
a level of mediation which tones downs language used (Aguilar et al., 2016).
This toning down of language may lead to a miscalibration of any scoring
systems used to gauge sentiment within a technique that this trained using
automated communication with more extreme language usage.
3.2. Methodology
Figure 1 shows the method for calculating the sentiment of the data set.
Figure 1: Flow diagram of the sentiment analysis process.
1. Load dataset
(a) Dataset is loaded into the notebook as a pandas data frame
2. Initialise sentiment algorithm
7
(a) Sentiment algorithm of choice library is loading into the notebook
and initialised based on instructions from the HuggingFace direc-
tions
(b) Note that no hyperparameter choices are required as the Hugging-
Face library does not support this
3. Load data sample
(a) Loop established to cycle through each text in the loaded dataset
in turn through steps 4 to 6
4. Sentence tokenize data
(a) Individual text is tokenized at a sentence level, with a loop gener-
ated to run through each tokenized sentence in turn through step
5
(b) Sentences longer than 522 characters are truncated due to the
word limit of the HuggingFace algorithm
(c) Note that sentence tokenization was preferred as it produced bet-
ter results than analysing each text as a whole
5. Calculate sentence sentiment
(a) Sentence text is run through the sentiment analysis function to
calculate the score
(b) HuggingFace outputs a score and a sentiment label (e.g. [‘label’:
‘POSITIVE’, ‘score’: 0.9998], score values were extracted from
this output with negative labelled score multiplied by -1
6. Data is collected and appended to the text entry data row in this initial
loaded data frame, collected data includes
(a) Average sentence sentiment
(b) Negative sentiment sentence count
(c) Max negative sentence score
(d) Positive sentence count
(e) Max positive sentence score
A subset of 1000 of the notes were annotated with sentiment sorted into
ﬁve categories. These are very bad, bad, neutral, good, very good. The
breakdown is shown in ﬁgure 2.
3.3. Results
Initial analysis of the sentiment distribution contained within the Au-
toTrader note data showed that over 65% of the notes were classiﬁed as
8
Figure 2: Bar chart showing distribution of annotated sentiment.
extremely negative (ﬁgure 3), and almost 87% of all notes showed a negative
sentiment score. The reason for this is that the notes worked on were marked
as feedback, which tends towards negative sentiment. Additionally research
has shown that sector experts tend to provide more negative feedback than
novices (Finkelstein and Fishbach, 2012) in order to help companies develop
their product, and as AutoTrader specialises in B2B trading with sector ex-
perts it is not unexpected that their customer feedback also reﬂects this.
Also noted in the data are notes with non-negative sentiment. Neutral
sentiment notes tended to be created by feedback which was purely informa-
tional with no information on customer mood shared, for example:
“he had his 3 lads running around his feet and his wife was doing the big
shop asked i call back either this afternoon or monday.”
9
Figure 3: Bar chart showing distribution of calculated sentiment.
whilst on analysis the extreme positive notes appeared to be mostly single
sentence with a focus on a single positive topic, for example:
“conﬁrmed the communication with him he is happy with what we have
mentioned”
Though not seen as statistically signiﬁcant, it is noted that longer multiple
sentence notes produced fewer extreme scores due to the average sentiment
being taken from multiple diﬀerent topic sentences.
Reviewing the change in note sentiment over time (ﬁgure 4) also revealed
some interesting trends in the data. We can observe spikes in the relative
note sentiment during April – July 2020 and in January – February 2021,
coinciding with the full lockdown dates for the UK. This increase in sen-
timent correlated with a popular policy from the company. Reﬂecting the
10
overall sentiment distribution, the general baseline sentiment value over time
is negative, between -0.80 and -0.65. This overall negativity is not an issue
however as the changing sentiment over time was the focus of the research.
The interest can be placed instead on the relative sentiment values with re-
spect to the baseline when assessing for the outcomes of any further policy
changes aﬀecting customers.
Figure 4: Chart displaying the change in sentiment over time.
The calculated sentiment when compared to the annotated sentiment was
far more negative. Using a pairwise comparison between the two the model
achieves an accuracy score of 24% when compared against all ﬁve categories.
When compared for three categories, (positive, negative and neutral) there
is an agreement of 60%.
3.4. Recommendations
There are a few suggestions that we have for anyone looking to perform
similar analysis.
1. Look to reduce granularity wherever possible to speed up analysis. The
analysis done here can take hours of compute time to calculate so the
more operations that can be performed on the entire dataset the more
11
time can be saved. Be aware that this cannot be done for some opera-
tions.
2. Be cautious of the reserved language and reduced punctuation present
in B2B data.
This could see worse performance for models trained
on B2C data when predicting sentiment.
Our dataset is examining
feedback so be aware and check with sector experts as to what to expect
from your dataset.
3. Look at diﬀerent tokenisation levels such as sentences paragraphs or
full documents. Higher level analysis will return neutral sentiment on
a more frequent basis. When we examined sentiment at a whole note
level the longer notes tended towards neutrality.
4. Examine analogous labels to your subject area, this will better allow
you to compare results. So the note data here is best compared to
customer review data. It would be better compared to B2B reviews
but these are not publicly accessible.
3.5. Conclusion
In conclusion we have demonstrated a robust method for assessing the
sentiment of the AutoTrader note library utilising a deep learning based
approach with the HuggingFace library. Conﬁrmation from the AutoTrader
team that the general trends seen within the data ﬁt with expected outcomes
of policy changes implemented by the company also acted as a sanity check
for the eﬃcacy with their data.
It is noted that a large portion of the notes were seen to be extremely
negative with the note set, which despite justiﬁcation of the outcome does
cause some concern. As the focus for the analysis is for change in sentiment
however this may not prove an issue as relative sentiment is considered for
drawing conclusions.
The comparison to the annotated data shows that
the implemented method has a tendency to misjudge the strength of the
sentiment within a message.
This could be due to the AutoTrader data
containing unfamiliar terms. The other reason could be that the removal
of personal identiﬁable data could have left sentences without subjects to
attribute sentiment to. This model could be more robustly calculated with
the use of more than one annotator to verify the reliability of the annotations.
Transfer learning (Weiss and Khoshgoftaar, 2016) could be used to allow the
model to understand the data better.
12
4. Topic modelling utilising Latent Dirichlet Allocation
4.1. Introduction
If the notes could be sorted automatically into relevant categories it would
be easier to analyse issues in diﬀerent areas. Issues are raised anecdotally
from team members collecting the notes and evidence is searched for within
the data using sector expert derived keywords. This approach can lead to
issues within identifying target areas for policy improvements, in particular
“ﬁreﬁghting” where only big issues and complaints are dealt with as they
grab the most attention, while smaller issues that may be more prevalent can
remain untouched. Additionally, even issues that have been identiﬁed may
be missed if customer feedback cannot be found due to the use of incorrect
keywords during evidence searches. Approaches to tackle this issue have been
undertaken such as adding selective hashtags to key words in customer note
data and initiating topic check boxes but these have so far been unsuccessful.
Topic modelling can provide a diﬀerent approach to the problem for Au-
toTrader. It utilises a data driven approach where the topics of interest are
derived from the data itself rather than expert led anecdotal evidence which
may contain unintended bias. Topic modelling however is not ﬂawless as
human interaction is still required to make sense of the topics suggested by
the chosen methodology, but this may present itself as an additional oppor-
tunity. Human interaction with the algorithm will ensure investment from
the interested parties and can be used to sense check the model during train-
ing rather than ﬁnding the results are faulty at the analysis stage. For this
section we shall demonstrate the use of LDA topic modelling with the Auto-
Trader note data, with a view to demonstrate the types of note data that can
be extracted and how the data can be merged with the sentiment analysis
results from section three to be used for further analysis.
4.2. Methodology
The data used here was the same as in section three with the additional
sentiment analysis added to the data. Additional data preparation was per-
formed via technical term extraction and joining into n-grams, using the
following ﬂow process outlined in ﬁgure 5, with a step-by-step breakdown
detailed below.
1. Load dataset
(a) Dataset is loaded into the notebook as a pandas data frame
13
Figure 5: Flow diagram of the technical term extraction process.
2. Load data sample
(a) Loop established to cycle through each text in the loaded dataset
in turn through steps 3 and 4
3. Tokenize and Part-of-Speech (POS) tag samples
(a) Notes are tokenized at the word level
(b) Each token is POS tagged with a semantic label using the nltk
POS tagging library (Bird et al, 2019)
4. Pass sample through semantic ﬁlter to identify n-grams
(a) Samples are passed through the technical term semantic ﬁlter de-
ﬁned by Justedon and Katz (1995)
(b) Technical terms limited to bi-grams and tri-grams as longer terms
are typically only associated with highly technical ﬁelds (Justedon
and Katz, 1995)
5. Assess collected technical terms and generate stoplist
(a) Top 100 most frequent terms manually assessed and common ter-
minology phrases removed
(b) Top 100 most frequent terms reassessed after stoplist terms re-
moved and additional identiﬁed stop terms removed
(c) Process repeated until top 100 phrases clear of common terminol-
ogy phrases
(d) Process repeated until top 100 phrases clear of common terminol-
ogy phrases - c-score weightings of the technical terms calculated
using the method deﬁned by Frantzi et al. (2000)
6. Aﬃx technical term words in dataset and replace
(a) All technical term tokens within the list adjoined with an un-
derscore to create a single token (e.g.
“new”, “cars” becomes
“new cars”)
(b) Technical terms individual tokens removed from the dataset
14
Figure 6 shows the process by which the topic modelling is done. Again
the ﬂow chart is explained in more detail below.
Figure 6: Flow diagram of the topic modelling process.
1. Load dataset
(a) Dataset is loaded into the notebook as a pandas data frame
2. Tokenization, lemmatization and stopword removal
(a) Each note in the corpus is run through in turn
(b) Tokenization is performed at the word level using the gensim.simple preprocess
library in python (ˇReh˚uˇrek, 2022)
(c) Lemmatization of tokens is performed using the nltk WordNetLem-
matizer library (NLTK Project, 2023)
(d) Stopwords are removed from each note using the nltk library stop-
word corpus (NLTK Project, 2023)
3. Dictionary creation and ﬁltering
(a) A dictionary is created from the entire pre-processed corpus using
the gensim.corpora dictionary library (ˇReh˚uˇrek, 2022)
(b) Once created the dictionary is ﬁltered to remove noise from ex-
treme case tokens
i. Tokens featured in 5 or less notes are removed
ii. Top 100,000 used terms are reserved
iii. Limit of the number of texts a token can feature in is also used
in the dictionary ﬁlter which is tuned by the expert operator
as a hyperparameter
4. BOW corpus creation
(a) Each note is compared against the dictionary to create a BOW
note using the gensim.corpora dictionary library doc2bow feature
(ˇReh˚uˇrek, 2022) and tokens in the dictionary are retained and
their frequency recorded
5. LDA modelling and hyperparameter tuning
15
(a) LDA model is generated using gensim.models.ldamulticore library
(ˇReh˚uˇrek, 2022) using the created dictionary and BOW corpus as
inputs
(b) Hyperparameters tuned as follows
i. Number of passes set to ten (experimentation showed consis-
tent convergence of the model at this number)
ii. Number of topics to be tuned by an expert user assessing the
resultant topics for sense
iii. Minimum probability level for a note to be contained within
a topic to be tuned by an expert user assessing the resultant
topics for sense
4.3. Results
A list of the top 25 technical term n-grams identiﬁed from the AutoTrader
corpus is shown in Figure 7. Noted from the results is that bi-grams dominate
the list, justifying the decision to only look for bi and tri-grams within the
corpus. The only tri-gram within the list is “end-of-April”, which despite
being a generic date based term holds weight as this is the typical annual date
of a customer based policy change and is considered the end of the ﬁnancial
year. Also observed is that the word frequency and weight (c-score) drop oﬀ
signiﬁcantly after the ﬁrst 4 n-grams on the list, indicating that the set of
notes analysed are potentially dominated by topics revolving around those
terms. In fact, the weighting for the third term on the list (“price-indicator”)
appears to have been dampened as the same term is referred to in several
diﬀerent variations (“price-ﬂag”, “price-indicators”, “price-ﬂag”, “pi-ﬂags”),
which, if combined, would signiﬁcantly increase the weighting of the term.
This highlights a potential process improvement for data collection where
terms with the same meaning referred to in diﬀerent ways can be combined
in the initial cleaning stage of note processing. If this is done before running
through the sentiment and topic analysis algorithms the analysis would be
better sorted by toipcs.
As previously described the topic modelling hyperparameter tuning was
performed alongside a sector expert from AutoTrader to ensure sensible re-
sults. Table 1 shows the ﬁnal satisfactory set of identiﬁed topics from the
corpus. 10 topics were identiﬁed using a heavy dictionary ﬁlter with no terms
featured in more than 5% of the notes included and a minimum probability
level of 0.005% of being within a topic. Feedback from the AutoTrader team
indicated that most of the topics identiﬁed showed consistent language and
16
Figure 7: Identiﬁed technical term n-grams identiﬁed from the Autotrader note corpus.
Weights denote the c-score given to each of the terms.
could be classiﬁed as relevant topics within the business (labelled as such in
table 1), with only one of the topics being deemed as nonsense (labelled as
“no recognised subject”). Also identiﬁed by the AutoTrader team were two
topics not expected to be within the notes, namely “live chat” and “package”,
which would not have searched for using the old knowledge led approach.
In addition to assessing the topic modelling in isolation the results were
combined with the earlier sentiment analysis works to assess the variation
in sentiment amongst the identiﬁed topics. Figure 8 shows the distributions
of the mean average note sentiment over each of the identiﬁed topics within
the note corpus.
Analysis shows that each of the topics follows the gen-
eral trend of the overall note sentiment identiﬁed in section 3.3, with the
notes showing a general negative sentiment skew with a long tail and outliers
present for extreme positive sentiment. From the chart we can see that the
“price indicator ﬂags” and “live chat” topics show a higher median sentiment
value and wider distribution towards the positive than the other identiﬁed
topic. These signiﬁcant diﬀerences would indicate that these topics warrant
further investigation to assess why their average sentiment diﬀers from the
underlying population. Their higher average sentiments are due to the same
positive sentiment spike as seen in section three and correlate with the ﬁrst
17
High Probability Words
Suggested
topic
0.018*”quote” + 0.013*”ebay” + 0.010*”ﬁnance” + 0.009*”pre-
mium” + 0.009*”level” + 0.008*”performance” + 0.007*”new car”
+ 0.007*”expensive” + 0.007*”struggle” + 0.006*”advance”
package
0.019*”data”
+
0.015*”ﬂag”
+
0.013*”meet”
+
0.011*”re-
tail check” + 0.010*”price indicator” + 0.010*”spec” + 0.008*”sit”
+ 0.008*”valuations” + 0.007*”group” + 0.007*”price ﬂags”
price
indi-
cator ﬂags
0.012*”request”
+
0.012*”admin fees”
+
0.011*”video”
+
0.007*”ﬁnd” + 0.007*”image” + 0.006*”actually” + 0.006*”query”
+ 0.006*”frustrate” + 0.005*”spec” + 0.005*”unhappy”
unhappy
0.017*”image” + 0.013*”rat” + 0.012*”new car” + 0.010*”highly”
+ 0.009*”upload” + 0.008*”reply” + 0.008*”award” + 0.007*”con-
sumers” + 0.006*”info” + 0.006*”message”
live chat
0.012*”text”
+
0.011*”valuations”
+
0.011*”product”
+
0.010*”chat”
+
0.009*”lose”
+
0.007*”tech”
+
0.007*”mar-
gin” + 0.006*”platform” + 0.006*”retail” + 0.006*”higher”
valuations
0.010*”retract” + 0.008*”close” + 0.008*”open” + 0.007*”watch”
+
0.007*”webinar”
+
0.006*”book”
+
0.006*”phone”
+
0.006*”process” + 0.006*”answer” + 0.006*”charge”
process re-
lated
0.011*”staﬀ”
+
0.010*”coronavirus”
+
0.010*”reduce”
+
0.010*”lockdown” + 0.009*”canx” + 0.009*”plan” + 0.008*”strug-
gle” + 0.008*”online” + 0.008*”june” + 0.008*”continue”
coronavirus
0.016*”lockdown”
+
0.010*”june”
+
0.010*”collect”
+
0.008*”open” + 0.008*”retract” + 0.007*”confuse” + 0.007*”fol-
low” + 0.007*”aware” + 0.007*”extend” + 0.007*”appreciate”
lockdown
extensions
0.061*”xxxemailxxx”
+
0.023*”subject”
+
0.015*”group”
+
0.013*”kind”
+
0.009*”xxxtelephonexxx”
+
0.008*”sit”
+
0.008*”retail” + 0.007*”lead” + 0.007*”manheim” + 0.006*”op-
tion”
no
recog-
nised
subject
0.027*”year”
+
0.016*”experian”
+
0.008*”car gurus”
+
0.007*”ebay” + 0.006*”meet” + 0.006*”zuto” + 0.006*”july”
+ 0.005*”achieve” + 0.005*”award” + 0.005*”normal”
rival valua-
tion
prod-
ucts
Table 1: Topic modelling results from the AutoTrader note corpus, with sector expert led
topic naming suggestions.
18
coronavirus lockdown.
Figure 8: Mean average note sentiment distribution for the unidentiﬁed topics within the
AutoTrader dataset.
4.4. Recommendations
There are also suggestions that we would have when examining topic
modelling for B2B data.
1. The ﬁrst is that where possible use the bespoke knowledge of sector
experts. They will likely have a great understanding of acronyms and
keywords. They will also understand the context behind topics and
how relevant they are to the area of study.
2. Beware possible bias from experts on certain topics, let the data guide
the overall analysis. The experts may already have decided their view
on a topic or have a vested interest in the sentiment analysis of a topic.
The underlying data will inform as to whether that view is justiﬁable
or not.
3. Use harsh dictionary ﬁlters to remove terms that are too frequent.
These terms can distort the desired keyword output. This also removes
a greater amount of stop words.
19
4. Apply advanced lemmatisation for the relevant area as well as technical
N-gram creation which will be required to examine speciﬁc sector terms.
This will allow for the adaptation to the terminology and technical
language found within the dataset that you are working with.
4.5. Conclusion
In conclusion we have demonstrated a robust repeatable method for topic
modelling using the AutoTrader note data. The sector specialist input during
the method hyperparameter tuning allows for an expert knowledge sense
check of the notes before further analysis and dissemination to a wider team.
Feedback from the AutoTrader team noted that the method revealed several
technical terms that were previously missed in the topics using their previous
expert led technical term search. Additionally, the topic modelling was noted
to produce two additional topics that were relevant but not expected to be
seen within the content of the notes provided.
5. Topic modelling utilising Keyword Extraction
5.1. Introduction
The last section looked at topic modelling using LDA. The problem with
LDA was that it provided little information as to why the topic was chosen or
the subject of the topic. The lack of explanation for the topics is detrimental
to understanding them. The ﬁrst steps of this work are dedicated to ﬁnd
a solution to this problem and apply NLP techniques to help describe the
context of identiﬁed topics by LDA. The data was cleaned in the same way
as the last section but now we had access to live note data which required
some more cleaning. For this reason, additional pre-processing steps were
added based on a heuristic knowledge obtained from an exploration of the
data. These steps were:
1. Remove new set of tokens that was identiﬁed by data exploration, e.g.
‘—original message—’
2. Remove notes shorter than 20 characters assumed to be accidental or
not intended to be a note, e.g. ‘insert text’, ‘test’, ‘hjbyhkjbkh’
3. Remove set of special characters resulting from wrong parsing, e.g.
single characters appearing as ‘ˆaCTM’
20
The ﬁrst step taken to provide more information about the notes, was to
work on the topics provided with the use of the LDA analysis. The LDA
identiﬁed topics within notes and grouped the notes into these topics, but
assigned them no description or name. For a user, this means that they are
presented with a topic, some group of notes, and they are left to ﬁnd the
meaning of it themselves. This could be enhanced by using the approach of
KE on the topics, as keywords should best describe the subject of the text in
these topics. Extracting the most important words within the topic should
give information about the topic as a whole. Main challenges rising from the
AutoTrader dataset for KE are considered to be :
1. Dataset obtains large volume of notes, requiring an eﬃcient algorithm
that would practically run quickly
2. Language and jargon of the dataset is unique to the automotive in-
dustry, making it even more necessary for the algorithm to be able to
encapsulate the subject and meaning notes have
3. Notes vary in text range, with some of them containing only the im-
portant information from a conversation, approach based purely on
statistical appearance may not be enough to cope with the lack of text.
We compare RAKE and KeyBERT. The chosen way of evaluating the
KE is with feedback from sector experts.
5.2. Results
5.2.1. RAKE and KeyBERT applied to LDA topics
The ﬁrst method applied in the project was RAKE, with its potential to
quickly and eﬃciently deliver keywords. LDA was executed again in the same
way as the last section, to generate topics. To prepare pre-processed data for
RAKE, lemmatised words of each note were joined into single strings. RAKE
was run on these strings for each topic to generate keywords for them. To
evaluate the keywords, the following action was taken:
1. General sanity check of keywords by answering questions:
(a) Are keywords short and brief?
(b) Are keywords readable and understandable?
2. Generate word cloud graphs for the topics
3. Compare the words of word clouds with their relative keywords
21
4. Together with members of the AutoTrader team, compare word cloud
graphs to the extracted keywords and consider their meanings in re-
gards to the automotive industry
For the ﬁrst point, RAKE extracted extensively long keyphrases, which
were too long to be easily readable. For further evaluation to make sense, the
length of keywords was limited to maximum of ten words. With now shorter
keywords, they were made up of lemmatised words from the pre-processing,
forming a set of ten words that together do not create a grammatically con-
sistent sentence. However, some understanding can be achieved by ﬁnding
correlations between the words of the keyphrases. As an example, in Figure
9, RAKE identiﬁed the most important keyphrase containing words ‘issue
upload video go online’, which could translate to the customers having issues
with uploading videos online on AutoTrader’s web page. When the word
clouds were generated, the graph’s and keyphrases’ words were compared.
When comparing each word cloud with its related keyphrases of a topic,
it seemed that the keyphrases only sometimes included words contained in
word clouds and when they did, normally a single keyphrase included had
only one word from the word cloud. When comparing the word cloud to the
keyphrase pairs among each other for diﬀerent topics, they tended to be sim-
ilar in information, suggesting that topics, and therefore their keyphrases as
well, were broad and inconsistent with each other within topic, not bringing
any new speciﬁc information to the topics.
Afterwards, the group of sector experts were presented with a set of word
cloud and keyword pairs. An example of this is shown in Figure 9 for topic
number 2. A set of words may be useful to get a sense of what the subject is
about, but it was not practical enough to easily bring insight into the data,
leaving major portion of the work to be still done by hand. The foremost
issue needed tackling was agreed to be the need of the keywords to be more
comprehensive, intelligible and a subject of a topic should be more easily
identiﬁed from them.
To provide more comprehensible keywords, the next approach was to
apply KeyBERT. The idea is that embeddings from BERT should provide
deeper understanding of notes, although requiring more computational re-
sources. The implementation of KeyBERT takes as an input one whole text,
which meant the preprocessed data had to be formed into a single text.
Firstly, sentences were formed by joining words into sentences, separating
words with blank spaces. Secondly, these sentences were separated by dots
22
Figure 9: Word cloud - RAKE keyphrases on topic 2.
and joined into a single text. All notes that were chosen to be together in
a single text, belonged under the same topic group identiﬁed by the LDA.
Hence, KeyBERT was run on text, that consisted of lemmatised words from
notes, separating notes by dots, as if they were sentences, for each of the
topics. The parameters of KeyBERT were selected to tackle the issues which
arose from RAKE. To have keyphrases contain a lower number of words, the
n-gram range was set to be from 2 to 3, expecting keyphrases to have either
2 or 3 words. The ‘top n’ number of keyphrases was left with the default
option on top 5. The keyphrases evaluation was similar to the one of RAKE,
having RAKE’s results as a base line:
1. General sanity check of keywords by answering questions:
(a) Are keywords short and brief?
(b) Are keywords readable and understandable?
(c) How do they compare to RAKE’s results?
2. Generate word cloud graphs for the topics
3. Set the words contained in word clouds side by side with their relative
keywords and compare results to RAKE
4. Repeat the previous step with members of the AutoTrader team, weight
if the issues were tackled and consider future options
KeyBERT extracted mostly 3 word n-grams with 2 word n-grams only
occurring infrequently. Keyphrases consisted of combinations of words, that
together seemed to have a grammatical structure as well as some meaning,
e.g. ‘concerns around priceindicator’. Compared to RAKE, they are more
easily interpretable and the information is quickly readable from them. After
23
Figure 10: Word cloud - KeyBERT keyphrases on topic 2.
word clouds were created, there were instances when it was clear that the
subject was captured in the keyphrases.
On the other hand, keyphrases appeared to start with the same words
within a topic.
Furthermore, they seemed to be similar in word choice,
sometimes the diﬀerence only being the order of the words. This similarity
in keywords does not bring any new information about the context of the
topic. Compared to RAKE, however, it gives more interpretable and more
useful insight into the subject a topic could be about. Following that, the
team of experts was presented with the word cloud and keyphrase pairs, in
the same way as with RAKE. The expert feedback was that this approach
was an improvement on the the RAKE method but the pairs were still too
dissimilar.
Issues were noted in both variations of KE algorithms. With the lack of
measurements of accuracy for KE algorithms on an unlabelled dataset, word
clouds with clear meanings were needed to assess the generated keywords.
However, this was not delivered by the LDA algorithm, as words in the word
clouds did not always appeared to be related. A new suggestion was made to
try to ﬁnd a new way to categorise notes into topics. From experiments con-
ducted until that point, statistical approaches were seen as insuﬃcient when
dealing with given dataset. Inspired by the better performance of BERT, the
new approach should capitalise on the semantic approach of BERT-based al-
gorithms to identify topics.
24
5.2.2. Rake and KeyBERT applied to topics generated by K-means clustering
The topics provided by LDA were considered as the issue preventing
coherent keyword detection, since KE algorithms did not manage to return
sane keywords consistently or keywords clearly speciﬁc to a topic. This could
mean that topics identiﬁed by LDA were overlapping or it was not successful
at identifying topics. AutoTrader note data is too varied and could be too
diﬃcult for the LDA to pick up on the topics and identify them correctly. The
solution decided on was to try more modern approaches to Topic Modelling
(TM) with methods that can capture the meanings of notes and generate
trends based on them. As was in the case of KE, a BERT-based approach
was seen to be more successful than statistical methods.
Based on that,
the next step was to try to get topics using BERT-based embeddings in
combination with K-Means clustering. A BERT-based sentence-transformer
from HuggingFace library would be ﬁrst used to encode embeddings for the
data. The all-MiniLM-L6-v2 (Hugging Face, 2023) transformer model was
chosen, because it was designed to map sentences to a 384 dimensional dense
vector space and was meant for the application of clustering and semantic
search. The embeddings would be then used to cluster them into topics by K-
Means clustering method. K-Means is frequently used in NLP clustering and
provides easily computable solution to clustering problems. The main issue
was the choice of K. To ﬁnd optimal way to determine K a rigorous research
was conducted. Keeping in mind the interactive goal of the dashboard, the
aim was to ﬁnd the least complicated solution. The most appropriate solution
was the ’rule of thumb’, as mentioned in Naeem and Wumaier (2018). It is
a heuristic approach that does not have a mathematical proof, but is still
preferred by researchers. The ’rule of thumb’ formula for K is:
K =
rn
2
(1)
where n is the number of data points. In our case, n is the size of the
entire dataset. The aim of this approach was to get results that make more
sense than when using LDA method. To compare it, same comparisons with
word clouds would be made as when LDA was evaluated. This way a sanity
check could be performed to evaluate the success of this approach.
This
new approach was run on a dataset used by the previous project, containing
10544 notes. The number of topics was computed by the ’rule of thumb’ to
be 22. An example of a word cloud from identiﬁed generated topic is shown
25
in Figure 11, Both RAKE and KeyBERT were subsequently applied on the
generated topics.
Figure 11: Word cloud using K-Means of cluster 1.
In the case of RAKE, keyphrases again contained an abundance of words
and the result had to be trimmed down to 10 words per keyphrase to allow us
to make judgement. As for the evaluation of this approach, RAKE keyphrases
obtained words that were judged to have more meaning by the expert panel
as compared to the LDA approach. BERT-based clustering in combination
with RAKE seemed to produce more comprehensive keywords. Keyphrases
still included a lot of words, resembling the word clouds they were supposed
to replace.
5.3. Recommendations
1. TM algorithms recognise a given number of topics. Although there
exist methods to optimise the number of clusters, they are costly in
computational resource. This optimisation would have to be run every
time new notes are added to the dataset. That happens on a daily
basis. So this method does not work well with live data. When TM
is run twice on the same data, it generates topics that, although are
similar, diﬀer. If TM was run on future datasets, it would create a new
26
set of topics that may not align with previously created topics. This
would make topic analysis over a long period of time impossible.
2. Decide on an agreed objective or milestone before beginning TM anal-
ysis. Without a clear end goal the process of selecting new methods
and reﬁning existing ones can continue indeﬁnitely. An appropriate
objective could be identifying the most prominent keywords associated
with the most important topics. The number of these should be agreed
at the beginning of the analysis.
5.4. Conclusion
KeyBERT again proved to provide concise keyphrases. In contrast to
RAKE, KeyBERT’s keyphrases were shorter and neatly formed to contain
some meaning. KeyBERT coupled with BERT-based clustering produced
the most sane keywords for the topics. It was hard to see, however, if the
main goal was achieved. The keywords merely seemed to contain speciﬁc
words from the word clouds, no new information was obtained.
After the AutoTrader team was shown the word cloud - keyphrases pairs
obtained by using sentence transformer with K-Means, it performed a sanity
check same as was done previously. The team concluded that although there
is stronger correlation between the word cloud with its keyphrases, there is
no guarantee that they are actually correlated. Moreover, team stressed the
lack of new insights into the data even when more modern approaches were
used.
6. Information retrieval
6.1. Introduction
We then decided on a new approach and the next objective was to change
the goal itself. Instead of trying to generate topics, information in the data
could be retrieved. Information retrieval (IR) would allow users to search
notes and have data visualisation done. Semantic search is a method that
provides a NLP solution to the IR problem. It takes a query from the user
and enables them to search for notes relating to the given query.
6.2. Methodology
During this project, BERT-based approaches had achieved the best re-
sults and so it was again chosen to assist with IR. Semantic search could be
executed by the use of embeddings from a BERT-based model. Embeddings
27
are high dimensional vectors that should capture the sentimental meaning of
a text. The more similar two vectors are, the more similar meanings of two
texts are. Vector similarity is attained with the use of cosine similarity func-
tion. The main idea of this approach is to accomplish this task by executing
these steps:
1. Use BERT-based model to encode embeddings for all notes
2. Use the same BERT-based model to create an embedding for a given
query
3. Compute cosine similarity between the query embedding and all note
embeddings, this is named a similarity score, and assign embeddings
to their respective notes
4. Compile a list of notes based on ordering notes by their similarity from
highest to lowest.
In the previous approaches in this project, only qualitative analysis could
be performed without manually labelling thousands of notes. So to obtain
a quantitative analysis the labelling was required. Manually labelling notes
can take time and the input of sector experts is of great assistance in this
task. For the labelling the following approach was designed:
1. With the help of the AutoTrader team, agree on 7 topics that could be
queried
2. Create a labelling dataset by randomly selecting 1000 notes
3. Manually label the dataset by noting 1/0 as to whether the note belongs
to the topic, consulting the team to try to minimalise bias
4. Use a ranking score to assess the ranking accuracy of this approach
For this task, the labelling dataset was constructed by randomly choosing
1000 notes from the live dataset from year 2021. Admittedly, it was not a
large dataset, but it would still help to create a certain sense of how this
approach is behaving. Two annotators worked to label the dataset and one
annotated 169 notes and the other annotated all 1000. Agreement between
the annotators was calculated using Cohen’s kappa (Cohen, 1960). The result
was 0.64 indicating substantial agreement. Topics agreed upon were:
1. Valuation
(a) Note contains feedback or valuation on AutoTrader’s services
28
(b) Considering that this AutoTrader dataset should consist mainly
of feedback, it is used to distinguish notes that do not contain
feedback
(c) Example text: feels like service is X years out of date
2. Price
(a) Note discusses a price of services or products, when in context of
the AutoTrader’s prices or the dealer’s prices
(b) Example text: advanced to help with this by increasing his prices,
PRODUCTNAME he loves but didn’t realise it was MONEY per
month
3. Package
(a) Note discussing AutoTrader product package
(b) Example text: PRODUCT-NAME not performing as well it he
hoped to, PRODUCT-NAME he loves but didn’t realise it was
MONEY per month
4. Cancellation
(a) Note considers cancelling a service or informs about cancelling it
(b) Example text: process the cancellation to downgrade
5. Stock
(a) Stock in AutoTrader’s journal refers to a vehicle being sold on
their website
(b) Note talks about some stock
(c) Example text: uses all auction sites to sell it as well
6. Tech
(a) Note mentions any of AutoTrader’s online services
(b) Example text: gets an error when you click on ’see’, allows the
upload for images only
7. Billing
(a) Note contains information about money transport or concerns
about it
(b) Example text: at the moment not selling well but has to pay X
outstanding money
As for the ranking score, a Normalised Discounted Cumulative Gain
(NDCG) was chosen. NDCG provides a relatively easy to compute rank-
ing score. It is deemed to be a ”classic” information retrieval (IR) metric.
The goal of NDCG is to rank results from IR by comparing them to an ideal
29
rank ordering.
NDCG is computed from the discounted cumulative gain
DCG as deﬁned in Agrawal et al. (2009).The process of evaluation was as
follows:
1. Let us have a query Q belonging to one of the topics
2. Query the note corpus with Q
3. Provide NDCG scores for all topics
The idea behind this process is that if the query Q belongs to a topic,
NDCG score for this topic should be higher. If the query Q does not belong
to a topic, it should drop. As the querying process returns an ordered list
of notes with similarity scores, similarity scores can be compared to 1s and
0s from the labelling dataset to achieve NDCG score. This way, the NDCG
score compares the created similarity scores to an ideal ranking. The result
of this are NDCG scores, which can be compared to a baseline. This baseline
is that scores for all notes are 0.5. Another analysis could be performed to
see the impact of pre-processing on the NDCG scores. To see the impact of
this, the same NDCG analysis is performed on pre-processed notes, as well
as original notes. Computed NDCG scores for them are shown in table 2 and
table 3.
Clean
Baseline
Valuation
0.97
Price
0.76
Package
0.78
Cancellation
0.63
Stock
0.68
Tech
0.86
Billing
0.56
Table 2:
Baseline NDCG evaluations for the clean data.
From observing the Baseline it is clear, that topics are not equally repre-
sented in the labelled dataset. Because all values are 0.5, higher NDCG for
valuation means that there is higher volume of 0.5 data points. There is not
diﬀerence between clean and pre-processed data.
HuggingFace provides many models for the task of semantic search. A
set of them was picked to be analysed. The 768 dimensional vector models
30
Pre-processed
Baseline
Valuation
0.97
Price
0.76
Package
0.78
Cancellation
0.63
Stock
0.68
Tech
0.86
Billing
0.57
Table 3:
Baseline NDCG evaluations for the pre-processed data.
on which an analysis was performed were compared and the multi-qa-mpnet-
base-dotv1 (Hugging Face, 2023) model was chosen to be implemented. Only
the pre-processed notes are examined moving forward.
6.3. Results
Across all models the valuation scored highly, similar to the baseline
models this is due to the notes all containing the feedback ﬂag from the
AutoTrader team. The model was further tested with the use of queries.
These queries were designed to test the model and provided a use case for
how the queries could be used in the future. The ﬁrst query was ‘tech issue’.
This was expected to result in a higher than baseline score for the tech
category. Table 4 shows the scores for each topic given this query:
Topic
Score
Diﬀerence from baseline
Valuation
0.96
-0.01
Price
0.72
-0.04
Package
0.74
-0.04
Cancellation
0.60
-0.03
Stock
0.67
-0.01
Tech
0.92
+0.06
Billing
0.55
-0.02
Table 4: NDCG evaluations for the query “tech issue” on the pre-processed data.
As expected the query resulted in a higher score for tech. All other scores
decreased showing that the query was less relevant to those topics.
The
next query given was “too expensive”. This was anticipated to increase the
relevance of the price topic. The result is given below in table 5:
31
Topic
Score
Diﬀerence from baseline
Valuation
0.97
0.00
Price
0.86
+0.10
Package
0.79
+0.01
Cancellation
0.66
+0.03
Stock
0.68
0.00
Tech
0.82
-0.04
Billing
0.54
-0.03
Table 5: NDCG evaluations for the query “too expensive” on the pre-processed data.
These values show an increased score for price as expected but also have
higher then baseline values for package and cancellation. This could be inter-
preted that packages that are too expensive can lead to cancellations. This
is a logic assessment of how AutoTrader’s customers show their feedback to
high prices. This method of inputting queries can demonstrate the relevant
topics to the inquirer. The last query tested was ”send money”, this query
should highlight the billing topic and also may highlight the price topic.
Topic
Score
Diﬀerence from baseline
Valuation
0.96
-0.01
Price
0.75
-0.01
Package
0.74
-0.04
Cancellation
0.65
-0.02
Stock
0.64
-0.04
Tech
0.84
-0.02
Billing
0.68
+0.11
Table 6: NDCG evaluations for the query “send money” on the pre-processed data.
The result here shows that the billing topic does increase in relevance
signiﬁcantly compared to the previous queries and the baseline. The other
topics are at values decrease in relevance compared to the baseline showing
that the billing topic may have a distinct set of notes that are only pertinent
to the paying of bills.
The current approach enables the user to order the notes based on the
similarity to a given query. This list includes all notes. Should the user
be presented with analysis based on given query, a subset of notes has to be
32
created from this list. The subset would include notes that are more similar to
the query than notes that are not included in the subset. Graphical analysis
would then be done on notes from the subset.
6.4. Recommendations
We also have recommendations for data retrieval.
1. Get a number of sector experts to annotate if possible and compare
the annotations, then reject annotators if they vary too much from
the standard. This method increases the reliability of annotators and
removes the possibility of one annotator from being indistinguishable
from the ground truth. If they are sector experts then they will better
understand the context behind the conversations.
2. Use a variety of models and then select the best performer. For this
paper we examined ﬁve diﬀerent models before selecting the best per-
former. If only one method is used then the performance of the analysis
could be worse oﬀthan if more were ﬁrst evaluated.
3. Try to avoid having a large overlap between evaluation topics. This
can lead to situations where topics such as billing are almost a subset
of the price topic. Splitting the set of notes into separate categories is
easier with diverse topics. Topics should also be limited in scope and
if too many notes are within one topic then the topic deﬁnition needs
to be more narrowly deﬁned.
6.5. Conclusion
Information retrieval using topics decided by experts has provided better
results than with topics derived from topic modelling. The manually labelled
data allowed for a veriﬁcation of the similarity metric. The queries allow
the investigator to ﬁnd notes similar to the areas of investigation. Unlike
the topic modelling work the results returned here could be replicated. The
analysis also is fast enough to be updated each day for the relevant data. The
similarity threshold allows for a relevant number of notes to be analysed.
7. Conclusion and future work
This paper has looked at the analysis of business to business data with
natural language processing. Sentiment analysis, topic modelling and infor-
mation retrieval are applied to the data. The sentiment analysis work allowed
33
the data to be analysed automatically and can help AutoTrader by reduc-
ing the time spent on this task. The approach is transferable and could be
used to automatically analyse other note data in diﬀerent areas. The topic
modelling did not manage to achieve the results desired and lacked clarity.
Informational retrieval worked more eﬀectively.
The work struggled with the unlabelled nature of the notes and the mask-
ing of words in the sentences further removed information that would have
been helpful for analysis. The annotated data could be expanded upon with
more annotators and a larger number of notes studied. Recently, Large Lan-
guage Models (LLMs) have an increased proﬁle in the area of NLP (Qin et
al., 2023). Further work could be done to train a LLM on the notes studied
here. This model could then be prompted to answer questions about topics
within the notes.
References
Agrawal, R., Gollapudi, S., Halverson, A., & Ieong, S. (2009, February). Di-
versifying search results. In Proceedings of the second ACM international
conference on web search and data mining (pp. 5-14).
AutoTrader.
(2023).
About
us.
Retrieved
from
https://plc.autotrader.co.uk/who-we-are/about-us/.
Accessed
Febru-
ary 16, 2023
AutoTrader.
(2023).
About
AutoTrader.
Retrieved
from
https://plc.autotrader.co.uk/. Accessed February 16, 2023
Curiskis, S. A., Drake, B., Osborn, T. R., & Kennedy, P. J. (2020). An
evaluation of document clustering and topic modelling in two online social
networks: Twitter and Reddit. Information Processing & Management,
57(2), 102034.
Frantzi, K., Ananiadou, S., & Mima, H. (2000). Automatic recognition of
multi-word terms:. the c-value/nc-value method. International journal on
digital libraries, 3, 115-130.
Hugging
Face.
(2023).
sentence-transformers/all-MiniLM-L6-v2
..
Re-
trieved from https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/all-MiniLM-
L6-v2. Accessed February 28, 2023
34
Hugging Face. (2023). sentence-transformers/multi-qa-mpnet-base-dot-v1.
Retrieved
from
https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/multi-qa-
mpnet-base-dot-v1
Juhn, Y., & Liu, H. (2020). Artiﬁcial intelligence approaches using natural
language processing to advance EHR-based clinical research. Journal of
Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 145(2), 463-469.
Justeson, J. S., & Katz, S. M. (1995). Technical terminology: some linguistic
properties and an algorithm for identiﬁcation in text. Natural language
engineering, 1(1), 9-27.
Cohen, J. (1960). A coeﬃcient of agreement for nominal scales. Educational
and psychological measurement, 20(1), 37-46.
Naeem, S., & Wumaier, A. (2018). Study and implementing K-mean cluster-
ing algorithm on English text and techniques to ﬁnd the optimal value of
K. International Journal of Computer Applications, 182(31), 7-14.
NLTK
Project.
(2023).
nltk.stem
package
Retrieved
from
https://www.nltk.org/api/nltk.stem.html?highlight=lemmatizer
NLTK
Project.
(2023).
NLTK
Corpora
Retrieved
from
https://www.nltk.org/nltk data/
Qin, C., Zhang, A., Zhang, Z., Chen, J., Yasunaga, M., & Yang, D. (2023). Is
ChatGPT a General-Purpose Natural Language Processing Task Solver?.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06476.
Radim ˇReh˚uˇrek. (2022). utils – Various utility functions Retrieved from
https://radimrehurek.com/gensim/utils.html. Accessed February 27, 2023
Radim
ˇReh˚uˇrek.
(2022).
corpora.dictionary
–
Con-
struct
word
to
id
mappings
Retrieved
from
https://radimrehurek.com/gensim/corpora/dictionary.html.
Accessed
February 27, 2023
Radim
ˇReh˚uˇrek.
(2022).
models.ldamulticore
–
par-
allelized
Latent
Dirichlet
Allocation
Retrieved
from
https://radimrehurek.com/gensim/models/ldamulticore.html.
Accessed
February 27, 2023
35
Sanders, A. C., White, R. C., Severson, L. S., Ma, R., McQueen, R., Paulo, H.
C. A., ... & Bennett, K. P. (2021). Unmasking the conversation on masks:
Natural language processing for topical sentiment analysis of COVID-19
Twitter discourse. AMIA Summits on Translational Science Proceedings,
2021, 555.
Sheikhalishahi, S., Miotto, R., Dudley, J. T., Lavelli, A., Rinaldi, F., &
Osmani, V. (2019). Natural language processing of clinical notes on chronic
diseases: systematic review. JMIR medical informatics, 7(2), e12239.
Okon, E., Rachakonda, V., Hong, H. J., Callison-Burch, C., & Lipoﬀ, J.
B. (2020). Natural language processing of Reddit data to evaluate der-
matology patient experiences and therapeutics. Journal of the American
Academy of Dermatology, 83(3), 803-808.
Lam, A. Y., Cheung, R., & Lau, M. M. (2013). The inﬂuence of internet-
based customer relationship management on customer loyalty. Contempo-
rary management research, 9(4).
Azzam, Z. A. M. (2014). The impact of customer relationship management on
customer satisfaction in the banking industry–a case of Jordan. European
Journal of Business and Management, 6(32), 99-112.
Mulyono, H., & Situmorang, S. H. (2018). E-CRM and loyalty: A mediation
Eﬀect of Customer Experience and satisfaction in online transportation of
Indonesia. Academic journal of Economic studies, 4(3), 96-105.
Phan, D. D., & Vogel, D. R. (2010). A model of customer relationship man-
agement and business intelligence systems for catalogue and online retail-
ers. Information & management, 47(2), 69-77.
IBM. (2023). What is Natural Language Processing?. Retrieved from
https://www.ibm.com/topics/natural-language-processing.
Accessed
February 20, 2023
Pestian, J., Nasrallah, H., Matykiewicz, P., Bennett, A., & Leenaars, A.
(2010). Suicide note classiﬁcation using natural language processing: A
content analysis. Biomedical informatics insights, 3, BII-S4706.
36
Bra¸soveanu, A. M., & Andonie, R. (2020, September). Visualizing trans-
formers for nlp: a brief survey. In 2020 24th International Conference
Information Visualisation (IV) (pp. 270-279). IEEE.
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N.,
... & Polosukhin, I. (2017). Attention is all you need. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 30.
Devlin, J., Chang, M. W., Lee, K., & Toutanova, K. (2018). Bert: Pre-
training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805.
Liu, Y., Ott, M., Goyal, N., Du, J., Joshi, M., Chen, D., ... & Stoyanov, V.
(2019). Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1907.11692.
Wolf, T., Debut, L., Sanh, V., Chaumond, J., Delangue, C., Moi, A., ... &
Rush, A. M. (2019). Huggingface’s transformers: State-of-the-art natural
language processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03771.
Hugging Face. (2023). The AI community building the future.. Retrieved from
https://huggingface.co/. Accessed February 20, 2023
Kalyanathaya, K. P., Akila, D., & Rajesh, P. (2019). Advances in natural
language processing–a survey of current research trends, development tools
and industry applications. International Journal of Recent Technology and
Engineering, 7(5C), 199-202.
Khan, S., & Rabbani, M. R. (2021). Artiﬁcial intelligence and NLP-based
chatbot for islamic banking and ﬁnance. International Journal of Informa-
tion Retrieval Research (IJIRR), 11(3), 65-77.
Sari, A. C., Virnilia, N., Susanto, J. T., Phiedono, K. A., & Hartono, T. K.
(2020). Chatbot developments in the business world. Advances in Science,
Technology and Engineering Systems Journal, 5(6), 627-635.
Ding, Y., Ma, J., & Luo, X. (2022). Applications of natural language pro-
cessing in construction. Automation in Construction, 136, 104169.
M¨antyl¨a, M. V., Graziotin, D., & Kuutila, M. (2018). The evolution of senti-
ment analysis—A review of research topics, venues, and top cited papers.
Computer Science Review, 27, 16-32.
37
Kanakaraj, M., & Guddeti, R. M. R. (2015, February). Performance analysis
of Ensemble methods on Twitter sentiment analysis using NLP techniques.
In Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE 9th international conference on semantic
computing (IEEE ICSC 2015) (pp. 169-170). IEEE.
Hasan, M. R., Maliha, M., & Arifuzzaman, M. (2019, July). Sentiment
analysis with NLP on Twitter data. In 2019 international conference on
computer, communication, chemical, materials and electronic engineering
(IC4ME2) (pp. 1-4). IEEE.
Nasukawa, T., & Yi, J. (2003, October). Sentiment analysis: Capturing fa-
vorability using natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 2nd
international conference on Knowledge capture (pp. 70-77).
Murphy, M., & Sashi, C. M. (2018). Communication, interactivity, and satis-
faction in B2B relationships. Industrial Marketing Management, 68, 1-12.
Aguilar, L., Downey, G., Krauss, R., Pardo, J., Lane, S., & Bolger, N. (2016).
A dyadic perspective on speech accommodation and social connection:
Both partners’ rejection sensitivity matters. Journal of Personality, 84(2),
165-177.
Finkelstein, S. R., & Fishbach, A. (2012). Tell me what I did wrong: Experts
seek and respond to negative feedback. Journal of Consumer Research,
39(1), 22-38.
Weiss, K., Khoshgoftaar, T. M., & Wang, D. (2016). A survey of transfer
learning. Journal of Big data, 3(1), 1-40.
Hofmann, T. (1999, August). Probabilistic latent semantic indexing. In Pro-
ceedings of the 22nd annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Re-
search and development in information retrieval (pp. 50-57).
Han, J., Kamber, M., & Pei, J. (2001). Data Mining: Concepts and. Tech-
nology,, Mechanism Industrial Publishing, Company.
Gavval,
R.,
Ravi,
V.,
Harshal,
K. R.,
Gangwar,
A.,
& Ravi,
K.
(2019). CUDA-Self-Organizing feature map based visual sentiment anal-
ysis of bank customer complaints for Analytical CRM. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.09598.
38
Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y., & Jordan, M. I. (2003). Latent dirichlet allocation.
Journal of machine Learning research, 3(Jan), 993-1022.
Jelodar, H., Wang, Y., Yuan, C., Feng, X., Jiang, X., Li, Y., & Zhao, L.
(2019). Latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) and topic modeling: models, ap-
plications, a survey. Multimedia Tools and Applications, 78, 15169-15211.
Yang, Z., Yu, H., Tang, J., & Liu, H. (2019). Toward keyword extraction in
constrained information retrieval in vehicle social network. IEEE Transac-
tions on Vehicular Technology, 68(5), 4285-4294.
Rose, S., Engel, D., Cramer, N., & Cowley, W. (2010). Automatic keyword
extraction from individual documents. Text mining: applications and the-
ory, 1-20.
Sharma, P., & Li, Y. (2019). Self-supervised contextual keyword and
keyphrase retrieval with self-labelling.
Kodinariya, T. M., & Makwana, P. R. (2013). Review on determining number
of Cluster in K-Means Clustering. International Journal, 1(6), 90-95.
Rao, S. X., Piriyatamwong, P., Ghoshal, P., Nasirian, S., de Salis, E.,
Mitrovi´c, S., ... & Zhang, C. (2022). Keyword Extraction in Scientiﬁc Doc-
uments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.01888.
Steven Bird, Ewan Klein and Edward Loper 5. Categorizing and Tagging
Words. Retrieved from https://www.nltk.org/book/ch05.html. Accessed
February 27,2023
39
