Title: A Comprehensive Review of State-of-The-Art Methods for Java Code Generation from Natural Language Text
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2306.06371v1
--------------------------------------------------

Graphical Abstract
A Comprehensive Review of State-of-The-Art Methods for Java Code Generation from Natural
Language Text
Jessica López Espejel,Mahaman Sanoussi Yahaya Alassan,El Mehdi Chouham,Walid Dahhane,El Hassane Ettifouri
ar
Highlights
A Comprehensive Review of State-of-The-Art Methods for Java Code Generation from Natural
Language Text
Jessica López Espejel,Mahaman Sanoussi Yahaya Alassan,El Mehdi Chouham,Walid Dahhane,El Hassane Ettifouri
• Code Generation is an important Natural Language Processing (NLP) task
• Initializing models from pretrained weights leads to better results than training them from scratch
• Decoder-only models achieve the best comprehension of the code syntax and semantics
• Combining multiple learning objectives lead to better code generation models.
• Improving Code Generation metrics is becoming a must in order to better compare and further improve state-of-the-art
methods
A Comprehensive Review of State-of-The-Art Methods for Java Code
Generation from Natural Language Text⋆
Jessica López Espejela,∗, Mahaman Sanoussi Yahaya Alassana, El Mehdi Chouhama,
Walid Dahhanea and El Hassane Ettifouria
aNovelis Research and Innovation Lab, 207 Rue de Bercy, Paris, 75012, , France
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Java Code Generation
Language Models
Natural Language Processing
Recurrent Neural Networks
Transformer Neural Networks
A B S T R A C T
Java Code Generation consists in generating automatically Java code from a Natural Language Text.
This NLP task helps in increasing programmers’ productivity by providing them with immediate
solutions to the simplest and most repetitive tasks. Code generation is a challenging task because
of the hard syntactic rules and the necessity of a deep understanding of the semantic aspect of the
programming language. Many works tried to tackle this task using either RNN-based, or Transformer-
based models. The latter achieved remarkable advancement in the domain and they can be divided into
three groups: (1) encoder-only models, (2) decoder-only models, and (3) encoder-decoder models. In
this paper, we provide a comprehensive review of the evolution and progress of deep learning models
in Java code generation task. We focus on the most important methods and present their merits and
limitations, as well as the objective functions used by the community. In addition, we provide a detailed
description of datasets and evaluation metrics used in the literature. Finally, we discuss results of
different models on CONCODE dataset, then propose some future directions.
1. Introduction
In the last years, there has been a huge interest from
the Natural Language Processing (NLP) community in the
automation of software engineering to increase program-
mers’ productivity (Ahmad et al., 2021). Code Generation
Task (or Program Synthesis Task) helps considerably in
reducing workload of programmers, by speeding up the
implementation of simple functions, and letting them focus
on the most complex tasks only.
In this paper, we are interested to show the progress over
the years in the automatic Java source code generation from
natural language. This task consists in taking as an input a
natural language phrase, and producing an equivalent Java
code as an output (Figure 1).
Figure 1: Java source code generation from natural language
In the Java Code Generation task as in many others,
attention is put on both the model and the dataset. The
latter are key ingredients to develop a powerful Artificial
∗Corresponding author
Email addresses: jlopezespejel@novelis.io (J. López Espejel);
syahaya@novelis.io (M. Yahaya Alassan); elchouham@novelis.io (E.M.
Chouham); wdahhane@novelis.io (W. Dahhane); eettifouri@novelis.io
(E.H. Ettifouri)
ORCID(s): 0000-0001-6285-0770 (J. López Espejel);
0000-0001-5387-3380 (W. Dahhane); 0000-0001-5299-9053 (E.H. Ettifouri)
1
Intelligence (AI) system. Intuitively, most of code genera-
tion datasets are built from source code of the concerned
Programming Language (PL) and documentation in Natu-
ral Language (NL). These datasets are collected from web
sites such as Github1 and Stack Overflow2. In the case of
Java programming language, documentation is written in
JavaDoc (Oracle, 2022), which is a format that describes all
classes, member variables and methods. Therefore, JavaDoc
documentation with its source code have been exploited to
generate large datasets containing pairs of text-code lines
(See Section 6 for more details). Along with datasets, several
models have surged to tackle the Java Code Generation task.
The first models used in literature are based on Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNNs) such as LPN (Ling et al., 2016)
and Seq2Seq (Yin and Neubig, 2017). However, the big
success of Transformer-based pretrained language models
(LMs) such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), GPT (Radford
et al., 2019), and T5 (Raffel et al., 2020), in a wide range
of NLP tasks, shifted the efforts of the community to adapt
Transformers models (Vaswani et al., 2017) to generate Java
code from natural language. The results of such efforts gave
birth to more sophisticated Large Language Models (LLMs)
such as ChatGPT (OpenIA, 2023), LLaMA (Touvron et al.,
2023), and BARD (Google, 2023). Note that at the time of
writing this article, the performance of the latter algorithms
has not been tested on standard Java benchmarks. Nonethe-
less, initial indications suggest that their performance is
exceptional.
Programming language generation presents more chal-
lenges than standard natural language generation. For in-
stance, (1) the neural network should be able to correctly
understand instructions in natural language to generate a
corresponding correct source code, (2) the latter has lexical,
1https://github.com/
2https://stackoverflow.com/
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 1 of 16
Review of State-of-The-Art Methods for Java Code Generation from Natural Language Text
grammatical, and semantic constraints (Wang et al., 2021;
Scholak et al., 2021) that should be taken into account, and
(3) one small mistake (such as a missing dot or colon) can
change completely the semantic of the code and make the
model’s output incorrect.
In this paper, we provide a comprehensive review of
state-of-the-art methods in Java code generation from natural
language. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
review for Java Code Generation methods. Our goal is to
provide a solid base for future researchers by highlighting
what was already done, and what can be improved. These
are the main findings of our paper:
• Initializing models from pretrained weights leads to
better results than training them from scratch
• Decoder-only models have shown the best compre-
hension of the code syntax and semantics
• Combining multiple learning tasks lead to better code
generation models.
• Improving Code Generation metrics is becoming a
must in order to better compare and further improve
state-of-the-art methods
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2
provides a formulation of the problem. Section 3 outlines
the background of the studied task. Section 4 presents RNN-
based methods to tackle Java Code Generation. Note that
this type of methods are outdated nowadays and are not
effective to tackle complex NLP tasks. Section 5 presents
the most powerful Transformer-based methods. This section
is the largest, and takes the biggest attention in this article.
Section 6 provides a brief description of the most popular
datasets used in Java Generation. Section 7 presents evalu-
ation metrics used by the community to evaluate different
models. In Section 8, we compare experimentally between
the state-of-the-art methods and highlight their advantages
and disadvantages. Finally, we conclude in Section 9 and
provide some perspectives.
2. Problem Definition
We build on the notations used in Feng et al. (2020) and
propose a unified notation for all methods described in this
paper. The goal is to facilitate the comprehension and the
comparison between state-of-the-art methods.
Given an input text 𝑤= {𝑤0, 𝑤1, .., 𝑤𝑛−1} of length
|𝑤| = 𝑛, the goal of a code generation model is to produce
an equivalent source code sequence 𝑐= {𝑐0, 𝑐1, .., 𝑐𝑙−1} of
length |𝑐| = 𝑙, where 𝑤𝑖and 𝑐𝑖are input and output (target)
tokens respectively. The model is trained on batches of size
𝐵using a loss (𝜃), where 𝜃are the model’s parameters. The
formula of loss function (𝜃) varies between code genera-
tion methods and depends heavily on the architecture used.
We will provide a detailed explanation of these learning
objectives in Section 5.
Data type - Code generation models can be trained on
unimodal or bimodal data. On the one hand, unimodal
data keep the source code without paired natural language,
or keep the natural language without paired code. On the
other hand, bimodal data have NL-PL pairs. The bimodal
data have shown its usefulness in training the multi-modal
pretrained models (Feng et al., 2020), which learn implicit
alignment between input of different categories.
3. Background
The automatic source code generation task can be mod-
eled as a translation task, where the input text is a natural
language phrase and the output text is a programming source
code. Early works in the field of language translation focused
on regular expressions, logical forms, sequence of instruc-
tions, and agent-specific languages. Later, the efforts were
shifted to use semantic parsing and SQL code generation.
These developments paved the way for the generation of
Java code for natural language. In the following paragraphs,
we will provide a brief overview of remarkable methods
proposed for each category.
Regular expressions - Angluin (1987) worked on the
mapping of natural language to regular expressions by learn-
ing general rules from examples, and automatizing their
generation. Alternatively, Ranta (1998) and Kushman and
Barzilay (2013a) used rule-based techniques and Combi-
natory Categorical Grammar (CCG) to generate regular
expressions from natural language, respectively. Similarly,
Kushman and Barzilay (2013b) worked on generating reg-
ular expressions from natural language queries. While the
method proved effective in handling a wide variety of natural
language queries, including complex ones, it was not able to
handle all of them, as it relies on semantic unification and
could struggle with certain types of queries.
Logical forms - Authors of Zettlemoyer and Collins
(2005a) mapped natural language sentences to logical forms.
They introduced an approach based on probabilistic cate-
gorial grammars (PCGs). Even though the method handles
ambiguity in natural language, and can generate multiple
logical forms, the PCG parser used in the model is complex
and computationally expensive, making it difficult to scale
to large datasets.
Agent-specific language - Kate et al. (2005) proposed a
method for automatically translating natural language sen-
tences into agent-specific language expressions. The advan-
tages of this method is that it can automate the translation
process, saving time and effort for human translators, and
can potentially improve the accuracy of formal language
expression generation. However, the model could face diffi-
culties in processing certain categories of complex sentences
or in handling expressions that have multiple valid formal
language translations.
Sequence of instructions - Branavan et al. (2010) pre-
sented a framework that learns to map natural language
instructions to corresponding actions in an environment by
training an agent with a combination of supervised learning
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 2 of 16
Review of State-of-The-Art Methods for Java Code Generation from Natural Language Text
Figure 2: Timeline of some models in the Java Code Generation task
and reinforcement learning techniques. The method does not
require hand-engineered features, making it highly adaptable
to different tasks and environments. However, the framework
struggles with instructions that are ambiguous or imprecise,
leading to errors in action generation.
Semantic Parsing - We have identified salient back-
ground approaches in the semantic parsing. One example
is the work introduced by Zettlemoyer and Collins (2005a),
who mapped NL to lambda–calculus encodings of their
semantics. To check the syntax and the semantics, the au-
thors used a log-linear model. Later, Wong and Mooney
(2006), developed a statistical semantic parsing system
called WASP. This system is designed to generate a formal
representation of the meaning of a sentence. Similarly, Lu
et al. (2008) proposed for parsing natural language, which
involves utilizing a generative model to convert input sen-
tences into representations of their meanings.
SQL query generation - This is the closest type of ap-
proaches to Java generation task. One interesting work in
this category was proposed by Miller et al. (1996) who used
an interface that is based on trained statistical models. To
train the model, authors used ATIS (Air Travel Information)
dataset. This dataset also was used by Ramaswamy and
Kleindienst (2000).
The aforementioned works offer an introduction to the
methods utilized in the background and establish the ground-
work for more advanced techniques based on RNN and
Transformers, which will be discussed in subsequent sec-
tions of this paper. Unfortunately, most of the methods
presented in this section are outdated and are unable to deal
with complex Java generation programs.
4. RNN-based Code Generation Methods
The first neural-network-based approaches used to tackle
source code generation from natural language were based
on Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) such as Long Short-
term Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997)
and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) (Cho et al., 2014a). For
instance, Neelakantan et al. (2016) proposed an architecture
known as the Neural Programmer, which integrates RNNs
with a set of fundamental arithmetic and logic operations
to enhance program induction methods. One key feature of
their approach is the integration of additional memory into
neural networks (Graves et al., 2014; Kumar et al., 2016;
Joulin and Mikolov, 2015), which allows for more advanced
and sophisticated problem-solving capabilities. Moreover,
Mou et al. (2015) used a method based on RNNs for generat-
ing computer programs directly from natural language input.
This sequence-to-sequence model is an end-to-end approach
that uses an LSTM-based encoder to create a fixed-length
vector representation of the input, and a decoder that predicts
each token based on the output sequence tokens and the input
vector.
Similarly to Neelakantan et al. (2016), Reed and de Fre-
itas (2016) introduced an approach to induce programs
called NPI (Neural Programmer-Interpreter). As Mou et al.
(2015), NPI is an end-to-end model. NPI does not need
manual feature engineering or domain-specific knowledge.
It can learn how to create and execute programs, but the
method is limited to generate complex programs, as the
size of the programs is restricted by the capacity of the
neural network. In the same year, Ling et al. (2016) pro-
posed Latent Predictor Network (LPN) that generates code
from natural language descriptions by predicting the latent
representation of code snippets. The LPN model consists
of two components: a code generation model and a latent
predictor model. The code generation model maps natural
language descriptions to code representations, and the latent
predictor model predicts the latent code representation given
the previous generated code. However, LPN model requires
a large amount of training data to perform well.
Another interesting work in this category is called Deep-
API. It was proposed by Gu et al. (2016b), and consists
in generating Java API sequences from natural language
query. DeepAPI adapts a RNN encoder-decoder model (Cho
et al., 2014b) to encode the input sequence to a fixed-
length context vector. This helps in recognizing semantically
related words. In addition, importance of individual APIs is
used to enhance the performance of the model. DeepAPI
is the first model from its kind, but unfortunately, it only
focuses on JDK library.
Iyer et al. (2018) introduced a sequence-to-sequence
model and evaluated its performance on their CONCODE
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 3 of 16
Review of State-of-The-Art Methods for Java Code Generation from Natural Language Text
dataset. The model is composed of a bidirectional LSTM
encoder, and an LSTM-based decoder. The latter uses a two-
step attention mechanism, one of these steps is a supervised
copy of Gu et al. (2016a). Alternatively, Iyer et al. (2018)
tested seq2seq model introduced by Yin and Neubig (2017)
on their CONCODE dataset. Seq2seq uses sequence-to-
sequence LSTM-based architecture. However, the decoder
uses supervised copying from the whole input sequence.
Despite the usefulness of RNNs in multiple NLP tasks,
they are currently not very popular in the community since
they were highly outperformed in 2017 by Transformer
neural networks (Vaswani et al., 2017). Most of the works
presented in this section did not focus on Java programming
language. This is showed in Figure 2 that outlines some
methods focus on Java code generation. We can clearly see
that Java PL task is indeed tackled using Transformers. For
this reason, we booked more room for them in the rest of the
paper.
5. Transformer-based Java Code Generation
Methods
Transformers-based models have shown outstanding
scores on various NLP tasks such as translation (Vaswani
et al., 2017), automatic summarization (Zhang et al., 2020)
and question answering (Raffel et al., 2020). All of these
models have two stages: (1) pre-training, and (2) fine-tuning.
The pre-training consists of learning a language model or a
learning objective task from unlabeled data, and fine-tuning
is the step in which the model learns the knowledge that
is related to a specific task using labeled data. Therefore,
one of the main factors in the success of these models is
the supervised learning objectives used. Code generation
methods tried first to adapt existing standard text generation
methods and their objectives to Code Generation (Phan et al.,
2021; Ahmad et al., 2021). Later, other methods explored
more specific techniques to improve the syntax and seman-
tics of the generated code (Tipirneni et al., 2022; Wang
et al., 2021). We study state-of-the-art methods based on
their architecture and divide then into three main categories:
encoder-only models, decoder-only models, and encoder-
decoder models. Figure 3 shows a simplified illustration of
the main difference in the architecture between the three
types of models. Figure 4 shows the main learning objectives
used in each category of methods, plus, an example of
reference for each objective. We provide more details in the
following three subsections.
5.1. Encoder-only models
These methods use an encoder only in the Transformer
neural network architecture (Figure 3 (a)). They concatenate
the natural language sequence 𝑤, and the programming
language sequence 𝑐and use them as an input 𝑥= {𝑤, 𝑐} to
the encoder.
The main objectives used by this type of methods are as
follows:
Figure 3: A simplified illustration of the different architecture
types of Transformer neural networks
∙MLM: Masked Language Modeling (Devlin et al.,
2019) - It consists in selecting randomly a set of positions
from the input tokens, then replacing tokens in these po-
sitions with a special [MASK] token. This objective aims to
predict only the original tokens that are masked, and not
to reconstruct the entire input. The token chosen at each
position is selected from the model vocabulary. The MLM
loss function is defined in Equation 1.
𝑀𝐿𝑀(𝜃) = −
∑
𝑖∈𝑚𝑤∪𝑚𝑐
𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑃𝐷1
𝜃(𝑥𝑖|𝑤𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘𝑒𝑑, 𝑐𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘𝑒𝑑) (1)
where 𝜃are the model’s parameters, 𝑤is a natural lan-
guage input, 𝑐is programming language output, 𝑃𝐷1
𝜃
is the
discriminator that predicts a token from a large vocabulary,
and 𝑚𝑤and 𝑚𝑐are random set of masked positions in 𝑤and
𝑐, respectively.
∙RTD: Replaced Token Detection (Clark et al., 2020)
- It replaces (corrupts) some tokens in the input sequence
with plausible tokens proposed from a generator network.
The discriminator neural network is trained to determine if
each token in the corrupt input is the original one or not. The
RTD loss function is defined in Equation 2.
𝑅𝑇𝐷(𝜃) = ∑𝑛+𝑙−1
𝑖=0
(𝛿(𝑖) 𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑃𝐷2
𝜃(𝑥𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑢𝑝𝑡, 𝑖)+
(1 −𝛿(𝑖))(1 −𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑃𝐷2
𝜃(𝑥𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑢𝑝𝑡, 𝑖)))
(2)
where 𝑃𝐷2
𝜃
is the discriminator which predicts the prob-
ability of the 𝑖-th word being original, and 𝛿(𝑖) is an indicator
function defined as:
𝛿(𝑖) =
{
1
𝑖𝑓𝑥𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑢𝑝𝑡
𝑖
≡𝑥𝑖,
0
𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒.
∙DOBF: Deobfuscation (Rozière et al., 2021) - It re-
names the class, function and variable names with unin-
formative labels. All instances of selected identifiers are
replaced in the whole source code with the uninformative
label. The model is trained to recover the original names by
deobfuscating the code. It is the first approach to exploit the
structure of programming languages.
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 4 of 16
Review of State-of-The-Art Methods for Java Code Generation from Natural Language Text
∙Edge Prediction (Guo et al., 2021) - It is used with Data
Flow Graph (DFG) and consists in masking some direct
edges in the data flow. Then, the model aims to predict these
masked edges. Edge Prediction loss is defined in Equation 3.
𝐸𝑑𝑔𝑒𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑑(𝜃) = −∑
𝑒𝑖𝑗∈𝐸𝑐[𝛿(𝑒𝑖𝑗∈𝐸𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘𝑒𝑑) 𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑝𝑒𝑖𝑗+
(1 −𝛿(𝑒𝑖𝑗∈𝐸𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘𝑒𝑑)) 𝑙𝑜𝑔(1 −𝑝𝑒𝑖𝑗)]
(3)
where 𝐸𝑐is the set of candidate edges, 𝐸𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘𝑒𝑑is the set
of masked edges, 𝑝𝑒𝑖𝑗is the probability that an edge exists
between nodes 𝑖and 𝑗, and 𝛿(𝑒𝑖𝑗∈𝐸) is defined as follows:
𝛿(𝑒𝑖𝑗∈𝐸) =
{ 1
𝑖𝑓⟨𝑣𝑖, 𝑣𝑗⟩∈𝐸,
0
𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒.
∙Node Alignement (Guo et al., 2021) - It is similar to
the Edge Prediction task, but instead of predicting edges
between the nodes of DFG, it predicts edges between the
source code tokens and data flow nodes.
Methods - CodeBERT (Feng et al., 2020) is based on
BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), and is the first large bimodal
(NL-PL) pretrained model on CodeSearchNet (Husain et al.,
2019) dataset. In the pretraining stage, CodeBERT uses two
objective functions: Masked Language Modeling (MLM),
and Replaced Token Detection (RTD).
GraphCodeBERT (Guo et al., 2021) is based on BERT
(Devlin et al., 2019), and is the first pretrained model that
leverages the code structure via Data Flow Graph (DFG).
In the pretraining stage, GraphCodeBERT uses MLM as a
learning objective, and two additional tasks: prediction of
code structure edges in the data flow, and variable-alignment
over source code and data flow.
5.2. Decoder-only models
These methods use decoder(s) only in the Transformer
neural network architecture (Figure 3 (b)).
∙PAR: Parametric Loss Function (Hoffmann et al.,
2022) - This is one of the most recent objectives proposed for
decoder-only Chinchilla model. It is a parametric loss func-
tion, based on models parameters count and the number of
already-seen tokens. The PAR loss is defined in Equation 4:
𝑃𝐴𝑅(𝜃, 𝑁, 𝐷) ≜𝐸+ 𝐴
𝑁𝛼+ 𝐵
𝐷𝛽
(4)
where 𝐸is the entropy of the natural language text and
refers to ideal generative process,
𝐴
𝑁𝛼refers to the negative
gap in performance between a perfectly trained Transformer
with N parameters and an ideal generative process, and
𝐵
𝐷𝛽refers to incomplete convergence of the Transformer
model because of its limited number of optimization steps.
The estimation of 𝛼, 𝛽, 𝐴, 𝐵, 𝐸is done using a Huber Loss
(Hernandez et al., 2021) that uses the L-BFGS algorithm
(Nocedal, 1980), as in Equation 5:
min
𝐴,𝐵,𝐸,𝛼,𝛽
∑
𝑟𝑢𝑛𝑠𝑖
𝐻𝑢𝑏𝑒𝑟𝛿
(𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑃𝐴𝑅(𝜃, 𝑁𝑖, 𝐷𝑖) −𝑙𝑜𝑔𝐿𝑖
) (5)
where 𝛿= 10−3 and 𝐿is the pretraining loss. Huber
loss is robust to outliers and provides an overall good per-
formance.
∙ULM: Unidirectional Language Modeling (Radford
et al., 2019) - It aims to predict the next token 𝑥𝑖given
the previous tokens. The ULM loss function is defined in
Equation 6:
𝑈𝐿𝑀(𝜃) = −
𝑙−1
∑
𝑖=0
𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑃𝜃(𝑥𝑖|𝑥<𝑖)
(6)
where 𝑥<𝑖refers to all the tokens that are before the 𝑖𝑡ℎone.
Methods - Lu et al. (2021) tested the performance of
GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) model on code generation
task using three configurations: GPT-2, CodeGPT-2 and
CodeGPT-adapt. The latter is pretrained on text extracted
from 45 million links on the web. Unlike GPT-2, CodeGPT-
2 and CodeGPT-adapt that are pretrained on CodeSearch-
Net dataset, CodeGPT-2 is pretrained from scratch, and
CodeGPT-adapt is initialized from GPT-2 checkpoint.
Large Language Models (LLMs) - GPT-3 (Brown
et al., 2020) marked the beginning of the era of Large
Language Models (LLMs). It showed that, by scaling up
language models, the few-shot learning is possible, and it
can sometimes even reach competitive results in tasks such
as machine translation, code generation, reading compre-
hension, etc. For all tasks, GPT-3 is applied without any
gradient updates or fine-tuning, with tasks and few-shot
demonstrations specified purely via text interaction with
the model. This model follows GPT-2 architecture, and has
175B of parameters (10 times more than the previous one).
There is a series of GPT-3.5 models that are based on
GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020). We cite them hereafter:
• Code-davinci-002: is one of the Codex (Chen et al.,
2021a) models, that are trained on natural language
and programming languages including Java.
• Text-davinci-002: is an InstructGPT (Ouyang et al.,
2022) model based on code-davinci-002.
• Text-davinci-003: is the most powerful GPT-3 model
compared with previous GPT-based models. It
can perform better in quality language generation,
instruction-following, etc.
An upgrade of GPT-3.5 lead to the birth of Chat-
GPT (OpenIA, 2023), an impressive language model that
fueled a debate about the impact of AI on our daily life.
Currently, ChatGPT is based on an even more powerful
and sophisticated GPT-4 architecture. The latter is a large
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 5 of 16
Review of State-of-The-Art Methods for Java Code Generation from Natural Language Text
multimodal model capable of processing both text and im-
age inputs and producing text outputs. It surpasses exist-
ing models by a considerable margin in English and also
exhibits strong performance in other languages. The loss
function computation is one of the main modifications made
compared to previous GPT models. The authors were able
to predict GPT-4’s final loss on their internal codebase by
fitting a scaling law with an irreducible loss term. As for
Java, ChatGPT is able to generate very complex code from
natural language request.
Although GPT-4 is an advanced language model that
outperforms its predecessors, it still has limitations similar
to earlier GPT models. These limitations include generat-
ing false information, providing harmful advises, having a
restricted context window, and lacking the ability to learn
from experience. However, the authors conducted a thor-
ough evaluation of GPT-4’s performance on a variety of
datasets, such as academic exams. It was found that GPT-4
achieved a human-level performance on most of these tests.
Additionally, in their internal factuality evaluations designed
to test the model’s accuracy, GPT-4 scored 19% points
higher than the latest GPT-3.5 model. Note that ChatGPT
(and other large language models) is recent and was not
tested yet on CONCODE dataset. For this reason, we did not
include its results in our review.
At the same time than ChatGPT, Rae et al. (2021) built
on GPT-2 and proposed Gopher, a model that contains 280
billion parameters. However, Gopher has two modifications
compared with GPT-2: the authors used RMSNorm (Zhang
and Sennrich, 2019) instead of LayerNorm (Ba et al., 2016),
and also used the relative positional encoding (Dai et al.,
2019) instead of the absolute positional encodings. The
model was evaluated on 152 different tasks, including Java
code generation. Even though Gopher outperforms the state
of the art in 81% of the task, when the authors evaluated it
in 124 tasks, there are still some challenges related to the
distributional bias, and the training definition criteria.
After Gopher, Hoffmann et al. (2022) introduced a new
language model called Chinchilla. This model has the same
architecture as Gopher but with 70 billion parameters and
additional data. Unlike Gopher, Chinchilla uses variations in
the number of training steps, model sizes of different train-
ing FLOP counts, a different loss function (𝑃𝐴𝑅function
from Equation 4), and the AdamW (Loshchilov and Hutter,
2019) optimizer instead of Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2015).
Chinchilla outperforms various language models such as
Gopher and GPT-3 in many tasks. However, the quality
of code generation in Chinchilla is related to its size, and
scaling training tokens can improve it. Although Chinchilla’s
authors recommend training a 10B model on 200B tokens,
Touvron et al. (2023) has shown that a 7B model continues
to improve even after 1T tokens.
Inspired by Chinchilla, Touvron et al. (2023) proposed
the LLaMA family of LLMs, whose parameters range from
7B to 65B. The architecture of LLaMA incorporates the
strengths of previous LLMs, such as input normalization
inspired by GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), and SwiGLU activa-
tion function from PaLM (Driess et al., 2023). Additionally,
it employs rotary positional embeddings instead of absolute
positional embeddings used by GPTNeo (Black et al., 2022).
LLaMA-13B, which is only one-tenth the size of GPT-
3, performs better on most benchmarks and can be run
on a single GPU. Furthermore, the 65B-parameter model
is competitive with other LLMs like Chinchilla-70B and
PaLM-540B.
5.3. Encoder-Decoder models
These methods use both encoder(s) and decoder(s) in the
Transformer neural network architecture (Figure 3 (c)).
∙MSP: Masked Span Prediction (Raffel et al., 2020)- It
consists in randomly masking spans of text with arbitrary
lengths. Later, the model predicts the masked spans.MSP
loss is defined in Equation 7.
𝑀𝑆𝑃(𝜃) =
𝑘−1
∑
𝑖=0
−𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑃𝜃(𝑤𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘𝑒𝑑
𝑖
|𝑤∖𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘𝑒𝑑, 𝑤𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘𝑒𝑑
<𝑖
) (7)
where 𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘𝑒𝑑is the masked input of length 𝑘, 𝑥∖𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘𝑒𝑑
is the masked sequence to predict by the decoder, and
𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘𝑒𝑑
<𝑖
is the span sequence generated so far.
∙IT: Identifier Tagging (Wang et al., 2021) - It aims to
determine if code tokens are identifiers (e.g., function or
variable names). Therefore, authors compute a probability
value 𝑝𝑖for each output token.
To see if a node is an identifier or not, the authors convert
the code sequence to an AST (Abstract Syntax Tree). The IT
loss is computed using a binary cross entropy loss, where the
binary label 𝑦𝑖= 1 means that the token is an identifier, and
𝑦𝑖= 0 means that it is not (Equation 8).
𝐼𝑇(𝜃𝑒) =
𝑙−1
∑
𝑖=0
−[𝑦𝑖𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑝𝑖+ (1 −𝑦𝑖) 𝑙𝑜𝑔(1 −𝑝𝑖)] (8)
where 𝜃𝑒are the encoder’s parameters, and 𝑝𝑖are the
probabilities of the output sequence tokens.
∙MIP: Masked Identifier Prediction (Wang et al., 2021)
- It consists in masking all identifiers (function and variable
names) in the PL, and replacing all recurrences of a specific
identifier with a unique sentinel token. It is inspired by
deobfuscation previously used in Rozière et al. (2021). The
loss function is defined as:
𝑀𝐼𝑃(𝜃) =
𝑛−1
∑
𝑖=0
−𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑃𝜃(𝑤𝑖|𝑤𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘𝑒𝑑, 𝑤<𝑖)
(9)
where 𝑤𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘𝑒𝑑is the masked input.
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 6 of 16
Review of State-of-The-Art Methods for Java Code Generation from Natural Language Text
∙Bimodal dual objective (Wang et al., 2021) - It aims
to leverage bimodal data in order to achieve better NL-PL
alignments. During the training process, if NL is the encoder
input, then PL is the decoder input and vice versa.
∙MCL: MultiModal Contrastive Learning (Guo et al.,
2022) - This loss helps in learning the semantic embedding
of mapped AST sequences. Authors forward the same input
in the neural network and use different hidden dropout
masks. The resulting hidden representations are used as
positives, while the other representations from the same
batch are used as negatives.
𝑀𝐶𝐿(𝜃) = −
𝐵−1
∑
𝑖=0
𝑙𝑜𝑔
𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑠( ̃ℎ𝑖, ̃ℎ𝑖
+)∕𝜏
∑𝑏−1
𝑗=0 𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑠( ̃ℎ𝑗, ̃ℎ+
𝑗)∕𝜏
(10)
where 𝜏is the temperature scalar, ̃ℎ𝑖
+ and ̃ℎ𝑖are the
positive and negative representations, respectively, and 𝑐𝑜𝑠(̇)
is the cosine similarity.
∙CMG: Cross-Modal Generation (Guo et al., 2022) -
This loss is complementary to the previous one. It pushes the
model to provide comments to describe the code’s function.
This helps the model to better understand the semantics of
the code and unify its representation across programming
languages. Its is defined in Equation 11.
𝐶𝑀𝐺(𝜃) = −
𝑙−1
∑
𝑖=0
𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑃𝜃(𝑑𝑖|𝑋, 𝑑𝑡<𝑖)
(11)
where X is the flattened AST sequence, and 𝑑
=
{𝑑0, 𝑑1, .., 𝑑𝑛−1} is the code comments.
Methods - Ahmad et al. (2021) introduced PLBART (Pro-
gram and Language BART), a model based on 𝐵𝐴𝑅𝑇𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒
(Lewis et al., 2020). The latter was originally proposed to
tackle text generation and comprehension tasks, such as
translation, question answering, and automatic summariza-
tion. The only difference between the two model architec-
tures is that PLBART added a normalization layer on top
of both the encoder and the decoder. It is the first model to
exploit the possibility to generate source code from NL with
a pretrained decoder.
Posterior to PLBART, Phan et al. (2021) introduced
CoTexT (Code and Text Transfer Transformer), which builds
on 𝑇5𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒(Raffel et al., 2020) model. The authors studied the
CoTexT performance based on two criteria: (1) combining
corpora (CodeSearchNet and GitHub repositories), and (2)
pretraining with unimodal and bimodal data. Therefore,
the three resulting models are as follows: CoTexT (1-CC),
CoTexT (2-CC), and CoTexT (1-CCG). Since all of the
models are initialized from 𝑇5𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒weights, and the latter
was originally pretrained on the C4 dataset, the comparison
is fair.
Most recently, Lopez Espejel et al. (2023) introduced
JaCoText, a model that is initialized from CotexT weights.
It explores additional pretraining using Java code only. In
addition, the authors explore the impact of input and output
sequence length during fine-tuning.
Parvez et al. (2021) introduced REDCODER (Retrieval
augmentED CODe gEneration and summaRization frame-
work). It is composed of a retrieval module called SCODER-
R (Summary and CODE Retriever), and a generator module
called SCODER-G, which is based on PLBLART (Ahmad
et al., 2021). SCODER-R is initialized from GraphCode-
BERT (Guo et al., 2021) weights, it receives the NL text,
and returns the top-k source codes. Later, the NL sequence
is concatenated with the top-k code sequences to have the
augmented input sequence. This sequence is fed to PLBART
to generate Java code.
CodeT5 (Wang et al., 2021) is based on T5 (Raffel
et al., 2020) neural network architecture. Authors convert PL
segments into an Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) and introduce
two pretraining tasks: Identifier-aware denoising objective,
and bimodal dual generation objective. On the one hand,
Identifier-aware denoising objective uses Masked Span Pre-
diction (MSP) objective similar to T5 (Raffel et al., 2020),
and introduced two supplementary tasks: Identifier Tagging
(IT), and Masked Identifier Prediction (MIP). Identifier-
aware objective optimizes these three losses (MSP, IT, MIP)
equally. On the other hand, bimodal dual objective optimizes
the model simultaneously using bimodal data with different
order (NL-PL, then PL-NL). Surprisingly, experiments lead
by the authors have shown that the order between the code
and the natural language test matters in the model’s perfor-
mance.
Later, Tipirneni et al. (2022) proposed StructCoder
model, which is initialized from CodeT5 (Wang et al., 2021)
weights, and pretrained using DAE (Denoising Autoencod-
ing) task. StructCoder also uses an abstract syntax tree and
propose two learning objectives to train both the encoder
and the decoder: DFG prediction, and AST paths prediction.
Specifically, the decoder is trained to predict the node types
on all the root-leaf paths in the target AST, and to predict the
data flow edges.
Very recently, UniXcoder (Guo et al., 2022) surged
to tackle code-related understanding and generation tasks.
UniXcoder leverages the AST information through trans-
forming AST to sequence text. This method is functional
in three modes: encoder-only, decoder-only, and encoder-
decoder. Authors used three learning objective tasks to pre-
trained the model: MLM (Devlin et al., 2019), Unidirectional
Language Modeling (ULM) (Radford et al., 2019), and
Denoising Objective (Raffel et al., 2020). In addition, they
introduced two more objectives: Multi-modal Contrastive
Learning (MCL), and Cross-Modal Generation (CMG) that
target the semantic understanding of code and its unification
across different programming languages.
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 7 of 16
Review of State-of-The-Art Methods for Java Code Generation from Natural Language Text
Figure 4: Overview of learning objectives in Transformer-based Code Generation Methods, and some examples of such methods.
6. Datasets for Java Code Generation
In this section, we present the most used datasets in Java
Code Generation. A brief summary of them, as well as their
merits and limitations, are presented in Table 1.
CONCODE (Iyer et al., 2018) was collected from Java
projects on Github (approx. 33,000 repositories). It is com-
posed of tuples of class environment (member variables and
member methods), natural language (JavaDoc comments),
and source code. It aims to generate Java code from NL doc-
umentation and the class environment (used as a context).
Java code belongs to several domains. It has been used to
fine-tune the models. It contains 100𝐾, 2𝐾, and 2𝐾lines of
NL-PL in the train, validation, and test sets, respectively.
CoNaLa (Yin et al., 2018) consists of query-code pairs
collected from the website Stack Overflow via a mining
method. It contains two programming languages: Python
and Java. It contains 11125, 1237, and 500 lines of NL-PL
in the train, validation, and test sets, respectively.
MTG corpus (Ling et al., 2016) aims to generate source
code given the card description in Trading Card Games
(TCGs). The authors collected the data from two open source
implementations of TCGs: Magic the Gathering (MTG), and
Hearthtone (HS). While the latter digital implementation
is in python. we focus in this work on MTG dataset that
contains Java digital implementation. It contains 11969, 664,
and 664 lines of NL-PL in the train, validation, and test sets,
respectively.
CodeSearchNet (General Language Understanding Eval-
uation benchmark for CODE) was introduced by Lu et al.
(2021). It contains six programming languages (Ruby,
JavaScript, Go, Python, Java, and PHP) with 6.4M of uni-
modal (only PL) data, and 2.1M bimodal (PL-NL) data-
points. The data was collected from Github code reposito-
ries, and includes 10 tasks over 14 different datasets.
CodeNet was proposed by Puri et al. (2021b). It contains a
set of programming problems collected from two websites:
AIZU (Watanobe, 2022) and AtCoder (Inc., 2022). It con-
tains 13,916,868 submissions, divided into 4053 problems.
Submissions are in 55 different programming languages, but
95% are coded in C++, Python, Java, C, Ruby, and C#. Only
the other 5% are in Java.
Java dataset (Ahmad et al., 2021) was collected from
Github repositories associated with Java language available
on Google BigQuery. Authors follow Roziere et al. (2020)
to preprocess the data.
AlphaCode Pre-training was introduced by Li et al.
(2022) to pretrained their model. The authors scrawled
the data from public Github repositories. The pretrained
dataset contains 715.1 GB of code, including C++, C#, Go,
Java, JavaScript, Lua, PHP, Python, Ruby, Rust, Scala, and
TypeScript. From these programming languages, 113.8 GB
consist of Java data.
CodeContests was introduced by Li et al. (2022) to fine-
tuned their model. The authors combines scraped data from
Codeforces (Mirzayanov, 2020) with existing data from De-
scription2Code (Caballero et al., 2016), and CodeNet (Puri
et al., 2021a). It contains C++, Python, and Java.
BIGQUERY CODEGEN (Pang et al., 2022) contains six
programming languages: C, C++, Go, Java, JavaScript, and
Python. In total, it contains, 342.1 GB of data, including
around 120.2 GB of Java data. It was used to pretrain the
CODEGEN models.
PolyCoder Dataset (Xu et al., 2022) was collected from
Github repositories that have at least 50 stars. It contains 12
PLs (C, C#, C++, Go, Java, JavaScript, PHP, Python, Ruby,
Rust, Scala, TypeScript), where each PL has a maximum
of 25K repositories. The raw data size is around 631 GB
(including 60 GB for Java). To preprocess the data, the
authors follow Codex process (Chen et al., 2021b). After
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 8 of 16
Review of State-of-The-Art Methods for Java Code Generation from Natural Language Text
Dataset
Programming
language (PL)
Size
Source
Proposed for
merits
limitations
CONCODE
Java
100𝐾, 2𝐾, 2𝐾lines
in train/val/test
Github
code generation
large scale
query nl incorporates both member
variables and member methods. However,
in practice, is not an optimal approach.
CoNaLa
Python, Java
11125, 1237, and 500 lines
in train/val/test
Stack Overflow
classification
manual annotation
- If there are several valid source code
for a question, the annotators
might not identify all of them.
- The annotators can fail when the
code source is complex.
MTG corpus
Python, Java
11969, 664, and 664 lines
in train/val/test
trading card games
Magic the Gathering
and Hearthtone
code generation
new area of focus on
code generation
for card games.
- The programming of card games is
a niche industry that caters to a
specific demographic within society.
CodeSearchNet
Ruby, JavaScript, Go,
Python, Java, PHP
6.4M of PL data,
2.1M of PL-NL data
Github
code search
- large scale
- expert annotators
The authors create proxy dataset
of lower quality
BIGQUERY
CODEGEN
C, C++, Go,
Java, JavaScript, Python
342.1 GB of total code,
120.3 GB of Java code
-
Multi-Turn
program synthesis
- large scale
- multi-lingual dataset
-
The code in the dataset
exhibits certain vulnerabilities
and safety issues.
CodeNet
55 different
programming languages
14 million of code
samples and approx. 500
million lines of code
AIZU and AtCoder
- code similarity
and classification
code translation
- code performance
- large scale
- high-quality
annotations
- The code samples may lack
extensive comments and could
be in multiple languages.
- The code samples offer
solutions for programming problems
that are aimed at beginners
in college and high school.
AlphaCode
Pre-training
dataset
C++, C#, Go,
Java, JavaScript, Lua,
PHP, Python, Ruby,
Rust, Scala, TypeScript
715.1 GB of total code,
113.8 GB of Java code
Github
code generation
- large scale
- multiple PLs
The dataset may contain
unsafe code
CodeContests
C++, Python, Java
13328, 117, 165 in lines
train/valid/test
Codeforces
Description2Code
CodeNet
code generation
- includes problems,
solutions and test cases
- contains correct and
incorrect human
submissions
- the raw datasets of
CodeContests contain a
high rate of false
positive samples.
PolyCoder
Dataset
C, C#, C++,
Go, Java, JavaScript,
PHP, Python, Ruby,
Rust , Scala, TypeScript
631 GB of total code,
60 GB of Java code
Github
code completion
code synthesis
- large scale
- multiple PLs
The code source may
contain vulnerabilities
and safety issues.
The Stack
Dataset
358 languages
including Java
6 TB of total code
Github
- code completion
- documentation generation
- auto-completion of
code snippets
- large scale
- multiple PLs
it contains unsafe code
(malicious files)
Java dataset
Java
352 GB
Github and
StackOverflow
- code generation
- specialized in Java
- the code may contain
vulnerabilities
Table 1
Summary of datasets used in literature
filtering the data, the final data size is 243.6 GB, with 41
GB for Java language.
The Stack Dataset was proposed by Kocetkov et al.
(2022). It is the largest code dataset so far. It contains 6
TB of data from 358 programming languages. The code was
extracted from Github repositories with permissive licenses,
such as MIT, BSD-3-Clause, ISC, ECL and Apache 2.0.
7. Evaluation metrics
The following metrics are used to evaluate Java Code
Generation methods. A brief summary of these metrics is
presented in Table 2.
Exact Match (EM) measures the accuracy of the model.
It determines if the prediction is the same as the ground truth
(also known as reference or gold standard). Even though this
metric is easy and fast to compute, and provides straightfor-
ward understanding of model’s accuracy, it is too rigid that
it does not take into account the semantic similarity between
reference and prediction codes. It penalizes the model even
for white spaces and the variable names. Naturally, this is the
most difficult metric to satisfy.
BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) was originally introduced to
evaluate machine translation task. It measures the percentage
of overlapped n-grams between the ground truth and the
prediction generated by the model. It considers some criteria
to penalize the score, such as the sentence length. Overall,
this metric is less rigid than EM, and accepts small variations
between two predicted codes. However, since the Ngrams
order is not considered, it also ignores the semantic of the
generated code. Also, it can overestimate the model’s score.
CodeBLEU (Ren et al., 2020) uses the n-gram match
score of the BLEU metric between the ground truth and the
generated sequence. Furthermore, it takes into account the
code syntax, and code semantics by matching the AST and
DFG, respectively. This metric is the most accurate one so
far and is better adapted for code generation. Unlike BLEU
metric, it can be too strict and underestimate the model’s
score.
8. Results and Discussion
Main Results - Table 3 displays the hyper-parameters
utilized by state-of-the-art techniques during the pretraining
and fine-tuning stages to evaluate the CONCODE dataset.
Meanwhile, Table 4 presents the outcomes of diverse ap-
proaches on the same dataset. Since CONCODE was re-
leased in 2018, it has been the main benchmark to evaluate
Java code generation task. The first two lines of the table
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 9 of 16
Review of State-of-The-Art Methods for Java Code Generation from Natural Language Text
Metric
Proposed for
Merits
Limitations
Exact Match (EM)
- code completion
- code summarization
- easy to compute
- fastest in inference
- easy to interpret
- rigid metric
- semantic not considered
- penalizes even white spaces
BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002)
machine translation
- less rigid that EM
- easy to compute
- accepts multiple correct answers
- Ngram order not considered
- semantic not considered
- can be too optimistic
CodeBLEU (Ren et al., 2020)
code generation
- more accurate
- better adapted for code generation
- better handling of semantic
- slower in inference
- more difficult to compute
- can be too strict
Table 2
Summary of metrics used in literature
Model
Input / Output
Length
LR
Optimizer
Dropout
Batch
Size (B)
Training
steps
Vocab
Size
GPT-2 pretraining
1024
5e-5
Adam
0.1
32
-
50,000
PLBART pretraining
512 /512
1e-6
Adam
0.1, 0.5
2048
100K
50,004
PLBART fine-tuning
512 /512
3e-5
Adam
0.1
32
100K
50,004
CoTexT pretraining
1024 /1024
1e-3
Adam
-
128
200K
32,000
CoTexT-base fine-tuning
256 / 256
1e-3
Adam
-
128
45K
32,000
JaCoText-base fine-tuning
379 / 379
1e-3
Adam
-
128
60K
32,000
CodeBERT fine-tuning
512
5e-5
Adam
0.1
32
50,265
GraphCodeBERT fine-tuning
256
1e-4
Adam
-
64
-
CodeT5-base pretraining
512 / 256
2e-4
Adam
-
1024
150 epochs
32,100
CodeT5-base fine-tuning
320 / 150
5e-5
Adam
-
32
30 epochs
32,100
StructCoder pretraining
400 / 400
5e-5
AdamW
-
32
12K
32,100
StructCoder fine-tuning
325 / 155
5e-5
AdamW
-
32
100K
32,100
Table 3
Hyper-parameters used by state-of-the-art methods during pretraining and fine tuning
correspond to results of RNN-based methods. The latter ob-
tain the lowest scores. This finding is not surprising because
recurrent neural networks are not as large as Transformers,
and have limited generalization capability. In addition, they
suffer often from vanishing and exploding gradient problems
(Hochreiter, 1998; Squartini et al., 2003; Fadziso, 2020).
As for the Transfomer-based methods, most of encoder-
decoder methods are based on T5 (namely CodeT5, CoTexT,
JaCoText, and StructCoder) or BART (namely PLBART)
models. In the case of T5-base, the scores are obtained
after fine-tuning directly from the pretrained model. How-
ever, PLBART, CoTexT and JaCoText were pretrained using
source code datasets, and are based on previously trained
models.
Encoder-only methods are generally based on BERT.
Authors of CodeBERT and GraphCodeBERT did not orig-
inally used them for Java Code Generation on CONCODE
dataset. Instead, they used them in other tasks such as
code search and code documentation generation. Results
presented here were reported by Parvez et al. (2021) who
used the models for code generation. Note that CodeBERT
(Feng et al., 2020) is the first model to be pretrained on
various programming languages.
Decoder-only models presented by Lu et al. (2021) are
versions based on GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019). The first
model is directly fine-tuned from GPT-2 weights, while the
second and third models were trained on the CodeSearch-
Net dataset. The main difference is that CodeGPT-adapted
initializes the training process from the GPT-2 checkpoint,
and CodeGPT-2 performs a training from scratch.
Results show that performance of the Transformer-based
models varies significantly. The highest overall results are
obtained with the very recent state-of-the-art methods that
are based on T5 (Raffel et al., 2020) and GPT-2 (Radford
et al., 2019) models. The best model in terms of BLEU and
CodeBLEU metrics is CodeT5-large. This is intuitive insofar
as it has the largest number of parameters (770 M). However,
this boost in performance comes at an expense of longer
training time due to the large complexity of the model. The
best model in terms of Exact Match metric is REDCODER
(Parvez et al., 2021), indicating that it generates code that
is more similar syntactically to the ground-truth code. It is
noteworthy to mention that, on the one hand, results are very
comparable between CodeT5-large and REDCODER, while
on the other hand, there is a huge difference between their
number of parameters. In fact, CodeT5-large is x5.5 larger
than REDCODER. Depending on the application domain
and on the available computational resources, a compromise
should be done in order to prioritize the gain in memory or
the gain in performance.
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 10 of 16
Review of State-of-The-Art Methods for Java Code Generation from Natural Language Text
CodeBERT (Feng et al., 2020) and GraphCodeBERT
(Guo et al., 2021) have also achieved relatively high scores,
but not as high as the CodeT5-large and REDCODER. This
is likely due to the fact that they have fewer number of param-
eters (125M, 110M versus 770M and 140M, respectively).
Interestingly, REDCODER outperforms CodeGPT-2 even
thought it has less than half of its parameters only (140 M
vs 345 M). This proves the effectiveness of retrieval and
generation models SCODER-R and SCODER-G, the main
building blocks of REDCODER.
StructCoder (Tipirneni et al., 2022) and JaCoText
(Lopez Espejel et al., 2023) have very comparable EM
(22.35 vs 22.15) and BLEU (40.91 vs 39.07) results, with
StructCoder being slightly better than JaCoText. The latter
improves the results of CoText by an average of 2.5 points.
JaCotext increments CotexT by adding a pretraining phase in
which large input sequence were used. Finally, UniXcoder,
CodeT5-small, and 𝑇5𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒achieve the lowest results in
Transformer-based methods. Overall Code-T5-small is the
model that best balances the compromise between perfor-
mance and number of parameters, and is preferable is stricter
application domains.
Last but not least, results show that using pretraining
leads to a better performance than training from scratch. This
can be seen when comparing the performances of CodeGPT-
adapted and CodeGPT-2. As mentioned previously, the for-
mer is initialized from GPT-1 checkpoints, and the latter is
trained from scratch. This finding was also confirmed by
Feng et al. (2020) and Rozière et al. (2021). Therefore, we
recommend using pretrained models whose representation
is already stable and can facilitate the training of down-
streaming tasks.
Finally, since the highest achieved score on CONCODE
dataset is 45.08, there is still a large gap between the best Java
code generation methods and the ground truth. This means
that more effort is needed to tackle this task.
General Discussion - Over the years, generating code
through natural language has been a challenging task. The
main goal of this task is to increase programmers’ productiv-
ity by automating tedious and repetitive coding tasks. In this
paper, we present advancements in code generation within
the Java programming language. However, in order to fully
comprehend the subject matter, it is crucial to have a grasp of
the historical development of code generation in other fields.
Early attempts to generate code automatically involved
translating natural language requests into regular expres-
sions (Angluin, 1987; Ranta, 1998), logical forms based on
probabilistic categorial grammars (Zettlemoyer and Collins,
2005b), agent-specific language (Kate et al., 2005). These
approaches laid the groundwork for more sophisticated tech-
niques, such as semantic parsing (Wong and Mooney, 2006;
Lu et al., 2008) and SQL query generation (Miller et al.,
1996; Ramaswamy and Kleindienst, 2000), which were dis-
cussed in Section 3.
The previously mentioned methods utilize basic tech-
niques such as rule-based systems and simple statistical
methods to overcome the different tasks. However, as time
has progressed and technology has advanced, the demand
for more sophisticated techniques has increased to tackle
the most complex code generation obstacles. One of the
techniques that has made significant strides in this field is
the utilization of RNNs, such as LSTMs (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber, 1997), and later GRUs (Cho et al., 2014a).
These advanced techniques have greatly enhanced the ca-
pability to address the challenges of code generation. For
instance, Iyer et al. (2018) introduced CONCODE, a dataset
with the purpose of generating Java code through natural
language. The authors used a sequence-to-sequence model
based on RNNs, which was similar to other models used
in the field (Neelakantan et al., 2016; Ling et al., 2016). At
the time of the development of this model, the integration of
the attention mechanism (Gu et al., 2016a) was a significant
breakthrough in code and text generation.
Although models based on Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs) were initially promising, they were hindered by
several drawbacks. One of these was the vanishing gradient
problem (Hochreiter, 1998; Squartini et al., 2003; Fadziso,
2020), and also they were limited in their ability to effec-
tively process large amounts of input data. As a result, RNN-
based models often truncated natural language requests and
code sequences, leading to significant information loss and
incomplete generated code. Furthermore, due to Java’s strict
programming rules, the code generated by these models was
often riddled with syntax errors and could not be executed.
After the big success of Transformers Vaswani et al.
(2017) in NLP tasks, many Java Code Generation re-
searchers shifted their efforts to this neural network archi-
tecture, and proposed the above mentioned methods. The
most succesful models are based on T5 and GPT-2 mod-
els. CodeT5 models use a learning objective task that was
specifically designed to take advantage of the programming
language structure. In Wang et al. (2021), CodeT5-small
and CodeT5-base achieved remarkable improvements in the
performance of code generation task using bimodal dual
learning objective. Authors leverage the token type of iden-
tifiers from the AST such as function names and variables to
enrich the semantic features. Wang et al. (2021) studied three
objectives: Masked Span Prediction (MSP), Identifier Tag-
ging (IT), and Masked Identifier Prediction (MIP) . It turns
out that Masked Span Prediction is the most crucial objective
for learning the syntactic information in the generation tasks.
However, the simultaneous optimization of the three of them
achieve the best performance. Alternatively, Le et al. (2022)
show that CodeT5-large obtains higher scores than CodeT5-
small and CodeT5-base. This finding is intuitive since the
model architecture is more complex.
After the success of CodeT5, StructCoder (Tipirneni
et al., 2022) surged. It combines T5-base architecture with
ASTs. Moreover, authors use DFGs to make aware both
the encoder and decoder of the syntax and the data flow.
This system achieved better results than CodeT5 using T5-
base. Therefore, AST and DFG objectives are beneficial to
learn correctly the semantic and syntax of Java programming
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 11 of 16
Review of State-of-The-Art Methods for Java Code Generation from Natural Language Text
Score (↑
)
# params (↓)
Category
Model
EM
BLEU
CodeBLEU
RNN-based
Seq2Seq (Yin and Neubig, 2017)
6.65
21.29
-
-
Iyer et al. (2018)
8.60
22.11
-
-
Transformer-based Methods
Encoder-only
CodeBERT (Feng et al., 2020)
18.00
28.70
31.40
125M
GraphCodeBERT (Guo et al., 2021)
18.70
33.40
35.90
110M
Decoder-only
GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019)
17.35
25.37
29.69
345M
CodeGPT-2 (Lu et al., 2021)
18.35
28.69
32.71
124M
CodeGPT-adapted (Lu et al., 2021)
20.10
32.79
35.98
124M
Encoder-decoder
𝑇5𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒(Raffel et al., 2020)
18.65
32.74
35.95
220 M
CodeT5-small (Wang et al., 2021)
21.55
38.13
41.39
+dual-gen
19.95
39.02
42.21
60 M
+multi-task
20.15
35.89
38.83
CodeT5-base (Wang et al., 2021)
22.30
40.73
43.20
+dual-gen
22.70
41.48
44.10
220 M
+multi-task
21.15
37.54
40.01
CodeT5-large (Le et al., 2022)
22.65
42.66
45.08
770 M
PLBART (Ahmad et al., 2021)
18.75
36.69
38.52
140 M
CoTexT (Phan et al., 2021)
20.10
37.40
40.14
220 M
JaCoText (Lopez Espejel et al., 2023)
22.15
39.07
41.53
220 M
REDCODER (Parvez et al., 2021)
23.40
41.60
43.40
140 M
REDCODER-EXT (Parvez et al., 2021)
23.30
42.50
43.40
140 M
StructCoder (Tipirneni et al., 2022)
22.35
40.91
44.76
220 M
UniXcoder (Guo et al., 2022)
22.60
38.23
-
125M
Table 4
Results of Java code generation task on the CONCODE dataset. We present EM, BLEU, and CodeBLEU scores, as well as the
number of parameters for each method. Best results are in bold.
language. Another interesting models is REDCODER, the
latter is the first model to use two encoders. The first encoder
is used for the retrieval module to search for relevant code in
the dataset, the second one is part of the generator module
(encoder-decoder model) to generate the Java source code.
REDCODER achieves the best Exact Match (EM) score.
GPT-3 model in an improvement of GPT-2, introduced
by Brown et al. (2020). It is a breakthrough in Large Lan-
guage Models (LLMs), as it demonstrates the feasibility
of scaling the model and achieving competitive scores in
various tasks through few-shot learning. This model was the
starting point to many variants among which OpenAI’s Chat-
GPT chatbot (OpenIA, 2023). ChatGPT (OpenIA, 2023) is
based on the GPT-3.5 model, which has shown remarkable
performance in various tasks, such as machine translation
in multiple languages, automatic summarization, parts of
speech tagging, and even code generation through natural
language requests. In particular, ChatGPT has demonstrated
impressive proficiency in writing complex Java source code,
even for applications.
Despite the impressive results showed by ChatGPT, the
latter has many limitations, out of which, we mention the
following. (1) ChatGPT is not able to fully understand
natural language requests that are not well-formulated (such
as missing commas), and (2) ChatGPT is sensitive to the
prompts used by users to interact with it. The new version
of ChatGPT (called ChatGPT4) was proposed precisely to
augment the understanding capacity of it. ChatGPT4 has
made significant advancements in Java Code generation
from complex queries, as well as in working on multimodal
inputs such as text, images, and video.
ChatGPT4 is not the only attempt to improve ChatGPT,
other decoder-only competitors are trying hard to outper-
form it. Two examples of such systems are Google’s BARD
(Google, 2023) that is based on LaMDA model (Thoppilan
et al., 2022), and LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023) that is based
on Chinchilla model. It is noteworthy to mention that all very
recent LLMs have not been yet fully benchmarked on any of
state-of-the-art datasets for Java code generation, at the time
of writing this article.
9. Conclusions and Perspectives
In this paper, we presented a comparison review of
state-of-the-art methods in Java Code Generation using
CONCODE dataset. Many methods surged during the
last years and we categorized them based on their ar-
chitecture: (1) RNN-based methods, and (2) Transformer-
based methods. The latter are divided into three subcate-
gories: encoder-based methods, decoder-based methods, and
encoder-decoder-based methods. We propose the following
future directions:
• It would be interesting to use beam search algorithm
to detect syntax errors, similarly to what is done in
the semantic parser PICARD in SQL code generation.
(Scholak et al., 2021)
• One big drawback of current code generation metrics
is their high dependency on syntax similarity between
reference and predicted codes. It is really important
and right time to start focusing on handling the se-
mantic part of it. Even though that two codes are
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 12 of 16
Review of State-of-The-Art Methods for Java Code Generation from Natural Language Text
syntactically different, they still can perform the same
task.
• One straightforward line of work is to exploit more
Java datasets such as AlphaCode (Li et al., 2022),
PolyCoder (Xu et al., 2022), and AlphaCode (Li et al.,
2022) in the generation process, especially at the fine
tuning step. This is because current methods only use
Java data to pretrain the model, while they fine-tune
models on Python benchmarks.
• Despite the fact that large language models such as
ChatGPT, Bard and LLaMA provide extraordinary
performances in code generation, their number of
parameters is huge. Future research would focus on the
compression of such language models, or the proposal
of smaller-scale efficient language models. This will
be very useful for researcher and companies that do
not have enough computational resources or memory
(Tao et al., 2022).
• Alternatively, another perspective would be to work
on training time optimization, especially for large
models such as ChatGPT. For instance, continual
learning algorithms can be used in order to integrate
new data on-the-fly, without retraining the model from
scratch at each update (Gao et al., 2023).
• Current code generation models lack of reasoning
abilities. Another perspective would be to develop
more the common sense of language models to im-
prove their generation semantic, thus, their perfor-
mance (Huang and Chang, 2022).
References
Ahmad, W., Chakraborty, S., Ray, B., Chang, K.W., 2021. Unified pre-
training for program understanding and generation, in: Proceedings of
the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies.
Angluin, D., 1987. Learning regular sets from queries and counterexam-
ples. Information and Computation 75, 87–106. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0890540187900526, doi:https://
doi.org/10.1016/0890-5401(87)90052-6.
Ba, J.L., Kiros, J.R., Hinton, G.E., 2016.
Layer normalization.
URL:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1607.06450. cite arxiv:1607.06450.
Black, S., Biderman, S., Hallahan, E., Anthony, Q., Gao, L., Golding,
L., He, H., Leahy, C., McDonell, K., Phang, J., Pieler, M., Prashanth,
U.S., Purohit, S., Reynolds, L., Tow, J., Wang, B., Weinbach, S., 2022.
GPT-NeoX-20B: An open-source autoregressive language model, in:
Proceedings of BigScience Episode #5 – Workshop on Challenges &
Perspectives in Creating Large Language Models.
Branavan, S., Zettlemoyer, L., Barzilay, R., 2010. Reading between the
lines: Learning to map high-level instructions to commands, in: Proceed-
ings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, Association for Computational Linguistics, Uppsala, Swe-
den. pp. 1268–1277. URL: https://aclanthology.org/P10-1129.
Brown, T., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J.D., Dhariwal, P.,
Neelakantan, A., Shyam, P., Sastry, G., Askell, A., Agarwal, S., Herbert-
Voss, A., Krueger, G., Henighan, T., Child, R., Ramesh, A., Ziegler, D.,
Wu, J., Winter, C., Hesse, C., Chen, M., Sigler, E., Litwin, M., Gray, S.,
Chess, B., Clark, J., Berner, C., McCandlish, S., Radford, A., Sutskever,
I., Amodei, D., 2020.
Language models are few-shot learners, in:
Larochelle, H., Ranzato, M., Hadsell, R., Balcan, M., Lin, H. (Eds.), Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Curran Associates,
Inc.. pp. 1877–1901.
URL: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_
files/paper/2020/file/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.
Caballero, E., OpenAI, ., Sutskever, I., 2016.
Description2Code
Dataset.
URL: https://github.com/ethancaballero/description2code,
doi:10.5281/zenodo.5665051.
Chen, M., Tworek, J., Jun, H., Yuan, Q., Ponde, H., Kaplan, J., Edwards,
H., Burda, Y., Joseph, N., Brockman, G., Ray, A., Puri, R., Krueger, G.,
Petrov, M., Khlaaf, H., Sastry, G., Mishkin, P., Chan, B., Gray, S., Ryder,
N., Pavlov, M., Power, A., Kaiser, L., Bavarian, M., Winter, C., Tillet,
P., Such, F.P., Cummings, D.W., Plappert, M., Chantzis, F., Barnes, E.,
Herbert-Voss, A., Guss, W.H., Nichol, A., Babuschkin, I., Balaji, S.A.,
Jain, S., Carr, A., Leike, J., Achiam, J., Misra, V., Morikawa, E., Radford,
A., Knight, M.M., Brundage, M., Murati, M., Mayer, K., Welinder, P.,
McGrew, B., Amodei, D., McCandlish, S., Sutskever, I., Zaremba, W.,
2021a.
Evaluating large language models trained on code.
ArXiv
abs/2107.03374.
Chen, M., Tworek, J., Jun, H., Yuan, Q., Ponde, H., Kaplan, J., Edwards,
H., Burda, Y., Joseph, N., Brockman, G., Ray, A., Puri, R., Krueger, G.,
Petrov, M., Khlaaf, H., Sastry, G., Mishkin, P., Chan, B., Gray, S., Ryder,
N., Pavlov, M., Power, A., Kaiser, L., Bavarian, M., Winter, C., Tillet,
P., Such, F.P., Cummings, D.W., Plappert, M., Chantzis, F., Barnes, E.,
Herbert-Voss, A., Guss, W.H., Nichol, A., Babuschkin, I., Balaji, S.A.,
Jain, S., Carr, A., Leike, J., Achiam, J., Misra, V., Morikawa, E., Radford,
A., Knight, M.M., Brundage, M., Murati, M., Mayer, K., Welinder, P.,
McGrew, B., Amodei, D., McCandlish, S., Sutskever, I., Zaremba, W.,
2021b.
Evaluating large language models trained on code.
ArXiv
abs/2107.03374.
Cho, K., van Merriënboer, B., Gulcehre, C., Bahdanau, D., Bougares, F.,
Schwenk, H., Bengio, Y., 2014a. Learning phrase representations using
RNN encoder–decoder for statistical machine translation, in: Proceed-
ings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), pp. 1724–1734.
Cho, K., van Merrienboer, B., Gülçehre, Ç., Bahdanau, D., Bougares, F.,
Schwenk, H., Bengio, Y., 2014b. Learning phrase representations using
RNN encoder-decoder for statistical machine translation, in: Moschitti,
A., Pang, B., Daelemans, W. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2014 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2014,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar, A meeting of SIGDAT, a Special
Interest Group of the ACL, ACL. pp. 1724–1734.
Clark, K., Luong, M., Le, Q.V., Manning, C.D., 2020. ELECTRA: pre-
training text encoders as discriminators rather than generators.
8th
International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020,
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020 URL: https://openreview.
net/forum?id=r1xMH1BtvB.
Dai, Z., Yang, Z., Yang, Y., Carbonell, J.G., Le, Q.V., Salakhutdinov, R.,
2019. Transformer-xl: Attentive language models beyond a fixed-length
context, in: Korhonen, A., Traum, D.R., Màrquez, L. (Eds.), ACL (1),
Association for Computational Linguistics. pp. 2978–2988.
Devlin, J., Chang, M., Lee, K., Toutanova, K., 2019. BERT: pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding, in: Burstein,
J., Doran, C., Solorio, T. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT 2019, Min-
neapolis, MN, USA, June 2-7, 2019, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers),
Association for Computational Linguistics. pp. 4171–4186.
Driess, D., Xia, F., Sajjadi, M.S.M., Lynch, C., Chowdhery, A., Ichter, B.,
Wahid, A., Tompson, J., Vuong, Q., Yu, T., Huang, W., Chebotar, Y.,
Sermanet, P., Duckworth, D., Levine, S., Vanhoucke, V., Hausman, K.,
Toussaint, M., Greff, K., Zeng, A., Mordatch, I., Florence, P., 2023.
Palm-e: An embodied multimodal language model.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.03378 .
Fadziso, T., 2020.
Overcoming the vanishing gradient problem during
learning recurrent neural nets (rnn). Asian Journal of Applied Science
and Engineering 9, 207–218.
Feng, Z., Guo, D., Tang, D., Duan, N., Feng, X., Gong, M., Shou, L., Qin,
B., Liu, T., Jiang, D., Zhou, M., 2020. Codebert: A pre-trained model
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 13 of 16
Review of State-of-The-Art Methods for Java Code Generation from Natural Language Text
for programming and natural languages. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/
2002.08155. cite arxiv:2002.08155Comment: Accepted to Findings of
EMNLP 2020. 12 pages.
Gao, S., Zhang, H., Gao, C., Wang, C., 2023. Keeping pace with ever-
increasing data: Towards continual learning of code intelligence models.
CoRR abs/2302.03482.
Google, 2023. An overview of bard: an early experiment with generative
ai. URL: https://ai.google/static/documents/google-about-bard.pdf.
Graves, A., Wayne, G., Danihelka, I., 2014. Neural turing machines. arxiv
Cite arxiv:1410.5401.
Gu, J., Lu, Z., Li, H., Li, V.O.K., 2016a. Incorporating copying mechanism
in sequence-to-sequence learning. CoRR abs/1603.06393.
Gu, X., Zhang, H., Zhang, D., Kim, S., 2016b.
Deep api learning, in:
Proceedings of the 2016 24th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium
on Foundations of Software Engineering, Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA. p. 631–642. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1145/2950290.2950334, doi:10.1145/2950290.2950334.
Guo, D., Lu, S., Duan, N., Wang, Y., Zhou, M., Yin, J., 2022. Unixcoder:
Unified cross-modal pre-training for code representation. arxiv .
Guo, D., Ren, S., Lu, S., Feng, Z., Tang, D., Liu, S., Zhou, L., Duan, N., Svy-
atkovskiy, A., Fu, S., Tufano, M., Deng, S.K., Clement, C.B., Drain, D.,
Sundaresan, N., Yin, J., Jiang, D., Zhou, M., 2021. Graphcodebert: Pre-
training code representations with data flow. 9th International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria,
May 3-7, 2021 URL: https://openreview.net/forum?id=jLoC4ez43PZ.
Hernandez, D., Kaplan, J., Henighan, T., McCandlish, S., 2021. Scaling
laws for transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.01293 .
Hochreiter, S., 1998.
The vanishing gradient problem during learning
recurrent neural nets and problem solutions. International Journal of
Uncertainty, Fuzziness and Knowledge-Based Systems 6, 107–116.
Hochreiter, S., Schmidhuber, J., 1997. Long short-term memory. Neural
computation 9, 1735–1780.
Hoffmann, J., Borgeaud, S., Mensch, A., Buchatskaya, E., Cai, T., Ruther-
ford, E., de Las Casas, D., Hendricks, L.A., Welbl, J., Clark, A., Hen-
nigan, T., Noland, E., Millican, K., van den Driessche, G., Damoc, B.,
Guy, A., Osindero, S., Simonyan, K., Elsen, E., Rae, J.W., Vinyals, O.,
Sifre, L., 2022. Training Compute-Optimal Large Language Models.
arXiv e-prints .
Huang, J., Chang, K.C.C., 2022.
Towards reasoning in large language
models: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10403 .
Husain, H., Wu, H., Gazit, T., Allamanis, M., Brockschmidt, M.,
2019. Codesearchnet challenge: Evaluating the state of semantic code
search. CoRR abs/1909.09436. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1909.09436,
arXiv:1909.09436.
Inc., A., 2022. Atcoder. https://atcoder.jp/. Accessed: 2022-10-28.
Iyer, S., Konstas, I., Cheung, A., Zettlemoyer, L., 2018. Mapping language
to code in programmatic context, in: Proceedings of the 2018 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Association for
Computational Linguistics, Brussels, Belgium. pp. 1643–1652. URL:
https://aclanthology.org/D18-1192, doi:10.18653/v1/D18-1192.
Joulin, A., Mikolov, T., 2015. Inferring algorithmic patterns with stack-
augmented recurrent nets. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 28. URL: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
2015/file/26657d5ff9020d2abefe558796b99584-Paper.pdf.
Kate, R.J., Wong, Y.W., Mooney, R.J., 2005. Learning to transform natural
to formal languages, in: Proceedings of the 20th National Conference on
Artificial Intelligence - Volume 3, AAAI Press. p. 1062–1068.
Kingma, D.P., Ba, J., 2015. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.
3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015,
San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
Kocetkov, D., Li, R., Ben Allal, L., Li, J., Mou, C., Muños Ferrandis, C.,
Hughes, S., Wolf, T., Bahdanau, D., von Werra, L., de Vries, H., 2022.
The stack: 3 tb of permissively licensed source code. arxiv .
Kumar, A., Irsoy, O., Ondruska, P., Iyyer, M., Bradbury, J., Gulrajani, I.,
Zhong, V., Paulus, R., Socher, R., 2016. Ask me anything: Dynamic
memory networks for natural language processing, in: Balcan, M.F.,
Weinberger, K.Q. (Eds.), Proceedings of The 33rd International Con-
ference on Machine Learning, PMLR, New York, New York, USA. pp.
1378–1387. URL: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v48/kumar16.html.
Kushman, N., Barzilay, R., 2013a. Using semantic unification to generate
regular expressions from natural language, in: Proceedings of the 2013
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Association for
Computational Linguistics, Atlanta, Georgia. pp. 826–836. URL: https:
//aclanthology.org/N13-1103.
Kushman, N., Barzilay, R., 2013b. Using semantic unification to generate
regular expressions from natural language, in: Proceedings of the 2013
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Association for
Computational Linguistics, Atlanta, Georgia. pp. 826–836. URL: https:
//aclanthology.org/N13-1103.
Le, H., Wang, Y., Gotmare, A.D., Savarese, S., Hoi, S.C.H., 2022. Coderl:
Mastering code generation through pretrained models and deep rein-
forcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.01780 .
Lewis, M., Liu, Y., Goyal, N., Ghazvininejad, M., Mohamed, A., Levy, O.,
Stoyanov, V., Zettlemoyer, L., 2020. BART: Denoising sequence-to-
sequence pre-training for natural language generation, translation, and
comprehension, in: Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, Association for Computational
Linguistics, Online. pp. 7871–7880. URL: https://aclanthology.org/
2020.acl-main.703, doi:10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.703.
Li, Y., Choi, D., Chung, J., Kushman, N., Schrittwieser, J., Leblond, R.,
Eccles, T., Keeling, J., Gimeno, F., Dal Lago, A., Hubert, T., Choy,
P., de Masson d’Autume, C., Babuschkin, I., Chen, X., Huang, P.S.,
Welbl, J., Gowal, S., Cherepanov, A., Molloy, J., Mankowitz, D., Suther-
land Robson, E., Kohli, P., de Freitas, N., Kavukcuoglu, K., Vinyals, O.,
2022. Competition-level code generation with alphacode. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.07814 .
Ling, W., Blunsom, P., Grefenstette, E., Hermann, K.M., Kočiský, T., Wang,
F., Senior, A., 2016.
Latent predictor networks for code generation,
in: Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 599–609.
Lopez Espejel, J., Alassan, M.S.Y., Dahhane, W., Ettifouri, E.H., 2023.
Jacotext: A pretrained model for java code-text generation. International
Journal of Computer and Systems Engineering 17, 100 – 105.
Loshchilov, I., Hutter, F., 2019. Decoupled weight decay regularization.
7th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019,
New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019 URL: https://openreview.net/
forum?id=Bkg6RiCqY7.
Lu, S., Guo, D., Ren, S., Huang, J., Svyatkovskiy, A., Blanco, A., Clement,
C.B., Drain, D., Jiang, D., Tang, D., Li, G., Zhou, L., Shou, L., Zhou,
L., Tufano, M., Gong, M., Zhou, M., Duan, N., Sundaresan, N., Deng,
S.K., Fu, S., Liu, S., 2021. Codexglue: A machine learning benchmark
dataset for code understanding and generation. ArXiv abs/2102.04664.
Lu, W., Ng, H.T., Lee, W.S., Zettlemoyer, L.S., 2008. A generative model
for parsing natural language to meaning representations, in: Proceedings
of the 2008 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, Association for Computational Linguistics, Honolulu, Hawaii.
pp. 783–792. URL: https://aclanthology.org/D08-1082.
Miller, S., Stallard, D., Bobrow, R., Schwartz, R., 1996. A fully statistical
approach to natural language interfaces, in: 34th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, Santa Cruz, California, USA. pp. 55–61. URL:
https://aclanthology.org/P96-1008, doi:10.3115/981863.981871.
Mirzayanov, M., 2020.
Codeforces: Results of 2020.
URL: https://
codeforces.com/blog/entry/89502.
Mou, L., Men, R., Li, G., Zhang, L., Jin, Z., 2015.
On end-to-end
program generation from user intention by deep neural networks. CoRR
abs/1510.07211.
URL: http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/journals/corr/
corr1510.html#MouMLZJ15.
Neelakantan, A., Le, Q.V., Sutskever, I., 2016. Neural programmer: Induc-
ing latent programs with gradient descent. 4th International Conference
on Learning Representations, ICLR 2016, San Juan, Puerto Rico, May
2-4, 2016, Conference Track Proceedings URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 14 of 16
Review of State-of-The-Art Methods for Java Code Generation from Natural Language Text
1511.04834.
Nocedal, J., 1980. Updating quasi-newton matrices with limited storage.
Mathematics of computation 35, 773–782.
OpenIA, 2023. Gpt-4 technical report. arxiv URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/
2303.08774.pdf.
Oracle, 2022. javadoc. https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/technotes/
tools/windows/javadoc.html. Accessed: 2022-09-05.
Ouyang, L., Wu, J., Jiang, X., Almeida, D., Wainwright, C.L., Mishkin,
P., Zhang, C., Agarwal, S., Slama, K., Ray, A., Schulman, J., Hilton, J.,
Kelton, F., Miller, L.E., Simens, M., Askell, A., Welinder, P., Christiano,
P.F., Leike, J., Lowe, R.J., 2022. Training language models to follow
instructions with human feedback. ArXiv abs/2203.02155.
Pang, B., Hayashi, H., Tu, L., Wang, H., Zhou, Y., Savarese, Silvio Xiong,
C., 2022. Codegen: An open large language model for code with multi-
turn program synthesis. ArXiv .
Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., Zhu, W.J., 2002.
Bleu: a method
for automatic evaluation of machine translation, in: Proceedings of the
40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
Association for Computational Linguistics, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
USA. pp. 311–318. URL: https://aclanthology.org/P02-1040, doi:10.
3115/1073083.1073135.
Parvez, M.R., Ahmad, W.U., Chakraborty, S., Ray, B., Chang, K., 2021.
Retrieval augmented code generation and summarization.
CoRR
abs/2108.11601.
Phan, L., Tran, H., Le, D., Nguyen, H., Annibal, J., Peltekian, A., Ye,
Y., 2021. CoTexT: Multi-task learning with code-text transformer, in:
Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Natural Language Processing for
Programming (NLP4Prog 2021).
Puri, R., Kung, D., Janssen, G., Zhang, W., Domeniconi, G., Zolotov, V.,
Dolby, J., Chen, J., Choudhury, M., Decker, L., Thost, V., Buratti, L.,
Pujar, S., Finkler, U., 2021a. Project codenet: A large-scale ai for code
dataset for learning a diversity of coding tasks. arxiv .
Puri, R., Kung, D.S., Janssen, G., Zhang, W., Domeniconi, G., Zolotov, V.,
Dolby, J., Chen, J., Choudhury, M., Decker, L., Thost, V., Buratti, L.,
Pujar, S., Ramji, S., Finkler, U., Malaika, S., Reiss, F., 2021b. Project
codenet: A large-scale ai for code dataset for learning a diversity of
coding tasks. ArXiv arXiv:2105.12655.
Radford, A., Wu, J., Child, R., Luan, D., Amodei, D., Sutskever, I., 2019.
Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. arxiv .
Rae, J.W., Borgeaud, S., Cai, T., Millican, K., Hoffmann, J., Song, F.,
Aslanides, J., Henderson, S., Ring, R., Young, S., Rutherford, E., Hen-
nigan, T., Menick, J., Cassirer, A., Powell, R., van den Driessche, G.,
Hendricks, L.A., Rauh, M., Huang, P.S., Glaese, A., Welbl, J., Dathathri,
S., Huang, S., Uesato, J., Mellor, J., Higgins, I., Creswell, A., McAleese,
N., Wu, A., Elsen, E., Jayakumar, S., Buchatskaya, E., Budden, D.,
Sutherland, E., Simonyan, K., Paganini, M., Sifre, L., Martens, L.,
Li, X.L., Kuncoro, A., Nematzadeh, A., Gribovskaya, E., Donato, D.,
Lazaridou, A., Mensch, A., Lespiau, J.B., Tsimpoukelli, M., Grigorev,
N., Fritz, D., Sottiaux, T., Pajarskas, M., Pohlen, T., Gong, Z., Toyama,
D., de Masson d’Autume, C., Li, Y., Terzi, T., Mikulik, V., Babuschkin,
I., Clark, A., de Las Casas, D., Guy, A., Jones, C., Bradbury, J., Johnson,
M., Hechtman, B., Weidinger, L., Gabriel, I., Isaac, W., Lockhart, E.,
Osindero, S., Rimell, L., Dyer, C., Vinyals, O., Ayoub, K., Stanway, J.,
Bennett, L., Hassabis, D., Kavukcuoglu, K., Irving, G., 2021. Scaling
Language Models: Methods, Analysis & Insights from Training Go-
pher. arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2112.11446doi:10.48550/arXiv.2112.11446,
arXiv:2112.11446.
Raffel, C., Shazeer, N., Roberts, A., Lee, K., Narang, S., Matena, M., Zhou,
Y., Li, W., Liu, P.J., 2020. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a
unified text-to-text transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research
21, 1–67. URL: http://jmlr.org/papers/v21/20-074.html.
Ramaswamy, G.N., Kleindienst, J., 2000. Hierarchical feature-based trans-
lation for scalable natural language understanding. Sixth International
Conference on Spoken Language Processing .
Ranta, A., 1998.
A multilingual natural-language interface to regular
expressions, in: Proceedings of the International Workshop on Finite
State Methods in Natural Language Processing, Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, USA. p. 79–90.
Reed, S.E., de Freitas, N., 2016.
Neural programmer-interpreters.
4th
International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2016, San
Juan, Puerto Rico, May 2-4, 2016, Conference Track Proceedings URL:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.06279.
Ren, S., Guo, D., Lu, S., Zhou, L., Liu, S., Tang, D., Zhou, M., Blanco,
A., Ma, S., 2020. Codebleu: a method for automatic evaluation of code
synthesis. ArXiv abs/2009.10297.
Rozière, B., Lachaux, M., Szafraniec, M., Lample, G., 2021. DOBF: A
deobfuscation pre-training objective for programming languages. CoRR
abs/2102.07492.
Roziere, B., Lachaux, M.A., Chanussot, L., Lample, G., 2020.
Un-
supervised translation of programming languages, in: Larochelle, H.,
Ranzato, M., Hadsell, R., Balcan, M., Lin, H. (Eds.), Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, Curran Associates, Inc.. pp. 20601–
20611. URL: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
file/ed23fbf18c2cd35f8c7f8de44f85c08d-Paper.pdf.
Scholak, T., Schucher, N., Bahdanau, D., 2021. PICARD: Parsing incre-
mentally for constrained auto-regressive decoding from language mod-
els, in: Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, Association for Computational Linguis-
tics. pp. 9895–9901. URL: https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.
779.
Squartini, S., Hussain, A., Piazza, F., 2003. Preprocessing based solution
for the vanishing gradient problem in recurrent neural networks, in:
Proceedings of the 2003 International Symposium on Circuits and
Systems, 2003. ISCAS’03., IEEE. pp. V–V.
Tao, C., Hou, L., Zhang, W., Shang, L., Jiang, X., Liu, Q., Luo, P., Wong,
N., 2022. Compression of generative pre-trained language models via
quantization. CoRR abs/2203.10705.
Thoppilan, R., Freitas, D., Hall, J., Shazeer, N., Kulshreshtha, A., Cheng,
H.T., Jin, A., Bos, T., Baker, L., Du, Y., Li, Y., Lee, H., Zheng, H.,
Ghafouri, A., Menegali, M., Huang, Y., Krikun, M., Lepikhin, D., Qin,
J., Le, Q., 2022. Lamda: Language models for dialog applications. arXiv
.
Tipirneni, S., Zhu, M., Reddy, C.K., 2022.
Structcoder: Structure-
aware transformer for code generation.
CoRR abs/2206.05239.
URL: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2206.05239, doi:10.48550/arXiv.
2206.05239, arXiv:2206.05239.
Touvron, H., Lavril, T., Izacard, G., Martinet, X., Lachaux, M.A., Lacroix,
T., Rozière, B., Goyal, N., Hambro, E., Azhar, F., et al., 2023. Llama:
Open and efficient foundation language models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.13971 .
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N.,
Kaiser, Ł., Polosukhin, I., 2017. Attention is all you need, in: Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 5998–6008.
Wang, Y., Wang, W., Joty, S., Hoi, S.C., 2021. CodeT5: Identifier-aware
unified pre-trained encoder-decoder models for code understanding and
generation, in: Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing.
Watanobe, Y., 2022. Aizu online judge. https://onlinejudge.u-aizu.ac.jp.
Accessed: 2022-10-28.
Wong, Y.W., Mooney, R., 2006.
Learning for semantic parsing with
statistical machine translation, in: Proceedings of the Human Language
Technology Conference of the NAACL, Main Conference, Association
for Computational Linguistics, New York City, USA. pp. 439–446.
URL: https://aclanthology.org/N06-1056.
Xu, F.F., Alon, U., Neubig, G., Hellendoorn, V.J., 2022.
A systematic
evaluation of large language models of code, in: Proceedings of the 6th
ACM SIGPLAN International Symposium on Machine Programming,
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. p. 1–10.
Yin, P., Deng, B., Chen, E., Vasilescu, B., Neubig, G., 2018. Learning to
mine aligned code and natural language pairs from stack overflow, in:
Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Mining Software
Repositories, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA. p. 476–486.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3196398.3196408,
doi:10.1145/3196398.3196408.
Yin, P., Neubig, G., 2017. A syntactic neural model for general-purpose
code generation, in: Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 15 of 16
Review of State-of-The-Art Methods for Java Code Generation from Natural Language Text
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp.
440–450.
Zettlemoyer, L.S., Collins, M., 2005a. Learning to map sentences to logical
form: Structured classification with probabilistic categorial grammars,
in: Proceedings of the Twenty-First Conference on Uncertainty in Arti-
ficial Intelligence, AUAI Press, Arlington, Virginia, USA. p. 658–666.
Zettlemoyer, L.S., Collins, M., 2005b. Learning to map sentences to logical
form: Structured classification with probabilistic categorial grammars,
in: Proceedings of the Twenty-First Conference on Uncertainty in Arti-
ficial Intelligence, AUAI Press, Arlington, Virginia, USA. p. 658–666.
Zhang, B., Sennrich, R., 2019. Root Mean Square Layer Normalization.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32 URL: https:
//openreview.net/references/pdf?id=S1qBAf6rr.
Zhang, J., Zhao, Y., Saleh, M., Liu, P.J., 2020. Pegasus: Pre-training with
extracted gap-sentences for abstractive summarization, in: Proceedings
of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11328–
11339.
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 16 of 16
