Title: Deep Natural Language Processing for LinkedIn Search Systems
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2108.08252v1
--------------------------------------------------

Deep Natural Language Processing for LinkedIn Search Systems
Weiwei Guo, Xiaowei Liu, Sida Wang, Michaeel Kazi,
Zhoutong Fu, Huiji Gao, Jun Jia, Liang Zhang, Bo Long
{wguo,xwli,sidwang,mikazi,zfu,hgao,jjia,lizhang,blong}@linkedin.com
LinkedIn, Mountain View, CA
Abstract
Many search systems work with large amounts
of natural language data, e.g., search queries,
user proﬁles and documents, where deep learn-
ing based natural language processing tech-
niques (deep NLP) can be of great help. In this
paper, we introduce a comprehensive study of
applying deep NLP techniques to ﬁve repre-
sentative tasks in search engines. Through the
model design and experiments of the ﬁve tasks,
readers can ﬁnd answers to three important
questions: (1) When is deep NLP helpful/not
helpful in search systems? (2) How to address
latency challenges? (3) How to ensure model
robustness? This work builds on existing ef-
forts of LinkedIn search, and is tested at scale
on a commercial search engine. We believe
our experiences can provide useful insights for
the industry and research communities.
1
Introduction
Search engines are typically complicated ecosys-
tems that contain many components (Figure 1), e.g.,
named entity recognition, query-document match-
ing, etc. A common part of these search compo-
nents is that they all deal with large amounts of text
data, such as queries, user proﬁles and documents.
Deep learning has shown great success in NLP
tasks (LeCun et al., 2015), indicating its poten-
tial in search systems. However, developing and
deploying deep NLP models for industry search en-
gines requires considering three challenges (Croft
et al., 2010; Mitra et al., 2018). Firstly, serving
latency constraints preclude complex models from
being deployed in production. In addition, directly
trained deep learning models can have robustness
issues, which hurts user experience when a model
fails on simple queries. The last challenge is ef-
fectiveness: often production models are strong
baselines that are trained on millions of data ex-
amples with many handcrafted features, and have
been tweaked for years.
In this paper, we focus on developing practi-
cal solutions to tackle the three challenges, and
share real world experiences. As shown in Figure
2, we have picked ﬁve representative search tasks
that cover the classic NLP problems. For each
task, we investigate the unique challenges, provide
practical deep NLP solutions, and share insights
from the ofﬂine/online experiments. By providing
a comprehensive study, we hope the readers can not
only learn how to handle the different challenges in
search systems, but also generalize and apply deep
NLP to new tasks in other industry productions
such as recommender systems.
The contribution of the paper is:
• To our best knowledge, this is the ﬁrst compre-
hensive study for applying deep learning in ﬁve
representative NLP tasks in search engine produc-
tions. For each task, we highlight the difference
between classic NLP task and search task, pro-
vide practical solutions and deploy the models in
LinkedIn’s commercial search engines.
• While previous works focus on ofﬂine relevance
improvement, we strive to reach a balance be-
tween latency, robustness and effectiveness. We
summarize the observations and best practice
across ﬁve tasks into lessons, which would be
a valuable resource for search engines and other
industry applications.
2
Search Systems at LinkedIn
LinkedIn provides multiple vertical searches, each
corresponding to a document type, e.g., people, job,
company, etc. In this paper, the experiments are
conducted on 3 vertical searches (people search,
job search, help center search), and federated
search. Federated search retrieves the documents
from all vertical searches and blends them into the
same search result page.
A typical search system is shown in Figure 1.
There are three main components: (1) Language
arXiv:2108.08252v1  [cs.CL]  30 Jul 2021
Language 
Understanding
Query 
Intention
NER
Documents
Entity 
Disambiguation
Language 
Generation
Auto 
Completion
Spell Check
Query 
Suggestion
Raw query
Doc Retrieval 
& Ranking
Retrieval
Ranking
…...
…...
Figure 1: Overview of a search system.
Sequential Modeling
Classification
(Query Intent)
to sequence 
label
to 
documents
Sequence Generation
(Query Suggestion)
to next 
sequence
Sequence Completion
(Auto Completion)
to completed 
sequence
Sequential Labeling
(Query Tagging)
to word 
label
Ranking
(Search Ranking)
Figure 2: Deep NLP models are applied to ﬁve representative
search tasks.
understanding to construct important features for
the other two components; (2) Language genera-
tion to suggest news queries that are more likely
to lead to desirable search results. (3) Document
retrieval & ranking to produce the ﬁnal results of
search systems. Usually the whole process should
be ﬁnished within several hundreds of millisec-
onds. In this paper, we selected representative
search tasks (Figure 2) that reﬂect ﬁve common
NLP tasks: classiﬁcation, ranking, sequence label-
ing, sequence completion and generation.
It is worth noting that search datasets are dif-
ferent from classic NLP task datasets, mainly in
two aspects: (1) Data genre. The data unit of clas-
sic NLP datasets (Pang and Lee, 2005; Hu and
Liu, 2004) is complete sentences with dozens of
words, while queries only have several keywords
without grammar. (2) Training data size. Classic
NLP datasets are human annotated, therefore the
size is usually around tens of thousands of sen-
tences, while search tasks have millions of training
examples derived from click-through search log.
3
Search Tasks
In this section, we introduce each speciﬁc task,
outline the challenges, show how to overcome the
challenges, and analyze the ofﬂine/online experi-
ment results. The experiments are conducted on
the LinkedIn English market. Ofﬂine results are
reported on the test set. All reported online metrics
are statistically signiﬁcant with p<0.05.
3.1
Query Intent Prediction
Introduction:
Query intent prediction (Kang
and Kim, 2003; Hu et al., 2009) is an important
product in modern search engines. At LinkedIn,
query intent is used in federated search, and it
predicts the probability of a user’s intent towards
seven vertical searches: people, job, feed, com-
pany, group, school, event. The predicted intent
is an important feature leveraged by downstream
tasks such as search result blending (Li et al., 2008)
to rank higher the documents from relevant vertical
searches.
Approach: CNN has achieved signiﬁcant perfor-
mance gains in text classiﬁcation problems (Kim,
2014). Therefore, we also use CNN for the query
intent task.
In our approach, we combine the
extracted text embedding with handcrafted fea-
tures, and use a hidden layer to enable feature non-
linearity.
Experiments:
The label is inferred from click-
through behaviors in the search log: if a user
clicked on a document from one of the seven verti-
cals, then the query is assigned the corresponding
vertical label. We use 24M queries for training,
and 50K for dev and test each. We also compare
with bidirectional LSTM (Graves et al., 2013). For
the CNN and LSTM model, the vocabulary size is
100k with word embedding dimension as 64; hid-
den layer dimension is 200; CNN has 128 ﬁlters of
window size 3 (tri-grams); LSTM has hidden state
size of 128.
Results: The baseline model is the production
model, logistic regression on bag-of-words features
and other handcrafted features. The ofﬂine rele-
vance and latency performance are shown in Table
1. Both CNN and LSTM models outperform the
production model, meaning that the features auto-
matically extracted by CNN/LSTM can capture the
query intents. For online experiments (Table 2),
we choose CNN instead of LSTM, since CNN is
faster than LSTM and has similar relevance perfor-
mance. The online results show CNN increases the
job documents click metrics.
3.2
Query Tagging
Introduction:
The goal of query tagging is to
identify the named entities in queries. At LinkedIn,
Accuracy
P99 Latency
LR (baseline)
-
-
CNN
+1.49%
+0.45ms
LSTM
+1.61%
+0.96ms
Table 1: Ofﬂine experiments of query intent task.
Metrics
Percentage Lift
CTR@5 of job posts
+0.43%
Table 2: Online experiments for CNN based query intent
over production baseline. CTR@5 calculates the proportion
of searches that received a click at top 5 items.
we are interested in 7 types of entities: ﬁrst name,
last name, company name, school name, geolo-
cation, title, and skill. After entities are identi-
ﬁed, many useful features can be constructed for
downstream tasks such as query intent prediction
or search ranking.
Approach: Query tagging is a named entity recog-
nition task on query data. The production model
uses three categories of features: character based,
word based and lexicon based. It is worth noting
that we are able to extract powerful lexicon features
leveraging large amount of user generated data, i.e.,
collecting the lexicon items from the corresponding
ﬁelds of 600 million member proﬁles. Because of
this, we choose semi-markov conditional random
ﬁeld (SCRF) (Sarawagi and Cohen, 2005) to train
the production model, which can better exploit lex-
icon features than CRF (Lafferty et al., 2001).
The bidirectional LSTM-CRF architecture (Lam-
ple et al., 2016) proves to be a successful model on
classic NLP datasets (Sang and De Meulder, 2003).
We further extend it to bidirectional LSTM-SCRF.
Essentially, the deep part, Bidirectional LSTM, is
used to replace the word-based features.
Experiments: Queries from LinkedIn federated
search are collected and manually annotated: 100K
training queries, 5K for dev and test each. For
LSTM based models, word embedding size is 50;
hidden size is 50.
Results: The traditional method SCRF achieves
the best results in Table 3. LSTM-SCRF has all the
handcrafted features except word based features,
however, it cannot outperform the SCRF baseline,
and neither can LSTM-SCRF-all with all hand-
Handcrafted Ftrs
F1
SCRF (baseline)
char/word/lexicon
-
CRF
char/word/lexicon
−0.6%
SCRF-nolex
char/word
−6.1%
LSTM-SCRF
char/lexicon
−0.3%
LSTM-SCRF-all
char/word/lexicon
−0.1%
Table 3: Query tagging results, measured by F1 score.
crafted features. Due to no signiﬁcant ofﬂine exper-
iment gain, these models are not deployed online.
We believe the major reason is the strength of lex-
icon features, therefore LSTM does not help much.
The SCRF-nolex (without lexicon based features)
performance also indicates lexicon features are the
most important. Meanwhile, looking at the data,
we found most entities are already covered by the
lexicons that are built on large scales of data. Other
reasons could be due to the data genre: Queries
are much shorter than natural language sentences.
Therefore, LSTM’s ability to extract long distance
dependencies is not helpful in this task.
3.3
Query auto completion
Introduction:
Query auto completion (Bar-
Yossef and Kraus, 2011) is a language generation
task. The input is a preﬁx typed by a user, and the
goal is to return a list of completed queries that
match the user’s intent. Query auto completion has
a strict latency requirement, as the model needs to
return results for each keystroke.
Approach: The traditional auto completion sys-
tem has two separate steps: candidate generation
and candidate ranking (Cai and De Rijke, 2016).
In our production model, candidate generation
use heuristics to extend a query preﬁx to a set of
completed query candidates (Mitra and Craswell,
2015). Candidate ranking uses xgboost (Chen and
Guestrin, 2016) to rank the candidates with hand-
crafted features, with the most effective feature
being the query frequency.
Since query auto completion is a language gener-
ation task, an ideal model is neural language model-
ing (Mikolov et al., 2010) to score the probability of
a completed query (Park and Chiba, 2017a). While
this approach achieves impressive relevance results,
the computation time is too long for production de-
ployment (Wang et al., 2018).
To solve the latency challenge, we apply unnor-
malized language model (Sethy et al., 2015) to
candidate ranking phase. This is motivated by the
observation that majority of time is spent on the
probability normalization over all vocabulary. The
normalization factor is approximated by:
log P (wi|hi) = log
exp(v⊤
i hi)
P
j exp(v⊤
j hi)
= v⊤
i hi −log
X
j
exp(v⊤
j hi) = v⊤
i hi −b
, where b is another parameter to estimate.
Experiments: The model is applied on job search
query auto completion. We follow the experiment
Ranking Models
MRR@10
P99 Latency
xgboost
-
-
Language model
+3.2%
+53ms
Unnormalized LM
+3.1%
+3ms
Table 4: Ofﬂine experiments of query auto completion task.
MRR@10 is the mean reciprocal rank of the correct answer
in top 10 list. P99 latency is the 99 percentile latency.
Metric
Lift
Job Views
+0.43%
Job Applies
+1.45%
Table 5: Online experiments of query auto completion on job
search. "Job Views"/"Job Applies" is the number of job posts
clicked/applied from search, respectively.
setting and the training/dev/test splitting schema
deﬁned in (Mitra and Craswell, 2015). The LSTM
has one layer with a 100 dimension hidden state.
The vocabulary is 100K words with 100 dimen-
sional embeddings.
Table 4 and 5 show the ofﬂine/online results, re-
spectively. Compared to language model approach,
our unnormalized language model approach can
reach the same level of relevance performance,
while signiﬁcantly reducing the latency.
3.4
Query Suggestion
Introduction: Query suggestion (Fonseca et al.,
2005; Cao et al., 2008) is another essential part of
our search experience. Many search engines offer
such a function, e.g., Google’s "Searches related
to ...", and LinkedIn’s "People also search for", to
assist users to seek relevant information.
Approach:
Our production approach is based
on frequency counting of search queries. To be
speciﬁc, it collects query reformulation pairs from
search log, and for each input query, sorts the sug-
gestions by the query pair frequency. Heuristics are
used to make sure the query pairs are semantically
related: (1) the query pairs must be in the same
session, where sessions are deﬁned by queries sep-
arated by no more than 10 minutes; (2) two queries
must share one common word.
We formulate the problem as machine translation
in the sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) framework
(Sutskever et al., 2014), of which the main beneﬁt
is to generalize to infrequent and unseen queries.
We ﬁnd the deep learning model can overﬁt to re-
formulation pairs if we are not careful. When the
training data contains a query generalization, e.g.
"research scientist –> scientist", the trained model
will degrade to only delete words, to produce low
perplexity suggestions. We handle this by remov-
ing these types of examples from the training data.
MRR@10
Coverage
Frequency baseline
-
67.3%
Seq2Seq
+11.1%
100%
Table 6: Ofﬂine experiments for query suggestion task.
Metric
Lift
Job Views
+0.6%
Job Applies
+1.0%
Table 7: Online performance of query suggestion task.
The seq2seq model has a large latency, which
can be an issue in production. In this case, we serve
our model in parallel with search result ranking,
which gives us plenty of time (more than 100ms)
to run the seq2seq model.
Experiments:
The seq2seq model is tested in
federated search.
Our baseline is a frequency
based method.
Training/dev/test data size is
300M/50K/50K query pairs.
For the seq2seq
model, we use a small model to reduce latency
(100 hidden size and 2 layers in LSTM).
Our ofﬂine experiments in Table 6 demonstrate
that the seq2seq can ﬁnd better candidates, mea-
sured by MRR@10. The coverage of the deep
learning method is trivially 100%.
The online
experiments (Table 7) display evidence of an en-
hanced user experience, particularly on ﬁnding jobs
where seq2seq can generate in-domain terminology
for novice users.
3.5
Document Ranking
Introduction:
Given a query, a searcher proﬁle
and a set of retrieved documents, the goal of docu-
ment ranking is to assign a relevance score to each
document and generate the ranking. Latency is the
biggest challenge for this task, since the data unit of
document ranking task is thousands of documents.
The other challenge comes from effectiveness. The
production model is optimized in many iterations,
with many strong handcrafted features.
We conduct experiments on people search and
help center. People search has 600M member pro-
ﬁles, and help center has 2700 FAQ documents.
Approach: The production model uses xgboost
(Chen and Guestrin, 2016) for training. In peo-
ple search, many non-text based features are used,
e.g., personalized features based on social network
structures, past user behaviors, document popular-
ity, etc.
One beneﬁt of the neural networks approaches
is that we can easily combine the deep NLP based
semantic matching with other techniques that prove
Raw text
Text 
embeddings
Deep features
Handcrafted features
Hidden layer
Doc score
Doc_field1
Query
Doc_field2
CNN
CNN
CNN
Figure 3: Model architecture for the ranking model. The
learning-to-rank layer is not drawn in the ﬁgure.
Search
Deployment Strategy
P99 latency
People search
Two pass ranking
+21ms
All-decoding
+55ms
Help center
Document pre-computing
+25ms
Table 8: P99 latency over xgboost in document ranking.
to be effective. The architecture is shown in Fig-
ure 3. To improve the relevance performance, we
extend the previous work (Huang et al., 2013) by
(1) better representing the document by multiple
ﬁelds; (2) combining hand crafted features with
deep features to outperform the production base-
line; (3) adding a hidden layer to extract non-linear
features.
Online Production Deployment: As mentioned
before, latency is a major issue for document rank-
ing tasks. We design practical online deployment
strategies to reduce computation time. For the help
center task, since there are only 2,700 documents,
we pre-compute the document embeddings. For
people search with 600M member proﬁles, docu-
ment pre-computing requires nontrivial infrastruc-
ture changes, i.e., a lot of space to store the embed-
dings and complicated designs to keep them fresh.
Our solution is a two-pass ranking strategy: ﬁrstly
apply a lightweight model without deep learning
modules, and choose the top hundreds of docu-
ments to send to deep models for reranking. The
latency impact over xgboost is shown in Table 8.
Experiments:
Training data size is 5M/340K
queries for people search/help center, respectively,
with 50K for dev and test for both tasks. On aver-
age each query has around 10 documents. For all
models that apply, batch size is 256; word embed-
ding size is 64.
Models
People Search
Help Center
xgboost (baseline)
-
-
CNN-ranking
+3.02%
+11.56%
CNN-ranking w/o handcrafted ftrs
−4.52%
+11.07%
Table 9: Ofﬂine experiments for document ranking task, mea-
sured by NDCG@10.
Search
Metrics
Percentage lift
People Search
CTR@5
+1.13%
Sat Click
+0.76%
Help Center
Happy Path Rate
+15.0%
Table 10: Online experiments for document ranking task. "Sat click" is
the number of satisfactory searches in people search, such as connecting, mes-
saging or following a proﬁle. "Happy path rate" is a help center search metric:
proportion of users who searched and clicked a document without using help
center search again in that day.
We report ofﬂine and online results in Table
9 and 10, respectively. In summary, the ofﬂine
and online performance are consistent. Our model
CNN-ranking signiﬁcantly outperforms the base-
line by a large margin. By comparing CNN-ranking
vs baseline across the two searches, it is interesting
to see that the improvement of deep NLP models is
signiﬁcantly larger in the help center setting. This
is caused by the data genre. In help center, the
queries and documents are mostly natural language
sentences, such as a query "how to hide my proﬁle
updates" to document "Sharing Proﬁle Changes
with Your Network", where CNN can capture the
semantic meaning. In people search, it is more
important to perform exact matching, for exam-
ple, query "facebook" should not return member
proﬁles who work at "linkedin".
4
Lessons Learned
In this section, we go beyond the task boundary and
generalize the learnings into lessons. We believe
these lessons are not limited to search systems, but
also useful for other industry applications such as
recommender systems.
4.1
When is Deep NLP Helpful?
In general, the deep NLP models achieve better
relevance performance than traditional methods in
search tasks, and are particularly powerful in the
following scenarios:
(1) Language generation tasks. Based on the of-
ﬂine experiments, query suggestion (Table 6) bene-
ﬁts most from deep NLP modeling. This is deter-
mined by the nature of language generation tasks.
In the seq2seq framework, the hidden state summa-
rizes the context well, and the decoder can produce
related queries for any input query.
(2) Data with rich paraphrasing. In document
ranking, the improvement brought by using CNN
is larger in help center than in people search (Table
9 and 10), since help center has a lot of natural
language queries while people search queries are
combination of keywords.
4.2
When is Deep NLP not Helpful?
No gain is observed when applying LSTM-SCRF
for query tagging task. It reveals an important
difference between industry and academic data –
huge amount of user generated data. Hence, the
SCRF approach can do well with a lexicon built
on 600M member proﬁles. Another factor is data
genre. Compared to classic NER datasets (Sang
and De Meulder, 2003) with sentence level data
points, search queries not have much long distance
dependency for LSTM to extract entities.
4.3
Latency is the Biggest Challenge
We believe latency to be the biggest challenge of
applying deep NLP models to search productions.
In this paper, we summarize as below the practical
solutions to reduce latency:
(1) Algorithm redesign. In query auto completion,
we apply the unnormalized language model, which
signiﬁcantly reduces computation time and main-
tains the same level of relevance.
(2) Parallel computing. In query suggestion, the
seq2seq model runs in parallel with search ranking,
which leave more than 100ms buffer for seq2seq
decoding.
(3) Embedding pre-computing. In help center
search ranking, the document embeddings are pre-
computed, leaving only query processing to be
computed at run-time.
(4) Two pass ranking. In people search ranking,
a lightweight model is applied to handle all doc-
uments, then a deep model reranks the top ones.
Compared to embedding pre-computing, two pass
ranking has less of an infrastructure requirement.
4.4
How to Ensure Robustness?
Robustness is an essential requirement for industry
productions, as it directly affects user experience.
Compared to traditional methods, deep NLP mod-
els are more likely to overﬁt the training data and
over generalize word semantics. Our solutions are:
(1) Training data manipulation. In query sug-
gestion, we observe that with generalization pairs
("senior research scientist" -> "research scientist"),
the trained seq2seq will mostly generate queries by
deleting original words. We address it by removing
the generalization pairs in the training data.
(2) Reuse handcrafted features.
In document
ranking, the deep NLP model may rank the top-
ically related documents higher than the keywords
matched documents. For example, in people search,
matching professor proﬁles to query "student".
This can be alleviated by incorporating the exist-
ing handcrafted features (e.g., keywords matching
features such as cosine similarity) into neural net-
works.
5
Related Work
Shallow models are popular in today’s search en-
gines. The models are easy to deploy because of
small latency and robustness, and they also achieve
desirable relevance performance due to the large
scale of user generated training data. Recently,
deep NLP models have been designed for many of
the search tasks (Hashemi et al., 2016; He et al.,
2016; Huang et al., 2013; Park and Chiba, 2017b).
These works concentrate on improving ofﬂine rel-
evance performance by incorporating additional
information such as personalization (Jaech and Os-
tendorf, 2018; Fiorini and Lu, 2018), session (De-
hghani et al., 2017; Ren et al., 2018), etc. There
are some existing efforts that are deployed to on-
line productions, however, most models are for
the document ranking task with embedding pre-
computing approach (Ramanath et al., 2018; Yin
et al., 2016; Grbovic and Cheng, 2018; Li et al.,
2019). In contrast, we target at productionizing
deep NLP models for a set of much boarder tasks
by reaching a balance among latency, robustness,
effectiveness.
6
Conclusions
Industry provides its own set of challenges for deep
NLP, different in key ways from classic studied
NLP tasks: (1) the amount and type of data, (2)
constraints on latency or infrastructure, and (3) the
highly optimized production baselines. This paper
focuses on how to apply deep NLP models to ﬁve
representative search productions, illuminating the
challenges along the way. All resulting models
except query tagging are deployed in LinkedIn’s
search engines. More importantly, we also summa-
rize the lessons learned across the tasks. We listed
the factors to consider when estimating the poten-
tial improvement brought by deep NLP models for
a new task. We show robustness and overﬁtting
can be typically handled with careful data analysis.
Latency, which is almost always a concern, can be
addressed creatively in many ways, such as algo-
rithm simpliﬁcation, two-pass systems, embedding
pre-computing or parallel computation.
References
Ziv Bar-Yossef and Naama Kraus. 2011.
Context-
sensitive query auto-completion. In WWW.
Fei Cai and Maarten De Rijke. 2016. A survey of query
auto completion in information retrieval.
Founda-
tions and Trends® in Information Retrieval.
Huanhuan Cao, Daxin Jiang, Jian Pei, Qi He, Zhen
Liao, Enhong Chen, and Hang Li. 2008. Context-
aware query suggestion by mining click-through and
session data. In KDD.
Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. 2016. Xgboost: A
scalable tree boosting system. In KDD.
W. Bruce Croft, Donald Metzler, and Trevor Strohman.
2010. Search engines: Information retrieval in prac-
tice. Reading: Addison-Wesley.
Mostafa Dehghani, Sascha Rothe, Enrique Alfonseca,
and Pascal Fleury. 2017. Learning to attend, copy,
and generate for session-based query suggestion. In
CIKM.
Nicolas Fiorini and Zhiyong Lu. 2018. Personalized
neural language models for real-world query auto
completion. In NAACL.
Bruno M Fonseca, Paulo Golgher, Bruno Pôssas,
Berthier Ribeiro-Neto, and Nivio Ziviani. 2005.
Concept-based interactive query expansion.
In
CIKM.
Alex Graves, Navdeep Jaitly, and Abdel-rahman Mo-
hamed. 2013. Hybrid speech recognition with deep
bidirectional lstm. In IEEE workshop on automatic
speech recognition and understanding.
Mihajlo Grbovic and Haibin Cheng. 2018. Real-time
personalization using embeddings for search rank-
ing at airbnb. In KDD.
Homa B. Hashemi, Amir Asiaee, and Reiner Kraft.
2016.
Query intent detection using convolutional
neural networks. In WSDM, Workshop on Query Un-
derstanding.
Yunlong He, Jiliang Tang, Hua Ouyang, Changsung
Kang, Dawei Yin, , and Yi Chang. 2016. Learning
to rewrite queries. In CIKM.
Jian Hu, Gang Wang, Fred Lochovsky, Jian-tao Sun,
and Zheng Chen. 2009. Understanding user’s query
intent with wikipedia. In WWW.
Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. 2004. Mining and summa-
rizing customer reviews. In KDD.
Po-Sen Huang, Xiaodong He, Jianfeng Gao, Li Deng,
Alex Acero, and Larry Heck. 2013. Learning deep
structured semantic models for web search using
clickthrough data. In CIKM.
Aaron Jaech and Mari Ostendorf. 2018. Personalized
language model for query auto-completion. In ACL.
In-Ho Kang and GilChang Kim. 2003. Query type clas-
siﬁcation for web document retrieval. In SIGIR.
Yoon Kim. 2014. Convolutional neural networks for
sentence classiﬁcation. In EMNLP.
John Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando CN
Pereira. 2001.
Conditional random ﬁelds: Prob-
abilistic models for segmenting and labeling se-
quence data. In ICML.
Guillaume Lample, Miguel Ballesteros, Sandeep Sub-
ramanian, Kazuya Kawakami, and Chris Dyer. 2016.
Neural architectures for named entity recognition.
NAACL.
Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton.
2015. Deep learning. nature.
Cheng Li, Mingyang Zhang, Michael Bendersky,
Hongbo Deng, Donald Metzler, and Marc Najork.
2019. Multi-view embedding-based synonyms for
email search. In SIGIR.
Xiao Li, Ye-Yi Wang, and Alex Acero. 2008. Learn-
ing query intent from regularized click graphs. In
SIGIR.
Tomáš Mikolov, Martin Karaﬁát, Lukáš Burget, Jan
ˇCernock`y, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. 2010.
Recur-
rent neural network based language model. In In-
terSpeech.
Bhaskar Mitra and Nick Craswell. 2015. Query auto-
completion for rare preﬁxes. In CIKM.
Bhaskar Mitra, Nick Craswell, et al. 2018. An intro-
duction to neural information retrieval. Foundations
and Trends® in Information Retrieval.
Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2005. Seeing stars: Exploit-
ing class relationships for sentiment categorization
with respect to rating scales. In ACL.
Dae Hoon Park and Rikio Chiba. 2017a. A neural lan-
guage model for query auto-completion. In SIGIR.
Dae Hoon Park and Rikio Chiba. 2017b. A neural lan-
guage model for query auto-completion. In SIGIR.
Rohan Ramanath,
Hakan Inan,
Gungor Polatkan,
Bo Hu, Qi Guo, Cagri Ozcaglar, Xianren Wu, Kr-
ishnaram Kenthapadi, and Sahin Cem Geyik. 2018.
Towards deep and representation learning for talent
search at linkedin. In CIKM.
Gary Ren, Xiaochuan Ni, Manish Malik, and Qifa Ke.
2018. Conversational query understanding using se-
quence to sequence modeling. In WWW.
Erik F Sang and Fien De Meulder. 2003.
Intro-
duction to the conll-2003 shared task: Language-
independent named entity recognition. In NAACL:
HLT.
Sunita Sarawagi and William W Cohen. 2005. Semi-
markov conditional random ﬁelds for information
extraction. In NeurIPS.
Abhinav Sethy, Stanley Chen, Ebru Arisoy, and Bhu-
vana Ramabhadran. 2015.
Unnormalized expo-
nential and neural network language models.
In
ICASSP.
Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V. Le. 2014.
Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks.
In NeurIPS.
Po-Wei Wang, Huan Zhang, Vijai Mohan, Inderjit S.
Dhillon, and J. Zico Kolter. 2018. Realtime query
completion via deep language models.
In SIGIR
Workshop On eCommerce.
Dawei Yin, Yuening Hu, Jiliang Tang, Tim Daly, Mian-
wei Zhou, Hua Ouyang, Jianhui Chen, Changsung
Kang, Hongbo Deng, Chikashi Nobata, et al. 2016.
Ranking relevance in yahoo search. In KDD.
