Title: Rank over Class: The Untapped Potential of Ranking in Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2009.05160v4
--------------------------------------------------

Rank over Class: The Untapped Potential of
Ranking in Natural Language Processing
Amir Atapour-Abarghouei
Department of Computer Science
Durham University
Durham, UK
amir.atapour-abarghouei@durham.ac.uk
Stephen Bonner
School of Computing
Newcastle University
Newcastle, UK
stephen.bonner3@newcastle.ac.uk
Andrew Stephen McGough
School of Computing
Newcastle University
Newcastle, UK
stephen.mcgough@newcastle.ac.uk
Abstract—Text classiﬁcation has long been a staple within
Natural Language Processing (NLP) with applications spanning
across diverse areas such as sentiment analysis, recommender
systems and spam detection. With such a powerful solution,
it is often tempting to use it as the go-to tool for all NLP
problems since when you are holding a hammer, everything
looks like a nail. However, we argue here that many tasks
which are currently addressed using classiﬁcation are in fact
being shoehorned into a classiﬁcation mould and that if we
instead address them as a ranking problem, we not only improve
the model, but we achieve better performance. We propose a
novel end-to-end ranking approach consisting of a Transformer
network responsible for producing representations for a pair
of text sequences, which are in turn passed into a context
aggregating network outputting ranking scores used to determine
an ordering to the sequences based on some notion of relevance.
We perform numerous experiments on publicly-available datasets
and investigate the applications of ranking in problems often
solved using classiﬁcation. In an experiment on a heavily-
skewed sentiment analysis dataset, converting ranking results to
classiﬁcation labels yields an approximately 22% improvement
over state-of-the-art text classiﬁcation, demonstrating the efﬁcacy
of text ranking over text classiﬁcation in certain scenarios.
Index Terms—Sentiment Analysis, Text Ranking, Text Classi-
ﬁcation, Natural Language Processing, Deep Learning
I. INTRODUCTION
Recent advances in machine learning have led to signiﬁcant
strides in various active areas of research, with many appli-
cations already integrated into our daily lives. However, as
natural languages are the primary method of human commu-
nication, learning-based Natural Language Processing (NLP)
is receiving an ever-increasing level of attention within both
academia and industry. Amongst the various applications of
NLP, text classiﬁcation [1], [2] has arguably blazed the trail
due to the simplicity of its deﬁnition and its numerous use
cases. From online content tagging [3] to sentiment analysis
[4], text classiﬁcation has always been at the forefront of
natural language processing.
With the emergence of deep learning, various approaches
have addressed text classiﬁcation via feed-forward networks
using bag-of-word inputs [5], recurrent neural networks that
consider structural elements of the text [6] and convolutional
neural networks capable of detecting position-invariant pat-
terns in the text [7]. Transformers [8], however, have ar-
guably been the greatest advancement in NLP with signiﬁcant
improvements enabled by large-scale pre-trained language
models, taking advantage of deeper architectures and larger
corpora of text used for training to enable a stronger and better
representation learning process.
However, despite the signiﬁcant advances in text classiﬁ-
cation, the ﬁeld is still fraught with challenges. For instance,
text classiﬁcation can be highly subjective due to the presence
of textual ambiguity, biased annotations and unknown classes.
Examples of this are widely seen in the numerous publicly-
available movie review datasets [9], [10], [11], commonly used
as benchmarks for text classiﬁcation. As an example, imagine
the following sentence from a movie review:
Example 1: Movie Review - while plagued with a plodding
mess of a narrative, the sincere performance of the main
character salvages the clich´ed dialogue and provides some
escapism from the distorted perspective of the protagonist.
Any observer would have trouble labelling this review as
positive or negative. In the same vein, the performance of
a machine learning model trained on subjectively annotated
reviews would solely depend on the presence of similar words,
patterns and structures of the text in other less ambiguous
and more concrete data points in the dataset. This level
of subjectivity and ambiguity essentially makes a fair and
accurate classiﬁcation of the sentiment of such passages very
difﬁcult using learning-based models.
Another signiﬁcant issue in text classiﬁcation stems from
signiﬁcant imbalances commonly found in existing datasets.
If opinions on a speciﬁc topic are extracted from social media
to be used as training data, most would lie on the extreme
ends of the spectrum as individuals with extreme beliefs are
more likely to voice their opinions publicly, thus creating a
skew in the dataset towards more extreme opinions [12]. In
other scenarios, if subjective passages are labelled by multiple
annotators with an averaging method determining the ﬁnal la-
bel, most of the passages will inevitably fall near the centre of
the labelling interval due to the subjectivity of the annotation
[13]. Such imbalances can impede accurate classiﬁcation and
necessitate signiﬁcant algorithmic intervention.
There are numerous other similar shortcomings in text
classiﬁcation, depending on the scope of the problem, the
nature of the classes and the features available in the dataset.
arXiv:2009.05160v4  [cs.CL]  3 Dec 2021
Here, we argue that many such issues can be resolved by
reformulating certain text classiﬁcation problems as text rank-
ing. It is important to note that we are in no way suggesting
that ranking should completely replace classiﬁcation. On the
contrary, classiﬁcation remains an integral solution to a vast
portion of the problems in computational linguistics. Our
objective here is to investigate the possibility of reformulating
certain key problems as ranking to address the common
challenges hindering classiﬁcation solutions.
Ranking is deﬁned as a derivation of ordering over a list of
items that maximises the utility of the entire list [14]. It is a
signiﬁcant component of many information retrieval systems
with applications including web search, recommender systems,
document summarisation and question answering [15].
Ranking, by nature, is different from classiﬁcation and
regression in that a classiﬁer or a regressor attempts to assign
a speciﬁc class label or value to an individual data point, while
the objective of a ranking approach is to optimally sort a list,
such that, for some notion of relevance, the items within the
list with higher relevance scores appear earlier in the list.
Note that while we primarily discuss the efﬁcacy of ranking
compared to classiﬁcation in certain problems, the same con-
clusions can be made about regression solutions. The reason
why classiﬁcation is chosen as the main point of comparison
is that the existing literature is dominated by text classiﬁcation
solutions to sentiment analysis [16], [17], [18], [19] due to the
availability of discrete class labels in benchmark datasets [9],
[10], [11] and the difﬁculty of attaining accurate continuous
regression labels for subjective text data.
In this paper, we argue that for certain problems, ranking is
a more appropriate formulation than classiﬁcation (or regres-
sion). Take the movie review from Example 1. While it might
be difﬁcult for a human or a neural network to accurately
classify this as a positive or a negative review or associate
it with an absolute sentiment value or class, it is signiﬁcantly
easier to rank this review with respect to other reviews as more
positive or more negative, especially if they are placed in some
known shared context, for example all the reviews given for
the same movie. In this paper, we explore the capabilities of
text ranking and demonstrate its efﬁcacy using experiments
conducted over publicly-available datasets.
In short, the main contributions of this work are as follows:
• With the end-to-end training of a Transformer, a context
aggregating dense network and a pair-wise ranking loss,
text passages are accurately ranked based on a given
ranking label or score (Section III-A).
• The potential of text ranking is demonstrated using vari-
ous datasets [11], [20] with the learning process pivoting
around the different contexts the passages can be placed
in, e.g. the writer of a given passage or the topic of the
passage, and the effectiveness of this contextual ranking
is explored (Sections IV-A and IV-B).
• When ranking results are artiﬁcially converted to class
labels, our approach is capable of outperforming state-of-
the-art text classiﬁcation models on heavily-skewed text
classiﬁcation datasets [21] (Section IV-C).
To enable reproducibility, an implementation of our ranking
approach is publicly available1.
II. RELATED WORK
Having ﬁrst appeared in the literature in the 1940s [22],
ranking gained prominence as the foundation of modern search
engines towards the end of the last millennium [23]. Given a
query q and a collection P of passages p that match the query,
the goal is to rank all the passages p in P according to some
notion of relevance to q so that the best results appear earlier
in the ranked list. Note that while we, in this work, focus on
passage ranking, the same concepts can equally be applied to
any data modality.
Though traditionally solved via boolean, vector space and
probabilistic models [24], [25], ranking is now commonly
performed using learning-based approaches [15], taking ad-
vantage of labelled data and some parametrised function to
map feature vectors extracted from list items to real values
used as ranking scores. This function is subsequently used to
sort the items. Ranking approaches can be point-wise, pair-
wise or list-wise.
Point-wise approaches [26] utilise a classiﬁer or a regressor
trained to predict the relevance score of a passage, which is
subsequently used to sort the items, with respect to a given
query. Pair-wise techniques [27], on the other hand, consider
a pair of items at each pass with the overall objective being to
minimise the number of inversions, where the items are in the
wrong order relative to the ground truth, in the ranked list. List-
wise approaches [28] attempt to solve for the optimal ranking
for the entire list all at once. This is often done either via a
speciﬁc loss function design, based on the unique properties
of the items [29], or by directly optimising certain information
retrieval metrics [30].
In this paper, we propose a pair-wise ranking approach,
capable of outperforming classiﬁcation in certain natural lan-
guage processing problems. Unlike point-wise approaches, a
pair-wise technique, such as the one proposed here, receives
more context as it directly compares list items. List-wise
models, despite considering the explicit global context and
removing the need for post-processing, are more difﬁcult
to optimise, slower to converge and suffer from training
instability issues, which is why a pair-wise ranking approach
is implemented for this study.
III. PROPOSED APPROACH
Consisting of two sub-networks trained end-to-end, our
overall approach receives two passages as its input and outputs
two scalar values which can be used to determine whether the
passages have been input in the correct order. See Figure 1.
The ﬁrst sub-network (left) is a Transformer that produces a
representation of the input passages. The second sub-network
(right) is a context aggregating multilayer perceptron, which
receives the latent vectors representing the passages (produced
by the Transformer network) and outputs ranking scores, used
to determine the ordering of the two input passages.
1https://github.com/atapour/rank-over-class
Fig. 1: The overall model approximates the ranking function, f. Input passages, x1 and x2, are ﬁrst passed through a Transformer
network. A multilayer perceptron then takes the concatenated Transformer outputs (z′
1 ++ z′
2) and produces the ranking scores,
f(x1) and f(x2), used to rank the inputs.
The proposed approach performs contextually sound com-
parisons between passage pairs to ensure meaningful ranking
results. Details of the approach are discussed in the following.
A. Context is King
In text classiﬁcation, either it can be assumed that the
entirety of the training dataset falls within the same context
or the context is completely ignored. Context, in this setting,
refers to a unifying element which the passages can be grouped
by and provides a coherent background for understanding what
those passages represent. To get a clearer picture of what is
meant by context, let’s refer to the following examples:
Example 2: a human observer is given three random passages
and asked to assess their quality. One passage is an excerpt
from a technical report, one a poem and the other from a
history textbook.
Example 3: a human observer is given three random passages
and asked to assess their quality. All three passages contain
answers from different individuals to the same question.
In Example 2, the passages are from different sources,
follow different linguistic patterns and address different types
of information. As such, they lack a shared context. This
makes objectively comparing their quality extremely difﬁcult,
even for a human expert. However, in Example 3, the passages
are all answers to the same question and follow a shared
context. This means the problem can be solved in a more
meaningful and objective manner. In this vein, our approach
ﬁrst attempts to introduce the idea of context.
To bring the notion of context of the passages into the
learning process, we ﬁrst group the passages in our dataset
based on some shared context, thereby pivoting the learning
process around it. This provides a stronger background for
the model’s representation learning capabilities as the model,
at any given point in time, is only being trained on passages
from the same context. From now on, we will refer to this
as the contextual pivot point. Subsequently, once the passages
are grouped based on a contextual pivot point, all possible
combinations of passages within the groups are extracted and
used as training data for our pair-wise ranking model.
The overall pipeline of our approach is seen in Figure 1.
A pair of input passages are passed through the layers of a
headless Transformer network to get a latent vector containing
the representation of each passage. In our experiments, BERT
[31], GPT2 [32], RoBERTa [33] and ALBERT v2 [34] are
used to obtain the feature vectors but any other Transformer
model can similarly be used. As seen in Figure 1, the resulting
feature vectors of the two passages are concatenated and used
as the input to a four-layered multilayer perceptron (context-
aggregating network). The multilayer perceptron assesses the
relationship between the two inputs and regresses to two values
(ranking scores), subsequently used to rank the passages.
Note that both the input passage pairs and the output
score pairs are correspondingly-ordered and any change in
the ordering of the input passages affects the output ranking
scores. However, this does not mean that the results will be
inconsistent when the input changes, but that the interpretation
of the output ranking scores depends on the order of the input
passages (similar to a comparison operator). Trained end to
end, the entire model uses a ranking loss function (explained
in Section III-B) and pair-wise ranking is enabled via the
comparison of the output values.
B. Loss Function
While most ranking approaches traditionally utilise loss
functions such as the sigmoid cross-entropy for binary rel-
evance labels, pair-wise logistic loss or softmax cross-entropy
[35], we make use of a margin-based ranking loss, which has
been effectively used for representation learning in knowledge
graph embedding models [36] by separating the positive
samples from the negative samples within the dataset by a
given margin. Using this loss function, we can take advantage
of its strong representation learning capabilities to extract
more robust features from the passages and better learn their
compositional relationship during ranking. Formally, for any
passage pair pi and pj, the ranking label, E, is determined as:
E(pi, pj) =
(
1,
pi ranked higher than pj
-1,
pj ranked higher than pi
,
(1)
Classiﬁcation Model
(a) Stack Exchange
(b) Fine Foods
Accuracy
F1 Score
AUC
Accuracy
F1 Score
AUC
ALBERT [34]
0.272
0.278
0.618
0.722
0.617
0.810
RoBERTa [33]
0.281
0.291
0.635
0.705
0.590
0.809
GPT2 [32]
0.285
0.298
0.622
0.765
0.738
0.813
BERT [31]
0.292
0.309
0.648
0.768
0.721
0.828
TABLE I: (a) Quality assessment of Stack Exchange posts and (b) sentiment analysis of Fine Food Reviews.
where E is the ground truth ranking label. Consequently, for
the set of all passage pairs Ψ = {(pi, pj); E(pi, pj)}, a pair is
fed into our model, which approximates the desired ranking
function f. The loss function is thus deﬁned as:
L =
X
(pi,pj)∈Ψ
max(0, −E(pi, pj) × (f(pi) −f(pj)) + γ),
(2)
where f(pi) and f(pj) are the ranking scores produced by the
overall model, f, and γ is the margin enforced between f(pi)
and f(pj). In our experiments, γ = 2 empirically yields the
most favourable results. This loss measures ranking violations
of passage pairs, allowing the network to learn discriminative
features to enforce a clearer distinction between the passages.
C. Implementation Details
For all experiments, the smallest pre-trained versions of the
Transformers provided by the HuggingFace library [37] are
used. Text sequences are truncated if they exceed 128 tokens,
except for experiments in Section IV-D, where sequences of
512 tokens are used. The multilayer perceptron uses Linear-
BatchNorm-PReLu modules with a dropout of 0.2 for each
layer during training. All implementations are done in PyTorch
[38], with AdamW [39] providing the optimization (β1 = 0.9,
β2 = 0.999, ϵ =1e-8).
An advantage of our approach is that there are very few
hyperparameters associated with it. The only hyperparameters
that might have an effect on the overall results of the approach
in the experiments are the margin value in the loss function (γ)
and the optimisation parameters (e.g. learning rate). These hy-
perparameters are empirically selected through a grid search.
For our hyperparameter searches, 10% of our Stack Exchange
dataset (explained in Section IV-A) is randomly selected as the
training dataset and 2% as the test set. The margin value γ is
selected from values of {0, 0.1, 1, 2, 5, 10} and the learning
rate α is selected from {1e-6, 4e-6, 8e-6, 1e-5, 4e-5, 8e-5, 1e-
4, 4e-4, 8e-4}. Our experiments indicate that the best results
are obtained when the margin value is γ = 2 for all models
and the learning rate is α =4e-5 for BERT and GPT2 and
α = 4e-6 for ALBERT and RoBERTa.
All the Transformer networks used in our work are trained
from a ﬁxed pre-trained state and the only portion of our
overall models that actually starts from random initialisation
is the four-layer context aggregating fully-connected network.
This greatly reduces the effect of random initialisation on our
approach as the size of the context aggregating multilayer
perceptron pales in comparison to the size of the Transformer
networks.
All experiments are carried out using two NVIDIA Titan
RTX GPUs in parallel with a combined memory of 48 GB on
an Arch Linux system with a 3.30GHz 10-core Intel CPU and
64 GB of memory. Note that for large NLP models, such as
those used in this work, this hardware has limited capabilities,
which is why smaller Transformer models and datasets are
used in the approach.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
To evaluate our approach, we perform extensive experiments
using four publicly-available datasets, Stack Exchange [20],
Fine Food Reviews [11], tweets about self-driving cars [21]
and the MS MARCO passage ranking dataset [40]. The
datasets are selected for their level of difﬁculty and prevalence
in the sentiment analysis and text classiﬁcation literature.
Note that the tweets about self-driving cars are downloaded
from an anonymised publicly available dataset [21] and not
extracted by the authors of this paper. In addition to the ex-
periments conducted to assess the efﬁcacy of our technique, we
also perform ablation studies and demonstrate the importance
of every component of the proposed approach.
A. Stack Exchange
A large Question and Answer Forum made up of numerous
communities focusing on different subjects, Stack Exchange
[20] offers a space where users can post questions about
speciﬁc topics for which they can receive answers from other
users. Any user can annotate whether an answer is useful
or not by voting for it favourably (up-vote) or unfavourably
(down-vote). The original asker can also mark one answer as
the best. As these votes are expected to be based on quality,
subjective though they might be, they provide an opportunity
for a learning-based approach to assess the quality of each
answer for a potential recommendation system.
A na¨ıve way to assess post quality (in this work only the
answers are considered for quality assessment in the training
and testing datasets) is using a classiﬁcation-based solution
that predicts the quality of posts using classes corresponding
to how well the post has done (or can do) in terms of up-
votes. The ground truth quality scores can be generated based
on the number of votes an answer has received normalised by
the number of votes the original question has received.
Approach
Ranking Metrics @k
Pair Labels
MRR
NDCG
MAP
Accuracy
(a) Stack
Exchange
w/ ALBERT
0.656
0.772
0.662
0.854
w/ RoBERTa
0.671
0.780
0.678
0.882
w/ GPT2
0.760
0.806
0.764
0.895
w/ BERT
0.762
0.814
0.768
0.910
(b) Review
(User)
w/ ALBERT
0.970
0.982
0.976
0.985
w/ RoBERTa
0.972
0.984
0.979
0.990
w/ GPT2
0.975
0.986
0.982
0.991
w/ BERT
0.977
0.986
0.984
0.990
(c) Review
(Product)
w/ ALBERT
0.972
0.984
0.976
0.981
w/ RoBERTa
0.970
0.982
0.972
0.985
w/ GPT2
0.976
0.987
0.982
0.990
w/ BERT
0.974
0.985
0.981
0.990
TABLE II: Results of passage ranking using the proposed ap-
proach with data from (a) Stack Exchange, (b) Food Reviews
with users as the contextual pivot point and (c) Food Reviews
with products as the pivot point.
This normalisation is important since questions with higher
vote counts generally receive more engagement from the users.
As such, the normalisation process removes the possibility of
bad answers to more popular questions with a higher vote
count overwhelming better answers to less popular questions.
The quality scores are then categorised into 5 classes via a
simple histogram.
The dataset is extracted from the communities of Ask
Ubuntu, Cryptography, Data Science, Network Engineering,
Unix & Linux and Webmasters. 250,000 posts are randomly
selected for the training dataset and 50,000 for testing. State-
of-the-art text classiﬁcation models [31], [32], [33], [34] are
trained for 3 epochs (to convergence) to classify the posts
based on their quality scores.
As seen in Table I (a), all classiﬁcation models fail to
assess the quality of the posts beyond randomly guessing,
evidenced by the low accuracy, F1 Score and Area Under the
ROC Curve (AUC). This is explained by the lack of context
providing a coherent backdrop for the passages as they are
associated with different users, questions and communities.
Note that while in this paper, we focus on classiﬁcation as a
commonly used baseline, experiments with a regression-based
models, predicting the quality score of the passages directly,
demonstrated similarly bad performance, explained by the
extreme sensitivity of regression models to data imbalances.
Using Example 2 in Section III-A, we explained how even
a human would have trouble assessing the text quality of
unrelated passages without any shared context. The same
concept applies to this dataset, where even a human observer
would have difﬁculty comparing the quality of answers written
by different people to different questions. This is why a
contextual pivot point is necessary.
The Stack Exchange post quality annotations (user votes)
are within the context of each question, i.e. users vote on
post quality based on how well the post addresses the speciﬁc
Ranking Model
Pair Labels
Accuracy
F1 Score
Ranking w/ ALBERT
0.905
0.908
Ranking w/ RoBERTa
0.910
0.917
Ranking w/ GPT2
0.932
0.936
Ranking w/ BERT
0.945
0.950
TABLE III: Ranking results of the proposed approach over
1,633 comparisons of temporally-ordered passages from 50
users with at least 20 answers that have unique scores [20].
question. Therefore, measuring the quality of the posts within
each question would be very easy as the desired task directly
aligns with the ground truth data. As a result, we experiment
with unique users as the contextual pivot point. There are
17,085 unique users within our dataset with an average of
20.1 answers per user.
In our experiments, we assess the quality of passages posted
by individual users by ranking them. While evaluating the
quality of posts for each individual user is possible via text
classiﬁcation, since classiﬁcation cannot explicitly take context
into account, it would entail training a separate classiﬁcation
model for each individual user (17,085 different classiﬁcation
models for the 17,085 users), which is intractable. Our ranking
approach, however, is trained end to end over the entire dataset
once and can provide an accurate measure of the quality for
the posts across all questions, all users and all communities.
With the user chosen as the contextual pivot point, the pas-
sages are grouped based on unique users and all combinations
of passages are extracted as training data (≈8,000,000 pairs).
Similar to the classiﬁcation setup, ground truth ranking labels
(Eqn. 1) are based on the number of votes an answer has
received normalised by the number of votes the original ques-
tion has received. To enable evaluation with the appropriate
ranking metrics, 100 random users with at least 100 answers
that have unique quality scores are selected as the test set.
Table II (a) demonstrates better results are obtained with
BERT and GPT2. Common ranking metrics, including Nor-
malized Discounted Cumulative Gain (NDCG), Mean Average
Precision (MAP) and Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR) are used
to evaluate the results with k = 10. Note that k denotes how
many items are considered relevant in the ranked list - i.e.
relevance is only considered in the top k items in the list for
the ranking metrics.
We also measure the accuracy of the approach applied to
test passages (with success referring to an accurate ranking of
pairs - Eqn. 1). As seen in Table II (a), despite the fact that
the ground truth labels are crowd-sourced and not objective,
accurate ranking is achieved.
An interesting application of ranking the passages with the
contextual pivot point being the users is the possibility of
tracking the change in the skill level of users over time. To
test this, we extract a test set of 50 random users with at least
20 answers that have unique ranking scores. Considering that
Fig. 2: Test accuracy of pair rankings on the Fine Foods reviews dataset using our model trained for 40,000 steps. When
ranking is pivoted around users, the models reach convergence faster, due to the overpowering effect of user writing styles.
the model receives no information about the time of the posts,
if the resulting ranking matches the order at which passages
were posted, the approach is capable of tracking the skill level
of users, which can be of value in downstream recommen-
dation and forum moderation systems, with opportunities for
recommending questions to users and ordering posts based on
a user’s skill level, among others.
A numerical analysis of this is shown in Table III, which
presents the results after evaluating the ranking of posts
from 50 users. Since for this experiment, the accuracy of
the comparison of the pairs is what matters, we present the
accuracy metric over the 1,633 comparisons of temporally-
ordered passage pairs. The promising results in Table III
are indicative of the potential for better user behaviour and
proﬁle tracking, leading to more accurate recommendation and
security systems.
We would like to also point out that while we demonstrate
how classiﬁcation is not a suitable solution for this problem
(Table I (a)), a regression-based solution also suffers from
the same issues. The quality scores for the Stack Overﬂow
posts are segmented into 5 classes via a simple histogram.
This leads to an unbalanced dataset as many of the posts
are of roughly the same quality with a number of outliers
with signiﬁcantly different scores. These issues will remain the
same in a regression setup with most posts having the same
score and the outliers skewing the possible range of scores the
model is meant to learn, leading to potentially worse results
than classiﬁcation in general. This is why the literature on
quality assessment/sentiment analysis predominantly focuses
on classiﬁcation solutions [41], [42], [43], [44].
Due to the fact that the majority of the posts are clumped
together in terms of their score and the existence of outliers,
a regression model completely fails to capture the underlying
data distribution and will perform no better than classiﬁcation.
Our ranking model, however, does not suffer from issues
stemming from data imbalance, better captures the patterns
and the associations in the posts and their quality and produces
promising results, as seen in Tables II (a) and III.
B. Fine Food Reviews
The Amazon Fine Food Reviews dataset [11] contains
approximately 500,000 reviews of around 75,000 products
from roughly 250,000 users. The objective is to predict the
sentiment of the review based on scores (from 1 to 5) provided
in the dataset. As opposed to the Stack Exchange data, the
passages in this dataset are signiﬁcantly easier to classify as
they substantially follow the same context (product reviews).
Experimental results presented in Table I (b) demonstrate
that classiﬁcation methods are reasonably capable of clas-
sifying the reviews albeit with underwhelming results. 20%
of the data is randomly selected as the test set and the text
sequences are truncated to 128 tokens (words). The dataset is
unbalanced with higher sentiment scores being more prevalent
in the dataset. However, if the task of sentiment analysis is
reformulated as ranking, signiﬁcantly better performance can
be expected.
For the purposes of our approach, the contextual pivot point
for this dataset can be either the user (ranking the sentiment of
the reviews from individual users for all the products they have
reviewed) or the product (ranking the sentiment of the reviews
of individual products from all users who have reviewed them).
Here, we perform experiments based on both the users and the
products as contextual pivot points.
Separate training and testing sets are created, with the
product-based test set made up of 200 random products with
reviews that have unique scores (only 5 unique scores exist)
and the user-based test set made up of 200 random users
with reviews that have unique scores. To evaluate ranking,
the test reviews for each user or product are selected not to
have the same score so the ranking of the ground truth list for
each user/product can be easily compared against the ranking
output of the approach. As our model always ranks a pair of
passages, even if they are similar, only pairs with different
ranking scores are passed into the model during training and
in the test set, only passages with unique scores are used to
evaluate the model.
Table II (b) shows the results of the user-based experiments
and Table II (c) the results of the product-based experiments.
As there are only 5 items for each user or product (5 sentiment
classes), the ranking metrics are calculated with k = 2.
Accuracy alludes to the correctness of pair rankings over all
possible pairs in the test set. The metric values are higher than
those of Section IV-A, as only ﬁve items exist in the list, but as
seen in Table II, the results are extremely promising with the
models achieving near perfect ranking in both experiments.
While highly accurate results are achieved across the board,
an interesting observation is that it is easier for the model to
learn the context and thus perform better ranking when the
pairs are pivoted around users as opposed to products. Figure
2 demonstrates how all models consistently reach convergence
faster when the contextual pivot point is the user. This is due
to the powerful inﬂuence of the writing style of users with
different reviews. While the reviews of all products share a
clear context as evidenced by the results in Table II (c), user-
based ranking is more easily learned (Figure 2).
C. Sentiment Analysis: Self-Driving Cars
This dataset [21] focuses on people’s opinions of au-
tonomous driving and consists of 6,943 relevant tweets la-
belled from 1 to 5, with 1 indicating the most negative
sentiment and 5 the most positive. This dataset is heavily
skewed with over 61% of the data annotated as neutral (4,245
tweets with label 3) and less than 2% annotated as very
Classiﬁcation Model
Evaluation Metrics
Accuracy
F1 Score
AUC
Liu et al. [33]
0.668
0.598
0.642
Lan et al. [34]
0.672
0.602
0.626
Radford et al. [32]
0.684
0.608
0.638
Devlin et al. [31]
0.688
0.620
0.634
Yang et al. [45]
0.692
0.626
0.642
Converted Ranking w/ ALBERT
0.872
–
–
Converted Ranking w/ RoBERTa
0.902
–
–
Converted Ranking w/ GPT2
0.898
–
–
Converted Ranking w/ BERT
0.916
–
–
TABLE IV: Accuracy results of state-of-the-art classiﬁcation
compared against our ranking approach converted to class
labels on the Self-Driving Car Tweets dataset [21].
negative (110 tweets with label 1). This creates signiﬁcant
challenges for any classiﬁcation approach and requires extreme
measures to combat the imbalance in the dataset. Note that this
datasets is not directly obtained from Twitter by the authors
of this work and is instead downloaded as an anonymised
publicly-available dataset [21].
Here, we evaluate the ability of our model to deal with
such a challenging dataset. While all the tweets follow the
same context (self-driving vehicles), the user that posted each
tweet is ignored in this dataset and thus no contextual pivot
point is available other than the shared subject of the tweets
(self-driving vehicles). The dataset is split into an unbalanced
training set and a balanced test set with the test data containing
100 tweets from each class (500 tweets in total). This leaves
only 10 tweets from class 1 for training, further exacerbating
the data imbalance problem.
Note that the only reason that the test set for this experiment
is balanced is to enable a better analysis of the results of
our comparators. Our ranking approach is not affected by
any imbalances in the training and/or test datasets and is
able to remain completely unchanged even if the test set was
extremely unbalanced.
This is intuitively expected as when one ranks a series
of data points based on some score, the distribution of the
data and the score does not matter as the ranking technique
only needs to predict an ordering of the data and not their
class/value or score – each pair for comparison are handled
independently and there is no longer a concept of balance to
the data. For a classiﬁcation or regression approach, however,
distribution is of signiﬁcant importance. We have opted for a
balanced test set only to make the evaluation of the classiﬁ-
cation techniques easier.
As our approach is a ranking one, it is capable of producing
an ordered list and does not predict absolute class labels. To
enable a direct comparison with classiﬁcation methods, here,
we convert the resulting ranked list to a set of class labels,
which can be trivial as the class labels represent sentiment
scores from 5 to 1 (most positive to most negative) and our
ranking approach is trained to rank based on sentiment scores
Ranking Approach
Dev
MRR@10
Mitra and Craswell [46]
0.252
Mitra et al. [47]
0.254
Rosset et al. [48]
0.262
Nogueira et al. [49]
0.277
Qiao et al. [50]
0.311
Hofstatter et al.[51]
0.318
Our Approach w/ ALBERT
0.264
Our Approach w/ RoBERTa
0.267
Our Approach w/ GPT2
0.273
Our Approach w/ BERT
0.275
TABLE V: Comparison of contemporary ranking methods and
our approach applied to MS MARCO. It is important to note
that unlike many comparators, the proposed approach uses the
smallest most basic version of the Transformers.
(most positive to most negative). This is accomplished by
simply sorting the balanced test set of 500 tweets from most
positive to most negative using our ranking approach, dividing
the ranked list into 5 segments and assigning labels (5 to 1)
to each segment from top to bottom.
It is important to note that the balance or imbalance of the
test set has no bearing on the performance of our approach.
For example, if only 5% of the test data belonged to class 5
(most positive) instead of the current 20%, it would make no
difference to our approach as those would still be ranked at
the top of the sorted list. Ranking does not suffer from such
imbalance issues, which is why we argue it is more suited for
solving such problems than classiﬁcation solutions.
Metrics such as F1 and AUC do not apply to a ranking
approach even when the results are converted to class labels.
However, accuracy provides an excellent metric for evaluating
the performance of the state-of-the-art classiﬁcation methods
as well as our ranking technique. So while we report accuracy,
F1 and AUC for classiﬁcation methods, our converted ranking
is evaluated using accuracy as the primary metric (Table IV).
We would like to emphasise that this conversion of the
ranking results to class labels is not necessary in the real world
and is only done to evaluate our approach in direct comparison
to classiﬁcation. We argue that in certain problems, such as
the one addressed in this section, ranking is a better solution
and assigning an absolute class or value to a passage does not
offer as much information as an ordered list of passages with
a shared context provides.
In this experiment, all models are trained for 100,000 steps.
Table IV shows how effective our approach is by achieving
promising results despite the signiﬁcant imbalance in the
training dataset. Based on the F1 and AUC scores of the state-
of-the-art text classiﬁcation methods [33], [34], [32], [31],
[45], it is clear that the skew in the training dataset has
severely affected the learning capabilities of the state-of-the-
art classiﬁers.
On the other hand, ranking remains robust. In fact, the
converted results of our best ranking approach improve on
the most effective text classiﬁer [45] by about 22%.
D. MS MARCO
While the primary focus of this paper is not information
retrieval, ranking is indelibly linked to information retrieval
so much so that the metrics used to evaluate our results are
predominantly from the information retrieval literature. In this
vein, we also apply our approach to the publicly available
benchmark dataset of MS MARCO [40].
We perform the passage ranking task within the benchmark
using our proposed pipeline. The queries and the passages
are concatenated into sequences of no more 512 tokens. Due
to hardware restrictions, less than 1% of the entire available
dataset is used for training and the smallest possible versions
of the Transformer models are used.
Table V demonstrates the results of our approach compared
to contemporary ranking approaches on the validation set of
the MS MARCO dataset. Despite using smaller Transformer
models and a fraction of the available training data, our
proposed approach produces promising results and remains
competitive with dedicated information retrieval techniques.
E. Ablation Studies
It is important to evaluate and demonstrate the contribution
of every component of our approach. Consequently, we re-train
our model with different components removed or replaced,
with pair ranking accuracy being measured as the primary
metric. For these experiments, 30% of the Stack Exchange
dataset is selected for our ablation studies.
As an integral part of our pipeline is the Transformer model
generating the feature vector representing the input sequences,
the choice of the Transformer is a critical decision. We perform
all our experiments with four commonly-used state-of-the-
art Transformers. Table VI demonstrates that BERT produces
superior results with GPT2 only remaining competitive despite
its larger size. This is also supported by our other experiments
with results presented in Tables II, III, IV and V.
Another important component of the proposed approach
is the context aggregating multilayer perceptron (MLP) that
receives the sequence representations of the two input pas-
sages and generates the scores, subsequently used to rank the
passages. To evaluate its overall inﬂuence, the model is re-
trained with a single linear layer replacing the entire multilayer
perceptron that projects the sequence representation into a
single scalar value that is passed into the loss function as the
ranking score.
As seen in Table VI, while the approach still learns to rank
the passages reasonably well without the context aggregating
multilayer perceptron, the pair ranking accuracy signiﬁcantly
drops. This emphasises the importance of the MLP component
to the overall predictive performance of our approach.
Within our proposed pipeline, we opt for the use of a single
Transformer model to produce the latent vector representing
both passages in the input pair. However, one could envisage
using two separate Transformer models, each independently
Approach
Pair Labels
Accuracy
Full Approach w/ ALBERT
0.861
Full Approach w/ RoBERTa
0.882
Full Approach w/ GPT2
0.899
Separate Transformers (BERT)
0.890
Approach w/o MLP (BERT)
0.815
Full Approach w/ BERT
0.902
TABLE VI: Pair-wise ranking accuracy results with different
components of the proposed ranking approach removed or
replaced, applied to 30% of the Stack Exchange dataset [20].
learning the representation of one of the passages. While this
will almost double the number of learnable parameters and can
potentially introduce training instabilities, it is possible that the
higher parameter count will enhance the learning process.
However, as seen in Table VI, the pair ranking accuracy
is reduced when separate Transformer networks not sharing
weights are used for the passages. This is primarily due to
the reduction in the number of training samples for each
Transformer and the possible overﬁtting of each network.
Additionally, by using the same network for all passages, the
model will get a better sense of the entire dataset and can
produce more robust representations.
V. LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
While ranking does not suffer from common issues that
classiﬁcation approaches suffer from, such as data imbalances,
text subjectivity and lack of context, it does not suit every
problem. Many text classiﬁcation applications could be re-
placed by ranking with superior results, but there are certain
situations where text classiﬁcation remains the only option.
For instance, a scenario wherein passages are meant to be
categorised based on their topic cannot be addressed with
ranking and requires a classiﬁcation solution.
Moreover, text ranking cannot deal in absolutes and is only
capable of relatively comparing items. For example, while
ranking can provide an answer to whether a movie review
is more or less positive than another, it cannot deﬁnitively
say whether both the reviews are positive or negative. This
issue could simply be addressed in real-world applications
by identifying “sentinel” examples which are agreed, by
consensus, to be positive / neutral / negative. Then using our
ranking approach could indicate where an example is placed
by comparing with the sentinels – for example if it is ranked
above a positive sentinel then it is a positive example. In this
way, during inference, other passages can then be assigned an
absolute labels/scores relative to their position in the sorted
list produced by our ranking model based on the previously
known sentinel passages.
It is important to note, however, that the inability to
accurately provide absolute sentiments is seen in sentiment
classiﬁcation methods as well. Many classiﬁcation solutions
do not generalise to unseen data well and are incapable of
absolute sentiment prediction if the vocabulary and linguistic
structure of a new sentence has not been seen by the model
within the training data.
Additionally, for our approach, we intend to address this in
a future work with a double-headed model that simultaneously
ranks and classiﬁes the input passages. As the two heads
can correct each other during training, better representation
learning and thus more accurate results can be expected,
as well as the ability to provide an absolute relevance and
sentiment value for each passage.
Another avenue for future work would be to modify the loss
function to cope with lists rather than pairs of passages. Whilst
more difﬁcult to optimise, list-wise ranking generally offers
a better understanding of the context of the dataset, leading
to more accurate results in addition to fewer post-processing
requirements and thus better efﬁciency during inference.
VI. CONCLUSION
We have investigated the applications of ranking in natural
language processing using a novel pair-wise ranking approach
and different publicly-available datasets. Our text ranking
approach makes use of state-of-the-art Transformer networks
to generate a learned representation of a pair of text sequences.
These representation vectors are subsequently used as the
input to a context-aggregating multilayer perceptron, which
combines the features representing the context and the content
of the passages, assesses the relationship between the two input
passages and regresses to two values denoting the ranking
scores subsequently used to rank the passages simply based
on the ordering of the predicted scores.
The entirety of the model is trained end to end using a
margin-based ranking loss function. Experiments are carried
out on four publicly available datasets, with all the evalua-
tion demonstrating the effectiveness of ranking for potential
recommendation, forum moderation and security applications.
We also compare the results of our approach directly with
state-of-the-art classiﬁcation methods. A comparison of our
ranking results converted to class labels with state-of-the-art
classiﬁcation results indicates an approximately 22% improve-
ment, pointing to the efﬁcacy of ranking over classiﬁcation.
We kindly invite the readers to refer to the supplemental video:
https://youtu.be/Njjg3mWVE2g for more information.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Kowsari, K. Jafari Meimandi, M. Heidarysafa, S. Mendu, L. Barnes,
and D. Brown, “Text classiﬁcation algorithms: A survey,” Information,
vol. 10, no. 4, p. 150, 2019.
[2] S. Minaee, N. Kalchbrenner, E. Cambria, N. Nikzad, M. Chenaghlu,
and J. Gao, “Deep learning based text classiﬁcation: A comprehensive
review,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.03705, 2020.
[3] J. Salminen, V. Yoganathan, J. Corporan, B. J. Jansen, and S.-G. Jung,
“Machine learning approach to auto-tagging online content for content
marketing efﬁciency: A comparative analysis between methods and
content type,” Journal of Business Research, vol. 101, pp. 203–217,
2019.
[4] L. Zhang, S. Wang, and B. Liu, “Deep learning for sentiment analysis: A
survey,” Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge
Discovery, vol. 8, no. 4, p. e1253, 2018.
[5] M. Iyyer, V. Manjunatha, J. Boyd-Graber, and H. Daum´e III, “Deep
unordered composition rivals syntactic methods for text classiﬁcation,”
in Int. Joint Conf. Natural Language Processing, 2015, pp. 1681–1691.
[6] S. Wan, Y. Lan, J. Guo, J. Xu, L. Pang, and X. Cheng, “A deep
architecture for semantic matching with multiple positional sentence
representations,” in AAAI Conf. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2016.
[7] J. Wang, Z. Wang, D. Zhang, and J. Yan, “Combining knowledge with
deep convolutional neural networks for short text classiﬁcation,” in Int.
Joint Conf. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2017, pp. 2915–2921.
[8] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[9] A. L. Maas, R. E. Daly, P. T. Pham, D. Huang, A. Y. Ng, and C. Potts,
“Learning word vectors for sentiment analysis,” in Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies.
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2011, pp.
142–150.
[10] B. Pang and L. Lee, “Seeing stars: Exploiting class relationships for
sentiment categorization with respect to rating scales,” in Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies.
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2005, pp.
115–124.
[11] J. J. McAuley and J. Leskovec, “From amateurs to connoisseurs:
Modeling user expertise through online reviews,” in Int. Conf. World
Wide Web, 2013, pp. 897–908.
[12] J.
Finn,
“Twitter
users
overrepresent
extreme
and
fringe
political
ideas,
not
the
mainstream,”
https://screenrant.com/
twitter-extreme-view-problem/, 2020.
[13] F. Rodrigues, F. Pereira, and B. Ribeiro, “Sequence labeling with
multiple annotators,” Machine learning, vol. 95, no. 2, pp. 165–181,
2014.
[14] H. Sch¨utze, C. D. Manning, and P. Raghavan, Introduction to Informa-
tion Retrieval.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press Cambridge,
2008, vol. 39.
[15] H. Li, “Learning to rank for information retrieval and natural language
processing,” Synthesis Lectures on Human Language Technologies,
vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–113, 2011.
[16] M. Zulqarnain, R. Ghazali, Y. M. M. Hassim, and M. Rehan, “A
comparative review on deep learning models for text classiﬁcation,”
Indones. J. Electr. Eng. Comput. Sci, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 325–335, 2020.
[17] S. Minaee, N. Kalchbrenner, E. Cambria, N. Nikzad, M. Chenaghlu,
and J. Gao, “Deep learning-based text classiﬁcation: A comprehensive
review,” ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 1–40, 2021.
[18] A. Joulin, E. Grave, P. Bojanowski, and T. Mikolov, “Bag of tricks for
efﬁcient text classiﬁcation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.01759, 2016.
[19] K. Mouthami, K. N. Devi, and V. M. Bhaskaran, “Sentiment analysis
and classiﬁcation based on textual reviews,” in Int. Conf. Information
Communication and Embedded Systems.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 271–276.
[20] I. Stack Exchange, Stack Exchange Data Dump, 2019, https://archive.
org/details/stackexchange.
[21] Twitter, Twitter Sentiment Analysis: Self-Driving Cars, 2017, https://
data.world/crowdﬂower/sentiment-self-driving-cars.
[22] W. W. Leontief, “The structure of american economy, 1919-1929,”
Harvard University Press, Tech. Rep., 1941.
[23] L. Page, S. Brin, R. Motwani, and T. Winograd, “The PageRank citation
ranking: Bringing order to the web,” Stanford InfoLab, Tech. Rep., 1999.
[24] K. S. Jones, S. Walker, and S. E. Robertson, “A probabilistic model of
information retrieval: Development and comparative experiments: Part
2,” Information Processing & Management, vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 809–840,
2000.
[25] R. Baeza-Yates and B. Ribeiro-Neto, Modern Information Retrieval.
ACM Press New York, 1999, vol. 463.
[26] F. C. Gey, “Inferring probability of relevance using the method of logistic
regression,” in Int. Conf. Research and Development in Information
Retrieval, 1994, pp. 222–231.
[27] C. J. Burges, “From RankNet to LambdaRank to LambdaMART: An
overview,” Learning, vol. 11, no. 23-581, p. 81, 2010.
[28] X. Wang, C. Li, N. Golbandi, M. Bendersky, and M. Najork, “The
LambdaLoss framework for ranking metric optimization,” in ACM Int.
Conf. Information and Knowledge Management, 2018, pp. 1313–1322.
[29] Y. Lan, Y. Zhu, J. Guo, S. Niu, and X. Cheng, “Position-aware ListMLE:
A sequential learning process for ranking.” in Conf. Uncertainty in
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2014, pp. 449–458.
[30] M. Taylor, J. Guiver, S. Robertson, and T. Minka, “SoftRank: Optimizing
non-smooth rank metrics,” in Int. Conf. Web Search and Data Mining,
2008, pp. 77–86.
[31] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-
training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,”
in Conf. North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, 2019, pp. 4171–4186.
[32] A. Radford, J. Wu, R. Child, D. Luan, D. Amodei, and I. Sutskever,
“Language models are unsupervised multitask learners,” OpenAI Blog,
vol. 1, no. 8, p. 9, 2019.
[33] Y. Liu, M. Ott, N. Goyal, J. Du, M. Joshi, D. Chen, O. Levy, M. Lewis,
L. Zettlemoyer, and V. Stoyanov, “RoBERTa: A robustly optimized
BERT pretraining approach,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019.
[34] Z. Lan, M. Chen, S. Goodman, K. Gimpel, P. Sharma, and R. Sori-
cut, “ALBERT: A lite BERT for self-supervised learning of language
representations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.11942, 2019.
[35] R. K. Pasumarthi, S. Bruch, X. Wang, C. Li, M. Bendersky, M. Najork,
J. Pfeifer, N. Golbandi, R. Anil, and S. Wolf, “TF-Ranking: Scalable
TensorFlow library for Learning-to-Rank,” in Int. Conf. Knowledge
Discovery & Data Mining, 2019, pp. 2970–2978.
[36] T. Trouillon, J. Welbl, S. Riedel, ´E. Gaussier, and G. Bouchard,
“Complex embeddings for simple link prediction,” in Int. Conf. Machine
Learning, 2016.
[37] T. Wolf, L. Debut, V. Sanh, J. Chaumond, C. Delangue, A. Moi,
P. Cistac, T. Rault, R. Louf, M. Funtowicz et al., “Transformers: State-of-
the-art natural language processing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03771,
2019.
[38] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan,
T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga et al., “PyTorch: An
imperative style, high-performance deep learning library,” in Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019, pp. 8026–8037.
[39] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “Decoupled weight decay regularization,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
[40] P. Bajaj, D. Campos, N. Craswell, L. Deng, J. Gao, X. Liu, R. Majumder,
A. McNamara, B. Mitra, T. Nguyen et al., “MS MARCO: A Human
Generated MAchine Reading COmprehension dataset,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.09268, 2016.
[41] O. Ormandjieva, I. Hussain, and L. Kosseim, “Toward a text classiﬁca-
tion system for the quality assessment of software requirements written
in natural language,” in Int. Workshop on Software Quality Assurance:
in Conjunction with ESEC/FSE Joint Meeting, 2007, pp. 39–45.
[42] D. Ganguly, J. Leveling, and G. Jones, “Automatic prediction of aes-
thetics and interestingness of text passages,” in Int. Conf. Computational
Linguistics: Technical Papers.
Dublin, Ireland: Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, 2014, pp. 905–916.
[43] T. U. Haque, N. N. Saber, and F. M. Shah, “Sentiment analysis on large
scale amazon product reviews,” in IEEE Int. Conf. Innovative Research
and Development.
IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–6.
[44] R. Johnson and T. Zhang, “Deep pyramid convolutional neural networks
for text categorization,” in Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2017, pp. 562–570.
[45] Z. Yang, Z. Dai, Y. Yang, J. Carbonell, R. R. Salakhutdinov, and
Q. V. Le, “XLnet: Generalized autoregressive pretraining for language
understanding,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
2019, pp. 5754–5764.
[46] B. Mitra and N. Craswell, “An updated duet model for passage re-
ranking,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.07666, 2019.
[47] B. Mitra, C. Rosset, D. Hawking, N. Craswell, F. Diaz, and E. Yil-
maz, “Incorporating query term independence assumption for efﬁcient
retrieval and ranking using deep neural networks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.03693, 2019.
[48] C. Rosset, B. Mitra, C. Xiong, N. Craswell, X. Song, and S. Tiwary,
“An axiomatic approach to regularizing neural ranking models,” in Int.
Conf. Research and Development in Information Retrieval, 2019, pp.
981–984.
[49] R. Nogueira, J. Lin, and A. Epistemic, “From doc2query to docTTTT-
Tquery,” Online preprint, 2019.
[50] Y. Qiao, C. Xiong, Z. Liu, and Z. Liu, “Understanding the behaviors of
BERT in ranking,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.07531, 2019.
[51] S. Hofst¨atter, N. Rekabsaz, C. Eickhoff, and A. Hanbury, “On the effect
of low-frequency terms on neural-IR models,” in Int. Conf. Research
and Development in Information Retrieval, 2019, pp. 1137–1140.
