Title: Multichannel LSTM-CNN for Telugu Technical Domain Identification
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2102.12179v1
--------------------------------------------------

Multichannel LSTM-CNN for Telugu Technical Domain Identiﬁcation
Sunil Gundapu
Language Technologies Research Centre
KCIS, IIIT Hyderabad
Telangana, India
sunil.g@research.iiit.ac.in
Radhika Mamidi
Language Technologies Research Centre
KCIS, IIIT Hyderabad
Telangana, India
radhika.mamidi@iiit.ac.in
Abstract
With the instantaneous growth of text informa-
tion, retrieving domain-oriented information
from the text data has a broad range of applica-
tions in Information Retrieval and Natural lan-
guage Processing. Thematic keywords give a
compressed representation of the text. Usually,
Domain Identiﬁcation plays a signiﬁcant role
in Machine Translation, Text Summarization,
Question Answering, Information Extraction,
and Sentiment Analysis. In this paper, we pro-
posed the Multichannel LSTM-CNN method-
ology for Technical Domain Identiﬁcation for
Telugu. This architecture was used and eval-
uated in the context of the ICON shared task
“TechDOﬁcation 2020” (task h), and our sys-
tem got 69.9% of the F1 score on the test
dataset and 90.01% on the validation set.
1
Introduction
Technical Domain Identiﬁcation is the task of auto-
matically identifying and categorizing a set of unla-
beled text passages/documents to their correspond-
ing domain categories from a predeﬁned domain
category set. The domain category set consists
of 6 category labels: Bio-Chemistry, Communica-
tion Technology, Computer Science, Management,
Physics, and Other. These domains can be viewed
as a set of text passages, and test text data can be
treated as a query to the system. Domain identiﬁ-
cation has many applications like Machine Trans-
lation, Summarization, Question Answering, etc.
This task would be the ﬁrst step for most down-
stream applications (i.e., Machine Translation). It
decides the domain for text data, and afterward,
Machine Translation can choose its resources as
per the identiﬁed domain.
Majority of the research work in the area of text
classiﬁcation and domain identiﬁcation has been
done in English. There has been well below con-
tribution for regional languages, especially Indian
Languages. Telugu is one of India’s old traditional
languages, and it is categorized as one of the Dra-
vidian language family. According to the Ethno-
logue1 list, there are about 93 million native Telugu
speakers, and it ranks sixteenth most-spoken lan-
guages worldwide.
We tried to identify the domain of Telugu text
data using various Supervised Machine Learning
and Deep Learning techniques in our work. Our
Multichannel LSTM-CNN method outperforms the
other methods on the provided dataset. This ap-
proach incorporates the advantages of CNN and
Self-Attention based BiLSTM into one model.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows:
Section 2 explains some related works of domain
identiﬁcation, Section 3 describes the dataset pro-
vided in the shared task, Section 4 addresses the
methodology applied in the task, Section 5 presents
the results and error analysis, and ﬁnally, Section
6 concludes the paper as well as possible future
works.
2
Related Work
Several methods for domain identiﬁcation and text
categorization have been done on Indian languages,
and few of the works have been reported on the
Telugu language. In this section, we survey some of
the methodologies and approaches used to address
domain identiﬁcation and text categorization.
Murthy (2005) explains the automatic text cate-
gorization with special emphasis on Telugu. In his
research work, supervised classiﬁcation using the
Naive Bayes classiﬁer has been applied to 800 Tel-
ugu news articles for text categorization. Swamy
et al. (2014) work on representing and categorizing
Indian language text documents using text mining
techniques K Nearest Neighbour, Naive Bayes, and
decision tree classiﬁer.
1https://www.ethnologue.com/guides/ethnologue200
arXiv:2102.12179v1  [cs.CL]  24 Feb 2021
Categorization of Telugu text documents using
language-dependent and independent models pro-
posed by Narala et al. (2017). Durga and Govard-
han (2011) introduced a model for document clas-
siﬁcation and text categorization. In their paper
described a term frequency ontology-based text
categorization for Telugu documents. Combining
LSTM and CNN’s robustness, Liu et al. (2020) pro-
posed Attention-based Multichannel Convolutional
Neural Network for text classiﬁcation. In their
network, BiLSTM encodes the history and future
information of words, and CNN capture relations
between words.
3
Dataset Description
We used the dataset provided by the organizers
of Task-h of TechDOﬁcation 2020 for training the
models. The data for the task consists of 68865 text
documents for training, 5920 for validation, 2611
for testing. For hyperparameter tuning, we used
the validation set provided by the organizers. The
statistics of the dataset are shown in Table 1. And
the amount of texts for the dataset can be seen in
Figure 1.
Labels(↓)
Train Data
Validation Data
cse
24937
2175
phy
16839
1650
com tech
11626
970
bio tech
7468
580
mgnt
2347
155
other
5648
390
Total
68865
5920
Table 1: Dataset Statistics
Figure 1: Number of samples per class
4
Proposed Approach
4.1
Data Preprocessing
The text passages have been originally provided in
the Telugu script with the corresponding domain
tags. The text documents have some noise, so be-
fore passing the text to the training stage, they are
preprocessed using the following procedure:
• Acronym Mapping Dictionary: We created
an acronym mapping dictionary. Expanded
the English acronyms using the acronym map-
ping dictionary.
• Find Language Words: Sometimes, English
words are co-located with Telugu words in the
passage. We ﬁnd the index of those words to
translate into Telugu.
• Translate English Words: Translate the En-
glish words into the Telugu language, which
are identiﬁed in the ﬁrst stage of preprocess-
ing. Google’s Translation API2 was used for
this purpose.
• Hindi Sentence Translation: We can ob-
serve a few Hindi sentences in the dataset. We
translated those sentences into Telugu using
Google translation tool.
• Noise Removal: Removed the unnecessary
tokens, punctuation marks, non-UTF format
tokens, and single length English tokens from
the text data.
4.2
Supervise Machine Learning Algorithms
To build the ﬁnest system for domain identiﬁcation,
we started with supervised machine learning tech-
niques then moved to deep learning models. SVM,
Multilayer Perceptron, Linear Classiﬁer, Gradient
Boosting methods performed very well on the given
training dataset. These supervised models trained
on the word level, n-gram level, and character level
TF-IDF vector representations.
4.3
Multichannel LSTM-CNN Architecture
We started experiments with individual LSTM,
GRU, CNN models with different word embed-
dings like word2vec, glove and fasstext. How-
ever, ensembling of CNN with self-attention LSTM
model gave better results than individual models.
2https://py-googletrans.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
We develop a multichannel model for domain
identiﬁcation consisting of two main components.
The ﬁrst component is a long short time mem-
ory (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997) (hence-
forth, LSTM). The advantage of LSTM can han-
dle the long term dependencies but does not store
the global semantics of foregoing information in
a variable-sized vector. The second component
is a convolutional neural network (LeCun, 1989)
(henceforth, CNN). The advantage of CNN can
capture the n-gram features of text by using con-
volution ﬁlters, but it restricts the performance due
to convolutional ﬁlters size. By considering the
strengths of these two components, we ensemble
the LSTM and CNN model for domain identiﬁca-
tion.
Figure 2: Multichannel LSTM-CNN Model
4.3.1
Self-Attention BiLSTM Classiﬁer
The ﬁrst module in architecture is Self-Attention
based BiLSTM classiﬁer. We employed this self-
attention (Xu et al., 2015) based BiLSTM model
to extract the semantic and sentiment information
from the input text data. Self-attention is an intra-
attention mechanism in which a softmax function
gives each subword’s weights in the sentence. The
outcome of this module is a weighted sum of hid-
den representations at each subword.
The self-attention mechanism is built on BiL-
STMs architecture (See ﬁgure 3), and it takes input
as pre-trained embeddings of the subwords. We
passed the Telugu fasttext (Grave et al., 2018) sub-
word embeddings to a BiLSTM layer to get hidden
representation at each timestep, which is the input
to the self-attention component.
Suppose the input sentence S is given by the
subwords (w1, w2, ..., wn). Let −→h represents the
forward hidden state and ←−h represents the back-
ward hidden state at ith position in BiLSTM. The
merged representation ki is obtained by combining
Figure 3: Self-Attention BiLSTM
the forward and backward hidden states. We con-
catenate the forward and backward hidden units to
get the merged representations (k1, k2, ...kn).
ki = [−→
hi; ←−
hi]
(1)
The self-attention model gives a score ei to each
subword i in the sentence S, as given by below
equation
ei = kT
i kn
(2)
Then we calculate the attention weight ai by
normalizing the attention score ei
ai =
exp(ei)
Pn
j=1 exp(ej)
(3)
Finally, we compute the sentence S latent repre-
sentation vector h using below equation
h =
ai×ki
X
i=1
(4)
The latent representation vector h is fed to a
fully connected layer followed by a softmax layer
to obtain probabilities Plstm.
4.3.2
Convolutional Neural Network
The second component is CNN, which consider the
ordering of the words and the context in which each
word appears in the sentence. We present Telugu
fasstext subword embeddings (Bojanowski et al.
(2016)) of a sentence to 1D-CNN (See ﬁgure 4) to
generate the required embeddings.
Figure 4: CNN Classiﬁer
Initially, we present a d × S sentence embed-
ding matrix to the convolution layer. Each row is
a d-dimension fasstext subword embedding vec-
tor of each word, and S is sentence length. We
perform convolution operations in the convolution
layer with three different kernel sizes (2, 4, and
6). The purpose behind using various kernel sizes
was to capture contexts of varying lengths and to
extract local features around each word window.
The output of convolution layers was passed to cor-
responding max-pooling layers. The max-pooling
layer is used to preserve the word order and bring
out the important features from the feature map.
We change the original max-pooling layer in the
convolution neural network with the word order-
preserving k-max-pooling layer to preserve the in-
putted sentences word order. The order persevering
max-pooling layer reduces the number of features
while preserving the order of these words.
The max-pooling layer output is concatenated
together fed to a fully connected layer followed
by a softmax layer to obtain softmax probabilities
Pcnn.
The CNN and BiLSTM models softmax prob-
abilities are aggregated (See ﬁgure 2) using an
element-wise product to obtain the ﬁnal probabil-
ities Pfinal = Pcnn ◦Plstm. We tried various ag-
gregation techniques like average, maximum, min-
imum, element-wise addition, and element-wise
multiplication to combine LSTM and CNN mod-
els’ probabilities. But an element-wise product
gave better results than other techniques.
5
Results and Error Analysis
We ﬁrst started our experiments with machine learn-
ing algorithms with various kinds of TF-IDF fea-
ture vector representations. SVM, MLP gave pretty
good results on the validation dataset but failed
on bio-chemistry and management data points.
And CNN model with fasstext word embeddings
seemed to be confused between the computer tech-
nology and cse data points (See table 2). Maybe the
reason behind this confusion is that both datapoints
quite similar at the syntactic level.
The self-attention based BiLSTM model outper-
forms the CNN model on physics, cse, and com-
puter technology data points though it performs
worse on the bio-chemistry and management data
points. If we observe the training set, 75% of the
data samples belong to physics, cse, and computer
technology domains remaining 25% of data owned
by the remaining domain labels. So we were as-
suming that an imbalanced training set was also
one of the problems for misclassiﬁcation of bio-
chemistry and management domain samples. We
tried to handle the this data-skewing problem with
SMOTE (Chawla et al., 2002) technique, but it is
doesn’t work very well.
After observing the CNN and BiLSTM model
results, we ensemble these two models for better
results. The ensemble Multichannel LSTM CNN
model outperforms all our previous models, achiev-
ing a recall of 0.90 with the weighted F1-score of
0.90 on the development dataset and a recall of
0.698 with an F1-score of 0.699 on the test dataset
(See table 3).
Validation Data
Test Data
Model
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1-Score
Accracy
Precision
Recall
F1-Score
SVM
0.8612
0.8598
0.8601
0.866
-
-
-
-
CNN
0.8890
0.8874
0.8897
0.8902
0.6465
0.6558
0.6948
0.6609
BiLSTM
0.8706
0.8714
0.8702
0.8786
0.6465
0.6519
0.6927
0.6571
Multichannel
0.9001
0.9008
0.9006
0.9003
0.6928
0.6984
0.7228
0.6992
Organizers System
-
-
-
-
0.6855
0.6974
0.7289
0.7028
Table 2: Comparison between various model results
Measures(↓)
Validation Data
Test Data
precision
0.90
0.7228
recall
0.90
0.6984
f1score
0.90
0.6992
accuracy
0.9003
0.6928
Table 3: Performance of multichannel system
6
Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed a multichannel approach
that integrates the advantages of CNN and LSTM.
This model captures local, global dependencies,
and sentiment in a sentence. Our approach gives
better results than individual CNN, LSTM, and
supervised machine learning algorithms on the Tel-
ugu TechDOﬁcation dataset.
As discussed in the previous section, we will
handle the data imbalance problem efﬁciently in
future work. And we will improve the performance
of the unambiguous cases in cse and computer tech-
nology domains.
References
Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin,
and Tomas Mikolov. 2016.
Enriching word vec-
tors with subword information.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1607.04606.
Nitesh Chawla, Kevin Bowyer, Lawrence Hall, and
W. Kegelmeyer. 2002. Smote: Synthetic minority
over-sampling technique. J. Artif. Intell. Res. (JAIR),
16:321–357.
A. Durga and A. Govardhan. 2011. Ontology based
text categorization - telugu documents.
Edouard Grave, Piotr Bojanowski, Prakhar Gupta, Ar-
mand Joulin, and Tomas Mikolov. 2018. Learning
word vectors for 157 languages.
In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC 2018).
Sepp Hochreiter and J¨urgen Schmidhuber. 1997. Long
short-term memory. Neural computation, 9:1735–
80.
Y. LeCun. 1989. Generalization and network design
strategies.
Zhenyu Liu,
Haiwei Huang,
Chaohong Lu,
and
Shengfei Lyu. 2020. Multichannel cnn with atten-
tion for text classiﬁcation. ArXiv, abs/2006.16174.
Kavi Murthy. 2005. Automatic categorization of telugu
news articles.
Swapna Narala, B. P. Rani, and K. Ramakrishna. 2017.
Telugu text categorization using language models.
Global journal of computer science and technology.
M. N. Swamy, M. Hanumanthappa, and N. Jyothi.
2014.
Indian language text representation and
categorization using supervised learning algorithm.
2014 International Conference on Intelligent Com-
puting Applications, pages 406–410.
Kelvin Xu, Jimmy Ba, Ryan Kiros, Kyunghyun Cho,
Aaron C. Courville, R. Salakhutdinov, R. Zemel, and
Yoshua Bengio. 2015. Show, attend and tell: Neural
image caption generation with visual attention. In
ICML.
