Title: An Open Natural Language Processing Development Framework for EHR-based Clinical Research: A case demonstration using the National COVID Cohort Collaborative (N3C)
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2110.10780v3
--------------------------------------------------

 
 
 
 
An Open Natural Language Processing (NLP) 
Framework for EHR-based Clinical Research: A Case 
Demonstration Using the National COVID Cohort 
Collaborative (N3C) 
Sijia Liu1,*, Andrew Wen1,*, Liwei Wang1,*, Huan He1,*, Sunyang Fu1,*, Robert Miller2, Andrew 
Williams2, Daniel Harris3, Ramakanth Kavuluru3, Mei Liu4, Noor Abu-el-rub4, Dalton Schutte5, 
Rui Zhang5, Masoud Rouhizadeh6, John D. Osborne7, Yongqun He8, Umit Topaloglu9, Stephanie 
S Hong10, Joel H Saltz11, Thomas Schaffter12, Emily Pfaff13, Christopher G. Chute10, Tim Duong14, 
Melissa A. Haendel15, Rafael Fuentes16, Peter Szolovits17, Hua Xu18, Hongfang Liu1, National 
COVID Cohort Collaborative (N3C) Natural Language Processing (NLP) Subgroup, National 
COVID Cohort Collaborative (N3C) 
1. Department of Artificial Intelligence and Informatics, Mayo Clinic.  
2. Tufts Clinical and Translational Science Institute, Tufts Medical Center.  
3. Department of Internal Medicine, University of Kentucky.  
4. Department of Internal Medicine, University of Kansas Medical Center.  
5. Department of Pharmaceutical Care & Health Systems, University of Minnesota at Twin 
Cities.  
6. Department of Pharmaceutical Outcomes & Policy, University of Florida 
7. Department of Computer Science, University of Alabama at Birmingham. 
8. University of Michigan Medical School. 
9. Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center. 
10. Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University.  
11. Department of Biomedical Informatics, Stony Brook University. 
12. Sage Bionetwork. 
 
 
 
 
13. Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina Chapel Hill.  
14. Albert Einstein College of Medicine.  
15. Center for Health AI, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus.  
16. Alex Informatics. 
17. Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology.  
18. School of Biomedical Informatics, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston. 
* These authors contributed equally to this study 
 
Abstract 
Despite recent methodology advancements in clinical natural language processing (NLP), 
adoption of clinical NLP models within the clinical and translational research community remains 
hindered by issues with ETL process heterogeneity and human factor variations. In this study, we 
proposed an open NLP development framework with the aim of addressing these issues. The 
viability of such a platform was evaluated on a COVID-19 use case through sites participating in 
the National COVID Cohort Collaborative (N3C). As part of our assessment of the impact of single 
vs. multi-site NLP algorithm development, we evaluated the performance of both an NLP ruleset 
developed solely using a single site’s clinical narratives as well as one further refined using a 
synthetic derived dataset sourced from three sites (Mayo, UKen, and UMN). The single-site ruleset 
resulted in performances of 0.876, 0.706, and 0.694 in F-scores for Mayo, Minnesota, and 
Kentucky test datasets, respectively, while the multi-site NLP ruleset improved performances to 
0.884, 0.769 and 0.806.  The results of our use case test run inform us of the importance of a multi-
site federated development, evaluation, and implementation framework. As such, we aim to meet 
 
 
 
 
this need with our framework by providing the tools necessary to conduct NLP development in a 
collaborative manner through consensus building, process coordination, and best practice sharing. 
 
Introduction 
Over the past decade, Electronic Health Record (EHR) systems have been increasingly 
implemented at US healthcare institutions. Large amounts of detailed longitudinal patient 
information, including lab tests, medications, disease status, and treatment outcomes, have 
consequently been accumulated and made electronically available. These large clinical databases 
are valuable data sources for clinical and translational research. As a result, major initiatives have 
been established to exploit this crucial resource, including the Clinical and Translational Science 
Awards (CTSA) Program’s National Center for Data to Health (CD2H)/National COVID Cohort 
Collaborative (N3C)1, 2, the Electronic Medical Records and Genomics (eMERGE) Network3, the 
Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute’s (PCORI) Clinical Research Networks (CRNs)4, 
the NIH All of Us Research Program5, and the Observational Health Data Science and Informatics 
(OHDSI) Consortia with demonstrated successes6, 7, 8, 9.  
One common challenge faced by those initiatives is, however, the prevalence of clinical 
information embedded in unstructured text10. Compared to structured data entry, text is a more 
conventional way in the healthcare environment to document impressions, clinical findings, 
assessments, and care plans. Even with the advent of sophisticated EHR systems, studies have 
shown that capturing health information fully in structured format through data entry is unlikely 
to happen and a blended model where physicians use templates when and where possible and 
dictate the details of a patient visit in text11. 
Natural language processing (NLP) has been promoted as having a great potential to extract 
information from text12. NLP algorithms can generally be categorized into using either symbolic 
 
 
 
 
or statistical methods13. Since the turn of the century, machine learning algorithms (i.e., statistical 
NLP) have gained increased prominence in clinical NLP research14. Nevertheless, a substantial 
portion of clinical NLP use cases leverages symbolic techniques given that dictionary or rule-based 
methodologies suffice to meet the information needs of many clinical applications under specific 
use cases. In the context of EHR-based clinical research, NLP has been leveraged to assist 
information extraction and knowledge conversion at different stages of research including 
feasibility assessment, eligibility criteria screening, data elements extraction, and text data 
analytics. As a result, an increasing number of clinical research benefits from state-of-the-art NLP 
solutions and have been reported ranging from disease study areas15, 16, 17, 18 to drug-related 
studies19, 20. A majority of existing clinical NLP studies are, however, done within a mono-
institutional environment13, which may suffer from limited external validity and research 
inclusiveness. Compared with single-site research, multisite research potentially offers larger 
sample size, more adequate representation of participant demographics (e.g., age, gender, race, 
ethnicity, and social-economic status), and more diverse investigator expertise, which may 
ultimately yield a higher level of research evidence21, 22, 23, 24.  
Despite a plethora of recent advances in adopting NLP for clinical research, there have been 
barriers towards adoption of NLP solutions in clinical and translation research, especially in multi-
site settings. The root causes of these barriers can be categorized into two major reasons: 1) 
heterogeneity of ETL (extract, transform, load) processes between differing sites with their own 
disparate EHR environments, and 2) human factor variation in gold standard corpus development 
processes.  
ETL Process Heterogeneity. The challenges faced by NLP development and evaluation to 
facilitate the secondary use of EHR data originate from the complex, voluminous, and dynamic 
nature of the data being documented and stored within a heterogeneous set of disparate, institution 
specific, EHR implementations. Variations in EHR system vendors, data infrastructure (e.g., 
unified, ontology driven, and de-centralized), and institutions’ modes of operation can lead to 
 
 
 
 
idiosyncratic ways of clinical documentation, transformed, and representation25. Collecting these 
data would require a significant expenditure  of effort to locate, retrieve, and link EHR data into a 
specific format26. This variability in ETL processes required to support a high level of data 
heterogeneity brings additional challenges in the adoption of NLP for clinical and translational 
research, which  substantially limits both the cross-institutional interoperability of developed NLP 
solutions and the reproducibility of the associated evaluations.  
Human factor variation in gold standard corpus development process.  The process of 
developing, evaluating, and deploying NLP solutions in both mono- and multi-site environments 
can be task-specific, iterative, and complex, often involving a multitude of stakeholders with 
diverse backgrounds13, 26. A key step prior to model development is corpus annotation, the process 
of developing a gold standard by marking the occurrence of both task-defined sets of clinical 
information as well as their associated interpretative linguistic features (e.g., certainty, status) 
within text documents. Due to the complexity of clinical language, creating such gold standard 
corpora requires significant expenditure of domain expertise and time as clinical experts regularly 
make decisions directly affecting study cohort, annotation guideline, and task definitions. Studies 
have discovered potential biases in clinical decision making and  interpretation of  clinical 
guidelines27, in coding of clinical terminologies28, and in interpretation of imaging findings29. This 
issue can be further exacerbated when conducting multi-site collaborations due to inter-site 
variations in care practice30, 31, ultimately affecting the validity and reliability of the resulting gold 
standard corpus.  A coordinated, transparent, and collaborative platform is therefore needed to 
promote open team science collaboration in NLP algorithm development and evaluation through 
consensus building, process coordination, and best practice sharing. 
Built upon our previous work32, 33, here, we proposed an open NLP development framework to 
address the aforementioned issues through the following components: 1) an interoperable NLP 
infrastructure for incorporation of different NLP engines utilizing a clinical common data model 
for data source interfacing and representation with the aim of reducing the impact of the 
 
 
 
 
heterogeneity of ETL processes; 2) a transparent multi-site participation workflow on corpus 
development and evaluation with the aim of addressing the variation in data abstraction and 
annotation processes between sites; and 3) a user-centric crowdsourcing interface for collaborative 
ruleset development that enables effectively and efficiently gathering, synthesizing, and fusing 
site-specific knowledge and findings. To demonstrate the viability of the framework, we conducted 
a case study where we developed, evaluated, and implemented an NLP algorithm for extracting 34, 
35, 36 COVID-19 signs and symptoms to support the National COVID Cohort Collaborative (N3C).  
 
Results 
Framework Description 
The framework itself consists of a data ingestion layer, a processing layer, and a data persistence 
layer. The architecture of the proposed framework is illustrated in Figure 3. The data ingestion 
layer works as the data collector with the ability to read text from a configurable variety of data 
sources such as relational databases or file systems including and load them into the NOTE table 
of OMOP CDM. The processing layer serves as the NLP engine where information extraction 
from raw texts happens given a set of heuristic rules created by various NLP engines. By default, 
as an example implementation, the MedTagger37 NLP engine is provided, although alternative 
NLP engines can be substituted by wrapping their respective NLP pipelines to conform to a 
provided API specification. After the term modifiers added by contextual rules from ConText 
Algorithm38 around the extracted condition mentions, these conditions will compose clinical 
events with temporal information. The reason we opt for a symbolic solution is due to its 
simplicity, transparency, and interpretability as the outcomes are fully deterministic based on the 
definition of the rules. When the baseline rulesets and dictionaries are made available to the public, 
they can therefore be easily refined by different users from different sites.  The data persistence 
 
 
 
 
layer stores resulting extracted NLP artifacts in the OMOP CDM NOTE_NLP table as the events 
are extracted from NLP systems. 
The framework is distributed as open-source software under the Apache 2.0 license via Github in 
three parts: 1) ETL Backbone (https://github.com/OHNLP/Backbone) with an example NLP 
engine 
(https://github.com/OHNLP/MedTagger), 
2) 
process 
documentation 
(https://github.com/OHNLP/N3C-NLP-Documentation/wiki), 
3) 
open-source 
collaborative 
platform for developing NLP rulesets (https://github.com/OHNLP/OHNLPTK). The demo 
homepage (Figure 2(a) - https://ohnlp4covid-dev.n3c.ncats.io/) demonstrates the N3C NLP engine 
outputs on annotating clinical text using the baseline rulesets and dictionary. The annotations are 
from components of Sign/Symptom extractor, temporal information extractor and dictionary 
lookup extractor. To further customize each model, the users can visit “Rule Editor” 
(https://ohnlp4covid-dev.n3c.ncats.io/ie_editor) 
and 
the 
“Dictionary 
Builder” 
(https://ohnlp4covid-dev.n3c.ncats.io/dict_builder) page (Figure 2(b)). Figure 2(c) provides an 
example of the rules editing interface with the baseline COVID-19 ruleset. The rulesets can be 
tested in real time by clicking the “Upload and test” button, where the rulesets will be uploaded, 
and the NLP engine will be generated for testing and debugging purposes. As a use case study, we 
also provide an example NLP project for extracting signs/symptoms related to COVID-19 that was 
developed as an example use case for this framework. The elements with original texts such as 
text snippets and concept mentions are truncated before submission.  
N3C Case Study 
NLP Algorithm Development and Evaluation: Table 1 shows the annotation corpora statistics. 
A COVID-19 sign/symptom ruleset was produced consisting of 17 concepts. The IAA of the 
annotated corpus was 0.686 F1-score for Mayo, 0.516 for UMN and 0.211 for UKen. Two NLP 
algorithms were evaluated in this study. One was developed based solely on the narratives sourced 
from a single site (Mayo Clinic). The other used the resulting NLP algorithm from the single site 
 
 
 
 
and fine-tuned based on the annotated training data from an additional two sites (UMN and UKen). 
Table 2 shows the performance of the single-site NLP algorithm and Table 3 shows the 
performance of the multi-site NLP algorithm. The single-site ruleset resulted in performances of 
0.876, 0.706, and 0.694 in F-scores for Mayo, Minnesota, and Kentucky test datasets, respectively, 
while the multi-site NLP ruleset improved performances to 0.884, 0.769 and 0.806. The 
performance of the multi-site NLP algorithm was better than that of the single-site NLP algorithm, 
but both showed a degrading trend from Mayo site to other sites. 
Tables 4, 5 and 6 show the results of error analysis for the three sites. For FP, major discrepancies 
between the NLP algorithm and the gold standard were due to the NLP algorithm extracting 
mentions that are not COVID signs/symptoms but for instruction/patient education, adverse 
events/indication of treatment, clinical goal/precaution, template, etc. It should be noted that gold 
standards were not always correct, and in some notes, it was hard to judge if the mentions are 
COVID signs/symptoms when symptoms are not appearing with COVID or de-identified dates are 
inconsistent. For FN, reasons include NLP algorithm not complete, tokenization error due to de-
identification process, template, and annotation errors.  
 
Discussion 
In this study, we proposed an open NLP development framework with the following properties: 
an interoperable NLP infrastructure, a transparent multi-site participation workflow, and a user-
centric crowdsourcing interface. The key goal of this framework is to facilitate multi-site 
collaborative development, evaluation, and implementation of NLP algorithms. The framework 
has been implemented to support efforts conducted by the National COVID Cohort Collaborative 
(N3C) to enable the utilization of unstructured text in high throughput.  
 
 
 
 
Here, we have presented our results from running our framework using a centralized annotation 
process on texts sourced from multiple sites after de-identification, with the aim of assessing the 
impact on NLP algorithm development (single-site algorithm vs multi-site algorithm). Several 
pragmatic implementation challenges were discovered that may impact the intermediate and final 
NLP results. We observed that IAA varied greatly between the three sites despite the fact that 
annotators had been trained using de-identified Mayo notes (0.686 F1-score for Mayo, 0.516 for 
UMN, 0.211 for UKen). Firstly, utilizing a centralized annotation approach, the process of text 
data collection took a very long time because each site needs to complete de-identification before 
sharing data. Secondly, it was a challenge for annotators to work on annotation tasks that spanned 
a long period of time. Thirdly, the shared data sets were usually small, and as such, annotators had 
no chance to do annotation training using these outside notes, and it was hard for them to get 
familiar with the disparate variety of document structures from other sites.  
Both multi-site and single-site NLP algorithms showed a degrading trend in performance from 
Mayo site to other sites, albeit this issue being less prominent in the multi-site NLP algorithm as 
compared to the single-site NLP algorithm. The data sharing issues also impacted NLP algorithm 
performance. First, training sets from outside institutions were very small due to the small number 
of shared notes, causing difficulties in developing comprehensive rules as features, patterns, and 
contextual information that could appear in third party narratives could not be fully represented in 
such a small sample. Second, de-identification processes could cause text span issues that may 
impact the input text format and thus NLP algorithm performance. The algorithm performance for 
algorithms developed through a centralized mode was therefore not ideal for immediate use at 
multiple sites, as additional local fine-tuning is still needed before final implementation and 
application. 
Our experiment results showed that a centralized approach towards multi-site NLP algorithm 
development is suboptimal for advancing the adoption of NLP techniques in the clinical and 
translational research community, this further support our proposed federated method. The 
 
 
 
 
experiment also demonstrates that deployment of NLP algorithms for multi-site studies needs to 
be done in each local site. To ensure the scientific rigor of the data generated, each site need to 
perform annotation and evaluation on their own while collectively contributing to NLP algorithm 
development and refinement. Since the NLP models are to be shared in rule-based systems, the 
models can be shared without the concerns typically associated with language resources involving 
the Protected Health Information (PHI) issue.   
In the proposed workflow, each site will evaluate the NLP algorithms for concept extraction by 
creating a gold standard corpus based on the common annotation guidelines. The federated 
evaluation can be deployed leveraging cloud computing through a centralized controller where 
NLP algorithms can be distributed to each institution. NLP Sandbox1 is an example of such an 
evaluation framework, which uses Docker39 containers to encapsulate algorithm implementations. 
By adopting this process, the evaluation only happens behind each institution’s firewall, and only 
the summary statistics on NLP algorithm performance (i.e., no raw data containing PHI) is 
transferred out of the firewall. Performance statistics, such as the precision, recall, and F1-score, 
as defined depending on the experimental setting, can be obtained in near real-time and can thus 
be used as part of continuous development workflows. 
This federated process offers several benefits. For instance, when conducting error analysis, we 
discovered that contexts played an important role in this case study. Error analyses showed it was 
not a trivial task to extract COVID signs/symptoms, as their occurrence is not necessarily isolated 
only to occurring due to COVID, and as they could appear as adverse events/indication of 
treatment, or in instruction/patient education, or clinical goal/precaution, etc. This posed a 
challenge not only for annotation, but also for the NLP algorithm development. One benefit of the 
 
1 NLP Sandbox: https://github.com/nlpsandbox 
 
 
 
 
federated annotation and development process is that these contexts can be systematically 
incorporated by local expertise in the annotation process.  
Deployment of a federated development framework requires the participation of multiple sites. 
Adoption can, however, be hindered by the fact that the process of translating NLP algorithms into 
implementation is complex, much like the “bench to bedside” process that translates laboratory 
discoveries into patient care. To facilitate participation in our federated method, we have 
developed a further suite of tools such as MedTator40 and best practice guidelines41. MedTator, a 
serverless annotation tool, aims to provide an intuitive and interactive user interface for high-
quality annotation corpus generation. The best practice guideline contains detailed instructions for 
facilitating multisite annotation practice with the following key activities: task formulation, cohort 
screening, annotation guideline development, annotation training, annotation production, and 
adjudication.  
Simply having the toolsets be available, is, however, insufficient. Pragmatically, we have seen that 
there is a hyper focus on novel methods in academia with competing as opposed to collaborative 
priorities in NLP algorithm development. Our experience suggests that a collaborative 
development process for NLP algorithms is needed for truly implementable and useful multi-site 
NLP solutions. This is one of the key goals we seek to achieve with the Open Health Natural 
Language Processing (OHNLP) Collaboratory and have thus positioned our framework’s 
workflow to facilitate this task. Additionally, we recognize that it is not simply a software problem, 
a local workforce is also needed at each institution. As a consequence of conducting coordinated 
development of NLP algorithms deployed using our framework as a solution for consortia-specific 
tasks such as with the N3C, we simultaneously build the human workforce locally at institutions 
necessary to conduct the federated development, evaluation, and implementation of NLP 
algorithms using our framework.  
 
 
 
 
 
Methods 
Design Principles 
Incorporating standards and interoperability. A common barrier to the widespread adoption of 
NLP in clinical research is the need to transform input and outputs to conform to part of an overall 
pipeline. While seemingly straightforward, such a task is difficult without prior significant 
investment in associated infrastructure and dedicated software development. It is therefore 
desirable to leverage existing infrastructure where possible and incorporate such an effort into the 
distributed NLP pipeline to reduce technical burden on the end user. 
There is, however, significant variation in terms of available infrastructure and data availability 
amongst different institutions. Creating a solution that is immediately suitable for all these 
environments out of the box would be immensely challenging. For that reason, we sought to 
leverage existing data modeling efforts that are likely to be already adopted by academic medical 
institutions to standardize the data ingestion and output process. In our implementation, we chose 
the Observational Health Data Sciences and Informatics’ Observational Medical Outcomes 
Partnership common data model (OHDSI/OMOP CDM) to handle input of clinical narratives via 
the NOTE table and output via the NOTE_NLP table. This brings the advantage that input/output 
is now standardized: so long as institutions have already transformed their clinical data into the 
OMOP CDM, and/or their downstream NLP-reliant applications read from the OMOP CDM 
database, no additional technical development burden is needed. 
It is important to note that standardization as a default only serves to simplify adoption for those 
who already have a solution complying with the standard and cannot be a comprehensive solution. 
A purely OMOP CDM reliant solution is not ideal, as not all institutions will have their own OMOP 
CDM instance and standing up such an instance to just use a pipeline may produce undue burden. 
For that reason, input/output in our infrastructure is modularized, and can be substituted at will: 
the default OMOP CDM I/O utilizes a variant of SQL-based data extractors/writers, and the 
 
 
 
 
specific query and connection strings used can be substituted via plaintext configuration changes. 
Additionally, SQL-based I/O is not the only supported setting, a variety of other data sources 
including Elasticsearch, google cloud storage, amazon s3, and plaintext are included as well as 
configuration-swappable options. 
Crowdsourcing algorithm development. To promote collaboration and sharing efforts between 
participants in the algorithm development process, we built a crowdsourcing platform for domain 
experts to upload, customize, and examine their NLP algorithms in an interactive web application. 
Users can create keyword-based and rule-based algorithms and test the performance in the online 
environment instantly. The crowdsourcing platform consists of three modules based on our NLP 
system to support expert collaboration, including dictionary builder, regular expression rule set 
editor, and detection result visualization.  
The dictionary builder can extend the keyword collection used by the algorithm. Users can 
customize particular terms from the ontology database such as CIDO 42 and MONDO 43. The 
regular expression rule set editor provides an integrated interface to help users customize their own 
regular expression rule set (on top of an existing dictionary, if desired), to support use cases such 
as extraction of new symptoms, treatments, or outcomes. The detection result visualization is 
designed based on Brat annotation tool 44 to check the results generated by different methods.  
Case study 
The National COVID Cohort Collaborative36 (N3C) is a novel partnership that includes the 
Clinical and Translational Science Awards (CTSA) Program hubs, the National Center for 
Advancing Translational Science (NCATS), the Center for Data to Health (CD2H) and the 
community, focusing on collaborative sharing of structured EHR data. Access to unstructured data 
is limited due to protection of PHI and clinical care decision logics, that were further contributing 
to NLP infrastructure lacking within the consortia. However, structured data does not show the 
whole picture from the EHR perspective, greatly restricting research activities. In this case study, 
 
 
 
 
extraction of COVID-19 signs and symptoms was used as a case study to investigate the viability 
of the proposed framework among sites participating in the N3C.   
Centralizing gold standard corpus development. Due to resources and time constraints at each 
of the N3C sites, we opted to conduct the gold standard corpus development process in a 
centralized manner. A collection of de-identified and synthesized clinical documents was gathered 
from participating sites through an existing de-identification effort led by the NCATS Clinical 
Data to Health (CD2H). The N3C deidentification and synthetic text generation workflow is 
illustrated in Figure 1. Specifically, clinical notes from patients with positive COVID-19 test 
results from three institutions, Mayo Clinic, the University of Kentucky (UKen), and the 
University of Minnesota at Twin Cities (UMN) were initially collected. Notes that were not office 
visit notes (e.g., nurse calls, etc.), notes that had fewer than 1000 characters, and notes that were 
authored more than 14 days prior to the date of the patient’s earliest positive COVID-19 test result 
were further filtered out. A total of 369 clinical notes from these sites that met these criteria were 
randomly selected, de-identified using the de-identification program developed by the Medical 
College of Wisconsin followed by manual review. The removed PHI identifiers are replaced by 
the programmatically added synthetic texts. We collected 20 signs and symptoms of COVID-19 
as a basic COVID-19 concept set according to the recommendations from the CDC and Mayo 
Clinic. Five out of the 20 concepts are emergency warning signs including dyspnea, chest pain, 
delirium, hypersomnia and cyanosis. We then gathered formal definitions of each clinical concept 
from the Coronavirus Infectious Disease Ontology (CIDO) 42. Based on the Open Biological and 
Biomedical Ontology (OBO) Foundry library, CIDO concepts were imported from 45 ontologies, 
and it uses Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) 45 for phenotypes. Some representative phenotypes 
shown in COVID-19 have been imported to the CIDO. However, if the chosen COVID-19 clinical 
concepts were not collected by the CIDO, we re-pulled them from the HPO to the CIDO. We also 
gathered cross-reference concept codes from the CIDO including UMLS 46, SNOMED-CT 47, 
MeSH 48, HPO, MeDDRA 49.  
 
 
 
 
We selected available clinical notes from both inpatients and outpatients in the two-week window 
preceding the order date of the first positive COVID-19 result as the annotation cohort. After the 
text data was collected from participating sites, the same annotation process was completed by the 
annotator team from Mayo Clinic to generate the gold standard annotations on COVID-19 signs 
and symptoms. There are 313 clinical notes from Mayo Clinic, 20 notes from UKen and 36 notes 
from UMN. Annotators were first trained using Mayo notes to gain better understanding of the 
annotation guidelines. Inter-annotator agreement (IAA) was calculated after annotation and 
corresponding discrepancies were resolved by discussions between the two annotators to generate 
a final gold standard dataset.   
NLP algorithm development and evaluation. Using the annotated corpus, we developed both a 
single-site and multi-site NLP algorithm using a regular expression-based matching method, which 
has been widely adopted for information extraction in clinical settings. Specifically, for the Mayo 
data, we randomly chose 101 notes out of the 313 annotated notes as development set, 105 notes 
as validation set, and the remaining 107 notes were used as the testing set. For the UKen data, 10 
notes were used for training and 10 for testing. For the UMN data, 18 was used for training and 18 
for testing. Single-site algorithm was developed using the development set and validation set from 
Mayo, tested on the Mayo testing set and all data from UKen and UMN. Multi-site algorithm was 
generated through further refinement of the single-site algorithm using training sets from UKen 
and UMN and then tested on testing sets from all sites.  
We evaluated the performance of single-site and multi-site algorithms using precision, recall, and 
F1-score for the annotated concept mentions, without and with certainty. A span can be represented 
from the start position to the end position of the concept mention. Certainty is an attribute of the 
concept mention including positive, negated, hypothetical and possible. For the mention-level 
evaluation without certainty, when there are overlaps between the gold standard mention span and 
the NLP detected mention span while the concept type (i.e., the specific sign/symptom such as 
fever, cough) is the same, it is considered a true positive (TP). If a concept mention exists in the 
 
 
 
 
gold standard annotation but not detected by the NLP algorithm, or spans overlap but the concept 
type is not matched, it is considered as a false negative (FN). If a concept mention is detected by 
the algorithm but does not exist in the gold standard annotation, the concept is considered as a 
false positive (FP). For the mention-level span and certainty evaluation, certainty match needs to 
be considered when calculating TP, FN and FP. The precision, recall and F1-score are then 
calculated as follows. We further manually analyzed errors from multi-site algorithm mention-
level evaluation without certainty. 
Pr 𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛=
𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃+ 𝐹𝑁 
𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙=
𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃+ 𝐹𝑁 
𝐹1 = 2 ⋅Pr 𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛⋅𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙
Pr 𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛+ 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acknowledgment 
This research was possible because of the patients whose information is included within the data 
and the organizations and scientists who have contributed to the on-going development of this 
community resource https://doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocaa196. The analyses described in this 
publication were conducted with data or tools accessed through the NCATS N3C Data Enclave 
https://covid.cd2h.org and N3C Attribution & Publication Policy v1.2-2020-08-25b and supported 
by NCATS U24 TR002306. This task was made possible by the National Center for Advancing 
Translational Sciences of the National Institutes of Health under award number U01TR02062 and 
the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and 
does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health. 
Code Availability Statement 
Framework components can be found on GitHub: 
• ETL Pipeline: https://github.com/OHNLP/Backbone 
• NLP Implementation: https://github.com/OHNLP/MedTagger 
• Web Rule Editor Front-end: https://github.com/OHNLP/OHNLPTK 
• MedTator annotation tool: https://github.com/OHNLP/MedTator 
The developed NLP ruleset can be found at 
https://github.com/OHNLP/covid19ruleset/tree/main/covid19  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data Availability Statement 
• A detailed annotation guideline outlining the goals of the NLP task and how the corpora 
were 
annotated 
can 
be 
found 
at 
https://github.com/OHNLP/N3C-NLP-
Documentation/wiki/Annotation-guideline-for-COVID-19-concepts  
• The sample deidentified synthetic corpus used as part of this study can be found at 
https://github.com/OHNLP/N3C-NLP-
Documentation/blob/master/n3c_omop_sample.csv  
Competing Interests Declaration 
MAH has a founding interest in Pryzm Health. HX and The University of Texas Health Science 
Center at Houston have financial related interests at Melax Technologies Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Author contributions 
Project Conceptualization: SL, AWen, LW, HH, SF, HL 
Data curation: SL, AWen, LW, HH, RM, AWilliams, DH, RK, ML, NA, MR, RZ, JDO, JHS 
Data integration: AWen, LW, HH, RM, DH, RK, ML, NA, RZ, TS, YH, EP, SSH, CGC, JHS 
Data analysis: SL, AWen, LW, RM, RK, NA, RZ, MR, TS 
Software development: SL, AWen, HH, MR, TS 
Data quality assurance: SL, RM, DH, RK, LM, NA, RZ, TS, JDO, HY, EP, TD, PS, HX 
Draft the manuscript: SL, AWen, LW, HH, RM, RZ, HL, SF 
Critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content: AWilliams, RK, ML, NA, 
YH 
Project evaluation: LW, SF, RM, AWilliams, DH, RK, ML, NA, RZ, MR, TS 
Project management: SL, LW, RZ, TS, EP, JHS, RF, HL 
Regulatory oversight / admin: EP, CGC, HL 
Database / Information systems admin: RM, DH, NA, RZ, TD 
Biological subject matter expertise: LW, YH, UT, MAH 
Funding acquisition: MAH, CGC, PS, HX, HL 
 
 
 
 
 
Reference 
 
1. 
Health 
NIo. 
Clinical 
and 
Translational 
Science 
Awards 
(CTSA) 
Program. 
https://ncats.nih.gov/ctsa. 
 
2. 
Welcome | Center for Data to Health. https://cd2h.org/mission. 
 
3. 
Gottesman O, Kuivaniemi H, Tromp G, Faucett WA, Li R, Manolio TA, Sanderson SC, Kannry J, 
Zinberg R, Basford MA, Brilliant M, Carey DJ, Chisholm RL, Chute CG, Connolly JJ, Crosslin D, 
Denny JC, Gallego CJ, Haines JL, Hakonarson H, Harley J, Jarvik GP, Kohane I, Kullo IJ, Larson 
EB, McCarty C, Ritchie MD, Roden DM, Smith ME, Böttinger EP, Williams MS, and The e MN. 
The Electronic Medical Records and Genomics (eMERGE) Network: past, present, and future. 
Genetics in Medicine 15, 761-771 (2013). 
 
4. 
Selby JV, Beal AC, Frank L. The Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI) national 
priorities for research and initial research agenda. Jama 307, 1583-1584 (2012). 
 
5. 
Investigators AoURP. The “All of Us” research program. New England Journal of Medicine 381, 
668-676 (2019). 
 
6. 
Hripcsak G, Duke JD, Shah NH, Reich CG, Huser V, Schuemie MJ, Suchard MA, Park RW, Wong 
ICK, Rijnbeek PR. Observational Health Data Sciences and Informatics (OHDSI): opportunities 
for observational researchers. Studies in health technology and informatics 216, 574 (2015). 
 
7. 
Hripcsak G, Ryan PB, Duke JD, Shah NH, Park RW, Huser V, Suchard MA, Schuemie MJ, 
DeFalco FJ, Perotte A. Characterizing treatment pathways at scale using the OHDSI network. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113, 7329-7336 (2016). 
 
 
 
 
 
8. 
Hripcsak G, Schuemie MJ, Madigan D, Ryan PB, Suchard MA. Drawing reproducible conclusions 
from observational clinical data with OHDSI. Yearbook of medical informatics 30, 283-289 (2021). 
 
9. 
Hripcsak G, Wilcox A. Reference standards, judges, and comparison subjects: roles for experts in 
evaluating system performance. J Am Med Inform Assoc 9, 1-15 (2002). 
 
10. 
Rosenbloom ST, Denny JC, Xu H, Lorenzi N, Stead WW, Johnson KB. Data from clinical notes: 
a perspective on the tension between structure and flexible documentation. Journal of the American 
Medical Informatics Association 18, 181-186 (2011). 
 
11. 
Cannon J, Lucci S. Transcription and EHRs. Benefits of a blended approach. Journal of 
AHIMA/American Health Information Management Association 81, 36 (2010). 
 
12. 
Blease C, Kaptchuk TJ, Bernstein MH, Mandl KD, Halamka JD, DesRoches CM. Artificial 
Intelligence and the Future of Primary Care: Exploratory Qualitative Study of UK General 
Practitioners' Views. J Med Internet Res 21, e12802 (2019). 
 
13. 
Fu S, Chen D, He H, Liu S, Moon S, Peterson KJ, Shen F, Wang L, Wang Y, Wen A. Clinical 
concept extraction: a methodology review. Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 103526 (2020). 
 
14. 
Rongali S, Soldaini L, Monti E, Hamza W. Don’t parse, generate! a sequence to sequence 
architecture for task-oriented semantic parsing. In: Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020) 
(2020). 
 
15. 
Goleva SB, Lake AM, Torstenson ES, Haas KF, Davis LK. Epidemiology of functional seizures 
among adults treated at a university hospital. JAMA network open 3, e2027920-e2027920 (2020). 
 
 
 
 
 
16. 
Dowell A, Darlow B, Macrae J, Stubbe M, Turner N, McBain L. Childhood respiratory illness 
presentation and service utilisation in primary care: a six-year cohort study in Wellington, New 
Zealand, using natural language processing (NLP) software. BMJ open 7, e017146 (2017). 
 
17. 
Nunes AP, Seeger JD, Stewart A, Gupta A, McGraw T. Cardiovascular Outcome Risks in Patients 
With Erectile Dysfunction Co-Prescribed a Phosphodiesterase Type 5 Inhibitor (PDE5i) and a 
Nitrate: A Retrospective Observational Study Using Electronic Health Record Data in the United 
States. The Journal of Sexual Medicine 18, 1511-1523 (2021). 
 
18. 
Chan L, Beers K, Yau AA, Chauhan K, Duffy Á, Chaudhary K, Debnath N, Saha A, Pattharanitima 
P, Cho J, Kotanko P, Federman A, Coca SG, Van Vleck T, Nadkarni GN. Natural language 
processing of electronic health records is superior to billing codes to identify symptom burden in 
hemodialysis patients. Kidney Int 97, 383-392 (2020). 
 
19. 
Hylan TR, Von Korff M, Saunders K, Masters E, Palmer RE, Carrell D, Cronkite D, Mardekian J, 
Gross D. Automated prediction of risk for problem opioid use in a primary care setting. The Journal 
of Pain 16, 380-387 (2015). 
 
20. 
Blumenthal KG, Lai KH, Huang M, Wallace ZS, Wickner PG, Zhou L. Adverse and 
hypersensitivity reactions to prescription nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents in a large health 
care system. The Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology: In Practice 5, 737-743. e733 (2017). 
 
21. 
Haug CJ. From patient to patient—sharing the data from clinical trials. New England Journal of 
Medicine 374, 2409-2411 (2016). 
 
22. 
Kent DM, Leung LY, Zhou Y, Luetmer PH, Kallmes DF, Nelson J, Fu S, Zheng C, Liu H, Chen 
W. Association of silent cerebrovascular disease identified using natural language processing and 
future ischemic stroke. Neurology 97, e1313-e1321 (2021). 
 
23. 
Goodlett D, Hung A, Feriozzi A, Lu H, Bekelman JE, Mullins CD. Site engagement for multi-site 
clinical trials. Contemporary Clinical Trials Communications 19, 100608 (2020). 
 
 
 
 
 
24. 
McGraw D, Leiter AB. Pathways to success for multi-site clinical data research. Pathways 9, 19-
2013 (2013). 
 
25. 
Glynn EF, Hoffman MA. Heterogeneity introduced by EHR system implementation in a de-
identified data resource from 100 non-affiliated organizations. JAMIA open 2, 554-561 (2019). 
 
26. 
Fu S, Leung LY, Raulli A-O, Kallmes DF, Kinsman KA, Nelson KB, Clark MS, Luetmer PH, 
Kingsbury PR, Kent DM. Assessment of the impact of EHR heterogeneity for clinical research 
through a case study of silent brain infarction. BMC medical informatics and decision making 20, 
1-12 (2020). 
 
27. 
Morris AH, Orme Jr J, Truwit JD, Steingrub J, Grissom C, Lee KH, Li GL, Thompson BT, Brower 
R, Tidswell M. A replicable method for blood glucose control in critically ill patients. Critical care 
medicine 36, 1787-1795 (2008). 
 
28. 
Chiang MF, Hwang JC, Alexander CY, Casper DS, Cimino JJ, Starren J. Reliability of SNOMED-
CT coding by three physicians using two terminology browsers. In: AMIA Annual Symposium 
Proceedings). American Medical Informatics Association (2006). 
 
29. 
Leung LY, Fu S, Luetmer PH, Kallmes DF, Madan N, Weinstein G, Lehman VT, Rydberg CH, 
Nelson J, Liu H. Agreement between neuroimages and reports for natural language processing-
based detection of silent brain infarcts and white matter disease. BMC neurology 21, 1-5 (2021). 
 
30. 
Kennedy PJ, Leathley CM, Hughes CF. Clinical practice variation. Medical Journal of Australia 
193, S97-S99 (2010). 
 
31. 
Sohn S, Wang Y, Wi C-I, Krusemark EA, Ryu E, Ali MH, Juhn YJ, Liu H. Clinical documentation 
variations and NLP system portability: a case study in asthma birth cohorts across institutions. 
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 25, 353-359 (2018). 
 
 
 
 
 
32. 
Liu H, Bielinski SJ, Sohn S, Murphy S, Wagholikar KB, Jonnalagadda SR, Ravikumar K, Wu ST, 
Kullo IJ, Chute CG. An information extraction framework for cohort identification using electronic 
health records. AMIA Summits on Translational Science Proceedings 2013, 149 (2013). 
 
33. 
Wen A, Fu S, Moon S, El Wazir M, Rosenbaum A, Kaggal VC, Liu S, Sohn S, Liu H, Fan J. 
Desiderata for delivering NLP to accelerate healthcare AI advancement and a Mayo Clinic NLP-
as-a-service implementation. NPJ digital medicine 2, 1-7 (2019). 
 
34. 
Rando HM, Bennett TD, Byrd JB, Bramante C, Callahan TJ, Chute CG, Davis HE, Deer R, Gagnier 
J, Koraishy FM, Liu F, McMurry JA, Moffitt RA, Pfaff ER, Reese JT, Relevo R, Robinson PN, 
Saltz JH, Solomonides A, Sule A, Topaloglu U, Haendel MA. Challenges in defining Long 
COVID: Striking differences across literature, Electronic Health Records, and patient-reported 
information. medRxiv, 2021.2003.2020.21253896 (2021). 
 
35. 
Sharafeldin N, Bates B, Song Q, Madhira V, Yan Y, Dong S, Lee E, Kuhrt N, Shao YR, Liu F, 
Bergquist T, Guinney J, Su J, Topaloglu U. Outcomes of COVID-19 in Patients With Cancer: 
Report From the National COVID Cohort Collaborative (N3C). Journal of Clinical Oncology, 
JCO.21.01074 (2021). 
 
36. 
Haendel MA, Chute CG, Bennett TD, Eichmann DA, Guinney J, Kibbe WA, Payne PRO, Pfaff 
ER, Robinson PN, Saltz JH, Spratt H, Suver C, Wilbanks J, Wilcox AB, Williams AE, Wu C, 
Blacketer C, Bradford RL, Cimino JJ, Clark M, Colmenares EW, Francis PA, Gabriel D, Graves 
A, Hemadri R, Hong SS, Hripscak G, Jiao D, Klann JG, Kostka K, Lee AM, Lehmann HP, Lingrey 
L, Miller RT, Morris M, Murphy SN, Natarajan K, Palchuk MB, Sheikh U, Solbrig H, Visweswaran 
S, Walden A, Walters KM, Weber GM, Zhang XT, Zhu RL, Amor B, Girvin AT, Manna A, Qureshi 
N, Kurilla MG, Michael SG, Portilla LM, Rutter JL, Austin CP, Gersing KR, the NCC. The 
National COVID Cohort Collaborative (N3C): Rationale, design, infrastructure, and deployment. 
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 28, 427-443 (2021). 
 
37. 
Github - OHNLP/MedTagger. https://github.com/OHNLP/MedTagger. 
 
 
 
 
 
38. 
Harkema H, Dowling JN, Thornblade T, Chapman WW. ConText: an algorithm for determining 
negation, experiencer, and temporal status from clinical reports. Journal of biomedical informatics 
42, 839-851 (2009). 
 
39. 
Merkel D. Docker: lightweight Linux containers for consistent development and deployment. Linux 
J 2014, Article 2 (2014). 
 
40. 
He H, Fu S, Wang L, Liu S, Wen A, Liu H. MedTator: a serverless annotation tool for corpus 
development. Bioinformatics,  (2022). 
 
41. 
Liu S, Fu S, Liu H. Best practices of annotating clinical texts for information extraction tasks. In: 
Informatics Playbook (ed Wu C) (2021). 
 
42. 
He Y, Yu H, Ong E, Wang Y, Liu Y, Huffman A, Huang H-h, Beverley J, Hur J, Yang X, Chen L, 
Omenn GS, Athey B, Smith B. CIDO, a community-based ontology for coronavirus disease 
knowledge and data integration, sharing, and analysis. Scientific Data 7, 181 (2020). 
 
43. 
Mungall CJ, McMurry JA, Köhler S, Balhoff JP, Borromeo C, Brush M, Carbon S, Conlin T, Dunn 
N, Engelstad M, Foster E, Gourdine JP, Jacobsen JOB, Keith D, Laraway B, Lewis SE, 
NguyenXuan J, Shefchek K, Vasilevsky N, Yuan Z, Washington N, Hochheiser H, Groza T, 
Smedley D, Robinson PN, Haendel MA. The Monarch Initiative: an integrative data and analytic 
platform connecting phenotypes to genotypes across species. Nucleic Acids Research 45, D712-
D722 (2017). 
 
44. 
Stenetorp P, Pyysalo S, Topić G, Ohta T, Ananiadou S, Tsujii Ji. brat: a Web-based Tool for NLP-
Assisted Text Annotation.). Association for Computational Linguistics (2012). 
 
45. 
Köhler S, Gargano M, Matentzoglu N, Carmody LC, Lewis-Smith D, Vasilevsky NA, Danis D, 
Balagura G, Baynam G, Brower AM, Callahan TJ, Chute CG, Est JL, Galer PD, Ganesan S, Griese 
M, Haimel M, Pazmandi J, Hanauer M, Harris NL, Hartnett MJ, Hastreiter M, Hauck F, He Y, 
Jeske T, Kearney H, Kindle G, Klein C, Knoflach K, Krause R, Lagorce D, McMurry JA, Miller 
 
 
 
 
JA, Munoz-Torres MC, Peters RL, Rapp CK, Rath AM, Rind SA, Rosenberg AZ, Segal MM, 
Seidel MG, Smedley D, Talmy T, Thomas Y, Wiafe SA, Xian J, Yüksel Z, Helbig I, Mungall CJ, 
Haendel MA, Robinson PN. The Human Phenotype Ontology in 2021. Nucleic Acids Res 49, 
D1207-d1217 (2021). 
 
46. 
Bodenreider O. The Unified Medical Language System (UMLS): integrating biomedical 
terminology. Nucleic Acids Research 32, 267D-270 (2004). 
 
47. 
SNOMED-CT. https://www.nlm.nih.gov/healthit/snomedct/index.html. 
 
48. 
Medicine NLo. Medical Subject Headings. https://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/meshhome.html. 
 
49. 
Brown EG, Wood L, Wood S. The medical dictionary for regulatory activities (MedDRA). Drug 
Saf 20, 109-117 (1999). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figures  
Figure 1. N3C deidentification and synthetic text generation workflow 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Screenshots of the Web GUI 
(a) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
  
 
 
 
 
(c) 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Diagram of N3C NLP Solution 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tables 
Table 1. Annotation corpora statistics. (Mayo: Mayo Clinic, UKen: University of Kentucky, UMN: 
University of Minnesota) 
 Concepts 
Mayo (313 notes) 
UKen (20 notes) 
UMN (36 notes) 
Abdominal_pain  
59  
2  
 3 
Chest_pain  
62  
2  
11 
Chill  
51  
6  
6 
Cough  
104  
14  
43 
Cyanosis  
9  
4  
17 
Delirium  
38  
2  
10 
Diarrhea  
92  
5  
11 
Dyspnea  
199  
19  
46 
Fatigue  
61  
15  
13 
Fever  
148  
25  
53 
Headache  
43  
6  
15 
Hypersomnia  
6  
0  
14 
Loss_of_appetite  
41  
2  
4 
Loss_of_smell  
23  
4  
6 
Loss_of_taste  
19  
2  
5 
Myalgia  
21  
6  
8 
Nasal_obstruction  
16  
6  
14 
Nausea  
87  
7  
10 
Sore_throat  
16  
4  
17 
Vomiting  
86  
6  
14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2. Performance of the single-site NLP algorithm (Mayo: Mayo Clinic, UKen: University of 
Kentucky, UMN: University of Minnesota) 
Dataset 
Span 
Span+Certainty 
Precision 
Recall 
F1 
Precision 
Recall 
F1 
Mayo 
0.882 
0.869 
0.876 
0.789 
0.639 
0.706 
UKen 
0.698 
0.714 
0.706 
0.664 
0.643 
0.653 
UMN 
0.658 
0.735 
0.694 
0.534 
0.438 
0.481 
 
Table 3. Performance of the multi-site NLP algorithm (Mayo: Mayo Clinic, UKentucky: 
University of Kentucky, UMN: University of Minnesota) 
Dataset 
Span 
Span+Certainty 
Precision 
Recall 
F1 
Precision 
Recall 
F1 
Mayo 
0.863 
0.908 
0.884 
0.824 
0.681 
0.746 
UKen 
0.696 
0.859 
0.769 
0.662 
0.734 
0.696 
UMN 
0.718 
0.918 
0.806 
0.562 
0.456 
0.504 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 4. Error analysis of the multi-site algorithm mention-level evaluation without certainty for 
Mayo site 
Error types of FP 
No. FP 
(%) 
Error types of FN 
No. FN 
(%) 
Annotation error:  missing annotation 
17 (26%) 
NLP algorithm not 
complete 
21 (66%) 
Hard 
to 
judge 
if 
are 
COVID 
signs/symptoms 
15 (23%) Annotation error 
8 (25%) 
Not COVID signs/symptoms - 
instruction/patient education 
10 (15%) 
Tokenization error due to 
input format 
2 (6%) 
Not COVID signs/symptoms - adverse 
events/indication of treatment 
7 (11%) Template 
1 (3%) 
Not COVID signs/symptoms - others 
(anesthesia plan, symptoms of other 
disease, etc.) 
5 (7%)   
  
Not COVID signs/symptoms - clinical 
goal/precaution 
4 (6%) 
Not COVID signs/symptoms - template 
5 (7%) 
  
NLP algorithm not precise 
2 (3%) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 5. Error analysis of the multi-site algorithm mention-level evaluation without certainty for 
UMN  
Error types of FP 
No. FP 
(%) 
Error types 
of FN 
No. FN 
(%) 
Not COVID signs/symptoms - instruction/patient 
education 
30 (61%) 
NLP algorithm 
not complete 
11 
(85%) 
Not COVID signs/symptoms - (substance use history; 
overdose; due to surgery, other comorbidity, etc.)   
7 (14%) 
Annotation 
error 
2 
(15%) 
Annotation error: missing annotation 
6 (12%)  
 
Not COVID signs/symptoms - template 
4 (8%)   
  
Hard to judge if are COVID signs/symptoms 
2 (3%)   
  
 
Table 6. Error analysis of the multi-site algorithm mention-level evaluation without certainty for 
UKen  
Error types of PF 
No. FP 
(%) 
Error types 
of FN 
No. FN 
(%) 
Not COVID signs/symptoms - (substance use history; 
overdose; due to surgery, other comorbidity, etc.)   
8 (33%) 
NLP algorithm 
not complete 
7 
(78%) 
Annotation error: missing annotation 
5 (21%) 
Annotation 
error 
2 
(22%) 
Not COVID signs/symptoms - instruction/patient 
education 
5 (21%)  
 
Hard to judge if are COVID signs/symptoms 
3 (13%)   
  
Not COVID signs/symptoms - template 
2 (8%) 
  
  
NLP algorithm not precise 
1 (4%) 
 
 
 
 
