Title: A Survey on Natural Language Processing for Fake News Detection
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1811.00770v2
--------------------------------------------------

arXiv:1811.00770v2  [cs.CL]  5 Mar 2020
A Survey on Natural Language Processing for Fake News Detection
Ray Oshikawa1, Jing Qian2, William Yang Wang2
1College of Arts and Sciences, The University of Tokyo
2Department of Computer Science, University of California, Santa Barbara
Tokyo, 153-8902 JAPAN / Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA
ray.oshikawa@gmail.com, {jing qian,william}@cs.ucsb.edu
Abstract
Fake news detection is a critical yet challenging problem in Natural Language Processing (NLP). The rapid rise of social networking
platforms has not only yielded a vast increase in information accessibility but has also accelerated the spread of fake news. Thus,
the effect of fake news has been growing, sometimes extending to the ofﬂine world and threatening public safety. Given the massive
amount of Web content, automatic fake news detection is a practical NLP problem useful to all online content providers, in order to
reduce the human time and effort to detect and prevent the spread of fake news. In this paper, we describe the challenges involved
in fake news detection and also describe related tasks.
We systematically review and compare the task formulations, datasets
and NLP solutions that have been developed for this task, and also discuss the potentials and limitations of them. Based on our
insights, we outline promising research directions, including more ﬁne-grained, detailed, fair, and practical detection models. We also
highlight the difference between fake news detection and other related tasks, and the importance of NLP solutions for fake news detection.
Keywords: Natural Language Processing, fake news detection, survey.
1.
Introduction
Automated fake news detection is the task of assessing
the truthfulness of claims in news.
This is a new but
critical NLP problem because both traditional news me-
dia and social media have huge social-political impacts
on every individual in the society.
For example, expo-
sure to fake news can cause attitudes of inefﬁcacy, alien-
ation, and cynicism toward certain political candidates
(Balmas, 2014). Fake news even relates to real-world vi-
olent events that threaten public safety (e.g., the PizzaGate
(Kang and Goldman, 2016)). Detecting fake news is an im-
portant application in the world that NLP can help with, as
it also creates broader impacts on how technologies can fa-
cilitate the veriﬁcation of the veracity of claims while edu-
cating the general public.
The conventional solution to this task is to ask professionals
such as journalists to check claims against evidence based
on previously spoken or written facts. However, it is time-
consuming and expensive. For example, PolitiFact1 takes
three editors to judge whether a piece of news is real or not.
As the Internet community and the speed of the spread of
information are growing rapidly, automated fake news de-
tection on internet content has gained interest in the Ar-
tiﬁcial Intelligence research community. The goal of au-
tomatic fake news detection is to reduce the human time
and effort to detect fake news and help us stop spreading
it. The task of fake news detection has been studied from
various perspectives with the development in subareas of
Computer Science, such as Machine Learning (ML), Data
Mining (DM), and NLP.
In this paper, we survey automated fake news detection
from the perspective of NLP. Broadly speaking, we intro-
duce the technical challenges in fake news detection and
how researchers deﬁne different tasks and formulate ML
solutions to tackle this problem. We discuss the pros and
cons, as well as the potential pitfalls and drawbacks of each
1https://www.politifact.com/
task. More speciﬁcally, we provide an overview of research
efforts for fake news detection and a systematic compari-
son of their task deﬁnitions, datasets, model construction,
and performances. We also discuss a guideline for future
research in this direction. This paper also includes some
other aspects such as social engagement analysis. Our con-
tributions are three-fold:
• We provide the ﬁrst comprehensive review of Natu-
ral Language Processing solutions for automatic fake
news detection;
• We systematically analyze how fake news detection
is aligned with existing NLP tasks, and discuss the
assumptions and notable issues for different formula-
tions of the problem;
• We categorize and summarize available datasets, NLP
approaches, and results, providing ﬁrst-hand experi-
ences and accessible introductions for new researchers
interested in this problem.
2.
Related Problems
2.1.
Fact-Checking
Fact-checking is the task of assessing the truthfulness of
claims made by public ﬁgures such as politicians, pun-
dits, etc (Vlachos and Riedel, 2014). Many researchers do
not distinguish fake news detection and fact-checking since
both of them are to assess the truthfulness of claims. Gen-
erally, fake news detection usually focuses on news events
while fact-checking is broader. Thorne and Vlachos (2018)
provides a comprehensive review of this topic.
2.2.
Rumor Detection
There is not a consistent deﬁnition of rumor detection. A
recent survey (Zubiaga et al., 2018) deﬁnes rumor detec-
tion as separating personal statements into rumor or non-
rumor, where rumor is deﬁned as a statement consisting of
Name
Main Input
Data Size
Label
Annotation
LIAR
short claim
12,836
six-grade
editors, journalists
FEVER
short claim
185,445
three-grade
trained annotators
BUZZFEEDNEWS
FB post
2,282
four-grade
journalists
BUZZFACE
FB post
2,263
four-grade
journalists
SOME-LIKE-IT-HOAX
FB post
15,500
hoaxes or non-hoaxes
none
PHEME
Tweet
330
true or false
journalists
CREDBANK
Tweet
60 million
30-element vector
workers
FAKENEWSNET
article
23,921
fake or real
editors
BS DETECTOR
article
-
10 different types
none
Table 1: A Summary of Various Fake News Detection Related Datasets. FB: FaceBook.
Attributes
Value
ID of the statement
11972
Label
True
Statement
Building a wall on the U.S.-Mexico border will take literally years.
Subject(s)
Immigration
Speaker
Rick Perry
Speaker’s job title
Governor of Texas
Party afﬁliation
Republican
Total Credibility History Counts
30, 30, 42, 23, 18
Context
Radio Interview
Table 2: An Example Entry from LIAR. The ordered total credibility history counts are {barely true, false, half true, mostly
true, pants on ﬁre}, note that the history counts only include the history for inaccurate statements.
unveriﬁed pieces of information at the time of posting. In
other words, rumor must contain information that can be
veriﬁed rather than subjective opinions or feelings.
2.3.
Stance Detection
Stance detection is the task of assessing what side of de-
bate an author is on from text. It is different from fake
news detection in that it is not for veracity but consistency.
Stance detection can be a subtask of fake news detection
since it can be applied to searching documents for evidence
(Ferreira and Vlachos, 2016).
PHEME, one of the fake-
news datasets has tweets related to news, capturing the be-
havior of users who trust or untrust.
2.4.
Sentiment Analysis
Sentiment analysis is the task of extracting emotions, such
as customers’ favorable or unfavorable impression of a
restaurant. Different from rumor detection and fake news
detection, sentiment analysis is not to do an objective veri-
ﬁcation of claim but to analyze personal emotions.
3.
Task Formulations
In Section 2., we compared related problems with fake
news detection to deﬁne the scope of this survey. In this
survey, The general goal of fake news detection is to iden-
tify fake news, deﬁned as the false stories that appear to
be news, including rumors judged as information that can
be veriﬁed in rumor detection. Especially, we focus on
fake news detection of text content. The input can be text
ranging from short statements to entire articles. Inputs are
related to which dataset is used (see Section 4.), and ad-
ditional information such as speakers’ identity can be ap-
pended.
There are different types of labeling or scoring strategies for
fake news detection. In most studies, fake news detection
is formulated as a classiﬁcation or regression problem, but
the classiﬁcation is more frequently used.
3.1.
Classiﬁcation
The most common way is to formulate the fake news detec-
tion as a binary classiﬁcation problem. However, catego-
rizing all the news into two classes (fake or real) is difﬁcult
because there are cases where the news is partially real and
partially fake. To address this problem, adding additional
classes is common practice. Mainly, a category for the news
which is neither completely real nor completely fake, or,
more than two degrees of truthfulness are set as additional
classes. When using these datasets, the expected outputs
are multi-class labels, and those labels are learned as inde-
pendent labels with i.i.d assumptions (Rashkin et al., 2017;
Wang, 2017).
One of the conditions for fake news classiﬁers to achieve
good performances is to have sufﬁcient labeled data. How-
ever, to obtain reliable labels requires a lot of time and
labor.
Therefore, semi/weakly-supervised and unsuper-
vised methods are proposed (Rubin and Vashchilko, 2012;
Bhattacharjee et al., 2017).
3.2.
Regression
Fake news detection can also be formulated as a regression
task, where the output is a numeric score of truthfulness.
This approach is used by Nakashole and Mitchell (2014).
Usually, evaluation is done by calculating the difference
between the predicted scores and the ground truth scores
or using Pearson/Spearman Correlations. However, since
the available datasets have discrete ground truth scores, the
challenge here is how to convert the discrete labels to nu-
meric scores.
4.
Datasets
A signiﬁcant challenge for automated fake news detection
is the availability and quality of the datasets. We categorize
public fake-news datasets into three categories: claims, en-
tire articles, and Social Networking Services (SNS) data.
Claims are one or a few sentences including information
worth validating (there is a sample in Table 2), while en-
tire articles are composed of many sentences related to each
other constituting information as the whole. SNS data are
similar to claims in length but featured by structured data
of accounts and posts, including a lot of non-text data.
4.1.
Claims
POLITIFACT, CHANNEL4.COM2, and SNOPES3 are three
sources for manually labeled short claims in news, which
is collected and labeled manually.
Editors handpicked
the claims from a variety of occasions such as debate,
campaign, Facebook, Twitter, interviews, ads, etc. Many
datasets are created based on these websites.
Vlachos and Riedel (2014) released the ﬁrst public fake
news detection dataset gathering data from POLITIFACT
and CHANNEL4.COM.
This dataset has 221 statements
with the date it was made, the speaker and the URL,
and the veracity label of a ﬁve-point scale. EMERGENT
(Ferreira and Vlachos, 2016) is the early work of claim-
veriﬁcation dataset too. It is for stance classiﬁcation in the
context of fact-checking, including claim with some docu-
ments for or against them. This dataset can improve fact-
checking in the condition that some articles related to the
claim were given.
Vlachos includes only 221 claims and Emergent includes
only 300 claims so that it was impractical to use them for
machine learning based assessments. These days, datasets
with many claims are published, which can use as an im-
proved version of the ﬁrst two.
A recent benchmark dataset for fake news detection is
LIAR (Wang, 2017). This dataset collected data from Poli-
tifact as Vlachos and Riedel (2014), but includes 12,836
real-world short statements, and each statement is labeled
with six-grade truthfulness.
The information about the
subjects, party, context, and speakers are also included
in this dataset.
For the datasets from Politifact articles,
Rashkin et al. (2017) also published large datasets. They
collect articles from PunditFact (Politifact’s spin-off site)
too.
Fever (Thorne et al., 2018) is a dataset providing related
evidence for fact-checking. In this point, it is similar to
EMERGENT. Fever contains 185,445 claims generated from
Wikipedia data. Each statement is labeled as Supported,
2https://www.channel4.com/news/factcheck/
3https://www.snopes.com/fact-check/
Refuted, or Not Enough Info. They also marked which sen-
tences from Wikipedia they use as evidence. Fever makes
it possible to develop a system that can predict the truthful-
ness of a claim together with the evidence, even though the
type of facts and evidence from Wikipedia may still exhibit
some major stylistic differences from those in real-world
political campaigns.
4.2.
Entire-Article Datasets
There are several datasets for fake news detection predict-
ing whether the entire article is true or fake. For exam-
ple, FAKENEWSNET (Shu et al., 2017a; Shu et al., 2017b;
Shu et al., 2018) is an ongoing data collection project for
fake news research. It consists of headlines and body texts
of fake news articles based on BuzzFeed and PolitiFact. It
also collects information about the social engagements of
these articles from Twitter.
BS DETECTOR4 is collected from a browser extension
named BS Detector, indicating that its labels are the out-
puts of the BS Detector, not human annotators. BS Detec-
tor searches all links on a web page at issue for references
to unreliable sources by checking against a manually com-
piled list of unreliable domains.
4.3.
Posts On Social Networking Services
There are some datasets for fake news detection focusing
on SNS, but they tend to have a limited set of topics and
can be less related to news.
BUZZFEEDNEWS5 collects 2,282 posts from 9 news agen-
cies on Facebook.
Each post is factchecked by 5 Buz-
zFeed journalists. The advantages of this dataset are that
the articles are collected from both sides of left-leaning and
right-leaning organizations. There are two enriched ver-
sions of BUZZFEEDNEWS: Potthast et al. (2017) enriched
them by adding data such as the linked articles, and BUZ-
ZFACE (Santia and Williams, 2018) extends the BuzzFeed
dataset with the 1.6 million comments related to news arti-
cles on Facebook.
SOME-LIKE-IT-HOAX6 (Tacchini et al., 2017) consists of
15,500 posts from 32 Facebook pages, that is, the public
proﬁle of organizations (14 conspiracy and 18 scientiﬁc or-
ganizations). This dataset is labeled based on the identity
of the publisher instead of post-level annotations. A po-
tential pitfall of such a dataset is that such kind of labeling
strategies can result in machine learning models learning
characteristics of each publisher, rather than that of the fake
news.
PHEME
(Zubiaga et al., 2016)
and
CREDBANK
(Mitra and Gilbert, 2015)
are
two
Twitter
datasets.
PHEME contains 330 twitter threads (a series of connected
Tweets from one person) of nine newsworthy events,
labeled as true or false.
CREDBANK contains 60 million
tweets covering 96 days, grouped into 1,049 events with a
30-dimensional vector of truthfulness labels. Each event
was rated on a 5-point Likert scale of truthfulness by
30 human annotators.
They concatenate 30 ratings as
4https://github.com/bs-detector/bs-detector
5https://github.com/BuzzFeedNews/2016-10-facebook-fact-
check
6https://github.com/gabll/some-like-it-hoax
a vector because they ﬁnd it difﬁcult to reduce it to a
one-dimensional score.
As mentioned above, these datasets were created for verify-
ing the truthfulness of tweets. Thus they are limited to a few
topics and can include tweets with no relationship to news.
Hence both datasets are not ideal for fake news detection,
and they are more frequently used for rumor detection.
5.
Methods
We introduce the methods for fake news detection.
As
usual, we ﬁrst preprocess input texts into suitable forms
(5.1.). If the dataset has an entire article length, the rhetori-
cal approach can be used as one of the hand-crafted features
extraction (5.3.). If the dataset has evidence like EMER-
GENT or FEVER, we can use methods in 5.4. to gather
evidence for outputs.
5.1.
Preprocessing
Preprocessing usually includes tokenization, stemming,
and generalization or weighting words.
To convert tok-
enized texts into features, Term Frequency-Inverse Docu-
ment Frequency (TF-IDF) and Linguistic Inquiry and Word
Count (LIWC) are frequently used. For word sequences,
pre-learned word embedding vectors such as word2vec
(Mikolov et al., 2013) and GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014)
are commonly used.
When using entire articles as inputs, an additional pre-
processing step is to identify the central claims from raw
texts. Thorne et al. (2018) rank the sentences using TF-
IDF and DrQA system (Chen et al., 2017). These opera-
tions are closely related to subtasks, such as word embed-
dings, named entity recognition, disambiguation or coref-
erence resolution.
5.2.
Machine Learning Models
As mentioned in Section 3., the majority of existing re-
search uses supervised methods while semi-supervised or
unsupervised methods are less commonly used. In this sec-
tion, we mainly describe classiﬁcation models with several
actual examples.
5.2.1.
Non-Neural Network Models
Support Vector Machine (SVM) and Naive Bayes Clas-
siﬁer (NBC) are frequently used classiﬁcation mod-
els (Conroy et al., 2015; Khurana and Intelligentie, 2017;
Shu et al., 2018).These two models differ a lot in struc-
ture and both of them are usually used as baseline models.
Logistic regression (LR) (Khurana and Intelligentie, 2017;
Bhattacharjee et al., 2017) and decision tree such as Ran-
dom Forest Classiﬁer (RFC) (Hassan et al., 2017) are also
used occasionally.
5.2.2.
Neural Network Models
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) is very popular in Nat-
ural Language Processing, especially Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM), which solves the vanishing gradient
problem so that it can capture longer-term dependen-
cies.
In Section 6., many models based on LSTM per-
form high accuracy on LIAR and FEVER. In addition,
Rashkin et al. (2017) set up two LSTM models and input
text as simple word embeddings to one side and as LIWC
feature vectors to the other. In both cases, they were more
accurate than NBC and Maximum Entropy(MaxEnt) mod-
els, though only slightly.
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) are also widely
used since they succeed in many text classiﬁcation
tasks. Wang (2017) uses a model based on Kim’s CNN
(Kim, 2014), concatenating the max-pooled text repre-
sentations with the meta-data representation from the
bi-directional LSTM. CNN is also used for extracting
features with a variety of meta-data.
For example,
Deligiannis et al. (2018) took graph-like data of relation-
ships between news and publishers as input for CNN and
assess news with them.
Karimi et al. (2018) proposed Multi-source Multi-class
Fake news Detection framework (MMFD), in which CNN
analyzes local patterns of each text in a claim and LSTM
analyze temporal dependencies in the entire text, then pass-
ing the concatenation of all last hidden outputs through a
Fully Connected Network. This model takes advantage of
the characteristics of both models because LSTM works
better for long sentences.
Attention mechanisms are often incorporated into neural
networks to achieve better performance. Long et al. (2017)
used an attention model that incorporates the speaker’s
name and the statement’s topic to attend to features
ﬁrst, then weighted vectors are fed into an LSTM. Do-
ing this increases accuracy by about 3% (Table 3).
Kirilin and Strube (2018) used a very similar attention
mechanism.
Memory networks, which are a kind of
attention-based neural network and also share the idea of
attention mechanism, are used by Pham (2018).
5.3.
Rhetorical Approach
Rhetorical Structure Theory (RST), sometimes com-
bined with the Vector Space Model (VSM), is also
used
for
fake
news
detection
(Rubin et al., 2015b;
Della Vedova et al., 2018;
Shu et al., 2017b).
RST is
an analytic framework for the coherence of a story.
Through deﬁning the semantic role (e.g., a sentence for
Circumstance, Evidence, and Purpose) of text units, this
framework can systematically identify the essential idea
and analyze the characteristics of the input text. Fake news
is then identiﬁed according to its coherence and structure.
To explain the results by RST, VSM is used to convert
news texts into vectors, which are compared to the center
of true news and fake news in high-dimensional RST space.
Each dimension of the vector space indicates the number of
rhetorical relations in the news text.
5.4.
Collecting Evidence
The
RTE-based
(Recognizing
Textual
Entailment)
(Dagan et al., 2010) method is frequently used to gather
and to utilize evidence. RTE is the task of recognizing
relationships between sentences. By gathering sentences
that are for or against input from data sources such as news
articles using RTE methods, we can predict whether the
input is correct or not.
RTE-based models need textual
evidence for fact-checking, thus this approach can be used
only when the dataset includes evidence, such as FEVER
Author
Meta-data
Base Model
Acc.
Wang
SVMs
0.255
CNNs
0.270
+Speaker
CNNs
0.248
+All
CNNs
0.274
Karimi
MMFD
0.291
+All
MMFD
0.348
Long
LSTM+Att
0.255
+All
LSTM(no Att)
0.399
+All
LSTM+Att
0.415
Kirilin
+All
LSTM
0.415
+All+Sp2C
LSTM
0.457
Bhatta-
2-class label
NLP Shallow
0.921
charjee
Deep (CNN)
0.962
Table 3: The Current Results for LIAR. +All means includ-
ing all meta-data in LIAR. Bhattacharjee convert 6-class
labels to 2-class labels.
and Emergent.
6.
Results & Observations
We compare empirical results on classiﬁcation datasets via
various machine learning models in this section. We fo-
cused on three datasets: LIAR, FEVER, and FAKENEWS-
NET. We introduced 9 datasets above, but we focus on 3
datasets for looking into the results of experiments on them.
It is because others have limited size than newer datasets,
limited numbers of experiments, or have the aspect of ru-
mor detection much more than fake news detection.
6.1.
LIAR
Table 3 shows accuracy of recent studies on LIAR. For
the detailed explanations of methods, see Section 5. As
the tendency, LSTM based models achieve higher accu-
racy than CNN based models. The additional meta-data
is also important. Karimi et al. (2018) supplement LIAR
by adding the verdict reports written by annotators and
raise accuracy by 4%. Kirilin and Strube (2018) improve
accuracy by 21% through replacing the credibility history
in LIAR with a larger credibility source (speaker2credit7).
The two papers also show the attention scores for verdict re-
ports/speaker credit are higher than the statement of claim.
6.2.
FEVER
Table 4 shows accuracy of recent studies on FEVER.
TWOWINGOS (Yin and Roth, 2018) is the model based
on attentive convolution, and Thorne et al. (2018) and
Hanselowski et al. (2018) also use attention based meth-
ods. As LIAR, attention-LSTM has the best score both of
veriﬁcation and evidence-collection task. The bottom one
of the table is the top results of the workshop for FEVER
from EMNLP 20188. This method selects evidence by con-
ducting semantic matching between each sentence from re-
trieved pages and the claim.
Author
Model
Acc.
Thorne
Decomposable Att
0.319
0.509
Yin
TWOWINGOS
0.543
0.760
Hanselowski
LSTM (ESIM-Att)
0.647
0.684
UNC-NLP
Semantic Matching Network
0.640
Nie
(LSTM)
0.680
Table 4: The Current Results for FEVER. The results in
boldface are the accuracy of evidence-collection task.
Author
Data
Model
Acc.
Shu
Buzz
RST
0.610
Feed
LIWC
0.655
Castillo
0.747
TriFN
0.864
Della
HC-CB-3
0.856
Deligiannis
GCN
0.944
Shu
Politi
RST
0.571
Fact
LIWC
0.637
Castillo
0.779
TriFN
0.878
Deligiannis
GCN
0.895
Della
HC-CB-3
0.938
Table 5: The Current Results for FAKENEWSNET. There
are two sources of data separately: BuzzFeed and Politi-
Fact.
6.3.
FAKENEWSNET
Table 5 shows accuracy of recent studies on FAKENEWS-
NET.
Shu et al. (2017b) achieve over 60% accuracy by
RST and LIWC methods,using hand-selected features such
as linguistic or rhetorical features, but both models achieve
lower accuracy compared to other methods. Other meth-
ods largely rely on social-engagements data, because FAK-
ENEWSNET has social engagements of these articles from
Twitter. Castillo, which uses social engagements data only,
defeats the model using only textual data (RST, LIWC).
HC-CB-3 sets a threshold of the size of social-engagements
data for combining a content-based method and a social-
engagements-based method.
GCN takes graph-like data
of relationships between news and publishers as input for
CNN and assesses news with them. They achieved very
high accuracy by the successful utilization of additional
data.
7.
Discussions, & Recommendations
7.1.
Datasets and Inputs
Rubin et al. (2015a) deﬁne nine requirements for fake news
detection corpus: 1. Availability of both truthful and de-
ceptive instances; 2. Digital textual format accessibility; 3.
Veriﬁability of “ground truth”; 4. Homogeneity in lengths;
7https://github.com/akthesis/speaker2credit
8http://fever.ai/2018/workshop.html
5. Homogeneity in writing matters; 6. Predeﬁned time-
frame; 7.
The manner of news delivery; 8.
Pragmatic
concerns; 9. Consideration for language and culture dif-
ferences.
As the performances on fake news detection are improved,
doing more ﬁne-grained and detailed detection becomes
more practical. We propose new recommendations for a
new dataset as the expansion and embodiment of the nine
requirements mentioned above, based on the observation of
existing dataset and experimental results.
7.1.1.
Sophisticated Index of Truthfulness
First, news articles or claims might be a mixture of true and
false statements, so it is not practical to categorize them
totally into true or false. It is shown by the fact that ex-
isting manually fact-checking sites have ﬁne-grained la-
bels such as MOSTLYFALSE, HALFTRUE or Mixture,
and annotators ﬁnd difﬁcult to reduce 30 human anno-
tations to a one-dimensional score while making CRED-
BANK as mentioned Section 4. Especially on crowdsourc-
ing, Roitero et al. (2018) report that the more classes or the
continuous scales seem to lead ordinary people to a similar
agreement with expert judges.
Second, as the machine learning and NLP technology have
been improved, we already achieve high accuracy on bi-
nary classiﬁcation, especially on claims. In Table 5 and the
bottom 2 case in Table 3, the accuracy of 2-class predic-
tion is over 90 % while 6-way classiﬁcation only with text
is lower then 30%. As the next step, we should develop
models predicting the veracity of news in more detail than
binary assessment. Currently, models on multi-class fake
news detection do not concern with the order of labels and
just classify. For example, It will be a fatal error if a clas-
siﬁer judges True news as False, but not much in judging
True news as Mostly True. However, these two are treated
as the same mistake in learning methods so far. It can im-
prove practicality if we can use this distance for learning,
so it can be a future issue too.
7.1.2.
Quote claims or articles from various speakers
and publishers within the scope of dataset
Fake news has different nature by its different birth mech-
anism, for example, some news has the intention to cause
harm but other was born only to make fun. There are 7
different types of fake news as deﬁned by Claire Wardle
(Wardle, 2017). Roitero et al. (2018) shows that satire can
be distinguished well from both real and fake news by style
analysis, ensuring that the types of fake news are the impor-
tant factor, so that we should be careful about which types
of fake news we will collect.
After deﬁning which types of fake-news the dataset will
cover, we should collect data carefully not to label state-
ments solely according to their website source and collect
all true or fake news from a certain speaker or publisher.
Shu et al. (2018) explore the distribution of publishers who
publish fake news on PolitiFact and GoccipCop, and ﬁnd
that the majority of publishers who published fake news
only publish one piece of fake news. Hence, it is dangerous
to assume a publisher as an authentic one because they have
not made any mistakes yet.
In addition, by collecting all true or fake news from a cer-
tain situation or publisher, it becomes confounding vari-
ables and the task may obtain the aspect of the website clas-
siﬁcation task. When collecting data from fact-checking
sites, the data has different backgrounds even if the source
site is the same; therefore existing datasets frequently based
on them.
7.1.3.
Validate Entire Article
For the claims dataset, there are some sources for manually
labeled sentences, such as POLITIFACT or Channel4.com.
It is easier and cheaper than annotating data from scratch,
and additionally, claims are collected grounded, various
and natural contexts and labeled with solid analysis.
For the entire article datasets, there is less such websites9.
The only human-annotated entire-article dataset is FAKE-
NEWSNET, but it is for claims in the article rather than
for an entire article, and methods on this dataset empha-
size utilization of social-engagements data (Table 5). For
those reasons, it is difﬁcult to get human annotation for
entire-articles. But machine annotation has strong assump-
tions. For example, BS DETECTOR only assumes an arti-
cle’s truthfulness by checking domains of links (mentioned
in section 4.) and it is not based on its content, so that the
machine learning models trained on this dataset are learn-
ing the parameters of the BS Detector. As a future task,
we should consider how to evaluate the truthfulness of the
entire-article and annotate them. For example, it may be
preferable to add truthfulness scores to individual state-
ments.
7.2.
Critiques of Common Methods
In this section, we analyze different automatic fake news
detection solutions and discuss our ﬁndings.
First, hand-crafted features were essential in non-neural
network approaches but can be replaced by neural net-
works.
Psycho-linguistic
categories
and
rhetorical
features
are typical features to extract in fake news detec-
tion.
After
Mihalcea and Strapparava (2009)
and
Rubin and Vashchilko (2012)
ﬁnd
characteristics
of
the word used and the structure in deceptive languages
respectively, Shu et al. (2017b) achieve 60% accuracy
using them(Table 5).
However, these hand-crafted features seem to learn some-
thing that is more useful and cannot be combined with
hand-crafted features. For example, Rashkin et al. (2017)
shows that adding LIWC did not improve the performance
of the LSTM model while non-neural network models are
improved largely on their dataset. There are no existing
studies proving the rhetorical features can not be combined
with neural network models, but there is a possibility of NN
learning something more useful because the RST model
achieves lower accuracy compared to other methods (Table
5).
Second, the attention mechanism can help improve the per-
formance of fake news detection models. As a neural net-
work model for Natural Language Processing on fake news
9GossipCop may be one of the few but only for celebrity re-
porting:https://www.gossipcop.com/
detection, LSTM and attention based method such as at-
tention attachments or memory network are often used as
mentioned in Section 5.2.2. It is because they can analyze
long-term and content-transitional information so that they
can use the abundant word data of sentences and detect con-
text. Many research getting high-acurracy in Table 3,4,5
use attention methods or LSTM to learn textual models.
Third, meta-data and additional information can be utilized
to improve the robustness and to suppress the noise of a
single textual claim or article but should be carefully used.
Most studies on three datasets improve accuracy by devel-
oping a better way to utilize not texts but meta-data includ-
ing speaker credibility and social engagements’ informa-
tion in section 6.
However, relying too much on speakers’ or publish-
ers’ information for judging may cause some problems,
such as silencing minorities’ voices as Vlachos indicates
(Graves, 2018). To solve this, he developed a FEVER men-
tioned above, which includes evidence so that it can be used
for claim veriﬁcation and not only for classiﬁcation, and
the shared task is tackled by many researchers. Consider-
ing the top team in the shared tasks used semantic match-
ing networks, the focus on content-based methods may be
promoted as intended. In this point of view, content-based
approaches should be developed more in the future, for ex-
ample, from writing style as Potthast et al. (2017).
8.
Conclusion
In this survey, we ﬁrst reveal the importance and deﬁnitions
of automatic fake news detection. Then we compare and
discuss the most recent benchmark datasets and experimen-
tal results of different methods. Based on our observations,
we propose new recommendations for future datasets, and
also give the following suggestions for our future fake news
detection model: investigate whether the hand-crafted fea-
tures can be combined with neural network models, appro-
priate usage of non-textual data, and extending the way of
veriﬁcation with contents.
Balmas, M. (2014). When fake news becomes real: Com-
bined exposure to multiple news sources and political at-
titudes of inefﬁcacy, alienation, and cynicism. Commu-
nication Research, 41(3):430–454.
Bhattacharjee, S. D., Talukder, A., and Balantrapu, B. V.
(2017). Active learning based news veracity detection
with feature weighting and deep-shallow fusion. In Big
Data (Big Data), 2017 IEEE International Conference
on, pages 556–565. IEEE.
Chen, D., Fisch, A., Weston, J., and Bordes, A. (2017).
Reading wikipedia to answer open-domain questions.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.00051.
Conroy, N. J., Rubin, V. L., and Chen, Y. (2015). Au-
tomatic deception detection: Methods for ﬁnding fake
news. Proceedings of the Association for Information
Science and Technology, 52(1):1–4.
Dagan, I., Dolan, B., Magnini, B., and Roth, D. (2010).
Recognizing textual entailment:
Rational, evaluation
and approaches–erratum. Natural Language Engineer-
ing, 16(1):105–105.
Deligiannis, N., Do, T. H., Nguyen, D. M., and Luo, X.
(2018). Deep learning for geolocating social media users
and detecting fake news.
Della Vedova, M. L., Tacchini, E., Moret, S., Ballarin, G.,
DiPierro, M., and de Alfaro, L. (2018). Automatic on-
line fake news detection combining content and social
signals. In 2018 22nd Conference of Open Innovations
Association (FRUCT), pages 272–279. IEEE.
Ferreira, W. and Vlachos, A. (2016). Emergent: a novel
data-set for stance classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the
2016 conference of the North American chapter of the
association for computational linguistics: Human lan-
guage technologies, pages 1163–1168.
Graves, L. (2018). Understanding the promise and limits
of automated fact-checking. Factsheet, 2:2018–02.
Hanselowski, A., Zhang, H., Li, Z., Sorokin, D., Schiller,
B., Schulz, C., and Gurevych, I. (2018). Ukp-athene:
Multi-sentence textual entailment for claim veriﬁcation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.01479.
Hassan, N., Arslan, F., Li, C., and Tremayne, M. (2017).
Toward automated fact-checking:
Detecting check-
worthy factual claims by claimbuster. In Proceedings
of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pages 1803–
1812. ACM.
Kang, C. and Goldman, A. (2016). In washington pizzeria
attack, fake news brought real guns. the New York Times.
Karimi, H., Roy, P., Saba-Sadiya, S., and Tang, J. (2018).
Multi-source multi-class fake news detection. In Pro-
ceedings of the 27th International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 1546–1557.
Khurana, U. and Intelligentie, B. O. K. (2017). The lin-
guistic features of fake news headlines and statements.
Kim, Y. (2014). Convolutional neural networks for sen-
tence classiﬁcation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1408.5882.
Kirilin, A. and Strube, M. (2018). Exploiting a speaker’s
credibility to detect fake news.
In Proceedings of
Data Science, Journalism & Media workshop at KDD
(DSJM’18).
Long, Y., Lu, Q., Xiang, R., Li, M., and Huang, C.-R.
(2017). Fake news detection through multi-perspective
speaker proﬁles. In Proceedings of the Eighth Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(Volume 2: Short Papers), volume 2, pages 252–256.
Mihalcea, R. and Strapparava, C. (2009). The lie detec-
tor: Explorations in the automatic recognition of decep-
tive language. In Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009
Conference Short Papers, pages 309–312. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., and Dean, J. (2013).
Efﬁcient estimation of word representations in vector
space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781.
Mitra, T. and Gilbert, E. (2015). Credbank: A large-scale
social media corpus with associated credibility annota-
tions. In ICWSM, pages 258–267.
Nakashole, N. and Mitchell, T. M. (2014). Language-
aware truth assessment of fact candidates. In Proceed-
ings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
volume 1, pages 1009–1019.
Pennington, J., Socher, R., and Manning, C.
(2014).
Glove: Global vectors for word representation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods
in natural language processing (EMNLP), pages 1532–
1543.
Pham, T. T. (2018). A study on deep learning for fake news
detection.
Potthast, M., Kiesel, J., Reinartz, K., Bevendorff, J., and
Stein, B. (2017). A stylometric inquiry into hyperparti-
san and fake news. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.05638.
Rashkin, H., Choi, E., Jang, J. Y., Volkova, S., and Choi, Y.
(2017). Truth of varying shades: Analyzing language in
fake news and political fact-checking. In Proceedings of
the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 2931–2937.
Roitero, K., Demartini, G., Mizzaro, S., and Spina, D.
(2018). How many truth levels? six? one hundred? even
more? validating truthfulness of statements via crowd-
sourcing. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Work-
shop on Rumours and Deception in Social Media.
Rubin, V. L. and Vashchilko, T. (2012). Identiﬁcation of
truth and deception in text: Application of vector space
model to rhetorical structure theory. In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Computational Approaches to Decep-
tion Detection, pages 97–106. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Rubin, V. L., Chen, Y., and Conroy, N. J. (2015a). Decep-
tion detection for news: three types of fakes. In Proceed-
ings of the 78th ASIS&T Annual Meeting: Information
Science with Impact: Research in and for the Commu-
nity, page 83. American Society for Information Science.
Rubin, V. L., Conroy, N. J., and Chen, Y. (2015b). Towards
news veriﬁcation: Deception detection methods for news
discourse. In Proceedings of the Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS48) Symposium
on Rapid Screening Technologies, Deception Detection
and Credibility Assessment Symposium, January, pages
5–8.
Santia, G. C. and Williams, J. R. (2018). Buzzface: A
news veracity dataset with facebook user commentary
and egos. In ICWSM, pages 531–540.
Shu, K., Sliva, A., Wang, S., Tang, J., and Liu, H. (2017a).
Fake news detection on social media: A data mining
perspective.
ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter,
19(1):22–36.
Shu, K., Wang, S., and Liu, H.
(2017b).
Exploiting
tri-relationship for fake news detection. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1712.07709.
Shu, K., Mahudeswaran, D., Wang, S., Lee, D., and
Liu, H. (2018). Fakenewsnet: A data repository with
news content, social context and dynamic information
for studying fake news on social media. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1809.01286.
Tacchini, E., Ballarin, G., Della Vedova, M. L., Moret, S.,
and de Alfaro, L. (2017). Some like it hoax: Automated
fake news detection in social networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.07506.
Thorne, J. and Vlachos, A. (2018). Automated fact check-
ing: Task formulations, methods and future directions.
COLING.
Thorne, J., Vlachos, A., Christodoulopoulos, C., and
Mittal,
A.
(2018).
Fever:
a large-scale dataset
for fact extraction and veriﬁcation.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.05355.
Vlachos, A. and Riedel, S. (2014). Fact checking: Task
deﬁnition and dataset construction. In Proceedings of
the ACL 2014 Workshop on Language Technologies and
Computational Social Science, pages 18–22.
Wang, W. Y.
(2017).
” liar, liar pants on ﬁre”:
A
new benchmark dataset for fake news detection. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1705.00648.
Wardle, C. (2017). Fake news. it’s complicated. First
Draft News.
Yin, W. and Roth, D. (2018). Twowingos: A two-wing
optimization strategy for evidential claim veriﬁcation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.03465.
Zubiaga, A., Liakata, M., Procter, R., Hoi, G. W. S., and
Tolmie, P. (2016). Analysing how people orient to and
spread rumours in social media by looking at conversa-
tional threads. PloS one, 11(3):e0150989.
Zubiaga, A., Aker, A., Bontcheva, K., Liakata, M., and
Procter, R. (2018). Detection and resolution of rumours
in social media: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys
(CSUR), 51(2):32.
