Title: A Natural Language Processing Pipeline for Detecting Informal Data References in Academic Literature
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2205.11651v1
--------------------------------------------------

Accepted for 2022 ASIS&T Annual Meeting (5/20/2022) 
1 
 
 
A Natural Language Processing Pipeline for Detecting 
Informal Data References in Academic Literature 
 
Lafia, Sara 
ICPSR, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA | slafia@umich.edu 
Fan, Lizhou 
School of Information, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA | lizhouf@umich.edu  
Hemphill, Libby 
School of Information, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA| libbyh@umich.edu 
 
ABSTRACT 
Discovering authoritative links between publications and the datasets that they use can be a labor-intensive process. 
We introduce a natural language processing pipeline that retrieves and reviews publications for informal references 
to research datasets, which complements the work of data librarians. We first describe the components of the 
pipeline and then apply it to expand an authoritative bibliography linking thousands of social science studies to the 
data-related publications in which they are used. The pipeline increases recall for literature to review for inclusion in 
data-related collections of publications and makes it possible to detect informal data references at scale. We 
contribute (1) a novel Named Entity Recognition (NER) model that reliably detects informal data references and (2) 
a dataset connecting items from social science literature with datasets they reference. Together, these contributions 
enable future work on data reference, data citation networks, and data reuse. 
KEYWORDS 
bibliometrics; data citation; data metrics; named entity recognition; natural language processing 
INTRODUCTION 
Recent work investigating the relationship between properties of research datasets, curation decisions, and reuse has 
found that intensively curated data tend to be used more often (Hemphill et al., 2021). However, there is much more 
to learn about the context of research data reuse, such as the academic disciplines that gravitate toward particular 
datasets and the variety of applications in which data are used. Analyzing data citations can shed light on data use. 
However, discovering links between publications and the datasets they use is non-trivial as many authors informally 
describe data that they have used rather than formally citing the data (Mooney, 2011). 
As a consequence, retrieving comprehensive references to data can be a labor-intensive process. At ICPSR, a large 
social science data archive, staff curate a bibliography of data-related literature linking 11,000 social science studies 
to 100,000 data-related publications that use them. Given limited resources at data archives like ICPSR, priority is 
often given to monitoring the use of high profile datasets, such as well-established and long-running studies, rather 
than lower-profile datasets in the “long tail” (Heidorn, 2008). As a result, the citation counts constructed from 
manual efforts tend to be conservative estimates, which undercount the degree of actual data usage. 
Our work contributes to the study of research data citation and reuse in two main ways. First, we developed a natural 
language processing pipeline to detect informal data references in academic literature. By automating the detection 
of data references, we complement data librarians’ manual work to identify connections between data and 
publications. To accomplish detection, we trained a custom Named Entity Recognition (NER) model on a dataset of 
several thousand manually verified data citation sentences (Lafia et al., 2021). The model detects informal dataset 
references in academic text with relatively high recall. Second, we applied the trained pipeline in a human-in-the-
loop paradigm to expand the ICPSR Bibliography of Data-Related Literature (Fan et al., 2022). This expanded 
dataset enables research on data reference, data citation networks, and data reuse. Together, the automation and 
expansion steps in the pipeline increased ICPSR’s capacity to identify connections between datasets and research 
publications across a vast body of literature, complementing ongoing labor by staff to track research data citations. 
Data citation practices 
Data citation practices in the social sciences are evolving. The assignment of machine-readable, persistent identifiers 
(PIDs) to research data is an emerging standard that supports the disambiguation and automated tracking of data 
citations (Cousijn et al., 2019). Data citation gives credit to research data, enabling the study of research data 
indicators and impact (Buneman et al., 2022). However, there is still a great deal of literature in which data 
references are vague, incomplete, and indirect (Moss & Lyle, 2018). This is especially true for the retrospective 
Accepted for 2022 ASIS&T Annual Meeting (5/20/2022) 
2 
 
 
analysis of data use prior to the advent of persistent identifiers for data. Informal references are time consuming to 
address and require human interpretation to infer which datasets the authors have used (Yarkoni et al., 2021). 
Data citations differ from other types of citations in several ways. Unlike references to literature, which are typically 
standardized and included in a works cited section, statements indicating data use tend to occur throughout the body 
of text, tables, footnotes, and acknowledgements sections (Mayo et al., 2016). A study of the Dryad digital 
repository found that while the share of publications citing persistent identifiers for data had grown from 69% to 
83% between 2011 and 2014, the share of publications that included data identifiers in their works cited section 
remained low, under 10% (He & Han, 2017). In a study of biomedical research articles, most data use indicators 
were informal and did not reference datasets’ persistent identifiers; these “mentions” of data were found mainly in 
the materials, acknowledgements, and supplemental materials sections of published articles (Park et al., 2018).  
Analyzing data citations 
Capturing and analyzing data citations is essential for understanding the context of data reuse and informing 
decisions about data governance (Hellerstein et al., 2017). However, data citation practices are inconsistent. 
Detecting informal data references in literature could provide a more complete view of data reuse. Data providers 
are leveraging machine learning to address the disconnect between research data and publications. Named entity 
recognition (NER) has been proposed to find references to research data but has achieved low recall at the level of 
individual dataset mentions and documents (Boland et al., 2012). Recent work in Artificial Intelligence has achieved 
substantially higher recall by applying deep-learning, transformer models, like BERT, to NER tasks to identify 
references to machine learning datasets (Heddes et al., 2021). Similar efforts are also being developed to detect 
mentions of software using combinations of NER and rule-based extraction methods to identify the “invisible” 
contributions that software makes to academic research (Du et al., 2021). 
Many information retrieval tasks, such as document summarization and semantic analysis, rely on the analysis of 
citation-bearing sentences, or “citances” (Nakov et al., 2004). Scientific citations serve many functions such as 
providing background, motivation, use cases, extensions, comparisons, or proposals of future work (Jurgens et al., 
2018). In particular, data citations indicate the disciplinary reach of scientific datasets, making it possible to study 
the impact of data products on academic disciplines (Chao, 2011). 
DATA DETECTION PIPELINE 
We developed a computational pipeline to detect informal data references in academic literature (Figure 1). This 
pipeline includes three steps: retrieve, parse, and predict. The pipeline accepts a catalog of datasets in the ICPSR 
Bibliography and automatically generates a set of sentences in which informal data references are tagged.  
 
Figure 1. Overview of inputs, outputs, and services used in the data detection pipeline 
Accepted for 2022 ASIS&T Annual Meeting (5/20/2022) 
3 
 
 
The pipeline starts from a data catalog and searches for dataset identifiers (digital object identifiers, archival study 
numbers) and names (canonical, variants) in a full text index of publications. We use the Dimensions database to 
search against an index of more than 69 million full text publications (Hook et al., 2018). Access to the Dimensions 
platform is provided by Digital Science through subscription-only data sources under a license agreement through 
the University of Michigan. From the Dimensions database, the pipeline retrieves metadata for candidate full text 
publications, which contain one or more dataset identifiers or names and which have not yet been collected in the 
ICPSR Bibliography. Metadata for candidate documents is then passed to the Crossref API, which is used to request 
open access full text PDFs through content negotiation (Lammey, 2015).  
Next, the pipeline parses full text PDFs into structured text documents using a service called GROBID (Lopez, 
2009). This conversion method retains headers, section titles, tables, figures, and footnotes where data references are 
likely to be found. The documents are then tokenized with pySBD, a pragmatic sentence boundary disambiguation 
library for scientific texts (Sadvilkar & Neumann, 2020).  
Finally, the pipeline applies a custom Named Entity Recognition (NER) model to each sentence in a document to 
detect dataset entities. We describe the creation of training data for our NER model and evaluate the model’s 
performance in the next section. The pipeline outputs a set of data entities and the sentences that contain them as 
predicted data references for each document. These predictions support bibliometric ingest workflows by 
summarizing informal data references across many documents and help prioritize documents to review. 
Creating training data 
To detect informal data references in academic literature, we first developed a training dataset for an NER model. 
We used the following definition of a dataset from the ICPSR Glossary of Social Science Terms: “collection of data 
records… numeric files originating from social research methodologies or administrative records, from which 
statistics are produced”. As an example, this bolded mention indicates a dataset: “We also investigate individual-
level black-white thermometer scores from waves of the American National Election Survey (ANES) from 1984 
until 1998." Individuals labeling data for the training set used following guidelines: 
● 
Only label dataset proper names (“Housing and Urban Development (HUD): Family Unification Program 
Youth Data”) rather than general references to data products (“a 1994 HUD survey….”) 
● 
If the dataset span is contiguous, keep it intact (“Early Childhood Longitudinal Study (ECLS)”) 
● 
If a year is given as part of the proper dataset name, include it in the label (“2007 ARMS Phase III”) 
● 
Omit trailing words that are not part of the proper name of the dataset (“ECLS-K” study, survey) 
● 
Label all references to a dataset even if mentioned more than once (“2013 LEMAS; LEMAS”) 
We selected training sentences from two sources of academic research publications: 1) the ICPSR Bibliography of 
Data-Related Literature (Moss et al., 2015); and 2) the Semantic Scholar Open Research Corpus (S2ORC) (Lo et al., 
2020). More than half of the items in the ICPSR Bibliography are social science journal articles, followed by theses, 
reports, book chapters, and other types of materials that use ICPSR data. The S2ORC corpus contains over 8 million 
full text academic articles from medicine, biology, and other STEM fields, complementing social science literature 
from the ICPSR Bibliography. 
To select a set of training sentences from these documents, we applied morphological patterns inspired by existing 
rule-based methods (Heddes et al., 2021) and included keywords indicating data use (Park et al., 2018). We created 
a three-level candidate extraction method for sentences, which is summarized in Table 1. These patterns filter the 
full text and limit review to sentences with at least one matching pattern. In addition, this method specifies levels of 
possibilities for the annotator to review in the annotation interface, which reduces the amount of processing time by 
specifying the spans for the dataset reference candidates. We designate sentences that contain an indicator keywords 
as highly likely to contain a dataset reference, while those that contain an acronym are moderately likely, and those 
that contain a sequence of upper cased words have a lower likelihood. Through this process, the annotator can 
simply make judgment about whether an entity span is a true dataset reference, and focus on candidates with higher 
possibilities. In total, we extracted and labeled 4,505 training sentences: 3,004 sentences came from the ICPSR 
Bibliography and 1,503 came from S2ORC. 
Accepted for 2022 ASIS&T Annual Meeting (5/20/2022) 
4 
 
 
Level 
Rule 
Pattern 
High 
keywords and their 
variations matched 
using regular 
expressions 
'(?:train|test|validation|testing|trainings?)\s*(?:
set)', 'data', 'data\s*(?:set|base)s?', 
'corp(us|ora)', 'tree\s*bank', 'collections?', 
'benchmarks?', 'surveys?', 'samples?', 
'stud(y|ies)', 'reports?', 'census(es)?' 
Medium 
regular expression to 
return acronyms of 
names of a dataset 
\b[A-Z]{3,}s?\b 
Low 
regular expression to 
return the full names 
of a dataset 
([A-Z][a-z]+\s){2,}[A-Z][a-z]+ 
Table 1. Extraction patterns for creating NER training data 
The training process was iterative and allowed us to update our NER model as we labeled batches of sentences 
(Figure 2). The dashed components in the diagram – labeling sets of sentences and training the model – were 
updated in each iteration following model evaluation. The sentences, along with the span of the labeled dataset 
references, were provided as inputs to assist subsequent annotation steps. 
 
Figure 2. Overview of workflow for developing NER training data and model 
We used Prodigy, a tool for machine learning and teaching (Montani & Honnibal, 2018) to label dataset entities in 
the extracted sentences. Figure 3 shows an example of a sentence referring to a dataset, the National Intimate 
Partner and Sexual Violence Survey, highlighted in yellow. The metadata included below the sentence show which 
morphological patterns the sentence matched. The keywords “Studies”, “data”, “samples”, and “Survey” are listed 
in Table 1 as highly likely matching keywords. The acronym “IPV” is a medium-level possibility, as it has 
consecutive capital letters and can be an acronym for a dataset. In this sentence however, “IPV” means “Intimate 
Partner Violence”, which is a proper noun phrase of public health. The dataset reference candidate with low-level 
possibility, “National Intimate Partner” and “Sexual Violence Survey” are both parts of the name of the true dataset 
reference, which help the annotator to locate where to annotate. As this example shows, the three-level candidate 
extraction method both automatically extracts data reference candidate sentences and provides context for the 
annotator, which accelerates the creation of the high-quality training data of the NER model. We describe the NER 
model training and performance in the following sections.  
Accepted for 2022 ASIS&T Annual Meeting (5/20/2022) 
5 
 
 
 
Figure 3. An annotated training data example for the NER model in the Prodigy interface: a candidate 
sentence and the extracted dataset reference candidates, with the true dataset reference highlighted in yellow 
Training a NER model 
We split the labeled data into 80% training (3,604 sentences) and 20% evaluation (901 sentences) sets. We labeled 
additional data and retrained our model until we achieved a target recall score of 80. Recall is the most important 
measure for our task as we seek to maximize our ability to retrieve all candidate dataset references; we are less 
concerned with prediction precision because of human-in-the-loop feedback. We used the Python spaCy library 
(Honnibal et al., 2020) to train our NER pipeline with a graphics processing unit using a transformer-based 
architecture, which relies on the context of tokens to identify entities. Our final model achieved a score of 80.0 for 
recall, 91.95 for precision, and 85.56 for F1. 
APPLYING THE PIPELINE 
ICPSR, a large social science data archive, manually curates a bibliography of data-related literature that links over 
11,661 social science studies to 105,797 data-related publications in which they were used. Because the process of 
finding data citations and verifying data use in literature is labor intensive, the coverage of the ICPSR Bibliography 
is uneven. For example, the bibliography contains literature published from the inception of ICPSR in 1962 up to the 
present; however, most items in the bibliography were published after 2000 and reflect more recent scholarship, 
which tends to be readily discoverable and digitally accessible, rather than older, analog materials (Figure 4). 
 
Figure 4. Publications in the current ICPSR Bibliography grouped by decade 
 
Accepted for 2022 ASIS&T Annual Meeting (5/20/2022) 
6 
 
 
Data at ICPSR is organized into topical archives, which receive substantially different levels of citation (Figure 5). 
For example, the “demographics” topical archive (Data Sharing for Demographic Research - DSDR) has the highest 
study-citation ratio of all topical archives (an average of 246 citations/study). It stewards 61 studies, which have 
collectively received 15,029 total citations. By comparison, the “child and family” topical archive (Child and Family 
Data Archive - CFDA) also stewards 61 studies, which have received 2,069 total citations (an average of 33.9 
citations/study). Citation counts are based on the ICPSR Bibliography. All materials in the bibliography are 
reviewed by staff to verify that they demonstrate substantial reuse of ICPSR data. Some topical data archives – such 
as the “demographics”, “criminal justice”, and “aging” archives – support bibliography staff time, so more materials 
citing these data tend to be collected. As a result, citations for items in smaller, topical archives that do not pay for 
bibliography services may be undercounted. We applied our data detection pipeline to expand the current 
bibliography and balance its coverage by retrieving and reviewing candidate data citations for all ICPSR datasets 
regardless of their funding source or topic. 
 
Figure 5. Average study citations for ICPSR datasets grouped by their topical archive 
 
Retrieving data-related publications 
We searched for publications referencing ICPSR datasets, which were not part of the current ICPSR Bibliography. 
At ICPSR, each study consists of one or more data files and metadata; data citations are issued at the study level. We 
searched all publication full text in the Dimensions database for exact references to all 11,656 ICPSR study names, 
study DOIs, and study numbers. Our searches excluded studies that were self-deposited by authors in openICPSR. 
We included studies with public and restricted-use data containing sensitive information. We also included union 
catalog records, as ICPSR Bibliography staff collect these citations, and included deaccessioned studies, as the 
associated publications found when the study was active are retained in the bibliography. 
We issued the following queries and retrieved results for each type of search query as reported in Table 2. ICPSR 
studies were first assigned DOIs beginning in 2008 so we did not expect to find literature referring to ICPSR DOIs 
published prior to 2008. Most new results included the exact names of ICPSR studies in their full text (69%), 
suggesting that many authors refer to data by name but do not formally cite it. Fewer results matched ICPSR study 
DOIs (17%) or study numbers (14%). We retrieved more instances of authors referring to ICPSR studies by study 
number, suggesting that fewer authors formally cite ICPSR data. This finding is consistent with prior studies of data 
citation practices in the social sciences (Moss et al., 2015). We then de-duplicated the search results by comparing 
search result identifiers to items in ICPSR’s Bibliography as of February 2022. After deduplicating the hits against 
the current bibliography, we retrieved 9,191 new candidate publications that were not part of the current ICPSR 
Bibliography. If a publication included a dataset study number and a dataset DOI for example, these references were 
counted separately. We then used the publicly available Crossref API to check the license information and request 
links to available full text. In all, we retrieved 1,285/9,191 (14%) of the search result candidates as full text PDFs for 
evaluation. By automating search and review, we were able to identify a wider range of candidate publications for 
an entire data catalog, ultimately increasing the coverage of the ICPSR Bibliography. 
 
Accepted for 2022 ASIS&T Annual Meeting (5/20/2022) 
7 
 
 
Search method 
Example query string 
Total publications 
Percent 
Study Name 
“American Citizen Participation Study 1990” 
6,318 
69% 
Study DOI 
“10.3886/ICPSR06635” 
1,614 
17% 
Study Number 
“ICPSR 6635” 
1,259 
14% 
Table 2. Search results for publications referencing ICPSR study data 
Close reading: Using NER to detect dataset references in an academic publication 
We use the concepts of “close” and “distant” reading from the digital humanities to illustrate how our model 
facilitates the detection of informal data references in academic publications (Moretti, 2000). First, we applied the 
model to a single publication; close reading allows us to assess the quality of the model’s predictions by inspecting 
the context of each extracted data reference. We then applied the model to the large corpus of candidate articles we 
retrieved to study general trends in data references and to perform distant reading of data references at scale. 
We began by coding a research article, The Political Legacy of American Slavery (Acharya et al., 2016), which is 
included in the ICPSR Bibliography and has been verified to use the following ICPSR datasets: Three Generations 
Combined, 1965-1997; Youth-Parent Socialization Panel Study, 1965-1997: Four Waves Combined; Historical, 
Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790-2002; and the ANES Time Series Study (1984, 
1986, 1988, 1990,  1992, 1994, 1996, 1998). We identified 31 sentences in the article that referenced seven distinct 
datasets or data series. We then applied the NER model to extract data references and compared the model’s 
predictions to the manually verified data references. The model identified 21/31 (68%) of all sentences coded as 
having data references; however, the NER model successfully identified all seven unique datasets and data series 
referenced in the paper, demonstrating high recall. 
The model also identified several datasets that are not part of ICPSR’s data collection: IPUMS data; and the 2010 
CCES (Cooperative Congressional Election Study). Figure 6 shows examples of extracted sentences with predicted 
data references highlighted in gray. The extracted sentences are a mixture of formal data citations and informal data 
references or mentions. Formal data citations give credit to the data that the authors analyzed in the references 
section and cite the dataset using the dataset’s lead principal investigator and year. Informal dataset references 
describe the data used, often by name, without referring to an unambiguous, persistent identifier. While the NER 
model is designed primarily to capture informal data references, it detects formal data citations as well. 
 
Figure 6. Examples of publication sentences and their predicted dataset references, highlighted in gray 
 
Distant reading: Using NER to extract data references from a large corpus of publications  
We applied the NER model to the available full text of all search result PDFs (n=1,285) mentioning ICPSR datasets. 
After tokenizing the publications and applying the NER model, we found that 1.9% (7,486/402,637) of sentences in 
the sample contained a predicted dataset entity. However, 84% (1,074/1,285) of the publications contained at least 
one predicted dataset reference. We used a probabilistic record linkage Python library, fuzzymatcher, to compare the 
extracted dataset entity strings to a list of ICPSR study name strings and find their closest matches. The distribution 
of match scores is normal and centered at zero, which we set as our threshold. If a predicted entity matched an 
ICPSR study name with a match score of zero or greater, we classified it as an ICPSR dataset reference. A match 
below this threshold was classified as a non-ICPSR dataset reference and matches that did not receive a score were 
morphologically distinct, suggesting that they were not dataset references. Figure 7 shows the twenty-five most 
frequently occurring dataset entities matched to their most similar ICPSR study name. 
Accepted for 2022 ASIS&T Annual Meeting (5/20/2022) 
8 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Most frequently detected dataset entities matched to their closest ICPSR study names 
 
Using this method, we partitioned the extracted entities into three categories: ICPSR datasets (n=1,128 references 
found in 754 publications); non-ICPSR datasets (n=1,787 references found in 815 publications); and non-datasets 
(n=617 references found in 477 publications). References that matched ICPSR datasets were referred to the ICPSR 
Bibliography team for review, while those that did not match ICPSR study names were shared with the ICPSR Data 
Acquisitions team. Distinguishing between ICPSR and non-ICPSR data references can be used to notify ICPSR of 
potential data products that might be of interest for the archive to acquire in the near future. The model also does not 
discriminate between social science and other types of dataset references. We find that 67% (720/1,074) publications 
reference more than one type of dataset (ICPSR; non-ICPSR) and that 20% (691/3,535) of datasets are co-referenced 
with other datasets. Our pipeline supports co-citation analysis by extracting datasets that authors have referenced 
together in publications, regardless of their source domain. 
To find where the predicted dataset references occur across publications, we normalized the section names (e.g., 
converted “Methodology” to “Methods”) and counted the dataset references in each section. Table 3 shows the  
sections of publications where dataset references matching ICPSR study names were identified most often. The 
majority of dataset references were found in the Introduction sections of publications; this contrasts with prior 
studies of data citation, which found more data references in Methods and Materials sections of articles (Boland et 
al., 2012; Mayo et al., 2016; Park et al., 2018). Data references likely serve different rhetorical and scientific 
purposes in different sections, and we include examples that illustrate these potential differences. For example, data 
references in Introduction sections of articles often contextualized and justified the selection of a dataset. References 
made in the Data and Methods sections described the specific data the authors used, the composition of the dataset, 
and procedures that the authors applied to the data. We also found examples where authors referenced data in their 
Discussion and Conclusions as supporting or contrasting evidence. Authors also described data quality and 
limitations, or describe plans to extend their analysis through future use of a dataset.  
 
Section 
References 
Examples 
Introduction 
142 
“To fill this niche, the 'Mature Adults Cohort of the Malawi Longitudinal 
Study of Families and Health (MLSFH-MAC)' was initiated in 2012." 
Accepted for 2022 ASIS&T Annual Meeting (5/20/2022) 
9 
 
 
Section 
References 
Examples 
Data 
89 
“As an extension to our analysis, we use another household survey, the 
Russia Longitudinal Monitoring Survey of the Higher School of 
Economics (RLMS-HSE), a panel dataset consisting of various survey 
rounds from 1994 to 2016.” 
Conclusions 
76 
“Data from ICPSR Study 6576 show that 21 percent of the counties in our 
data experienced a border change between 1870 and 1960.” 
Methods 
60 
“The Detroit Area Study, 1995: Social Influences on Health: Stress, 
Racism, and Health Protective Resources provides a sample of 1,139 
respondents in the Detroit area.” 
Discussion 
58 
“The need for increased investment in drug abuse treatment programs was 
underscored in the 2008 National Survey on Drug Use and Health, where 
3.0% of the total population (i.e., 7.6 million persons aged 12 or older) were 
estimated to be in need of treatment for an illicit drug use problem.” 
Table 3. Sections of publications where ICPSR dataset entities were most prevalent 
In short, by extracting informal data references, we captured a wider array of scholarly work and extracted 
statements that reflect the diverse ways that researchers engage with datasets. Limited definitions of data reuse 
determine what counts as a data citation. Data reuse is often defined as use of data by someone other than the 
original creator of the dataset (Pasquetto et al., 2017; Zimmerman, 2008) in order to replicate an existing analysis 
(King, 1995) or to recombine existing data with new data. However, if a dataset is not listed in a references section 
or formally cited in the body of text, it is a matter of inference to determine the author’s intention in mentioning a 
dataset. Strict collection requirements preserve only formal or explicit citations of research data; implicit or informal 
data references are lost. Future work should examine these differences to understand the specific intentions behind 
formal and informal dataset references. 
Limitations and outlook 
Even though machine learning can increase recall for data citations, gaps will remain because data citations do not 
capture all types of data reuse. Opaque data references persist, in which authors refer vaguely to datasets, variables, 
or instruments that they use in their research (Moss & Lyle, 2018). For example, datasets may be used, but are 
improperly cited, making references difficult to find. Researchers may also publish work in sources that are not 
formally recognized or reviewed, such as preprints, or mention research datasets in social media. As a consequence, 
an expanded ICPSR Bibliography will still not reflect the true level of engagement with research data. Capturing a 
more complete picture of engagement with research datasets as first class research outputs requires a broader view, 
which aligns with similar efforts to develop research altmetrics (Priem et al., 2012)). 
In the present study, we have searched for literature referencing social science data in one scholarly database, 
Dimensions. We can expand search to include additional licensed databases and open science resources such as the 
xDD database (Peters et al., 2017) and the Project Freya PID graph (Fenner, 2019). This is motivated in part by 
licensing constraints we encountered when accessing full text in bulk. In addition, while we included reports and 
white papers in our training data, the majority of training data examples come from peer-reviewed journal articles. 
We would like to expand our training data to capture a wider variety of data references from theses, book chapters, 
and other materials that reflect a wider diversity of researcher career stages and disciplines. 
While the NER model performs well by predicting sentences that contain the names of datasets, it cannot yet 
differentiate between instances of data analysis (e.g., using data to generate new insights or test new methods), 
making passing mentions to data products (e.g., providing background or describing a data product), and meta-level 
discussions (e.g., a critique of a dataset’s limitations or quality). Cues from the text itself, such as the article section 
where the reference occurs, and the context, such as whether there are corresponding analytical tables and graphs, 
can help to distinguish types of data citations and their rhetorical functions. We plan to apply our pipeline to build a 
larger corpus of data statements in order to analyze the function and context of data citation. An extended analysis 
will shed light on the context and intent of data use. 
Accepted for 2022 ASIS&T Annual Meeting (5/20/2022) 
10 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
In this study, we have contributed: 1) a Named Entity Recognition (NER) model to detect informal data references; 
and 2) an expanded corpus of data-related social science literature, which can be used to analyze the context of 
research data reuse. We find that the NER model detects informal dataset references in academic text with relatively 
high recall. We also find that the pipeline increases ICPSR’s capacity to automatically detect informal references 
made to their research datasets across a vast body of literature, complementing ongoing labor by staff to track 
research data use. We have expanded the ICPSR Bibliography of data-related literature, which supports long-range 
studies of data impact. Together, these contributions address gaps caused by inconsistent data citation practices and 
make it possible to detect and analyze data references at scale.  
As data archives seek to maximize their impact across communities, data citations provide valuable evidence of the 
use and impact of research data. Our data detection pipeline also complements ongoing efforts to collect citations in 
two main ways. First, our approach reduces the amount of manual work performed by retrieving and reviewing 
publications. We also take advantage of human expertise to interactively train and update the NER model. The 
model also predicts and filters information, reducing the amount of content that staff review. The NER training 
pipeline uses human-in-the-loop feedback so that the time archive staff spend manually reviewing model predictions 
also provides high quality, expert training data to update the model and refine its predictions. 
Second, by detecting informal data references at scale, we make it possible to gain a more comprehensive view of 
the data reuse landscape. We capture a wider array of mentions, references, and instances of data reuse. While the 
goal of the bibliography is to identify publications that use ICPSR data (e.g., for analysis, synthesis, and replication 
studies), our pipeline detects other types of discourse surrounding many kinds of data products. The analysis of data 
citations is an emerging area, given that data citation is a relatively new practice.  
Detecting informal references to research data is needed to build robust data metrics. As more data is made 
available, an awareness of how users interact with data throughout its lifecycle can support the development of data-
driven curation and collection policies. Understanding who is using data and for what purposes will also enrich data 
providers’ and funders’ understanding of the utility and impact of their research data. There is also potential to 
enhance and contextualize existing data metrics by providing more insights into the function of data citations and 
their intent. Data metrics that reflect a wider range of references to research data will better represent the diversity of 
data use and may also inspire novel reuse in the long-term. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Many thanks to David Bleckley and Elizabeth Moss of the MICA team at the Inter-university Consortium for 
Political and Social Research (ICPSR) for their support of this research. This material is based upon work supported 
by the National Science Foundation under grant 1930645. 
REFERENCES 
Acharya, A., Blackwell, M., & Sen, M. (2016). The Political Legacy of American Slavery. The 
Journal of Politics, 78(3), 621–641. 
Boland, K., Ritze, D., Eckert, K., & Mathiak, B. (2012). Identifying References to Datasets in 
Publications. Theory and Practice of Digital Libraries, 150–161. 
Buneman, P., Dosso, D., Lissandrini, M., & Silvello, G. (2022). Data citation and the citation graph. 
Quantitative Science Studies, 2(4), 1399–1422. 
Chao, T. C. (2011). Disciplinary reach: Investigating the impact of dataset reuse in the earth 
sciences. In Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology (Vol. 48, 
Issue 1, pp. 1–8). https://doi.org/10.1002/meet.2011.14504801125 
Accepted for 2022 ASIS&T Annual Meeting (5/20/2022) 
11 
 
 
Cousijn, H., Feeney, P., Lowenberg, D., Presani, E., & Simons, N. (2019). Bringing citations and 
usage metrics together to make data count. Data Science Journal, 18. https://doi.org/10.5334/dsj-
2019-009 
Du, C., Cohoon, J., Lopez, P., & Howison, J. (2021). Softcite dataset: A dataset of software 
mentions in biomedical and economic research publications. Journal of the Association for 
Information Science and Technology, 72(7), 870–884. 
Fan, L., Lafia, S., Bleckley, D., Moss, E., Thomer, A., & Hemphill, L. (2022). Librarian-in-the-
Loop: A Natural Language Processing Paradigm for Detecting Informal Mentions of Research Data 
in Academic Literature. In arXiv [cs.DL]. arXiv. http://arxiv.org/abs/2203.05112 
Fenner, M. (2019). Introducing the PID Graph. Front Matter. https://doi.org/10.53731/r79sf9h-
97aq74v-ag4wp 
Heddes, J., Meerdink, P., Pieters, M., & Marx, M. (2021). The Automatic Detection of Dataset 
Names in Scientific Articles. Data, 6(8), 84. 
Heidorn, P. B. (2008). Shedding Light on the Dark Data in the Long Tail of Science. Library Trends, 
57(2), 280–299. 
He, L., & Han, Z. (2017). Do usage counts of scientific data make sense? An investigation of the 
Dryad repository. Library Hi Tech, 35(2), 332–342. 
Hellerstein, J. M., Sreekanti, V., Gonzalez, J. E., & Dalton, J. (2017). Ground: A Data Context 
Service. CIDR. 
https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.1071.9562&rep=rep1&type=pdf 
Hemphill, L., Pienta, A., Lafia, S., Akmon, D., & Bleckley, D. (2021). How do properties of data, 
their curation, and their funding relate to reuse? Deep Blue. https://doi.org/10.7302/1639 
Honnibal, M., Montani, I., Van Landeghem, S., & Boyd, A. (2020). spaCy: Industrial-strength 
natural language processing in python. https://spacy.io/ 
Hook, D. W., Porter, S. J., & Herzog, C. (2018). Dimensions: Building Context for Search and 
Evaluation. Frontiers in Research Metrics and Analytics, 3. https://doi.org/10.3389/frma.2018.00023 
Accepted for 2022 ASIS&T Annual Meeting (5/20/2022) 
12 
 
 
Jurgens, D., Kumar, S., Hoover, R., McFarland, D., & Jurafsky, D. (2018). Measuring the evolution 
of a scientific field through citation frames. Transactions of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, 6, 391–406. 
King, G. (1995). Replication, Replication. PS, Political Science & Politics, 28(3), 444–452. 
Lafia, S., Ko, J.-W., Moss, E., Kim, J., Thomer, A., & Hemphill, L. (2021). Detecting informal data 
references in academic Literature. Deep Blue. https://doi.org/10.7302/1671 
Lammey, R. (2015). CrossRef text and data mining services. Insights, 28(2), 62–68. 
Lo, K., Wang, L. L., Neumann, M., Kinney, R., & Weld, D. S. (2020). S2ORC: The Semantic 
Scholar Open Research Corpus. Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics, 4969–4983. 
Lopez, P. (2009). GROBID: Combining Automatic Bibliographic Data Recognition and Term 
Extraction for Scholarship Publications. Research and Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries, 
473–474. 
Mayo, C., Vision, T. J., & Hull, E. A. (2016). The location of the citation: changing practices in how 
publications cite original data in the Dryad Digital Repository. 11(1), 150–155. 
Montani, I., & Honnibal, M. (2018). Prodigy: A new annotation tool for radically efficient machine 
teaching. https://prodi.gy/ 
Mooney, H. (2011). Citing data sources in the social sciences: do authors do it? Learned Publishing: 
Journal of the Association of Learned and Professional Society Publishers, 24(2), 99–108. 
Moretti, F. (2000). Conjectures on world literature. New Left Review, 54–68. 
Moss, E., Cave, C., & Lyle, J. (2015). Sharing and citing research data: A repository’s perspective. 
In H. K. P. Jayasuriya (Ed.), Big Data, Big Challenges in Evidence-based Policy Making (pp. 47–
65). West Academic Publishing. 
Moss, E., & Lyle, J. (2018). Opaque data citation: Actual citation practice and its implication for 
tracking data use. https://deepblue.lib.umich.edu/handle/2027.42/142393 
Nakov, P. I., Schwartz, A. S., Hearst, M., & Others. (2004). Citances: Citation sentences for 
Accepted for 2022 ASIS&T Annual Meeting (5/20/2022) 
13 
 
 
semantic analysis of bioscience text. Proceedings of the SIGIR, 4, 81–88. 
Park, H., You, S., & Wolfram, D. (2018). Informal data citation for data sharing and reuse is more 
common than formal data citation in biomedical fields. Journal of the Association for Information 
Science and Technology, 69(11), 1346–1354. 
Pasquetto, I. V., Randles, B. M., & Borgman, C. L. (2017). On the Reuse of Scientific Data. Data 
Science Journal, 16(8). https://doi.org/10.5334/dsj-2017-008 
Peters, S., Ross, I., Czaplewski, J., Glassel, A., Husson, J., Syverson, V., Zaffos, A., & Livny, M. 
(2017). A New Tool for Deep-Down Data Mining. In Eos. https://doi.org/10.1029/2017eo082377 
Priem, J., Groth, P., & Taraborelli, D. (2012). The altmetrics collection. PloS One, 7(11), e48753. 
Sadvilkar, N., & Neumann, M. (2020). PySBD: Pragmatic Sentence Boundary Disambiguation. In 
arXiv [cs.CL]. arXiv. http://arxiv.org/abs/2010.09657 
Yarkoni, T., Eckles, D., Heathers, J. A. J., Levenstein, M. C., Smaldino, P. E., & Lane, J. (2021). 
Enhancing and accelerating social science via automation: Challenges and opportunities. Harvard 
Data Science Review, 3(2). https://doi.org/10.1162/99608f92.df2262f5 
Zimmerman, A. S. (2008). New Knowledge from Old Data: The Role of Standards in the Sharing 
and Reuse of Ecological Data. Science, Technology & Human Values, 33(5), 631–652. 
 
 
