Title: Data-driven HR - Résumé Analysis Based on Natural Language Processing and Machine Learning
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1606.05611v2
--------------------------------------------------

Data-driven HR
R´esum´e Analysis Based on Natural Language Processing and Machine Learning
Tim Zimmermann
Hasso Plattner Institute
Potsdam, Germany
tim.zimmermann@student.hpi.de
Leo Kotschenreuther
SAP Labs
Palo Alto, USA
l.kotschenreuther@sap.com
Karsten Schmidt
SAP Labs
Palo Alto, USA
karsten.schmidt01@sap.com
Abstract—Recruiters usually spend less than a minute looking
at each r´esum´e when deciding whether it’s worth continuing
the recruitment process with the candidate. Recruiters focus on
keywords, and it’s almost impossible to guarantee a fair process
of candidate selection. The main scope of this paper is to tackle
this issue by introducing a data-driven approach that shows
how to process r´esum´es automatically and give recruiters more
time to only examine promising candidates. Furthermore, we
show how to leverage Machine Learning and Natural Language
Processing in order to extract all required information from
the r´esum´es. Once the information is extracted, a ranking score
is calculated. The score describes how well the candidates ﬁt
based on their education, work experience and skills. Later this
paper illustrates a prototype application that shows how this
novel approach can increase the productivity of recruiters. The
application enables them to ﬁlter and rank candidates based on
predeﬁned job descriptions. Guided by the ranking, recruiters
can get deeper insights from candidate proﬁles and validate
why and how the application ranked them. This application
shows how to improve the hiring process by giving an unbiased
hiring decision support.
Index Terms—Computer Science, Machine Learning, Natural
Language Processing, Human Resources
1. Motivation
Data-driven HR is the current trend in HR departments
to replace the outdated notion of support function and turn-
ing HR into a pro-active counselor and education partner
within a corporate environment. Especially, the ‘war for
talent’ and the amount of applications for open positions
lead to new dimensions in processing candidate proﬁles and
ﬁnding the best match [1]. Recruiters and hiring managers
can easily be biased or accidentally applying ‘ﬁlters’1 on
candidates without having a full 360◦view on an individual
candidate. Moreover, when having multiple proﬁles and
multiple positions to ﬁll, the problem of matching internal
and external candidates is multiplying the necessary efforts.
Candidates can easily ﬂood recruiting inboxes via online
1. E.g., only looking for a speciﬁc keyword or degree; and missing
domain knowledge for a position to ﬁll
Figure 1. From Document to Information: First we convert the PDF
documents to HTML. Based on HTML structure, layout, and the content,
we identify sections (personal, work experience, education and skills) using
a pre-trained ML classiﬁer.
channels. This is important, because according to Erica
Breuer, tailored r´esum´es are still the most effective way to
apply for a job [2]. This information ﬂooding is maybe one
of the reasons, why recruiters often ignore candidates that
did not explicitly apply for a position instead of actively
seeking them2. Having the right tools to objectively judge
and rank candidates could help to a) ﬁnd the best match and
b) process more potential candidates.
In this research prototype, we leveraged current state-
of-the-art technology in natural language processing (NLP)
and machine learning (ML) to demonstrate how data-driven
HR can signiﬁcantly improve the quality and speed of the
whole recruiting process.
2. From Document to Information
Most external3 job seekers have to provide multiple
documents to prove their education, their work eligibility,
language certiﬁcates, formal trainings, and a r´esum´e stating
prior work experience, education, awards, skills and more.
We observed that most r´esum´es are provided as a PDF docu-
ment and leveraged their typical structured nature. Because,
simple text extraction (e.g., xpdf’s pdf2text [3]) may result
2. Job hunting on online portals, such as linkedin is mostly focusing on
professionals
3. External - outside of an organization
arXiv:1606.05611v2  [cs.CL]  21 Jun 2016
Figure 2. This map shows clusters of related skills derived using word-embedding [4]. Each dot represents a particular skill, the coloring represents
different skill clusters.
in mixed segments (see Fig 1), leveraging layout information
is crucial. To correctly identify all entities in a r´esum´e, we
employed segment-speciﬁc processors. For instance, once
we identiﬁed the personal section or skill section, we instruct
the processing pipeline accordingly. For the segmentation
we identify headlines, extract font information, positioning,
keywords, and spaces. Once the r´esum´e is split a pre-trained
classiﬁer4 helps to correctly identify a section and route it
to the right processor.
Each processor is using Named Entity Recognition
(NER) to label locations, institutes, names, titles, and date
information. Given the huge variety of date spellings, a sepa-
rate regular expression step is necessary to normalize them.
For instance, ‘Summer 2015’, ‘Present/Now’ or ‘2004,10
- 2005,9’ are some of the non-standard instances which
will be replaced with a normalized form ‘mm/dd/yyyy’ or
a duration type, respectively.
When inspecting segments like work experience, we re-
apply the segmentation logic to split into individual career
steps before labeling employer, dates, and role.
To ensure consistent quality, a combination of NLP/ML
and well-deﬁned rules helps to label education experience.
The degree identiﬁcation is based on a normalized bache-
lor, master, doctoral degree ranking with a certain spelling
variation tolerance. Contrary, the segment identiﬁcation is
solely ML classiﬁcation based.
4. We used various SVM, RF, DT models and compared their perfor-
mance
Eventually, the skills section requires a customized pro-
cessing, too. We pre-trained a skill co-occurrence model
using word-embedding [4] based on a large corpus of 800 k
proﬁles. For an easy validation and visualization we reduced
the high dimensionality from hundred down to two using
Stochastic Neighborhood Embedding (t-SNE [5]) and auto-
matically identiﬁed clusters (see Fig 2) of related skills.
The whole pre-processing pipeline transforms a r´esum´e
document into a set of structured information entities that
can easily be processed.
3. From Information to Knowledge
The goal is to get a complete picture of a candidate’s ﬁt
to a speciﬁc job position. Thus, we need to combine multiple
dimensions of information, such as skills, education, and
work experience. In this section we will show how we
measure ﬁt on each dimension and how we can merge them
to gain a ﬁnal ranking score representing a candidate’s ﬁt.
3.1. Scoring
In our prototype, each candidate is assigned a score
between 0 and 100 indicating its match to a given job
description. The score is the weighted average of the three
categories: education, work experience, and skills. By de-
fault, the skills score is twice as important as the other two.
3.2. Education
The education score is based on academic degree as
well as the university’s ranking. For university ranking we
used: Times Higher Education [6] and QS [7]. Both of them
include a score between 0 and 100, with 100 being the best5.
We use the average of both scores. If a university is not
listed in one of these rankings, its score for that ranking is
considered to be 0. We know that this may be unfair, but
almost all universities we checked for our prototype were
present in at least one of the rankings. By default, the degree
score is a constant number: 20 (Bachelor), 35 (Master)
or 50 (Doctoral). The sum of degree score and university
ranking score leads to the ﬁnal education score. Note, that
for scoring only the most recent university and degree are
taken into account instead of previous ones. One of the
reasons is that certain school types, e.g., High Schools, are
not considered for university rankings which would result
in 0 scoring. Eventually, candidates with multiple entries
may have a couple of low (or zero) scores. An alternative
would be to have a more ﬁne-grained weighting based on
duration/degree and even courses taken if available or to
only consider the ‘top’ scorer. Nevertheless, the goal of
the prototype is to show how external data can objectively
improve judgment about education qualities.
3.3. Work Experience
Our second score is for work experience that depends
on duration of employment as well as on an employer score.
Additionally, the more recent the employment the more this
employment contributes to the work experience score. For
simpliﬁcation, each month of experience is worth one point.
It is extremely difﬁcult to rank employers. Not only be-
cause the lack of data for each and every company out there
(especially start-ups and SMEs), but also because there is not
a single criteria to rank them. Moreover, how much does a
ranking criteria such as ‘revenue’ or ‘number of employees’
support an individual’s ﬁt and level of experience. In order to
have at least some employer ‘quality’ metric in our ranking,
we relied on employer’s prior selectivity on hiring. We used
the training set of 800 k proﬁles introduced in Section 2 in
order to evaluate the career progress of employees based on
their current employer. Since we don’t have enough data to
take the complete career into account, we take the average
education score of its employees as employer score. The
ﬁnal score is the sum of the experience points and the
average of the weighted employer scores. It is limited to
100 points.
3.4. Skills
The skill score is the average scores of all desired skills.
To calculate a speciﬁc skill score, we match the skill to
the skill set of the candidate. For each candidate skill, the
distance (see Section 2) to the desired skill is calculated and
5. For THE 100 means ‘perfect’ and for QS 100 means ‘ﬁrst’
Figure 3. Various ways for candidate ﬁltering: minimal work experience in
years, most current university degree and the mix of desired skills.
the skill with the shortest distance is identiﬁed. The score
for this desired skill is calculated as follows:
score = scorematch −α ∗distance
(1)
Whereas scorematch is a constant, which reﬂects the score
for exact matching skills of distance zero. Other skills are
based on distance punishment regulated by the α parameter.
4. Prototype Application
To experience the potential of our application, we built a
prototype that allows for ﬁltering, ranking, and comparison
of candidates. In [8] we made a screencast available showing
all major capabilities.
4.1. Ranking Candidates
Candidates are assigned multiple scores as described
in Section 3.1. These scores are used to sort them based
on ranking in various visualizations (see Section 4.3) of
candidates. Either a weighted overall ranking can be applied
or a ﬁne-grained focused ranking based on individual skills,
education, or work experience.
4.2. Filtering Candidates
To ﬁlter candidates, the user6 has different options (see
Figure 3). One option is to ﬁlter by required degree(s). An-
other option is to specify the minimum number of years of
work experience. Note, ﬁltering does not affect the scoring,
it just helps to reduce the pool size of candidates.
The user can also select any ensemble of skills to specify
a desired candidate proﬁle. Skill selection is supported by
6. Recruiter or hiring manager
Figure 4. Different views for ranking and comparing candidates: A shows the card view highlighting most important information (i.e., how well everyone
ﬁts the search requirements) for each candidate. B shows the score view which enables the user to inspect each speciﬁc score which plays a role in the
overall score. Subﬁgure C shows the score chart. It displays the overall skill scores and the overall work experience scores ordered decreasingly by the
skill scores. A screencast showcasing these features is available in [8].
an auto-complete list, which is based on the large corpus of
800 k proﬁles described in Section 2.
Note, skill scoring and ranking relies on the co-
occurrence model on our training proﬁles. The beneﬁt of
that is that new skills automatically appear and mapped as
long as new skill proﬁles are added. The downside is that we
may experience a slight delay of new skills being correctly
mapped, because it requires some occurrences of these new
skills.
Additionally, users can add related skills at any time and
even start by using pre-deﬁned job templates.
4.3. Comparing Candidates
The tool gives the user multiple ways of displaying the
candidate pool.
4.3.1. Cards. The default way of displaying the candidates
is the card view shown in Figure 4 A. Every candidate is
represented by a card containing the most important aspects,
such as name, score, and most recent degree.
Each card also has a chart that shows the score broken
down in the three categories (education, work experience,
and skills). The user can quickly see which category a
candidate excels in or falls behind. Generally, the bigger the
area of the triangle in the chart, the better the candidate’s
score is relative to all other candidates.
Convenience features, like bookmarking of candidates
or direct contact options are present as well.
4.3.2. Scores. A tabular view of scores is depicted in Figure
4 B. This view lets the user quickly evaluate how a candidate
ﬁts w.r.t. speciﬁc skills. There is a column for each of
the three main categories as well as all the desired skills.
To highlight the top scorers for each score, the top ten
percentage is colored green. The user also has the option
to sort by a speciﬁc category or skill.
4.3.3. Score Chart. The score chart (see Figure 4 C) dis-
plays the overall skill scores and overall work experience
scores of the candidates. It is ordered decreasingly by the
skill scores. If two candidates have the same skill score, the
candidate with the better work experience score comes ﬁrst.
The advantage of this view is that the user can visually
compare how candidates perform in the mentioned score
parts in particular. For instance, the example shows that skill
ﬁt is fairly similar for all the candidates, but the score for
work experience is quite different. This helps to navigate
candidate ﬁltering by visually guiding towards distinctive
dimensions.
Figure 5. Proﬁle View of a candidate showing the original r´esum´e on the left and detail cards on the right. Any card content can be hovered to highlight
relevant appearances in the document. Except for the Job Scores card, all cards are speciﬁc to the current r´esum´e and the previously deﬁned job proﬁle.
4.4. Inspecting Candidates
One of the main features of the application is to analyze
and explain the match between candidate skill set and job
proﬁle requirements. On the proﬁle page (see Figure 5), the
original r´esum´e is embedded on the left, while the extracted
information is grouped in cards on the right.
4.4.1. Context. Hovering over an item of the extracted
information cards, e.g., a skill, all occurrences of that skill
are highlighted in the original r´esum´e. This provides the
user with the ability to easily validate and learn more about
the context of that skill. For instance, projects or classes this
skill was applied in.
4.4.2. Related Skills - Desired Skills Card. Not only does
the desired skills card visualize skill match quality for job
proﬁle skills, but each skill can also be expanded to show the
top similar skills and the degree of similarity. For instance,
Scilab is only a 90 % match. Since this skill is not explicitly
mentioned in the r´esum´e, contributing skills, i.e., similar
skills indicate knowledge in this area and based on our skill
mapping technique a matching score below 100 % can be
calculated.
4.4.3. Match - Job Scores Card. This card lists the top job
proﬁles for this candidate based on our scoring ﬁt measure.
This is especially helpful for candidates who avoid applying
for too many positions at the same time and recruiters who
struggle to ﬁnd the best candidate for a job. This card
emphasizes if this candidate would be even a better ﬁt for
another job she has not applied for.
5. Summary and next Steps
This research prototype shows how to use a data-driven
approach including multiple datasources in order to guide a
user in matching candidates and jobs. Using ML and NLP,
it is possible to build a pipeline that ﬁrst extracts all the
relevant information from r´esum´es and provides them in a
structured way. Once r´esum´es are processed, external data
for employers and educational institutes are included as well
to calculate candidate matches. Recruiters can tailor their
search and ﬁltering to speciﬁc job roles. Additionally, there
are several options and dimensions to compare candidates.
Eventually, the application allows for a detailed analysis of
the r´esum´e to validate ranking and matching recommenda-
tions.
However, because we developed a prototype, there are
potential next steps and areas to further improve. First
of all, weights to calculate scores are not optimized yet.
More speciﬁcally, user research is necessary to evaluate
various conﬁgurations. Secondly, in this work, we focused
on extracting the most important information from r´esum´es.
In fact, there are much more qualities to collect and to
assess, e.g., awards, courses, job details, and languages. In
addition, assessing career performance could be extremely
beneﬁcial. Other criteria to take into account could be costs
of hiring candidates, relocation, or training to ﬁll the gaps.
When hiring people it is important to know whether they
are going to ﬁt into the team and can adapt to the corporate
culture. Given all the data points that are available today,
there are many more extensions of our prototype presented
in this work.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the team from SAP
Innovation Center, Palo Alto: Frank Blechschmidt, Fredrick
Chew, Pascal Crenzin, Stephan Haarmann, Michael Janke,
Jaeyoon Jung, Roger Li, Bhumi Patel, Stefan Selent and
Ren´e Springer.
References
[1] The
Telegraph,
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/ﬁnance/jobs/10949825/
Employers-receive-39-applications-for-every-graduate-job.html,
July
2014
[2] Erica Breuer, Don’t just copy and paste: 4 things to put on
LinkedIn
but
not
your
r´esum´e,
http://mashable.com/2016/03/27/
differences-linkedin-resume, March 2016.
[3] Xpdf, http://www.foolabs.com/xpdf/, April 2016
[4] Christopher Olah’s blog, Deep Learning, NLP, and Representations,
http://colah.github.io/posts/2014-07-NLP-RNNs-Representations/,
July 2014
[5] Laurens van der Maaten, t-SNE, https://lvdmaaten.github.io/tsne/ April
2016
[6] Times Higher Education, World University Rankings 2015-2016,
https://www.timeshighereducation.com/world-university-rankings/
2016/world-ranking, April 2016
[7] QS World University Rankings 2015/16, http://www.topuniversities.
com/qs-world-university-rankings, April 2016
[8] Innovation Center Silicon Valley, SAP, R´esum´e Explorer Prototype
Screencast, https://youtu.be/qlW-QUkfg9k, March 2016
