Title: Evolution of transfer learning in natural language processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.07370v1
--------------------------------------------------

Evolution of Transfer Learning in Natural Language
Processing
Aditya Malte †
Dept. of Computer Engineering,
Pune Institute of Computer Technology,
Maharashtra, India.
Pratik Ratadiya †
Dept. of Computer Engineering,
Pune Institute of Computer Technology,
Maharashtra, India.
Abstract—In this paper, we present a study of the recent
advancements which have helped bring Transfer Learning to
NLP through the use of semi-supervised training. We discuss
cutting-edge methods and architectures such as BERT, GPT,
ELMo, ULMFit among others. Classically, tasks in natural
language processing have been performed through rule-based
and statistical methodologies. However, owing to the vast nature
of natural languages these methods do not generalise well and
failed to learn the nuances of language. Thus machine learning
algorithms such as Naive Bayes and decision trees coupled with
traditional models such as Bag-of-Words and N-grams were used
to usurp this problem. Eventually, with the advent of advanced
recurrent neural network architectures such as the LSTM, we
were able to achieve state-of-the-art performance in several
natural language processing tasks such as text classiﬁcation
and machine translation. We talk about how Transfer Learning
has brought about the well-known ImageNet moment for NLP.
Several advanced architectures such as the Transformer and its
variants have allowed practitioners to leverage knowledge gained
from unrelated task to drastically fasten convergence and provide
better performance on the target task. This survey represents
an effort at providing a succinct yet complete understanding of
the recent advances in natural language processing using deep
learning in with a special focus on detailing transfer learning
and its potential advantages.
Index Terms—Natural language processing, transfer learning,
self attention, language modeling
I. INTRODUCTION
Natural Language processing - the science of how to
make computers effectively process natural text- has recently
witnessed rapid advancements thanks to increased processing
power, data and better algorithms. It forms the heart of several
use cases such as opinion mining, conversational agents and
machine translation among others. Traditionally, NLP tasks
were achieved through rule-based systems, in essence, a set
of manually crafted rules that determined the behaviour of
the system. Examples include rule-based machine translation
where linguists iteratively framed new rules to make the
translations more accurate.
However, owing to the vast and heuristic nature of natural
language, machine learning gained a stronger ground in per-
forming NLP tasks. Machine learning models such as SVM,
Naive Bayes and random forests found use in tasks such as
sentiment analysis, spam detection and hate speech detection.
On the other hand, Natural Language Generation(NLG) tasks
such as machine translation, question-answering, abstractive
summarization were achieved through models such as the
Transformer and Seq2Seq architectures.
Two important breakthroughs that provided signiﬁcant im-
petus to the NLP and NLG domain were the arrival of
Transfer Learning and rapid improvements in the performance
of Language models. We† feel it necessary to discuss these
concepts before moving further:
A. Language Modeling
Language modeling is an NLP task where the model has
to predict the succeeding word given the previous words
of the sequence as context. This task requires the language
model(LM) to learn the nuances and inter-dependencies among
the various words of the language. Standard benchmark
datasets for the language modeling tasks include the wikitext
dataset, the BookCorpus dataset [1] and the 1B word [2]
benchmark. Perplexity is generally used as a metric to evaluate
the performance of language models. Perplexity is deﬁned as
follows:
N
v
u
u
t
N
Y
i=1
1
P(wi|w1...wi−1)
(1)
Given a sequence of N words of the corpus, w1w2...wN,
P(wi|w1...wi−1) is the probability assigned by the language
model to word wi given wi−1 preceding words of the se-
quence.
A lower perplexity generally signals towards a better per-
forming language model as it indicates a lower entropy in the
generated text. Language modeling is used for tasks such as
next word prediction, text auto-completion and checking lin-
guistic acceptability. The concept of semi-supervised learning
in NLP allows us to understand why and how language mod-
eling has played a fundamental role in various architectures
that have allowed for transfer learning in NLP.
B. Transfer Learning
Traditionally, NLP models were trained after random initial-
ization of the model parameters(also called weights). Transfer
Learning, a technique where a neural network is ﬁne-tuned on
a speciﬁc task after being pre-trained on a general task allowed
deep learning models to converge faster and with relatively
†Equal contribution of both the authors
arXiv:1910.07370v1  [cs.CL]  16 Oct 2019
lower requirements of ﬁne-tuning data. Historically, transfer
learning has been mainly associated with the ﬁne-tuning of
deep neural networks trained on the ImageNet dataset [3] for
other computer vision tasks. However, with recent advances in
natural language processing, it has become possible to perform
transfer learning in this domain as well.
In this survey, we seek to discuss the recent strides made in
Transfer learning, Language modeling and natural language
generations through advancements in algorithms and tech-
niques. Transfer learning can be used for applications where
there is lack of a large training set. The target dataset should
ideally be related to the pre-training dataset for effective
transfer learning. This type of training is generally referred
to as semi-supervised training where the neural network is
ﬁrst trained as a language model on a general dataset fol-
lowed by supervised training on a labelled training dataset
thus establishing a dependence of supervised ﬁne-tuning on
unsupervised language modeling.
The paper is structured as follows- Section II of the pa-
per elaborates on the various algorithms and architectures
that have serve as a base on which more advanced models
have been built upon. Section III provides information about
the transformer architecture which drastically improved the
prospects of using transfer learning for NLP tasks. Section IV
then goes on to discuss the evolution of language modeling
and transfer learning through models such as BERT, ElMo,
UlMFit and so on. We conclude our survey and suggest future
improvements in section V.
Fig. 1: Developments in Transfer Learning and Language
Modeling
II. BACKGROUND
A. Vanilla RNNs
Machine learning models have been widely been used for an
array of supervised as well as unsupervised learning tasks such
as regression, classiﬁcation, clustering and recommendation
modelling. Markov models such as the Multi-layer Perceptron
Network, vector machines and logistic regression, however,
did not perform well in sequence modeling tasks such as
text classiﬁcation, language modeling and tasks based on time
series forecasting. These models suffered from an inability to
retain information throughout the sequence and treated each
input independently. In essence, the lack of a memory element
precluded these models from performing well on sequence
modelling tasks.
Recurrent Neural Networks [4] or RNNs attempted to redress
this shortcoming by introducing loops within the network, thus
allowing the retention of information.
Fig. 2: Recurrent Neural Network [7]
ht = φ(Wht−1 + Uxt + b)
(2)
As shown in Fig.2 and the corresponding equation, the
current hidden state of the neuron can be modelled as a
function of the hidden state of the previous neuron st−1, the
current input xt, weight matrices
U, W and bias b. These
weights of the network are then updated through a training
algorithm called Backpropagation Through Time(BPTT) [5].
BPTT is, in essence, the backpropagation algorithm with
some modiﬁcations. The network is propagated for each time
step- an operation that is often referred to as unrolling the
RNN. The parameters of the neural network remain the same
throughout the unrolling operation of the RNN. Corresponding
errors concerning the predicted output and the ground truth are
then calculated for each time step. Gradients of the error with
respect to all parameters are then calculated and accumulated
using the backpropagation algorithm. It is only after the
unrolling is complete that all the parameters of the RNN are
updated by using this accumulated error gradient.
Vanilla RNNs were successful in a wide variety of tasks
including speech recognition, translation and language mod-
elling. Despite their initial success, vanilla RNNs were only
able to model short term dependencies. They failed to model
long term dependencies, primarily because the information
was often ”forgotten” after the unit activations were multiplied
several times by small numbers. Further, they suffered from
various issues while training such as the vanishing gradient
problem (the error gradient being used for weight updation
reducing to very low values) and the exploding gradient prob-
lem. Thus, successfully training and applying vanilla RNNs
was a challenging task.
B. Long Short Term Memory
The problem of ’long-term’ dependencies faced by earlier
recurrent neural networks was solved by designing a special
kind of RNN architecture called the LSTM(Long Short Term
Memory) [6]. They were designed to keep track of information
for the extended number of timesteps. LSTMs have an overall
chain-based architecture similar to RNNs but the crucial
difference is the improvements in the internal node structure.
While a node in RNN consists of a single neural layer, there
are four layers connected uniquely in LSTMs as shown in the
ﬁgure.
Fig. 3: Chain structure of LSTMs [7]
The key feature of LSTMs is the information carrier con-
nection present at the top known as the ’cell state’. It proves
to be useful to carry information along longer distances with
only minor linear operations taking place at each node.The
ability to add or delete certain information of the cell state
at each node is provided by structures called as gates. LSTM
has three such gates, each comprising of a sigmoid neural net
layer and a pointwise multiplier.
The ’forget gate’ decides what information is to be retained
in the cell state by using a sigmoid layer which outputs a
value between 0 and 1(0 indicates ’forget everything’ while 1
indicates ’retain completely’). The ’input gate’ layer is used
to determine new information which is to be added to the cell
state. It involves deciding which values to be updated and the
new candidates to do so. The previous cell state values and
the new candidate values are then combined to get the ﬁnal
new cell state. The output to be forwarded by the node is
decided by combining the values of current cell state with the
results of the ’output layer’. The output is generally supporting
information relevant to the previous word. Mathematically, the
operations performed using the three gates can be expressed
as:
ft = σ(Wf.[ht−1, xt] + bf)
(3)
it = σ(Wi.[ht−1, xt] + bi)
(4)
eCt = tanh(Wc.[ht−1, xt] + bC)
(5)
Ct = ft ∗Ct−1 + it ∗eCt
(6)
ot = σ(Wo.[ht−1, xt] + bo)
(7)
ht = ot ∗tanh(Ct)
(8)
where ft,it,ot indicate outputs of the forget gate, input gate
and output gate respectively. W and b indicate the weights and
bias. Ct−1 indicates the previous cell state, eCt represents the
new candidate values and the current cell state is shown by
Ct.
The advantage of using LSTM is that they offer more
control in a network than the conventional recurrent networks.
The system is more sophisticated and can retain information
over longer timesteps. However, the added gates lead to more
computation requirement and thus LSTMs tend to be slower.
C. Gated Recurrent Units
Gated Recurrent Units [8] or GRUs introduced by Cho, et al.
in 2014 are a curtailed variation of LSTMs designed to reduce
the computation issues of the latter. The forget and input gates
in LSTMs are combined into a single ’update gate’. The cell
state and hidden states are also merged together and computed
using a single ’reset gate’. The operations now performed are
as follows:
zt = σ(Wz.[ht−1, xt])
(9)
rt = σ(Wr.[ht−1, xt])
(10)
eht = tanh(Wc.[rt ∗ht−1, xt])
(11)
ht = (1 −zt) ∗ht−1 + zt ∗eht
(12)
Fig. 4: Internal structure of GRUs [7]
GRUs have the advantage of being able to control the ﬂow
of information without having an explicit memory unit, unlike
LSTMs. It exposes the hidden content of the node without any
control. The performance is almost on par with LSTM but with
efﬁcient computation. However, with large data LSTMs with
higher expressiveness may lead to better results.
D. Average SGD Weight Dropped(AWD)-LSTM
AWD-LSTM [9], despite its relatively simple 3-layer LSTM
architecture was proven to be highly effective for Language
Modeling tasks. It employed a novel algorithm called Drop-
Connect to mediate the problem of overﬁtting that had been
inherent in the RNN architecture. Besides, the authors used
Non-monotonically Triggered ASGD(NTASGD) algorithm to
optimize the network.
Dropconnect Algorithm Neural networks, prone to overﬁt-
ting, traditionally utilised Dropout as regularization to prevent
overﬁtting. Dropout, an algorithm that randomly(with a prob-
ability p) ignore units’ activations during the training phase
allows for the regularization of a neural network. By diminish-
ing the probability of neurons developing inter-dependencies,
it increases the individual power of a neuron and thus reduces
overﬁtting. However, dropout has not been able to provide
commensurate results in case of the RNN architectures. In
essence, it inhibits the RNN’s capability of developing long
term dependencies as there is loss of information caused due
to randomly ignoring units activations.
To this end, the drop connect algorithm randomly drops
weights instead of neuron activations. It does so by ran-
domly(with probability 1-p) setting weights of the neural
network to zero during the training phase. Thus redressing
the issue of information loss in the Recurrent Neural Network
while still performing regularization.
Non-monotonically
Triggered
ASGD
(NT-ASGD)
Stochastic gradient descent has been demonstrated to offer
good performance for language modeling tasks through saddle
point avoidance and linear convergence. Thus, the authors go
on to investigate a variant of SGD- averaged SGD. Averaged
SGD-almost identical to vanilla SGD- differs in the fact that
an averaging of the weights(which are cached) is performed
after a threshold number of iterations T is over.
While theoretically able to control the effects of noise,
averaged SGD has found little use while training neural
networks. This has been mainly attributed by the author to am-
biguous guidelines regarding the tuning of hyperparameters:
learning rate scheduler and averaging trigger. A commonly
used strategy while using the SGD optimizer is to reduce the
learning rate by a ﬁxed quantity when the validation error
worsens or fails to improve. Similarly, one may perform the
averaging operation after validation error worsens. The Non-
monotonically triggered ASGD employs a similar technique.
It differs in the fact that, instead of performing averaging
when the validation error worsens NT-ASGD performs the
averaging operation if the validation error fails to improve.
NT-ASGD introduces two new hyperparameters-the logging
interval L and the non-monotone interval n. Consequently, the
authors found that keeping n = 5 provided good performance
in general. Better results were achieved compared to SGD
while training their model.
E. Seq2Seq Architecture
We take the example of neural machine translation to ex-
plain the working of the Attention Mechanism and advantages
that it provides.
The Seq2Seq architecture [10] has been used to perform
a wide variety of tasks including Neural Machine Transla-
tion(NMT), Abstractive summarization and chatbot systems.
The traditional Seq2Seq architecture consists of an encoder
RNN(LSTM/GRU) followed by a decoder RNN. The encoder
encoded the given sequence into a ﬁxed-length vector. The
decoder generated the output sequence after taking the ﬁxed-
length vector as source hidden state. While giving signiﬁcant
improvements in the domains of neural machine translation,
encoding the context of complex and long sequences into
a single vector impeded the performance of the network.
This was since a ﬁxed-length vector was often incapable
of effectively encoding the context of the given sequence.
Consequently, this led to the birth of the Attention Mechanism,
a novel technique that allowed the neural network to identify
which input tokens are relevant to a corresponding target token
in the output.
F. Attention Mechanism
Instead of encoding a single vector to represent the se-
quence, the attention mechanism [11] computes a context
vector for all tokens in the input sequence for each token in
the output. The decoder computes a relevancy score for all
tokens on the input side. These scores are then normalized
by performing a softmax operation to obtain the Attention
weights. These weights are then used to perform a weighted
sum of the encoder’s hidden states, thus obtaining the Context
Vector ct.
αts =
exp(score(ht, hs))
PS
s′=1 exp(score(ht, hs′)))
(13)
ct =
X
s
αtshs
(14)
at = f(ct, ht) = tanh(Wc[ct; ht])
(15)
A hyperbolic tangent operation is performed on the concate-
nation of the context vector and the target hidden state to get
the Attention vector at. This attention vector generally pro-
vides a better representation of the sequence than traditional
ﬁxed-sized vector methods.
By identifying the relevant input tokens while generating
the output token, Attention mechanism is able to redress
the problem of compressing the context of the text into a
ﬁxed-sized vector. Using this mechanism Bahdanu et. al. [11]
were able to achieve state-of-the-art performance in machine
translation tasks.
III. THE TRANSFORMER ARCHITECTURE
Owing to the signiﬁcant improvements gained due to
the Attention mechanism, Vaswani et. al. [12] proposed the
Transformer architecture. The Transformer achieved new
state-of-the-art results in various tasks such as machine
translation, entailment and so on. As shown in Fig.5,
the Transformer consists of an encoder and a decoder.
Furthermore, the encoder consists of a Multi-Head Attention
Fig. 5: Architecture of the Transformer
layer, residual connections, normalization layer and a generic
feed-forward Layer. The decoder is almost identical to
the encoder but contains a certain ”Masked” Multi-Head
Attention layer.
Encoder: The encoder takes as input the input embedding
that is added with the positional encoding. The positional
encoding allows for the retention of position and order related
information. The authors employ the following equations to
compute the positional encoding:
PE(pos,2i) = sin(pos/10000(2i/dmodel))
(16)
PE(pos,2i+1) = cos(pos/10000(2i/dmodel))
(17)
Where pos is the position of the word in the sequence and
i is the dimension. This positional encoding is added to the
input embedding. It is then followed by a residual connection
R, deﬁned as follows:
R(x) = LayerNorm(x + MultiHeadedAttention(x))
(18)
Where x is the value of the input embedding added with
positional encoding. Thus we are effectively able to encode
the semantic and position-related information using the input
and positional encodings.
Decoder: As previously stated, the decoder is almost identical
to the Encoder but for the ”Masked” Multi-Headed Attention
Layer.
Scaled dot-Product Attention: While generating embeddings
for each word in the input token, the authors made use of
the self attention mechanism. Self attention, similar to vanilla
attention, allows the Transformer to identify words in the input
sequence that were relevant to the current token. Speciﬁcally,
the authors made use of Scaled dot-Product Attention.
Attention (Q, K, V ) = softmax(QKT
√dk
)V
(19)
As shown above, the Scaled dot-Product Attention takes
three vectors as input- the key, value and query.As shown,
we perform a weighted average of the value vector V . The
weights are assigned by using a ”compatibility function” to
ﬁnd .
• Embedding E is the output value of previous hidden layer
• Query, Q = EWq
• Key, Q = EWk
• Value, Q = EWv
Where Wq, Wk and Wv are weight matrices. A dot product
of the query vector Q and key vector K is performed with
a scaling factor 1/
√
dk. The scaling factor is used to avoid
the softmax input falling in a range where the output falls to
a negligible value. A softmax operation is performed on the
output of softmax. The ﬁnal vector is multiplied with the value
vector through a matrix multiplication operation to obtain the
ﬁnal attention scores.
Fig. 6: Multi-Headed and Scaled Dot-Product Attention
Multi-Headed Attention: Additionally, to reduce the number
of operations to compute Attention scores, the authors make
use of Multi-Headed Attention. Multi-Head Attention splits the
vector space into ’n’ parts. These divisions are then passed to
’n’ Attention Heads to perform the Self-Attention operation,
the results of these operations are then concatenated. In
addition to reducing the number of operations, Multi-Headed
Attention allows the model to ”jointly attend to information
from different representation subspaces at different positions”.
Masked Multi-Headed Attention: The Masked Multi-
Headed Attention is similar to the Multi-Headed Attention
but performs an additional ”masking” operations. The decoder
is allowed to attend to only the previous positions while
computing self-attention passing the output embedding. This
would result in the transformer being able to attend to the
subsequent positions and consequently the output prediction
in the sequence. To prevent this undesirable phenomenon, all
subsequent positions are set to −∞before computing the self-
attention that is passed to higher layers.
Finally, a softmax layer is used as the to compute output word
probabilities. The word probabilities are in the form of a vector
that has a size equal to the size of the vocabulary of the training
set.
Based on the Attention mechanism and without using any
recurrence mechanism, the Transformer effectively supplanted
the Recurrent Neural Network Architectures-LSTM, GRU,
etc.-as the state-of-the-art in several NLP tasks. It is used
for a wide variety of tasks including machine translation and
constituency parsing.
IV. EVOLUTION OF TRANSFER LEARNING AND
LANGUAGE MODELING
A. ULMFIT
Universal Language Model Fine-tuning (ULMFit) [13]- a
method to ﬁne-tune a pre-trained language model- was one
of the forerunners of inductive transfer learning in NLP. By
deﬁnition, the language modeling task entails that given a
sequence of tokens, the model has to predict the likelihood
of the next token based on the sequence. The ULMFit method
achieved good results by using the then state-of-the-art AWD-
LSTM for their experiments. The proposed network was a sim-
ple 3-layer neural network without any attention mechanism,
skip connections etc. ULMFit allowed for transfer learning by
employing the following three steps in the stated order:
1) Generic Pretraining of the Language Model: The
authors pre-trained their language model on WikiText-
103– a large general-purpose dataset that consists of
28,595 preprocessed articles and 103 million words. This
step allowed the language model to capture the general
properties of the given language. Also, while computa-
tionally expensive, this task need to be performed only
once.
2) Fine-tuning the Language Model on the Target task:
This step allowed the language model to capture the
inherent nuances of the target task,thus allowing better
performance. Furthermore, this step can be performed on
a relatively smaller dataset, thus requiring relatively less
computational power. The authors then proposed two
novel methods- Discriminative Fine-tuning and Slanted
Triangular Learning rates to perform this task.
Discriminative ﬁne-tuning - Different layers of the
model extract different features from the text. Thus,
the use of different learning rates for different layers
seemed apt. To this end, the the authors formulated
Discriminative Fine-Tuning, a variation of the SGD
optimizer-as follows:
θl
t = θl
t−1 −ηl · ∇θlJ(θ)
(20)
Where, θ is the weight, t is the iteration, l is the layer,
∇θlJ(θ) is the error gradient, η is the learning rate and
J indicates the error function.
The authors found that choosing a value of learning
rate for the last layers and then setting the learning rate
of lower layers by the relation ηl−1 = ηl/2.6 worked
well.
Slanted Triangular Learning Rates: The Slanted
Triangular Learning Rate is deﬁned by the author as
follows: by using a high initial learning rate, the model
would quickly converge to an appropriate region in the
hyperspace. The learning rate is then linearly decayed
in order to improve the parameters on target task at a
ﬁne rate. The authors deﬁned three new equations:
cut = [T · cutfrac]
p =



t/cut, t < cut
1 −
t −cut
cut·(1/cutfrac −1), otherwise



ηt = ηmax · 1 + p·(ratio −1)
ratio
where T is the number of iterations, cutfrac the frac-
tion of iterations that the LR is increased and p is
the number of iterations that the LR is going to be
decreased or has been decreased. Additionally, ratio
deﬁnes etamin/etamax and cut is the cutoff iteration
where the model switches from an increasing LR to a
decreasing LR.
3) Fine-Tuning the Classiﬁer on Target Task To perform
task-speciﬁc classiﬁcation, two linear blocks initialized
from scratch are added to the language model. The
author follows standard practices such as Batch Normal-
ization and Dropout to perform regularization. Besides,
the ReLu activation function is used similar to those
used in Computer Vision models.
Concat Pooling: To preserve information contained in
few words, the input provided to this classiﬁer is a
concatenation of the last hidden layers and the average
and max pooled output of the previous hidden layers.
For this purpose, the author sought to concatenate as
many hidden layers as would ﬁt in the GPU memory.
The concatenation hc is as given below:
hc = concatenate(hT , maxpool(H), averagepool(H))
(21)
where H = {h1, h2..hT }
Gradual Unfreezing: Keeping all parameters trainable,
i.e. performing the updation of all parameters during
training would lead to a rapid loss in information learnt
during the pre-training phase. To tackle this, the authors
have gradually ”unfrozen” the layers. In essence, the
authors start by unfreezing the last layers and then
perform ﬁne-tuning. They repeat this process until all
layers of the AWD-LSTM have not been trained.
Bidirectional LM: The authors train both a forward
LM as well as a backward LM. Consequently averaging
the predictions given by both the Language Models.
One can apply transfer learning using ULMFit by using pre-
trained models trained on datasets such as the Wikitext 103
data. Fine-tuning is performed by adding training the network
on the target task by using supervised learning
B. Embeddings from Language Models(ELMo)
Traditional word embeddings involve assigning a unique
vector to each word. These word embeddings are ﬁxed and
independent of the context in which the words are being
used. Peters et. al came up with a new word representation
called ”Embeddings from Language Models(ELMo)”, [14]
in which the tokens beings assigned to each word were
a function of the entire sentence of which the word as a
part of. These embeddings are obtained from the internal
layers of a deep bidirectional LSTM that is trained with a
coupled language model objective (biLM) on a large text
corpus. These representations are more elaborate as they are
dependent on all of the internal layers of the biLM. The
word representations are computed on top of two-layer biLMs
with character convolutions as a linear function of the internal
network states. For a given set of tokens, the biLM computes
their probability by taking into consideration the logarithmic
likelihood of both the previous words(forward LM) as well as
the future words(backward LM) and maximizing it.
p(t1, t2, ..., tN) =
N
X
k=1
(logp(tk|t1, ..., tk−1; Θx, −→
Θ LSTM, Θs)+
logp(tk|tk+1, ..., tN; Θx, ←−
Θ LSTM, Θs))
(22)
where Θs and Θx indicate the parameters for the softmax
layer and the token representations in the forward and back-
ward layer respectively. The ELMo model uses the intermedi-
ate layer representation of the biLM. ELMo combines all the
layers of the biLM representation into a single vector ELMOk
to be accommodated later in the ﬁne-tuning task. Generally,
for a given task of obtaining word embeddings in the language
modeling phase, we ﬁnd the obtained weightings of all biLM
layers:
ELMotask
k
= γtask
L
X
j=0
stask
j
hLM
k,j
(23)
where stask are the weights and γtask is a scalar quantity.
stask is obtained after normalizing the weights and passing
them through a softmax layer. γtask, on the other hand,
allows us to scale the ELMo vector. γtask plays an important
role in the optimization process. The layer representation
hLM
k,j = [−→h LM
k,j ; ←−h LM
k,j ] for each biLSTM layer wiz. combina-
tion of forward context representations and backward context
representations.
Such a deep representation helps ELMo to trace two im-
portant factors (1) Complex characteristics like the syntax and
semantics of the words being used and (2) Their variations
across linguistic contexts. For any supervised task, the weights
of the biLM are frozen. ELMOk is then concatenated with
it and the obtained representations are then forwarded to the
task-speciﬁc architecture. A pretrained biLM can be used to
obtain representations for any tasks and with ﬁne-tuning, they
have shown a decrease in perplexity thereby beneﬁting from
transfer learning.
The addition of ELMo embeddings to existing models has
helped them process more useful information from the sen-
tences and thus enhanced the performances in many applica-
tions like question answering, semantic role labelling, named
entity extraction and many more.
ELMo provides an enhancement to the traditional word
embedding techniques by incorporating context while gener-
ating the same. The vector generated by ELMo can be used
for a general downstream task. This is sometimes done by
passing the generated word embeddings to another neural
network(eg. LSTM) which is then trained on the target task.
Furthermore, concatenation of ELMo embeddings with other
word embeddings is also done to provide better performance.
C. OpenAI Transformer
Although there is availability of large text corpora, labelled
data is tough to ﬁnd and manually labelling the data is an
equally tedious task. Radford et al. at OpenAI proposed a
semi-supervised approach called Generative Pre-training(GPT)
[15] which involved unsupervised pre-tuning of the model
and then task-speciﬁc supervised ﬁne-tuning for language
understanding tasks. The Transformer is used as the base
model for this purpose. The unsupervised learning helps to
set the initial parameters of the model based on a language
modeling objective. The subsequent supervised learning helps
the parameters adjust to the target task.
Initially, a multi-layer transformer decoder is used to pro-
duce an output distribution over the target tokens based on a
multi-headed self-attention mechanism.
h0 = UWc + Wp
(24)
hl = transformer block(hl−1)∀i ∈[1, n]
(25)
P(u) = softmax(hnW T
c )
(26)
where hi is the transformer layer’s activations, Wc is the
token embedding matrix and Wp is the position embedding
matrix. The supervised learning task then obtains the ﬁnal
transformer block activations hl
m which are passed through
a softmax layer to predict output label y:
P(y|x1, ..., xm) = softmax(hm
l Wy)
(27)
to maximize
L2(C) =
X
(x,y)
logP(y|x1, ..., xn)
(28)
where C indicates the labeled dataset with each sequence
consisting of tokens x1, x2, ..xm. During transfer learning, the
input is converted into a single contiguous sequence of tokens
so as to ﬁt the pre-trained model.
OpenAI transformer improvises on generative pre-training
to improve performance on tasks by providing a better start
than random initialization. A single model is able to produce
quality results with minimum task-speciﬁc customization or
hyperparameter tuning, thereby showing its robustness. This
architecture model was able to outperform other approaches
on tasks like natural language inference, question answering,
sentence similarity etc.
D. Bidirectional Encoder Represenation from Transform-
ers(BERT)
BERT [16] -proposed by J.Devlin et al.- is a novel ap-
proach to incorporate bidirectionality in a single Transformer
model. A particularly challenging task, direct approaches to
incorporating bidirectionality in Transformer models fail since
direct bidirectional conditioning would allow the words to
see themselves in the light of context from multiple layers,
thereby ruling out the possibility of using it as a Language
Model. In essence, it was traditionally only possible to train
a unidirectional encoder- a left-right or a right-left model.
However, bidirectional models that could see the complete
sequence context would inherently be more powerful than
unidirectional models or a concatenation of two unidirectional
models-left-right and right-left. To this end, the authors trained
their model on two unsupervised prediction tasks:
Masked LM To overcome the challenges posed while ap-
plying of bi-directionality in Transformers, J.Devlin proposed
masking of random tokens in the sequence. The Transformer
was trained such that it had to predict only the words that had
been masked while being able to view the whole sequence.
WordPiece Tokenization is used to generate the sequence of
tokens where rare words are split into sub-tokens. Masking
of 15% of the Wordpiece Tokens is performed. Masking
essentially replace the words with [MASK] tokens. How-
ever, instead of always replacing the selected words with a
[MASK] token, the data generator employs the following
approach:
• Replace the word with [MASK] token 80% of the time
• Replace the word with another random word 10% of time
• Keep the word as it is 10% of the time
Performing prediction on only 15% of all words instead of
performing prediction on all words would entail that BERT
would be much slower to converge. However, BERT showed
immediate improvements in absolute accuracy while converg-
ing at a slightly slower pace than traditional unidirectional
left-right models.
Next Sentence Prediction This task entails predicting
whether the ﬁrst sequence provided immediately precedes the
next. This task allows the Transformer to perform better on
several downstream tasks such as question-answering, Natural
Language Inference that involve understanding the relationship
between two input sequences. The dataset so used for training
had a balanced 50/50 distribution created as follows: choosing
an actual pair of neighbouring sentences for positive examples
and a random choice of the second sentence for the negative
examples. The input sequence for this pair classiﬁcation task
is generated as:
[CLS] < Sentence A > [SEP] < Sentence B > [SEP],
where sentences A and B are two sentences after performing
the masking operations. The [CLS] token is the ﬁrst token used
to obtain a ﬁxed vector representation that is consequently
used for classiﬁcation and [SEP] is used to separate the two
input sequence. The authors were able to achieve an impressive
accuracy of 97-98% in the next sentence prediction task.
Pre-Training
Procedure The authors have used the
BooksCorpus and the English Wikipedia as pretraining data.
They have used two variations of BERT- BERTBASE(12-
layer) and BERTLARGE(24 layers)- that primarily differ in
their depth. The maximum length of the input sequence is
restricted to 512 tokens. All subsequent tokens in the sequence
are neglected. A dropout value of 0.1 is used as regularization.
Furthermore, the authors have made use of the GELU instead
of Relu as activation function. GELU- Gaussian Error Linear
units has been shown to provide improvements compared to
ReLU and eLu.
Training of the models was performed on TPUs, speciﬁcally
BERTBASE was trained on 16 TPU chips for 4 days.
BERTLARGE was trained on 64 TPU chips, also for 4 days.
Fine-Tuning Procedure The pre-trained BERT can be ﬁne-
tuned on a relatively small dataset and requires lesser pro-
cessing power. BERT was able to improve upon the previous
state-of-the-art in several tasks involving natural language
inference, question answering, semantic similarity, linguistic
acceptability among other tasks. The pattern of the input and
output sequence varies depending on the type of the task. The
tasks can be broadly divided into four categories:
• Single Sentence Classiﬁcation Tasks: These tasks are per-
formed by adding layers on the classiﬁcation embedding
[CLS] and passing the input sequence preceded by the
[CLS] token.
• Sentence Pair Classiﬁcation Tasks The two sentences are
passed to BERT after being separated by the [SEP]
token. Classiﬁcation can be performed by adding layers
to the [CLS
• Question Answering Tasks
• Single Sentence Tagging Tasks
Subsequently, two multilingual BERT models-uncased and
cased-for over 102 languages were released. Furthermore,
OpenAI released the GPT2 [17], essentially BERT trained as
a language model on a very large amount of data.
E. Universal sentence encoder
The amount of supervised training data present for language
processing tasks is limited. The use of pre-trained word
embeddings has proved to be useful in this case as they
perform a limited amount of transfer learning. Daniel et al.
[18] proposed a new approach which involved direct encoding
of sentences instead of words into vectors. The sentence
encoded vectors are found to require minimal task-speciﬁc
data to produce good results. The encoder models are available
in two architectures taking into consideration the two primal
challenges of training transfer learning models wiz. complexity
and accuracy.
1) Transformer based architecture: The ﬁrst model makes
use of the transformer architecture to construct sentence em-
beddings. The encoding subgraph of the transformer architec-
ture is used for this purpose. Attention mechanism is used
to ﬁnd context-based word representations which are then
converted into a ﬁxed-length sentence encoding vector. The
input to the transformer model is a lower case Penn Treebank
3(PTB) [19] tokenized string and a 512-dimensional sentence
embedding is produced as the output. A single encoding
model is trained over multiple tasks to make it as general
as possible. This model achieves superior accuracy over the
other architecture but at the expense of increased computation
requirement and complexity.
2) Deep Averaging Network(DAN) architecture: In this
model, the input embeddings for words and bi-grams are aver-
aged and then passed through a deep neural network. The input
and output format are same as that of the transformer encoder.
Multitask learning, similar to the transformer model encoder
model is used for training purpose. The main advantage of
this model is that it performs the required operations in linear
time.
The main difference between the transformer and DAN
encoder models is of time complexity(O(n2) and O(n) re-
spectively). The memory requirement for the transformer
model increases quickly with increase in sentence length while
that of DAN model remains constant. The trade-off between
complexity and accuracy should be noted when deciding a
particular architecture for a given task.
The unsupervised learning data used for training in both the
cases included Wikipedia, web news and discussion forums.
Augmentation is performed using training on supervised data
from the Stanford Natural Language Inference(SNLI) corpus
which improved the performance further. The universal sen-
tence encoder can be used for a variety of transfer tasks includ-
ing sentiment analysis, sentence classiﬁcation, text similarity
etc. For determining a pairwise semantic similarity between
two sentences, the similarity of the sentence embeddings
produced by the encoder can be calculated and converted into
angular distance to get the ﬁnal result.
sim(u, v) = (1 −arccos(
u.v
||u||||v||)/π)
(29)
The sentence embeddings outperform the results of word
embeddings on the fore mentioned tasks. However, combining
word and sentence embeddings for transfer learning produced
the best overall results. Universal sentence encoder assists the
most when limited training data is available for the transfer
task.
The Universal Sentence Encoder can be used for down-
stream tasks bypassing the generated embedding to a classiﬁer
such as an SVM or another deep neural network.
F. Transformer-XL
The Transformer-XL [20]was able to model very long-range
dependencies. It did so by overcoming one limitation of the
vanilla Transformer- ﬁxed-length context. Vanilla Transform-
ers were incapable of accommodating a very long sequence
owing to this limitation. Hence they resorted to alternatives
such as splitting the corpus into segments which could be
managed by the Transformers. This led to loss of context
among individual segments despite being part of the same
corpus. However, the Transformer-XL was able to take the
entire large corpus as input, thus preserving this contextual
information. In essence a vanilla Transformer, it relied on
two novel techniques-Recurrence mechanism and Positional
Encoding- to provide the improvement.
1) Recurrence mechanism: Instead of training the Trans-
former on individual segments of the corpus(without regards
to previous context), the authors propose caching the hidden
sequence state computed from the previous segments. Con-
sequently, the model computes self attention(and other opera-
tions) on the current hidden/input state as well as these cached
hidden states. The number of states cached during training
is limited due to memory limitations of the GPU. However,
during inference, the authors can increase the number of
cached hidden states used to model long-term dependency.
2) Relative Positional Encoding: An inherent problem with
using the said Recurrence mechanism is preserving relative
positional information while reusing cached states. The authors
overcame this problem by incorporating Relative Positional
Encoding in the Attention mechanism(instead of hidden states)
of the Transformer. They do so by encoding information re-
garding the positional embedding dynamically in the Attention
scores themselves. The distance of the key vectors for the
query vector is the temporal information that is encoded in the
Attention scores. In essence, computing attention is facilitated
as temporal distance is still available to the model while still
preserving previous states. Furthermore, information regarding
the absolute position can be recovered recursively.
The Transformer-XL was able to surpass the state-of-the-art
results for language modelling tasks on the enwiki8 and text8
datasets.
G. XLNet
The BERT model proposed by Authors et. al, was an
Auto Encoding(AE) model that suffered from the following
problems:
• The use of [MASK] tokens during the pre-training phase
led to a discrepancy as these tokens were absent during
the ﬁne-tuning phase.
• The model neglected inherent dependencies among two
or more [MASK] tokens, thus leading to sub-optimal
performance.
A new model, the XLNet [21] was able to overcome these
difﬁculties by using a modiﬁcation of general autoregressive
pretraining.
Generalized Autoregressive Pretraining Phase Instead
of using unidirectional language modeling or bidirectional
masked language model to predict tokens, the paper proposed
passing all permutations of a given sequence to the model
and predicting a particular token missing from this sequence.
Despite random re-ordering of the sequence, order-related
information remains preserved as positional encodings of the
tokens remained the same for all permutations of the input
sequence.
Use of this modiﬁed form of pretraining helped overcome
the two main challenges posed by the BERT architecture.
Along with that, the XLNet incorporated Transformer-XL into
its core architecture. This allowed for better modeling of long-
dependencies compared to BERT. Through the use of these
two major modiﬁcations, the XLNet provided new state-of-
the-art results in 18 natural language processing tasks.
Signiﬁcant gains were observed compared to BERT espe-
cially in tasks such as machine reading comprehension which
required modeling of long-range dependencies. The authors
attribute this improvement mainly to the use of Transformer-
XL in the XLNet architecture. The XLNet, similar to BERT,
can be used for a wide range of single sentence, sentence pair
and reading comprehension tasks among others.
V. CONCLUSION
We have thus provided a lucid summary of recent advances
in the domain of transfer learning in the domain of natural
language processing. We hope that this survey would help
the reader gain a quick and profound understanding of this
domain. Recent advances in this domain, despite being a
step forward, come with their challenges. Speciﬁcally, large
architectures such as the BERT, XLNet and Transformer-XL
make training and deployment difﬁcult owing to the large
amount of processing power required. Furthermore, employing
large and opaque models impedes upon the explainability
aspect of the same, thus making one question their deploy-
ment in the real-world. Thirdly, while newer models can
provide improvements over their predecessors, the lack of
a standard benchmark dataset for pre-training these models
makes one question whether these improvements were due
to an architectural innovation or simply because the said
model was pre-trained on larger amount of data. Take for
instance, it is difﬁcult to gauge whether the XLNet model
bettered upon the BERT model because of an architectural
improvement or because it was pre-trained on a larger corpus.
Thus, there is a need to decide upon a standard pre-training
dataset to remove this ambiguity. Lighter models such as the
DistilBERT and ALBERT are a step in the right direction and
could potentially help bridge the gap between performance
and processing power. On the other hand, innovations brought
about during the training phase, such as in the RoBERTa model
might help seek out better performance using the same model
architecture.
REFERENCES
[1] Yukun Zhu, Ryan Kiros, Richard Zemel, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
Raquel Urtasun, Antonio Torralba, Sanja Fidler,
”Aligning
Books and Movies: Towards Story-like Visual Explanations
by Watching Movies and Reading Books”, arXiv:1506.06724
[cs.CV]
[2] Ciprian Chelba, Tomas Mikolov, Mike Schuster, Qi Ge, Thorsten
Brants, Phillipp Koehn, Tony Robinson,
”One Billion Word
Benchmark for Measuring Progress in Statistical Language
Modeling”, arXiv:1312.3005 [cs.CL]
[3] Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li,
Li Fei-Fei,
”ImageNet: A large-scale hierarchical image
database”, 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition
[4] Zachary C. Lipton, John Berkowitz, Charles Elkan, ”A Critical
Review of Recurrent Neural Networks for Sequence Learning”,
arXiv:1506.00019 [cs.LG]
[5] P.J. Werbos, ”Backpropagation through time: what it does and
how to do it”, Proceedings of the IEEE, Volume: 78 , Issue: 10
, Oct 1990
[6] Sepp
Hochreiter,Jurgen
Schmidhuber,
”Long
short-term
memory”, Neural Computation 9(8):1735-1780, 1997
[7] Christopher
Olah,
”Understanding
LSTM
Networks”,
https://colah.github.io/posts/2015-08-Understanding-LSTMs/
[8] K. Cho, B. van Merrienboer, D. Bahdanau, Y. Bengio,
”On
the properties of neural machine translation: Encoder-decoder
approaches”, arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1259, 2014
[9] Stephen
Merity,
Nitish
Shirish
Keskar,
Richard
Socher,
”Regularizing
and
Optimizing
LSTM
Language
Models”,
arXiv:1708.02182 [cs.CL]
[10] Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, Quoc V. Le,
”Sequence to
Sequence Learning with Neural Networks”, arXiv:1409.3215
[cs.CL]
[11] Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, Yoshua Bengio, ”Neural
Machine Translation by Jointly Learning to Align and Translate”,
arXiv:1409.0473 [cs.CL]
[12] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit,
Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, Illia Polosukhin,
”Attention is All you Need”, Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 30 (NIPS 2017)
[13] Jeremy Howard, Sebastian Ruder, ”Universal Language Model
Fine-tuning for Text Classiﬁcation”, arXiv:1801.06146 [cs.CL]
[14] Matthew Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt Gardner,
Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, Luke Zettlemoyer,
”Deep
Contextualized Word Representations”, Volume: Proceedings
of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1, June 2018
[15] Alec Radford, Kartik Narsimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever
”Improving
Language
Understanding
by
Generative
Pre-
Training”,2018
[16] Jacob
Devlin,
Ming-Wei
Chang,
Kenton
Lee,
Kristina
Toutanova,
”BERT:
Pre-training
of
Deep
Bidirectional
Transformers for Language Understanding”, arXiv:1810.04805
[cs.CL]
[17] Radford, Alec and Wu, Jeff and Child, Rewon and Luan, David
and Amodei, Dario and Sutskever, Ilya, ”Language Models are
Unsupervised Multitask Learners”, 2019
[18] Daniel Cer, Yinfei Yang, Sheng-yi Kong, Nan Hua, Nicole
Limtiaco, Rhomni St. John, Noah Constant, Mario Guajardo-
Cespedes, Steve Yuan, Chris Tar, Yun-Hsuan Sung, Brian
Strope,
Ray
Kurzweil,
”Universal
Sentence
Encoder”,
arXiv:1803.11175 [cs.CL]
[19] Marcus, Mitchell P. and Marcinkiewicz, Mary Ann and
Santorini, Beatrice,
”Building a Large Annotated Corpus
of English: The Penn Treebank”, Computational Linguistics
Volume 19 Issue 2, 0891-2017, June 1993.
[20] Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell,
Quoc
V.
Le,
Ruslan
Salakhutdinov,
”Transformer-XL:
Attentive Language Models Beyond a Fixed-Length Context”,
arXiv:1901.02860 [cs.LG]
[21] Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Ruslan
Salakhutdinov, Quoc V. Le, ”XLNet: Generalized Autoregressive
Pretraining for Language Understanding”, arXiv:1906.08237
[cs.CL]
