Title: eRevise: Using Natural Language Processing to Provide Formative Feedback on Text Evidence Usage in Student Writing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1908.01992v1
--------------------------------------------------

eRevise: Using Natural Language Processing to Provide Formative Feedback on
Text Evidence Usage in Student Writing
H. Zhang, A. Magooda, D. Litman, R. Correnti, E. Wang, L.C. Matsmura, E. Howe, R. Quintana
Learning Research and Development Center
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15260
Abstract
Writing a good essay typically involves students revising an
initial paper draft after receiving feedback. We present eRe-
vise, a web-based writing and revising environment that uses
natural language processing features generated for rubric-
based essay scoring to trigger formative feedback messages
regarding students’ use of evidence in response-to-text writ-
ing. By helping students understand the criteria for using text
evidence during writing, eRevise empowers students to bet-
ter revise their paper drafts. In a pilot deployment of eRevise
in 7 classrooms spanning grades 5 and 6, the quality of text
evidence usage in writing improved after students received
formative feedback then engaged in paper revision.
Introduction
With beneﬁts such as minimizing human effort and assur-
ing scoring consistency, natural language processing (NLP)
has been used to develop many Automatic Essay Scoring
(AES) systems that can reliably assess the content, structure,
and quality of written prose (Shermis and Burstein 2003;
2013). However, before providing students with ﬁnal essay
scores, engaging students in cycles of essay drafting and
revising after feedback is also essential (Graham, Harris,
and Santangelo 2015). This is because scoring without feed-
back is typically not enough to guide students on how to
revise an essay for further improvement. Standalone AES
systems are thus increasingly being incorporated into Au-
tomated Writing Evaluation (AWE) systems (Dikli 2006;
Roscoe et al. 2014; Weigle 2013), which provide students
with formative feedback in addition to (or instead of) essay
scores. Formative feedback can guide students during revi-
sion in ways that help students compensate for identiﬁed
essay weaknesses. Although Foltz and Rosenstein (2015)
showed that student writing could improve with revisions
based on AWE feedback and Chapelle, Cotos, and Lee
(2015) showed that successful revising is related to feedback
accuracy, much AWE research remains to be done.
This paper presents the design and ﬁrst classroom eval-
uation of eRevise, an AWE system for improving students’
ability to use text evidence – a dimension of writing that is
important for college and career readiness. eRevise has been
Copyright c⃝2019, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
designed for students in grades 5-6 taking the Response to
Text Assessment (RTA) (Correnti et al. 2013), where stu-
dents ﬁrst write an essay in response to a source text and
are then assessed using a detailed Evidence scoring rubric.1
In particular, eRevise has been developed for deployment
in a formative/classroom environment over two class pe-
riods (in contrast to a summative/high-stakes usage). Stu-
dents write their essays in the ﬁrst period, then revise their
essays in the second period after receiving formative feed-
back automatically selected based on ﬁrst draft AES. In con-
trast to many AES systems that achieve high scoring relia-
bility but do not address construct validity (Condon 2013;
Perelman 2012), eRevise uses a rubric-based AES system to
ensure that dimensions of the construct are well represented
by the indicators used for scoring (Loukina et al. 2015). This
in turn enables the development of an AWE algorithm for
converting internal AES data structures into formative feed-
back messages that are both tailored to each student’s writ-
ing needs and aligned to the constructs of the scoring rubric.
eRevise is also notable in focusing on evidence usage rather
than on surface writing features, and on upper elementary
rather than middle or high school students, which makes the
application of NLP techniques particularly challenging.
The next two sections describe the eRevise workﬂow,
and the NLP techniques supporting eRevise’s AES and
AWE components, respectively. This is followed by a class-
room deployment and evaluation section demonstrating the
promise of eRevise in supporting essay revision. Our de-
ployment tested whether eRevise helped students: 1) im-
prove the overall quality of their drafts when evaluated by
human scorers using the RTA evidence rubric, and 2) in-
crease the quantity and relevance/speciﬁty of their text ev-
idence usage when evaluated using NLP. Analyses of 143
essays created by 5th and 6th grade students from 7 differ-
ent classes support both hypotheses.
System Usage and Architecture
During the ﬁrst class, a teacher reads an article aloud (with
students following along on a hardcopy) about an effort by
1Although eRevise currently focuses only on the Evidence
rubric, the full RTA as scored by humans comprises ﬁve di-
mensions: Analysis, Evidence, Organization, Academic Style, and
MUGS (Mechanics, Usage, Grammar, Spelling).
arXiv:1908.01992v1  [cs.CL]  6 Aug 2019
Figure 1: The architecture of the eRevise system.
the Millenium Villages Project (MVP) to eradicate poverty
in a Kenyan village.2 After the teacher discusses predeﬁned
vocabulary and asks standardized questions at designated
points, there is a prompt at the end of the article which asks
students: “Based on the article, did the author provide a con-
vincing argument that winning the ﬁght against poverty is
achievable in our lifetime? Explain why or why not with 3-
4 examples from the text to support your answer.” At this
point students use eRevise to write an essay in response to
the prompt. Both the source article and the prompt appear on
the screen, with students typing their drafts into a text area
below the prompt. The purpose of this ﬁrst usage of eRevise
is to electronically collect students’ ﬁrst drafts.
Figure 1 shows the architecture of eRevise. After stu-
dents submit their ﬁrst drafts, eRevise’s AES component
uses a previously developed RTA Evidence scoring algo-
rithm (Zhang and Litman 2017) to extract features repre-
senting the quality of text-based evidence usage in terms of
constructs in the RTA Evidence rubric. Some of these fea-
tures (described in the next section) are then passed as input
to the AWE system’s feedback selection algorithm, which
will in turn output a subset of predeﬁned feedback messages
that are believed to best address the problems of the ﬁrst
draft based on the features. These formative feedback mes-
sages (although not the AES Evidence scores themselves)
will be shown to students during the second class period.
During the second class period, students login to eRe-
vise and now revise their ﬁrst drafts using eRevise. Figure 2
shows a screenshot illustrating revision guided by formative
feedback. The left top box shows a student’s ﬁrst draft. This
helps students to recall their ﬁrst drafts and eases revising
(e.g., by allowing cutting and pasting). The right-hand side
of the screen shows the feedback on the ﬁrst draft that was
automatically selected by the AWE system. The left bottom
box shows where students create their second drafts, hope-
fully guided by the feedback displayed on the right.3
2While the RTA has three forms (i.e., articles), eRevise cur-
rently only supports AES for RTAMV P .
3After a student clicks submit, the AES system also scores the
revised version of the student’s essay. Although eRevise does not
share AES scores with students (due to its focus on formative feed-
back rather than summative assessment), AES scores are included
Essay Analysis and Feedback Selection
The ultimate goal of our research is to dynamically generate
formative feedback that incorporates excerpts from students’
essays. However, to simplify the ﬁrst version of eRevise, the
current AWE system instead dynamically selects two of four
pre-deﬁned feedback messages to guide students in revis-
ing ﬁrst drafts. Table 1 shows these messages, ordered by a
typical progression of evidence usage in student writing de-
velopment. The messages reﬂect research on effective feed-
back and conceptual frameworks for effective text evidence
use (Wang, Matsumura, and Correnti 2018), and were cre-
ated by content experts after an analysis of previously scored
RTA essays (Correnti et al. 2013; Rahimi et al. 2014; 2017;
Zhang and Litman 2017). These 4 messages were then or-
ganized into groups of two based on the appropriateness of
the messages for essays with differing evidence sophistica-
tion (messages 1 and 2 for the least sophisticated, messages
2 and 3 for more sophisticated, and messages 3 and 4 for
the most sophisticated essays). Based on AES feature anal-
ysis of evidence usage in the ﬁrst draft (and further feature
processing, described below), each student thus receives two
feedback messages based on the group assigned to the essay.
AES Feature Extraction
We have developed several AES systems for RTA assess-
ment (Rahimi et al. 2017; Zhang and Litman 2017; 2018).
Our ﬁrst model (denoted by Rubric) (Rahimi et al. 2017)
used NLP to represent an essay in terms of features that
largely correspond to cells in the RTA Evidence rubric. This
rubric, as well as the correspondence between the rubric and
features that serve as input to the scoring model, are shown
in Table 2. A subsequent model (denoted by SG) (Zhang and
Litman 2017) introduced skip-gram word embeddings into
the feature extraction process, in order to increase robust-
ness by moving from lexical to semantic similarity compu-
tation. Most recently, Zhang and Litman (2018) developed a
neural network model with a co-attention layer (denoted by
CO-ATTN) to eliminate human feature engineering. Table
3 shows performance ﬁgures for each of these AES mod-
els when evaluated using cross-validation on a previously
collected RTAMV P corpus of 2970 essays. Although the
neural CO-ATTN model has the best performance, to select
formative feedback messages that address essay weaknesses
in terms of rubric constructs, a more interpretable represen-
tation of the essay is necessary. Therefore, SG is the AES
system used in eRevise.In particular, two of the features used
by SG for score prediction, namely Number of Pieces of Ev-
idence (NPE) and Speciﬁcity (SPC), form the basis of eRe-
vise’s feedback selection algorithm.4 Table 4 shows an ex-
ample ﬁrst and second draft (with AES Evidence scores of 2
and 3, respectively), along with NPE and SPC values.
Number of Pieces of Evidence (NPE) is an integer en-
coding the number of evidence topics in the article that are
in summary reports later shared with teachers.
4Although Concentration (CON) is also aligned with the rubric,
the other two features are more aligned with the feedback and they
are more consequential for improving evidence usage.
Figure 2: A formative feedback screenshot of the eRevise system.
No.
Name
Feedback
1
Use
more
evidence
from the article
•Re-read the article and the writing prompt.
•Choose at least three different pieces of evidence to support your argument.
•Consider the whole article as you select your evidence.
2
Provide more details for
each piece of evidence
you use
•Add more speciﬁc details about each piece of evidence.
–For example, writing, “The school fee was a problem” is not speciﬁc enough. It is better to
write, ”Students could not attend school because they did not have enough money to pay the school
fee.”
•Use your own words to describe the evidence.
3
Explain the evidence
•Tell your reader why you included each piece of evidence. Explain how the evidence helps to
make your point.
4
Explain how the evi-
dence connects to the
main idea & elaborate
•Tie the evidence not only to the point you are making within a paragraph, but to your overall
argument.
•Elaborate. Give a detailed and clear explanation of how the evidence supports your argument.
Table 1: Four feedback messages predeﬁned by content experts, based on progression of evidence use.
mentioned in the essay. A ﬁxed size sliding window algo-
rithm is used to extract this feature. If a window5 contains
at least two similar words from a manually crafted list of
main topics and associated words from the article6, the win-
dow is determined to contain text-based evidence related to
the topic. Word embedding is used to calculate word simi-
larity, with two words considered as similar after threshold-
ing, thus enabling both lexical and semantic matching (e.g.,
a student’s use of “power” will match “electricity” in the
article). In Table 4, the NPE features indicate that the stu-
dent used text evidence from more topics after revision, i.e.,
AES identiﬁes one topic (Hospital) in the ﬁrst draft versus
three (Hospital, Farming, and Malaria) in the revised draft -
although Malaria is actually a false positive.
5In eRevise, all windows are of size 6, which optimized AES
performance on previously scored training essays.
6For the RTA article, the 4 topics are Hospital, Malaria, Farm-
ing, and School (Rahimi et al. 2017). Computing similarity with
pre-deﬁned topics is typical in content-based AES (Liu et al. 2014).
Speciﬁcity (SPC) is a vector of integers that encodes the
number of speciﬁc article examples mentioned in the es-
say. The length of this vector is the number of manually
crafted categories, which is 8 for the RTA article (Rahimi
et al. 2017). A window-based algorithm is again used for
feature extraction, now using a different manually crafted
list of words associated with examples and categories from
the article, where all examples are assigned to different cate-
gories. For example, in the sliding window “see people sick
with preventable diseases”, the essay words “preventable”
and “diseases” match the article word list (“malaria com-
mon disease preventable treatable”) for one of the 6 exam-
ples associated with SPC category 47. Therefore, the algo-
rithm increments the value of SPC4 by 1.
AWE Feedback Selection
Although the SPC values (which count the number of times
the student mentions speciﬁc examples from the article)
were useful for developing the AES system via supervised
7This category talks about malaria before the MVP program.
1
2
3
4
Number of Pieces of evi-
dence
Features one or no pieces of evi-
dence (NPE)
Features at least 2 pieces of evi-
dence (NPE)
Features at least 3 pieces of evi-
dence (NPE)
Features at least 3 pieces of evi-
dence (NPE)
Relevance of evidence
Selects inappropriate or irrelevant
details from the text to support key
idea (SPC); references to text fea-
ture serious factual errors or omis-
sions
Selects some appropriate and rele-
vant evidence to support key idea,
or evidence is provided for some
ideas, but not actually the key idea
(SPC); evidence may contain a fac-
tual error or omission
Selects pieces of evidence from the
text that are appropriate and rele-
vant to key idea (SPC)
Selects evidence from the text that
clearly and effectively supports key
idea
Speciﬁcity of evidence
Provides general or cursory evi-
dence from the text (SPC)
Provides general or cursory evi-
dence from the text (SPC)
Provides speciﬁc evidence from the
text (SPC)
Provides pieces of evidence that are
detailed and speciﬁc (SPC)
Elaboration of Evidence
Evidence may be listed in a sen-
tence (CON)
Evidence provided may be listed
in a sentence, not expanded upon
(CON)
Attempts to elaborate upon evi-
dence (CON)
Evidence must be used to support
key idea / inference(s)
Plagiarism
Summarize entire text or copies
heavily from text (in these cases,
the response automatically receives
a 1)
Table 2: Rubric for scoring the Evidence dimension of RTA. The abbreviations in the parentheses identify features used by the
AES system that are aligned with speciﬁc assessment criteria (Rahimi et al. 2017).
AES Model
QWK
Rubric
0.632
SG
0.653
CO-ATTN
0.697
Table 3:
Quadratic Weighted Kappa (QWK) of different
AES models. The CO-ATTN model signiﬁcantly outper-
forms the Rubric and SG models, respectively (p < 0.05).
machine learning, we found them to be less useful for de-
veloping a feedback selection algorithm because the count
included duplicate cases, and because the use of word-
embedding meant false positive examples were identiﬁed
during AES. The AWE system thus calculates a new fea-
ture named SPC Total Merged, which is a count of the
number of non-duplicate, unique article examples from the
SPC feature vector. For example, in the sentence “for me to
see people sick with preventable diseases”, bolding shows
the ﬁrst example found by the algorithm (window-size is
6, matched words are “people” and “sick”), while underlin-
ing shows the second (matched words are “preventable” and
“diseases”). While the SPC feature considers these as 2 ex-
amples, SPC Total Merged considers them as 1 unique
example. For the ﬁrst draft in Table 4, the algorithm thus re-
duces the SPC total of 11 (from AES, equation below) to a
smaller merged total of 6 (for AWE).
After extracting the above features for our previously col-
lected corpora of scored essays, AWE feedback selection
was guided by three assumptions: 1) the NPE feature indi-
cates the breadth of unique topics, 2) the SPC Total Merged
feature indicates the number of unique pieces of evidence
the student located and used; and 3) a matrix of these two
indicators could match each essay to appropriate feedback.
Given we did not need to modify NPE, the following equa-
tions were used to calculate SPCAW E for feedback selec-
tion.
SPCtotal =
N
X
i=1
SPCi
(1)
SPCtotal, where N is the number of categories in SPC, cal-
culates the total number of matches the computer ﬁnds be-
tween students’ ﬁrst drafts and examples we are looking for.
SPCimportant =
E
X
i=S
SPCi
(2)
SPCimportant, where S and E are the start and end in-
dices of important categories, calculates the total number
of matched examples from four primary topics for evi-
dence usage (hospital, malaria, farming and school). In the
RTAMV P , content experts identiﬁed these categories as pri-
mary because they are the topics on which students can pro-
vide speciﬁc examples of improvement, while other SPC
categories refer to more general examples from the article.
DR = SPCtotal −SPC Total Merged
SPCtotal
(3)
DR calculates the duplication rate of matched examples, by
using SPC Total Merged to calculate the proportion of
duplicate evidence from SPCtotal.
SPCAW E = RND(SPCimportant ∗(1 −DR))
(4)
SPCAW E adjusts the number of important matched ex-
amples by the duplication rate. This produces a new score
for generating feedback, representing the number of unique
matched examples from four primary topics. We round the
number to get an integer used in the conditional statement
below.
SPClmh =



L,
if SPCAW E < 3
M,
if SPCAW E ≥3 and SPCAW E ≤5
H,
otherwise
(5)
SPClmh is a categorical variable for SPCAW E that indi-
cates low (L), medium (M), or high (H) values.
Finally, the AWE system uses NPE (computed during
AES) and SPClmh to select the two most appropriate feed-
back messages for the essay based on Table 5. The content
experts used a previously scored corpus (Zhang and Litman
2017) as development data to manually design this table.
For the ﬁrst draft in Table 4, NPE = 1, SPCtotal = 11,
SPC Total Merged = 6, SPCimportant = 6, DR =
0.455. SPCAW E = 3, and SPClmh = M. Therefore, after
First Draft
Essay
In the story “A Brighter Future”,yes the author convince me that winning the ﬁght against poverty
is achievable in our lifetime. People need a home just like animals need a home ,and its just not fair
that we have homes and they don’t. It says that “The plan is to get people out of poverty, assure them
access to health care and help them stabilize the economy and quality of life in their communities.”
Another one is “Villages get technical advice and practical items,such as fertilizer,medicine and
school supplies.”Also it says that “It is hard for me to see people sick with preventable diseases,
people who are near death when they shouldn’t have to be.I just get scared and sad.” These 3
examples mean that people don’t need to go through poverty , it’s sad and scary for them and they
don’t need to go through this.
Features
NPE
SPC1
SPC2
SPC3
SPC4
SCP5
SCP6
SCP7
SPC8
SPC Total Merged
1
1
2
1
3
0
1
1
2
6
Second Draft
Essay
In the story “A Brighter Future” yes the author convince me that winning the ﬁght against poverty
is achievable in our lifetime. Yes we need to win the ﬁght against poverty because everybody needs
a home, shelter, food,and money. It say that “Their crops were dying because they could not
afford the necessary fertilizer and irrigation”Another one is that “Its hard for me to see people sick
with preventable diseases,people who are near death when they shouldn’t have to be.”Also “.Little
kids were wrapped in cloth on their mothers backs,or running around in bare feet and tattered
clothing.” These three examples mean that we need to help them have a better life and a better
home than the busty,dirty ground.
Features
NPE
SPC1
SPC2
SPC3
SPC4
SCP5
SCP6
SCP7
SPC8
SPC Total Merged
3
2
1
2
3
2
1
0
1
6
Table 4: Examples of a student’s ﬁrst and second essay drafts, showing the NLP analyses during AES that are needed for AWE.
For each essay, the text-based evidence identiﬁed during AES that is used to compute the essay’s SPC values is shown in italics
(and in bold if only identifed in the second draft). eRevise would display feedback messages 1 and 2 for the ﬁrst essay draft.
Feature
Value
NPE
0
0
0
1
2
3
4
1
1
2
2
3
4
3
4
SPClmh
L
M
H
L
L
L
L
M
H
H
M
M
M
H
H
Feedback Messages
1,2
1,2
1,2
1,2
1,2
1,2
1,2
1,2
1,2
1,2
2,3
2,3
2,3
3,4
3,4
Table 5: Lookup table for feedback selection.
consulting Table 5, eRevise would display feedback mes-
sages 1 and 2 for this essay (as for the essay displayed in
Figure 2).
In sum, the AWE process results in all students receiv-
ing two (of four possible) feedback messages that are se-
lected based on the AES feature analysis and are thus tar-
geted to improving the quality of each student’s particular
essay. Note that students will receive feedback even when
AES predicts a score of 4 for the ﬁrst draft. In most cases,
such students will receive the third and fourth feedback mes-
sages focusing on evidence elaboration.
Experimental Deployment and Results
Our ﬁrst deployment of eRevise took place in two public
rural parishes in Louisiana. Seven 5th and 6th-grade teach-
ers had all students in one of their English Language Arts
classes write and revise an essay using eRevise. A total of
143 students completed all tasks. We test two hypotheses:
H1: eRevise helps students improve the overall quality of
their drafts, as evaluated by human scorers using the RTA
evidence rubric.
H2:
eRevise
increases
the
quantity
and
rele-
vance/speciﬁcity8 of evidence that students use from the
RTA source text, as evaluated using NLP features.
8Corresponding to row 1 and rows 2-3 of Table 2.
The outcome measure for testing H1 is a human-produced
RTA Evidence score. After the deployment, a trained hu-
man grader used the rubric from Table 2 to score all es-
says, without knowing whether an essay was a ﬁrst or sec-
ond draft. A paired t-test comparing the ﬁrst and second
draft Evidence scores (n=143) supports H1, as the scores
improved from ﬁrst (MEAN = 2.62, SD = 0.95) to sec-
ond (MEAN = 2.72, SD = 0.92) drafts with trending
statistical signiﬁcance (p ≤0.08). The grader also scored
essays for the other four RTA dimensions (recall footnote
1). In contrast to Evidence (for which eRevise provided for-
mative feedback to guide revision), there were no signiﬁ-
cant or trending score improvements for any of these other
RTA dimensions (all p ≥.29). Finally, the scatter plot in
Figure 3a shows that the overall improvement in the Evi-
dence dimension was observed despite potential ceiling ef-
fects: 28 students received the maximum score of 4 on their
ﬁrst drafts, 16 of whom also received the maximum on their
second drafts. The plot also shows that although the scores
increased for 34 students, the scores did not change for the
majority of students (and less often even decreased).
We thus explore the use of more ﬁne-grained outcome
measures that have a stronger relationship to the eRevise
feedback that guided student revision. To test H2, we use
the NPE and SPC Total Merged features as automat-
ically computed by eRevise during its deployment to ap-
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 3: (a) RTA Evidence scores before and after revision. (b) Value changes for the NPE feature. (c) Value changes for the
SPC Total Merged feature. (d) RTA Evidence scores for essays receiving feedback messages 1 and 2. (e) RTA Evidence scores
for essays receiving feedback messages 2 and 3. (f) RTA Evidence scores for essays receiving feedback messages 3 and 4.
proximate evidence quantity and relevance/speciﬁcity, re-
spectively. Paired t-tests (n=143) for both support H2. The
NPE feature values improved signiﬁcantly (p ≤0.003)
from ﬁrst (MEAN = 2.61, SD = 1.27) to second draft
(MEAN = 2.81, SD = 1.08). The SPC Total Merged
feature values also improved signiﬁcantly (p ≤0.001) from
ﬁrst (MEAN
= 9.65, SD = 4.94) to second drafts
(MEAN = 11.15, SD = 5.39). For NPE, the histogram
in Figure 3b shows that more students added rather than re-
moved evidence (30 versus 8 students). Although 105 stu-
dents showed no evidence change, 43 were already at ceil-
ing with NPE values of 4 in the ﬁrst draft. For SPC, the his-
togram in Figure 3c shows that a large majority of students
(101) increased the number of speciﬁc article examples that
they incorporated into their essays. 33 other students showed
no change, while only 9 students removed speciﬁc examples.
Recall the 16 students in Figure 3a who were at ceiling
when the RTA Evidence score was used as the outcome mea-
sure. By instead using the SPC Total Merged values as
the outcome, these 16 students can now be seen to show im-
provement from their ﬁrst drafts (MEAN = 12.69, SD =
4.63) to the second drafts (MEAN = 13.25, SD = 5.20),
with trending statistical signiﬁcance (p ≤0.095).
Finally, Figure 3d shows how evidence scores changed
for the 45 essays receiving feedback messages 1 and 2. The
evidence score improvements from ﬁrst (MEAN = 2.33,
SD = 0.93) to second (MEAN = 2.64, SD = 0.98)
drafts were statistically signiﬁcant (p = 0.02). Figure 3e
shows the score changes for the 27 essays receiving feed-
back messages 2 and 3. The evidence scores only slightly
improved from ﬁrst (MEAN = 2.22, SD = 0.85) to sec-
ond (MEAN = 2.26, SD = 0.94) drafts. Figure 3f shows
that for the 71 essays receiving messages 3 and 4, the evi-
dence scores were almost the same from ﬁrst (MEAN =
2.94, SD = 0.89) to second (MEAN = 2.94, SD =
0.81) drafts. These three ﬁgures suggest that drafts with
the least sophisticated evidence usage had the most room
for improvement. It is also interesting to relate these three
feedback-based groupings to essay RTA Evidence scores.
40.63% of drafts receiving Evidence scores of 1 or 2 re-
ceived feedback messages 1 and 2. 62.03% of drafts receiv-
ing Evidence scores or 3 or 4 received messages 3 and 4.
Although only 27 essays received messages 2 and 3, 71.43%
of these drafts received Evidence scores of 2 or 3.
Current and Future Directions
We are about to begin the next deployment of eRevise,
which will extend our work in two ways. First, to better
determine the beneﬁt of using AES to adaptively guide re-
vision, we have added a control condition where eRevise
will display the same generic feedback message to all stu-
dents: “MAKE YOUR ESSAY MORE CONVINCING -
Help readers understand why you believe the ﬁght against
poverty is/isnt achievable in our lifetime.” This is in con-
trast to the existing eRevise adaptive feedback, where stu-
dents receive different messages based on AES. Second, stu-
dents will use eRevise for two different forms of the RTA
(i.e., RTAspace in addition to RTAMV P ). While we have
already trained a SG model for scoring RTAspace (Zhang
and Litman 2017), Table 5 needs to be veriﬁed to ensure the
validity of our feedback selection algorithm. We are also ex-
ploring adding CO-ATTN scores to the lookup table.
For the longer term, we plan to extend our research in
other ways. To score a new RTA form, human effort is cur-
rently necessary to deﬁne topical components, e.g., creating
a list of topics and a list of examples for scoring RTAspace.
While we have developed pilot data-driven methods that can
extract such topical components automatically (Rahimi and
Litman 2016), our methods need to be improved so that they
do not degrade SG model performance. eRevise will also
be enhanced to provide feedback for Organization, a second
substantive RTA writing dimension for which we already
have a pilot AES (Rahimi et al. 2017). We also plan to move
from feedback selection to more personalized feedback gen-
eration, and to create a teacher dashboard which can auto-
matically generate summaries such as Figure 3a. Finally,
since eRevise’s feedback encourages students to add more
concrete examples from the article, some students may sim-
ply copy and paste examples rather than use their own words
as the feedback suggests. While the human RTA rubric (last
row in Table 2) addresses plagiarism, eRevise currently does
not. We thus plan to incorporate the detection of different
types of adversarial essays into AES.
Conclusions
eRevise is an AWE system for text evidence usage that uses
NLP features produced by a rubric-based AES system to au-
tomatically select formative feedback messages most appro-
priate to a student’s needs. By increasing access to feedback
on a substantive and important writing dimension, eRevise
has the potential to reduce demands on teachers and to build
students’ knowledge of effective text evidence usage. We
ﬁrst described how eRevise uses NLP techniques to evalu-
ate draft essays and to select appropriate formative feedback
messages to guide later revision. Experimental results from a
ﬁrst deployment in 7 classrooms showed that eRevise helped
students improve their text evidence usage after receiving
formative feedback and engaging in essay revision.
Acknowledgments
The research reported here was supported, in whole or in
part, by the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Depart-
ment of Education, through Grant R305A160245 to the Uni-
versity of Pittsburgh. The opinions expressed are those of the
authors and do not represent the views of the Institute or the
U.S. Department of Education.
References
Chapelle, C. A.; Cotos, E.; and Lee, J. 2015. Validity ar-
guments for diagnostic assessment using automated writing
evaluation. Language testing 32(3):385–405.
Condon, W.
2013.
Large-scale assessment, locally-
developed measures, and automated scoring of essays: Fish-
ing for red herrings? Assessing Writing 18(1):100–108.
Correnti, R.; Matsumura, L.; Hamilton, L.; and Wang, E.
2013. Assessing students’ skills at writing analytically in
response to texts. Elementary School Journal 114:142–177.
Dikli, S. 2006. An overview of automated scoring of es-
says. The Journal of Technology, Learning and Assessment
5(1):4–35.
Foltz, P. W., and Rosenstein, M. 2015. Analysis of a large-
scale formative writing assessment system with automated
feedback. In Proceedings of the Second (2015) ACM Con-
ference on Learning@ Scale, 339–342. ACM.
Graham, S.; Harris, K. R.; and Santangelo, T.
2015.
based writing practices and the common core: Meta-
analysis and meta-synthesis. The Elementary School Jour-
nal 115(4):498–522.
Liu, L.; Brew, C.; Blackmore, J.; Gerard, L.; Madhok, J.; and
Linn, M. 2014. Automated scoring of constructed-response
science items prospects and obstacles. Educational Mea-
surement: Issues and Practice 33(2):19–28.
Loukina, A.; Zechner, K.; Chen, L.; and Heilman, M. 2015.
Feature selection for automated speech scoring. In Proceed-
ings of the Tenth Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for
Building Educational Applications, 12–19.
Perelman, L. 2012. Construct validity, length, score, and
time in holistically graded writing assessments: The case
against automated essay scoring. International advances in
writing research: Cultures, places, measures 121–131.
Rahimi, Z., and Litman, D. 2016. Automatically extract-
ing topical components for a response-to-text writing as-
sessment. In Proceedings of the 11th Workshop on Inno-
vative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications,
277–282.
Rahimi, Z.; Litman, D. J.; Correnti, R.; Matsumura, L. C.;
Wang, E.; and Kisa, Z. 2014. Automatic scoring of an an-
alytical response-to-text assessment. In International Con-
ference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems, 601–610. Springer.
Rahimi, Z.; Litman, D.; Correnti, R.; Wang, E.; and Mat-
sumura, L. C. 2017. Assessing students use of evidence and
organization in response-to-text writing: Using natural lan-
guage processing for rubric-based automated scoring. In-
ternational Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Education
27(4):694–728.
Roscoe, R. D.; Allen, L. K.; Weston, J. L.; Crossley, S. A.;
and McNamara, D. S. 2014. The writing pal intelligent tutor-
ing system: Usability testing and development. Computers
and Composition 34:39–59.
Shermis, M. D., and Burstein, J. C. 2003. Automated essay
scoring: A cross-disciplinary perspective. Routledge.
Shermis, M. D., and Burstein, J. 2013. Handbook of au-
tomated essay evaluation: Current applications and new di-
rections. Routledge.
Wang, E.; Matsumura, L. C.; and Correnti, R. 2018. Stu-
dent writing accepted as high-quality responses to analytic
text-based writing tasks.
The Elementary School Journal
118(3):357–383.
Weigle, S. C. 2013. English language learners and auto-
mated scoring of essays: Critical considerations. Assessing
Writing 18(1):85–99.
Zhang, H., and Litman, D.
2017.
Word embedding for
response-to-text assessment of evidence. In Proceedings of
ACL 2017, Student Research Workshop, 75–81.
Zhang, H., and Litman, D. 2018. Co-attention based neural
network for source-dependent essay scoring. In Proceedings
of the Thirteenth Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for
Building Educational Applications, 399–409.
