Title: Constructing a Testbed for Psychometric Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2007.12969v1
--------------------------------------------------

Constructing a Testbed for Psychometric Natural Language Processing 
Ahmed Abbasi1, David G. Dobolyi1, Richard G. Netemeyer2 
1University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana, USA 
2University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA 
E-mail: aabbasi@nd.edu, ddobolyi@nd.edu, rgn3p@virginia.edu  
Abstract 
Psychometric measures of ability, attitudes, perceptions, and beliefs are crucial for understanding user behaviors in various contexts 
including health, security, e-commerce, and finance. Traditionally, psychometric dimensions have been measured and collected using 
survey-based methods. Inferring such constructs from user-generated text could afford opportunities for timely, unobtrusive, collection 
and analysis. In this paper we describe our efforts to construct a corpus for psychometric natural language processing (NLP). We discuss 
our multi-step process to align user text with their survey-based response items and provide an overview of the resulting test bed which 
encompasses survey-based psychometric measures and accompanying user-generated text from over 8,500 respondents. We report 
preliminary results on use of the text to categorize/predict users’ survey response labels. We also discuss the important implications of 
our work and resulting testbed for future psychometric NLP research.    
 
Keywords: psychometrics, natural language processing, text mining, text classification, testbed construction 
 
1. Introduction 
Psychometrics is the field of study concerned with the 
measurement of individuals’ knowledge, abilities, attitudes, 
personality traits, and perceptions (Rust and Golomobok 
2014). In social science research, psychometric dimensions 
are latent constructs that are known to be important 
antecedents, moderators, mediators, and consequents for 
important humanistic behaviors and outcomes (Li et al. 
2016; 2017; 2020). For example, in the security behavior 
literature, constructs such as threat severity and response 
efficacy 
of 
protective 
mechanisms 
are 
critical 
psychometric measures of one’s likelihood to avoid 
security threats (Dobolyi et al. 2017; Zahedi et al. 2015). In 
behavioral health, psychometric dimensions such as health 
numeracy, subjective health literacy, trust in physicians, 
and anxiety visiting the doctor’s office are known to effect 
various health and wellness outcomes such as future 
physician visits and all-around well-being (Netemeyer et al. 
2019). In electronic commerce, satisfaction with a 
website’s functional, information, and visual design are 
correlated with purchase propensity and customer loyalty 
(Cyr 2009). Similarly, many individualized financial 
behaviors can be partially explained by financial literacy 
and psychological traits (Fernandes et al. 2014). 
 
Given the importance of psychometric dimensions for 
understanding behaviors and outcomes in various domains, 
rigorous data collection protocols and best practices have 
been developed over the years (Netemeyer et al. 2003). The 
primary modes of collection involve surveys and 
interviews (Li et al. 2020). While these techniques afford 
many benefits such as measurement control and robustness 
checks, they are not without their limitations. First, primary 
data collection facilitated through an administered survey 
can be time-consuming and invasive (often requiring 20-30 
minutes of the respondents’ time and attention). Second, 
such primary data collection cannot occur in real-time. 
Most surveys in field studies are conducted periodically at 
monthly or quarterly intervals. Third, while surveys are a 
rigorous form of data collection, they are limited in their 
ability to account for data/observations outside the pre-
defined 
measurement 
framework. 
Consequently, 
effectively collecting and measuring relevant psychometric 
dimensions in a timely, unobtrusive, and more open-ended 
manner could be invaluable in many real-world settings 
(Gefen and Larsen 2017). Accurately and efficiently 
measuring psychometrics inherent in secondary data such 
as user-generated context may constitute an important 
complementary information access refinement to periodic 
survey-based data collection, with positive implications for 
information retrieval, mobile text analytics, and behavior 
modeling (Abbasi et al. 2015; Brown et al. 2015; Dong et 
al. 2019). 
 
Given the abundance of user-generated text content, with 
unstructured data accounting for more than 80% of all data 
in various organizations (Kuechler 2007), measuring 
psychometric dimensions from text using natural language 
processing methods seems like one worthwhile avenue of 
inquiry (Li et al. 2018; 2020). In this paper we describe our 
efforts to construct a testbed for psychometric natural 
language processing (NLP). In the same vein as prior work 
on constructing language resources for sentiment, emotion, 
affect, and personality traits (Wiebe et al. 2005; Thelwall 
eta l. 2010; Luyckx and Daelemans 2008), we describe our 
approach and resulting test bed related to psychometric 
dimensions such as trust, anxiety, literacy, and numeracy in 
the health context. Figure 1 presents a motivating example 
describing the goal of our work. Given a well-established 
survey-based scale for “trust in visiting the physician’s 
office,” how can we arrive at a similar score for a user 
based on their generated text?  
 
Any NLP-based approximation is likely to have 
measurement error due to the error of the text classifier 
trained to score the user text, as well as dissonance between 
a user’s survey responses and text utterances. Nevertheless, 
the hope is that the ability to infer an imperfect yet 
reasonably accurate NLP-based measurement can still be 
advantageous as an alternative, complementary measure 
that can be derived unobtrusively in near real-time.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Illustration of survey and text data for a given 
psychometric dimension: “Trust in a Physician” 
 
In this paper we describe the process taken to construct a 
psychometric NLP testbed. The testbed is comprised of 
user-generated text from over 8,000 individuals related to 
four key health-related psychometric dimensions of interest: 
trust in physicians, anxiety visiting the doctor’s office, 
health numeracy, subjective health literacy. We believe our 
construction method and resulting test bed contribute to the 
language resource literature in the following ways: 
    
 
While psychometric dimensions such as sentiment, 
emotion, affect, and personality traits have garnered a 
fair amount of attention from the NLP community 
(Hassan et al. 2013; Sharif et al. 2014; Zimbra et al. 
2018), there has been limited work on constructs like 
trust, anxiety, and perceptions of literacy. 
 
Given that psychometric analysis often entails user 
modeling that could involve analysis of text, survey-
based responses (psychometric construct measures), 
and demographics, our test bed encompasses all three 
types of data (Abbasi et al. 2015). 
 
For each user, we capture text and gold-standard 
survey responses for four psychometric dimensions. 
The combination of four target dimensions, coupled 
with the aforementioned demographic and additional 
survey data affords opportunities for advanced 
machine learning text classification approaches such 
as multi-task learning, and psychometric embeddings 
and encoders (Ahmad et al. 2020). 
 
By including text and demographics from diverse user 
populations, the testbed also presents interesting 
opportunities for text machine learning research on 
fairness in NLP models (Abbasi et al. 2018; Taylor et 
al. 2018).     
 
While our efforts are geared towards psychometric 
dimensions in the health context, the method employed 
can be generalized to various contexts where 
psychometric dimensions are possible, practical, and 
valuable.          
 
As noted, we believe the testbed and process have 
important implications for future NLP research that 
examines psychometrics as part of broader user modeling 
efforts. In the rest of the paper we describe the testbed 
construction process, summary statistics, and some 
preliminary results on psychometric classification tasks. 
2. Related Work – Psychometric Language 
Resources 
Over the past thirty years, significant efforts have been 
made to develop a robust and burgeoning set of language 
resources for various linguistic and NLP tasks. Gold-
standard enriched test beds have been developed for 
sentiment analysis, including sentiment polarity (e.g., 
positive, neutral, negative), sentiment aspects, targets, 
opinion holder analysis, and so on (Wiebe et al. 2005; 
Thelwall et al. 2010; Sanders 2011). Similarly, testbeds 
have been developed for affect and emotion. Personality 
traits manifested in test have also received attention 
(Luyckx and Daelemans 2008). More recent work has 
explored construction of corpora for examining depression 
and cyberbullying, with the latter also annotating self-
disclosures of personal information which may trigger 
bullying (Rakib and Soon 2018). 
 
Given that psychometrics is concerned with measurement 
of attitudes, beliefs, perceptions, and personality traits, 
many of these aforementioned test beds and avenues of 
language resource construction could be considered as 
focusing on psychometric dimensions (Ahmad et al. 2020). 
As noted in the introduction section, our work builds on 
this work by focusing on underexplored dimensions such 
as trust, anxiety, and perceptions of literacy. Moreover, 
rather than relying on independent annotation, we seek to 
utilize user-generated text that is captured along with self-
reported survey-based responses for the psychometric 
dimensions of interest. Hence, the text is accompanied by 
survey-based quantifications from the individuals that can 
serve as a gold-standard proxy of what we hope to 
measure/score by applying NLP methods to the users’ text. 
This paper explores the efficacy of such a method that 
bridges the social science and NLP perspectives for test bed 
construction. We later use supervised machine learning 
classification methods to demonstrate the viability of the 
approach – that is, to validate that the text samples captured 
can indeed serve as a reasonable proxy of the users’ survey-
based responses for the psychometric dimensions of 
interest. Further, our testbed also includes the users’ 
survey-based 
responses 
to 
related 
psychometric 
dimensions, as well as demographic data. Details are as 
follows. 
3. Testbed Construction Process 
In this section we describe the process taken to construct 
our psychometric NLP test bed. The key steps included 
identifying relevant psychometric dimensions of interest, 
finding suitable survey-based items to operationalize our 
latent constructs, assessing different prompts for text 
equivalency questions, and test bed construction validation. 
Details regarding these steps are as follows. 
Sample trust text: These sawbones are just awful! Escitalopram caused 
me to gain weight and feel depressed. I'm better off using Google.  
3.1 Identifying Key Psychometric Dimensions 
Given our focus on psychometrics in the healthcare context, 
we began by reviewing nearly 90 articles from the 
behavioral health literature (refs). These articles all used 
survey-based methods to measure a set of core 
psychometric dimensions (i.e., latent constructs). Based on 
our literature review, we developed a structural equation 
model (see Figure 2) that showed the relevant antecedent-
consequent relations between various psychometric 
dimensions (Netemeyer et al. 2019). A structural equation 
model is a multivariate statistical analysis technique that is 
used to analyze structural relationships between measured 
variables and latent constructs. As depicted in Figure 2, the 
ovals represent psychometric dimensions and the arrows 
denote relationships. For instance, based on the literature, 
one’s perceptions of their health literacy are expected to 
influence their trust in physicians and anxiety visiting the 
doctor. Similarly, trust in physicians impacts future doctor 
visits and all-around well-being. In order to validate the 
initial identified set of psychometric dimensions, we ran the 
structural equation model against collected survey-based 
data. The values along the arrows indicate effect sizes for 
significant paths observed in different population segments. 
Insignificant paths are denoted with “ns”. With the 
exception of the link from anxiety visiting the doctor to 
future doctor visits, all paths were significant. These results 
suggested that the identified psychometric dimensions of 
interest might be worth exploring further.       
 
 
  
 
 
 
Process flow diagram 
Psychometric construct identification 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Structural equation model depicting key 
psychometric dimensions (and their relations), observed in 
the literature. 
3.2 Developing Survey Items 
Based on the analysis described in section 3.1, we further 
narrowed the consideration set down to four psychometric 
dimensions based on suitability of text-based response 
collection: trust in physicians, anxiety visiting the doctor, 
subjective literacy, and objective health numeracy. A 
critical step in survey-based psychometric research 
performed in the social sciences is development or 
inclusion of appropriate items to measure the latent 
constructs. Through our review of the literature, our own 
survey-based data collection, and statistical analysis 
(exploratory and confirmatory factor analysis), we 
identified a subset of items for each of these dimensions. 
An overview of the four psychometrics dimensions and 
some of their related items is as follows: 
 
Health Literacy (HL) – In essence, HL is a subjective 
construct reflecting how much one thinks one knows about 
health and access to health-related information and 
providers (Osborne et al. 2013). Low HL has been 
associated 
with 
increased 
mortality, 
increased 
hospitalization, and poor adherence and self-maintenance 
to a host of chronic diseases such as diabetes, heart disease, 
and risk of stroke (Atlin et al. 2014; Berkman et al. 2011; 
Osborne et al. 2013). Low HL has also been shown to be 
more prevalent among the elderly, lower income and 
education groups, and certain racial groups (Atlin et al. 
2014). In total, 10 HL items from three different scales 
were incorporated. Figure 3 shows examples of three of the 
items incorporated, which relate to one’s perceptions of 
ability to understand hospital materials, process medical 
information, and comprehend medical conditions.  
 
Health Numeracy (HN) – Conversely, health numeracy 
(HN) is an objective construct reflecting the ability to 
calculate, use, and understand numeric and quantitative 
concepts in the context of health issues (Schapira et al. 
2014). HN has been associated with positive health 
outcomes such as the ability to understand dosage in 
medication and adherence to self-care diabetes treatment 
(Ciampa et al. 2010; Osborn et al. 2013). As with HL, lower 
HN scores are more prevalent among the elderly, lower 
income and education groups, and certain racial groups 
(Schapira et al. 2014). We incorporated two HN scales 
comprising 14 total items. Figure 4 depicts four item 
examples from one of the two scales utilized. As shown, 
these items are objective measures such as ability to count 
calories or read a thermometer. 
 
Trust in Doctors (TD) – Perceptions of trust in 
physicians/doctors (TD) can have an important mediating 
role on health outcomes (Dugan et al. 2005). TD was 
measured using the 5 items depicted in Figure 1. 
 
Anxiety Visiting Doctors (AV) – Anxiety when visiting the 
doctor’s office is another strong potential mediator for 
health outcomes such as future doctor visits and wellness 
(Spielberger 1989; Marteau and Bekker 1992). Figure 5 
shows the items used to measure AV. These focused on 
levels of anxiousness, worry, uncertainty, and uneasiness. 
3.3 Attaining User-Generated Text 
We used an iterative trial-and-error process to develop our 
“equivalent” user generated text related to the four 
aforementioned psychometric dimensions. After several 
rounds of face validity checks and piloting with small sets 
of respondents, we ultimately arrived at a configuration 
where the survey items were used to prime respondents. We 
immediately followed these items with text questions that 
were tuned as part of our iterative process.   
 
Figure 3: Examples of survey items related to subjective 
health literacy (HL). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Examples of survey items related to objective 
health numeracy (HL). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Examples of survey items related to anxiety in 
visiting the doctor (AV). 
The text-response questions yielded the best responses 
when the questions were at the end of the survey item 
section for that particular psychometric dimensions, 
appearing immediately at the bottom of the same/final page 
of survey items. Figure 6 illustrates the method for 
collecting text responses after survey-based priming. Table 
1 depicts the prompts or questions used to attain the user-
generated text responses. While we recognize that the 
questions asked and approach undertaken could be further 
enhanced, we believe this constitutes an important first step 
toward aligning survey items with user-generated text 
responses. As we later show in the evaluation section, 
preliminary results from text classification tasks lend 
validity to the construction. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Illustration of survey item-primed text response 
collection (example shows trust in physician TD). 
 
Psychometric 
Dimension 
Question or Prompt 
Anxiety 
visiting the 
doctor (AV) 
In a few sentences, please describe what 
makes you most anxious or worried visiting 
the doctor’s office 
Subjective 
health literacy 
(HL)  
Regarding all the questions you just 
answered, to what degree do you feel you 
have capacity to obtain, process, and 
understand basic health information and 
services needed to make appropriate health 
decisions? Please explain you answer in a 
few sentences. 
Trust in 
physicians 
(TD) 
In a few sentences, please explain the reasons 
why you trust or distrust your primary care 
physician. If you do not have a primary care 
physician, please answer in regard to doctors in 
general. 
Objective 
health 
numeracy 
(HN) 
In a few sentences, please describe an 
experience in your life that demonstrated your 
knowledge of health or medical issues. 
Table 1: Questions used to elicit user-generated text 
responses  
4. Testbed Results and Summary Statistics 
Two rounds of data collection were performed. In the first 
round, we collected data using Amazon Mechanical Turk 
(AMT). A total of 4,262 usable responses were attained 
through AMT. In order to attain a second, more diverse set 
of responses, Qualtrics was used to collect an additional 
4,240 clean responses. Table 2 shows the testbed summary 
statistics. Each respondent provided a text response for 
each of the four psychometric dimensions, in addition to 
survey responses to all dimension items as well as 
additional demographic and behavior questions and 
complementary psychometric dimensions. In other words, 
we received 17,048 total responses from AMT (4262 x 4) 
and 16,960 from Qualtrics (4240 x 4), total. The AMT 
respondents tended to be more representative of the overall 
US population in terms of race, gender, and education. As 
noted earlier, the goal of the Qualtrics data collection was 
to garner a richer sample of responses from diverse 
populations with greater representation for racial and 
gender minorities and education and income-based 
disparate populations. Such testbeds are important to allow 
deeper exposition into studies that examine fairness of NLP 
models (Abbasi et al. 2018).   
 
Characteristics 
AMT 
Qualtrics 
User Responses 
4,262 
4,240 
Text Fields 
(per user 
respondent) 
Subjective literacy (SL) 
Objective numeracy (HN) 
Trust in physicians (TD) 
Anxiety visiting the doctor (AV) 
Race 
81.2% white 
7.4 % black
50% white 
50% black
Gender (male) 
48.3% 
24.2% 
Income (USD) 
62% < $55K 
67% < $55K 
Education 
(college grads) 
44.6% 
32.1% 
Examples of 
other behavior/ 
psychometric 
dimensions
Usage of prescription drugs 
Presence of primary care physician 
Frequency of doctor visits 
Smoking and drinking frequency
Table 2: Summary of the AMT and Qualtrics 
psychometric NLP test beds  
 
The most critical survey response items in the data are the 
ones corresponding to the four dimensions. Following best 
practices in the social science literature on survey design, 
we constructed a single composite score for each of these 
dimensions by averaging across all underlying items. The 
scores were scaled to a 0-1 range. Figure 7 and 8 depict the 
distribution of user responses for the four dimensions 
(subjective HL, numeracy HN, trust TD, and anxiety AV) 
on the AMT and Qualtrics data collections. We can see that 
for subjective, numeracy, and trust the response followed a 
skewed Gaussian distribution. In contrast, the distribution 
for anxiety scores was more uniformly distributed. Further, 
as expected, there were differences between the AMT and 
Qualtrics populations. For instance, AMT respondents had 
higher numeracy and trust in physicians. Conversely, the 
two data collections were relatively more comparable on 
the subjective literacy and anxiety visiting the doctor 
dimensions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7: Distribution of mean survey-based response 
scores for psychometric dimensions on the AMT test bed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8: Distribution of mean survey-based response 
scores for psychometric dimensions on the Qualtrics data. 
 
Table 3 shows examples of psychometric scores and 
accompanying text responses for the subjective health 
literacy (HL) dimension. The scores were scaled from 0-1 
based on the survey responses. The accompanying user text 
responses correspond to the two users’ self-reported scores. 
The 
example 
illustrates 
the 
“alignment-oriented” 
objectives of testbed construction in this context. 
 
HL score 
Text Response for Subjective Literacy Prompt 
0.4667 
I feel like with the terms and complicated medical 
lingo, I am not exactly sure what some of the 
meanings entail. Such as If I am diagnosed with a 
certain condition and need medication X, I don't 
know what that medication does, what the 
alternatives are, I don't even know how to 
pronounce some of these names. I feel like I am 
able to ask the doctors but can not fully grasp the 
magnitude of the situation without looking at the 
whole picture which is difficult to have someone 
explain to me in one visit. I feel like I need  a step 
by step diagnostic, of why this happened, what I 
can do, what the consequences are, what some 
definitions of the disease are, etc. 
0.9167
I think I have a fine capacity.  I am able to 
coherently explain my concerns, and ask for aid if I 
need it.  I am native in English, and know all my 
health issues and past surgeries and such.  It isn't 
hard for me to do anything medical, and I am 
confident in making whatever medical decisions I 
need to make. 
Table 3: Examples of survey-based scores and 
accompanying text responses for subjective health literacy  
5. Testbed Construction Evaluation 
In order to evaluate the effectiveness of the constructed 
psychometric NLP data set, we conducted a series of text 
classification experiments to see how well machine 
learning classification models could predict survey-based 
“gold-standard” ratings (treated as the dependent variable 
in our context) using the free text responses. A standard 
five-fold cross-validation scheme was employed where in 
each fold, a different 20% of the data was set aside for 
testing while the remaining 80% was used for training. 
 
In order to convert our continuous survey-based dependent 
variables to binary classification labels, we bifurcated the 
data by using the bottom 25% of data points as the low 
value and the top 25% as the high value. For instance, the 
top quartile of trust in physician values were deemed “high 
trust” whereas the bottom quartile were “low trust.” We 
used a support vector machines (SVM) classifier coupled 
with a classic feature subsumption-based feature selection 
method (Riloff et al. 2006) called feature relation network 
(FRN) (Abbasi et al. 2011). FRN uses rule-based feature 
selection applied to a large set of word, part-of-speech, 
character, and domain lexicon-based n-grams to identify a 
subset of key predictors. This method was used since it has 
attained reasonable results on related text classification 
tasks such as sentiment analysis as a feature-based 
classification method. We have attained even stronger 
results using more advanced deep learning methods in our 
more recent work (Ahmad et al. 2020). 
 
Table 4 presents the 5-fold cross validation results on the 
Qualtrics subset of the testbed. Similar results were attained 
on AMT as well. The table shows the accuracy, precision, 
recall, and f1 measure for the best FRN feature quantity as 
well as the results when fixing the number of input features 
to 15,000. We can see that for the trust (TD), subjective 
literacy (HL), and numeracy (HN) tasks, the classifiers 
attained around 80% accuracy. This is on par with many 
other classification tasks such as binary sentiment 
classification on Twitter (Abbasi et al. 2014). We also 
included the number of features utilized since the quantity 
of n-grams yielding the best performance can be considered 
a measure of the linguistic variation incorporated by users 
– larger feature set sizes are sometimes indicative of a more 
complex linguistic phenomena where the classifier needs 
to account for “long tail” usage of terms and literary 
devices. Here that does not appear to be the case. The one 
obvious exception is the anxiety task, where the best 
classifier only garnered about 73% accuracy on the 
balanced data set. 
 
Figure 9 shows the impact of feature quantity on 
classification accuracy across the four tasks. As noted, the 
quantity of features needed to attain best performance as 
well as the stability of classification performance are both 
indicators of the viability of the test classification task 
(Abbasi et al. 2011). The results underscore the efficacy of 
the survey-text alignment. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 4: Classification performance for FRN-based SVM 
classifier on the Qualtrics subset of the testbed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9: Impact of quantity of features in FRN-based 
SVM classifiers on classification performance across the 
four psychometric tasks in Qualtrics data. 
6. Conclusion 
The results of our work have important implications for 
several stakeholder groups. NLP research focused on 
constructing novel empirical methods can use the 
constructed test bed to build new text analytics models for 
psychometric NLP. The inclusion of demographic, text, 
target psychometric, and secondary psychometric data in 
the testbed could allow development of rich deep learning 
architectures that incorporate user models, psychometric 
embeddings, structural equation model-based encoders, 
and multi-task learning across the four parallel target 
psychometric dimensions. The unique multimodal nature 
of the data may also afford opportunities to better 
understand and study fairness in NLP models and methods. 
For each text utterance, the testbed encompasses gender, 
race, education levels, and income – all fields that are often 
the basis for bias in machine learning algorithms. The 
examination of fairness in NLP is an underexplored area of 
research. Finally, other teams developing language 
resources can adapt the process outlined to other domains 
such as security, e-commerce, finance, etc. We recognize 
that this is a first foray into rich psychometric NLP. Our 
hope is that future work can improve upon the methods and 
best practices for examining the interplay between survey-
based constructs and their manifestations in user-generated 
text.      
7. Acknowledgements 
We would like to acknowledge support of this work 
through the following grants: NSF BDS-1636933; NSF 
IIS-1816504; NSF IIS-1553109 and Microsoft Research 
CRM:0740129. 
8. References 
Abbasi, A., France, S., Zhang, Z., and Chen, H. (2011). Selecting 
attributes for sentiment classification using feature relation 
networks. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data 
Engineering, 23(3), pp. 447--462. 
Abbasi, A., Hassan, A., and Dhar, M. “Benchmarking Twitter 
Sentiment Analysis Tools,” In the 9th Language Resources and 
Evaluation Conference (LREC), Reykjavik, Iceland, May 26-
31, 2014. 
Abbasi, A., Li, J., Clifford, G. D., and Taylor, H. A, “Make 
‘Fairness By Design’ Part of Machine Learning,” Harvard 
Business Review, digital article: https://hbr.org/2018/08/make-
fairness-by-design-part-of-machine-learning, August 5, 2018. 
Abbasi, A., Lau, R. Y., & Brown, D. E. (2015). Predicting 
behavior. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 30(3), 35-43. 
Ahmad, F., Abbasi, A., Li, J., Dobolyi, D., Netemeyer, R., Clifford, 
G., and Chen, H. (2020) “A Deep Learning Architecture for 
Psychometric 
Natural 
Language 
Processing,” 
ACM 
Transactions on Information Systems, 38(1), no. 6. 
Atlin, S. V, Finke, I, Kautz-Freimuth, S,  Stock S (2014), The 
Evolution of Health Literacy Assessment Tools: A Systematic 
Review, BMC Public Health. 
Berkman, N. D., Sheridan, S., Donahue, K., Halpern, D. & Crotty, 
K. (2011), Low Health Literacy and Health Outcomes: An 
Updated Systematic Review, Annals of Internal Medicine,155, 
97-107 
Brown, D. E., Abbasi, A., and Lau, R. Y. K. (2015). Predictive 
Analytics: Predictive Modeling at the Micro Level, IEEE 
Intelligent Systems, 30(3), pp. 6-8. 
Callison-Burch, C. and Dredze, M. (2010). Creating speech and 
language data with Amazon's Mechanical Turk, Proceedings of 
the NAACL HLT Workshop on Creating Speech and Language 
Data with Amazon's Mechanical Turk, pp. 1--12. 
Ciampa, P.J., Osborn, C., Peterson, N. B., & Rothman, R. L. 
(2010), 
Patient 
Numeracy, 
Perceptions 
of 
Provider 
Communication, and Colorectal Cancer Screening Utilization, 
Journal of Health Communication, 15 (Suppl. 3), 157-168 
Cyr, D. (2008). Modeling web site design across cultures: 
relationships to trust, satisfaction, and e-loyalty, Journal Mgmt. 
Information Systems, 24(4), 47-72. 
Dobolyi, D., Abbasi, A., Zahedi, F. M., and Vance, T. (2017). 
Predicting User Susceptibility to Phishing Websites, INFORMS 
Workshop on Data Science, Houston, TX. 
Dong, Y., Chawla, N. V., Tang, J., Yang, Y., & Yang, Y. (2017). 
User modeling on demographic attributes in big mobile social 
networks, ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS), 
35(4), 35. 
Dugan E, Trachtenberg F, Hall MA. (2005), Development of 
Abbreviated Measures to Assess Patient Trust in a Physician, a 
Health Insurer, and the Medical Profession, BMC Health 
Services Research, 5-64 
Fernandes, D., Lynch Jr, J. G., & Netemeyer, R. G. (2014). 
Financial literacy, financial education, and downstream 
financial behaviors. Management Science, 60(8), 1861-1883. 
Gefen, D., & Larsen, K. (2017). Controlling for lexical closeness 
in survey research: A demonstration on the technology 
acceptance model. Journal of the Association for Information 
Systems, 18(10), 727-757. 
Hassan, A., Abbasi, A., and Zeng, D. (2013). Twitter Sentiment 
Analysis: A Bootstrap Ensemble Framework, ASE/IEEE 
International Conference on Social Computing, Washington 
D.C., September 8-14. 
Kuechler, W. L. (2007). Business applications of unstructured text. 
Comm. of the ACM, 50(10), 86-93. 
Li, J., Larsen, K., and Abbasi, A. (2020). TheoryOn: A Design 
Framework and System for Unlocking Behavioral Knowledge 
through Ontology Learning, MIS Quarterly, forthcoming. 
Li, J., Larsen, K., and Abbasi, A. (2016). Unlocking Knowledge 
Inheritance of Behavioral Research through Ontology Learning: 
An Ontology-Based Search Engine,” Workshop on Information 
Technologies and Systems (WITS), Dublin, Ireland, December 
15-16. 
Li, J., Larsen, K., and Abbasi, A. (2017). Unlocking our 
Behavioral Knowledge Inheritance through Ontology Learning: 
A Design Framework, an Instantiation, and a Randomized 
Experiment, INFORMS Workshop on Data Science, Houston, 
TX, October 21. 
Li, J., Abbasi, A., Ahmad, F., and Chen, H. (2018). PyNDA: Deep 
Learning for Psychometric Natural Language Processing, 
INFORMS Workshop on Data Science, Phoenix, AZ, 
November 3. 
Luyckx, K., and Daelemans, W. (2008). Personae: a Corpus for 
Author and Personality Prediction from Text, In the 7th 
Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC). 
Malta, May 17-23. 
Netemeyer, R. G., Bearden, W. O., & Sharma, S. (2003). Scaling 
procedures: Issues and applications. Sage Publications. 
Netemeyer, R., Dobolyi, D., Abbasi, A., Clifford, G., and Taylor, 
H. (2020) “Health Literacy, Health Numeracy and Trust in 
Doctor:  Effects on Key Consumer Health Outcomes,” Journal 
of Consumer Affairs, 54(1), pp. 3-42. 
Osborne, R., Batterham, R. W., Elsworth, G. R., Hawkins, M. & 
Buchbinder, R. (2013a), The Grounded Psychometric 
Development and Initial Validation of the Health Literacy 
Questionnaire, BMC Public Health. 
Rakib, T. B. A., and Soon, L. K. (2018). Using the reddit corpus 
for cyberbully detection. In Asian Conference on Intelligent 
Information and Database Systems (pp. 180-189). Springer, 
Cham. 
Riloff, E., Patwardhan, S., & Wiebe, J. (2006). Feature 
subsumption for opinion analysis. In Proc. Conf. Empirical 
Methods in Natural Language Processing (pp. 440-448). 
Rust, J., and Golombok, S. (2014). Modern psychometrics: The 
science of psychological assessment. Routledge. 
Sanders, N. (2011). Twitter Sentiment Corpus. Sanders Analytics 
2.0, p. 24. 
Schapira, M. M., Ganschow O'Connell M, Neuner JM. (2014), 
Development and Validation of the Numeracy Understanding 
in Medicine Instrument Short Form, Journal of Health 
Communication, 19 (2), 240-253 
Sharif, H., Zaffar, F., Abbasi, A., and Zimbra, D. (2014). 
Detecting Adverse Drug Reactions using a Sentiment 
Classification Framework, ASE Conference on Social 
Computing, Stanford, May 26-30. 
Spielberger, C. D. (1989). State-Trait Anxiety Inventory: 
Bibliography (2nd ed.). CA: Psychologists Press. 
Taylor, H. A., Henderson, F., Abbasi, A., and Clifford, G. D., 
(2018). Cardiovascular Disease in African Americans: 
Innovative Community Engagement for Research Recruitment 
and Impact, American Journal of Kidney Diseases, 72(5)(Supp 
1), S43-S46. 
Thelwall, M., Buckley, K., Paltoglou, G., Cai, D., and Kappas, A. 
(2010). Sentiment strength detection in short informal text. 
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and 
Technology, 61(12), pp. 2544-2558. 
Wiebe, J., Wilson, T., and Cardie, C. (2005). Annotating 
expressions of opinions and emotions in language. Language 
Resources and Evaluation, 39(2-3), pp. 165--210. 
Zahedi, F. M., Abbasi, A., and Chen, Y. “Fake-Website Detection 
Tools: Identifying Design Elements that Promote Individuals’ 
Use and Enhance their Performance,” Journal of the 
Association for Information Systems, 16(6), 2015, pp. 448-484. 
Zimbra, D., Abbasi, A., Zeng, D., and Chen, H. “The State-of-the-
Art in Twitter Sentiment Analysis: A Review and Benchmark 
Evaluation,” ACM Transactions on Management Information 
Systems, 9(2), 2018, no. 5.
