Title: Sentiment-Aware Measure (SAM) for Evaluating Sentiment Transfer by Machine Translation Systems
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2109.14895v2
--------------------------------------------------

Sentiment-Aware Measure (SAM) for Evaluating Sentiment Transfer by
Machine Translation Systems
Hadeel Saadany
RGCL
University of Wolverhampton
Wolverhampton, UK
h.s.saadany@wlv.ac.uk
Constantin Or˘asan
Centre for Translation Studies
University of Surrey
Guildford, UK
c.orasan@surrey.ac.uk
Emad Mohamed
RGCL
University of Wolverhampton
Wolverhampton, UK
e.mohamed2@wlv.ac.uk
Ashraf Tantawy
School of Computer Science and Informatics
De Montfort University
Leicester, UK
ashraf.tantavy@dmu.ac.uk
Abstract
In translating text where sentiment is the main
message, human translators give particular at-
tention to sentiment-carrying words. The rea-
son is that an incorrect translation of such
words would miss the fundamental aspect of
the source text, i.e.
the author’s sentiment.
In the online world, MT systems are exten-
sively used to translate User-Generated Con-
tent (UGC) such as reviews, tweets, and so-
cial media posts, where the main message is
often the author’s positive or negative attitude
towards the topic of the text. It is important in
such scenarios to accurately measure how far
an MT system can be a reliable real-life util-
ity in transferring the correct affect message.
This paper tackles an under-recognised prob-
lem in the ﬁeld of machine translation eval-
uation which is judging to what extent auto-
matic metrics concur with the gold standard of
human evaluation for a correct translation of
sentiment. We evaluate the efﬁcacy of conven-
tional quality metrics in spotting a mistransla-
tion of sentiment, especially when it is the sole
error in the MT output. We propose a numeri-
cal ‘sentiment-closeness’ measure appropriate
for assessing the accuracy of a translated af-
fect message in UGC text by an MT system.
We will show that incorporating this sentiment-
aware measure can signiﬁcantly enhance the
correlation of some available quality metrics
with the human judgement of an accurate trans-
lation of sentiment.
1
Introduction
Standard quality measures for assessing the per-
formance of machine translation systems, such as
BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002), are domain agnos-
tic; they evaluate the translation accuracy regard-
less of the semantic domain or linguistic peculiar-
ities of the source text. Consequently, they give
equal penalty weight to inaccurate translation of
n-grams, which may lead to performance overes-
timation (or underestimation). For example, the
Arabic high-rated Goodreads book review show-
ing the reviewers overall satisfaction of a novel:
‘Q
 	gB@ Z	Qm.Ì'@ YJ
kñË@ AîD.J
« éJ.J
ëP éK
@ðQË@ (‘The novel
is great, its only ﬂaw is the last part’) is mistrans-
lated by the available online translation tool which
wrongly outputs a negative sentiment (‘The novel
is terrible, its only ﬂaw is the last part’). Despite
the distortion of the affect message, this translation
receives an equally high score as a correct trans-
lation (The story is great, its only ﬂaw is the last
part), but which uses story instead of novel. This is
because BLEU mildly penalises the wrong transla-
tion as it swaps only one uni-gram (‘great’) with its
opposite (‘terrible’). Yet, the mistranslation of this
particular uni-gram is a critical error as it is most
pivotal in transferring the sentiment, and hence the
MT performance is over-estimated.
There have been numerous efforts to address
the common pitfalls of n-gram-based evaluation
metrics by incorporating semantic and contextual
features. However, despite research evidence of its
analytical limitations, BLEU is still the de facto
standard for MT performance evaluation (Mathur
et al., 2020a; Reiter, 2018). Moreover, although the
introduction of more semantically-oriented metrics
showed a better correlation with human judgement,
still the estimation of sentiment preservation in
UGC has not yet been investigated. This is par-
arXiv:2109.14895v2  [cs.CL]  5 Oct 2021
tially due to the fact that the domain and linguistic
style of the WMTs datasets typically used for met-
ric evaluation (e.g. newstest2020, Canadian Parlia-
ment, Wikipedia, UN corpus) is quite different than
the non-standard noisy UGC where sentiment is the
main content of a telegraphic message (Ma et al.,
2018; Barrault et al., 2019; Mathur et al., 2020b).
Assessed over these WMT datasets, some metrics
manifest an almost perfect correlation with human
evaluation on the segment-level (e.g. WMT20 par-
ticipating metrics record results of up to 0.97 Pear-
son correlation on the newstest2020) (Mathur et al.,
2020b). However, research has also shown that
metrics usually report weaker correlation with low
human assessment score ranges (Takahashi et al.,
2020a,b).
In this paper, we argue that the high correla-
tion of some metrics may not be replicated with
a different domain such as sentiment-oriented
UGC, speciﬁcally when there is a mistranslation
of sentiment-critical word(s). For this reason, we
propose a ‘sentiment-closeness’ measure that can
accommodate for a better evaluation of the MT sys-
tem’s ability to capture the correct sentiment of the
source text.
To present our sentiment quality measure, we
ﬁrst brieﬂy explain in Section 2 why metrics com-
monly used for MT quality estimation may not
always be efﬁcient in assessing sentiment-critical
translation errors. In Section 3, we present an ex-
periment to quantitatively assess the divergence of
the analysed metrics from a human judgement of a
correct/incorrect translation of an affect message.
Section 4 presents our proposed solution for ﬁne-
tuning quality metrics for a better correlation with
human judgement. Section 5 presents the results
of incorporating our sentiment-measure in differ-
ent quality metrics. In Section 6 we conduct an
error analysis of our empirical approach and dis-
cuss its limitations. Finally, Section 7 presents a
conclusion on our conducted experiments.
2
Available Metrics
Automatic evaluation metrics usually take the out-
put of an MT system (hypothesis) and compare it
to one or several translations produced by human
translator(s) (reference). Based on their match-
ing methods, the most commonly used automatic
metrics can be broadly categorised into: surface n-
gram matching and embedding matching. Surface
n-gram methods work by calculating exact match-
ing, heuristic matching or an edit distance between
the aligned n-grams of the reference and hypoth-
esis translation(s). The embedding methods, on
the other hand, calculate a similarity score between
learned token representations, such as contextual
embedding vectors, with or without the aid of ex-
ternal linguistic tools. In the following sections, we
brieﬂy explain the methods behind three canonical
metrics as representative of each category. We illus-
trate why the theoretical foundation of each metric
may not be optimum for evaluating the translation
of sentiment-oriented UGC.
2.1
Surface N-gram Matching Metrics
BLEU
The standard metric for assessing empir-
ical improvement of MT systems is BLEU (Pap-
ineni et al., 2002). Simply stated, the objective
of BLEU is to compare n-grams of the candidate
translation with n-grams of the reference transla-
tion and count the number of matches; the more the
matches, the better the candidate translation. The
ﬁnal score is calculated using a modiﬁed n-gram
precision multiplied by a brevity penalty so that a
good candidate translation would match the refer-
ence translation in length, in word choice, and in
word order. The disadvantage of the BLEU met-
ric which is relevant to our present study is that it
treats all n-grams equally. Due to its restrictive sur-
face n-gram matching, it does not account for the
semantic importance of an n-gram in the context
of a text. Accordingly, BLEU would incorrectly
give a high score to an MT output if it scores exact
match with the reference except for one uni-gram,
even if this uni-gram completely changes the sen-
timent of a text (e.g. ‘terrible’ and ‘great’ as in
the Goodreads example above). Online built-in
MT tools have been shown to frequently transfer
the exact opposite sentiment word for some dialec-
tical expressions in UGC translated into English
(Saadany and Orasan, 2020). Therefore, the BLEU
evaluation of an MT performance would be mis-
leadingly over-permissive in such cases where only
one or two sentiment-critical words are mistrans-
lated.
METEOR
METEOR
(Banerjee
and
Lavie,
2005) incorporates semantic information as it eval-
uates translation by calculating either exact match,
stem match, or synonymy match. For synonym
matching, it utilises WordNet synsets (Pedersen
et al., 2004). More recent versions (METEOR
1.5 and METEOR++2.0) apply also importance
weighting by giving smaller weight to function
words (Denkowski and Lavie, 2014; Guo and Hu,
2019). The METEOR score ranges from 0 (worst
translation) to 1 (best translation). There are two
shortcomings to the METEOR metric which do
not make it a robust solution for evaluating sen-
timent transfer. First, the synonym matching is
limited to checking whether the two words belong
to the same synset in WordNet. However, WordNet
synonymy classiﬁcation is different than regular
thesauruses. For example, ‘glad’ is a synset of
‘happy’ and hence considered a synonym, whereas
‘cheerful’ is not a direct synset to ‘happy’ and hence
would be considered a mismatch by METEOR. The
following two examples illustrate further the limi-
tations of using WordNet synonymy by METEOR:
Example 1
Scores: [METEOR: 0.46]
• Hypothesis: “The weather is sunny, what a
happy day”
• Reference: “The sun is shining, what a cheer-
ful day”
Example 2
Scores: [METEOR: 0.48]
• Hypothesis: “I’m not sure why, but I feel so
happy today”
• Reference: “I don’t get it, but I feel so sad
today”
The METEOR scores for Examples 1 and 2 clearly
diverge from a human evaluation of a good transla-
tion. In the ﬁrst example, although the translation
conveys the correct emotion (‘happiness’), it re-
ceives a similar METEOR score to the hypothesis
in the second example which gives the exact op-
posite emotion of the source (‘happiness’ instead
of ‘sadness’). The inadequate scoring is a result
of the WordNet taxonomy which causes the met-
ric to equally treat both pairs (‘sad’, ‘happy’) and
(‘cheerful’, ‘happy’) as non-synonym synsets and
hence unmatched chunks.
The second problem with METEOR which may
affect its efﬁcacy in evaluating sentiment transfer
relates to its weighting schema for function and
non-function words. The following example clari-
ﬁes the gravity of this problem:
Example 3
Scores: [METEOR: 0.92]
• Hypothesis: “If he had blown himself up in
your country, God would forgive him”
• Reference: “If he had blown himself up in
your country, God would not forgive”.
The hypothesis in Example 3 is the translation out-
put of Twitter’s built-in MT system for an Arabic
tweet commenting on a terrorist attack1. The MT
failure to translate the negation marker ﬂips the
sentiment of the author from ‘anger’ against the
terrorist to ‘sympathy’. Despite this, the METEOR
score is 0.92 which is within the highest upper
bound, ranking it as a good translation. On the
other hand, the METEOR score for a correct trans-
lation of sentiment with a negation marker is 0.93.
The main culprit for this inaccurate scoring is the
lexical weighting which causes the metric not to pe-
nalise the missing of a negation marker which pro-
duces a sentiment-critical error. Due to the grave
consequences of such mistranslations, it becomes
critical to have a sentiment-sensitive metric that is
capable of spotting similar errors.
2.2
Embedding-based Metrics
BERTScore
Recently embedding-based metrics
have proven to achieve the highest performance
in recent WMT shared tasks for quality metrics
(e.g. Sellam et al. (2020); Lo (2020); Mukherjee
et al. (2020)). We take BERTScore as a representa-
tive metric for this approach (Zhang et al., 2019).
BERTScore computes a score based on a pair wise
cosine similarity between the BERT contextual em-
beddings of the individual tokens for the hypothesis
and the reference (Devlin et al., 2018). Accord-
ingly, a BERTScore close to 1 indicates proximity
in vector space and hence a good translation. The
main problem with embedding-based metrics, such
as BERTScore, is that antonyms contain similar
distributional information since they usually occur
in similar contexts. Example 4 illustrates this point:
Example 4
Scores: [BERTScore: 0.85]
• Hypothesis: “What is this amount of anger, I
don’t understand!”
1https://twitter.com/gaston810/status/
673950532340465664
• Reference: “What is this amount of happiness,
I don’t understand!”
Example 4 shows the mistranslation produced
by Twitter’s Translate Tweet tab of an Arabic tweet.
Although the sentiment polarity is ﬂipped in the
candidate translation above, the hypothesis receives
a BERTScore of 0.85 which indicates a high cosine
similarity to the reference in vector space and hence
a good translation. Clearly, the metric score is not
comparable to a human perception of the emotion
reﬂected by the source.
Figure 1 illustrates the reason behind this mis-
leadingly high score. Figure 1 is a 2-D visualisa-
tion of BERT’s contextual embedding vectors for
the hypothesis translation (in blue) and the refer-
ence (in red). Both sentences are very close in the
embedding space due to the exact match of their
individual tokens. The only mismatch is between
the antonyms ‘happiness’ and ‘anger’. As shown
in the ﬁgure, the pre-trained embedding vectors of
the opposite polarity nouns are also quite close be-
cause of their common contextual information. An
embedding metric such as BERTScore, therefore,
may not penalise antonyms which typically occur
in similar contexts.
Figure 1: Visualisation of Contextual Embeddings of Sen-
tences in Example 4
Recently, there have been different approaches
to overcome some distributional problems of con-
textual embeddings. Reimers and Gurevych (2019),
for example, introduce SBert, a modiﬁcation of the
pretrained BERT network, which should mitigate
the antonymy problem. They use Siamese network
structures where the embeddings of similar sen-
tence pairs are independently learned via two paral-
lel transformer architectures. We measured how far
this technique could solve the opposite sentiment
problem by measuring the SBert sentence similar-
ity of the hypothesis and reference in Example 4.
The cosine similarity of the SBert sentence embed-
ding vectors for the hypothesis and reference in
Example 4 reached 0.61. A correct translation of
the reference, however, such as ‘What is all this
cheerfulness, I don’t understand’ has a cosine simi-
larity score of 0.79. This small similarity difference
(0.18) would be misleading if taken as an evalua-
tion of how far the sentiment poles in the two hy-
potheses are different. A more sentiment-targeted
measure is needed for assessing mistranslations
due to this antonymy problem.
In the following section, we conduct an experi-
ment to quantify the divergence of the above men-
tioned metrics from the human perception of a
proper sentiment transfer in a translated text.
3
Evaluation of Mistranslated Sentiment
We have shown in the previous section that three
canonical MT evaluation metrics do not give a
penalty proportional to sentiment-critical errors on
segment-level by an MT online tool. In order to
quantify how far the aforementioned quality met-
rics diverge or correlate with human judgement of
sentiment transfer, we measure the performance
of each metric on a dataset of tweets that had
sentiment-critical translation errors. To compile
this data, ﬁrst we used the Twitter built-in trans-
lation system (Google API) to translate a dataset
of tweets annotated for sentiment2. The source
dataset amounted to ≈7,000 tweets in three lan-
guages: English, Arabic and Spanish. We trans-
lated the Arabic and Spanish into English and the
English was translated into Spanish and Arabic.
To extract instances where the MT system failed
to translate the sentiment correctly, we built an En-
glish sentiment-detection classiﬁer by ﬁne-tuning
a Roberta XML model (Liu et al., 2019) on an
English dataset of 23,000 tweets annotated for sen-
timent3. The English classiﬁer was used to predict
the sentiment of the Google API output for the
translation of the Arabic and Spanish tweets into
English and the English back-translation of the En-
glish tweets translated into Spanish and Arabic.
The classiﬁer’s predicted sentiment was compared
to the gold standard emotion of the source text, and
2The dataset is collected from SemEval 2018 shared senti-
ment detection Task (Mohammad et al., 2018).
3The English dataset is collected from different sentiment
detection tasks (Lo, 2019; Mohammad and Bravo-Marquez,
2017).
instances of discrepancy were extracted as poten-
tial mistranslations of sentiment. Finally, from the
extracted instances, we manually built a translation
quality evaluation dataset.
The quality evaluation dataset, henceforth QE,
consisted of target tweets where the error is exclu-
sively a mistranslation of the sentiment-carrying
lexicon. In these tweets, the mistranslations ei-
ther completely ﬂip the sentiment polarity of the
source tweet, similar to Examples 3 and 4 above, or
transfer the same polarity but with a mitigated sen-
timent tone. The tweets with exclusive sentiment
translation errors amounted to 300 tweets. We also
added 100 tweet/translation pairs where the MT
system transfers the correct sentiment. Reference
translations of the QE dataset were created by na-
tive speakers of the respective source languages.
Essentially, the reference translations aimed at cor-
recting chunks that caused a distortion of the affect
message and retained as many of the hypothesis
n-grams as possible to detect how far each metric is
sensitive to sentiment mismatching and not to the
mismatch in other non-sentiment carrying words.
The translators were also asked to assign a score to
each pair of source-hypothesis tweet, where 1 is the
poorest sentiment transfer and 10 is best sentiment
transfer. The average scores of annotators were
taken as the ﬁnal human score4.
To quantify the ability of the three metrics ex-
plained in Section 2 to assess the transfer of senti-
ment in the QE dataset, we compared their scores
of the translation hypotheses with the human judge-
ment scores for sentiment transfer on the segment-
level. We followed the WMT standard methods
for evaluating quality metrics and used absolute
Pearson correlation coefﬁcient r and the Kendall
correlation coefﬁcient |τ| to evaluate each metric’s
performance against the human judgement. Figures
2 and 3 show heatmaps visualising the Pearson and
Kendall correlation coefﬁcients for the studied met-
rics and the human scores, respectively.
As seen from Figures 2 and 3, both BERTScore
and METEOR achieve a better correlation with
the human judgement than BLEU5 which achieves
only 0.16 and 0.12 Pearson and Kendall correla-
tions, respectively. However, the relatively overall
low correlations (max r = 0.39 and max |τ| = 0.27)
raise important doubts as to the reliability of these
4Annotators were computational linguists working on MT
research.
5We use the Sacrebleu implementation of the BLEU score
for all the experiments (Post, 2018).
Figure 2: Absolute Pearson correlations with segment-level
human judgements for the QE dataset
Figure 3: Kendall correlations with segment-level human
judgements for the QE dataset
accepted metrics for ranking MT systems which
translate sentiments. Bearing in mind that 75% of
the segments in the QE dataset have critical trans-
lation errors that seriously distort the sentiment,
the low correlation results highlight the need for a
sentiment-targeted measure that can improve a met-
ric’s efﬁcacy in capturing mistranslated sentiment
by an MT system in real-life scenarios.
4
Sentiment-Aware Measure (SAM) for
Machine Translated UGC
In this section, we propose a new measure for as-
sessing MT performance that takes into account
the sentiment similarity between the MT system
translation and the reference. This sentiment mea-
sure should be used as a ﬁne-tuning tool to adjust a
quality score in cases where it is used to assess the
translation quality of sentiment-oriented text. The
SAM score is calculated by using the SentiWord
dictionary of prior polarities (Gatti et al., 2015).
SentiWord is a sentiment lexicon that combines the
high precision of manual lexica and the high cov-
erage of automatic ones (covering 155,000 words).
It is based on assigning a ‘prior polarity’ score
for each lemma-POS in both SentiWordNet and a
number of human-annotated sentiment lexica (Bac-
cianella et al., 2010; Warriner et al., 2013). The
prior polarity is the out-of-context positive or nega-
tive score which a lemma-POS evokes. It is reached
via an ensemble learning framework that combines
several formulae where each lemma-POS is given
the score that receives the highest number of votes
from the different formulae. SentiWord prior polar-
ity scores have been proven to achieve the highest
correlation with human scores in sentiment anal-
ysis regression and classiﬁcation SemEval tasks
(Gatti et al., 2015).
We assume that our sentiment adjustment fac-
tor, SAM, is proportional to the distance between
the sentiment scores of the unmatched words in
the system translation and the reference, the higher
the distance the greater the SAM adjustment. To
calculate the SAM score, we designate the num-
ber of remaining mismatched words in the system
translation and reference translation by m and n,
respectively. We calculate the total SentiWord sen-
timent score for the lemma-POS of the mismatched
words in the translation and reference sentences
using a weighted average of the sentiment score
of each mismatched lemma-POS. The weight of a
hypothesis mismatched word wh and a reference
mismatched word wr is calculated based on the
sentiment score of its lemma-POS, s, as follows:
wi
h = |si|
i = 1, 2, . . . , m.
(1)
wi
r = |si|
i = 1, 2, . . . , n.
(2)
Then the total sentiment score for hypothesis Sh
and reference Sr is given by:
Sh =
m
X
i=1
αisi,
αi =
wi
h
Pm
i=1 wi
h
(3)
Sr =
n
X
i=1
βisi,
βi =
wi
r
Pn
i=1 wir
(4)
The normalised SAM adjustment is given by:
p = |Sr −Sh|
2
(5)
and the translation ﬁnal score will be given by:
Score = Chr (1 −p)
(6)
where Chr can be any metric’s matching score be-
tween a translation hypothesis and a reference seg-
ment. For this experiment, we will measure Chr
as the BLEU, METEOR and BERTScore scores.
To illustrate how SAM score adjusts a metric score
with respect to the transfer of sentiment, table 1
shows the SAM score adjustment for Examples 3
and 4 above.
As can be seen from Table 1, the metric score
Chr (here METEOR and BERTScore, respectively)
is signiﬁcantly reduced due to the sentiment dis-
tance between the mismatched words (wh, wr) as
well as their sentiment weights (Sh, Sr). The re-
duced scores are more representative of the distor-
tion of sentiment produced by the MT system in
Examples 3 and 4. The SAM adjustment, therefore,
is a targeted-measure that can ﬁne-tune a metric
according to the ‘sentiment-closeness’ of the trans-
lation and the reference6.
5
Assessing SAM performance
To check how far the SAM measure can improve
the evaluation of sentiment, we assessed the per-
formance of the three chosen metrics on the QE
dataset utilised in the experiment in Section 3
with the SAM adjustment. Figures 4 and 5 show
heatmaps of the Pearson and Kendall correlations
of the SAM adjusted metrics with the human judge-
ment in the QE dataset.
Figure 4: Absolute Pearson correlations with SAM Adjust-
ment for the QE dataset
Compared to metric scores without the SAM
adjustment, Figures 4 and 5 show that the combi-
nation of SAM with the three metrics consistently
leads to an improvement in each metric’s correla-
tion with the human judgement of a correct senti-
ment transfer in our dataset. Overall, BERTScore
records the highest Pearson correlation coefﬁcients
and Kendall rank dependence (0.59 and 0.44, re-
spectively). This means that it is better able to pe-
nalise critical translation errors in our QE dataset.
Moreover, compared to their scores without SAM,
6More examples of SAM adjustments are in Appendix A
Table 1: Calculating the SAM adjustment for Examples 3 and 4
Example
wh
wr
Sh
Sr
p
Chr
Score+SAM
3
him#a
not#r
0
-1.0
0.5
0.92
0.46
4
anger#n
happiness#n
-0.669
0.856
0.762
0.85
0.20
Figure 5: Kendall correlations with SAM adjustment for the
QE dataset
both BERTScore and METEOR record 20% and
18% higher correlation, respectively. It is also wor-
thy of notice, that although the Pearson correla-
tion of BLEU improves from 0.16 to 0.33 with the
SAM adjustment, the correlation is still relatively
small. Knowing that BLEU score is usually the
gate-keeping tool for accepting improvement in
MT research, the results cast doubt on the efﬁcacy
of this non-semantic method to penalise sentiment-
critical translation errors.
6
Error Analysis and Limitations
Human sentiment can be expressed in intricately
subtle ways so that the mistranslation of the affect
message is not necessarily reﬂected in divergence
of polarity scores. We conducted an error analy-
sis on instances where the SAM adjustment scores
were not able to capture the MT’s failure to trans-
fer the correct sentiment due to different linguistic
phenomena. The ﬁrst phenomenon we identiﬁed
is related to structure shifting. For example, the
sentiment distance between the source tweet ‘I was
saddened by him’ and its mistranslation ‘I made
him sad’ is very small despite the ﬂipping of senti-
ment direction in the translation. The three metrics
with and without the SAM adjustment failed to
penalise this type of distortion in the QE dataset.
Second, some words in the lexicon did not have a
score representative of their sentiment weight. For
example, most prepositions in the SentiWord lex-
icon are neutral, yet by checking the data, it was
found out that a mistranslation of a preposition can
distort the affect message. For example, the source
tweet ‘What is the beneﬁt of me in this world’ was
mistranslated by the MT system as ‘What is the
beneﬁt for me in this world’; the wrong preposition
causes the translation to lose the sad tone in the
source tweet. Again, similar instances were not
adequately measured with the three metrics with
and without the SAM adjustment. Third, some
nuanced sentiment-carrying words speciﬁc for the
informal style of tweets caused a mistranslation
of sentiment which was not captured by our ap-
proach. For instance, a one-word tweet referring
to a political ﬁgure as ‘Prick’ was mistranslated as
‘Sting’. The source is a slang word used to refer to a
mean, contemptible man. The translation wrongly
received a high score since both ‘prick’ and ‘sting’
had very similar negative sentiment weights. The
translation, however, fails to reﬂect the aggressive
sentiment in the source tweet. The BLEU metric,
on the other hand, succeeded in giving a penalty
to similar short mistranslated tweets without the
SAM adjustment.
One other limitation to the current approach for
assessing the translation of sentiment is that it relies
on an English sentiment lexicon. The applicability
of this approach to other languages depends on the
availability of a similar high-precision and high-
coverage sentiment lexicon. We have overcome
this problem by using the English backtranslations
of the Arabic and Spanish tweets in the QE dataset.
There are, however, multilingual translations of
English sentiment lexica that are commonly used
in the sentiment-analysis of non-English text. It
remains to be tested how far a translated sentiment
lexicon is capable of measuring sentiment transfer
among different language pairs by the SAM scoring
approach.
7
Conclusion
The most frequent scenario in which an MT system
is used to translate sentiment-oriented text is for the
translation of online UGC such as tweets, reviews
or social media posts. The users of the MT online
tool take these translations at face-value as there is
no human intervention for accuracy checking. It
is important, therefore, to ensure the reliability of
the MT system to accurately transfer the author’s
affect message before it is used as an online tool.
The reliability of an MT system with such big data
is commonly measured by automatic metrics. We
have shown that conventionally accepted metrics
may not always be an optimum solution for assess-
ing the translation of sentiment-oriented UGC. We
presented an empirical approach to quantify the
notion of sentiment transfer by an MT system and,
more concretely, to modify automatic metrics such
that its MT ranking comes closer to a human judge-
ment of a poor or good translation of sentiment.
Despite limitations to our approach, the SAM ad-
justment serves as a proxy to the complicated task
of manually evaluating the translation of sentiment
across different languages.
Acknowledgements
This research work has been supported in part by
the TranSent project at the Centre for Translation
Studies (CTS) of the University of Surrey.
References
Stefano Baccianella, Andrea Esuli, and Fabrizio Sebas-
tiani. 2010. Sentiwordnet 3.0: An Enhanced Lexical
Resource for Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Min-
ing. In Lrec, volume 10, pages 2200–2204.
Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. 2005. METEOR:
An automatic metric for MT evaluation with im-
proved correlation with human judgments. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL Workshop on Intrinsic and Ex-
trinsic Evaluation Measures for Machine Transla-
tion and/or Summarization, pages 65–72.
Lo¨ıc Barrault, Ondˇrej Bojar, Marta R. Costa-juss`a,
Christian Federmann, Mark Fishel, Yvette Gra-
ham, Barry Haddow, Matthias Huck, Philipp Koehn,
Shervin Malmasi, Christof Monz, Mathias M¨uller,
Santanu Pal, Matt Post, and Marcos Zampieri. 2019.
Findings of the 2019 conference on machine transla-
tion (WMT19). In Proceedings of the Fourth Con-
ference on Machine Translation (Volume 2: Shared
Task Papers, Day 1), pages 1–61, Florence, Italy. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Michael Denkowski and Alon Lavie. 2014. Meteor uni-
versal: Language speciﬁc translation evaluation for
any target language.
In Proceedings of the Ninth
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages
376–380.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2018.
BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805.
Lorenzo Gatti, Marco Guerini, and Marco Turchi. 2015.
Sentiwords: Deriving a high precision and high cov-
erage lexicon for sentiment analysis. IEEE Transac-
tions on Affective Computing, 7(4):409–421.
Yinuo Guo and Junfeng Hu. 2019. METEOR++ 2.0:
Adopt Syntactic Level Paraphrase Knowledge into
Machine Translation Evaluation. In Proceedings of
the Fourth Conference on Machine Translation (Vol-
ume 2: Shared Task Papers, Day 1), pages 501–506.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-
dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
Roberta: A robustly optimized BERT pretraining ap-
proach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692.
Chi-kiu Lo. 2019. YiSi-A uniﬁed semantic MT quality
evaluation and estimation metric for languages with
different levels of available resources. In Proceed-
ings of the Fourth Conference on Machine Transla-
tion (Volume 2: Shared Task Papers, Day 1), pages
507–513.
Chi-kiu Lo. 2020. Extended study on using pretrained
language models and YiSi-1 for machine translation
evaluation. In Proceedings of the Fifth Conference
on Machine Translation, pages 895–902.
Qingsong Ma, Ondˇrej Bojar, and Yvette Graham. 2018.
Results of the WMT18 metrics shared task: Both
characters and embeddings achieve good perfor-
mance. In Proceedings of the Third Conference on
Machine Translation: Shared Task Papers, pages
671–688.
Nitika Mathur, Tim Baldwin, and Trevor Cohn. 2020a.
Tangled up in BLEU: Reevaluating the Evaluation of
Automatic Machine Translation Evaluation Metrics.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.06264.
Nitika Mathur, Johnny Wei, Markus Freitag, Qing-
song Ma, and Ondˇrej Bojar. 2020b. Results of the
WMT20 Metrics Shared Task.
In Proceedings of
the Fifth Conference on Machine Translation, pages
688–725.
Saif M. Mohammad and Felipe Bravo-Marquez. 2017.
WASSA-2017 shared task on emotion intensity. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational Ap-
proaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment and Social Me-
dia Analysis (WASSA), Copenhagen, Denmark.
Saif M. Mohammad, Felipe Bravo-Marquez, Mo-
hammad Salameh, and Svetlana Kiritchenko. 2018.
Semeval-2018 Task 1: Affect in tweets. In Proceed-
ings of International Workshop on Semantic Evalua-
tion (SemEval-2018), New Orleans, LA, USA.
Ananva Mukherjee, Hema Ala, Manish Shrivastava,
and Dipti Misra Sharma. 2020. Mee: An automatic
metric for evaluation using embeddings for machine
translation.
In 2020 IEEE 7th International Con-
ference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics
(DSAA), pages 292–299. IEEE.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the
40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 311–318.
Ted Pedersen, Siddharth Patwardhan, Jason Michelizzi,
et al. 2004. Wordnet: Similarity-measuring the re-
latedness of concepts. In AAAI, volume 4, pages 25–
29.
Matt Post. 2018. A call for clarity in reporting BLEU
scores. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.08771.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019.
Sentence-
bert:
Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10084.
Ehud Reiter. 2018. A Structured Review of the Validity
of BLEU.
Computational Linguistics, 44(3):393–
401.
Hadeel Saadany and Constantin Orasan. 2020.
Is it
great or terrible? preserving sentiment in neural ma-
chine translation of Arabic reviews. In Proceedings
of the Fifth Arabic Natural Language Processing
Workshop, pages 24–37, Barcelona, Spain (Online).
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Thibault Sellam, Amy Pu, Hyung Won Chung, Sebas-
tian Gehrmann, Qijun Tan, Markus Freitag, Dipan-
jan Das, and Ankur P. Parikh. 2020.
Learning to
evaluate translation beyond english: Bleurt submis-
sions to the wmt metrics 2020 shared task.
Kosuke Takahashi, Katsuhito Sudoh, and Satoshi Naka-
mura. 2020a. Automatic machine translation evalu-
ation using source language inputs and cross-lingual
language model. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 3553–3558, Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Yujin Takahashi, Satoru Katsumata, and Mamoru Ko-
machi. 2020b.
Grammatical error correction us-
ing pseudo learner corpus considering learner’s er-
ror tendency.
In Proceedings of the 58th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Student Research Workshop, pages 27–32,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Amy Beth Warriner, Victor Kuperman, and Marc Brys-
baert. 2013. Norms of valence, arousal, and dom-
inance for 13,915 English lemmas.
Behavior re-
search methods, 45(4):1191–1207.
Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q
Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. 2019.
BERTScore:
Evaluating text generation with Bert. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.09675.
Appendix A
Examples for Mistranslated Tweets Measured with and without SAM
adjustment
