Title: MMCR4NLP: Multilingual Multiway Corpora Repository for Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1710.01025v3
--------------------------------------------------

arXiv:1710.01025v3  [cs.CL]  14 Feb 2019
MMCR4NLP: Multilingual Multiway Corpora Repository for Natural
Language Processing
Raj Dabre, Sadao Kurohashi
Kyoto University, Kyoto University
Kyoto, Japan, Kyoto, Japan
prajdabre@gmail,com, kuro@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp
Abstract
Multilinguality is gradually becoming ubiquitous in the sense that more and more researchers have successfully shown that using
additional languages help improve the results in many Natural Language Processing tasks. Multilingual Multiway Corpora (MMC)
contain the same sentence in multiple languages. Such corpora have been primarily used for Multi-Source and Pivot Language Machine
Translation but are also useful for developing multilingual sequence taggers by transfer learning. While these corpora are available, they
are not organized for multilingual experiments and researchers need to write boilerplate code every time they want to use said corpora.
Moreover, because there is no ofﬁcial MMC collection it becomes difﬁcult to compare against existing approaches. As such we present
our work on creating a uniﬁed and systematically organized repository of MMC spanning a large number of languages. We also provide
training, development and test splits for corpora where ofﬁcial splits are unavailable. We hope that this will help speed up the pace of
multilingual NLP research and ensure that NLP researchers obtain results that are more trustable since they can be compared easily. We
indicate corpora sources, extraction procedures if any and relevant statistics. We also make our collection public for research purposes.
Keywords: parallel corpora, multilingual multiway corpora, machine translation, resource
1.
Introduction
Text Corpora form the backbone of data-driven Natural
Language Processing tasks ranging from automatic text
segmentation to syntactic and semantic analysis to dis-
course. Bilingual parallel corpora which contain the same
sentences in two languages are not only useful for Machine
Translation tasks but also enable one to use an analysis tool
developed for one language for another language by us-
ing transfer learning. Multilingual Multiway corpora (also
known as N lingual corpora; terms which we will use inter-
changeably) are special corpora where the same sentence
is available in multiple languages. Formally speaking a N-
way corpus is one in which the same sentence is present in
N languages.
Large trilingual corpora are quite common since most coun-
tries maintain transcripts of various meetings (business, le-
gal etc.) in English, the native language and an additional
language. This additional language can depend on the sit-
uation such as geographical proximity or diplomatic and
economic relations. The ASPEC corpus which is a trilin-
gual Japanese-Chinese-English corpus is a product of joint
collaboration between Japan and China in order to boost
relations and promote research.
One of the most attractive features of a N-lingual corpus is
that by adding an additional language it automatically gets
direct links to each of the N languages. This is a very desir-
able property since it is possible to perform transfer learn-
ing from one language to another. For example it should
be possible to transfer part of speech tagging or parsing in-
formation from a language which has annotated data and
parsers to a language that has none.
In this paper we will list out various N-lingual corpora
which are either publicly available or have been extracted
by us. We list the extraction procedures along with various
corpora level statistics. We also group corpora by language
families where ever possible so that it becomes easier to
study linguistic phenomena for related languages. We make
our collection public so that people can work on them di-
rectly instead of having to spend time on searching for and
extracting them.
Most of these corpora are available online but they are not
organized for multilingual experiments and researchers end
up spending a signiﬁcant amount of time writing boilerplate
code to organize and use said corpora. Moreover, because
there is no ofﬁcial MMC collection researchers tend to use
their own splits of the datasets which makes it difﬁcult to
compare against their proposed approaches. And thus in
the cases where ofﬁcial development and test sets are un-
available we have created our own training, development
and test splits which we hope will be used by everyone to
ensure fair comparison of methodologies and their results.
Our key contributions are as follows:
• We have systematically collected, organized (or iden-
tiﬁed) and made available N lingual corpora from Eu-
roparl, TED talks, ILCI, Bible and UN corpora.
• We have also made available some of the scripts we
used to organize our corpus collection, thereby elimi-
nating the need to write boilerplate code.
• Our collection spans 5 domains and can be used for
studies on domain adaptation and transfer learning.
• We have also organized some of the corpora by group-
ing languages accoring to language families to facil-
itate NLP for related languages and investigate how
language relatedness impacts various transfer learning
tasks.
2.
Related Work
Our
work
revolves
around
accumulating
and
organizing
existing
N-lingual
corpora.
The
most
popular
examples
are:
United
Nations
(Ziemski et al., 2016),
Europarl
(Koehn, 2005),
Ted
Talks (Cettolo et al., 2012), ILCI (Jha, 2010) and Bible
(Christodouloupoulos and Steedman, 2015)
corpora.
These corpora have been used mainly for machine
translation (Zoph and Knight, 2016; Och and Ney, 2001)
and for various studies on language relatedness studies
(Asgari and Mofrad, 2016), cross lingual part of speech
tagging (Agi´c et al., 2015)
and
cross lingual parsing
(Agic et al., 2016). To the best of our knowledge there has
been no active work on creating a single compilation of
multilingual corpora.
3.
Extraction Procedures and Languages
3.1.
Corpus Extraction Mechanism
Most corpora are not directly available as N-way corpora
but as N-1 bilingual corpora where one of the languages
is always English. As such we simply extract the N-way
corpus by retaining the N-1 sentences which have the same
English translation. We use the following procedure:
• target-sentences = hashmap(hashset())
• all-corpora = hashmap(hashmap())
• for each language-pair, corpus in corpora:
– for source-sentence, target-sentence in corpus:
∗target-sentences[language-pair].add(target-
sentence)
∗all-corpora[language-pair][target-sentence] =
source-sentence
• common-sentences = intersect([target-sentences[key]
for key in target-sentences.keys()])
• for sentence in common-sentences:
– write sentence to corresponding ﬁle
– for language-pair in language-pair-list:
∗source-sentence
=
all-corpora[language-
pair][sentence]
∗write source-sentence to corresponding ﬁle
We load all the corpora in a dictionary to ensure quick ex-
traction. Although it might seem to quite memory intensive
our method works well in practice since there are not too
many corpora that are large enough to cause out of memory
issues. Additionally we will make the scripts, for extract-
ing the N lingual corpora from text and XML ﬁles, publicly
available.
3.2.
Languages
Our N-lingual corpus collection includes the following 59
languages: Afrikaans (afr), Albanian (al), Arabic (ar), Bul-
garian (bg), Cebuano (ce), Chinese (zh), Creole (cre), Croa-
tian (cr), Czech (cz), Danish (da), English (en), Esperanto
(esp), Estonian (et), Farsi (fa), Finnish (ﬁ), French (fr), Ger-
man (de), Greek (gr), Hebrew (he), Hindi (hi), Hungarian
(hu), Icelandic (ic), Indonesian (id), Italian (it), Japanese
(ja), Kannada (kn), Korean (ko), Latin (la), Latvian (lt),
Type
Languages
train
dev2010 tst2010/tst2013
3 lingual Fr, De, En
191381 880
1060/886
4 lingual Fr, De, Ar, En
84301
880
1059/708
5 lingual Fr, De, Ar, Cs, En 45684
461
1016/643
Table 1: Statistics for the the N-lingual corpora extracted
from the IWSLT 2016 corpus for the languages French (Fr),
German (De), Arabic (Ar), Czech (Cs) and English (En)
Lithuanian (li), Malagasy (mg), Malayalam (ma), Maori
(mao), Marathi (mr), Myanmar (my), Nepali (ne), Norwe-
gian (no), Paite (pa), Polish (po), Portuguese (pt), Punjabi
(pu), Qeqchi (qe), Romanian (ro), Russian (ru), Serbian
(se), Slovak (sl), Slovene (sv), Somali (so), Spanish (es),
Swedish (sw), Tagalog (tg), Taiwanese (tw), Tamil (ta), Tel-
ugu (te), Thai (th), Turkish (Tu), Vietnamese (Vi), Xhosa
(Xh), Zarma (Za). For the remainder of the paper we will
use these codes for brevity.
4.
Multilingual Multiway Corpora
In this section we list all the multilingual multiway
corpora we have managed to acquire/identify along
with
relevant
statistics.
Our
collection
is
avail-
able here: http://lotus.kuee.kyoto-u.ac.jp/
˜raj/mmcr4nlp/1
4.1.
UN corpus
The UN corpus2 spans 6 languages (ar, fr, ru, en, zh and
es) is directly available in its N-lingual form. It contains
roughly 11.36M lines and the average sentence lengths vary
from 23 for Arabic to 30 for Spanish. Additionally there are
6 lingual development and test sets of 4K lines each. Since
the UN corpus is directly available in its 6 lingual form we
do not include it in our (downloadable) collection.
4.2.
Spoken Language and Subtitles corpus
The Spoken Language and Subtitles corpus is an excellent
source of parallel sentences in the spoken language domain.
We have three different sources of TED talks corpora, two3
of which come from the IWSLT 2016 and 2017 shared tasks
and the third which was crawled from the TED website4.
4.2.1.
IWSLT 2016 corpus
The IWSLT 2016 task focused on 5 languages (fr, de, ar, cz
and en) where English was the target language. One devel-
opment set (dev2010) and 4 test sets (tst2010 to tst2013) are
available. This corpus is not directly 5 lingual and thus us-
ing English as the pivot we extracted 3, 4 and 5 lingual ver-
sions5 of the parallel corpus. We found that the test sets for
1In this folder we include readme ﬁles for each corpus collec-
tion for additional details which are not included in this paper due
to the limited number of pages.
2https://conferences.unite.un.org/uncorpus
3We believe that previous IWSLT tasks showcase bilingual
corpora that can be converted into N lingual versions but we leave
this for future work.
4https://www.ted.com/talk?page=N (where N is an integer
greater than 0)
5http://lotus.kuee.kyoto-u.ac.jp/˜raj/
mmcr4nlp/iwslt2016/
Type
Languages
train
dev2010
tst2010
3 lingual
De, Nl, En
172735
715
1363
5 lingual
De, Nl, It, Ro, En
145105
627
1153
Table 2: Statistics for the the N-lingual corpora extracted
from the IWSLT 2017 corpus for the languages Dutch (Nl),
German (De), Italian (It), Romanian (Ro) and English (En)
2011 and 2012 are not 5 lingual and thus exclude them from
our collection. Refer to table 1 for details. The 5 lingual
corpus is extremely small ( 45k lines) and is a good candi-
date for low reosource multilingual experiments. The 3 lin-
gual (fr, de and en) version of the corpus is almost 4 times
larger indicating low overlap of the English sentences for
Arabic-English and Czech-English with the French-English
and German-English corpora.
4.2.2.
IWSLT 2017 corpus
The IWSLT 2017 task focused on 5 languages (de, nl, it,
ro and en) but the objective was on a single multilingual
system. One development set (dev2010) and one test set
(tst2010) were provided. Like the IWSLT 2016 corpus this
corpus is not directly 5-lingual either. We extracted 3 lin-
gual (de, nl and en) and 5 lingual (de, nl, it, ro and en)
versions6 of the corpus. We do not list the 4 lingual version
since it is of roughly the same as the 5 lingual corpus. Refer
to table 2 for details.
4.2.3.
Generic Ted Talks Corpus
We found an unofﬁcial 13 lingual (ar, de, es, fr, he, it, ja,
ko, nl, pt (Brazilian Portuguese), ru, zh (Mainland Chinese)
and tw (Taiwanese Chinese)) TED talks corpus of 349049
lines which was crawled7 from the TED talks site. This
repository also contains many pairs of bilingual corpora but
one unusual aspect of this corpus is that it does not contain
English as either a source or a target language. A 4 lingual
version of this corpus which spans only ja, ko zh and tw
contains an additional 40K lines for a total of 389764 lines.
Since, there is no speciﬁc development or test set in the
case of this 13 lingual corpus8 we created our own splits.
For both these 4 and 13 lingual corpora we remove the last
4000 sentences (from the end of the corpus) and split them
into development and test sets of 2000 sentences each. We
believe that this corpus should be useful for future IWSLT
tasks which focus on multilinguality.
4.3.
Bible corpus
The Bible corpus is probably the only corpus which is trans-
lated into over 100 languages. However the corpus avail-
able online is present in XML format and needs to be pre-
processed. We developed a simple XML parsing script that
can produce a N-lingual version given the XML ﬁles for
each language. While inspecting the corpus we discovered
6http://lotus.kuee.kyoto-u.ac.jp/˜raj/
mmcr4nlp/iwslt2017/
7https://github.com/ajinkyakulkarni14/TED-Multilingual-
Parallel-Corpus
8http://lotus.kuee.kyoto-u.ac.jp/˜raj/
mmcr4nlp/ted
that the bible is not fully translated into about 40 of the lan-
guages and thus we exclude them from our collections. The
English version of the bible contains about 31102 verses
and we only considered the languages which contain 30000
or more translated verses. Another problem is that some
verses (each of which have a unique id in the XML ﬁle) of
the bible are not available in some of the XML ﬁles leading
to fewer number of N lingual entries.
In order to make it easier for researchers to work on lan-
guages belonging to the same language family we extracted
N lingual corpora for the following 8 language families:
Slavic, Uralic, Indo Aryan, Dravidian, Germanic, East
Asian, South East Asian and Romance. For all these cor-
pora groups we remove the last 2000 sentences (from the
end of the corpus) and split them into development and test
sets of 1000 sentences each. We extract the following N
lingual versions9 of the corpus where English is always one
of the languages:
• 55 lingual spanning all the languages mentioned in
Section 3.2. except Punjabi, Tamil, Taiwanese and
Latvian. We chose these 55 languages since these are
the only ones that are completely translated (with the
exception of a few accidental omissions). This 55 lin-
gual corpus contains 26121 lines and the missing 5000
lines are a result of the randomly missing translations
for a number of verses.
• 9 lingual Slavic languages corpus of 30350 lines
which includes bg, cr, cz, en, po, ru, se, sl and sv.
• 8 lingual Romance languages corpus of 30133 lines
which includes en, esp, fr, it, la, pt, ro and es.
• 5 lingual Indo Aryan languages corpus of 30049 lines
which includes en, hi, mr, my and ne.
• 8 lingual Germanic languages corpus of 28854 lines
which includes af, da, nl, en, de, ic, no and sw.
• 4 lingual Dravidian languages corpus of 30651 lines
which includes en, kn, ml and te.
• 4 lingual East Asian languages corpus of 31063 lines
which includes en, zh, ja and ko.
• 7 lingual South-east Asian languages corpus of 29621
lines which includes en, ce, id, ma, ta, th and vi.
• 4 lingual Uralic languages corpus of 30885 lines
which includes en, et, ﬁand hu.
4.4.
ILCI corpus
The ILCI corpus has been used frequently in the In-
dian Languages Machine Translation shared tasks in ICON
201410 and 201511. The ILCI corpus is a 6 lingual multilin-
gual corpus spanning the languages Hindi, English, Tamil,
Telugu, Marathi and Bengali was provided as a part of
the task. The training, development and test sets12 con-
9http://lotus.kuee.kyoto-u.ac.jp/˜raj/
mmcr4nlp/bible
10http://ltrc.iiit.ac.in/icon/2014
11http://ltrc.iiit.ac.in/icon2015/
12http://lotus.kuee.kyoto-u.ac.jp/˜raj/
mmcr4nlp/ilci
tain 45600, 1000 and 2400 6-lingual sentences respectively.
Half of the corpus (train/dev/test) belongs to the tourism do-
main and the other half to the health domain. There is work
on a 12 lingual equivalent of the ILCI corpus13 but it is not
publicly available. Most of the sentences in the corpus are
short and simple in terms of grammatical complexity. The
average sentence length varies from 12 for Tamil (morpho-
logically rich) to 17 for English (morphologically poor) in-
dicating that most of the sentences are intended to be used
in survival situations. This is quite different from the case
of the UN corpus where the average sentence length for En-
glish is around 25.
4.5.
Europarl corpus
The Europarl corpus covers the following 21 European lan-
guages: bg, cz, da, de, gr, en, es, et, ﬁ, fr, hu, it, li, lt, nl, po,
pt, sl, sv, and sw. Since the corpus available online14 is not
directly N lingual but is available as XX-English bilingual
pairs we used English to extract a 21 lingual corpus. One
issue with extracting a large 21 lingual corpus is that for
11 out of the 21 languages only 30% of the full corpus is
available. Countries such as Bulgaria and Romania joined
the European Union in 2007 and hence the Europarl corpus
has about 400K sentences for Bulgarian and Romanian as
compared to about 2M sentences for English and Spanish,
languages which have been present since the beginning.
Just like we did for the Bible corpus, we also extract N
lingual corpora for the following language families: Ger-
manic, Slavic, Uralic, Baltic and Romance. Since English
is the pivot language we used for extraction we include it
in all the collections. As in the case of the TED corpus we
remove the last 4000 sentences (from the end of the corpus
for each group) and split them into development and test
sets of 2000 sentences each. The details of the corpora15
are as follows:
• 21 lingual spanning all the languages. This corpus is
of 189310 lines.
• 10 lingual spanning en, da, de, es, ﬁ, fr, it, nl, pt and
sv. These 10 languages are the largest in the collection.
This corpus is of 1.071M lines.
• 6 lingual Slavic languages corpus of 342845 lines
which includes bg, cz, en, po, sl and sv. We also ex-
tract a 4 lingual Slavic languages corpus of 569962
lines which includes sl, sv, cz and en. This increase in
the number of lines is due to the exclusion of Polish
and Bulgarian which contain signiﬁcantly fewer num-
ber of entries in their respective monolingual corpora.
• 6 lingual Romance languages corpus of 294192 lines
which includes en, fr, it, pt, ro and es. We also ex-
tract a 5 lingual version of 1.454M lines by excluding
Romanian.
• 5 lingual Germanic languages corpus of 1.408M lines
which includes da, nl, en, de, and sw.
13http://sanskrit.jnu.ac.in/ilci/index.jsp
14http://www.statmt.org/europarl/
15http://lotus.kuee.kyoto-u.ac.jp/˜raj/
mmcr4nlp/europarl
• 4 lingual Uralic languages corpus of 563761 lines
which includes en, et, ﬁand hu.
• 3 lingual Baltic languages corpus of 588273 lines
which includes lt, li and en.
5.
Conclusion
In this paper we have described our collection of Multilin-
gual Multiway corpora. Our collection, which we believe
to be the ﬁrst of its kind, spans 59 languages and 5 domains.
We have also extracted N lingual development and test sets
from existing bilingual development and test sets for the
IWSLT corpora. For the Bible, Europarl and TED corpora
where ofﬁcial N lingual development and test sets are un-
available we deﬁned our own training, developmentand test
splits and encourage other researchers to use these splits for
ease of comparison. Our collection can be used for NLP re-
search in low (Bible and ILCI), medium (IWSLT and TED)
as well as high resource (Europarl and UN) scenarios. In
the cases of the Bible and Europarl corpora we have ex-
tracted N lingual corpora for various language families to
facilitate research on how language relatedness affects the
ﬁnal results of NLP tasks. Due to page limit restrictions
we do not give various statistics such as word count and
average sentence length for each instance of the N lingual
corpora we extracted but plan to include it later. We make
our collection available to the public16 and also plan on ex-
panding it in the future to improve coverage in terms of
domains, number of lines and number of languages. Some
additional and promising sources of N lingual corpora are:
BTEC corpus17 (Paul et al., 2013) and the QED corpus18.
We also plan on looking into extracting bilingual parallel
corpora from Wikipedia and then extract multilingual mul-
tiway versions of those corpora.
6.
References
Agi´c, ˇZ., Hovy, D., and Søgaard, A. (2015). If all you
have is a bit of the bible: Learning pos taggers for truly
low-resource languages. In Proceedings of the 53rd An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics and the 7th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing (Volume 2: Short Papers),
pages 268–272. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Agic, Z., Johannsen, A., Plank, B., Alonso, H. M., Schluter,
N., and Søgaard, A. (2016). Multilingual projection for
parsing truly low-resource languages. TACL, 4:301–312.
Asgari, E. and Mofrad, M. R. (2016). Comparing ﬁfty nat-
ural languages and twelve genetic languages using word
embedding language divergence (weld) as a quantitative
measure of language distance.
Cettolo, M., Girardi, C., and Federico, M. (2012). Wit3:
Web inventory of transcribed and translated talks. In
16http://lotus.kuee.kyoto-u.ac.jp/˜raj/
mmcr4nlp/
17Although this corpus is large in terms of number of languages
and lines it is not easily available
18http://alt.qcri.org/resources/qedcorpus/
Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European As-
sociation for Machine Translation (EAMT), pages 261–
268, Trento, Italy, May.
Christodouloupoulos, C. and Steedman, M. (2015). A
massively parallel corpus: the bible in 100 languages.
Language Resources and Evaluation, 49(2):375–395.
Jha, G. N.
(2010).
The tdil program and the indian
langauge corpora intitiative (ilci). In Nicoletta Calzo-
lari (Conference Chair), et al., editors, Proceedings of
the Seventh International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC’10), Valletta, Malta, may.
European Language Resources Association (ELRA).
Koehn, P. (2005). Europarl: A Parallel Corpus for Sta-
tistical Machine Translation. In Conference Proceed-
ings: the tenth Machine Translation Summit, pages 79–
86, Phuket, Thailand. AAMT, AAMT.
Och, F. J. and Ney, H. (2001). Statistical multi-source
translation. In Proceedings of MT Summit, volume 8,
pages 253–258.
Paul, M., Finch, A. M., and Sumita, E. (2013). How to
choose the best pivot language for automatic translation
of low-resource languages. ACM Trans. Asian Lang. Inf.
Process., 12:14:1–14:17.
Ziemski, M., Junczys-Dowmunt, M., and Pouliquen, B.
(2016). The united nations parallel corpus v1.0. In Nico-
letta Calzolari (Conference Chair), et al., editors, Pro-
ceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2016), Paris,
France, may. European Language Resources Association
(ELRA).
Zoph, B. and Knight, K. (2016). Multi-source neural trans-
lation. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
pages 30–34, San Diego, California, June. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
