Title: FedNLP: Benchmarking Federated Learning Methods for Natural Language Processing Tasks
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2104.08815v3
--------------------------------------------------

NAACL 2022 Findings
FedNLP: Benchmarking Federated Learning Methods
for Natural Language Processing Tasks
Bill Yuchen Lin1∗, Chaoyang He1∗, Zihang Zeng1, Hulin Wang1,
Yufen Huang1, Christophe Dupuy2, Rahul Gupta2,
Mahdi Soltanolkotabi1, Xiang Ren1∗, Salman Avestimehr1∗
University of Southern California1
Amazon Alexa AI2
{yuchen.lin,chaoyang.he,saltanol,xiangren,avestime}@usc.edu gupra@amazon.com
Abstract
Increasing concerns and regulations about data
privacy and sparsity necessitate the study
of privacy-preserving,
decentralized learn-
ing methods for natural language processing
(NLP) tasks.
Federated learning (FL) pro-
vides promising approaches for a large num-
ber of clients (e.g., personal devices or or-
ganizations) to collaboratively learn a shared
global model to beneﬁt all clients while al-
lowing users to keep their data locally. De-
spite interest in studying FL methods for NLP
tasks, a systematic comparison and analysis is
lacking in the literature. Herein, we present
the FedNLP1, a benchmarking framework for
evaluating federated learning methods on four
common formulations of NLP tasks: text clas-
siﬁcation, sequence tagging, question answer-
ing, and seq2seq generation.
We propose
a universal interface between Transformer-
based language models (e.g., BERT, BART)
and FL methods under various non-IID parti-
tioning strategies. Our extensive experiments
with FedNLP provide empirical comparisons
between FL methods and help us better under-
stand the inherent challenges of this direction.
The comprehensive analysis points to intrigu-
ing and exciting future research aimed at de-
veloping FL methods for NLP tasks.
1
Introduction
Fine-tuning large pre-trained language models
(LMs) such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) of-
ten leads to state-of-the-art performance in many
realistic NLP applications (e.g., text classiﬁca-
tion, named entity recognition, question answer-
ing, summarization, etc.), when large-scale, cen-
tralized training datasets are available.
How-
ever, due to the increasing concerns and regu-
∗Bill and Chaoyang contributed equally; Xiang and
Salman are equal advisors for this work.
1https://github.com/FedML-AI/FedNLP
FedNLP
↑Upload the updates of a local model 
↓Download the updated global model
Private Local Data (never exposed)
Federated models for an NLP task.
Transformer 
LMs
Federated Learning
Text Classification
Sequence Tagging
Question 
Answering
Language 
Modeling
Text Generation
Figure 1: The FedNLP benchmarking framework.
lations about data privacy (e.g., GPDR (Regula-
tion, 2016)) emerging data from realistic users
have been much more fragmented and distributed,
forming decentralized private datasets of multiple
“data silos” (a data silo can be viewed as an in-
dividual dataset) — across different clients (e.g.,
organizations or personal devices).
To respect the privacy of the users and abide
by these regulations, we must assume that users’
data in a silo are not allowed to transfer to a cen-
tralized server or other clients.
For example, a
client cannot share its private user data (e.g., docu-
ments, conversations, questions asked on the web-
site/app) with other clients.
This is a common
concern for organizations such as hospitals, ﬁnan-
cial institutions, or legal ﬁrms, as well as personal
computing devices such as smartphones, virtual
assistants (e.g., Amazon Alexa, Google Assistant,
etc.), or a personal computer. However, from a
machine learning perspective, models trained on
arXiv:2104.08815v3  [cs.CL]  6 May 2022
a centralized dataset that combine the data from
all organizations or devices usually result in bet-
ter performance in the NLP domain. Therefore, it
is of vital importance to study NLP problems in
such a realistic yet more challenging scenario —
i.e., training data are distributed across different
clients and cannot be shared for privacy concerns.
The nascent ﬁeld of federated learning (et al,
2019; Li et al., 2020a) (FL) aims to enable many
individual clients to train their models jointly
while keeping their local data decentralized and
completely private from other users or a central-
ized server.
A common training schema of FL
methods is that each client sends its model param-
eters to the server, which updates and sends back
the global model to all clients in each round. Since
the raw data of one client has never been exposed
to others, FL is promising as an effective way to
address the above challenges, particularly in the
NLP domain, where many user-generated text data
contain sensitive and/or personal information.
Despite the growing progress in the FL domain,
research into and application for NLP has been
rather limited.
There are indeed several recent
works on using FL methods for processing med-
ical information extraction tasks (Sui et al., 2020).
However, such prior work usually has its exper-
imental setup and speciﬁc task, making it difﬁ-
cult to fairly compare these FL methods and an-
alyze their performance in other NLP tasks. We
argue that future research in this promising direc-
tion (FL for NLP) would highly beneﬁt from a uni-
versal benchmarking platform for systematically
comparing different FL methods for NLP. To the
best of our knowledge, such a benchmarking plat-
form is still absent from the literature.
Therefore, our goal in this paper is to provide
comprehensive comparisons between popular FL
methods (e.g., FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017a),
FedOPT (Reddi et al., 2021), FedProx (Li et al.,
2020b)) for four mainstream formulations of NLP
tasks: text classiﬁcation, sequence tagging, ques-
tion answering, and seq2seq generation. Although
there are few available realistic FL datasets for
NLP due to privacy concerns, we manage to use
existing NLP datasets to create various non-IID
data partitions over clients. These non-IID parti-
tions simulate various kinds of distribution shifts
(e.g., label, features, quantities, etc.)
over the
clients, which often happen in real-world NLP
applications.
As for the base NLP models, we
use the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al.,
2017) as the backbone and support a wide range of
pre-trained LMs such as DistilBERT (Sanh et al.,
2019), BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), BART (Lewis
et al., 2020), etc.
To conduct extensive experi-
ments, we need to support the experiments with
multiple options on dimensions such as (1) task
formulations, (2) NLP models, (3) FL algorithms,
and (4) non-IID partitions. Therefore, we propose
FedNLP, a modular framework with universal in-
terfaces among the above four components, which
is thus more extensible for supporting future re-
search in FL for NLP.
We aim to unblock the research of FL for NLP
with the following two-fold contributions:
• Evaluation and analysis.
We system-
atically compare popular federated learning
algorithms for mainstream NLP task formu-
lations under multiple non-IID data parti-
tions, which thus provides the ﬁrst compre-
hensive understanding. Our analysis reveals
that there is a considerably large gap between
centralized and decentralized training in var-
ious settings. We also analyze the efﬁciency
of different FL methods and model sizes.
With our analysis, we highlight several direc-
tions to advance FL for NLP.
• Resource.
The implementation of our ex-
periments also forms a general open-source
framework named FedNLP, which is capable
of evaluating, analyzing, and developing FL
methods for NLP. We also provide decentral-
ized NLP datasets of various task formula-
tions created by various non-IID partitioning
strategies for future research.
The remainder of this paper is structured as fol-
lows.
We introduce the background knowledge
of federated learning and several typical FL al-
gorithms in §2. Then, we present the proposed
non-IID partitioning strategies to create synthetic
datasets for different task formulations in §3. Our
results, analysis, and ﬁndings are in §4. Finally,
we discuss related work (§5) and conclusions (§6).
2
Federated Learning for NLP
In this section, we ﬁrst introduce the background
knowledge of federated learning (FL) in the con-
text of NLP tasks. Then, we illustrate a uniﬁed
FL framework that we used to study typical FL
algorithms. Based on this, we build our research
framework, a general pipeline for benchmarking
and developing FL methods for NLP.
2.1
Federated Learning Concepts
Federated learning (FL) is a machine learning
paradigm where multiple entities (clients) collab-
orate in solving a machine learning problem un-
der the coordination of a central server or service
provider. Each client’s raw data is stored locally
and not exchanged or transferred; instead, focused
updates intended for immediate aggregation are
used to achieve the learning objectives (Kairouz
et al., 2019).
Therefore, federated learning has
been seen as a promising direction to decrease the
risk of attack and leakage, reduce the difﬁculty
and cost of data movement, and meet the privacy-
related data storage regulations.
In the basic conception of federated learning,
we would like to minimize the objective function,
F(x) = Ei∼P[Fi(x)],
where
Fi(x) = Eξ∼Di[fi(x, ξ)].
(1)
x ∈Rd represents the parameter for the global
model, Fi : Rd →R denotes the local objective
function at client i, and P denotes a distribution
on the collection of clients I. The local loss func-
tions fi(x, ξ) are often the same across all clients,
but the local data distribution Di will often vary,
capturing data heterogeneity.
Federated
averaging
(FedAvg)
(McMahan
et al., 2017a) is a common algorithm to solve (1)
by dividing the training process into rounds. At
the beginning of the t-th round (t ≥0), the server
broadcasts the current global model x(t) to a co-
hort of participants: a random subset of clients
from S(t) which includes M clients in total. Then,
each sampled client in the round’s cohort performs
τi local SGD updates on its own local dataset and
sends the local model changes ∆(t)
i
= x(t,τi)
i
−x(t)
to the server. Finally, the server uses the aggre-
gated ∆(t)
i
to update the global model: x(t+1) =
x(t)+
P
i∈S(t) pi∆(t)
i
P
i∈S(t) pi
. where pi is the relative weight
of client i. The above procedure will repeat un-
til the algorithm converges. In the cross-silo set-
ting where all clients participate in training on ev-
ery round (each cohort is the entire population),
we have S(t) = {1, 2, . . . , M}. Consequently, we
can learn a global model to beneﬁt all clients while
preserving their data privacy.
2.2
Our Uniﬁed Framework for FL
Algorithm 1: FEDOPT (Reddi et al.,
2021)): A Generic FedAvg Algorithm
Input: Initial model x(0), CLIENTOPT,
SERVEROPT
1 for t ∈{0, 1, . . . , T −1} do
2
Sample a subset S(t) of clients
3
for client i ∈S(t) in parallel do
4
Initialize local model x(t,0)
i
= x(t)
5
for k = 0, . . . , τi −1 do
6
Compute local stochastic gradient
gi(x(t,k)
i
)
7
Perform local update x(t,k+1)
i
=
CLIENTOPT(x(t,k)
i
, gi(x(t,k)
i
), η, t)
8
Compute local model changes
∆(t)
i
= x(t,τi)
i
−x(t,0)
i
9
Aggregate local changes
∆(t) = P
i∈S(t) pi∆(t)
i / P
i∈S(t) pi
10
Update global model
x(t+1) = SERVEROPT(x(t), −∆(t), ηs, t)
In this work, we propose to use FedOPT (Reddi
et al., 2021), a generalized version of FedAvg, to
build the FedNLP platform. As the pseudo-code
presented in Algorithm 1, the algorithm is parame-
terized by two gradient-based optimizers: CLIEN-
TOPT and SERVEROPT with client learning rate
η and server learning rate ηs, respectively. While
CLIENTOPT is used to update the local models,
SERVEROPT treats the negative of aggregated lo-
cal changes −∆(t) as a pseudo-gradient and ap-
plies it to the global model.
This optimization
framework generalizes to many aggregation-based
FL algorithms and simpliﬁes the system design.
To make our research general, we explore dif-
ferent combinations of SEVEROPT and CLIEN-
TOPT. The original FedAvg algorithm implicitly
sets SEVEROPT and CLIENTOPT to be SGD, with
a ﬁxed server learning rate ηs of 1.0. FedProx (Li
et al., 2020b), tackling statistical heterogeneity by
restricting the local model updates to be closer to
the initial (global) model, can be easily incorpo-
rated into this framework by adding L2 regular-
ization for better stability in training. Moreover,
given that AdamW (Loshchilov and Hutter, 2019)
is widely used in NLP, we set it for ClientOpt
and let the ServerOpt be SGD with momentum
to reduce the burden of tuning.
2.3
The Proposed FedNLP Framework
To support our research in this paper and other fu-
ture work in the area of federated learning for NLP,
we build a general research framework named
FedNLP, based on the above universal optimiza-
tion framework.
We here brieﬂy highlight its
unique features and leave the details in the fol-
lowing content and a detailed design is shown in
App. F. First, FedNLP is the very ﬁrst frame-
work that connects multiple FL algorithms with
Transformer-based models, to our best knowledge.
Also, we implement a ﬂexible suite of interfaces to
support different types of NLP tasks and models,
as well as different non-IID partitioning strategies
(Sec. 3.2). To study security and privacy guaran-
tees, we incorporate state-of-the-art secure aggre-
gation algorithms such as LightSecAgg (see F.5).
3
Benchmarking Setup with FedNLP
In this section, we introduce the creation of our
benchmark datasets from a set of chosen NLP
tasks with different non-IID partition methods. We
evaluate various FL methods on these datasets.
3.1
Task Formulations, Datasets, and Models
There are numerous NLP applications, but most
of them can be categorized based on four main-
stream formulations: text classiﬁcation (TC), se-
quence tagging (ST), question answering (QA),
and seq2seq generation (SS). The formal def-
inition of each formulation is detailed in Ap-
pendix §B. To cover all formulations while keep-
ing our experiments in a reasonable scope, we se-
lect one representative task for each formulation:
• Text Classiﬁcation:
20Newsgroup (Lang,
1995) is a news classiﬁcation dataset with an-
notations for 20 labels.
We showcase our
FedNLP with this dataset as it has a larger out-
put space (20 labels) than sentiment-analysis
datasets, which is an important factor for the
label-distribution shift scenarios. .
• Sequence Tagging:
OntoNotes (Pradhan
et al., 2013) (5.0) is a corpus where sentences
have annotations for the entity spans and types.
We use it for the named entity recognition task,
which is fundamental to information extraction
and other applications.
Task
Txt.Cls.
Seq.Tag.
QA
Seq2Seq
Dataset
20News
Onto.
MRQA
Giga.
# Training
11.3k
50k
53.9k
10k
# Test
7.5k
5k
3k
2k
# Labels
20
37*
N/A
N/A
Metrics
Acc.
F-1
F-1
ROUGE
Table 1: Statistics of the selected datasets for our ex-
periments. *37 is the size of the tag vocabulary.
• QA: MRQA (Fisch et al., 2019) is a bench-
mark
consisting
of
6
popular
datasets2:
SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016) (8529/431),
NewsQA (Trischler et al., 2017) (11877/613),
TriviaQA (Joshi et al., 2017) (4120/176) ,
SearchQA (Dunn et al., 2017) (9972/499)
,
HotpotQA (Yang et al., 2018b) ,
and
NQ (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019) (9617/795).
• Seq2Seq
Generation:
Gigaword
(DBL,
2012) is a news corpus with headlines that are
often used for testing seq2seq models as a sum-
marization task. Other tasks such as dialogue
response generation and machine translation can
also be adapted to this format.
We show the basic statistics of the above
datasets in Table 1. Note that our FedNLP as a
research platform supports a much wider range of
speciﬁc tasks of each formulation, while we only
introduce the ones used in our experiments here
with typical settings. Moreover, our contribution
is more of a general FL+NLP benchmarking plat-
form instead of particular datasets and partitions.
Base
NLP
Models.
Fine-tuning
pre-trained
LMs has been the de facto method for NLP re-
search, so we focus on testing Transformer-based
architectures in FedNLP. Speciﬁcally, we choose
to use BART (Lewis et al., 2020), a text-to-text
Transformer model similar to the T5 model (Raf-
fel et al., 2020), for seq2seq tasks.
3.2
Non-IID Partitioning Strategies
The existing datasets have been used for central-
ized training in NLP. As our focus here is to test
decentralized learning methods, we need to dis-
tribute the existing datasets to a set of clients. It
is the non-IIDness of the client distribution that
2We only use part of the data to demonstrate and verify
our hypothesis; we show the train/test split in brackets.
makes federated learning a challenging problem.
Thus, we extend the common practice widely used
in prior works to the NLP domain for generating
synthetic FL benchmarks (Li et al., 2021a). We
ﬁrst introduce how we control the label distribu-
tion shift for TC and ST, then the quantity dis-
tribution shift, and ﬁnally how we model the dis-
tribution shift in terms of input features for non-
classiﬁcation NLP tasks (e.g., summarization).
Non-IID Label Distributions.
Here we present
how we synthesize the data partitions such that
clients share the same (or very similar) number
of examples, but have different label distribu-
tions from each other.
We assume that on ev-
ery client training, examples are drawn indepen-
dently with labels following a categorical distri-
bution over L classes parameterized by a vec-
tor q (qi ≥0, i ∈[1, L] and ∥q∥1 = 1). To syn-
thesize a population of non-identical clients, we
draw q ∼DirL(αp) from a Dirichlet distribu-
tion, where p characterizes a prior class distribu-
tion over L classes, and α > 0 is a concentra-
tion parameter controlling the identicalness among
clients. For each client Cj, we draw a qj as its la-
bel distribution and then sample examples without
replacement from the global dataset according to
qj. With α →∞, all clients have identical dis-
tributions to the prior (i.e., uniform distribution);
with α →0, on the other extreme, each client
holds examples from only one class chosen at ran-
dom. In Fig. 2, we show heatmaps for visualizing
the distribution differences between each client.
Figure 3 shows an example of the concrete label
distributions for all clients with different α. We
can see that when α is smaller, the overall label
distribution shift becomes larger.
Controlling non-IID Quantity.
It is also com-
mon that different clients have very different data
quantities while sharing similar label distribution.
We thus also provide a quantity-level Dirichlet al-
location z ∼DirN(β) where N is the number of
clients. Then, we can allocate examples in a global
dataset to all clients according to the distribution z
— i.e., |Di| = zi|DG|. If we would like to model
both quantity and label distribution shift, it is also
easy to combine both factors. Note that one could
assume it is a uniform distribution z ∼U(N), (or
β →∞) if we expect all clients to share a sim-
100 clients
100 clients
𝛼= 1
𝛼= 5
𝛼= 10
𝛼= 100
JSD
Figure 2:
The J-S divergence matrix between
100 clients on the 20News dataset when α
∈
{1, 5, 10, 100}. Each sub-ﬁgure is a 100x100 symmet-
ric matrix. The intensity of a cell (i, j)’s color here
represents the distance between the label distribution
of Client i and j. It is expected that when α is smaller,
the partition over clients is more non-IID in terms of
their label distributions.
ilar number of examples. A concrete example is
shown in Figure 8 (Appendix).
Controlling
non-IID
Features.
Although
straightforward and effective, the above label-
based Dirichlet allocation method has a major
limitation — it is only suitable for text classiﬁ-
cation tasks where the outputs can be modeled
as category-based random variables.
To create
synthetic partitions for other non-classiﬁcation
NLP tasks and model distribution shifts, we
thus propose a partition method based on feature
clustering.
Speciﬁcally,
we use Sentence-
BERT (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019) to encode
each example to a dense vector by their text then
we apply K-Means clustering to get the cluster
label of each example; ﬁnally, we use these cluster
labels (as if they were classiﬁcation tasks) to
follow the steps in modeling label distribution
shift.
There are two obvious beneﬁts of this
clustering-based Dirichlet partition method: 1) It
enables us to easily synthesize the FL datasets for
non-classiﬁcation tasks (i.e., ST, QA, SS) as they
do not have discrete labels as output space; 2) The
BERT-based clustering results naturally imply
different sub-topics of a dataset, and thus feature
shift can be seen as a shift of latent labels — we
can reuse the same method for the label-based
Dirichlet partition method.
Natural Factors
For datasets like MRQA, we
consider a cross-silo setting where each client is
associated with a particular sub-dataset (out of the
six datasets of the same format), forming a natu-
ral distribution shift based on the inherent factors
such as data source and annotating style.
Task
Dataset
Partition
Clients
FedAvg
FedProx
FedOPT
# Rounds
Text Classiﬁcation
20news
α =1 (label shift)
100
0.5142
0.5143
0.5349
22
Sequence Tagging
OntoNotes
α =0.1 (label shift)
30
0.7382
0.6731
0.7918
17
Question Answering
MRQA
natural factor
6
0.2707
0.2706
0.3280
13
Seq2Seq Generation
Gigaword
α =0.1 (feature shift)
100
0.3192
0.3169
0.3037
13
Table 2: The comparisons between different FL methods under the same setting on different NLP tasks. The
number of workers per round are 10, expect for the MRQA task, which uses 6.
𝛼= 1
𝛼= 5
𝛼= 10
𝛼= 100
20 labels
100 clients
Ratio
Figure 3: Visualizing the non-IID label distributions
on 20News with α being {1, 5, 10, 100}.
Each sub-
ﬁgure is a 100x20 matrix, where 100 is the number of
clients, and 20 is the number of labels. The intensity of
a cell here represents the ratio of a particular label in the
local data of a client. When α is smaller (1, 5, 10), each
client has a relatively unique label distribution, thus the
differences between clients are larger; when α = 100,
every client has a nearly uniform label distribution.
4
Experimental Results and Analysis
In this section, we aim to analyze typical federated
learning methods (introduced in our benchmark
datasets with multiple dimensions with the base
NLP models listed previously. We put more im-
plementation details and additional results in Ap-
pendix. We organize our extensive experimental
results and ﬁndings from the analysis as a collec-
tion of research questions with answers.
Experimental Setup and Hyper-parameters.
We use DistilBERT and BART-base for most of
our experiments, as the former is a distilled ver-
sion of the BERT model and has a 7x speed
improvement over BERT-base on mobile devices
— a common scenario for FL applications; the
BART-base model is the most suitable option con-
sidering the trade-off between performance and
computation cost. We leave our implementation
details and the selected hyper-parameters in the
submitted supplementary materials.
Our experiments cover both cross-device and
cross-silo settings. As shown in Table 2, in the
cross-device setting, we use uniform sampling to
select 10 clients for each round when the client
number in a dataset is very large (e.g., 100). For
the cross-silo setting, each round will select the
same number of clients (we use 6 for the QA task).
The local epoch number is set to 1 for all experi-
ments. To make our results reproducible, we use
wandb.ai to store all experiment logs and hyper-
parameters as well as running scripts.
Q1: How do popular FL methods perform
differently under the same setting?
We compare the three typical FL methods under
the same setting (i.e., data partition, communica-
tion rounds, etc.) for each task formulation. As
shown in Table 2, we report the results of FedAvg,
FedProx, and FedOPT. We can see that overall Fe-
dOPT performs better than the other two methods,
with the only exception being in the seq2seq gen-
eration task. FedAvg and FedProx perform sim-
ilarly with marginal differences, but FedAvg out-
performs FedProx in sequence tagging. These two
exceptions are surprising ﬁndings, as many prior
works in the FL community show that FedOPT is
generally better than FedProx and FedAvg on vi-
sion tasks and datasets.
We conjecture that such inconsistent perfor-
mance across tasks suggests the difference in
terms of the loss functions has a great impact on
FL performance. Seq2seq and sequence tagging
tasks usually have more complex loss landscapes
than text classiﬁcation, as they are both typical
structured prediction tasks, while the text classi-
ﬁcation has a much smaller output space. From
Fig. 4, we see that the FedOPT outperforms the
other two methods at the beginning while gradu-
ally becoming worse over time.
20news
Ontonotes
Gigaword
MRQA
Figure 4: The learning curves of the three FL Methods on four different task formulations. The metrics used for
these tasks are accuracy, span-F1, token-F1, and ROUGE respectively; The x-axis is the number of rounds.
0
5
10
15
20
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
uniform
label ( =1)
label ( =10)
label ( =5)
quantity ( =1)
Figure 5: Testing FedOPT with DistilBERT for
20News under different data partition strategies.
This tells us that the use of AdamW as the client
optimizer may not always be a good choice, es-
pecially for a complex task such as the Seq2Seq
ones, as its adaptive method for scheduling learn-
ing rates might cause implicit conﬂicts. These ob-
servations suggest that federated optimization al-
gorithms need to be tailored for various NLP tasks,
and exploring FL-friendly model architecture or
loss function can also be promising directions to
address these challenges.
Q2: How do different non-IID partitions of
the same data inﬂuence FL performance?
The FedNLP platform supports users to inves-
tigate the performance of an FL algorithm with a
wide range of data partitioning strategies, as dis-
cussed in §3.2. Here we look at the training curves
of the FedOPT on different partitions, as shown in
Figure 5. We reveal several ﬁndings:
• When α is smaller (i.e., the partition is more
non-IID in terms of their label distribution), the
performance tends to degrade, based on the three
curves (α = {1, 5, 10}).
• The variance is also larger when the label distri-
bution shift is larger. Both uniform and quantity-
Frozen Layers
# Tunable Paras.
Cent.
FedOpt.
None
67.0M
86.86
55.11
E
43.1M
86.19
54.86
E + L0
36.0M
86.54
52.91
E + L0→1
29.0M
86.52
53.92
E + L0→2
21.9M
85.71
52.01
E + L0→3
14.8M
85.47
30.68
E + L0→4
7.7M
82.76
16.63
E + L0→5
0.6M
63.83
12.97
Table 3: Performance (Acc.%) on 20news (TC) when
different parts of DistilBERT are frozen for central-
ized training and FedOpt (at 28-th round). E stands for
the embedding layer and Li means the i-th layer. The
signiﬁcant lower accuracy are underlined.
skew partitions have a smoother curve, while the
variance is smaller for a larger α (e.g., 10).
• Quantity skew does not introduce a great chal-
lenge for federated learning when the label dis-
tribution is closer to the uniform one.
These ﬁndings suggest that it is important to
design algorithms to mitigate data heterogene-
ity. One promising direction is personalized FL,
which enables each client to learn its personalized
model via adapting its local data distribution and
system resources (Dinh et al., 2020; Fallah et al.,
2020; Li et al., 2021b).
Q3: How does freezing of Transformers in-
ﬂuence the FL performance?
Communication cost is a major concern in the
federated learning process. It is thus natural to
consider freezing some Transformer layers of the
client models to reduce the size of the trainable pa-
rameters that will be transmitted between servers
and clients. To study the inﬂuence of freezing lay-
ers on the FL performance, we conduct a series of
experiments that freeze the layers from the embed-
0
5
10
15
20
25
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
None
E
E+L0
E+L0
1
E+L0
2
E+L0
3
E+L0
4
E+L0
5
Figure 6: Testing FedOPT with DistilBERT for
20News under different frozen layers.
0
5
10
15
20
25
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
bert-base
distilbert-base
Figure 7: FedOPT for 20News with different LMs.
ding layer (E) to the top layer (L5) of DistilBERT
with both centralized training and FedOPT on the
text classiﬁcation task.
We report our results in Table 3 and Figure 6.
We ﬁnd that in centralized training, the largest
performance gain happens when we unfreeze the
last layer, while in FedOPT we have to unfreeze
the last three layers to enjoy a comparable per-
formance with the full model. This suggests that
reducing communication costs via freezing some
layers of Transformer LMs is feasible, though one
should be aware that the experience in centralized
training may not generalize to the FL experiments.
Q4: Are compact model DistilBERT ade-
quate for FL+NLP?
We know that BERT has a better performance than
DistilBERT for its larger model size. However,
is it cost-effective to use BERT rather than Dis-
tilBERT? To study this, we compare the perfor-
mance of both models with FedOPT on text classi-
ﬁcation, sharing the same setting as the above ex-
periments. As shown in Figure 7, although BERT-
base achieves better performance, the performance
of DistilBERT is not signiﬁcantly worse. Consid-
ering the communication cost (BERT-base is al-
most 2x larger), we argue that using DistilBERT is
a more cost-effective choice for both experimental
analysis and realistic applications.
5
Related Work
FL benchmarks and platforms.
In the last few
years a proliferation of frameworks and bench-
mark datasets have been developed to enable re-
searchers to better explore and study algorithms
and modeling for federated learning, both from
academia: LEAF(Caldas et al., 2018), FedML (He
et al., 2020c), Flower (Beutel et al., 2020), and
from the industry: PySyft (Ryffel et al., 2018),
TensorFlow-Federated (TFF) (Ingerman and Os-
trowski, 2019), FATE (Yang et al., 2019), Clara
(NVIDIA, 2019), PaddleFL (Ma et al., 2019),
Open FL (Intel®, 2021). However, most platforms
only focus on designing a uniﬁed framework for
federated learning methods and do not provide
a dedicated environment for studying NLP prob-
lems with FL methods. LEAF (Caldas et al., 2018)
contains a few text datasets, however, it is limited
to classiﬁcation and next-word prediction datasets
and does not consider the pre-trained language
models. We want to provide a dedicated platform
for studying FL methods in realistic NLP applica-
tions with state-of-the-art language models.
Federated
learning
in
NLP
applications.
There are a few prior works that have begun
to apply FL methods in privacy-oriented NLP
applications. For example, federated learning has
been applied to many keyboard-related applica-
tions including (Hard et al., 2018; Stremmel and
Singh, 2020; Leroy et al., 2019; Ramaswamy
et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2018a), sentence-level
text intent classiﬁcation using Text-CNN (Zhu
et al., 2020), and pretraining and ﬁne-tuning of
BERT using medical data from multiple silos
without fetching all data to the same place (Liu
and Miller, 2020).
FL methods also have been
proposed to train high-quality language models
that can outperform the models trained without
federated learning (Ji et al., 2019; Chen et al.,
2019).
Besides these applications, some work
has been done in medical relation extractions (Ge
et al., 2020) and medical name entity recognition
(Sui et al., 2020). These methods use federated
learning to preserve the privacy of sensitive
medical data and learn data on different platforms,
excluding the need for exchanging data between
different platforms.
Our work aims to provide a uniﬁed platform
for studying various NLP applications in a shared
environment so that researchers can better design
new FL methods either for a speciﬁc NLP task or
as a general-purpose model. The aforementioned
prior works would thus be a particular instance of
the settings supported by the FedNLP platform.
6
Conclusion and Future Directions
Our key contribution is providing a thorough and
insightful empirical analysis of existing federated
learning algorithms in the context of NLP mod-
els.
Notably, We compare typical FL methods
for four NLP task formulations under multiple
non-IID data partitions. Our ﬁndings reveal both
promise and the challenges of FL for NLP. In ad-
dition, we also provide a suite of resources to sup-
port future research in FL for NLP (e.g., a unify-
ing framework for connecting Transformer mod-
els with popular FL methods and different non-IID
partition strategies). Thus, we believe our well-
maintained open-source codebase to support fu-
ture work in this area.
Promising future directions in FL for NLP in-
clude: 1) minimizing the performance gap, 2) im-
proving the system efﬁciency and scalability, 3)
trustworthy and privacy-preserving NLP, 4) per-
sonalized FL methods for NLP, etc. (Please see
Appendix E for more details.)
Ethical Considerations and Limitations(*)
Ethical considerations.
The key motivation of
FedNLP (and FL) is to protect the data privacy of
general users by keeping their data on their own
devices while beneﬁting from a shared model from
a broader community. Among the risks that need
to be considered in any deployment of NLP are
that responses may be wrong, or biased, in ways
that would lead to improperly justiﬁed decisions.
Although in our view the current technology is still
relatively immature, and unlikely to be ﬁelded in
applications that would cause harm of this sort, it
is desirable that FedNLP methods provide audit
trails, and recourse so that their predictions can be
explained to and critiqued by affected parties.
Limitations.
One limitation of our work is that
we have not analyzed the privacy leakage of FL
methods.
We argue that novel privacy-centric
measures are orthogonal to the development of FL
methods, which is beyond the scope of our work.
How to fairly analyze the privacy leakage is now
still an open problem for both FL and NLP, and
it is only possible to study this when we have an
existing platform like FedNLP.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported in part by a research
grant and an Amazon ML Fellowship from USC-
Amazon Center on Secure and Trustworthy AI
(https://trustedai.usc.edu).
Xiang
Ren is supported in part by the Ofﬁce of the
Director of National Intelligence (ODNI), In-
telligence Advanced Research Projects Activity
(IARPA), via Contract No. 2019-19051600007,
the DARPA MCS program under Contract No.
N660011924033, the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency with award W911NF-19-20271,
NSF IIS 2048211, NSF SMA 1829268, and gift
awards from Google, Amazon, JP Morgan and
Sony. Mahdi Soltanolkotabi is supported by the
Packard Fellowship in Science and Engineering,
a Sloan Research Fellowship in Mathematics, an
NSF-CAREER under award #1846369, DARPA
Learning with Less Labels (LwLL) and FastNICS
programs, and NSF-CIF awards #1813877 and
#2008443.
References
2012.
Proceedings of the Joint Workshop on Auto-
matic Knowledge Base Construction and Web-scale
Knowledge Extraction, AKBC-WEKEX@NAACL-
HLT 2012, Montrèal, Canada, June 7-8, 2012.
James Henry Bell, Kallista A Bonawitz, Adrià Gascón,
Tancrède Lepoint, and Mariana Raykova. 2020. Se-
cure single-server aggregation with (poly) logarith-
mic overhead.
In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM
SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communica-
tions Security.
Daniel J Beutel, Taner Topal, Akhil Mathur, Xinchi
Qiu, Titouan Parcollet, and Nicholas D Lane. 2020.
Flower:
A friendly federated learning research
framework. ArXiv preprint.
Keith Bonawitz, Vladimir Ivanov, Ben Kreuter, Anto-
nio Marcedone, H Brendan McMahan, Sarvar Patel,
Daniel Ramage, Aaron Segal, and Karn Seth. 2017.
Practical secure aggregation for privacy-preserving
machine learning. In proceedings of the 2017 ACM
SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communica-
tions Security.
Sebastian Caldas, Peter Wu, Tian Li, Jakub Koneˇcn`y,
H Brendan McMahan, Virginia Smith, and Ameet
Talwalkar. 2018. Leaf: A benchmark for federated
settings. ArXiv preprint.
Mingqing Chen, Ananda Theertha Suresh, Rajiv Math-
ews, Adeline Wong, Cyril Allauzen, Françoise Bea-
ufays, and Michael Riley. 2019.
Federated learn-
ing of n-gram language models.
In Proceedings
of the 23rd Conference on Computational Natural
Language Learning (CoNLL), pages 121–130, Hong
Kong, China. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019.
BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers),
pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Canh T. Dinh, Nguyen H. Tran, and Tuan Dung
Nguyen. 2020. Personalized federated learning with
moreau envelopes.
In Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020,
NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual.
Matthew Dunn, Levent Sagun, Mike Higgins, V. U.
Güney, Volkan Cirik, and Kyunghyun Cho. 2017.
Searchqa: A new q&a dataset augmented with con-
text from a search engine. ArXiv.
A. Elkordy and A. Avestimehr. 2020. Secure aggre-
gation with heterogeneous quantization in federated
learning. ArXiv.
P. Kairouz et al. 2019. Advances and open problems in
federated learning. ArXiv.
Alireza
Fallah,
Aryan
Mokhtari,
and
Asuman
Ozdaglar. 2020. Personalized federated learning: A
meta-learning approach. ArXiv preprint.
Adam Fisch, Alon Talmor, Robin Jia, Minjoon Seo,
Eunsol Choi, and Danqi Chen. 2019. MRQA 2019
shared task: Evaluating generalization in reading
comprehension.
In Proceedings of the 2nd Work-
shop on Machine Reading for Question Answering,
pages 1–13, Hong Kong, China. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Suyu Ge,
Fangzhao Wu,
Chuhan Wu,
Tao Qi,
Yongfeng Huang, and X. Xie. 2020.
Fedner:
Privacy-preserving medical named entity recogni-
tion with federated learning. ArXiv.
Andrew Hard, K. Rao, Rajiv Mathews, F. Beaufays,
S. Augenstein, Hubert Eichner, Chloé Kiddon, and
D. Ramage. 2018.
Federated learning for mobile
keyboard prediction. ArXiv.
Chaoyang He, Murali Annavaram, and Salman Aves-
timehr. 2020a. Fednas: Federated deep learning via
neural architecture search.
Chaoyang He, Murali Annavaram, and Salman Aves-
timehr. 2020b. Group knowledge transfer: Feder-
ated learning of large cnns at the edge. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: An-
nual Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020,
virtual.
Chaoyang He, Keshav Balasubramanian, Emir Ceyani,
Yu Rong, Peilin Zhao, Junzhou Huang, M. An-
navaram, and S. Avestimehr. 2021. Fedgraphnn: A
federated learning system and benchmark for graph
neural networks.
Chaoyang He, Songze Li, Jinhyun So, Xiao Zeng,
Mi Zhang, Hongyi Wang, Xiaoyang Wang, Praneeth
Vepakomma, Abhishek Singh, Hang Qiu, Xinghua
Zhu, Jianzong Wang, Li Shen, Peilin Zhao, Yan
Kang, Yang Liu, Ramesh Raskar, Qiang Yang, Mu-
rali Annavaram, and Salman Avestimehr. 2020c.
Fedml: A research library and benchmark for fed-
erated machine learning. ArXiv preprint.
Chaoyang He, Conghui Tan, Hanlin Tang, Shuang Qiu,
and Ji Liu. 2019. Central server free federated learn-
ing over single-sided trust social networks. ArXiv
preprint.
Chaoyang He, Haishan Ye, Li Shen, and Tong Zhang.
2020d. Milenas: Efﬁcient neural architecture search
via mixed-level reformulation. In 2020 IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition, CVPR 2020, Seattle, WA, USA, June 13-19,
2020, pages 11990–11999. IEEE.
Alex Ingerman and Krzys Ostrowski. 2019. Tensor-
Flow Federated.
Intel®. 2021. Intel® open federated learning.
Shaoxiong Ji, Shirui Pan, Guodong Long, Xue Li, Jing
Jiang, and Zi Huang. 2019. Learning private neural
language modeling with attentive aggregation. 2019
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks
(IJCNN).
Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel Weld, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2017.
TriviaQA: A large scale dis-
tantly supervised challenge dataset for reading com-
prehension.
In Proceedings of the 55th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pages 1601–
1611, Vancouver, Canada. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Peter Kairouz, H Brendan McMahan, Brendan Avent,
Aurélien Bellet, Mehdi Bennis, Arjun Nitin Bhagoji,
Keith Bonawitz, Zachary Charles, Graham Cor-
mode, Rachel Cummings, et al. 2019.
Advances
and open problems in federated learning.
ArXiv
preprint.
Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Red-
ﬁeld, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris Al-
berti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob De-
vlin, Kenton Lee, Kristina Toutanova, Llion Jones,
Matthew Kelcey, Ming-Wei Chang, Andrew M. Dai,
Jakob Uszkoreit, Quoc Le, and Slav Petrov. 2019.
Natural questions: A benchmark for question an-
swering research. Transactions of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, 7:452–466.
Ken Lang. 1995. Newsweeder: Learning to ﬁlter net-
news. In Proc. of ICML.
David Leroy, Alice Coucke, Thibaut Lavril, Thibault
Gisselbrecht, and Joseph Dureau. 2019. Federated
learning for keyword spotting.
In IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing, ICASSP 2019, Brighton, United King-
dom, May 12-17, 2019, pages 6341–6345. IEEE.
Mike Lewis,
Yinhan Liu,
Naman Goyal,
Mar-
jan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer
Levy, Veselin Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
2020. BART: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-
training for natural language generation, translation,
and comprehension. In Proceedings of the 58th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 7871–7880, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Q. Li, Yiqun Diao, Quan Chen, and Bingsheng He.
2021a. Federated learning on non-iid data silos: An
experimental study. ArXiv.
Tian Li, Shengyuan Hu, Ahmad Beirami, and Vir-
ginia Smith. 2021b. Ditto: Fair and robust feder-
ated learning through personalization. In Proceed-
ings of the 38th International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, ICML 2021, 18-24 July 2021, Vir-
tual Event, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, pages 6357–6368. PMLR.
Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Ameet Talwalkar, and
V. Smith. 2020a. Federated learning: Challenges,
methods, and future directions. IEEE Signal Pro-
cessing Magazine.
Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Manzil Zaheer, Maziar San-
jabi, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith. 2020b.
Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks.
In Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems
2020, MLSys 2020, Austin, TX, USA, March 2-4,
2020. mlsys.org.
Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang. 2021. Preﬁx-tuning:
Optimizing continuous prompts for generation. In
Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics and the
11th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
4582–4597, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
D. Liu and T. Miller. 2020. Federated pretraining and
ﬁne tuning of bert using clinical notes from multiple
silos. ArXiv.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. 2019.
Decou-
pled weight decay regularization.
In 7th Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019.
OpenReview.net.
Lingjuan Lyu, Han Yu, Xingjun Ma, Lichao Sun, Jun
Zhao, Qiang Yang, and Philip S Yu. 2020. Privacy
and robustness in federated learning: Attacks and
defenses. ArXiv preprint.
Yanjun Ma, Dianhai Yu, Tian Wu, and Haifeng Wang.
2019. Paddlepaddle: An open-source deep learning
platform from industrial practice. Frontiers of Data
and Domputing, (1).
Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage,
Seth Hampson, and Blaise Agüera y Arcas. 2017a.
Communication-efﬁcient learning of deep networks
from decentralized data. In Proceedings of the 20th
International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
and Statistics, AISTATS 2017, 20-22 April 2017,
Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA, volume 54 of Proceed-
ings of Machine Learning Research, pages 1273–
1282. PMLR.
Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage,
Seth Hampson, and Blaise Agüera y Arcas. 2017b.
Communication-efﬁcient learning of deep networks
from decentralized data. In Proceedings of the 20th
International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
and Statistics, AISTATS 2017, 20-22 April 2017,
Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA, volume 54 of Proceed-
ings of Machine Learning Research, pages 1273–
1282. PMLR.
NVIDIA. 2019. Nvidia clara.
Sameer Pradhan, Alessandro Moschitti, Nianwen Xue,
Hwee Tou Ng, Anders Björkelund, Olga Uryupina,
Yuchen Zhang, and Zhi Zhong. 2013. Towards ro-
bust linguistic analysis using OntoNotes.
In Pro-
ceedings of the Seventeenth Conference on Com-
putational Natural Language Learning, pages 143–
152, Soﬁa, Bulgaria. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Saurav Prakash and Amir Salman Avestimehr. 2020.
Mitigating byzantine attacks in federated learning.
ArXiv preprint.
Saurav Prakash, Sagar Dhakal, Mustafa Riza Akdeniz,
Yair Yona, Shilpa Talwar, Salman Avestimehr, and
Nageen Himayat. 2020. Coded computing for low-
latency federated learning over wireless edge net-
works. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Commu-
nications, (1).
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine
Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou,
Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. 2020. Exploring the limits
of transfer learning with a uniﬁed text-to-text trans-
former.
Journal of Machine Learning Research,
(140).
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and
Percy Liang. 2016. SQuAD: 100,000+ questions for
machine comprehension of text. In Proceedings of
the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 2383–2392, Austin,
Texas. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Swaroop Indra Ramaswamy, Rajiv Mathews, K. Rao,
and Franccoise Beaufays. 2019. Federated learning
for emoji prediction in a mobile keyboard. ArXiv.
Sashank J. Reddi, Zachary Charles, Manzil Zaheer,
Zachary Garrett, Keith Rush, Jakub Koneˇcný, San-
jiv Kumar, and Hugh Brendan McMahan. 2021.
Adaptive federated optimization.
In 9th Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021.
OpenReview.net.
General Data Protection Regulation. 2016.
Regu-
lation eu 2016/679 of the european parliament
and of the council of 27 april 2016.
Ofﬁ-
cial
Journal
of
the
European
Union.
Avail-
able
at:
http://ec.
europa.
eu/justice/data-
protection/reform/ﬁles/regulation_oj_en.
pdf
(accessed 20 September 2017).
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019.
Sentence-
BERT: Sentence embeddings using Siamese BERT-
networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing and the 9th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP),
pages 3982–3992, Hong Kong, China. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Theo Ryffel, Andrew Trask, Morten Dahl, Bobby Wag-
ner, Jason Mancuso, Daniel Rueckert, and Jonathan
Passerat-Palmbach. 2018. A generic framework for
privacy preserving deep learning. ArXiv preprint.
Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and
Thomas Wolf. 2019. Distilbert, a distilled version
of bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. ArXiv.
Virginia Smith, Chao-Kai Chiang, Maziar Sanjabi, and
Ameet S. Talwalkar. 2017.
Federated multi-task
learning. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-
9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pages 4424–4434.
Jinhyun So, Ba¸sak Güler, and A Salman Avestimehr.
2020.
Byzantine-resilient secure federated learn-
ing.
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Commu-
nications.
Jinhyun So, Ba¸sak Güler, and A Salman Avestimehr.
2021a.
Codedprivateml:
A fast and privacy-
preserving framework for distributed machine learn-
ing. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Information
Theory, (1).
Jinhyun So, Ba¸sak Güler, and A Salman Avestimehr.
2021b. Turbo-aggregate: Breaking the quadratic ag-
gregation barrier in secure federated learning. IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Information Theory,
(1).
Joel Stremmel and Arjun Singh. 2020. Pretraining fed-
erated text models for next word prediction. ArXiv.
Dianbo Sui, Yubo Chen, Jun Zhao, Yantao Jia, Yuan-
tao Xie, and Weijian Sun. 2020.
FedED: Feder-
ated learning via ensemble distillation for medical
relation extraction.
In Proceedings of the 2020
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP), pages 2118–2128, On-
line. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Adam Trischler, Tong Wang, Xingdi Yuan, Justin Har-
ris, Alessandro Sordoni, Philip Bachman, and Ka-
heer Suleman. 2017. NewsQA: A machine compre-
hension dataset. In Proceedings of the 2nd Work-
shop on Representation Learning for NLP, pages
191–200, Vancouver, Canada. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-
9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pages 5998–6008.
Hongyi Wang, Kartik Sreenivasan, Shashank Ra-
jput, Harit Vishwakarma, Saurabh Agarwal, Jy-yong
Sohn, Kangwook Lee, and Dimitris S. Papailiopou-
los. 2020a. Attack of the tails: Yes, you really can
backdoor federated learning. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Con-
ference on Neural Information Processing Systems
2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual.
Hongyi Wang, Mikhail Yurochkin, Yuekai Sun, Dim-
itris S. Papailiopoulos, and Yasaman Khazaeni.
2020b. Federated learning with matched averaging.
In 8th International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April
26-30, 2020. OpenReview.net.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien
Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pier-
ric Cistac, Tim Rault, Remi Louf, Morgan Funtow-
icz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen,
Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu,
Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame,
Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander Rush. 2020. Trans-
formers: State-of-the-art natural language process-
ing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing:
System Demonstrations, pages 38–45, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Qiang Yang, Yang Liu, Tianjian Chen, and Yongxin
Tong. 2019. Federated machine learning: Concept
and applications. ACM Transactions on Intelligent
Systems and Technology (TIST), (2).
T. Yang, G. Andrew, Hubert Eichner, Haicheng Sun,
W. Li, Nicholas Kong, D. Ramage, and F. Beau-
fays. 2018a. Applied federated learning: Improving
google keyboard query suggestions. ArXiv.
Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Ben-
gio, William Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2018b.
HotpotQA: A
dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question
answering. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 2369–2380, Brussels, Belgium. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Ligeng Zhu, Zhijian Liu, and Song Han. 2019. Deep
leakage from gradients.
In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 32: Annual Con-
ference on Neural Information Processing Systems
2019, NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Van-
couver, BC, Canada, pages 14747–14756.
Xinghua Zhu, Jianzong Wang, Zhenhou Hong, and
Jing Xiao. 2020. Empirical studies of institutional
federated learning for natural language processing.
In Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pages 625–634, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Appendix
A
FL+NLP
Many realistic NLP services heavily rely on users’
local data (e.g., text messages, documents and
their tags, questions and selected answers, etc.),
which can be located at either personal devices
or larger data-silos for organizations. These lo-
cal data are usually regarded as highly private and
thus not directly accessible by anyone, according
to many data privacy regulations; this makes it dif-
ﬁcult to train a high-performance model to beneﬁt
users. Federated learning aims to solve machine
learning under such a privacy-preserving use case,
thus offering a novel and promising direction to
the community: FL+NLP.
Apart from the goal of learning a shared global
model for all clients, FL also provides a new per-
spective for many other interesting research ques-
tions in NLP. One related direction is to develop
personalized models for NLP applications, which
requires both protection of data privacy and trans-
ferred ability on users’ own input feature distri-
bution caused by language styles, interested top-
ics and so on. The recent concerns on adversar-
ial attacks and safety issues of NLP models are
also highly related to FL+NLP. We thus believe
FL+NLP is of vital importance for applying NLP
technologies in realistic use cases and could bene-
ﬁt many relevant research areas.
A.1
Challenges of Applying FL in NLP
Given the promising beneﬁts of studying FL+NLP,
however,
this research direction is currently
blocked by the lack of a standardized platform
providing fundamental building blocks: bench-
mark datasets, NLP models, FL methods, evalu-
ation protocols, etc. Most of the current FL plat-
forms either focus on unifying various FL meth-
ods and use computer vision models and datasets
for their experiments, but lack the ability to con-
nect the study of pre-trained language models, the
most popular NLP , and realistic NLP applications
of various task formulations.
The ﬁrst challenge in developing a comprehen-
sive and universal platform for FL+NLP is to deal
with various task formulations for realistic NLP
applications, which have different input and output
formats (Section B). As the non-IID data partition
over clients is the major feature of FL problems, it
is also a challenge to simulate the realistic non-IID
partition for existing NLP datasets (Section 3.2).
Finally, a platform also must integrate various FL
methods with the Transformer-based NLP mod-
els for a variety of task types, and thus a ﬂexible
and extensible learning framework is needed. In
particular, the conventional trainer component of
Transformers now needs to be modiﬁed for efﬁ-
cient and safe communications towards federated
learning (Section F).
B
Basic Formulations of NLP Tasks
There are various types of NLP applications, but
many of them share a similar task formulation
(i.e., input-and-put formats). We show four com-
mon task formulations that can cover most of the
mainstream NLP applications: text classiﬁcation,
sequence tagging, question answering, sequence-
to-sequence generation.
Text Classiﬁcation (TC) The input is a sequence
of words, x = [w1, w2, . . . ], and the output is a la-
bel y in a ﬁxed set of labels L. Many NLP applica-
tions can be formulated as text classiﬁcation tasks.
For example, we can use TC models for classi-
fying the topic of a news article to be political,
sports, entertainment, etc., or analyzing movie re-
views to be positive, negative or neutral.
Sequence Tagging (ST) The input is a sequence
of words, x = [w1, w2, . . . , wN], and the out-
put is a same-length sequence of tags y
=
[t1, t2, . . . , tN], where ti is in a ﬁxed set of labels
L. The main difference between TC and ST is that
ST learns to classify the label of each token in a
sentence, which is particularly useful in analyzing
syntactic structures (e.g., part-of-speech analysis,
phrase chunking, and word segmentation) and ex-
tracting spans (e.g., named entity recognition).
Question Answering (QA) Given a passage P =
[w1, w2, . . . , wN] and a question q as input, the
task is to locate a span in the passage as the an-
swer to the question. Thus, the output is a pair of
token index (s, e) where s, e ∈{1, 2, . . . , N} for
denoting the begin and end of the span in the pas-
sage. This particular formulation is also known as
reading comprehension.
Natural Language Generation (NLG) Both in-
# examples per client
Prob. Density 
Figure 8: The probability density of quantity of train-
ing examples in each of the 100 clients on the 20News
dataset with different β. When β is larger, then all
clients share more similar numbers of examples; when
β is smaller, then the range of the quantity is much
wider — i.e., the larger differences between clients in
terms of their sizes of datasets.
put and output are sequence of words, x
=
[wi
1, wi
2, . . . , wi
N] , y = [wo
1, wo
2, . . . , wo
M]. It is
shared by many realistic applications such as sum-
marization, response generation in dialogue sys-
tems, machine translation, etc.
Language Modeling (LM) The left-to-right lan-
guage modeling task considers a sequence of
words as the input x = [w1, w2, . . . , wn] and a
token y = wn+1 as the output. The output token
is expected to be the most plausible next word of
the incomplete sentence denoted as x. Although
the direct application of LM is limited, a high-
performance pre-trained language model can ben-
eﬁt a wide range of NLP applications (as above)
via ﬁne-tuning. It also serves as an excellent test
bed as it requires no human annotations at all.
Others. There are some other applications that
not are covered by the above four basic formu-
lations, and our extensible platform (detailed in
Section F) enables users to easily implement their
speciﬁc tasks. For each task formulation, we show
which datasets are used in FedNLP and how we
partition them in Section 3.
C
Implementation Details
Non-IID. Label Distribution
Note that this
might cause a few clients not to have enough ex-
amples to sample for particular labels if they are
already used up. Prior works choose to stop as-
signing early and remove such clients, but it conse-
quently loses the other unused examples and also
causes the inconsistency of client numbers. Thus,
to avoid these issues, we propose a dynamic re-
assigning method which complement the vacancy
of a label by ﬁlling in the examples of other la-
bels based on their current ratio of remaining unas-
signed examples.
C.1
The FedNLP Training Pipeline: Security
and Efﬁciency
Under the deﬁnition of federated learning in Algo-
rithm 1, we design a training system to support the
research of NLP in the FL paradigm. We highlight
its core capabilities and design as follows.
Supporting diverse FL algorithms.
FedNLP
aims to enable ﬂexible customization for future
algorithmic innovations.
We have supported a
number of classical federated learning algorithms,
including FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017a), Fe-
dOPT (Reddi et al., 2021), and FedProx (Li et al.,
2020b). These algorithms follow the same frame-
work introduced in Algorithm 1. The algorithmic
APIs are modularized: all data loaders follow the
same format of input and output arguments, which
are compatible with different models and algo-
rithms and are easy to support new datasets; the
method of deﬁning the model and related trainer is
kept the same as in centralized training to reduce
the difﬁculty of developing the distributed train-
ing framework. For new FL algorithm develop-
ment, worker-oriented programming reduces the
difﬁculty of message passing and deﬁnition. More
details are introduced in Appendix F.3.
Enabling
secure
benchmarking
with
lightweight
secure
aggregation.
In
partic-
ular, FedNLP enhances the security aspect of
federated training, which is not supported by ex-
isting non-NLP-oriented benchmarking libraries
(e.g., TFF, LEAF). This is motivated by the fact
that model weights from clients may still have
the risk of privacy leakage (Zhu et al., 2019). To
break this barrier, we integrate secure aggregation
(SA) algorithms to the FedNLP system.
NLP
researchers do not need to master security-
related knowledge and also beneﬁt from a secure
distributed training environment.
To be more
speciﬁc, FedNLP supports state-of-the-art SA
algorithms LightSecAgg, SecAgg (Bonawitz
et al., 2017), and SecAgg+ (Bell et al., 2020). At
a high-level understanding, SA protects the client
model by generating a single random mask and
allows their cancellation when aggregated at the
server. Consequently, the server can only see the
aggregated model and not the raw model from
each client.
In this work, our main effort is to
design and optimize these SA algorithms in the
context of the FedNLP system. We provide an
algorithmic performance comparison in Appendix
F.5.
Realistic evaluation with efﬁcient distributed
system design.
FedNLP aims to support dis-
tributed training in multiple edge servers (e.g,
AWS EC2) or edge devices (e.g., IoTs and smart-
phones). To achieve this, the system is designed
with three layers: the application layer, the algo-
rithm layer, and the infrastructure layer. At the ap-
plication layer, FedNLP provides three modules:
data management, model deﬁnition, and a single-
process trainer for all task formats; at the algo-
rithm layer, FedNLP supports various FL algo-
rithms; at the infrastructure layer, FedNLP aims
at integrating single-process trainers with a dis-
tributed learning system for FL. Speciﬁcally, we
make each layer and module perform its own du-
ties and have a high degree of modularization. We
refer readers to Appendix F for a detailed descrip-
tion of the system architecture and design philos-
ophy.
D
More Related Works
Federated
Learning
Methods.
Federated
Learning (FL) is a widely disciplinary research
area that mainly focuses on three aspects: sta-
tistical challenge, trustworthiness, and system
optimization.
Numerous methods have been
proposed to solve statistical challenges, including
FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017b), FedProx (Li
et al., 2020b), FedOPT (Reddi et al., 2021),
FedNAS (He et al., 2020a,d), and FedMA (Wang
et al., 2020b) that alleviate the non-IID issue
with distributed optimization, and new formu-
lations, MOCHA (Smith et al., 2017), pFedMe
(Dinh et al., 2020), perFedAvg (Fallah et al.,
2020), and Ditto (Li et al., 2021b), that consider
personalization and fairness in federated training.
For trustworthiness, security and privacy are the
two main research directions that are mainly con-
cerned with resisting data or model attacks, recon-
struction, and leakage during training (So et al.,
2021b,a, 2020; Prakash et al., 2020; Prakash and
Avestimehr, 2020; Elkordy and Avestimehr, 2020;
Prakash et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020a; Lyu
et al., 2020). Given that modern deep neural net-
works are over-parameterized and dominate nearly
all learning tasks, researchers also proposed algo-
rithms or systems to improve the efﬁciency and
scalability of edge training (He et al., 2020b,c,
2019, 2021). We refer readers to the canonical sur-
vey (Kairouz et al., 2019) for details.
Although tremendous progress has been made
in the past few years, these algorithms or systems
have not been fully evaluated on realistic NLP
tasks introduced in this paper.
E
Future Directions
Minimizing the performance gap.
In the FL
setting, we demonstrate that federated ﬁne-tuning
still has a large accuracy gap in the non-IID dataset
compared to centralized ﬁne-tuning.
Develop-
ing algorithms for Transformer models with NLP
tasks is of the highest priority.
Improving the system efﬁciency and scalabil-
ity.
Transformer models are usually large, while
resource-constrained edge devices may not be able
to run large models. Designing efﬁcient FL meth-
ods for NLP tasks is thus a practical problem
worth solving. How to adopt a reasonable user se-
lection mechanism to avoid stragglers and speed
up the convergence of training algorithms is also a
pressing problem to be solved.
Trustworthy
and
privacy-preserving
NLP.
We argue that it is an important future research
direction to analyze and assure the privacy-
preserving ability of these methods, although our
focus in this paper is the implementation and
performance analysis of the FL methods for NLP
tasks.
It is now an open problem for both FL
and NLP areas, while it is an orthogonal goal
for improving the trustworthy of decentralized
learning, and it is only possible to study privacy
preservation when we have an existing FL+NLP
platform. This is also part of our motivation in
proposing FedNLP, and we believe our framework
provides a set of ﬂexible interfaces for future
development to analyze and improve the privacy-
preserving ability of FL methods for NLP tasks
and beyond.
Personalized FedNLP.
From the perspective of
the data itself, user-generated text is inherently
personalized. Designing personalized algorithms
to improve model accuracy or fairness is a very
promising direction. In addition, it is also an inter-
esting problem to adapt the heterogeneous model
architecture for each client in the FL network. We
show that it is feasible to only ﬁne-tune a small
amount of the parameters of LMs, so it is promis-
ing to adapt recent preﬁx-tuning methods (Li and
Liang, 2021) for personalizing the parameters of
NLP models within the FedNLP framework.
F
The System Design of FedNLP
The FedNLP platform consists of three layers:
the application layer, the algorithm layer, and
the infrastructure layer. At the application layer,
FedNLP provides three modules: data manage-
ment, model deﬁnition, and single-process trainer
for all task formats;
At the algorithm layer,
FedNLP supports various FL algorithms; At the
infrastructure layer, FedNLP aims at integrating
single-process trainers with a distributed learning
system for FL. Speciﬁcally, we make each layer
and module perform its own duties and have a high
degree of modularization.
F.1
Overall Workﬂow
The module calling logic ﬂow of the whole frame-
work is shown on the left of Figure 9.
When
we start the federated training, we ﬁrst complete
the launcher script, device allocation, data load-
ing, and model creation, and ﬁnally call the API
of the federated learning algorithm. This process
is expressed in Python-style code (see Alg. 2).
F.2
The Application Layer
Data Management.
In data management, What
DataManager does is control the whole workﬂow
from loading data to returning trainable features.
To be speciﬁc, DataManager is set up for read-
ing h5py data ﬁles and driving a preprocessor
to convert raw data to features.
There are four
Algorithm 2: The FedNLP Workﬂow
# using text classification (TC) as an example
# initialize distributed computing environment
process_id, ... = FedNLP_init()
# GPU device management
device = map_process_to_gpu(process_id, ...)
# data management
data_manager = TCDataManager (process_id, ...)
# load the data dictionary by process_id
data_dict = dm.load_federated_data(process_id)
# create model by specifying the task
client_model, ... = create_model(model_args,
formulation="classification")
# define a customized NLP Trainer
client_trainer = TCTrainer(device,
client_model, ...)
# launch the federated training (e.g., FedAvg)
FedAvg_distributed(..., device,
client_model,
data_dict, ...,
client_trainer)
types of DataManager according to the task def-
inition. Users can customize their DataManager
by inheriting one of the DataManager class, spec-
ifying data operation functions, and embedding a
particular preprocessor. Note that the raw data’s
H5Py ﬁle and the non-IID partition ﬁle are pre-
processed ofﬂine, while DataManager only loads
them in runtime.
Model Deﬁnition.
We support two types of
models: Transformer and LSTM. For Transformer
models, to dock with the existing NLP ecology,
our framework is compatible with the Hugging-
Face Transformers library (Wolf et al., 2020), so
that various types of Transformers can be directly
reused without the need for re-implementation.
Speciﬁcally, our code is compatible with the three
main classes of Tokenizer, Model, and Config
in HuggingFace. Users can also customize them
based on HuggingFace’s code. Although LSTM
has gradually deviated from the mainstream, we
still support LSTM to reﬂect the framework’s in-
tegrity, which may meet some particular use cases
in a federated setting.
NLP Trainer (single process perspective).
As
for the task-speciﬁc NLP Trainer, the most
prominent feature is that it does not require users
to have any background in distributed comput-
ing.
Users of FedNLP only need to complete
single-process code writing.
A user should in-
herit the Trainer class in the application layer
Figure 9: The overall workﬂow and system design of the proposed FedNLP platform.
to implement the four methods as shown in the
ﬁgure: 1. the get_model_params() interface al-
lows the algorithm layer to obtain model param-
eters and transmit them to the server; 2.
the
set_model_params() interface obtains the up-
dated model from the server’s aggregation and
then updates the model parameters of the local
model; 3. the programming of the train() and
test() function only needs to consider the data
of a single user, meaning that the trainer is com-
pletely consistent with the centralized training.
F.3
The Algorithm Layer
In the design of the algorithm layer, we follow
the principle of one-line API. The parameters of
the API include model, data, and single-process
trainer (as shown in Algorithm 2). The algorithms
we support include:
Centralized Training.
We concatenate all client
datasets and use the global data DG to train a
global model — i.e., the conventional protocol for
learning an NLP model on a dataset.
FedAvg
(McMahan et al., 2017a) is the de facto
method for federated learning, assuming both
client and server use the SGD optimizer for up-
dating model weights.
FedProx
(Li et al., 2020b) can tackle statistical
heterogeneity by restricting the local model up-
dates to be closer to the initial (global) model with
L2 regularization for better stability in training.
FedOPT
(Reddi et al., 2021) is a generalized
version of FedAvg. There are two gradient-based
optimizers in the algorithm: ClientOpt and
ServerOpt (please refer to the pseudo code in
the original paper (Reddi et al., 2021)).
While
ClientOpt is used to update the local models,
SerevrOpt treats the negative of aggregated lo-
cal changes −∆(t) as a pseudo-gradient and ap-
plies it on the global model. In our FedNLP frame-
work, by default, we set the ClientOpt to be
AdamW (Loshchilov and Hutter, 2019) and the
SerevrOpt to be SGD with momentum (0.9)
and ﬁx server learning rate as 1.0.
Each algorithm includes two core objects,
ServerManager and ClientManager, which in-
tegrate the communication module ComManager
from the infrastructure layer and the Trainer of
the training engine to complete the distributed al-
gorithm protocol and edge training.
Note that
users can customize the Trainer by passing a cus-
tomized Trainer through the algorithm API.
F.4
The Infrastructure Layer
The infrastructure layer includes three modules:
1) Users can write distributed scripts to man-
age GPU resource allocation.
In particular,
FedNLP provides the GPU assignment API
(map_process_to_gpu() in Algorithm 2) to as-
sign speciﬁc GPUs to different FL Clients.
2) The algorithm layer can use a uniﬁed and ab-
stract ComManager to complete a complex al-
gorithmic communication protocol.
Currently,
we support MPI (Message Passing Interface),
RPC (Remote procedure call), and MQTT (Mes-
sage Queuing Telemetry Transport) communica-
tion backend. MPI meets the distributed training
needs in a single cluster; RPC meets the communi-
cation needs of cross-data centers (e.g., cross-silo
federated learning); MQTT can meet the commu-
nication needs of smartphones or IoT devices.
3) The third part is the training engine, which
reuses the existing deep learning training engines
by presenting as the Trainer class.
Our cur-
rent version of this module is built on PyTorch,
but it can easily support frameworks such as
TensorFlow. In the future, we may consider sup-
porting the lightweight edge training engine opti-
mized by the compiler technology at this level.
F.5
Enhancing Security with Secure
Aggregation (SA)
FedNLP supports state-of-the-art SA algorithms
LightSecAgg,
SecAgg
(Bonawitz
et
al.,
2017), and SecAgg+ (Bell et al., 2020). Here, we
provide a short performance comparison of these
three algorithms.
In general, LightSecAgg
provides the same model privacy guarantees as
SecAgg (Bonawitz et al., 2017) and SecAgg+
(Bell et al., 2020)) while substantially reducing the
aggregation (hence run-time) complexity (Figure
??). The main idea of LightSecAgg are that
each user protects its local model using a locally
generated random mask. This mask is then en-
coded and shared with other users, in such a way
that the aggregate mask of any sufﬁciently large
set of surviving users can be directly reconstructed
at the server. Our main effort in FedNLP is in-
tegrating these algorithms, optimizing its system
performance, and designing user-friendly APIs to
make them compatible with NLP models and FL
algorithms.
