Title: Stop! In the Name of Flaws: Disentangling Personal Names and Sociodemographic Attributes in NLP
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2405.17159v2
--------------------------------------------------

Stop! In the Name of Flaws:
Disentangling Personal Names and Sociodemographic Attributes in NLP
Vagrant Gautam1
Arjun Subramonian2
Anne Lauscher3
Os Keyes4
1Saarland University, Germany
2University of California, Los Angeles, USA
3Universität Hamburg, Germany
4University of Washington, USA
Abstract
Personal names simultaneously differentiate
individuals and categorize them in ways
that are important in a given society. While
the natural language processing community
has thus associated personal names with
sociodemographic characteristics in a variety
of tasks, researchers have engaged to varying
degrees with the established methodological
problems in doing so. To guide future work
that uses names and sociodemographic char-
acteristics, we provide an overview of relevant
research: first, we present an interdisciplinary
background on names and naming. We then
survey the issues inherent to associating names
with sociodemographic attributes, covering
problems of validity (e.g., systematic error,
construct validity), as well as ethical concerns
(e.g., harms, differential impact, cultural
insensitivity).
Finally, we provide guiding
questions along with normative recommenda-
tions to avoid validity and ethical pitfalls when
dealing with names and sociodemographic
characteristics in natural language processing.
1
Introduction
A person’s identity is a complex and paradoxi-
cal thing - it simultaneously identifies someone’s
uniqueness, and categorizes them, identifying what
they have in common with others (Strauss, 2017).
A perfect example of this phenomenon is a person’s
name. Personal names are proper nouns used to
refer to individuals. They play an important distin-
guishing role in our lives, as they let us uniquely
represent people mentally, refer to them directly in
speech, and underscore their significance as indi-
viduals (Jeshion, 2009). For these reasons, personal
names are a linguistic universal, i.e., they appear
across languages and cultures, although naming
customs vary across the world (Hough, 2016).
But alongside differentiating people, names also
categorize them in their society. Names assigned to
Validity Issues
Ethical Issues
Errors not 
robustly 
quantifiable
Systematic 
error
Poor 
construct 
validity
Systems of 
classification 
create results
Errors cause 
harms
Errors and 
harms not 
distributed 
equally
Representational 
harms
Cultural 
insensitivity
No shifts in 
power
Figure 1: Overview of the methodological issues (con-
cerning validity and ethics) of the use of personal names
and sociodemographic characteristics in NLP.
people often index aspects of identity that are im-
portant in the context of their society, including sex,
religion, tribe, stage of life, etc. Personal names
are thus rich resources to understand the social or-
ganization of communities, and have been studied
across anthropology (Alford, 1987; Hough, 2016),
sociology (Marx, 1999; Pilcher, 2017), linguistics
(Allerton, 1987; Anderson, 2003), and onomastics
(Alvarez-Altman et al., 1987; Adams, 2009).
In natural language processing (NLP) as well,
personal names have a long history of use—NLP
researchers have worked on identifying and dis-
ambiguating uses of personal names (Mann and
Yarowsky, 2003; Minkov et al., 2005; Färber
and Ao, 2022) and have examined name trans-
lation (Sennrich et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2022;
Sandoval et al., 2023) and name transliteration (Li
et al., 2007; Benites et al., 2020; Sälevä and Lig-
nos, 2024). Increasingly, NLP researchers also use
personal names along with sociodemographic char-
acteristics for passive analysis of media and schol-
arly content (Vogel and Jurafsky, 2012; Knowles
et al., 2016; Mohammad, 2020; Asr et al., 2021),
or to examine model biases and harms (Maudslay
et al., 2019; Romanov et al., 2019; Webster et al.,
2021). However, these papers engage to varying
degrees with concerns that have been raised out-
side of NLP about the methodological validity and
arXiv:2405.17159v2  [cs.CL]  15 Jul 2024
ethics of associating names with sociodemographic
characteristics. We argue that neglect of these is-
sues is a significant barrier to valid and respectful
research, as well as more inclusive NLP systems.
Hence, we contribute an overview of the issues
with associating names with sociodemographic at-
tributes (focused on gender and race, two popular
categories used in NLP research), as shown in Fig-
ure 1. We begin with background on names in other
fields and in NLP (§2), and lay out the problems
with validity (§3) and ethical concerns (§4) raised
when associating personal names with sociodemo-
graphic characteristics. Finally, we present guiding
questions along with normative recommendations
(§5) to guide future work in the field with names.
Bias statement.
We consider group-level, indi-
vidual, and representational harms, terms which we
explain where we use them in Section 4.
Positionality statement.
All authors have a back-
ground in data science and ethics, and one has a
background in philosophy. Three of the authors
are trans and have names that are likely unintel-
ligible to popular name-based sociodemographic
inference methods. Two authors are trans people of
colour; as such, many examples in this paper reflect
concerns about misgendering and racialization.
2
Background
We begin with some background: on names and
naming, and on the use of names in NLP.
2.1
Names and Naming
Names are generally regarded as social phenomena
that serve two central functions that are sometimes
in conflict: differentiation and categorization of
individuals (Alford, 1987). Differentiation is im-
portant psychologically and semantically for us to
be able to directly refer to and mentally represent
individuals, and names also serve to underscore
their referent’s significance as an individual (Jesh-
ion, 2009). Categorization, on the other hand, is
important for the social organization of communi-
ties, and naming conventions tend to reflect factors
that are important to a community at a given point
in time, e.g., gender, religion, descent, transition
to adulthood, and so on (Hough, 2016). For in-
stance, the practice of naming someone after their
father or grandfather—patronymic naming—was
once common across Europe, and was popular in
Sweden until the nineteenth century (e.g., Samuels-
son) and continues into Iceland today (e.g., Gun-
narsdóttir) (Hough, 2016). This example shows
how names and naming can only be understood in
a specific (geographic, cultural, temporal) context,
and even then includes a lot of variation. As folk
assumptions about names tend to overlook the wide
variation in names and naming (McKenzie, 2010),
we present an overview of naming as it relates to
sociodemographic characteristics below.
Variation in societal conventions.
The mark-
ers considered important to index in a name vary
widely across cultures. For example, almost all
European naming systems and indeed most soci-
eties across the world tend to assign sex-typed
names (Hough, 2016), while South Indian nam-
ing conventions often index caste (Meganathan,
2009). However, convention does not mean that ev-
ery single individual is assigned a name that neatly
follows that convention, as shown by the long his-
tory of gender-ambiguous names in the U.S. (Barry
and Harper, 1982). Additionally, gendered associ-
ations for specific names change over time (Barry
and Harper, 1993), as do naming conventions in
societies–for example, it is becoming increasingly
popular to assign non-gendered names in the U.S.
and in Israel (Hough, 2016; Obasi et al., 2019).
Apart from conventions, names themselves are not
static and unchanging from birth, with many names
changing due to partnerships, adoption, transition
to a different life stage or gender, and so on (Hough,
2016; Obasi et al., 2019; AIATSIS, 2022).
Assimilation and resistance to convention.
Trends in big-picture naming conventions are com-
plicated by factions of society who want to resist
imposed classification. Increasingly heterogeneous
societies are a natural setting for such tensions;
cross-cultural associations with sociodemographic
characteristics can differ and sometimes clash, com-
plicating naming, e.g., names like Nicola and An-
drea tend to be assigned to boys in Italy but to
girls in Germany. As Germany is a society with
highly regulated naming practices, inclusion of
these names necessitated a court judgment (Hough,
2016). Immigrant families thus have to juggle the
delicate balance of asserting their identity but avoid-
ing name-based stigma and discrimination in the
new culture. Their naming practices have therefore
been studied as an indicator of attitudes towards as-
similation or its rejection, showing how names are
not a transparent indicator of race (Sue and Telles,
2007; Becker, 2009). Even among adults, imperial-
ism and colonialism are forces that affect naming.
Indigenous individuals have been forced to adopt
Western names in settler colonial and postcolonial
societies, e.g., the U.S., Canada, Australia (AIAT-
SIS, 2022). Similarly, Chinese individuals around
the world adopt Western names in conversa-
tional (Li, 1997) and professional settings (Chan,
2016). Among trans and gender-nonconforming
adults, many choose a new name to reflect and
express their gender, walking the tightrope be-
tween normativity and self-assertion (Konnelly,
2021); Obasi et al. (2019) find that 50% of
gender-nonconforming respondents who change
their name pick a gender-neutral name. Beyond
transgender people, new names and pseudonyms
are also often self-selected to assert agency in iden-
tity creation, e.g., bell hooks, Sojourner Truth, and
Malcolm X (Baker and Green, 2021).
Quantitative aspects of naming.
As naming in-
volves a trade-off between differentiation and cat-
egorization, names often recur, a quantitative as-
sumption that a lot of sociological, anthropological
and NLP classification relies on (Alford, 1987).
However, the distributions of names and people
can be very different. Weitman (1981) finds that in
100 years of first names from Israel’s Population
Registry, the most frequent names (101+ occur-
rences) account for the majority of the population
of a society (91%), but this corresponds to just a
tiny minority of all assigned names (2.93%). These
numbers could vary widely depending on the soci-
ety, as, for example, the Chuukese people of Mi-
cronesia have a tradition of giving entirely unique
names to children (Alford, 1987). Hence, it is im-
portant to distinguish when names are the object
of study and when people are, to contextualize any
results that involve the analysis of names.
2.2
Names and Sociodemographic
Characteristics in NLP
Here, we present a non-comprehensive list of pa-
pers to illustrate some common uses of names and
sociodemographic characteristics in NLP.
NLP tasks and problems.
Numerous NLP
works have developed algorithms to infer sociode-
mographic attributes from names (Chang et al.,
2010; Liu and Ruths, 2013; Knowles et al., 2016),
e.g., for passive analysis of social media content.
Another line of NLP papers have relied on names
to quantify gender disparities in academic publish-
ing (Vogel and Jurafsky, 2012; Mohammad, 2020)
or media representation (Asr et al., 2021). Some
NLP works have identified preserving dominant
gender associations as an important criterion for
transliteration and translation (Li et al., 2007; Wang
et al., 2022). Names are also used to investigate
social biases in NLP systems and language mod-
els (Kotek et al., 2023; An et al., 2023; Ibaraki et al.,
2024). For example, De-Arteaga et al. (2019) study
how first names, which they consider “explicit gen-
der indicators,” affect the gender bias of occupa-
tion prediction from biographies. Similarly, Jeoung
et al. (2023) assess the causal impact of first names,
which they posit “may serve as proxies for (inter-
sectional) socio-demographic representations,” on
the commonsense reasoning performance of lan-
guage models. Smith and Williams (2021) measure
racial biases as well, evaluating generative dialogue
models by having “one conversational partner [. . . ]
state a name commonly associated with a certain
gender and/or race/ethnicity.” In this line of re-
search, it is commonplace to use skewed reference
populations such as U.S. census data (U.S. Cen-
sus, 2020) and Social Security Administration baby
names (U.S. Social Security Administration, 2023)
for gender assocations (Lockhart et al., 2023).
Engagement with pitfalls.
In these works, re-
searchers engage to varying degrees with the es-
tablished methodological and ethical problems of
associating names with sociodemographic charac-
teristics. Some NLP papers make unfounded as-
sumptions about names, e.g., Vogel and Jurafsky
(2012) posit that certain names are “unambiguous”
with respect to gender across languages, and Wang
et al. (2022) claim that there exist “names with
obvious gender.” Other papers are more critically
reflective, acknowledging the limitations of their
work: Knowles et al. (2016) state that their classi-
fier to predict gender from names is biased towards
the U.S. and assumes gender is binary, but leaves
these issues “to be addressed in future work.” Mo-
hammad (2020) acknowledges that inferring gen-
der from names can yield misgendering because
“names do not capture gender fluidity or contextual
gender,” but suggest a trade-off with “the benefits
of NLP techniques and social category detection.”
Encouragingly, some recent papers opt for more
inclusive study designs after engaging deeply with
the pitfalls of using names and sociodemographic
characteristics (Sandoval et al., 2023; Saunders and
Olsen, 2023; Lassen et al., 2023).
3
Validity Issues
In this section, we present issues of validity when
associating names with sociodemographic cate-
gories, or using names to infer them. Issues of
validity mean that results with these operationaliza-
tions may neither be indicative of what we actually
want to measure, nor of reality.
Error is not quantifiable without asking humans.
The accuracy of using names to infer sociodemo-
graphic characteristics of individuals cannot be
quantified without ground truth data, which for
people’s identities, can only be obtained by asking
them. Multiple studies thus empirically analyze the
error rates of name-based gender and race inference
systems as compared to gold data in different con-
texts (Karimi et al., 2016; Kozlowski et al., 2022;
Van Buskirk et al., 2023; Lockhart et al., 2023).1
For example, Lockhart et al. (2023) evaluate gen-
der and race inference systems using self-reported
data from nearly 20,000 individuals. Importantly,
their self-reported data does not directly transfer
to other contexts, as their respondents are authors
of English language social science journal articles
who are mostly located in the U.S. Using this data
as reference data for a system with users located
primarily in India, or for U.S. authors in a different
century, makes little sense. In new environments,
it is simply not possible to reasonably estimate
the bounds of error of a name-based analysis, and
results without a corresponding analysis of self-
reported data should not be taken seriously.
Popular design choices lead to systematic error
and selection bias.
Names that are uninforma-
tive of a sociodemographic characteristic present
an issue for tools that aim to label everyone. In the
context of gender, names like Alex have no unique
gendered association in the U.S. and Canada; with
race, names assigned by Black and white parents
overlap in the U.S. (Lockhart et al., 2023), and re-
ligious names are used around the world (Curtis,
2005; Olúwáfe ´mi, 2014)); at the intersection of gen-
der and race, many Chinese names are not gender-
associated when Romanized, and infrequent names
are also not informative. Two common design
1All these studies look at imputing an individual’s gen-
der, but the gold labels they compare to are, confusingly, not
always self-reported gender! Some use gender assigned by
annotators as the ground truth, which would be fine if com-
paring to perceptions of an individual based on their name,
but these studies do not, raising further questions about their
methodological validity.
choices for handling uninformative names are to
assign the majority class label anyway, or, alterna-
tively, to just exclude them. Assigning the majority
class (i.e., classifying all people named Miaoran
as female if a gender prediction tool predicts the
name to be “60% female”) results in systematic er-
ror (Kirkup and Frenkel, 2006). On the other hand,
excluding uninformative names from the analysis
completely alters the makeup of the data and there-
fore the results (Mihaljevi´c et al., 2019), resulting
in selection bias. Both choices affect internal valid-
ity, i.e., gaps in the translation from measurements
to overall conclusions (Liao et al., 2021), leading
to less robust and trustworthy results.
Poor construct validity.
Construct validity asks
how well an abstract concept can be measured
through some indicator (Messick, 1995); in our
case, the question is: how valid is it to assign so-
ciodemographic categories via names?2 The an-
swer to this depends on what aspects of the sociode-
mographic category we are interested in: identity,
socialization, expression, perception—all of which
could differ and are frequently conflated (Keyes
et al., 2021). As discussed previously, many names
are simply not informative of certain sociodemo-
graphic identities in given contexts and with homo-
geneous populations; Lockhart et al. (2023) find
that overall error rates of name-based gender and
race imputation tools range from 4.6% to 86% over-
all, and up to 100% for particular subgroups, de-
pending on the tool. However, when it comes to
the perception of names as indexing a sociodemo-
graphic category, some names may have stronger
construct validity, an assumption used by Sandoval
et al. (2023) in their examination of names as-
signed at birth that are strongly associated with
the baby’s sex and the parents’ race/ethnicity. On
the other hand, Mohammad (2020) uses names to
operationalize both identity (to investigate trends
in authorship) and perception (to investigate trends
in citation) in a bibliometric analysis of the ACL
Anthology, even though these need not match, and
many underrepresented names are uninformative
of identity as well as perception (Van Buskirk et al.,
2023). As names do not neatly line up with sociode-
2While we focus on the construct validity of names in
this section, we note that poor construct validity also ap-
plies to the sociodemographic categories themselves (Benthall
and Haynes, 2019; Hanna et al., 2020) and to abstract con-
cepts such as “bias” and “fairness,” which show up frequently
in the study of names and sociodemographic categories in
NLP (Blodgett et al., 2020; Jacobs and Wallach, 2021).
mographic identities, perceptions, or experiences
in a context-independent way, it is critical to in-
vestigate construct validity of names in any setting
where they are used.
Systems of classification create results.
Al-
though classification is inherently human, classifi-
cation systems are produced by culture and politics
and end up creating a view of the world (Bowker
and Star, 2000). In computing, researchers have
power and our positionality shapes how we view
and operationalize categories of classification such
as race and gender (Scheuerman et al., 2020b;
Scheuerman and Brubaker, 2024). However, many
such categories are unstable and contested (Keyes
et al., 2021; Mickel, 2024). For instance, it has been
shown that different ways of operationalizing race
can result in entirely different conclusions (Steidl
and Werum, 2019; Benthall and Haynes, 2019;
Hanna et al., 2020). Individuals and groups thus
cannot be treated as monoliths that can be charac-
terized one-dimensionally via names.
4
Ethical Issues
The issues we have examined so far impact the
scientific validity of claims made using personal
names and sociodemographic categories. Many
of these problems arise from assumptions that can
also be criticized on ethical grounds, as we show.
Errors cause harms.
Harms can be broadly de-
scribed as a setback in the interests or progress of
people due to, e.g., the outcomes of an automatic
process (Feinberg, 1984). Group-level harms are
experienced collectively by people in a sociode-
mographic group, while individual harms (which
might result from group membership) are experi-
enced at the person-person or person-technology
level. Inferring gender from names frequently mis-
genders trans people and erases non-binary peo-
ple (Keyes, 2018). This perpetrates group-level
erasure, as well as individual harms including dam-
aging autonomy and dignity (Mcnamarah, 2020),
inflicting psychological harms (Dev et al., 2021),
and a failure to show recognition respect to peo-
ple (Darwall, 1977). Certain types of name-based
classification (e.g., of persecuted ethnic or religious
groups) can threaten individual safety, and when
NLP infrastructure is used for surveillance and
targeting, this also threatens the safety of entire
groups of people (Wadhawan, 2022).3 NLP sys-
tems reinforce group-level structural discrimination
in other ways as well; name-based studies of racial
disparities in academia have been shown to system-
atically discount the intellectual contributions of
Black researchers (Kozlowski et al., 2022).
Errors and harms are not distributed equally.
In their work on name-based gender classification,
Van Buskirk et al. (2023) note that for names with
no available data, assigning the majority class (in
their case, male) maximizes accuracy, but results
in 0% error for the male class and 100% error for
any other classes. For non-binary people, who are
generally excluded from gender classification by
design, the error rate is also almost always 100%.
As for name-based race/ethnicity classifiers, Lock-
hart et al. (2023) show that people who self-identify
as Filipino, Black, or Middle Eastern and North
African, are misrecognized 55-75% of the time, as
compared to those who identify as white, Chinese,
or Korean, who are mislabelled less than 10% of
the time. As described above, misrecognition er-
rors cause harms, which are then disproportionately
experienced by these individuals. We echo the con-
clusions of Mihaljevi´c et al. (2019) and Lockhart
et al. (2023), i.e., that inclusive analyses are only
possible when names are no longer used as a proxy
to infer individuals’ gender or race/ethnicity.
Representational harms.
The erasure of identi-
ties and the flattening of variation in naming cus-
toms leads to representational harms, which in-
clude the reinforcement of essentialist categories
and power structures (Chien and Danks, 2024).
These harms primarily affect sociodemographic
groups, e.g., non-binary people, who are often in-
correctly and unjustly treated as a novel social phe-
nomenon. Groups of people with a certain name are
often subject to a different type of representational
harm, i.e., stereotyping. For instance, the name
Kevin is associated with lower socioeconomic class
in Germany (Kaiser, 2010). This stereotype, if en-
coded in an NLP system, could lead to quality-of-
service differentials, as class is a sociodemographic
characteristic that correlates with lower NLP per-
formance in other contexts (Curry et al., 2024).
Cultural insensitivity.
Conceptualizations of
names and sociodemographic characteristics in
3Regulation efforts such as the AI Act (Commission, 2021)
in the EU try to mitigate this, but this does not apply to author-
itarian regimes’ use of such technology (Briglia, 2021).
NLP are often Western-centric, with folk assump-
tions about what names look like and the applica-
tion of U.S. racial categories and naming prefer-
ences to areas outside the U.S., where they are unin-
telligible (Field et al., 2021). Non-Western naming
practices are only sometimes described in papers
where there is a specific language of study that is
not English, e.g., name tagging in Arabic (Shaalan
and Raza, 2007) and Uyghur (Abudukelimu et al.,
2018). Even within English, there is little recogni-
tion of, e.g., English common nouns used as names
in China (Billboard, Shooting, Pray, etc.; Chan,
2016), names containing spelling variations (AIAT-
SIS, 2022), and names that overlap in different
cultures but have different associations, e.g., Jan
in the U.S. compared to Jan in Germany. Beyond
names, even gender, race, and other sociodemo-
graphic categories of relevance are different across
cultures. Many cultures have definitions of gender
that go beyond the binary. Enforcing binary gender
can thus be seen as an example of what Lugones
(2016) calls the “coloniality” of gender, which also
results in epistemic violence, i.e., inhibiting peo-
ple from producing knowledge, or silencing and
discrediting their knowledge (Chilisa, 2019).
No shifts in power.
Names are a site for
enforcing institutional power, as seen in “real
name” policies (Haimson and Hoffmann, 2016),
the (non-consensual) permanence of names in data
infrastructure including Google Scholar (Speer,
2021), governmental name regulation (Te Tari
Taiwhenua, 2021), and the “collective delusion”
of legal names, at least in the U.S. (Baker and
Green, 2021). Names are also regulated socially
through norms and expectations, many of which
end up baked into our NLP systems. We exercise
power as NLP researchers and practitioners via our
assumptions, which may reify sociodemographic
categories, codify (or dismantle) associations
between names and these categories, and create
infrastructure that harms people at scale through
surveillance or mislabelling. Knowles et al. (2016)
open-sourced their name-based gender inference
tool, and Vogel and Jurafsky (2012) published (bi-
nary) gender labels with names of authors of NLP
papers, which continue to be used in research (Mo-
hammad, 2020; Van Buskirk et al., 2023). This data
reflects folk assumptions about gender, i.e., that it
is binary, immutable and in perfect correspondence
with names (Keyes, 2018; Cao and Daumé III,
2021). These datasets also deadname and misgen-
der scientists from the NLP community, some of
whom have spoken about its harms (Mielke, 2024).
Transgender people can only be counted in such
a system if they conform to normative expecta-
tions (Johnson, 2016; Konnelly, 2021), and if not,
the burden is disproportionately on them to seek re-
dress. Even Asr et al. (2021)—a system relying on
name-based gender inference that considers gender
beyond the binary and does not publicly misgender
individuals—does not shift power, as workarounds
are a patch rather than built-in to the method;
gender inference still relies on APIs that use binary
gender, and mistakes (typically, famous non-binary
people) are manually corrected. As all these exam-
ples show how power remains centralized, we echo
previous calls to reimagine and reconfigure power
relations in service of user autonomy (Keyes et al.,
2019; Blodgett et al., 2020; Hanna and Park, 2020).
5
Guiding Questions and
Recommendations
In the previous sections, we have reviewed the myr-
iad of issues surrounding the accuracy, validity and
ethical use of names along with sociodemographic
characteristics, and noted that all these issues arise
from the same assumptions and inform each other.
In addition, we have shown that these problems ap-
ply overwhelmingly to those who are not cisgender,
white, normatively named in a Western context, and
well-represented in publicly available data. Thus,
work that uses names to operationalize people’s so-
ciodemographic categories most misrepresents and
further marginalizes those who are already at the
margins. We take the normative position that this
is not acceptable collateral damage, even (and es-
pecially!) in the name of ostensible fairness. Thus,
we come up with guiding questions and recommen-
dations for NLP practitioners who are considering
the use of names as they relate to sociodemographic
categories. These are summarized in Table 1.
What are you aiming to study–names? Or peo-
ple, via their names?
It is acceptable to inves-
tigate what concepts NLP models associate with
names, e.g., Madeleine with kindness. It is even
acceptable to demonstrate that NLP models asso-
ciate Marius with the pronoun he or with being
male, and that these associations mirror common
human associations (Caliskan et al., 2017; Crabtree
et al., 2023). It is marginally acceptable to associate
names with sociodemographic characteristics using
imaginary people, e.g., drawing insights about gen-
Theme
Guiding questions
Names vs. people
What are you aiming to study–names? Or people, via their names?
What aspects of names are you interested in?
What aspects of people are you interested in?
Context
What is your context?
Is processing names with NLP systems necessary to answer your questions?
Harms and power
What kinds of harms apply? How can you mitigate them?
Are you describing or prescribing?
How does your work reify/redistribute power?
Refusal
Is it still worth it?
Table 1: Our list of guiding questions for the use of names and sociodemographic categories in NLP, grouped by
theme. See paragraphs in Section 5 for detailed recommendations.
der bias more broadly based on how NLP models
handle synthetic names of people assumed to be
exclusively female; while doing so does not com-
promise people’s autonomy and dignity, it does
further entrench hegemonic folk theories of names
and people’s identities, which has cultural harms.
Finally, it is unacceptable to present results about
real people based solely on the assumption that
their names provide a reliable signal about their
identities, e.g., NLP papers authored by people
named Madeleine and Marius cannot on their own
provide trustworthy insights into gender and racial
representation in the field, unless those specific
individuals are asked about their gender.
What aspects of names are you interested in?
Names are rich objects of study with variation in
form, length, training data frequency, tokenization,
associations, the strengths of these associations,
and more.4 Once you have decided what aspects
to study, they must be operationalized and mea-
sured carefully, with attention to the context of
the study or eventual system deployment. This in-
cludes the scope of what counts as a “name.” For
instance, considering the use of English common
nouns as names (e.g., Cloud) is particularly im-
portant when working with data from or systems
deployed in China, where this naming practice is
common (Chan, 2016). Ensure that pre-processing
choices are contextualized and do not distort results,
that names are understood within context, and that
error can be quantified robustly in the given con-
text. Thus, when measuring training data frequency
4Some of these aspects have already been explored in prior
work in NLP (Shwartz et al., 2020; Wolfe and Caliskan, 2021;
Sandoval et al., 2023).
of names, counting Cloud tokens as names must
consider when it is used as a name and when it is
used simply as a noun. Error could be quantified
through manual analysis on a subset of the data.
What aspects of people are you interested in?
People’s identity and perceptions of them can dif-
fer, and these shape their experiences in various
ways. Therefore, it is first necessary to decide
which aspects are relevant for a study. Attempting
to infer someone’s identity using names is simply
unacceptable due to the range of methodological
and ethical concerns we list in this paper. We echo
onomastic advice from nearly 40 years ago (Weit-
man, 1981), i.e., that “inferences from names must
be to the givers of these names, not to their bearers.
What is more, inferences must always be to soci-
ological formations (such as social classes, ethnic
groups, historical generations, and the like), not
to individual name-givers.” In addition to study-
ing formations of name-givers, it can also be ac-
ceptable to study perceptions of identity based on
names. For instance, numerous sociology papers
have investigated racial and ethnic perceptions, as
well as occupational stereotypes, based on names
(King et al., 2006; Gaddis, 2017a,b). Again, we em-
phasize that perceptions based on names are also
highly contextual and non-universal.
What is your context?
It is essential to under-
stand the geographical, temporal, and cultural con-
text of data with names, and document this infor-
mation for datasets, e.g., with datasheets (Gebru
et al., 2021). What is the geographic, temporal, cul-
tural and political context of the name data, name-
bearers, models and sociodemographic categories
you use? Who are the people who will be impacted
by your work, and what is their context? What do
you know about the naming practices in these con-
texts and the hetereogeneity in these practices? Are
you quantifying error with self-reported data? We
posit that it is unacceptable to use names without
deeply engaging with context in these senses, and
stress that ascribing contemporary Western identity
categories to historical peoples without acknowl-
edging the difference in contexts is reductive.
Is processing names with NLP systems necessary
to answer your questions?
For questions about
human identity and perception based on names,
NLP may not be the only or best method available.
We warn against technical solutionism (Green,
2021); researchers should reflect on whether their
questions could be approached with interviews,
case studies, fourth-world paradigms, and so
on (Cameron, 2004). Qualitative methods can pro-
vide deeper, richer evidence while respecting peo-
ple’s autonomy, dignity and context. If your ques-
tions are instead about NLP systems, then process-
ing names with them is certainly necessary, but we
note that methodological pluralism and interdisci-
plinarity can enrich our practice as NLP researchers
and practitioners regardless (Wahle et al., 2023).
What kinds of harms apply? How can you miti-
gate them?
Our paper provides a starting point
for harms that are relevant to the use of names
and sociodemographic characteristics in NLP, and
we encourage transparency about methodological
and ethical problems (Bietti, 2019; Hao, 2019). It
is unacceptable to sideline these problems in the
name of “social good” (Green, 2019; Greene et al.,
2019; Bennett and Keyes, 2020), and rather than
treating entire segments of the world as limitations
of or future work for your research, we encour-
age changing the methods themselves, as Lauscher
et al. (2022) do with neopronouns. We recom-
mend firmly grounding work in the ethical prin-
ciples of autonomy, justice, and beneficence for
people (Floridi and Cowls, 2019), which we note
are sadly under-represented in machine learning
research (Birhane et al., 2022).
Are you describing or prescribing?
Descrip-
tions of social phenomena are often conflated with
normative behaviour (i.e., assumptions and asser-
tions that create and reinforce norms) in NLP (Vida
et al., 2023). This is the subtle but significant dif-
ference between showing that sociodemographic
name associations in language models mirror the
judgements of some group of humans, versus stat-
ing that model associations should mirror the judge-
ments of some group of humans. The latter “cannot
avoid creating and reinforcing norms” (Talat et al.,
2022). Therefore, researchers should clearly dis-
tinguish descriptive and normative behaviours in
the design, execution, and presentation of their ex-
periments (Vida et al., 2023). System designers do
have to make decisions about how systems should
behave, i.e., they need to choose to perpetuate harm-
ful structures in service of usability or to impose
their own values on users and stakeholders when
they take an advocacy position. This is an ethical
dilemma in design that participatory methods and
feminist epistemologies are uniquely positioned to
help with (Bardzell, 2010).
How does your work reify or redistribute
power?
Central to NLP and computer science
at large are scale thinking (Hanna and Park, 2020),
quantitative methodologies (Birhane et al., 2022),
and the illusion of objectivity (Waseem et al., 2021).
All these values serve to reify existing hierarchies
and power structures. We must first recognize our
own power as NLP researchers and practitioners,
and how our work can reinforce infrastructure for
(mis)classifying real people and enable surveillance
and harms at scale. We recommend a counter-
power stance (Keyes et al., 2019), situated knowl-
edges (Haraway, 1988), and methods informed by
a politic, e.g., intersectionality, a critical framework
that centers justice, power, and reflexivity, and man-
dates praxis with teeth (Collins, 2019; Erete et al.,
2018; Ovalle et al., 2023). Particularly for those of
us who are interested in using NLP for social good,
we should constantly be asking: “social good for
whom?” The differential impact on people matters,
and as researchers and practitioners, we have a re-
sponsibility to attend to it and resist the othering
perpetuated by classification systems.
Is it still worth it?
After considering all these
guiding questions, we remind the reader that
refusal is possible (Honeywell, 2016; Tatman,
2020; Lockhart et al., 2023; Mihaljevi´c et al.,
2019), and indeed an important part of the history
of science (Williams, 1924; United States National
Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects
of Biomedical and Behavioral Research, 1978;
Weindling, 2001).
6
Related Work
Several papers study and critically interrogate the
inference and use of sociodemographic informa-
tion in computing (Larson, 2017; Keyes, 2018;
Benthall and Haynes, 2019; Hanna et al., 2020;
Keyes et al., 2021; Field et al., 2021; Devinney
et al., 2022), many of which touch upon names
but do not address them in detail. The work that
deals with names in particular are all outside of
NLP: Karimi et al. (2016); Keyes (2017); Tzioumis
(2018); Mihaljevi´c et al. (2019); Scheuerman et al.
(2019); Lockhart et al. (2023); Van Buskirk et al.
(2023). These papers have different scopes and
take a variety of positions with regards to the ethics
of name-based inference, some of which we find in-
sufficiently radical. Finally, our recommendations
echo those from prior work (particularly in the
fields of human-computer interaction and science
and technology studies), but are contextualized for
names in NLP. Among others, we take inspiration
from Keyes et al. (2019); Hanna and Park (2020);
Blodgett et al. (2020); Scheuerman et al. (2020a);
and Green (2021).
7
Conclusion
We present the field with an overview of names
and naming as discussed in other disciplines. We
lay out background on naming practices around
the world and describe how these practices create
issues of validity (e.g., selection bias and construct
validity) and ethical concerns (e.g., harms, cultural
insensitivity), that affect NLP uses of names and so-
ciodemographic characteristics. Finally, we present
a list of guiding questions and normative sugges-
tions towards addressing these concerns in future
work involving names in NLP.
Acknowledgments
We thank Lucy Li for recommending literature
about personal names, sociodemographic character-
istics, and social perceptions. We are also grateful
to our reviewers, and to members of the Critical
Media Lab Basel, Switzerland, and the Interdisci-
plinary Institute for Societal Computing, Germany,
for their feedback on the ideas in this paper.
Limitations
Our background on names and naming is lim-
ited, and meant only as a brief introduction to
onomastics and related fields that use names and
sociodemographic characteristics; space prevents
us from being more comprehensive and we refer
the interested reader to our references for deeper
discussion of onomastic variation. Additionally,
we know that problematic and decontextualized
assumptions about names are rife within NLP
based on our background as authors within or
adjacent to the field, as well as writing in other
fields about methods that are also popular in NLP.
However, as we do not undertake a comprehensive,
critical survey of NLP papers that use names and
sociodemographic characteristics, we cannot em-
pirically quantify the extent to which the problems
we outline plague NLP research, and we leave a
more systematic study of this to future work.
References
Halidanmu Abudukelimu, Abudoukelimu Abulizi, Bo-
liang Zhang, Xiaoman Pan, Di Lu, Heng Ji, and Yang
Liu. 2018. Error analysis of Uyghur name tagging:
Language-specific techniques and remaining chal-
lenges. In Proceedings of the Eleventh International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2018), Miyazaki, Japan. European Language
Resources Association (ELRA).
Michael D. Adams. 2009. Power, politeness, and the
pragmatics of nicknames. Names, 57:81–91.
AIATSIS. 2022.
Indigenous names.
https:
//aiatsis.gov.au/family-history/
you-start/indigenous-names.
Richard Alford. 1987. Naming and identity: A cross-
cultural study of personal naming practices. Hraf
Press.
David J. Allerton. 1987. The linguistic and sociolinguis-
tic status of proper names what are they, and who do
they belong to? Journal of Pragmatics, 11:61–92.
Grace Alvarez-Altman, Frederick M. Burelbach, Luis A.
Oyarzun, and Walter P. Bowman. 1987. Names in
literature : essays from Literary onomastics studies.
University Press of America.
Haozhe An, Zongxia Li, Jieyu Zhao, and Rachel
Rudinger. 2023. SODAPOP: Open-ended discov-
ery of social biases in social commonsense reasoning
models. In Proceedings of the 17th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 1573–1596, Dubrovnik,
Croatia. Association for Computational Linguistics.
John Anderson. 2003. On the structure of names. Folia
Linguistica.
Fatemeh Torabi Asr, Mohammad Bagheri Mazraeh,
Alexandre Lopes, Vagrant Gautam, Junette Fatima
Gonzales, Prashanth Rao, and Maite Taboada. 2021.
The gender gap tracker: Using natural language pro-
cessing to measure gender bias in media. PLoS ONE,
16.
Austin A Baker and J Remy Green. 2021. There is no
such thing as a ‘legal name’: A strange, shared delu-
sion. Columbia Human Rights Law Review, 53:129.
Shaowen Bardzell. 2010. Feminist hci: taking stock and
outlining an agenda for design. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Comput-
ing Systems, page 1301–1310, Atlanta Georgia USA.
ACM.
Herbert Barry and Aylene S. Harper. 1982. Evolution
of unisex names. Names, 30(1):15–22.
Herbert Barry and Aylene S. Harper. 1993. Feminiza-
tion of unisex names from 1960 to 1990. Names,
41(4):228–238.
Birgit Becker. 2009. Immigrants’ emotional identifica-
tion with the host society: The example of turkish
parents’ naming practices in germany. Ethnicities,
9(2):200–225.
Fernando
Benites,
Gilbert
François
Duivesteijn,
Pius von Däniken, and Mark Cieliebak. 2020.
TRANSLIT: A large-scale name transliteration re-
source.
In Proceedings of the Twelfth Language
Resources and Evaluation Conference, pages 3265–
3271, Marseille, France. European Language Re-
sources Association.
Cynthia L. Bennett and Os Keyes. 2020. What is the
point of fairness? disability, ai and the complexity of
justice. SIGACCESS Access. Comput., (125).
Sebastian Benthall and Bruce D. Haynes. 2019. Racial
categories in machine learning. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Trans-
parency, FAT* ’19, page 289–298, New York, NY,
USA. Association for Computing Machinery.
Elettra Bietti. 2019.
From ethics washing to ethics
bashing: a view on tech ethics from within moral
philosophy. Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency.
Abeba Birhane, Pratyusha Kalluri, Dallas Card, William
Agnew, Ravit Dotan, and Michelle Bao. 2022. The
values encoded in machine learning research. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness,
Accountability, and Transparency, FAccT ’22, page
173–184, New York, NY, USA. Association for Com-
puting Machinery.
Su Lin Blodgett, Solon Barocas, Hal Daumé III, and
Hanna Wallach. 2020.
Language (technology) is
power: A critical survey of “bias” in NLP. In Pro-
ceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 5454–
5476, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Geoffrey C. Bowker and Susan Leigh Star. 2000. Sort-
ing Things Out: Classification and Its Consequences.
The MIT Press.
Makenzie D. Briglia. 2021. Big brother xi: How china’s
surveillance of the uyghur population violates inter-
national law note. George Washington International
Law Review, 53(1):85–118.
Aylin Caliskan,
Joanna J. Bryson,
and Arvind
Narayanan. 2017. Semantics derived automatically
from language corpora contain human-like biases.
Science, 356(6334):183–186.
Graham Cameron. 2004. Evidence in an indigenous
world. In Australasian Evaluation Society 2004 In-
ternational Conference, Adelaide, South Australia.
Yang Trista Cao and Hal Daumé III. 2021. Toward
gender-inclusive coreference resolution: An analysis
of gender and bias throughout the machine learning
lifecycle*. Computational Linguistics, 47(3):615–
661.
Cherie Chan. 2016. Why Chinese speakers use Western
names.
Jonathan D. Chang, Itamar Rosenn, Lars Backstrom,
and Cameron A. Marlow. 2010. epluribus: Ethnicity
on social networks. Proceedings of the International
AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media.
Jennifer Chien and David Danks. 2024.
Beyond
behaviorist representational harms:
A plan for
measurement and mitigation.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.01705.
Bagele Chilisa. 2019. Indigenous research methodolo-
gies. Sage publications.
Patricia Hill Collins. 2019. Intersectionality as Critical
Social Theory. Duke University Press.
European Commission. 2021. Proposal for a regulation
of the european parliament and of the council laying
down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence (ar-
tificial intelligence act) and amending certain union
legislative acts com(2021) 206 final.
Charles Crabtree, Jae Yeon Kim, S. Michael Gaddis,
John B. Holbein, Cameron Guage, and William W.
Marx. 2023. Validated names for experimental stud-
ies on race and ethnicity. Scientific Data, 10.
Amanda Cercas Curry, Giuseppe Attanasio, Zeerak Ta-
lat, and Dirk Hovy. 2024.
Classist tools: Social
class correlates with performance in nlp. Preprint,
arXiv:2403.04445.
Edward E. Curtis. 2005. African-american islamization
reconsidered: Black history narratives and muslim
identity. Journal of the American Academy of Reli-
gion, 73:659–684.
Stephen Darwall. 1977. Two kinds of respect. Ethics,
88:36 – 49.
Maria De-Arteaga, Alexey Romanov, Hanna Wal-
lach, Jennifer Chayes, Christian Borgs, Alexandra
Chouldechova, Sahin Geyik, Krishnaram Kenthapadi,
and Adam Tauman Kalai. 2019. Bias in bios: A case
study of semantic representation bias in a high-stakes
setting. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fair-
ness, Accountability, and Transparency, FAT* ’19,
page 120–128, New York, NY, USA. Association for
Computing Machinery.
Sunipa Dev, Masoud Monajatipoor, Anaelia Ovalle, Ar-
jun Subramonian, Jeff Phillips, and Kai-Wei Chang.
2021. Harms of gender exclusivity and challenges in
non-binary representation in language technologies.
In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
1968–1994, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Re-
public. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Hannah Devinney, Jenny Björklund, and Henrik Björk-
lund. 2022. Theories of “gender” in nlp bias research.
In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fair-
ness, Accountability, and Transparency, FAccT ’22,
page 2083–2102, New York, NY, USA. Association
for Computing Machinery.
Sheena Erete, Aarti Israni, and Tawanna Dillahunt. 2018.
An intersectional approach to designing in the mar-
gins. Interactions, 25(3):66–69.
Michael Färber and Lin Ao. 2022. The microsoft aca-
demic knowledge graph enhanced: Author name dis-
ambiguation, publication classification, and embed-
dings. Quantitative Science Studies, 3:51–98.
J. Feinberg. 1984. Harmless Wrongdoing. Moral Limits
of the Criminal Law. Oxford University Press.
Anjalie Field, Su Lin Blodgett, Zeerak Waseem, and
Yulia Tsvetkov. 2021. A survey of race, racism, and
anti-racism in NLP. In Proceedings of the 59th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pages 1905–1925, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Luciano Floridi and Josh Cowls. 2019.
A Uni-
fied Framework of Five Principles for AI in
Society.
Harvard Data Science Review, 1(1).
Https://hdsr.mitpress.mit.edu/pub/l0jsh9d1.
S. Michael Gaddis. 2017a. How black are lakisha and
jamal? racial perceptions from names used in corre-
spondence audit studies. Randomized Social Experi-
ments eJournal.
S. Michael Gaddis. 2017b. Racial/ethnic perceptions
from hispanic names: Selecting names to test for
discrimination. Socius, 3.
Timnit Gebru,
Jamie Morgenstern,
Briana Vec-
chione, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, Hanna Wallach,
Hal Daumé III, and Kate Crawford. 2021. Datasheets
for datasets. Commun. ACM, 64(12):86–92.
Ben Green. 2019. Good” isn’t good enough. In Pro-
ceedings of the AI for Social Good workshop at
NeurIPS, volume 17.
Ben Green. 2021. The contestation of tech ethics: A
sociotechnical approach to technology ethics in prac-
tice. Journal of Social Computing, 2(3):209–225.
Daniel Greene, Anna Lauren Hoffmann, and Luke Stark.
2019. Better, nicer, clearer, fairer: A critical assess-
ment of the movement for ethical artificial intelli-
gence and machine learning. In Proceedings of the
52nd Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences.
Oliver L Haimson and Anna Lauren Hoffmann. 2016.
Constructing and enforcing" authentic" identity on-
line: Facebook, real names, and non-normative iden-
tities. First Monday.
Alex Hanna, Emily Denton, Andrew Smart, and Jamila
Smith-Loud. 2020. Towards a critical race method-
ology in algorithmic fairness. In Proceedings of the
2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and
Transparency, FAT* ’20, page 501–512, New York,
NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery.
Alex Hanna and Tina M Park. 2020. Against scale:
Provocations and resistances to scale thinking. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2010.08850.
Karen
Hao.
2019.
In
2020,
let’s
stop
AI
ethics-washing
and
actually
do
something.
https://www.technologyreview.com/2019/
12/27/57/ai-ethics-washing-time-to-act/.
Donna Haraway. 1988. Situated knowledges: The sci-
ence question in feminism and the privilege of partial
perspective. Feminist Studies, 14(3):575–599.
Leigh Honeywell. 2016. neveragain.tech. https://
neveragain.tech/.
Carole Hough. 2016. The Oxford Handbook of Names
and Naming. Oxford University Press.
Katsumi Ibaraki, Winston Wu, Lu Wang, and Rada Mi-
halcea. 2024. Analyzing occupational distribution
representation in Japanese language models. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2024 Joint International Conference
on Computational Linguistics, Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024), pages 959–
973, Torino, Italia. ELRA and ICCL.
Abigail Z. Jacobs and Hanna Wallach. 2021. Measure-
ment and fairness. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM
Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Trans-
parency, page 375–385, Virtual Event Canada. ACM.
Sullam Jeoung, Jana Diesner, and Halil Kilicoglu. 2023.
Examining the causal impact of first names on lan-
guage models: The case of social commonsense rea-
soning. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Trust-
worthy Natural Language Processing (TrustNLP
2023), pages 61–72, Toronto, Canada. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Robin Jeshion. 2009. The significance of names. Mind
& Language, 24(4):370–403.
Austin H Johnson. 2016. Transnormativity: A new
concept and its validation through documentary
film about transgender men. Sociological inquiry,
86(4):465–491.
Astrid Kaiser. 2010. „kevin ist kein name, sondern
eine diagnose!“der vorname in der grundschule–
klangwort, modewort oder reizwort.
Die Grund-
schulzeitschrift, 24:26–29.
Fariba Karimi, Claudia Wagner, Florian Lemmerich,
Mohsen Jadidi, and Markus Strohmaier. 2016. Infer-
ring gender from names on the web: A comparative
evaluation of gender detection methods. In Proceed-
ings of the 25th International Conference Companion
on World Wide Web - WWW ’16 Companion, page
53–54, Montréal, Québec, Canada. ACM Press.
Os Keyes. 2017. Stop mapping names to gender.
Os Keyes. 2018. The misgendering machines: Trans/hci
implications of automatic gender recognition. Proc.
ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., 2(CSCW).
Os Keyes, Josephine Hoy, and Margaret Drouhard. 2019.
Human-computer insurrection: Notes on an anarchist
hci. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’19,
page 1–13, New York, NY, USA. Association for
Computing Machinery.
Os Keyes, Chandler May, and Annabelle Carrell. 2021.
You keep using that word: Ways of thinking about
gender in computing research. Proc. ACM Hum.-
Comput. Interact., 5(CSCW1).
Eden B. King, Saaid A. Mendoza, Juan M. Madera,
Mikki R. Hebl, and Jennifer L. Knight. 2006. What’s
in a name? a multiracial investigation of the role of
occupational stereotypes in selection decisions. Jour-
nal of Applied Social Psychology, 36:1145–1159.
L. Kirkup and R. B. Frenkel. 2006. Systematic errors,
page 83–96. Cambridge University Press.
Rebecca Knowles, Josh Carroll, and Mark Dredze. 2016.
Demographer: Extremely simple name demograph-
ics. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on NLP
and Computational Social Science, pages 108–113,
Austin, Texas. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Lex Konnelly. 2021. Nuance and normativity in trans
linguistic research. Journal of Language and Sexual-
ity, 10:71–82.
Hadas Kotek, Rikker Dockum, and David Sun. 2023.
Gender bias and stereotypes in large language models.
In Proceedings of The ACM Collective Intelligence
Conference, CI ’23, page 12–24, New York, NY,
USA. Association for Computing Machinery.
Diego Kozlowski, Dakota S Murray, Alexis Bell, Will
Hulsey, Vincent Larivière, Thema Monroe-White,
and Cassidy R Sugimoto. 2022. Avoiding bias when
inferring race using name-based approaches. Plos
one, 17(3):e0264270.
Brian Larson. 2017. Gender as a variable in natural-
language processing: Ethical considerations. In Pro-
ceedings of the First ACL Workshop on Ethics in
Natural Language Processing, pages 1–11, Valencia,
Spain. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ida Marie S. Lassen, Mina Almasi, Kenneth Enevold-
sen, and Ross Deans Kristensen-McLachlan. 2023.
Detecting intersectionality in NER models: A data-
driven approach. In Proceedings of the 7th Joint
SIGHUM Workshop on Computational Linguistics
for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, Humanities
and Literature, pages 116–127, Dubrovnik, Croatia.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Anne Lauscher, Archie Crowley, and Dirk Hovy. 2022.
Welcome to the modern world of pronouns: Identity-
inclusive natural language processing beyond gen-
der. In Proceedings of the 29th International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics, pages 1221–
1232, Gyeongju, Republic of Korea. International
Committee on Computational Linguistics.
David C.S. Li. 1997. Borrowed identity: Signaling in-
volvement with a western name. Journal of Pragmat-
ics, 28(4):489–513. Language and Discourse Issues
in Hong Kong’s Change of Sovereignity.
Haizhou Li, Khe Chai Sim, Jin-Shea Kuo, and Minghui
Dong. 2007. Semantic transliteration of personal
names. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of
the Association of Computational Linguistics, pages
120–127, Prague, Czech Republic. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Thomas Liao, Rohan Taori, Inioluwa Deborah Raji, and
Ludwig Schmidt. 2021. Are we learning yet? a meta
review of evaluation failures across machine learn-
ing. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track
(Round 2).
Wendy Liu and Derek Ruths. 2013. What’s in a name?
using first names as features for gender inference
in twitter. In AAAI Spring Symposium: Analyzing
Microtext.
Jeffrey W. Lockhart, Molly M. King, and Christin Mun-
sch. 2023. Name-based demographic inference and
the unequal distribution of misrecognition. Nature
Human Behaviour, 7(7):1084–1095.
María Lugones. 2016. The Coloniality of Gender, pages
13–33. Palgrave Macmillan UK, London.
Gideon S. Mann and David Yarowsky. 2003. Unsuper-
vised personal name disambiguation. In Conference
on Computational Natural Language Learning.
Gary T. Marx. 1999.
What’s in a name? some re-
flections on the sociology of anonymity. Inf. Soc.,
15:99–112.
Rowan Hall Maudslay, Hila Gonen, Ryan Cotterell, and
Simone Teufel. 2019. It’s all in the name: Mitigating
gender bias with name-based counterfactual data sub-
stitution. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages
5267–5275, Hong Kong, China. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Patrick McKenzie. 2010.
Falsehoods Programmers
Believe About Names | Kalzumeus Software.
https://www.kalzumeus.com/2010/06/17/
falsehoods-programmers-believe-about-names/.
Chan Tov Mcnamarah. 2020. Misgendering. The SAGE
Encyclopedia of Trans Studies.
Ramanujam Meganathan. 2009. The politics of naming.
Contributions to Indian Sociology, 43:317–324.
Samuel Messick. 1995. Standards of validity and the
validity of standards in performance asessment. Edu-
cational Measurement: Issues and Practice, 14(4):5–
8.
Jennifer Mickel. 2024. Racial/ethnic categories in ai
and algorithmic fairness: Why they matter and what
they represent. ArXiv, abs/2404.06717.
Sabrina Mielke. 2024. Personal communication.
Helena Mihaljevi´c, Marco Tullney, Lucía Santamaría,
and Christian Steinfeldt. 2019. Reflections on gender
analyses of bibliographic corpora. Frontiers in Big
Data, 2:29.
Einat Minkov, Richard C. Wang, and William W. Co-
hen. 2005. Extracting personal names from email:
Applying named entity recognition to informal text.
In Proceedings of Human Language Technology Con-
ference and Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 443–450, Van-
couver, British Columbia, Canada. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Saif M. Mohammad. 2020. Gender gap in natural lan-
guage processing research: Disparities in authorship
and citations. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 7860–7870, Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Sharon N. Obasi, Richard Mocarski, Natalie Holt, De-
bra A. Hope, and Nathan Woodruff. 2019. Renaming
me: Assessing the influence of gender identity on
name selection. Names, 67(4):199–211.
Ìkòtún Reuben Olúwáfe ´mi. 2014. New trends in yorùbá
personal names among yorùbá christians. Linguistik
Online, 59(2).
Anaelia Ovalle, Arjun Subramonian, Vagrant Gautam,
Gilbert Gee, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2023. Factoring the
matrix of domination: A critical review and reimagi-
nation of intersectionality in ai fairness. In Proceed-
ings of the 2023 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics,
and Society, AIES ’23, page 496–511, New York, NY,
USA. Association for Computing Machinery.
Jane Pilcher. 2017. Names and “doing gender”: How
forenames and surnames contribute to gender identi-
ties, difference, and inequalities. Sex Roles, 77:812–
822.
Alexey Romanov, Maria De-Arteaga, Hanna Wal-
lach, Jennifer Chayes, Christian Borgs, Alexandra
Chouldechova, Sahin Geyik, Krishnaram Kenthapadi,
Anna Rumshisky, and Adam Kalai. 2019. What’s
in a name? Reducing bias in bios without access
to protected attributes. In Proceedings of the 2019
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short
Papers), pages 4187–4195, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jonne
Sälevä
and
Constantine
Lignos.
2024.
ParaNames 1.0:
Creating an entity name cor-
pus for 400+ languages using Wikidata.
In
Proceedings of the 2024 Joint International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics, Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024),
pages 12599–12610, Torino, Italia. ELRA and ICCL.
Sandra Sandoval, Jieyu Zhao, Marine Carpuat, and Hal
Daumé III. 2023. A rose by any other name would
not smell as sweet: Social bias in names mistrans-
lation. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 3933–3945, Singapore. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Danielle Saunders and Katrina Olsen. 2023. Gender,
names and other mysteries: Towards the ambiguous
for gender-inclusive translation. In Proceedings of
the First Workshop on Gender-Inclusive Translation
Technologies, pages 85–93, Tampere, Finland. Euro-
pean Association for Machine Translation.
Morgan Klaus Scheuerman and Jed R. Brubaker. 2024.
Products of positionality: How tech workers shape
identity concepts in computer vision. In Proceed-
ings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, page 1–18, Honolulu HI USA.
ACM.
Morgan Klaus Scheuerman, Jacob M. Paul, and Jed R.
Brubaker. 2019. How computers see gender: An
evaluation of gender classification in commercial fa-
cial analysis services. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput.
Interact., 3(CSCW).
Morgan Klaus Scheuerman, Katta Spiel, Oliver L Haim-
son, Foad Hamidi, and Stacy M Branham. 2020a.
Hci guidelines for gender equity and inclusivity.
Morgan Klaus Scheuerman, Kandrea Wade, Caitlin
Lustig, and Jed R. Brubaker. 2020b. How we’ve
taught algorithms to see identity: Constructing race
and gender in image databases for facial analysis.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Inter-
action, 4(CSCW1):1–35.
Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
2016. Neural machine translation of rare words with
subword units. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1715–1725,
Berlin, Germany. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Khaled Shaalan and Hafsa Raza. 2007. Person name en-
tity recognition for Arabic. In Proceedings of the
2007 Workshop on Computational Approaches to
Semitic Languages: Common Issues and Resources,
pages 17–24, Prague, Czech Republic. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Vered Shwartz, Rachel Rudinger, and Oyvind Tafjord.
2020. “you are grounded!”: Latent name artifacts in
pre-trained language models. In Proceedings of the
2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 6850–6861,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Eric Michael Smith and Adina Williams. 2021. Hi,
my name is martha: Using names to measure and
mitigate bias in generative dialogue models. ArXiv,
abs/2109.03300.
Robyn Speer. 2021. Google scholar has failed us.
Christina R. Steidl and Regina Werum. 2019. If all
you have is a hammer, everything looks like a nail:
Operationalization matters.
Sociology Compass,
13(8):e12727.
Anselm L Strauss. 2017.
Mirrors and masks: The
search for identity. Routledge.
Christina A. Sue and Edward E. Telles. 2007. Assim-
ilation and gender in naming. American Journal of
Sociology, 112(5):1383–1415.
Zeerak Talat, Hagen Blix, Josef Valvoda, Maya Indira
Ganesh, Ryan Cotterell, and Adina Williams. 2022.
On the machine learning of ethical judgments from
natural language. In Proceedings of the 2022 Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, pages 769–779, Seattle, United
States. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Rachael Tatman. 2020. What i won’t build. https://
www.rctatman.com/talks/what-i-wont-build.
Department
of
Internal
Affairs
|
Te
Tari
Tai-
whenua. 2021.
Press Releases - dia.govt.nz —
dia.govt.nz.
https://www.dia.govt.nz/press.
nsf/d77da9b523f12931cc256ac5000d19b6/
d1288ac08d7758c2cc25838200107411!
OpenDocument.
Konstantinos Tzioumis. 2018. Demographic aspects of
first names. Scientific Data, 5.
United States National Commission for the Protection
of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral
Research. 1978. The Belmont report: ethical princi-
ples and guidelines for the protection of human sub-
jects of research, volume 2. United States National
Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of
Biomedical and Behavioral Research.
U.S. Census. 2020. First name frequency by gender.
U.S. Social Security Administration. 2023. Top 10 baby
names of 2023.
Ian Van Buskirk, Aaron Clauset, and Daniel B. Lar-
remore. 2023. An open-source cultural consensus
approach to name-based gender classification. Pro-
ceedings of the International AAAI Conference on
Web and Social Media, 17:866–877.
Karina Vida, Judith Simon, and Anne Lauscher. 2023.
Values, ethics, morals? on the use of moral con-
cepts in NLP research. In Findings of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023,
pages 5534–5554, Singapore. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Adam Vogel and Dan Jurafsky. 2012. He said, she said:
Gender in the ACL Anthology. In Proceedings of
the ACL-2012 Special Workshop on Rediscovering
50 Years of Discoveries, pages 33–41, Jeju Island,
Korea. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Subhah Wadhawan. 2022. Let the machines do the dirty
work: Social media, machine learning technology
and the iteration of racialized surveillance. Canadian
Journal of Law and Technology, 20(1):1.
Jan Philip Wahle, Terry Ruas, Mohamed Abdalla, Bela
Gipp, and Saif Mohammad. 2023. We are who we
cite: Bridges of influence between natural language
processing and other academic fields. In Proceed-
ings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 12896–12913,
Singapore. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Jun Wang, Benjamin Rubinstein, and Trevor Cohn.
2022.
Measuring and mitigating name biases in
neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the
60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
2576–2590, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Zeerak Waseem, Smarika Lulz, Joachim Bingel, and
Isabelle Augenstein. 2021. Disembodied machine
learning:
On the illusion of objectivity in nlp.
Preprint, arXiv:2101.11974.
Kellie Webster, Xuezhi Wang, Ian Tenney, Alex Beu-
tel, Emily Pitler, Ellie Pavlick, Jilin Chen, Ed Chi,
and Slav Petrov. 2021. Measuring and reducing gen-
dered correlations in pre-trained models. Preprint,
arXiv:2010.06032.
Paul Weindling. 2001. The origins of informed consent:
The international scientific commission on medical
war crimes, and the nuremberg code. Bulletin of the
History of Medicine, 75(1):37–71.
Sasha Weitman. 1981. Some methodological issues in
quantitative onomastics. Names, 29(3):181–196.
John F. Williams. 1924. The geneva protocol of 1924
for the pacific settlement of international disputes1.
Journal of the British Institute of International Af-
fairs, 3(6):288–304.
Robert Wolfe and Aylin Caliskan. 2021. Low frequency
names exhibit bias and overfitting in contextualizing
language models. In Proceedings of the 2021 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 518–532, Online and Punta Cana,
Dominican Republic. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
