Title: Natural Language Processing for Electronic Health Records in Scandinavian Languages: Norwegian, Swedish, and Danish
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.18539v1
--------------------------------------------------

 
 
 
 
 
Natural Language Processing for Electronic Health Records in Scandinavian 
Languages: Norwegian, Swedish, and Danish 
Ashenafi Zebene Woldaregay a, PhD, Jørgen Aarmo Lund c, j, 1, MSc, Phuong Dinh Ngo  g, PhD, Mariyam Tayefi g, 
PhD, Joel Burman a, MSc, Stine Hansen a, PhD, Martin Hylleholt Sillesen i, PhD, Hercules Dalianis g, h, PhD, Robert 
Jenssen c, d, e,1,2, Lindsetmo Rolf Ole b, f,  PhD, Karl Øyvind Mikalsen a, c, f ,1, PhD 
a Norwegian Centre for Clinical Artificial Intelligence (SPKI), University Hospital of Northern Norway, Tromsø, Norway 
b Clinic of Surgery, Oncology and Women Health, University Hospital of North Norway, Tromso, Norway 
c Department of Physics and Technology, UiT The Arctic University of Norway, Hansine Hansens veg 18, 9019 Tromsø, Norway 
d Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen, Universitetsparken 1, Copenhagen 2100, Denmark 
e Norwegian Computing Center, Gaustadalleen 23a, 0373 Oslo, Norway 
f  Department of Clinical Medicine, UiT – The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway 
g Norwegian Centre for E-health Research, Tromsø, Norway 
h Department of Computer and Systems Sciences, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden 
i Department of Surgery and Transplantation C-TX, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark 
j DIPS AS 
 
Background: 
Clinical natural language processing (NLP) refers to the use of computational methods for extracting, processing, and analyzing 
unstructured clinical text data, and holds a huge potential to transform healthcare in various clinical tasks. The advancement of deep 
learning, augmented by the recent advent of transformers, has been pivotal in the success of NLP across multiple domains. This 
success is largely attributed to deep learning systems' end-to-end training capabilities, allowing models to automatically learn 
features from large amounts of data. Further, recent advancements in instruction tuning have led to the development of Large 
Language Models (LLMs), e.g. OpenAI's GPT, which can perform tasks described in natural language, and holds promising 
potential. While these advancements have dramatically enhanced capabilities in processing languages like English, these benefits 
are not always equally transferable to under-resourced languages. In this regard, this review aims to provide a comprehensive 
assessment of the state-of-the-art NLP methods for the mainland Scandinavian clinical text, thereby providing an insightful overview 
of the landscape for clinical NLP within the region. 
Objective: 
The study aims to perform a systematic review to comprehensively assess and analyze the state-of-the-art NLP methods for the 
Scandinavian clinical domain, thereby providing an overview of the landscape for clinical language processing within the 
Scandinavian languages across Norway, Denmark, and Sweden. Generally, the review seeks to provide a practical outline regarding 
various modeling options, opportunities, and challenges or limitations, thus, providing a clear overview of existing methodologies 
and potential avenues for future research and development.  
Method: 
A literature search was conducted in various online databases including PubMed, ScienceDirect, Google Scholar, ACM digital 
library, and IEEE Xplore between December 2022 and February 2023. Further, relevant references to the included articles were also 
used to solidify our search. Additionally, an updated search was performed between February and March 2024 to incorporate new 
articles released after the initial search. The search considers peer-reviewed journal articles, preprints, and conference proceedings. 
Relevant articles were initially identified by scanning titles, abstracts, and keywords, which served as a preliminary filter in 
conjunction with inclusion and exclusion criteria. After the initial screening and removal of duplicates, the remaining articles went 
through a full-text eligibility assessment, and, finally, relevant studies were incorporated. The final pool includes articles that 
conducted clinical NLP in the mainland Scandinavian languages and were published in English between 2010 and 2024. Data was 
extracted according to predefined categories, established from prior studies and further refined through brainstorming sessions 
among the authors. 
 
* Corresponding author. 
email address: ashenafi.zebene.woldaregay@unn.no 
 
1 Work done while at the UiT Machine Learning Group, machine-learning.uit.no. 
2 Work done while at Visual Intelligence, www.visual-intelligence.no. 
 
 
 
Results: 
The initial search yielded 217 articles. Following the identification stage, 172 articles remained following the removal of duplicates 
and studies that were outside the study scope. After the initial screening stage, 134 studies remained, which went through full-text 
eligibility. The full-text eligibility assessment was independently carried out by five of the authors and resulted in 105 studies. After 
performing an updated search, 8 more articles were included, resulting in a total of 113 articles, which were critically analyzed in 
the study. Any disagreements among the authors were resolved through discussion. Out of the 113 articles, 18% (n=21) focus on 
Norwegian clinical text, 64% (n=72) on Swedish, 10% (n=11) on Danish, and 8% (n=9) focus on more than one language. Generally, 
the review identified positive developments across the region despite some observable gaps and disparities between the languages.  
Concerning publication trends and co-occurrence, a significant number of studies focus on Swedish clinical text compared to the 
others, with minimal efforts to study these languages together. There are substantial disparities in the level of adoption of 
transformer-based models. Research focusing on Swedish and Danish clinical text has shown satisfactory levels, while activities 
focusing on Norwegian clinical text are minimal. In essential tasks such as de-identification, there is significantly less research 
activity focusing on Norwegian and Danish compared to Swedish text. Further, the review identified a low level of sharing resources 
such as data, experimentation code, pre-trained models, and rate of adaptation and transfer learning in the region. Additionally, there 
are very few efforts to validate models in clinical settings. Regarding active medical expert involvement, the review identified a 
satisfactory level though the rates vary among the three languages. 
Conclusion: 
The review presented a comprehensive assessment of the state-of-the-art Clinical NLP for electronic health records (EHR) text in 
mainland Scandinavian languages and, highlighted the potential barriers and challenges that hinder the rapid advancement of the 
field in the region. The review identified a lack of shared resources, such as datasets, pre-trained models and tools, inadequate 
research infrastructure, and insufficient collaboration as the most significant barriers that require careful consideration in future 
research endeavors. For example, the disparity in research activities among the three languages underscores the importance of robust 
research infrastructure, as demonstrated by the significant impact of the research infrastructure  “Swedish Health Record Research 
Bank” (Health Bank). Given the low-resource nature of these languages, more research activities should be targeted toward resource 
development, core NLP tasks, and de-identification. Generally, we foresee the findings presented in this review will help shape 
future research directions by shedding some light on areas that require further attention for the rapid advancement of the field in the 
region 
 
Keywords: natural language processing, transformers, deep learning, clinical text, Scandinavian language 
1. Introduction  
The adoption of Electronic Health Record (EHR) systems in hospitals has enabled large-scale collection and digitization of 
healthcare data, allowing population health analysis and predictive modeling with novel and potentially transformative applications 
in healthcare (1-3). While EHR systems generally attempt to store data in structured and standardized formats, unstructured free-
text notes still make up significant portions of EHR records. These notes afford users the necessary flexibility to provide 
comprehensive and relevant information for other healthcare workers, especially in complex care situations where preexisting 
guidelines are challenging to apply. However, they also contain valuable clinical information that can serve as validation for other 
healthcare data sources, aid for EHR data entry and administrative duties, and support for clinical decision-making. Inferring this 
information is the main goal of research into clinical NLP methods, which apply computational methods to analyze and process 
unstructured clinical text (4). 
The last decade of NLP research has seen the breakaway success of deep learning methods, which forgo the rule and feature design 
involved in traditional NLP methods, in favor of having the model itself discover semantic and syntactic relationships in large 
corpora of unannotated text. One key event was the publication of the Transformer network design in 2017, which builds on attention 
blocks that allow the networks to capture complex dependencies between terms. Transformer networks still form the backbone of 
state-of-the-art NLP models and have been shown to perform well in various clinical NLP tasks (17-20), including information 
extraction (18, 21-23), classification (24-27), and context analysis (28-30). These networks also benefit from training with domain-
specific corpora: models specifically developed for clinical text, such as ClinicalBERT (31) and BlueBERT (146), outperform 
equivalent general-purpose models in information extraction and other clinical NLP tasks. 
Recent research into instruction tuning has allowed the development of Large Language Models (LLMs) capable of performing 
tasks specified in natural languages, such as the OpenAI GPT models, the Meta LLaMa models, and Google’s Gemini (5-7). The 
ability to perform tasks without specifically annotated training corpora has led to a groundswell of proposed applications for LLMs, 
with healthcare being no exception: LLM-based solutions have been proposed for clinical tasks such as patient triage and treatment 
plan generation, as well as documentation tasks such as summarization and clinical narrative structuring (8-10). However, the 
disconnect between the proposed tasks and the LLMs’ language modeling objectives introduces its own challenges, such as 
“hallucinations” arising from the model picking superficially probable but incorrect answers. The scale of the models also introduces 
privacy and data security concerns. 
 
 
 
However, despite the favorable conditions for general NLP research, the clinical domain presents unique challenges for developing 
and implementing clinical NLP. Data access is the most readily apparent challenge: clinical notes contain uniquely sensitive 
information about patients, along with potentially directly personally identifying details, requiring access control and privacy-
preserving measures to preserve patient privacy (11). The clinical notes themselves are shaped by the realities of healthcare work: 
as a means of communicating with other healthcare professionals, often containing jargon and abbreviations specific to the 
profession, as well as misspellings due to time pressure, making it more difficult to apply methods developed and evaluated with 
general NLP datasets (11). Depending on the task, getting data annotated may require medical expertise, requiring effort from 
healthcare workers already under a heavy workload. Beyond model development, challenges also arise when implementing NLP 
methods in clinical settings. On a technical level, clinical NLP models must work reliably at scale, and with minimal latency, 
especially in applications directly related to patient treatment. Operationally, the NLP applications must integrate into existing 
workflows, ideally as seamlessly as possible. From the user’s perspective, uninterpretable “black box” models can be perceived as 
untrustworthy, leading to lower adoption and use (11, 12). 
While deep learning methods have drastically enhanced language processing capabilities in high-resource languages like English, 
Spanish, and German, these capabilities do not necessarily transfer equally to low-resource languages, where large corpora of 
unannotated text are not as readily available (13). Prior reviews have examined clinical NLP in languages other than English (13, 
14), but these reviews cover a wider range of languages, often unrelated to each other, and primarily focus on NLP method 
development over clinical applications. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first comprehensive review covering the 
development of clinical NLP for the mainland Scandinavian languages – Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish – which are linguistically 
related, and broadly similar in vocabulary and grammar (15-17). These languages are among the most under-resourced, especially 
compared to resource-rich languages like English. This review aims to comprehensively document the state-of-the-art and the 
developments in clinical NLP methods for the mainland Scandinavian languages, while also providing a practical outline of existing 
NLP methods and future research opportunities. To provide a better picture of the overall research trends, the review examined four 
major topics: 
I. 
Publication insight and trends: examines the number of publications, co-occurrence of languages, and collaboration of 
authors among each respective country, 
II. 
Data characteristics: examines the type of data sources, reported data quality issues, access to data for public use, and the 
type of EHR documents targeted in the study, 
III. 
NLP techniques: examines NLP techniques employed in the studies, including the availability of codes and pre-trained 
models,  
IV. 
Clinical characteristics: examines the clinical settings the studies were conducted, including the specific healthcare domain 
targeted, and whether medical professionals were involved in developing or evaluating the method.  
 
Generally, the review identified that the number of publications per year on clinical NLP for mainland Scandinavian languages is 
trending upwards, aside from a peak in 2014 and a lull between 2018 and 2019. However, the research task focus differs significantly 
across languages, leaving, for instance, less published research into de-identification for Norwegian text than for Swedish. Despite 
the similarities between the mainland Scandinavian languages, only a few of the reviewed studies applied adaptation or transfer 
learning techniques, and only one reviewed study incorporated all three languages. Under a third of the reviewed studies (31.9%) 
make their datasets available to other researchers, but even fewer studies (18.6%) make their experiment code or NLP models 
available. 
2. Methods  
The study aims to perform a systematic review to comprehensively assess and analyze the state-of-the-art natural language 
processing methods for the Scandinavian clinical domain, thereby providing an insightful overview of the landscape for clinical 
language processing within the mainland Scandinavian languages: Norwegian, Danish, and Swedish. Further, the review seeks to 
provide a practical outline regarding various modeling options, opportunities, and challenges or limitations, thus, providing a clear 
overview of existing methodologies and potential avenues for future research and development. To this end, a literature search was 
conducted in the research aggregators PubMed, ScienceDirect, Google Scholar, ACM digital library, and IEEE Xplore between 
December 2022 and February 2023. Additionally, an updated search was performed between February and March 2024 to 
incorporate new articles released after the initial search.  Further, relevant references to the included articles were also used to 
solidify our search. In addition, research outputs from distinguished researchers from our networks were also used. The search 
considered peer-reviewed journal articles, preprints, and conference proceedings. Different search strings were used including 
“clinical decision support”, “natural language processing”, “Norway”, “Norwegian”, “Danish”, “Denmark”, “Swedish”, 
“Sweden”, “artificial intelligence”, “machine learning”, “deep learning”, “transformers”, “ neural network”, “clinical text”, 
“clinical notes”, ”EHR”, and “clinical NLP”. Further, these strings and sub-strings were combined using “OR”, and “AND” for 
a better search strategy.  Relevant articles were initially identified by scanning titles, abstracts, and keywords, which served as a 
preliminary filter in conjunction with inclusion and exclusion criteria. After removing the duplicates, studies that passed the initial 
screening went through a full-text eligibility assessment, and, studies fulfilling the inclusion criteria were encompassed. Studies that 
perform clinical NLP in the mainland Scandinavian languages and were published between 2010 and 2024 in the English language 
 
 
 
are included in the study. The process was carried out and reported according to the widely used PRISMA guidelines for reporting 
systematic review (18). Information was extracted from the included articles using predefined categories established through a series 
of brainstorming sessions among the authors.    
2.1. 
Inclusion and exclusion criteria: 
Studies were included in the review if and only if they met the following criteria: 
• 
Studies should use natural language processing for extracting, processing, or analyzing medical texts written in Norwegian, 
Swedish, or Danish. Clinical text in our context encompasses but is not limited to, electronic health records  (EHR) (e.g., 
progress notes, lab reports, pathology reports, discharge summaries, and others). 
• 
Studies should be published between 2010 and 2024.  
• 
Peer-reviewed journal articles, preprints, and conference proceedings are included.  
• 
Studies published in English.  
Studies that fell outside the defined scope, including those limited to only structured data, were excluded. 
2.2. 
Categorization and Data Collection 
This section describes the categories used in extracting information from the articles included in the study. These categories are 
solely determined to assess and evaluate the included articles and are pre-defined based on previous knowledge, brainstorming, 
discussion among the authors, and literature (4, 13). A more detailed description of these categories can be found in Appendix A 
and the result section. These variables were selected so as to capture an overview of the clinical NLP research dynamics and assist 
in analyzing trends, identifying gaps, and understanding research directions. The definition of other relevant categories, which were 
extracted but not directly used in the literature analysis, can also be found in Appendix A.  
• 
Clinical Application and Technical Objective: The clinical challenges or healthcare goals the study intends to address, 
and, if there is any technical innovation being pursued from an NLP perspective. 
• 
Author's country and Date of publication: The author’s country of affiliation, and article publication date.    
• 
Language: Language of the clinical text processed in the study. 
• 
NLP Task: High-level categorization of the NLP task implemented in the study. 
• 
Type Description: Specific categorization of the NLP tasks implemented in the study.   
• 
Model and Method: Family and type of model either used or developed in the study.  
• 
Code Availability, and pre-trained models: Whether the study had released any accompanying code or pre-trained 
models related to the experiments conducted.   
• 
Adaptation & Transfer learning: Whether the study employed adaptation and transfer learning such as data 
augmentation, or domain adaptation. 
• 
Data Sources and Names: The origin and name, where available, of the dataset employed in the study. 
• 
Other data: Non-free text data utilized in the study along with free text data. 
• 
Type of EHR documents: Where reported, the specific type of EHR documents utilized in the study.  
• 
Feature Representation Techniques: The specific methods employed to convert the preprocessed text data into a 
numerical representation that the NLP models can understand and analyze. 
• 
Disease area/Health domain: The disease or health domain targeted by the study, wherever possible, roughly mapped 
onto the classification defined by the Clinical Data Interchange Standards Consortium (19). 
• 
Departments/Clinical Unit: The particular healthcare department or clinical unit from which the study dataset was 
retrieved.  
• 
Data Availability: Accessibility of the dataset, whether public, restricted to certain users, or available upon request. 
• 
Domain Expert: Involvement of clinical domain experts in dataset preparation or analysis process.  
• 
Data quality and related issues: Type of data quality and other related issues reported in the study and measures to 
mitigate them. 
• 
Implementation Status: State of deployment and integration, or trial in clinical settings. 
Based on the categories defined above, five authors (AZW, PDN, MT, JB, and JAL) independently performed the data extraction 
process. To mitigate bias, all authors carried out random checking of each other’s results and as a final confirmation, AZW performed 
a thorough inspection of the team’s results. Any ambiguity that arose at this stage was resolved through discussion.  
2.3. 
Literature Analysis and Evaluation  
Literature evaluation was carried out based on the predefined categories mentioned above to provide a comprehensive overview of 
the landscape for state-of-the-art clinical NLP in mainland Scandinavian languages: Swedish, Norwegians, and Danish. For the sake 
of brevity, the analysis was conducted by grouping these predefined categories into four groups: Publication Insight and Trends, 
Clinical Characteristics, NLP Techniques, and Data Characteristics. It is worth noting that evaluations of certain features in the 
analysis could exceed the total number of articles reviewed, given the fact that an article could have more than one contribution. 
 
 
 
Further detailed information regarding how the specific values in a category were grouped into sub-categories can be found in 
Appendix A. 
Publication Insight and Trends: This group delves into these three predefined categories – language, author's country, and date 
of publication. It focuses on analyzing the general publication trends across the three languages over the years, examining the co-
occurrence of languages within publications, and exploring collaborations between authors from the three mentioned countries and 
others, thereby providing a broader understanding of the research dynamics, language use, and international cooperation in the field.  
Clinical Characteristics: This group delves into these four predefined categories - disease area/health domain, 
departments/clinical unit, domain expert and annotation, and implementation status, thereby providing analysis and insight into the 
overall focus of the included studies regarding the type of disease and department or clinical unit considered, and the extent of pilot 
testing or other forms of evaluation performed within the clinical settings along with the extent of experts involvement in data 
annotation. For the sake of brevity and ease, the disease area/health domain was further grouped into hematologic and immune 
disorders, cardiovascular disorders, gastrointestinal disorders, behavioral and lifestyle factors, infectious diseases, cancer and 
systemic disorders, musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders, neurological and psychiatric disorders, general conditions and 
procedures, surgical and postoperative complications, family and genetic history, specific conditions (Appendix A). By the same 
token, the departments/clinical units were further grouped into general services, intensive and critical care, surgical specialties, 
medical specialties, oncology and hematology, diagnostic and therapeutic services, women's health, pediatrics, other specialties, 
and administrative (Appendix A).  
NLP Techniques: This group thoroughly examines six predefined categories - NLP task, type description, feature representation 
techniques, model and methods, code availability, and adaptation & transfer learning, thereby providing detailed analysis and 
insight into the specific NLP task addressed, the type of methodology and feature representation employed for the specific task 
under consideration, the availability of resource for replicating or building upon the work, and the adaptation of existing pre-trained 
models to the language of interest. For the sake of brevity and ease, the model and methods reported in the included studies are 
categorized into rule-based systems, interpretable methods, ensemble methods, traditional/statistical learning methods, 
deep/nonlinear learning methods, hybrid methods, transformers and large language models (Appendix A). By the same token, the 
feature representation techniques reported were categorized into Statistical features, Orthographic word features, Ontologies, 
Learned word-level embeddings, and Learned sentence/document embeddings (Appendix A).  
Data Characteristics: This group thoroughly examines five predefined categories - data sources and names, type of EHR 
documents, language, data availability, and data quality and related issues, thereby providing detailed analysis and insight into the 
complexity and diversity of the datasets used in clinical NLP research. This examination aids in understanding the scope of data 
types, the linguistic variety, accessibility for research purposes, and potential challenges related to data integrity and reliability, 
crucial for advancing NLP applications in healthcare. For the sake of brevity and ease, the data quality and related issues reported 
in the studies are mapped into one or more of the following categories: misspelled, multi-word, abbreviation, reference resolution, 
lexical variation, incomplete data, inconsistent data, noisy data, duplicate data, formatting issues, handwritten text, data sparsity, 
lack of public data and others (Appendix A).  
3. Results  
3.1. 
Relevant literature 
The initial search, conducted by the first author AZW, yielded 217 articles. Following the identification stage, AZW removed 
duplicates and studies that resided outside of the study scope, resulting in 172 articles. Further, AZW performed the initial screening 
stage resulting in 134 articles, which remained for further full-text assessment. The full-text eligibility assessment was independently 
carried out by the five authors, AZW, PDN, MT, JB, and JAL. To mitigate bias, the five authors provided reasons for inclusions and 
exclusions at this stage and reached an agreement through discussions. Any disagreements among the authors were resolved through 
discussion. The full-text eligibility assessment results in 105 studies, which are included in the study. After performing an updated 
search, 8 more articles were included, resulting in a total of 113 articles, as shown in Figure 1 and Table 1, that were critically 
analyzed in the study.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Figure 1: The review process - identification, screening, and eligibility. * Denotes articles included after the update search. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Records identified from*: 
Databases (n = 217) 
 
Records removed before the 
screening: 
Duplicate records removed (n 
= 34) 
Records removed for other 
reasons (n = 11) 
Records screened 
(n = 172) 
Records excluded 
(n =38) 
Reports assessed for eligibility 
(n = 134) 
Reports excluded: (n=29) 
Not free text (n =8) 
Not full paper (n =5) 
Qualitative study (n=2) 
Other language (n =5) 
Thesis (n=6) 
Position paper (n=2) 
      Unavailable full text (n=1) 
etc. 
Studies included in review 
(n = 105 + 8*) 
Identification of studies via databases 
Identification 
Screening 
Included 
 
 
 
Table 1: Language coverage, and category of proposed model for the included articles. “NA” depicts resource (dataset) construction. (see 
Appendix A for more information). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Task-specific categorization of the included articles (13): 
• 
Information extraction (medical concepts, findings/symptoms, drugs/adverse events, specific characteristics, named entity 
recognition, and relations): encompasses a set of techniques that are designed to identify, categorize, and extract key pieces 
of information from unstructured clinical text data sources (20-23, 26-29, 33-36, 39, 47, 51, 54, 55, 62, 63, 68-70, 72-74, 
76, 85-87, 89, 91, 92, 96, 97, 99, 100, 102, 108, 109, 115, 116, 123, 124, 127, 129, 130).   
• 
Classification (risk stratification of medical conditions, coding, and cohort stratification): encompasses a set of techniques 
that are designed to categorize various types of health-related data (unstructured and structured) into predefined classes or 
groups (25, 26, 28-32, 35, 36, 38, 39, 54, 65, 66, 76, 79, 87, 88, 93, 104-106, 110-120, 124, 126, 127, 130-132). 
• 
De-identification: refers to a set of methods employed to remove personal identifiers from a clinical text data (37, 40-42, 
56, 57, 62, 64, 67, 78, 90, 94, 95, 98, 101, 103, 107, 110-112, 128).  
• 
Context Analysis (negation detection, uncertainty/assertion, temporality, and abbreviation): encompasses a set of methods 
that are designed to extract and interpret the nuanced meanings or context of text data beyond the literal content (44, 46, 
48-53, 60, 61, 68, 69, 71, 75, 77, 79, 82, 84, 110, 112, 118, 122).  
• 
Core NLP (part-of-speech tagging, parsing, and segmentation): refers to a set of foundational computational techniques 
designed to process and analyze natural language, thereby helping to understand the structure and meaning, and they serve 
as the building blocks for more complex NLP tasks and applications (45, 59, 80).  
• 
Resource development (content analysis, lexicons, corpora, and annotation, machine-readable dictionaries, models, and 
methods): refers to a set of techniques that focus on developing and compiling accessible resources that can serve as a 
building block for other complex and advanced NLP tasks and applications (22, 23, 27, 33, 34, 37, 40, 43-45, 47, 48, 50, 
52, 53, 58, 60, 68-72, 75-77, 81-85, 92, 121, 123, 125, 128-130, 132).  
3.2. 
Comprehensive Analysis and Evaluation of the literature  
As described earlier, the analysis and evaluation of the included articles were performed based on the above-predefined categories, 
which were further grouped for the analysis including publication insight and trends, providing an overview related to the 
publications dynamics, data characteristics providing an overview related to the dataset used in model development and evaluations,  
clinical characteristics providing overview related to the clinical aspect of the dataset and study objective along with extent of 
Refs. 
Language 
Main Model/Method 
(20-25) 
Norwegian 
Rule-Based Systems 
(26-30) 
Norwegian 
Interpretable Methods 
(31-37) 
Norwegian 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
(38) 
Norwegian 
Deep/Nonlinear Learning Methods 
(39) 
Norwegian 
Hybrid Methods 
(40) 
Norwegian 
Transformers and Large Language Models 
(41) 
Norwegian, Danish, Swedish 
Transformers and Large Language Models 
(42-51) 
Swedish 
Rule-Based Systems 
(52) 
Swedish, Finnish 
Rule-Based Systems 
(53) 
English, French, German, Swedish 
Rule-Based Systems 
(54) 
Swedish 
Interpretable Methods 
(55-82) 
Swedish 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
(83) 
Swedish, Finnish 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
(84) 
English, Swedish 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
(85-90) 
Swedish 
Ensemble Methods 
(91-98) 
Swedish 
Deep/Nonlinear Learning Methods 
(99, 100) 
Spanish, Swedish 
Deep/Nonlinear Learning Methods 
(101, 102) 
Swedish 
Hybrid Methods 
(103-118) 
Swedish 
Transformers and Large Language Models 
(119) 
Spanish, Swedish 
Transformers and Large Language Models 
(120) 
Spanish, Swedish, English 
Transformers and Large Language Models 
(121) 
Swedish 
NA 
(122, 123) 
Danish 
Rule-Based Systems 
(124) 
Danish 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
(125-127) 
Danish 
Deep/Nonlinear Learning Methods 
(128-132) 
Danish 
Transformers, and Large Language Models 
 
 
 
expert involvement in data preparation, and NLP techniques providing overview related to the class of NLP models and task category 
studied. 
3.2.1. Publication Insight and Trends 
This section provides insights into the general publication trends among the three languages depicting the total volume of 
publications per year, language co-occurrence depicting the extent these languages appear together in a publication, and 
collaborative network depicting the overall inter and intra-collaborations of researchers from each respective country.  
Publication Trend 
The overall publication trend for the three languages is shown in Figure 2 below. As can be seen from the figure, the number of 
publications focusing on Swedish clinical text shows a slight fluctuation over the years but maintains a generally positive trend over 
the years, while publications focusing on Norwegian clinical text have seen similar trends but to a lesser extent. However, 
publications focusing on Danish clinical text have seen the highest fluctuations over the years, despite starting publishing early in 
2011, and have no publication between 2015 and 2020. The three languages began appearing in publications at different timeframes:  
Swedish was the first, emerging in 2010, followed by Danish in 2011, and Norwegian, which appeared last, in 2014. In general, 
Swedish accounts for the majority of the publications every year, and this trend seems to become a fair share among the three 
languages starting from 2023, indicating the overall increased research activity in clinical NLP among the Scandinavian languages. 
The pie chart depicts the distributions of publications across the languages over the years, revealing the enormous clinical NLP 
research activity in the Swedish language, accounting for 69.2%, followed by Norwegian at 20.6%, and Danish at 10.3%. The 
success of Swedish in this domain could be attributed to several contributing factors including early initiatives, adoption and 
commitment, the presence of a strong research infrastructure with access to data and computing power, good governmental intiatives 
and institutional support including funding, a good interdisciplinary collaboration among universities, research institutions, 
healthcare providers, and international partners. On the other hand, certain contributing factors such as population size can be 
determinantal, with Sweden having a population twice as large as Norway, and Denmark.  
 
Figure 2: Publications trend among the three countries: Norwegian, Swedish, and Danish. 
Language Co-occurrence  
In a natural language processing setting, language co-occurrence, i.e. analysis of two or more languages, in a publication can signify 
several important aspects of research and development. This could involve analysis related to cross-cultural research to understand 
cultural and linguistic nuances for adaptation and transfer learning, and diverse data insights for uncovering language-specific 
patterns, characteristics, and phenomena along with shared similarities (83). One such aspect is the prospect of enhanced transfer 
learning and adaptation, where developed tools and knowledge from one language can be easily applied or transferred to another. It 
could also pave the way for addressing data limitations by leveraging data augmentation techniques with closely related language. 
Furthermore, this could facilitate addressing resource disparities through leveraging resources from well-supported languages to 
 
 
 
less-supported languages. In this regard, the result demonstrated that out of 113 articles, only 8% (n=9) articles considered multiple 
languages.  
The language co-occurrence diagram, shown below in Figure 3, provides insight into how frequently pairs of languages appear 
together in a publication over the years, emphasizing only the three languages: Norwegian, Swedish, and Danish. Language co-
occurrence counts the presence of a pair of languages appearing in publication over the years. For example, given a set of languages 
𝒮 with predefined criteria group 𝔾𝑖 (Swedish, Norwegian, Danish), generate unique two-element permutations (𝑠1, 𝑠2) such that 
𝑠1, 𝑠2 ∈𝒮  and at least one 𝑠𝑖 belong 𝔾𝑖. Each newly generated permutation element 𝑝𝑖 is added to the pairs list 𝒰 if 𝑝∉𝒰. As can 
be seen from Figure 3, Swedish has shown extensive co-occurrence with other languages and has been studied along with Norwegian 
(n=1), Danish (n=1), English (n=3), German (n=1), Spanish (n=4), Finnish (n=2) and French (n=1). Norwegian and Danish, on the 
other hand, have the least frequent co-occurrence only appearing together once and each having one occurrence with Swedish. The 
most intriguing observation is related to the least frequent co-occurrence of the three languages – Swedish, Norwegian, and Danish. 
There is little to no effort in studying these languages together, even though these languages share linguistic similarities with 
countries that have similar healthcare systems, cultural contexts, social values, healthcare challenges, and possibly a culture of cross-
border cooperation. Those single pairs of occurrences, as shown in Figure 3, involving French, German, Norwegian, Danish, and 
Swedish could suggest initial explorations encompassing either a pilot study, proof of concept study, or the beginning stages of 
expanding research to include more diverse linguistic data. 
 
Figure 3: Language co-occurrence in a publication over the years. 
Collaboration Network 
The collaborative network depicts the frequency of authors from a certain country appearing with either authors of the same country, 
depicted in a self-loop, or authors of another country depicted in the edge connecting the countries. The network counts a pair of 
authors from either the same country or two different countries appearing in publications over the years. In our context, the author’s 
country refers to the individual’s affiliation. Self-loop depicts only those articles, whose authors’ affiliations are in the same country, 
in other words, articles that fully depict intra-collaborations within a country. Edge represents inter-collaborations between 
countries, and considers only distinct or unique countries from an article. For example, if there are four authors in one article, where 
2 from Sweden, 1 from Norway, and 1 from the USA, then only the 3 authors are considered in the analysis discarding the duplicate 
and 1 author from Sweden in this case, and only the connection to the 3 countries – Sweden, Norway, and Denmark are displayed 
on the network. The existence of active and frequent collaborations among the different research groups and institutions, both within 
and across borders, could be a key driver for the success of a project and is crucial in a field like NLP, where interdisciplinary and 
international cooperation can lead to significant advancements by fostering knowledge exchange, and innovations.  
Out of the 113 reviewed articles, 22% (n =25) articles include authors from different countries depicting inter-collaborations, and 
where 78% (n=88) articles depict intra-collaboration within the same country. Similarly, as can be seen in Figure 4, there is a strong 
 
 
 
intra-national collaboration in all three countries, where Sweden (n=67) represents the highest, followed by Norway (n=11), and 
Denmark (n=10). Sweden appears as the most frequent collaborator internationally, with ties to Finland (n=2), Norway (n=12), 
Australia (n=1), Spain (n=4), the USA (n=3), Italy (n=1), Denmark(n=1), and France (n=1). This centrality implies that Sweden 
could be a leading force in research, possibly providing pivotal datasets, resources, or expertise in the field. Despite the small number 
of publications compared to Sweden, Norway also appears to gain frequent collaborators across the globe with ties to Finland (n=2), 
Sweden (n=12), Australia (n=1), Spain (n=6), the USA (n=3), Italy (n=1). On the other hand, Denmark appears to have limited 
collaborators with ties only to Sweden (n=1), and Spain (n=1), and this could perhaps imply either the presence of a strong 
independent national research community in clinical NLP or a lack of resources and funding to create the necessary collaboration 
across the globe. Another possible explanation is that Denmark potentially has a journal, which is less based on free text. 
There appears a robust partnership between Norwegian and Swedish researchers (n=12), and given their geographic proximity and 
linguistic similarities, it is expected that these two nations to have strong research ties. However, it is surprising that Denmark has 
very few ties with Norwegian, and Swedish researchers, only having one connection with Sweden (n=1), even though these countries 
share strong linguistic similarities. This kind of connection, with only one connection (n=1), might depict one-time or project-
specific partnerships rather than ongoing research relationships. Overall, cross-Nordic interactions depict a productive research 
network involving Sweden, Norway, and Finland but Denmark. Generally, Sweden displayed a significant international 
collaboration and high-frequency intra-national collaboration compared to the other languages. Sweden’s high level of collaboration 
could suggest the existence of one or more research and innovation hubs spearheading multiple projects. In this regard, the “Swedish 
Health Record Research Bank”, an infrastructure incorporating a large EHR dataset from Karolinska University Hospital, is among 
the facilitating factors.  Similarly, the results suggest that, in addition to Sweden, Norway is maybe developing its research and 
innovation hubs. 
 
Figure 4: Collaborations Network. Self-loop indicates the number of publications appearing only among authors in that country. 
3.2.2. Data Characteristics 
This section presents an overview of the data sources and names, type of EHR documents, language, data availability, data quality, 
and related issues, and further provides insight into the scope of data types, the linguistic variety, accessibility for research purposes, 
and potential challenges related to data integrity and reliability. 
Data sources  
Health institutions' participation in providing datasets for research and development is vital to developing clinically relevant NLP 
models that are well-adapted to real-world clinical and hospital settings or environments. In general, the reviewed studies have relied 
on four major types of data sources: EHR data from hospitals, registry data that may provide information about specific patients or 
larger population insights, non-EHR data including medical journals, and synthetic data/artificially generated data, which bypass 
 
 
 
privacy concerns while still contributing valuable information for model development. In those studies utilizing registry data, the 
review identified that registry information is mainly used to augment EHR data for classification and symptom extraction tasks. For 
example, Jensen et. al. used the Norwegian death registry to construct disease and event trajectories for cancer patients from 
symptoms to death (30).   
The Karolinska University Hospital stands out with a substantial contribution to Swedish datasets (n =65), as shown in Figure 5, 
with very little contribution from other similar hospitals in Sweden. The success behind the huge contribution of the Karolinska 
University Hospital could be linked to the initiative to release massive EHR data research infrastructure known as “The Swedish 
Health Record Research Bank” (133). Among the hospitals in Denmark, Odense University Hospital (n = 6) provides the highest 
contributions followed by Sct. Hans Hospital (n=2). In Norway, the University Hospital of North Norway has the highest 
contribution (n=5), followed by Akershus University Hospital (n=3) and Sørlandet Hospital Trust (n=3). There appears to be a more 
equitable distribution of contributions among healthcare institutions in Norway compared to Sweden and Denmark. Utilizations of 
registry data and non-EHR data sources to augment EHR datasets are also observed in some of the studies, specifically involving 
Swedish (registry: n =4, non-EHR: n =7 ) and Norwegian languages (registry: n =4, non-EHR: n =2 ). However, the use of synthetic 
datasets is observed only in Norwegian (n=6). 
 
Figure 5: Frequency of data sources by institutions used in the study. ** denotes mention of a data source without specific identifiers of the 
source. 
Data Quality and Other Related Issues 
High-quality data is of utmost importance and a foundational step for model development (134). Failure to address the existing data 
quality issues at the early stage of model development can be costly, and it could affect many aspects including accuracy and 
reliability, model training and validation, generalization ability, and finally model adoption and use (134, 135). Therefore, it is 
crucial to address, mitigate, and improve the quality of the data through preprocessing, understanding of the clinical context, and 
performing an ongoing validation. There are several types of data quality and other related issues reported in the reviewed studies, 
and for the sake of clarity, these reported issues were mapped into one or more of the following keywords: misspelled, multi-word, 
abbreviation, reference resolution, lexical variation, incomplete data, inconsistent data, noisy data, duplicate data, formatting 
issues, handwritten text, lack of public data, data sparsity, and Others (3, 13). A detailed definition of these keywords can be found 
in Appendix A. It should be noted that the extracted number of issues from the studies could be low since authors often don’t report 
all issues encountered in model development and should be interpreted accordingly. 
As can be seen from Figure 6, the category others have the highest frequency (n = 29) suggesting the wide variety of data quality 
issues that are not even easily categorized into the above-predefined keywords and highlighting the complexity and uniqueness of 
challenges in clinical text data. It should be noted that although the others category is the highest, it encompasses more than eighteen 
individual issues, and if these issues were compared as individual categories, the frequency would be much smaller.  
The next top frequent issue is inconsistent data (n = 22), followed by incomplete data (n = 11). The fourth and fifth most frequent 
issues are lexical variation (n = 8) and formatting issues (n = 7), which reflect the diverse ways in which medical professionals 
 
 
 
document patient information. The presence of misspelled words and noisy data along with the lack of public data ranked as the six 
most frequent issues with all appearing in six occurrences emphasizing the need for robust preprocessing methods and privacy 
concerns. The seventh most frequent issues are abbreviation and data sparsity, each appearing in five occurrences, followed by 
reference resolution and handwritten text each appearing in three occurrences. The less frequent issues include multi-word 
expressions (n = 2) and duplicate data (n = 1).  
 
 
 
Figure 6: Data quality and other related issues reported in the studies. 
Type of EHR Documents 
EHR encompasses a wide range of document types that record comprehensive information on various aspects of patient care. The 
reviewed studies have utilized various kinds of EHR documents for NLP model development, as shown in Table 2. In Table 2, 
studies that didn’t specifically mention the type of documents are categorized under “Diverse/Not specific” categories, and studies 
that barely refer to “clinical notes” without a detailed description of the type of document are categorized as “clinical notes”. 
Accordingly, clinical notes are the most utilized document type overall (19.7%) and across each language group, with the highest 
percentage in Swedish (62.5%) and the lowest in Norwegian (17.5%). The progress note is the second most utilized document 
overall (17.73%), and evenly distributed but with a slight lean towards Norwegian (38.88%) and Swedish (41.67%). The third most 
utilized document overall is the medical history and physical examination report (15.76%), with a strong presence in Swedish 
(56.25%) followed by Norwegian (37.5%). The other relatively well-utilized documents overall include discharge summaries 
(10.84%), and laboratory and diagnostic reports (10.34%), where Swedish has the highest usage of discharge summaries (59.09%), 
and Norwegian has the highest usage of laboratory and diagnostic reports (57.14%). Some document types have notably low 
utilization across the data set, such as surgical reports (4.43%), emergency department reports (2.46%), allergy and adverse event 
reports (1.97%), medication and prescription information (1.48%), and nutritional assessments and plans (0.99%). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2: Electronic Health Record (EHR) documents utilized in the studies. "Diverse/Not specific" category implies studies that didn't specifically 
mention the type of EHR document analyzed. 
Type of Documents 
Overall 
Norwegian 
Swedish 
Danish 
Utilization (Percentage and Count) 
Allergy and Adverse Event Reports 
1.97% (4) 
75% (3) 
25% (1) 
- 
Clinical Notes 
19.7% (40) 
17.5% (7) 
62.5% (25) 
20% (8) 
Consultation and Referral Reports 
4.9% (10) 
90% (9) 
- 
10% (1) 
Discharge Summary 
10.8% (22) 
31.8% (7) 
59.1% (13) 
9.1% (2) 
Diverse/Not specific 
9.4% (19) 
- 
100% (19) 
- 
Emergency Department Reports 
2.5% (5) 
- 
75% (4) 
25% (1) 
Laboratory and Diagnostic Reports 
10.3% (21) 
57.1% (12) 
38.1% (8) 
4.7% (1) 
Medical History and Physical 
Examination Report 
15.8% (32) 
37.5% (12) 
56.3% (18) 
6.3% (2) 
Medication and Prescription 
Information 
1.5% (3) 
66.7% (2) 
33.3% (1) 
- 
Nutritional Assessments and Plans 
1% (2) 
- 
100% (2) 
- 
Progress Notes 
17.7% (36) 
38.9% (14) 
41.7% (15) 
19.4% (7) 
Surgical Reports 
4.4% (9) 
55.5% (5) 
11.1% (1) 
33.3% (3) 
 
Access to Clinical Text Data 
Access to clinical data is of utmost importance and cornerstone for model development. However, data sharing remains a significant 
challenge in the clinical domain for various reasons including but not limited to privacy concerns, ethical considerations, and the 
logistical challenges of anonymizing and sharing large datasets. The review has identified studies that mentioned access to data 
either as readily available or that can be accessed upon request by the authors. Overall, only about just under the third of the studies 
(31.86%, n = 36/113) reported that their clinical text data are available to external researchers. On the other hand, Sweden (34.57%, 
n = 28/81) and Norwegian (31.82%, n = 7/22) show the highest availability rate with nearly over a third of the studies indicating 
data availability, and only one study reporting data availability in Denmark (8.33%, n = 1/11). 
3.2.3. Natural Language Processing Techniques 
This section presents an overview and insight into the class of NLP model/methods employed in the studies, the diversity of NLP 
tasks and sub-tasks considered, feature representation techniques applied, availability of code and pre-trained models along with 
adaptation and transfer learning. 
Natural Language Processing Methods 
For the sake of brevity and interpretability, NLP methods employed in the studies are roughly grouped into rule-based, interpretable 
methods, traditional/statistical learning methods, ensemble methods, deep/nonlinear learning methods, hybrid methods (combining 
deep learning and other models), and transformers and large language models based on method complexity, see Appendix A. The 
evolution of these methods over the years is shown in Figure 7. Generally, traditional/statistical learning methods are the most 
frequently used method accounting for 31.6% (n = 78) followed by rule-based systems (23.9%, n = 59). The third most frequent 
method is transformers and large language models (14.2%, n = 35) followed by interpretable methods (12.6%, n = 31), and 
deep/nonlinear learning methods (11.3%, n = 28). Ensemble methods and hybrid methods are the least frequent accounting for 4.9% 
(n = 12) and 1.6% (n = 4) respectively. A more country-specific analysis can be found in Appendix A.  
Initial period (2010-2014): During this period as can be seen from Figure 7, there's a clear dominance of rule-based systems 
(41.97%, n = 34) and traditional/statistical learning methods (53.1%, n = 43) reflecting the initial stages of NLP development, where 
simpler models that relied on handcrafted rules and statistical features were prevalent. There are some activities of using ensemble 
methods (2.5%, n =2), and interpretable methods (2.5%, n = 2) that started to appear in 2014.  
Mid period (2015-2019): The adoption of ensemble methods (12.8%, n = 7) and deep/nonlinear learning methods (16.3%, n = 9) 
starts to be noticeable from 2015 onwards, marking the beginning of the transition towards more complex models that can capture 
the nuances of language better than traditional methods. This period marks the initial exploration of deep learning techniques. 
Further, interpretable methods (20.0%, n = 11) continue to grow, albeit slowly, indicating a consistent interest in maintaining some 
level of interpretability in clinical NLP solutions. Generally, despite the introduction of deep/nonlinear methods, 
traditional/statistical learning methods (30.0%, n= 17) remain dominant, and rule-based systems (20.0%, n = 11) are still noticeable 
but to a lesser extent compared to the initial period.  
 
 
 
Recent period (2020-2024): A significant shift towards transformers and large language models (31.53%, n = 35), and continued 
interest in deep/nonlinear learning methods (17.12%, n = 19) from 2020 onwards. The substantial jump in these methods by 2022 
and onwards suggests a rapid adoption of state-of-the-art NLP technologies, likely driven by their success in general language 
understanding tasks. The emergence of hybrid methods (3.6%, n = 4) in 2023 depicts the interest in combining various 
methodologies to leverage the strengths of each for tackling complex clinical text analysis tasks. Interpretable methods (16.22%, n 
= 18) maintain a consistent appearance across the years. Traditional/statistical learning methods (16.22%, n = 18), and ensemble 
methods (2.7%, n = 3) showed a significant decline compared to the previous period, however, rule-based systems (12.6%, n = 14) 
showed a consistent decrease.  
 
Figure 7: Evolution of NLP methods for Scandinavian over the years. The colour gradients depict model complexity.  
Natural Language Processing Tasks Trend 
This section provides an overview and insights into the various NLP tasks and strategies employed in the studies. For the sake of 
brevity and interpretability, the NLP strategies employed in the studies are categorized into core NLP, resource development, de-
identification, classification, context analysis, and information extraction (13, 38, 136, 137). It is worth noting that a single study 
can represent three or more tasks, and the number of NLP tasks could exceed the number of reviewed articles. A more detailed 
description of these specific tasks and their sub-categories along with detailed results corresponding to country-specific development 
can be found in Appendix A. 
Information extraction (33.8%, n = 67) represents a significant portion of the studied strategy across all the NLP tasks, and named 
entity recognition (44.3%, n = 43), a fundamental task for identifying clinical entities in text, is the most focused strategy within 
this category followed by findings/symptoms (16.5%, n = 16) and drugs/adverse events (15.5%, n = 15). Medical concepts (11.3%, 
n = 11) and relations (9.28%, n = 9) are also fairly represented, where studies focusing on specific characteristics (3.1%, n = 3) are 
less.  
Classification (24.2%, n = 48) tasks take up a notable share of the studied strategy, with a significant emphasis on risk stratification 
of medical conditions from EHR text (58.4%, n = 28) followed by coding (39.6%, n = 19), and studies focusing on cohort 
stratification (2.1%, n = 1) are rare.   
Resource development (18.7%, n = 37) represents a fair portion of the studied strategy, emphasizing the importance of creating 
foundational resources like lexicons, corpora, and machine-readable dictionaries. The high frequency of corpora and annotation 
(45.2%, n = 19) efforts suggests a strong emphasis on developing annotated datasets, which are critical for training and evaluating 
NLP models. Efforts towards developing new methods (30.9%, n = 13) are also significant followed by lexicons (19%, n = 8), while 
efforts to release pre-trained models (2.4%, n = 1), and create machine-readable dictionaries (2.4%, n = 1) are very seldom.  
 
 
 
Context Analysis (11.1%, n = 22) focuses on understanding the context around clinical mentions in the text. Negation detection 
(46.4%, n = 13) and uncertainty/assertion (28.5%, n = 8) are the most represented strategies, crucial for accurately interpreting the 
clinical significance of statements in records. Other strategies like temporality (10.7%, n = 3) and abbreviation (14.2%, n = 4) are 
also present.  
De-identification (10.6%, n = 21) represents a tenth of the studied strategy, highlighting the significant challenge of privacy concerns 
in working with clinical texts and the need for methods that can reliably anonymize patient information effectively on both small 
and large-scale datasets.  
Core NLP tasks are relatively underrepresented, with only a small fraction (1.5%, n = 3) of the efforts dedicated to fundamental 
NLP capabilities like part of speech tagging (40%, n = 2) and parsing (60%, n = 3). 
Analysis of Model usage in various Natural Language Processing Tasks 
This section presents an insight into the adoption rate of different types of models/methods in realizing specific clinical NLP tasks, 
as shown in Table 3. As can be seen from the table, research focusing on classification tasks places high emphasis on interpretability 
as demonstrated by the dominance of interpretable methods. The dominance of a rule-based system and traditional/Statistical 
learning methods in context analysis, information extraction, and core NLP tasks demonstrated the research efforts in incorporating 
domain knowledge in feature engineering. There is also a higher adoption rate of deep/nonlinear learning methods, and transformers 
and large language models in classification and information extraction tasks.  
Table 3: Utilization of different NLP models/methods across various NLP tasks. 
Models/Methods 
Classification 
Context 
Analysis 
Core NLP 
De-identification 
Information 
Extraction 
Deep/Nonlinear 
Learning Methods 
44.2% (19) 
- 
- 
7.0% (3) 
48.8% (21) 
Ensemble Methods 
25.0% (4) 
- 
- 
6.25% (1) 
68.8% (11) 
Hybrid Methods 
40.0% (2) 
- 
- 
20.0% (1) 
40.0% (2) 
Interpretable Methods 
57.5% (27) 
2.2% (1) 
- 
- 
40.4% (19) 
Rule-Based Systems 
15.3% (11) 
31.9% (23) 
8.3% (6) 
11.1% (8) 
33.3% (24) 
Traditional/Statistical 
Learning Methods 
17.6% (18) 
18.6% (19) 
2.0% (2) 
14.7% (15) 
47.1% (48) 
Transformers and Large 
Language Models 
39.7% (23) 
5.2% (3) 
- 
19.0% (11) 
36.2% (21) 
 
Classification Tasks  
Classification methods encompass the set of approaches that are employed to categorize various clinical text data into predefined 
classes or groups (13, 38). A classification method encompasses several key tasks, including risk stratification of medical conditions 
from EHR text (70.4%, n = 76), coding (27.8%, n = 30), and cohort stratification (1.9%, n = 2), each addressing different aspects of 
clinical data categorization and analysis. The overall adoption rate of the NLP model/methods corresponding to these classification 
tasks is depicted in Table 4. The high adoption rate of interpretable methods in classification tasks depicts the research interest in 
generating an explainable or interpretable model, which provides insight into how the model reaches at such a decision for 
classification. In coding, transformers and large language models (36.7%, n = 11) have the highest adoption rate, and 
traditional/statistical learning methods (26.7%, n = 8) and interpretable methods (20%, n = 6) have a significant presence. Little 
efforts are focused on the Cohort stratification task, and the existing efforts rely exclusively on traditional/statistical learning 
methods (100%, n = 2). In risk stratification of medical conditions from EHR text interpretable methods see the most significant 
adoption (27.6%, n = 21), followed closely by deep/nonlinear learning methods (21.1%, n = 16). There is also a notable usage of 
traditional/statistical learning methods (15.8%, n = 12), and transformers and large language models (15.8%, n = 12).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 4: Adoption rate of different NLP methods for classification tasks. 
Model/Method 
Classification Task 
Coding 
Cohort 
stratification 
Risk stratification of medical 
conditions from EHR text 
Deep/Nonlinear Learning Methods 
3.3% (1) 
- 
21.1% (16) 
Ensemble Methods 
- 
- 
5.3% (4) 
Hybrid Methods 
- 
- 
5.3% (4) 
Interpretable Methods 
20% (6) 
- 
27.6% (21) 
Rule-Based Systems 
13.2% (4) 
- 
9.2% (7) 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
26.7% (8) 
100% (2) 
15.8% (12) 
Transformers and Large Language Models 
36.7% (11) 
- 
15.8% (12) 
 
Information Extraction Task 
Information extraction methods encompass the set of approaches that are designed to identify, categorize, and extract key pieces of 
information from unstructured clinical text data sources (13, 136). Information extraction methods comprise several key strategies 
and focus areas including medical concepts (15.5%, n =33), findings/symptoms (18.6%, n = 40), drugs/adverse events (12.1%, n = 
26), specific characteristics (4.2%, n = 9), named entity recognition (41.9%, n = 90), relations (7.9%, n = 17). The overall adoption 
rate of the NLP model/methods corresponding to these information extraction tasks is depicted in Table 5. Generally, the high 
adoption rate of rule-based systems and traditional/Statistical learning methods in this specific task could be due to the research 
interest in incorporating domain knowledge in feature engineering. Extraction of medical concepts predominantly utilized 
traditional/statistical learning methods (27.3%, n = 9), along with interpretable methods (21.2%, n = 7), deep/nonlinear learning 
methods (18.2%, n = 6), and rule-based systems (18.2%, n = 6), to varying extents. Moreover, there are some utilizations of 
transformers and large language models (6%, n = 2), and hybrid models (6%, n = 2). Findings/Symptoms predominantly utilized 
rule-based systems (25%, n = 10), with deep/nonlinear learning methods (22.5%, n = 9) and interpretable methods (22.5%, n = 9) 
closely following. There are also some utilizations of traditional/statistical learning methods (15%, n = 6), and transformers and 
large language models (7.5%, n = 3). Drugs/Adverse Events predominantly utilized ensemble methods (30.8%, n = 8), with 
transformers and large language models (19.2%, n = 5), and traditional/statistical learning methods (19.2%, n = 5) also taking a 
significant share. Extraction of specific characteristics predominately utilized interpretable methods (55.6%, n = 5), with rule-based 
systems (33.3%, n = 3) and traditional/statistical learning methods (11.1%, n = 1) taking a noticeable share. Named Entity 
Recognition (NER) predominantly utilized traditional/statistical learning methods (37.8%, n = 34), where transformers and large 
language models (16.7%, n = 15), and rule-based systems (18.9%, n = 17) also take a significant share. Moreover, there is a 
noticeable presence of deep/nonlinear learning methods (7.8%, n = 7), and interpretable methods (10%, n = 9). Extraction of 
Relations predominantly utilized traditional/statistical learning methods (47.1%, n = 8), whereas interpretable methods (23.5%, n = 
4), and transformer and large language models (17.7%, n = 3) also have a very significant presence.  
Table 5: Adoption rate of different NLP methods for information extraction tasks. 
Model/Method 
Information Extraction Task 
Medical 
Concepts 
Findings/ 
Symptoms 
Drugs/Adverse 
events 
Specific 
characteristics 
Named entity 
recognition 
Relations 
Deep/Nonlinear Learning Methods 
18.2% (6) 
22.5% (9) 
15.4% (4) 
- 
7.8% (7) 
- 
Ensemble Methods 
3% (1) 
2.5% (1) 
30.8% (8) 
- 
4.4% (4) 
5.88% (1) 
Hybrid Methods 
6% (2) 
5% (2) 
- 
- 
4.4% (4) 
5.88% (1) 
Interpretable Methods 
21.2% (7) 
22.5% (9) 
11.5% (3) 
55.6% (5) 
10% (9) 
23.5% (4) 
Rule-Based Systems 
18.2% (6) 
25% (10) 
3.9% (1) 
33.3% (3) 
18.9% (17) 
- 
Traditional/Statistical Learning 
Methods 
27.3% (9) 
15% (6) 
19.2% (5) 
11.1% (1) 
37.8% (34) 
47.1% (8) 
Transformers and Large Language 
Models 
6% (2) 
7.5% (3) 
19.2% (5) 
- 
16.7% (15) 
17.7% (3) 
 
Context Analysis Task 
Context analysis encompasses a set of methods that are designed to extract and interpret the nuanced meanings of text data beyond 
the literal content (13, 137). Context Analysis comprises several key tasks that allow for a deeper understanding of the text by 
considering how the context of the surrounding affects the meaning of words and phrases and includes negation detection (39.1%, 
n = 27), uncertainty/assertion (21.7%, n = 15), temporality (4.4%, n = 3), abbreviation (17.4%, n = 12), and content analysis (17.4%, 
n = 12). The overall adoption rate of the NLP model/methods corresponding to these context analysis tasks is depicted in Table 6. 
Similar to the information extraction task, there is high interest in incorporating domain knowledge during the crafting of the input 
 
 
 
features as demonstrated by the high adoption of rule-based systems and traditional/Statistical learning methods for this task. The 
negation detection task is predominated by rule-based systems (48.2%, n = 13) and traditional/statistical learning methods (40.7%, 
n = 11), while there are some utilizations of transformers and large language models (7.4%, n = 2), and interpretable methods (3.7%, 
n = 1). Uncertainty/Assertion predominantly utilized traditional/statistical learning methods (66.7%, n = 10), followed by rule-based 
systems (26.7%, n = 4), and there is small utilization of transformers and large language models (6.7%, n = 1). Temporality analysis, 
Content Analysis, and Abbreviation decoding are primarily performed with rule-based systems and traditional/statistical learning 
methods, but to a varying extent.  
Table 6: Adoption rate of different NLP methods for context analysis tasks. 
Model/Method 
Context Analysis Task 
 
 
Negation 
detection 
Uncertainty/ 
Assertion 
Temporality 
Abbreviation 
Content 
analysis 
Deep/Nonlinear Learning Methods 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Ensemble Methods 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Hybrid Methods 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Interpretable Methods 
3.7% (1) 
- 
- 
 
- 
Rule-Based Systems 
48.2% (13) 
26.7% (4) 
66.7% (2) 
41.7% (5) 
41.7% (5) 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
40.7% (11) 
66.7% (10) 
33.3% (1) 
58.3% (7) 
58.3% (7) 
Transformers and Large Language Models 
7.4% (2) 
6.7% (1) 
- 
- 
- 
 
Feature representation techniques  
There are various ways of representing text data, and for the sake of brevity, the feature representation techniques reported in the 
reviewed studies are categorized into statistical features (e.g. n-grams, skipgrams, bag-of-words, tf-idf, co-occurrence matrix, and 
others), orthographic word features (e.g. tags, anchor specification, and others), ontologies (e.g. dictionary, ontology, and others), 
learned word-level embeddings (e.g. context vectors, Word2vec, GloVE, Fasttext, Starspace, and others), and learned 
sentence/document embeddings (e.g. topic vectors, and others) (138-141).  
The findings demonstrate that statistical features (42.9%, n = 100) are the most utilized among the feature representation techniques, 
reflecting the preference for techniques that are more or less easy to interpret. Statistical features describe the distribution and 
frequency of words within a text, in the form of frequency counts, the presence or absence of specific terms, and other numerical 
representations derived from the text data (140, 141). The second most common technique is learned word-level embeddings 
(26.2%, n = 61), which involves learning representations of words in a continuous vector space where semantically similar words 
are mapped to nearby points, reflecting the growing interest in capturing semantic relationships and meanings of words as they 
appear in clinical text (140, 141). The third most common technique is ontologies (13.7%, n = 32), which are a structured framework 
that represents a set of concepts within a domain and the relationships between those concepts (140, 142), and the moderate use 
depicts the interest in incorporating domain-specific knowledge in the NLP models. The fourth most common technique is learned 
sentence/document embeddings (11.6%, n = 27), which is like word-level embeddings, but instead, entire sentences or documents 
are represented as vectors in a continuous space. The fifth most common technique is orthographic word features (5.6%, n = 13), 
which relate to the specific characteristics of word forms themselves, including spelling, capitalization, punctuation, and other 
aspects of the way words are written (140).  
The landscape of feature representation techniques utilized by different kinds of models is depicted in Table 7. Statistical features 
(52.5%, n = 32) and ontologies (41.0%, n = 25) are dominant in a rule-based system, whereas statistical features (59.6%, n = 65) 
and learned word-level embeddings (29.4%, n = 32) are favored by interpretable methods. Like the interpretable methods, ensemble 
methods utilize often statistical features (50.0%, n = 21) and learned word-level embeddings (40.5%, n = 17). By the same token, 
statistical features (40.1%, n = 59) and learned word-level embeddings (39.5%, n = 58) are more prevalent in traditional/statistical 
learning methods, but ontologies (7.5%, n = 11), and orthographic word features (8.8%, n = 13), are also present but to a lesser 
extent. Deep/nonlinear learning methods commonly utilize learned word-level embeddings (52.0%, n = 51), and statistical features 
(44.9%, n = 44), and the strong preference for word-level embeddings underscores the importance of capturing intricate, nonlinear 
semantic patterns in text, which deep learning models excel at modeling. Transformer and large language models utilize learned 
sentence/document embeddings (100%, n = 37) as the sole feature representation techniques. On the other hand, hybrid models, 
which presumably combine different modeling techniques, show a strong reliance on learned word-level embeddings (46.7%, n = 
14), and statistical features (33.3%, n = 10), and also used the others but to a lesser extent.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 7: Examining feature representation techniques utilized in the studies. 
Model/Method 
Feature representation techniques 
Statistical 
Features 
Ontologies 
Orthographic 
Word Features 
Learned Word-
level Embeddings 
Learned Sentence/   
Document 
Embeddings 
Rule-Based Systems  
52.5% (32) 
41.0% (25) 
3.3% (2) 
3.3% (2) 
- 
Interpretable Methods 
59.6% (65) 
3.7% (4) 
6.4% (7) 
29.4% (32) 
0.9% (1) 
Ensemble Methods 
50.0% (21) 
4.8% (2) 
4.8% (2) 
40.5% (17) 
- 
Traditional/Statistical 
Learning Methods 
40.1% (59) 
7.5% (11)  
8.8% (13) 
39.5% (58) 
4.1% (6) 
Deep/Nonlinear Learning 
Methods 
44.9% (44) 
- 
1.0% (1) 
52.0% (51) 
2.0% (2) 
Transformers and Large 
Language Models 
- 
- 
- 
- 
100.0% (37) 
Hybrid Methods 
33.3% (10)  
3.3% (1)  
6.7% (2) 
46.7% (14) 
10.0% (3) 
 
Resource Availability - Code and pre-trained model 
A high state of resource sharing and accessibility in terms of experimental code and pre-trained model plays a crucial role in NLP 
model development (143, 144). The resource availability presented here is based on whether the authors of the studies reviewed 
reported access to the code used in model development and if there is a pre-trained model released. In this regard, the result 
demonstrated that, overall, there is low availability of codes and pre-trained models. Across all languages, there's low overall 
availability of codes and pre-trained models, with only 18.6% affirming availability (Yes: 21, No: 92). This could indicate a 
significant gap in open-access resources for clinical NLP applications in Scandinavian texts, which could hinder the progress and 
reproducibility of research in this field. In comparison, despite the small number of publications, Danish exhibit the highest 
availability rate (25%) among the three (Yes: 3, No: 9), followed by Norwegian with 22.7% (Yes: 5, No: 17). On the other hand, 
the Swedish exhibit a lower availability rate 16.1% (Yes: 13, No: 68). 
 
Adaptation and Transfer learning 
In model development, adaptation and transfer learning are essential tools to address challenges related to data scarcity, and low 
computational resources, especially in low-resource language settings (145). Given the close linguistic similarities among mainland 
Scandinavian languages (15), one could expect that successful techniques and models in one language could be readily adapted to 
another, potentially boosting the efficiency of research and application development in the region. However, the result of the 
assessment regarding adaptation and transfer learning in the region indicates otherwise. Accordingly, the overall rate of adaptation 
and transfer learning in the region is relatively low at 19.5% (Yes:22, No:91). Among the three countries, Danish exhibits a 
significant research activity to leverage adaptation and transfer learning at 66.7% (Yes:8, No:4). Norwegian 13.6% (Yes:3, No:19) 
and Swedish 16.1% (Yes:13, No:68) exhibit relatively low rate of adaptation and transfer learning.  
3.2.4. Clinical Characteristics 
This section presents an overview of the clinical aspects presented in the studies such as whether the studies had performed some 
kind of implementation and testing of the model within a clinical setting, overall distribution of focus area in terms of disease area 
or health domain, and types of hospital departments or clinical unit considered along with the extent of medical experts in data 
preparations. 
Applied in Clinical Settings 
Despite the rapid advancement and widespread adoption of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) models across 
various industries, integrating trained models seamlessly into clinical settings continues to pose a significant challenge (146). In this 
regard, the reviewed studies were assessed to provide an overview of the efforts to validate the developed models clinically. The 
findings revealed that only a small fraction of the studies 5.31% (Yes:6, No:107) had tried to conduct some form of clinical 
validation, highlighting the significant challenges in the healthcare domain. Specifically, Norway 9.01% (Yes:2, No:20) 
demonstrated a slightly higher tendency to test the models in a clinical setting than Sweden 4.9% (Yes:4, No:77) and Danish. In 
contrast, Danish shows no implementation (0%, n=0), with all surveyed studies (100%, n=12) not testing the model in real-world 
clinical settings.  
Disease Area/Health Domain  
Analysis of the type of disease area or health domain the study focuses on could provide several interesting insights into research 
gaps and opportunities, and neglected disease areas, and could guide future research directions. In this regard, an assessment of the 
reviewed studies was conducted to provide an overview of the disease area or health domain the studies focus on. For the sake of 
brevity, the disease areas mentioned in the studies were categorized into 13 distinct and representative groups: Infectious diseases, 
 
 
 
Adverse events, Cardiovascular disorders, Gastrointestinal disorders, Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders, Cancer and 
systemic disorders, Surgical and postoperative complications, Hematologic and immune disorder, Neurological and psychiatric 
disorder, Behavioural and lifestyle factors, Family and genetic history. The analysis of the relevant studies was performed by 
counting the frequency of disease areas or health domains reported within the studies dataset. Studies that did not specifically 
mention the disease area or health domain are categorized under General conditions and Procedures. In this regard, as can be seen 
from the pie chart in Figure 8, the majority of the studies for some reason didn’t report the type of disease area considered (28.9%, 
n=76/263). Apart from this, overall, the findings revealed that infectious diseases (12.2%, n = 32), adverse events (9.9%, n = 26/263), 
cardiovascular disorders (8.0%, n = 21/263), gastrointestinal disorders (8.7%, n = 23/263), and musculoskeletal and connective 
tissue disorders (10.3%, n = 27/263) are the most studied groups. Others receive fair consideration including cancer and systemic 
disorders (4.6%, n=12/263), surgical and postoperative complications (4.2%, n = 11/263), and earn, nose and throat (ENT) (5.7%, 
n = 15/263). Others with fairly small consideration include neurological and psychiatric disorders (2.6%, n = 7/263), hematologic 
and immune disorders (2.3%, n = 6/263), behavioral and lifestyle factors (1.5%, n = 4/263), and family and genetic history (1.1%, 
n = 3/263).  
 
Figure 8: Distribution of disease area or health domain the studies considered. ENT stands for ear, nose, and throat.  
Assessment of the disease area or health domain considered in the study along with the various NLP tasks is given in Table 8 below. 
As can be seen from the table, information extraction (18.6%, n =13) is particularly dominant in adverse events, which might be 
related to the need to accurately capture, categorize, and report any unexpected medical adverse events that require medical 
intervention including drug-drug interactions. On the other hand, classification (27.5%, n=11) is dominant in Gastrointestinal 
disorders, which might be related to the overlapping symptoms present in gastrointestinal disorders (147). Context analysis is fairly 
present in all the disease areas, and a little higher in Gastrointestinal disorders and Infectious diseases demonstrating its overall 
significance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 8: NLP Tasks focus on areas of disease types or health domains. 
Disease area/Health 
domain 
NLP Tasks 
Information 
extraction 
Classification 
De-identification 
Context 
analysis 
Resource 
development 
Hematologic and Immune 
Disorders 
4.3% (3) 
2.5% (1) 
- 
9.1% (1) 
3.2% (1) 
Cardiovascular Disorders 
10.0% (7) 
7.5% (3) 
10.7% (3) 
9.1% (1) 
22.6% (7) 
Gastrointestinal Disorders 
5.7% (4) 
27.5% (11) 
10.7% (3) 
18.2% (2) 
3.2% (1) 
Behavioral and Lifestyle 
Factors 
1.4% (1) 
2.5% (1) 
- 
9.1% (1) 
3.2% (1) 
Infectious Diseases 
14.3% (10) 
17.5% (7) 
17.9% (5) 
18.2% (2) 
22.6% (7) 
Cancer and Systemic 
Disorders 
8.6% (6) 
10.0% (4) 
3.6% (1) 
9.1% (1) 
- 
Musculoskeletal and 
Connective Tissue 
Disorders 
17.1% (12) 
7.5% (3) 
25.0% (7) 
9.1% (1) 
9.7% (3) 
Neurological and 
Psychiatric Disorders 
4.3% (3) 
2.5% (1) 
- 
9.1% (1) 
3.2% (1) 
Surgical and Postoperative 
Complications 
4.3% (3) 
12.5% (5) 
- 
- 
9.7% (3) 
Family and Genetic History 
1.4% (1) 
- 
3.6% (1) 
- 
3.2% (1) 
Adverse Events 
18.6% (13) 
10.0% (4) 
7.1% (2) 
9.1% (1) 
16.1% (5) 
 
Hospital Departments/Clinical Unit 
This section aims to present an overview of the hospital departments or clinical units that provide a dataset for the studies. For the 
sake of brevity, the analysis was performed by grouping the departments reported in the studies into intensive and critical care, 
surgical specialties, medical specialties, oncology and hematology, infectious diseases and pathology, diagnostic and therapeutic 
services, general services, women's health, pediatrics, other specialties, and administrative, see Appendix A. The analysis was 
conducted by counting the frequency of the departments reported as a data source. Studies that didn’t report this information were 
categorized under general services. In this regard, as shown in Figure 9, surgical specialties are the most widely reported source of 
data (23.0%, n = 89/387), followed by medical specialties (19.1%, n = 74/387), intensive and critical care (11.1%, n = 43/387). 
Some groups take a small share including infectious diseases and pathology (5.4%, n = 21/387), diagnostic and therapeutic services 
(4.1%, n = 16/387), oncology and hematology (3.4%, n = 13/387), women's health (2.6%, n = 10/387), other specialties (7.3%, n = 
28/387), pediatrics (0.5%, n = 2/387), and administrative (5.7%, n = 22/387).  
 
Figure 9: Distribution of hospital departments as data source reported in the studies. 
 
 
 
Data Annotation 
Data annotation is a crucial step in model development, and the active participation of medical experts in this process is critical in 
setting the quality of the ground truth right (148). In this regard, this section presents an analysis that is performed by counting the 
active involvement of medical experts (occupation and experience in years) in data preparation in each study. It aims to provide 
insight into the extent to which the study involves domain experts in the dataset's preparation or analysis process, highlighting their 
contribution to data curation, annotation, or validation. It underscores the level of specialized knowledge applied to ensure the 
accuracy, relevance, and reliability of the data. Accordingly, the findings revealed that, overall, the active participation of medical 
experts is satisfactory at 64.6% (Yes:73, No:40). It should be noted that those studies that didn’t mention the active participation of 
medical experts could most probably be using second-hand data that were already annotated, or something else. Specifically, 
Norwegian 90.9% (Yes:20, No:2) and Danish studies 91.7% (Yes:11, No: 1) reported a significant level of active rate of medical 
expert involvement compared to Swedish 54.3% (Yes:44, No: 37). This may be due attributed to Swedish studies’ heavy reliance 
on a single infrastructure, namely Health Record Research Bank, which is already pre-annotated.   
Discussion  
The advancement of deep learning, along with the recent introduction of transformers, coupled with the exponential growth of 
digital data has contributed to the success of NLP in various domains (149-152). Despite the advancements of NLP methods for 
resource-rich languages like English, these advancements are not equally transferable to low-resource languages (13). The objective 
of this review was to provide a comprehensive assessment of the state-of-the-art NLP techniques for the mainland Scandinavian 
clinical domain. 
Although there are promising developments, the adoption of these technologies to clinical text is slower compared to other types of 
text. For example, the adoption of transformer-based models like ClinicalBERT (153), and BlueBERT (154) for English clinical 
texts occurred one year after the introduction of BERT (155) in 2018. On a similar note, the review identified the adoption of 
transformer-based models to Scandinavian clinical text is slower than in English, the earliest being in 2021. SweDeCin-BERT was 
introduced in 2022 (115). However, among the three languages, there exist noticeable gaps in adopting the transformer-based model, 
where research focusing on Swedish and Danish clinical text exhibits a satisfactory level of adoption, whereas there is little to none 
for Norwegian clinical text. Generally, this slower uptake compared to English could be attributed to several factors but mainly due 
to the availability of shared resources such as publicly available datasets, e.g. MIMIC (156), and necessary tools for processing text.  
The most recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) including the introduction of ChatGPT (Chat Generative Pre-trained 
Transformer) have sparked intense discussion among experts on the potential use of these models in healthcare settings (157-159). 
The diverse potential applications range from clinical tasks, such as diagnostic assistance, patient triage, and automatic treatment 
plan generation, to documentation tasks, such as summarization, de-identification, coding, and automatic structuring of clinical 
narratives, and finally in medical research and education (8, 10, 159, 160). However, despite these promising applications, certain 
challenges need to be addressed before actual use including risks associated with ethics and privacy, incorrect and biased decisions, 
error accountability, technology misconceptions, and others (159, 161). To this end, several pieces of research have been conducted 
to evaluate these LLMs under different clinical tasks mainly for resource-rich languages like English (8-10, 160). For instance, Liu 
et. al. recently published an article focusing on the development of a de-identification framework to evaluate GPT-4 based on zero-
shot learning, and despite some of the shortcomings, the study demonstrated the application of GPT-4 for a de-identification task 
(162). On a similar note, however, the review identified very limited research activities focusing on the utilization of these models 
in various clinical tasks for mainland Scandinavian clinical tasks. Nevertheless, there was one recent article that demonstrated the 
use of the GPT model in synthetic clinical data generation and de-identification tasks for Norwegian clinical text (40). Lund et. al. 
employed GPT for the generation of Norwegian discharge summaries and evaluated and compared the GPT model along with other 
baseline models for the de-identification task, where the GPT model is promoted to either annotate or redact personal identifying 
information based on instruction tunning (40).  
The trend of publication for the three countries varies over the years, and the number of publications focusing on Swedish clinical 
text is significant compared to the other two. Despite these gaps, publications focusing on Norwegian and Danish clinical text 
appeared to catch up notably after 2023, indicating the increased activities in clinical NLP research. There could be several 
contributing factors to the success of publications focusing on Swedish clinical text, but the prominent factor is the presence of a 
strong research infrastructure with access to data– “Swedish Health Record Research Bank” (133, 163), and others like early 
commitment and the presence of a research ecosystem consisting of various stakeholders are also among the contributing factors. 
An ongoing national initiative like “Health Data Sweden” (164), which aims to further develop and strengthen the research 
ecosystem, is expected to further boost clinical NLP research activities.  
There exists literature that points out the advantage of utilizing language similarities, especially for the mainland Scandinavian 
languages (15-17). For example, Faarlund et. al. even argue that these languages are basically the same (17). Further, Sahlgren et. 
al. promote joint Nordic LLMs considering the language and cultural similarities as their argument cases (16). In this regard, for 
 
 
 
instance, studying these languages together can provide evidence for differences and similarities in terms of linguistic characteristics 
(83) to lay the groundwork for technology transfer, and also can be an effective tool for utilizing data augmentations and transfer 
learning (15, 41). Despite these potential gains, the most intriguing observation is the least frequent co-occurrence of the three 
languages – Swedish, Norwegian, and Danish. There is little to no effort in studying these languages together, even though these 
languages share linguistic similarities with countries that have similar healthcare systems, cultural contexts, and social values. 
From another perspective, collaboration and knowledge sharing among different institutions are vital components of a well-
functioning research ecosystem, and also a key driver for the success of a project requiring interdisciplinary cooperation in a field 
like clinical NLP. In this regard, overall, the result depicts a productive research collaboration network among the mainland 
Scandinavian countries, except Denmark, which has very limited ties, only having one occasion with Sweden depicting a one-time 
or project-specific collaboration rather than an ongoing research partnership. In the future, we envision more productive and active 
research collaborations than one-time or project-specific relationships among the mainland Scandinavian countries to facilitate and 
further foster clinical NLP research and development, given their close similarities in many aspects. 
Enhancing reproducibility and the availability of shared resources in clinical NLP research are essential for accelerating the 
development of clinical NLP. In this context, research endeavors should focus on providing a dataset and, where applicable, its 
annotated version - corpora, tools, and resources such as dictionaries, lexicons, and annotation standards, pre-trained models, and 
experimentation code along with clear documentation of procedures and requirements, as these are the main ingredients for rapid 
development. However, it is often challenging to publicly share datasets due to the sensitivity of health data, which contain patient-
identifiable information such as names, addresses, telephone numbers, and others,  and the privacy and confidentiality concerns that 
come along with it. A de-identification procedure performed to preserve individual privacy and confidentiality remains a significant 
challenge, especially on a large scale. A recent study conducted by Berg et.al. (62) assess the impact of de-identification on data 
quality for downstream named entity recognition tasks, and highlight the importance of balancing the level of de-identification and 
the utility of the data. In general, this review identified that the majority of research activity focusing on the de-identification task 
was conducted for Swedish clinical text, and there was little effort for the other two languages. Regardless, with some constraints, 
studies still can share pre-trained models, and experimentation code, which undeniably have significant impacts. In this regard,  the 
most intriguing observation is, despite the apparent challenge of sharing clinical text data, the review identifies high availability of 
data (31.86%, n = 36/113) compared to experimentation code and pre-trained models, with only 18.6% affirming availability 
(n=21/113). These observations can be attributed to factors such as intellectual property issues, and the need for extensive 
documentation, and, in some cases, researchers might also withhold models and experimentation code to gain competitive 
advantages, and possibly if there is a commercial interest. The reflection of this lack of shared resources including experimentation 
code and pre-trained model can be observed by closely looking at the rate of adaptation and transfer learning in the region, which 
is relatively low at 19.5% (n =22/113), despite the potential advantages of language similarity as mentioned above.  
When it comes to resource development, such as dictionaries, lexicons, or annotation standards, the review identified fair endeavors, 
where 32% of the studies (n=37 /113) have engaged in such resource development either as their main or an additional contribution. 
However, this number greatly varies among the three languages, with Danish exhibiting the lowest and Swedish the highest level 
of activities in this direction. Generally, given the low-resource nature of these languages, extensive research endeavors are expected 
to enrich the available resources for language processing tasks, potentially opening doors for enormous opportunities similar to 
those enjoyed by resource-rich languages like English. Regarding the development of annotation standards and methods, there are 
some research activities (24, 72, 76, 128), but are more of case-specific development than general purposes. The involvement of 
medical experts in developing annotation guidelines, as well as directly in data curation and annotation processes, is crucial to ensure 
the integrity of training and validation datasets. In this regard, the review identifies a satisfactory level of active medical expert 
involvement though the rates vary among the three languages. On a different note, it generally remains challenging to clinically 
validate models in real-world clinical settings, and most developed models fail to transition into actual clinical use. There are several 
contributing factors to this including stringent regulatory and compliance requirements, difficulties integrating models with existing 
systems and workflows, concerns over maintaining patient privacy, lack of standardization across data collection and processing, 
the inherent complexity of clinical environments, and other similar challenges. By the same token, the review identified that only a 
small fraction of the studies 5.31% (n = 6/113) had tried to conduct some form of clinical validation, highlighting the significant 
challenges in the healthcare domain, and there is no noticeable difference between the three languages. In this regard, for example, 
Laursen MS et. al. (165), developed an AI model capable of detecting hemorrhage events and evaluated the performance gained by 
assisting medical doctors with AI during chart review in a mock-up setting.    
 
 
 
Conclusion 
The review presented a comprehensive assessment of the state-of-the-art Clinical NLP for EHR text in Scandinavian languages and, 
highlighted the potential barriers and challenges that hinder the rapid advancement of the field in the region. The review identified 
a lack of shared resources, such as datasets, pre-trained models and tools, inadequate research infrastructure, and insufficient 
collaboration as the most significant barriers that require careful consideration in future research endeavors. For example, the 
disparity in research activities among the three languages underscores the importance of robust research infrastructure, as 
demonstrated by the significant impact of the “Swedish Health Record Research Bank”. Further, despite the close similarities among 
these languages, there has been minimal effort to study these languages together, which can potentially open up enormous 
opportunities. Future research should focus on exploring the potential of data augmentation, adaptation, and transfer learning across 
the three languages to facilitate progress. Starting in 2021, we observed a high research interest in adopting transformer-based 
models. However, there is a noticeable gap between the three languages; Swedish and Danish have shown significant activities, 
while Norwegian has exhibited minimal activities. Despite the recent booming of LLMs like GPT with enormous potential, there 
have been limited research activities, and the review identified only one study focusing on Norwegian clinical text.  Given the low-
resource nature of these languages, more research activities should be targeted toward resource development, core NLP tasks, and 
de-identification. In this regard, research focusing on Swedish clinical text is more prominent, while the other two languages, Danish 
and Norwegian, require further research efforts in this direction. The availability of research infrastructure, including data and 
computational resources, is a key driving factor for the success of NLP development, underscoring the need for increased efforts in 
this area.  Generally, we foresee the findings presented in this review will help shape future research directions by shedding light 
on areas that require further attention for the rapid advancement of the field in the region. 
 
Acknowledgment 
This work was financially supported by the Research Council of Norway (RCN), through its Centre for Research-based Innovation 
funding scheme (Visual Intelligence, grant no. 309439), and RCN IKTPLUSS, grant no. 303514.  
Conflict of Interest  
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper. 
References  
1. 
Dalianis H. Clinical text mining: Secondary use of electronic patient records: Springer Nature; 2018. 
2. 
Hossain E, Rana R, Higgins N, Soar J, Barua PD, Pisani AR, et al. Natural Language Processing in Electronic Health Records 
in relation to healthcare decision-making: A systematic review. Comput Biol Med. 2023;155:106649. 
3. 
Botsis T, Hartvigsen G, Chen F, Weng C. Secondary Use of EHR: Data Quality Issues and Informatics Opportunities. Summit 
Transl Bioinform. 2010;2010:1-5. 
4. 
Wu H, Wang M, Wu J, Francis F, Chang Y-H, Shavick A, et al. A survey on clinical natural language processing in the United 
Kingdom from 2007 to 2022. npj Digital Medicine. 2022;5(1):186. 
5. 
Gallifant J, Fiske A, Levites Strekalova YA, Osorio-Valencia JS, Parke R, Mwavu R, et al. Peer review of GPT-4 technical 
report and systems card. PLOS Digit Health. 2024;3(1):e0000417. 
6. 
Achiam OJ, Adler S, Agarwal S, Ahmad L, Akkaya I, Aleman FL, et al. GPT-4 Technical Report. 2023. 
7. 
Touvron H, Lavril T, Izacard G, Martinet X, Lachaux M-A, Lacroix T, et al. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language 
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:230213971. 2023. 
8. 
Wang G, Yang G, Du Z, Fan L, Li X. ClinicalGPT: Large Language Models Finetuned with Diverse Medical Data and 
Comprehensive Evaluation. ArXiv. 2023;abs/2306.09968. 
9. 
Huang J, Yang DM, Rong R, Nezafati K, Treager C, Chi Z, et al. A critical assessment of using ChatGPT for extracting 
structured data from clinical notes. npj Digital Medicine. 2024;7(1):106. 
10. 
Van Veen D, Van Uden C, Blankemeier L, Delbrouck JB, Aali A, Bluethgen C, et al. Clinical Text Summarization: Adapting 
Large Language Models Can Outperform Human Experts. Res Sq. 2023. 
11. 
Šuster S, Tulkens S, Daelemans W. A Short Review of Ethical Challenges in Clinical Natural Language Processing. April; 
Valencia, Spain: Association for Computational Linguistics; 2017. p. 80-7. 
12. 
Chapman WW, Nadkarni PM, Hirschman L, D'Avolio LW, Savova GK, Uzuner O. Overcoming barriers to NLP for clinical 
text: the role of shared tasks and the need for additional creative solutions. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2011;18(5):540-3. 
13. 
Neveol A, Dalianis H, Velupillai S, Savova G, Zweigenbaum P. Clinical Natural Language Processing in languages other than 
English: opportunities and challenges. J Biomed Semantics. 2018;9(1):12. 
 
 
 
14. 
Shaitarova A, Zaghir J, Lavelli A, Krauthammer M, Rinaldi F. Exploring the Latest Highlights in Medical Natural Language 
Processing across Multiple Languages: A Survey. Yearb Med Inform. 2023;32(1):230-43. 
15. 
Nielsen D. ScandEval: A Benchmark for Scandinavian Natural Language Processing. May; Tórshavn, Faroe Islands: 
University of Tartu Library; 2023. p. 185-201. 
16. 
Sahlgren M, Carlsson F, Olsson F, Börjeson L. It’s Basically the Same Language Anyway: the Case for a Nordic Language 
Model. may 31–2 jun; Reykjavik, Iceland (Online): Linköping University Electronic Press, Sweden; 2021. p. 367-72. 
17. 
Faarlund JT. The Syntax of Mainland Scandinavian: Oxford University Press; 2019 23 May 2019. 
18. 
Page MJ, McKenzie JE, Bossuyt PM, Boutron I, Hoffmann TC, Mulrow CD, et al. The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated 
guideline for reporting systematic reviews. BMJ. 2021;372:n71. 
19. 
Therapeutic Areas by Disease Area  [Available from: https://www.cdisc.org/standards/therapeutic-areas/disease-area. 
20. 
Weegar R, Dalianis H. Creating a rule based system for text mining of Norwegian breast cancer pathology reports.  
Proceedings of the Sixth International Workshop on Health Text Mining and Information Analysis2015. p. 73-8. 
21. 
Weegar R, Nygård JF, Dalianis H. Efficient Encoding of Pathology Reports Using Natural Language Processing. September; 
Varna, Bulgaria: INCOMA Ltd.; 2017. p. 778-83. 
22. 
Yan MY, Høvik LH, Gustad LT, Ø N. Understanding and Reasoning About Early Signs of Sepsis: From Annotation Guideline 
to Ontology.  2021 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM); 9-12 Dec. 20212021. p. 
1906-11. 
23. 
Pilan I, Brekke PH, Øvrelid L. Building a Norwegian Lexical Resource for Medical Entity Recognition. May; Marseille, 
France: European Language Resources Association; 2020. p. 9-14. 
24. 
Yan M, Gustad L, Høvik L, Nytrø Ø. Method for Designing Semantic Annotation of Sepsis Signs in Clinical Text. July; 
Toronto, Canada: Association for Computational Linguistics; 2023. p. 236-46. 
25. 
Dahl A, Özkan A, Dalianis H. Pathology text mining - on Norwegian prostate cancer reports.  2016 IEEE 32nd International 
Conference on Data Engineering Workshops (ICDEW); 16-20 May, 20162016. p. 84-7. 
26. 
Mikalsen K, Soguero-Ruiz C, Jensen K, Hindberg K, Gran M, Revhaug A, et al. Using anchors from free text in electronic 
health records to diagnose postoperative delirium. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2017;152:105-14. 
27. 
Rama T, Brekke P, Nytrø Ø, Øvrelid L. Iterative development of family history annotation guidelines using a synthetic 
corpus of clinical text. October; Brussels, Belgium: Association for Computational Linguistics; 2018. p. 111-21. 
28. 
Røst TB, Tvedt CR, Husby H, Berg IA, Nytrø Ø. Capturing central venous catheterization events in health record texts.  
2018 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM); 3-6 Dec. 2018: IEEE; 2018. p. 488-95. 
29. 
Røst TB, Tvedt CR, Husby H, Berg IA, Nytrø Ø. Identifying catheter-related events through sentence classification. 
International Journal of Data Mining and Bioinformatics. 2020;23(3):213-33. 
30. 
Jensen K, Soguero-Ruiz C, Oyvind Mikalsen K, Lindsetmo R-O, Kouskoumvekaki I, Girolami M, et al. Analysis of free text 
in electronic health records for identification of cancer patient trajectories. Scientific reports. 2017;7(1):46226. 
31. 
Soguero-Ruiz C, Hindberg K, Rojo-Alvarez JL, Skrovseth SO, Godtliebsen F, Mortensen K, et al. Support Vector Feature 
Selection for Early Detection of Anastomosis Leakage From Bag-of-Words in Electronic Health Records. IEEE J Biomed 
Health Inform. 2016;20(5):1404-15. 
32. 
Soguero-Ruiz C, Hindberg K, Mora-Jiménez I, Rojo-Álvarez JL, Skrøvseth SO, Godtliebsen F, et al. Predicting colorectal 
surgical complications using heterogeneous clinical data and kernel methods. J Biomed Inform. 2016;61:87-96. 
33. 
Yan MY, Hovik LH, Pedersen A, Gustad LT, Nytro O. Preliminary Processing and Analysis of an Adverse Event Dataset for 
Detecting Sepsis-Related Events.  2021 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM): IEEE 
Computer Society; 2021. p. 1605-10. 
34. 
Brekke PH, Rama T, Pilán I, Nytrø Ø, Øvrelid L. Synthetic data for annotation and extraction of family history information 
from clinical text. Journal of Biomedical Semantics. 2021;12(1):1-11. 
35. 
Berge GT, Granmo O-C, Tveit TO. Combining unsupervised, supervised, and rule-based algorithms for text mining of 
Electronic Health Records - A clinical decision support system for identifying and classifying allergies of concern for 
anesthesia during surgery.  Information Systems Development: Advances in Methods, Tools and Management (ISD2017 
Proceedings); Larnaca, Cyprus: University of Central Lancashire Cyprus 2017. 
36. 
Berge GT, Granmo OC, Tveit TO, Munkvold BE, Ruthjersen AL, Sharma J. Machine learning-driven clinical decision support 
system for concept-based searching: a field trial in a Norwegian hospital. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2023;23(1):5. 
37. 
Bråthen S, Wie W, Dalianis H. Creating and Evaluating a Synthetic Norwegian Clinical Corpus for De-Identification. May 
31–2 Jun, 2021; Reykjavik, Iceland (Online): Linköping University Electronic Press, Sweden; 2021. p. 222-30. 
38. 
Dahl FA, Rama T, Hurlen P, Brekke PH, Husby H, Gundersen T, et al. Neural classification of Norwegian radiology reports: 
using NLP to detect findings in CT-scans of children. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making. 2021;21(1):84. 
39. 
Berge GT, Granmo O-C, Tveit TO, Ruthjersen AL, Sharma J. Combining unsupervised, supervised and rule-based learning: 
the case of detecting patient allergies in electronic health records. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making. 
2023;23(1):188. 
40. 
Lund JA, Mikalsen KØ, Burman J, Woldaregay AZ, Jenssen R. Instruction-guided deidentification with synthetic test cases 
for Norwegian clinical text.  Northern Lights Deep Learning Conference; January, 2024: PMLR; 2024. p. 145-52. 
 
 
 
41. 
Lamproudis A, Mora S, Svenning TO, Torsvik T, Chomutare T, Ngo PD, et al. De-identifying Norwegian Clinical Text using 
Resources from Swedish and Danish. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2023;2023:456-64. 
42. 
Dalianis H. Pseudonymisation of Swedish Electronic Patient Records Using a Rule-Based Approach. September, 2019; 
Turku, Finland: Linköping Electronic Press; 2019. p. 16-23. 
43. 
Grigonyte G, Kvist M, Velupillai S, Wirén M. Improving readability of Swedish electronic health records through lexical 
simplification: First results.  PITR; April; Gothenburg, Sweden: Association for Computational Linguistics; 2014. p. 74-83. 
44. 
Kvist M, Velupillai S. SCAN: A Swedish Clinical Abbreviation Normalizer. Cham: Springer International Publishing; 2014. p. 
62-73. 
45. 
Nizamuddin U, Dalianis H. Detection of Spelling Errors in Swedish Clinical Text.  1st Nordic workshop on evaluation of 
spellchecking and proofing tools (NorWEST2014), SLTC 2014, Uppsala; 20142014. 
46. 
Skeppstedt M. Negation detection in Swedish clinical text: An adaption of NegEx to Swedish. Journal of Biomedical 
Semantics. 2011;2(3):S3. 
47. 
Skeppstedt M, Kvist M, Dalianis H. Rule-based Entity Recognition and Coverage of SNOMED CT in Swedish Clinical Text. 
May; Istanbul, Turkey: European Language Resources Association (ELRA); 2012. p. 1250-7. 
48. 
Tanushi H, Dalianis H, Duneld M, Kvist M, Skeppstedt M, Velupillai S. Negation Scope Delimitation in Clinical Text Using 
Three Approaches: NegEx, PyConTextNLP and SynNeg. May; Oslo, Norway: Linköping University Electronic Press, Sweden; 
2013. p. 387-97. 
49. 
Velupillai S. Temporal Expressions in Swedish Medical Text – A Pilot Study. June; Baltimore, Maryland: Association for 
Computational Linguistics; 2014. p. 88-92. 
50. 
Velupillai S, Skeppstedt M, Kvist M, Mowery D, Chapman BE, Dalianis H, et al. Cue-based assertion classification for 
Swedish clinical text—Developing a lexicon for pyConTextSwe. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine. 2014;61(3):137-44. 
51. 
Weegar R, Kvist M, Sundström K, Brunak S, Dalianis H. Finding Cervical Cancer Symptoms in Swedish Clinical Text using a 
Machine Learning Approach and NegEx. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2015;2015:1296-305. 
52. 
Velupillai S, Weegar R, Kvist M. Temporal Annotation of Swedish Intensive Care Notes.  AMIA 2016 Annual Symposium, 
Chicago, USA, November 12 - 16, 2016; 20162016. 
53. 
Chapman WW, Hilert D, Velupillai S, Kvist M, Skeppstedt M, Chapman BE, et al. Extending the NegEx lexicon for multiple 
languages. Studies in health technology and informatics. 2013;192:677. 
54. 
Caccamisi A, Jørgensen L, Dalianis H, Rosenlund M. Natural language processing and machine learning to enable 
automatic extraction and classification of patients' smoking status from electronic medical records. Ups J Med Sci. 
2020;125(4):316-24. 
55. 
Alam MU, Henriksson A, Hideyuki T, Emil T, Pontus N, Dalianis H. Terminology expansion with prototype embeddings : 
Extracting symptoms of urinary tract infection from clinical text. In: Cátia P, Ana F, Hugo G, editors. BIOSTEC 2021 : 14th 
International Joint Conference on Biomedical Engineering Systems and Technologies; February 11 - 13, 2021; Vienna, 
Austria: SciTePress; 2021. p. 47-57. 
56. 
Alfalahi A, Brissman S, Dalianis H. Pseudonymisation of personal names and other PHIs in an annotated clinical Swedish 
corpus. In: Nicoletta C, et al., editors. LREC 2012; May 23-24-25, 2012; Istanbul, Turkey2012. 
57. 
Berg H, Dalianis H. HB Deid - HB De-identification tool demonstrator.  NoDaLiDa; May 31–2 Jun, 2021; Reykjavik, Iceland 
(Online): Linköping University Electronic Press, Sweden; 2021. p. 467-71. 
58. 
Grigonyte G, Kvist M, Wirén M, Velupillai S, Henriksson A. Swedification patterns of Latin and Greek affixes in clinical text. 
Nordic Journal of Linguistics. 2016;39(1):5-37. 
59. 
Duneld M, Henriksson A, Velupillai S. Something old, something new – Applying a pre-trained parsing model to clinical 
Swedish. May, 2021; Riga, Latvia: Northern European Association for Language Technology (NEALT); 2011. p. 287-90. 
60. 
Tengstrand L, Megyesi B, Henriksson A, Duneld M, Kvist M. EACL - Expansion of Abbreviations in CLinical text.  14th 
Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,April 27, 2014 Gothenburg, 
Sweden; 2014: Association for Computational Linguistics; 2014. 
61. 
Alfalahi A, Skeppstedt M, Ahlbom R, Baskalayci R, Henriksson A, Asker L, et al. Expanding a dictionary of marker words 
for uncertainty and negation using distributional semantics. September, 2015; Lisbon, Portugal: Association for 
Computational Linguistics; 2015. p. 90-6. 
62. 
Berg H, Henriksson A, Dalianis H. The Impact of De-identification on Downstream Named Entity Recognition in Clinical 
Text. November, 2020; Online: Association for Computational Linguistics; 2020. p. 1-11. 
63. 
Henriksson A. Learning multiple distributed prototypes of semantic categories for named entity recognition. Int J Data 
Min Bioinform. 2015;13(4):395-411. 
64. 
Henriksson A, Dalianis H, Kowalski S. Generating features for named entity recognition by learning prototypes in semantic 
space: The case of de-identifying health records.  2014 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine 
(BIBM); 2-5 Nov, 20142014. p. 450-7. 
65. 
Henriksson A, Hassel M. Optimizing the dimensionality of clinical term spaces for improved diagnosis coding support. In: 
Suominen H, editor. The 4th International Louhi Workshop on Health Document Text Mining and Information Analysis 
(Louhi 2013); 2013: Citeseer; 2013. 
 
 
 
66. 
Henriksson A, Hassel M, Kvist M. Diagnosis code assignment support using random indexing of patient records – A 
Qualitative feasibility study.  AIME 2011; Berlin, Heidelberg: Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg; 2011. p. 348-52. 
67. 
Henriksson A, Kvist M, Dalianis H. Detecting Protected Health Information in Heterogeneous Clinical Notes. Stud Health 
Technol Inform. 2017;245:393-7. 
68. 
Henriksson A, Kvist M, Dalianis H, Duneld M. Identifying adverse drug event information in clinical notes with 
distributional semantic representations of context. Journal of Biomedical Informatics. 2015;57:333-49. 
69. 
Henriksson A, Moen H, Skeppstedt M, Daudaravičius V, Duneld M. Synonym extraction and abbreviation expansion with 
ensembles of semantic spaces. Journal of Biomedical Semantics. 2014;5(1):6. 
70. 
Henriksson A, Skeppstedt M, Kvist M, Duneld M, Conway M. Corpus-driven terminology development: populating 
Swedish SNOMED CT with synonyms extracted from electronic health records. August, 2013; Sofia, Bulgaria: Association 
for Computational Linguistics; 2013. p. 36-44. 
71. 
Lövestam E, Velupillai S, Kvist M. Abbreviations in Swedish Clinical Text--use by three professions. Stud Health Technol 
Inform. 2014;205:720-4. 
72. 
Skeppstedt M. Annotating named entities in clinical text by combining pre-annotation and active learning. August; Sofia, 
Bulgaria: Association for Computational Linguistics; 2013. p. 74-80. 
73. 
Skeppstedt M. Enhancing Medical Named Entity Recognition with Features Derived from Unsupervised Methods. April; 
Gothenburg, Sweden: Association for Computational Linguistics; 2014. p. 21-30. 
74. 
Skeppstedt M, Kvist M, Nilsson GH, Dalianis H. Automatic recognition of disorders, findings, pharmaceuticals and body 
structures from clinical text: an annotation and machine learning study. J Biomed Inform. 2014;49:148-58. 
75. 
Velupillai S. Towards a better understanding of uncertainties and speculations in Swedish clinical text – Analysis of an 
initial annotation trial. July; Uppsala, Sweden: University of Antwerp; 2010. p. 14-22. 
76. 
Velupillai S, Kvist M. Fine-Grained Certainty Level Annotations Used for Coarser-Grained E-Health Scenarios. Berlin, 
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 2012. p. 450-61. 
77. 
Velupillai S, Dalianis H, Kvist M. Factuality levels of diagnoses in Swedish clinical text. Stud Health Technol Inform. 
2011;169:559-63. 
78. 
Dalianis H, Velupillai S. De-identifying Swedish clinical text-refinement of a gold standard and experiments with 
Conditional random fields. Journal of biomedical semantics. 2010;1:1-10. 
79. 
Henriksson A, Hassel M. Exploiting structured data, negation detection and SNOMED CT terms in a random indexing 
approach to clinical coding. September; Hissar, Bulgaria: Association for Computational Linguistics; 2011. p. 3-10. 
80. 
Skeppstedt M. Adapting a Parser to Clinical Text by Simple Pre-processing Rules. August; Sofia, Bulgaria: Association for 
Computational Linguistics; 2013. p. 98-101. 
81. 
Skeppstedt M, Ahltorp M, Henriksson A. Vocabulary Expansion by Semantic Extraction of Medical Terms.  The 5th 
International Symposium on Languages in Biology and Medicine (LBM 2013), Tokyo, Japan, 12 - 13 December, 2013; 
20132013. p. 63-8. 
82. 
Dalianis H, Skeppstedt M. Creating and evaluating a consensus for negated and speculative words in a Swedish clinical 
corpus. 20102010. p. 5-13. 
83. 
Allvin H, Carlsson E, Dalianis H, Danielsson-Ojala R, Daudaravicius V, Hassel M, et al. Characteristics of Finnish and Swedish 
intensive care nursing narratives: a comparative analysis to support the development of clinical language technologies. J 
Biomed Semantics. 2011;2 Suppl 3(Suppl 3):S1. 
84. 
Mowery DL, Velupillai S, Chapman WW. Medical diagnosis lost in translation – Analysis of uncertainty and negation 
expressions in English and Swedish clinical texts.  BioNLP; June; Montréal, Canada: Association for Computational 
Linguistics; 2012. p. 56-64. 
85. 
Henriksson A, Zhao J, Boström H, Dalianis H. Modeling heterogeneous clinical sequence data in semantic space for 
adverse drug event detection.  2015 IEEE International Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics (DSAA); 19-
21 Oct. 20152015. p. 1-8. 
86. 
Karlsson I, Zhao J. Dimensionality reduction with random indexing: An application on adverse drug event detection using 
electronic health records.  2014 IEEE 27th International Symposium on Computer-Based Medical Systems; 27-29 May 
2014: IEEE; 2014. p. 304-7. 
87. 
Bampa M, Dalianis H. Detecting adverse drug events from Swedish electronic health records using text mining.  
MultilingualBIO 2020; May, 2020; Marseille, France: European Language Resources Association; 2020. p. 1-8. 
88. 
Ehrentraut C, Ekholm M, Tanushi H, Tiedemann J, Dalianis H. Detecting hospital-acquired infections: A document 
classification approach using support vector machines and gradient tree boosting. Health Informatics J. 2018;24(1):24-
42. 
89. 
Friedrich S, Dalianis H. Adverse drug event classification of health records using dictionary based pre-processing and 
machine learning. September, 2015; Lisbon, Portugal: Association for Computational Linguistics; 2015. p. 121-30. 
90. 
Dalianis H, Boström H. Releasing a Swedish clinical corpus after removing all words–de-identification experiments with 
conditional random fields and random forests.  BioTxtM 2012; 20122012. p. 45-8. 
 
 
 
91. 
Henriksson A, Zhao J, Boström H, Dalianis H. Modeling electronic health records in ensembles of semantic spaces for 
adverse drug event detection.  2015 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM): IEEE; 2015. 
p. 343-50. 
92. 
Henriksson A, Zhao J, Dalianis H, Boström H. Ensembles of randomized trees using diverse distributed representations of 
clinical events. BMC medical informatics and decision making. 2016;16(2):85-95. 
93. 
Jacobson O, Dalianis H. Applying deep learning on electronic health records in Swedish to predict healthcare-associated 
infections. August; Berlin, Germany: Association for Computational Linguistics; 2016. p. 191-5. 
94. 
Berg H, Chomutare T, Dalianis H. Building a de-identification system for real swedish clinical text using pseudonymised 
clinical text.  LOUHI 2019; November, 2019; Hong Kong: Association for Computational Linguistics; 2019. p. 118-25. 
95. 
Berg H, Dalianis H. Augmenting a De-identification System for Swedish Clinical Text Using Open Resources and Deep 
Learning. September, 2019; Turku, Finland: Linköping Electronic Press; 2019. p. 8-15. 
96. 
Henriksson A. Representing clinical notes for adverse drug event detection. September, 2015; Lisbon, Portugal: 
Association for Computational Linguistics; 2015. p. 152-8. 
97. 
Almgren S, Pavlov S, Mogren O. Named entity recognition in swedish health records with character-based deep 
bidirectional lstms. December, 2016; Osaka, Japan: The COLING 2016 Organizing Committee; 2016. p. 30-9. 
98. 
Berg H, Dalianis H. A Semi-supervised Approach for De-identification of Swedish Clinical Text. May, 2020; Marseille, 
France: European Language Resources Association; 2020. p. 4444-50. 
99. 
Weegar R, Pérez A, Dalianis H, Gojenola K, Casillas A, Oronoz M. Ensembles for clinical entity extraction. Procesamiento 
del Lenguaje Natural. 2018;60:13-20. 
100. 
Perez A, Weegar R, Casillas A, Gojenola K, Oronoz M, Dalianis H. Semi-supervised medical entity recognition: A study on 
Spanish and Swedish clinical corpora. J Biomed Inform. 2017;71:16-30. 
101. 
Chomutare T, Yigzaw KY, Budrionis A, Makhlysheva A, Godtliebsen F, Dalianis H. De-Identifying Swedish EHR Text Using 
Public Resources in the General Domain.  Stud Health Technol Inform; Jun 162020. p. 148-52. 
102. 
Grancharova M, Berg H, Dalianis H. Improving named entity recognition and classification in class imbalanced Swedish 
electronic patient records through resampling.  Eighth Swedish Language Technology Conference (SLTC 2020), online, 
November 25-27, 2020; 2020: Göteborgs universitet; 2020. 
103. 
Bridal O, Vakili T, Santini M. Cross-Clinic De-Identification of Swedish Electronic Health Records: Nuances and Caveats. 
June, 2022; Marseille, France: European Language Resources Association; 2022. p. 49-52. 
104. 
Chomutare T, Budrionis A, Dalianis H. Combining deep learning and fuzzy logic to predict rare ICD-10 codes from clinical 
notes.  2022 IEEE International Conference on Digital Health (ICDH); 10-16 July, 2022: IEEE 2022. p. 163-8. 
105. 
Dolk A, Davidsen H, Dalianis H, Vakili T. Evaluation of LIME and SHAP in explaining automatic ICD-10 classifications of 
Swedish gastrointestinal discharge summaries.  Scandinavian Conference on Health Informatics2022. p. 166-73. 
106. 
Lamproudis A, Svenning TO, Torsvik T, Chomutare T, Budrionis A, Dinh Ngo P, et al. Using a large open clinical corpus for 
improved ICD-10 diagnosis coding. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2023;2023:465-73. 
107. 
Vakili T, Henriksson A, Dalianis H. End-to-End Pseudonymization of Fine-Tuned Clinical BERT Models. 2023. 
108. 
Grancharova M, Dalianis H. Applying and sharing pre-trained BERT-models for named entity recognition and classification 
in Swedish electronic patient records. May 31–2 Jun, 2021; Reykjavik, Iceland (Online): Linköping University Electronic 
Press, Sweden; 2021. p. 231-9. 
109. 
Jerdhaf O, Santini M, Lundberg P, Bjerner T, Al-Abasse Y, Jonsson A, et al. Evaluating pre-trained language models for 
focused terminology extraction from Swedish medical records. June; Marseille, France: European Language Resources 
Association; 2022. p. 30-2. 
110. 
Lamproudis A, Henriksson A, Dalianis H. Developing a clinical language model for swedish: Continued pretraining of 
generic bert with in-domain data.  RANLP 2021; September; Held Online: INCOMA Ltd.; 2021. p. 790-7. 
111. 
Lamproudis A, Henriksson A, Dalianis H. Vocabulary modifications for domain-adaptive pretraining of clinical language 
models. In: Nathalie B, Ana F, Hugo G, editors. The 15th International Joint Conference on Biomedical Engineering 
Systems and Technologies (BIOSTEC 2022), 9 - 11 February, 2022, Online; 2022: SciTePress; 2022. p. 180-8. 
112. 
Lamproudis A, Henriksson A, Dalianis H. Evaluating pretraining strategies for clinical BERT models. June; Marseille, France: 
European Language Resources Association; 2022. p. 410-6. 
113. 
Pawar Y, Henriksson A, Hedberg P, Naucler P. Leveraging clinical BERT in multimodal mortality prediction models for 
COVID-19.  2022 IEEE 35th International Symposium on Computer-Based Medical Systems (CBMS); 21-23 July 2022: IEEE; 
2022. p. 199-204. 
114. 
Henriksson A, Pawar Y, Hedberg P, Nauclér P. Multimodal fine-tuning of clinical language models for predicting COVID-
19 outcomes. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine. 2023;146:102695. 
115. 
Vakili T, Lamproudis A, Henriksson A, Dalianis H. Downstream Task Performance of BERT Models Pre-Trained Using 
Automatically De-Identified Clinical Data.  Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2022), Marseilles, 
France, 21-23 June 2022; 2022: European Language Resources Association; 2022. p. 4245-52. 
116. 
Bergman E, Dürlich L, Arthurson V, Sundström A, Larsson M, Bhuiyan S, et al. BERT based natural language processing for 
triage of adverse drug reaction reports shows close to human-level performance. PLOS Digital Health. 
2023;2(12):e0000409. 
 
 
 
117. 
Remmer S, Lamproudis A, Dalianis H. Multi-label Diagnosis Classification of Swedish Discharge Summaries – ICD-10 Code 
Assignment Using KB-BERT. September; Held Online: INCOMA Ltd.; 2021. p. 1158-66. 
118. 
Budrionis A, Chomutare T, Svenning TO, Dalianis H. The Influence of NegEx on ICD-10 code prediction in Swedish: How is 
the performance of BERT and SVM models affected by negations?  Scandinavian Conference on Health Informatics2022. 
p. 174-8. 
119. 
Blanco A, Remmer S, Pérez A, Dalianis H, Casillas A. On the Contribution of Per-ICD Attention Mechanisms to Classify 
Health Records in Languages with Fewer Resources than English. September, 2021; Held Online: INCOMA Ltd.; 2021. p. 
165-72. 
120. 
Blanco A, Remmer S, Perez A, Dalianis H, Casillas A. Implementation of specialised attention mechanisms: ICD-10 
classification of Gastrointestinal discharge summaries in English, Spanish and Swedish. J Biomed Inform. 
2022;130:104050. 
121. 
Berg J, Aasa CO, Appelgren Thorell B, Aits S. OpenChart-SE: A corpus of artificial Swedish electronic health records for 
imagined emergency care patients written by physicians in a crowd-sourcing project. medRxiv. 2023. 
122. 
Engel Thomas C, Bjødstrup Jensen P, Werge T, Brunak S. Negation scope and spelling variation for text-mining of Danish 
electronic patient records. April; Gothenburg, Sweden: Association for Computational Linguistics; 2014. p. 64-8. 
123. 
Eriksson R, Jensen PB, Frankild S, Jensen LJ, Brunak S. Dictionary construction and identification of possible adverse drug 
events in Danish clinical narrative text. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2013;20(5):947-53. 
124. 
Roque FS, Jensen PB, Schmock H, Dalgaard M, Andreatta M, Hansen T, et al. Using electronic patient records to discover 
disease correlations and stratify patient cohorts. PLoS Comput Biol. 2011;7(8):e1002141. 
125. 
Laursen MS, Pedersen JS, Vinholt PJ, Hansen RS, Savarimuthu TR. Benchmark for Evaluation of Danish Clinical Word 
Embeddings. Northern European Journal of Language Technology. 2023;9(1). 
126. 
Bonde A, Lorenzen S, Brixen G, Troelsen A, Sillesen M. Assessing the utility of deep neural networks in detecting superficial 
surgical site infections from free text electronic health record data. Front Digit Health. 2024;5:1249835. 
127. 
Pedersen JS, Laursen MS, Savarimuthu TR, Hansen RS, Alnor AB, Bjerre KV, et al. Deep learning detects and visualizes 
bleeding events in electronic health records. Research and practice in thrombosis and haemostasis. 2021;5(4):e12505. 
128. 
Laursen MS, Pedersen JS, Vinholt PJ, Savarimuthu TR. Automatic annotation of training data for deep learning based de-
identification of narrative clinical text.  WNLPe-Health 2022: CEUR Workshop Proceedings; 2023. p. 30-44. 
129. 
Laursen M, Pedersen J, Hansen R, Savarimuthu TR, Vinholt P. Danish Clinical Named Entity Recognition and Relation 
Extraction. May, 2023; Tórshavn, Faroe Islands: University of Tartu Library; 2023. p. 655-66. 
130. 
Pedersen JS, Laursen MS, Soguero-Ruiz C, Savarimuthu TR, Hansen RS, Vinholt PJ. Domain over size: Clinical ELECTRA 
surpasses general BERT for bleeding site classification in the free text of electronic health records.  2022 IEEE-EMBS 
International Conference on Biomedical and Health Informatics (BHI); 27-30 Sept. 2022: IEEE; 2022. p. 1-4. 
131. 
Pedersen J, Laursen M, Vinholt P, Alnor A, Savarimuthu T. Investigating anatomical bias in clinical machine learning 
algorithms.  EACL 2023; May, 2023; Dubrovnik, Croatia: Association for Computational Linguistics; 2023. p. 1398-410. 
132. 
Pedersen J, Laursen M, Vinholt P, Savarimuthu TR. MeDa-BERT: A medical Danish pretrained transformer model.  
NoDaLiDa; May, 2023; Tórshavn, Faroe Islands: University of Tartu Library; 2023. p. 301-7. 
133. 
Dalianis H, Henriksson A, Kvist M, Velupillai S, Weegar R. HEALTH BANK - A Workbench for Data Science Applications in 
Healthcare.  CAiSE Industry Track, CAiSE-IT 2015 June 2015; Stockholm, Sweden: CEUR Workshop Proceedings; 2015. p. 
1-18. 
134. 
Nesca M, Katz A, Leung CK, Lix LM. A scoping review of preprocessing methods for unstructured text data to assess data 
quality. Int J Popul Data Sci. 2022;7(1):1757. 
135. 
Gupta N, Mujumdar S, Patel H, Masuda S, Panwar N, Bandyopadhyay S, et al. Data Quality for Machine Learning Tasks.  
Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining; Virtual Event, Singapore: 
Association for Computing Machinery; 2021. p. 4040–1. 
136. 
Singh S. Natural language processing for information extraction. arXiv preprint arXiv:180702383. 2018. 
137. 
Hung V. Context and NLP. In: Brézillon P, Gonzalez AJ, editors. Context in Computing: A Cross-Disciplinary Approach for 
Modeling the Real World. New York, NY: Springer New York; 2014. p. 143-54. 
138. 
Asudani DS, Nagwani NK, Singh P. Impact of word embedding models on text analytics in deep learning environment: a 
review. Artificial Intelligence Review. 2023;56(9):10345-425. 
139. 
Liu Q, Huang H, Gao Y, Wei X, Tian Y, Liu L. Task-oriented Word Embedding for Text Classification. August; Santa Fe, New 
Mexico, USA: Association for Computational Linguistics; 2018. p. 2023-32. 
140. 
Patil R, Boit S, Gudivada V, Nandigam J. A Survey of Text Representation and Embedding Techniques in NLP. IEEE Access. 
2023;11:36120-46. 
141. 
Naseem U, Razzak I, Khan SK, Prasad M. A Comprehensive Survey on Word Representation Models: From Classical to 
State-of-the-Art Word Representation Language Models. ACM Trans Asian Low-Resour Lang Inf Process. 
2021;20(5):Article 74. 
142. 
Leite MAA. Ontology-Based Extraction and Structuring of Narrative Elements from Clinical Texts: Faculty of Sciences of 
the University of Porto; 2024. 
 
 
 
143. 
Nissim M, Abzianidze L, Evang K, van der Goot R, Haagsma H, Plank B, et al. Sharing Is Caring: The Future of Shared Tasks. 
Computational Linguistics. 2017;43(4):897-904. 
144. 
Hedderich MA, Lange L, Adel H, Strotgen J, Klakow D. A Survey on Recent Approaches for Natural Language Processing in 
Low-Resource Scenarios.  North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics 2020. 
145. 
Zhao Z, Alzubaidi L, Zhang J, Duan Y, Gu Y. A comparison review of transfer learning and self-supervised learning: 
Definitions, applications, advantages and limitations. Expert Systems with Applications. 2024;242. 
146. 
Mennella C, Maniscalco U, De Pietro G, Esposito M. Ethical and regulatory challenges of AI technologies in healthcare: A 
narrative review. Heliyon. 2024;10(4):e26297. 
147. 
Loosen SH, Kostev K, Jördens MS, Luedde T, Roderburg C. Overlap between irritable bowel syndrome and common 
gastrointestinal diagnoses: a retrospective cohort study of 29,553 outpatients in Germany. BMC Gastroenterol. 
2022;22(1):48. 
148. 
Wei Q, Franklin A, Cohen T, Xu H. Clinical text annotation - what factors are associated with the cost of time? AMIA Annu 
Symp Proc. 2018;2018:1552-60. 
149. 
Young T, Hazarika D, Poria S, Cambria E. Recent Trends in Deep Learning Based Natural Language Processing. IEEE Comput 
Intell Mag. 2017;13:55-75. 
150. 
Vaswani A, Shazeer N, Parmar N, Uszkoreit J, Jones L, Gomez AN, et al. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural 
information processing systems. 2017;30. 
151. 
Jia J, Liang W, Liang Y. A review of hybrid and ensemble in deep learning for natural language processing. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:231205589. 2023. 
152. 
Khan W, Daud A, Khan K, Muhammad S, Haq R. Exploring the frontiers of deep learning and natural language processing: 
A comprehensive overview of key challenges and emerging trends. Natural Language Processing Journal. 2023:100026. 
153. 
Huang K, Altosaar J, Ranganath R. ClinicalBERT: Modeling Clinical Notes and Predicting Hospital Readmission. ArXiv. 
2019;abs/1904.05342. 
154. 
Peng Y, Yan S, Lu Z. Transfer Learning in Biomedical Natural Language Processing: An Evaluation of BERT and ELMo on 
Ten Benchmarking Datasets. August; Florence, Italy: Association for Computational Linguistics; 2019. p. 58-65. 
155. 
Devlin J, Chang M-W, Lee K, Toutanova K. BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language 
Understanding. June; Minneapolis, Minnesota: Association for Computational Linguistics; 2019. p. 4171-86. 
156. 
Johnson AEW, Bulgarelli L, Shen L, Gayles A, Shammout A, Horng S, et al. MIMIC-IV, a freely accessible electronic health 
record dataset. Scientific Data. 2023;10(1):1. 
157. 
Cascella M, Semeraro F, Montomoli J, Bellini V, Piazza O, Bignami E. The Breakthrough of Large Language Models Release 
for Medical Applications: 1-Year Timeline and Perspectives. J Med Syst. 2024;48(1):22. 
158. 
Clusmann J, Kolbinger FR, Muti HS, Carrero ZI, Eckardt J-N, Laleh NG, et al. The future landscape of large language models 
in medicine. Communications Medicine. 2023;3(1):141. 
159. 
Denecke K, May R, Rivera Romero O. Potential of Large Language Models in Health Care: Delphi Study. J Med Internet 
Res. 2024;26:e52399. 
160. 
Agrawal M, Hegselmann S, Lang H, Kim Y, Sontag D. Large language models are few-shot clinical information extractors. 
December; Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates: Association for Computational Linguistics; 2022. p. 1998-2022. 
161. 
Andrew A. Potential applications and implications of large language models in primary care. Fam Med Community Health. 
2024;12(Suppl 1). 
162. 
Liu Z-L, Yu X-X, Zhang L, Wu Z, Cao C-Y, Dai H, et al. DeID-GPT: Zero-shot Medical Text De-Identification by GPT-4. ArXiv. 
2023;abs/2303.11032. 
163. 
Infrastructure - Swedish Health Record Research Bank [updated August 31, 2022. Available from: 
https://www.su.se/department-of-computer-and-systems-sciences/research/infrastructure?open-collapse-
boxes=ccbd-swedishhealthrecordresearchbank. 
164. 
Health Data Sweden  [Available from: https://www.healthdatasweden.eu/. 
165. 
Laursen MS, Pedersen JS, Hansen RS, Savarimuthu TR, Lynggaard RB, Vinholt PJ. Doctors Identify Hemorrhage Better 
during Chart Review when Assisted by Artificial Intelligence. Appl Clin Inform. 2023;14(4):743-51. 
 
Appendix A 
Extended Definition of Categorization Used in Data Collection 
Categories used in extracting information from the articles included in the study. These categories are solely 
determined to assess and evaluate the included articles and are pre-defined based on previous knowledge, 
brainstorming, discussion among the authors, and literature (1, 2). 
• 
Clinical Application and Technical Objective: This category identifies the precise clinical challenges or 
healthcare goals the study intends to address through Natural language processing (NLP). It also identifies the 
technical objective defined to address the clinical needs, emphasizing the technical contribution of the study 
to solve the clinical challenges.   
• 
Language: This category identifies and pinpoints the language of the processed clinical text in each of the 
reviewed studies. It can be either Swedish, Norwegian, Danish, or other languages studied along with these 
three main languages.  
• 
NLP Task: This category defines the high-level grouping of the NLP task considered in each of the reviewed 
studies. It can take any of the following: core NLP, resource development, de-identification, information 
extraction, classification, context analysis, and multi-lingual tasks. Each group can contain several types of 
methods outlined under the “type description” category below. 
• 
Type Description: This category identifies and pinpoints the specific group of NLP methods, which are the 
sub-category of each NLP task defined above, used or implemented in each of the reviewed studies and it can 
be part-of-speech tagging, negation detection, drugs/adverse events, uncertainty/assertion, named entity 
recognition, and others.  
• 
Model and Method: This category identifies and pinpoints the type of NLP models or methods proposed, and 
developed in each of the reviewed studies and it can take any of the following: rule-based, interpretable 
methods, ensemble, deep/non-linear learning, hybrid, and transformer and large language model.  
• 
Code Availability, and pre-trained models: This category identifies if the studies had released any 
accompanying code related to the experiments conducted and further looks if there are any reported releases 
of pre-trained models.   
• 
Adaption & Transfer learning: This category identifies and pinpoints if there is some form of adaptation and 
transfer learning used including, for example, data augmentation, transfer learning, etc. 
• 
Data Sources and Names: This category specifies the origin and name of the dataset used in the study, 
detailing the institutions or platforms from which it was sourced, and the specific names or identifiers of the 
datasets used. 
• 
Other data: This category identifies, and pinpoints datasets other than clinical free text utilized in the studies 
and can include laboratory measurements, codes, registry, and others.  
• 
Type of EHR documents: This category identifies the specific type of Electronic Health Record (EHR) 
documents targeted in each of the reviewed studies (e.g., Progress notes, lab reports, pathology reports, 
discharge summaries, consultation reports, medication lists, immunization records, and others).  
• 
Text Preprocessing: This category identifies the preprocessing strategies used to refine and transform the 
clinical text data into a format more suitable for feature representation. It can be tokenization, sentence splitter, 
stop word removal, stemming, lemmatization, PoS-tagger, and others.  
• 
Feature Representation Techniques: This category outlines the specific methods used to convert the 
preprocessed clinical text data or words into a numerical representation that the NLP models can understand 
and analyze. There are various kinds of feature representation available and can include Word2Vec, 
Phrase2Vec, GloVe, FastText, TF-IDF, N-grams, Bag-of-words, and other representation techniques used in 
NLP. 
• 
Disease area/Health domain: This category identifies and pinpoints the specific type of disease or health 
domain targeted by the reviewed studies. Whenever possible, the reported disease areas are roughly mapped 
into the existing classifications as defined by the Clinical Data Interchange Standards Consortium 
https://www.cdisc.org/standards/therapeutic-areas/disease-area. 
• 
Departments/Clinical Unit: This category identifies the specific department or clinical unit within the 
healthcare setting in which the dataset was retrieved for each of the reviewed studies and aims to pinpoint the 
group of clinical units that were studied most or least.  
• 
Study Period: This category captures the dataset's temporal dimensions, providing insights into the specific 
timeframe over which the data was collected. It outlines the duration, including start and end dates if 
applicable. 
• 
Dataset Size: This category pinpoints the total volume of the dataset used, detailing the number of patients, 
records, documents, instances, or tokens it comprises.  
• 
Training/Test /Validation size: This category details the division of the dataset into training, test, and 
validation subsets, offering insights into the allocation of data for model development, evaluation, and 
validation. 
• 
Data Availability: This category identifies if the dataset used in each of the reviewed studies is accessible for 
other researchers, indicating how and where the dataset can be accessed, whether it is publicly available, 
restricted to certain users, or available upon request.  
• 
Annotated Set: This category pinpoints the size of the dataset that had been annotated, detailing the volume 
of data that has undergone labeling processes. 
• 
Domain Expert: This category identifies the involvement of domain experts in the dataset's preparation or 
analysis process, highlighting their contribution to data curation, annotation, or validation.  
• 
Data quality and related issues: This category identifies the type of data quality and other related issues 
reported in each of the reviewed studies. The data quality issues can incorporate any of the following: 
misspellings, abbreviations, incompleteness, inconsistency, lack of standardization, inconsistencies in data 
representation, missing data, incorrect data labeling, or others. Other data-related issues were also 
considered, e.g. lack of public data.  
• 
Performance and efficiency: This category identifies and pinpoints the performance reported in the studies 
and evaluation methods (performance metrics) used.  
• 
Implementation Status: This category provides an overview of the current state of model evaluation in real-
world clinical settings and the extent of deployment and integration of these models into clinics.  
Grouping of Values in Categories for the Literature Analysis and Evaluation 
After the data collection stage, where all the categories described above have been extracted from each study, for the 
sake of brevity, the categories were further grouped into sub-categories, and specific values were assigned to each 
category. The following table provides the delineation of all the values extracted from the articles, and how they were 
mapped or grouped under each sub-category during the analysis. 
• 
Disease area/health domain, Departments/clinical units, Type of EHR Documents, Models 
and methods, Feature representation techniques 
Table 1 incorporates the mapping of the values from the main category (Disease area/health domain, 
Departments/clinical units, Type of EHR Documents, Models and methods, Feature representation techniques) into 
sub-categories.  
Table 1: Mapping disease areas and department/clinical units, model/methods, and feature representation 
techniques employed in the studies. 
Category 
Sub-category 
Values Assigned 
Disease area/health 
domain 
Hematologic and immune disorders 
e.g. aplastic anemia, allergies 
Cardiovascular disorders 
e.g. 
cardiac 
disease, 
venous 
thromboembolism 
Gastrointestinal disorders 
e.g. gastrointestinal surgery 
Behavioral and lifestyle factors 
e.g. patients’ smoking status, nutrition 
Infectious diseases 
e.g. infection, sepsis 
Cancer and systemic disorders 
e.g. cancer, skin disorder 
Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders 
e.g. musculoskeletal conditions 
Neurological and psychiatric disorders 
e.g. psychiatric disorder 
General conditions and procedures 
e.g. adverse events 
Surgical and postoperative complications 
e.g. postoperative delirium, bleeding 
Family and genetic history 
e.g. family history 
Specific conditions 
e.g. oral, throat 
 
General services 
e.g. nursing, ambulatory care, outpatient 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Departments/clinical 
units 
Intensive and critical care 
e.g. intensive care unit, emergency, anesthesia 
Surgical specialties 
e.g. 
orthopedic, 
dental, 
gastrointestinal, 
general surgery, cardiothoracic, ophthalmic, 
plastic 
surgery, neurological, 
oral 
and 
maxillofacial surgery, colorectal surgery, 
thoracic and vascular Surgery 
Medical Specialties 
e.g. neurology, geriatric, cardiology, internal 
medicine, dermatology, urology, psychiatry, 
rheumatology 
Oncology and hematology 
e.g. oncology, hematology, infectious 
diseases, pathology 
Diagnostic and therapeutic services 
e.g. radiology, diagnostics, drugs 
Women's Health 
e.g. gynecology, obstetrics 
Pediatrics 
 
Other specialties 
e.g. nutrition and dietetics, speech pathology, 
ENT (otorhinolaryngology), ophthalmology, 
maxillofacial 
Administrative 
e.g. admission, discharge 
Type of EHR 
Documents 
Progress Notes 
e.g. Progress, Nurse, and Physician Notes 
Medical History and Physical Examination 
Report 
e.g. Admission Notes, Patient History, 
Assessment Entries, Chief complaint 
Medication List and Prescriptions 
e.g.  Drug information, prescription records 
Allergy and Adverse Reaction List 
e.g.  Adverse event reports 
Surgical Reports 
e.g. Surgical reports and notes 
Laboratory and Diagnostic Test Results 
e.g. Laboratory examination notes, radiology 
reports, pathology reports, diagnostic notes 
Consultation and Referral Reports 
e.g. Outpatient and transfer notes, referrals 
Discharge Summary 
e.g. Discharge summaries, notes, and letters 
Nutritional Assessments and Plans 
e.g. Dietetic notes 
Emergency Department Reports 
e.g. Emergency department notes, and reports 
Diverse/Not specific 
Not mentioned in the study 
Clinical Notes 
e.g. Clinical Notes, text, narrative, EHR notes, 
narratives, text, journal notes 
Model and methods 
Rule-based systems 
e.g. rule-based systems 
Interpretable methods 
e.g. decision tree, naïve Bayes, KNN, logistic 
regression 
Ensemble methods 
e.g. random forest 
Traditional/statistical learning methods 
e.g. CRFs, SVMs 
Deep/nonlinear learning methods 
e.g. MLP, LSTM, GRU, CNN 
Hybrid methods 
e.g. LSTM+CNN 
Transformers and large language models 
e.g. BERT, GPT 
Feature 
representation 
techniques 
Statistical features 
e.g. N-grams, Skipgrams, Bag-of-words, TF-
IDF, Co-occurrence matrix 
Orthographic word features 
e.g. Tags, Anchor specification 
Ontologies 
e.g. Dictionary, Ontology 
Learned word-level embeddings 
e.g. Context vectors, Word2vec, GloVE, 
Fasttext, Starspace 
Learned sentence/document embeddings 
e.g. Topic vectors 
 
• 
Mapping of extracted values into keywords: Data quality and related issues 
The values extracted on data quality and related issues from the reviewed studies are further mapped into proper 
keywords, and the table below defines the keywords used in analyzing the reported issues. The categories “Others” are 
created to include issues that are project-specific and have limited horizons and only happen to the specific data 
considered in that particular study.    
Table 2: Mapping the data quality and other related issues reported in the studies. 
Data Quality and Related 
Issues 
Working definition 
misspelled 
Issues related to misspellings or typographical errors in the data 
multi-word 
Issues related to phrases or terms that consist of multiple words 
abbreviation 
Issues related to abbreviations or shortened forms of words 
reference resolution 
Issues related to challenges in linking mentions of entities to the same underlying real-world 
entities. 
lexical variation 
Issues related to variability in how a concept or entity is expressed, such as synonyms or different 
ways of writing the same term, e.g., medical jargon, and acronyms. 
incomplete data 
Issues related to missing information or data entries 
inconsistent data 
Issues related to inconsistencies in the data, such as conflicting information. 
noisy data 
Issues related to data that contains errors, irrelevant information, or is otherwise not clean. 
duplicate data 
Issues related to repeated information or entries that should be unique. 
formatting issues 
Issues related to problems with the way data is formatted, which could include date formats or 
numerical formats. 
handwritten text 
Issues related to text that is written by hand, often in a way that may be challenging for automated 
processing. 
Data sparsity 
Issues related to a large proportion of the data being sparse. 
Lack of public data 
Issues related to the scarcity of publicly available clinical datasets. 
Others 
Any other issues or anomalies in the data that are not covered by the specific keywords listed 
above 
 
• 
Natural language tasks  
For the sake of brevity and interpretability, the NLP strategies employed in the studies are categorized into core NLP, 
resource development, de-identification, classification, context analysis, and information extraction. A detailed 
description of these keywords is given below.  
• 
Core NLP: This category encompasses techniques like morphology, part-of-speech tagging, parsing, and 
segmentation. 
• 
Resource development: This category encompasses techniques like lexicons, corpora and annotation, 
machine-readable dictionaries, models, and methods. 
• 
De-identification: refers to a set of methods used to remove personal identifiers from the clinical text data.  
• 
Classification: This category encompasses several key tasks, including risk stratification of medical 
conditions from EHR text, indexing and coding, patient-authored text analysis, and cohort stratification, each 
addressing different aspects of medical data categorization and analysis. 
• 
Context Analysis: This category encompasses negation detection, uncertainty/assertion, temporality, 
abbreviation, and experiencer. 
• 
Information extraction: This category encompasses several key techniques and focus areas including medical 
concepts, findings/symptoms, drugs/adverse events, specific characteristics, named entity recognition, and 
relations.  
Extended results 
• 
Data/Information Extraction  
The following tables provide information extracted from the reviewed studies. Table 3 provides information/categories 
mapped from the raw extracted information, which is given in Table 4 below. Table 4 provides the raw data extracted 
and used in the analysis. It is worth noting that all the rest of the variables described above in the categorization section 
can be found in the Excel file possibly attached to this publication or by contacting the corresponding author.    
 
Table 3: Information mapped from the raw extraction information (see Table 4). 
Ref. 
NLP Techniques 
Model/Method 
Feature Representation 
Language 
(3) 
Information extraction (Findings/Symptoms, Named entity recognition) 
Rule-Based Systems, Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
Learnt Word-level Embeddings, Ontologies, Statistical Features, Learnt 
Sentence/Document Embeddings 
Swedish 
(4) 
Information extraction (Named entity recognition), De-identification 
Rule-Based Systems, Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
N/A 
Swedish 
(5) 
Context Analysis (Negation detection, Uncertainty/Assertion) 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
Learnt Word-level Embeddings, Statistical Features, Ontologies  
Swedish 
(6) 
Resource development (content analysis) 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
Ontologies, Statistical Features 
Swedish, Finnish 
(7) 
Information extraction (Named Entity Recognition) 
Rule-Based Systems, Deep/Nonlinear Learning Methods 
Ontologies, Statistical Features, Learnt Word-level Embeddings. Orthographic 
Word Features 
Swedish 
(8) 
Information extraction (Drugs/Adverse events), Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Ensemble Methods, Interpretable Methods 
Statistical Features 
Swedish 
(9, 10) 
Information extraction (Named entity recognition), De-identification 
Deep/Nonlinear Learning Methods, Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
Learnt Word-level Embeddings 
Swedish 
(11) 
Information extraction (Named entity recognition), De-identification 
Rule-based systems, Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods, Deep/Nonlinear Learning 
Methods 
Ontologies, Statistical Features, Orthographic Word Features 
Swedish 
(12) 
Information extraction (Named entity recognition), De-identification 
Rule-Based Systems 
Ontologies 
Swedish 
(13) 
Information extraction (Named entity recognition), De-identification 
Rule-Based Systems, Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
Ontologies 
Swedish 
(14) 
Information extraction (Named entity recognition), De-identification 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
NA 
Swedish 
(15, 16) 
Information extraction (Medical Concepts, Findings/Symptoms), Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods, Rule-Based Systems 
 Statistical Features, Learnt Word-level Embeddings 
Norwegian 
(17) 
Resource development (Corpora and annotation) 
NA 
NA 
Swedish 
(18) 
Classification (Indexing and coding) 
Transformers and Large Language Models 
Learnt Sentence/Document Embeddings 
Spanish, Swedish, English 
(19) 
Classification (Indexing and coding) 
Transformers and Large Language Models 
Learnt Sentence/Document Embeddings 
Spanish, Swedish 
(20) 
Information extraction (Named entity recognition), De-identification 
Transformers and Large Language Models 
Learnt Sentence/Document Embeddings 
Swedish 
(21) 
Resource development (Corpora and annotation), Information Extraction (Named entity recognition), De-
identification 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods, Rule-Based Systems 
NA 
Norwegian 
(22) 
Classification (Indexing and coding), Context Analysis (Negation detection) 
Transformers and Large Language Models, Interpretable Methods, Rule-Based Systems 
Statistical Features, Learnt Sentence/Document Embeddings 
Swedish 
(23) 
Information extraction (Specific characteristics, Named entity recognition), Classification (Phenotyping from 
EHR text) 
Interpretable Methods, Rule-Based Systems 
Statistical Features, Learnt Word-level Embeddings 
Swedish 
(24-26) 
Classification (Indexing and coding) 
Transformers and Large Language Models 
Learnt Sentence/Document Embeddings 
Swedish 
(27) 
Information extraction (Named entity recognition), De-identification 
Hybrid Methods 
Learnt Word-level Embeddings 
Swedish 
(28) 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Rule-Based Systems 
NA 
Norwegian 
(29) 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Interpretable Methods, Deep/Nonlinear Learning Methods 
Statistical Features 
Norwegian 
(30) 
Resource development (Corpora and annotation), Information Extraction (Named entity recognition), De-
identification 
Rule-Based Systems, Transformers and Large Language Models 
Ontologies, Learnt Sentence/Document Embeddings 
Danish 
(31) 
Resource development (Corpora and annotation) 
Deep/Nonlinear Learning Methods 
Learnt Word-level Embeddings 
Danish 
(32) 
Information extraction (Medical Concept, and Findings/Symptoms), classification (Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Deep/Nonlinear Learning Methods, Interpretable Methods, Ensemble Methods, Hybrid 
Methods 
 
 Ontologies, Statistical Features, Learnt Word-level Embeddings 
Norwegian 
(33) 
Resource development (Corpora and annotation), Information Extraction (Named entity recognition, and 
Relations) 
Transformers and Large Language Models 
Learnt Sentence/Document Embeddings 
Danish 
(34) 
Information extraction (Named entity recognition), Classification, De-identification 
Transformers and Large Language Models 
Learnt Sentence/Document Embeddings 
Swedish 
(35) 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Transformers and Large Language Models, Deep/Nonlinear Learning Methods 
Learnt Sentence/Document Embeddings, Learnt Word-level Embeddings 
Danish 
(36) 
Resource development (Models), Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Transformers and Large Language Models, Hybrid Methods 
Learnt Sentence/Document Embeddings, Learnt Word-level Embeddings 
Danish 
(37) 
Resource development (Corpora and annotation, and methods) 
Rule-Based Systems 
NA 
Norwegian 
(38) 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Interpretable Methods, Ensemble Methods 
Statistical Features 
Swedish 
(39) 
Resource development (Machine-readable dictionaries), Information Extraction (Named Entity Recognition, 
Drugs/Adverse events) 
Rule-Based Systems 
Ontologies 
Danish 
(40) 
Information Extraction (Named Entity Recognition, Drugs/Adverse events, Relations) 
Interpretable Methods, Ensemble Methods 
Ontologies 
Swedish 
(41) 
Information extraction (Named Entity Recognition) 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods, Hybrid Methods 
Learnt Word-level Embeddings, Orthographic Word Features, Ontologies 
Swedish 
(42) 
Information extraction (Named Entity Recognition) 
Transformers and Large Language Models 
Learnt Sentence/Document Embeddings 
Swedish 
(43) 
Resource development (Lexicons, methods) 
Rule-Based Systems 
Ontologies; Statistical Features 
Swedish 
(44) 
Resource development (Content analysis) 
Rule-Based Systems, Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
Statistical Features 
Swedish 
(45) 
Core NLP (Parsing, Part of Speech tagging) 
Rule-Based Systems, Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
NA 
Swedish 
(46) 
Information Extraction (Named Entity Recognition) 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
Learnt Word-level Embeddings 
Swedish 
(47) 
Information Extraction (Named Entity Recognition, Drugs/Adverse events) 
Ensemble Methods, Deep/Nonlinear Learning Methods 
Learnt Word-level Embeddings, Statistical Features 
Swedish 
(48) 
Information extraction (Named entity recognition), De-identification 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
Learnt Word-level Embeddings, Orthographic Word Features 
Swedish 
(49) 
Classification (Indexing and coding), Context Analysis (negation detection) 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods, Rule-Based Systems 
Statistical Features 
Swedish 
(50) 
Classification (Indexing and coding) 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
Statistical Features, Learnt Word-level Embeddings 
Swedish 
 
(51) 
Classification (Indexing and coding) 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
Learnt Word-level Embeddings 
Swedish 
(52) 
Information extraction (Named entity recognition), De-identification 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
Ontologies 
Swedish 
(53) 
Information extraction (Drugs/Adverse events, Named entity recognition, Relations), Context Analysis 
(Negation detection, Uncertainty/Assertion, Temporality), Resource Development (Corpora and annotation) 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
Learnt Word-level Embeddings, Statistical Features, Ontologies 
Swedish 
(54) 
Information Extraction (Medical Concepts, Relations), Context Analysis (Abbreviation), Resource Development 
(methods) 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
Learnt Word-level Embeddings, Ontologies, Statistical Features 
Swedish 
(55) 
Resource Development (methods), Information Extraction (Medical concept, Relations) 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
Learnt Word-level Embeddings, Statistical Features 
Swedish 
(56) 
Resource Development (methods), Information Extraction (Drugs/Adverse events) 
Ensemble Methods 
Learnt Word-level Embeddings, Statistical Features 
Swedish 
(57) 
Information extraction (Drugs/Adverse events) 
Deep/Nonlinear Learning Methods, Ensemble Methods 
Learnt Word-level Embeddings 
Swedish 
(58) 
Resource Development (methods), Information Extraction (Drugs/Adverse events) 
Deep/Nonlinear Learning Methods, Ensemble Methods 
Learnt Word-level Embeddings 
Swedish 
(59) 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Deep/Nonlinear Learning Methods, Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
 Statistical Features, Learnt Word-level Embeddings 
Swedish 
(60) 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Rule-Based Systems, Interpretable Methods 
Statistical Features 
Norwegian 
(61) 
Information extraction (Medical Concepts) 
Transformers and Large Language Models 
Learnt Sentence/Document Embeddings 
Swedish 
(62) 
Information extraction (Drugs/Adverse events) 
Ensemble Methods, Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
Learnt Word-level Embeddings, Statistical Features 
Swedish 
(63) 
Context analysis (abbreviation), Classification 
Rule-Based Systems 
NA 
Swedish 
(64) 
Information extraction (Named entity recognition), De-identification, Classification (indexing and coding), 
Context analysis (uncertainty/assertion classification) 
Transformers and Large Language Models 
Learnt Sentence/Document Embeddings 
Swedish 
(65) 
Information extraction (Named entity recognition), De-identification, Classification (indexing and coding) 
Transformers and Large Language Models 
Learnt Sentence/Document Embeddings 
Swedish 
(66) 
Classification (Indexing and coding), De-identification, Information Extraction (Named entity recognition, 
Negation detection, Findings/Symptoms, Drugs/Adverse events), Context Analysis (Negation detection) 
Transformers and Large Language Models 
Learnt Sentence/Document Embeddings 
Swedish 
(67) 
Resource Development (content analysis), Context Analysis (Abbreviation) 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
NA 
Swedish 
(68) 
Information extraction (Findings/Symptoms, Medical Concepts, Specific characteristics), Classification 
(Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Interpretable Methods 
Statistical Features, Orthographic Word Features 
Norwegian 
(69) 
Resource development (Corpora and annotation, methods, content analysis), Context analysis (Negation 
detection, Uncertainty/Assertion) 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
NA 
English, Swedish 
(70) 
Resource development (Lexicons), Core NLP (Part of Speech tagging, Parsing) 
Rule-Based Systems 
Ontologies 
Swedish 
(71, 72) 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Transformers and Large Language Models 
Learnt Sentence/Document Embeddings 
Swedish 
(73) 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Deep/Nonlinear Learning Methods 
NA 
Danish 
(74) 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text), Information extraction (Drugs/Adverse events) 
Transformers and Large Language Models, Deep/Nonlinear Learning Methods, Ensemble 
Methods 
Learnt Sentence/Document Embeddings, Statistical Features, Ontologies 
Swedish 
(75) 
Resource development (Corpora and annotation), Information extraction (Named entity recognition), De-
identification 
Transformers and Large Language Models 
Learnt Sentence/Document Embeddings 
Norwegian 
(76) 
Information extraction (Named entity recognition), Classification, De-identification 
Transformers and Large Language Models 
Learnt Sentence/Document Embeddings 
Norwegian, Danish, 
Swedish 
(77) 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text), Information Extraction (Findings/Symptoms) 
Deep/Nonlinear Learning Methods, Rule-Based Systems 
Learnt Word-level Embeddings 
Danish 
(78) 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text), Information Extraction (Findings/Symptoms), Resource 
development (Corpora and annotation) 
Transformers and Large Language Models, Deep/Nonlinear Learning Methods 
Learnt Sentence/Document Embeddings, Learnt Word-level Embeddings 
Danish 
(79) 
Information extraction (Named entity recognition, Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods, Deep/Nonlinear Learning Methods, 
Interpretable Methods 
Learnt Word-level Embeddings, Learnt Sentence/Document Embeddings 
Spanish, Swedish 
(80) 
Resource development (Lexicons, methods), Information extraction (Named entity recognition) 
Rule-Based Systems 
Ontologies 
Norwegian 
 
(81) 
Resource development (Corpora and annotation, methods)), Information extraction (Named entity recognition, 
Relations), Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Interpretable Methods 
NA 
Norwegian 
(82) 
Classification (Indexing and coding) 
Transformers and Large Language Models, Interpretable Methods 
Statistical Features, Learnt Sentence/Document Embeddings 
Swedish 
(83) 
Information extraction (Relations), Classification (Cohort stratification, Indexing and coding) 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
Statistical Features, Ontologies 
Danish 
(84, 85) 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text), Information Extraction (Findings/Symptoms) 
Interpretable Methods 
Statistical Features 
Norwegian 
(86) 
Context Analysis (Negation detection), Classification (Medical Concepts) 
Rule-Based Systems 
Ontologies 
Swedish 
(87) 
Information extraction (Named entity recognition), resource development (Corpora and annotation) 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
NA 
Swedish 
(88) 
Core NLP (Parsing) 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods, Rule-Based Systems 
NA 
Swedish 
(89) 
Information extraction (Named entity recognition) 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
Learnt Word-level Embeddings, Statistical Features 
Swedish 
(90) 
Resource development (Lexicons) 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods, Rule-Based Systems 
Learnt Word-level Embeddings, Statistical Features 
Swedish 
(91) 
Information extraction (Named entity recognition), Resource Development (Lexicons), Classification (Indexing 
and coding) 
Rule-Based Systems 
NA 
Swedish 
(92) 
Information extraction (Named entity recognition), Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
NA 
Swedish 
(93, 94) 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Interpretable Methods, Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
Statistical Features 
Norwegian 
(95) 
Resource Development (methods), Context Analysis (Negation detection) 
Rule-Based Systems 
Ontologies 
Swedish 
(96) 
Resource development (Lexicons), Context analysis (Abbreviation) 
Rule-Based Systems, Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
Statistical Features 
Swedish 
(97) 
Information extraction (Findings/Symptoms, Medical Concepts), Context Analysis (Negation detection) 
Rule-Based Systems 
Ontologies 
Danish 
(98) 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text), Information Extraction (Drugs/Adverse events, Relations, Named 
entity recognition) 
Transformers and Large Language Models 
Learnt Sentence/Document Embeddings 
Swedish 
(99) 
Resource development (Corpora and annotation) and Context Analysis (Negation detection, 
Uncertainty/Assertion) 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
NA 
Swedish 
(100) 
Context Analysis (Temporality) 
Rule-Based Systems 
NA 
Swedish 
(101) 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text, Indexing and coding), information extraction (Drugs/Adverse events) 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
NA 
Swedish 
(102) 
Resource development (Lexicons), Context Analysis (Uncertainty/Assertion) 
Rule-Based Systems 
Ontologies 
Swedish 
(103) 
Resource development (Corpora and annotation), Context Analysis (Temporality) 
Rule-Based Systems 
Statistical Features 
Swedish, Finnish 
(104) 
Resource development (Corpora and annotation, methods), Context Analysis (Uncertainty/Assertion, Negation 
detection) 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods, Rule-Based Systems 
NA 
Swedish 
(105) 
Information extraction (Findings/Symptoms) 
Rule-Based Systems 
Statistical Features 
Norwegian 
(106) 
Information extraction (Findings/Symptoms), Context Analysis (Negation detection) 
Rule-Based Systems 
Ontologies 
Swedish 
(107) 
Information extraction (Findings/Symptoms, Named entity recognition, Specific characteristics) 
Rule-Based Systems 
NA 
Norwegian 
(108) 
Resource Development (Corpora and annotation, methods), Context Analysis (Uncertainty/Assertion) 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
NA 
Swedish 
(109) 
Information extraction (Named entity recognition) 
Ensemble Methods, Deep/Nonlinear Learning Methods, Interpretable Methods, 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
Orthographic Word Features, Learnt Word-level Embeddings 
Spanish, Swedish 
(110) 
Information extraction (Medical Concepts, Findings/Symptoms, and Drugs/Adverse events), Resource 
Development (Corpora and annotation) 
Rule-Based Systems 
Ontologies 
Norwegian 
(111) 
Information extraction (Medical Concepts, Findings/Symptoms, and Drugs/Adverse events), Resource 
Development (Corpora and annotation) 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
Statistical Features, Learnt Sentence/Document Embeddings 
Norwegian 
(112) 
Information extraction (Named entity recognition), De-identification 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods 
Learnt Word-level Embeddings, Statistical Features 
Swedish 
(113) 
Information extraction (Named entity recognition), De-identification 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods, Ensemble Methods 
Orthographic Word Features 
Swedish 
(114) 
Context Analysis (Negation detection), Resource development (Lexicons), Content Analysis 
Rule-Based Systems 
Ontologies 
English, French, German, 
Swedish 
(115) 
Resource development (Corpora and annotation), Information Extraction (Named entity recognition, Relations) 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods, Interpretable Methods 
Orthographic Word Features 
Norwegian 
 
Table 4: Data extracted from the included studies (raw data). The table highlights the most important categories used in the analysis. 
 
References 
Author’s Country 
Health Domain 
NLP Techniques 
Model/Method 
Accessibility 
Adaption 
Data source 
Type of EHR 
documents 
Language 
Data Availability 
Domain expert 
Clinical Testing 
(3) 
Sweden 
Infection 
Information extraction (Findings/Symptoms, 
Named entity recognition) 
Phrase detection, Iterative 
merging, Normalized (pointwise) mutual information 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Clinical notes 
Swedish 
Yes* 
YES  
NO 
(4) 
Sweden 
N/A 
Information extraction (Named entity 
recognition), De-identification 
Rule-based, Edit distance  
(Levenshtein   Distance), Qualitative analysis 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Clinical notes 
Swedish 
NO 
YES  
NO 
(5) 
Sweden 
N/A 
Context Analysis (Negation detection, 
Uncertainty/Assertion) 
Random indexing, Euclidean distance, Single-linkage 
agglomerative hierarchical clustering with Euclidean 
distance 
NO 
NO 
Läkartidningen 
(Journal of the Swedish Medical 
Association) corpus 
N/A 
Swedish 
Yes 
Yes  
NO 
(6) 
Sweden, Finland, 
Norway, Australia 
N/A 
Resource development (content analysis) 
Qualitative analysis, Quantitative analysis 
NO 
NO 
Finnish university-affiliated 
hospital, Swedish University-
affiliated hospital 
Nursing narratives 
Swedish, 
Finnish 
NO 
NO 
NO 
(7) 
Sweden 
N/A 
Information extraction (Named Entity 
Recognition) 
Rule-based, Cosine similarity, Character-based 
deep bidirectional recurrent neural network. 
Yes 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Diverse/Not specific 
Swedish 
Yes 
Yes  
NO 
(8) 
Sweden 
Adverse events 
Information extraction (Drugs/Adverse 
events), Classification (Phenotyping from EHR 
text) 
Random forests, Support vector machines 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
N/A 
Swedish 
NO 
NO 
NO 
(9) 
Sweden, Norway 
N/A 
Information extraction (Named entity 
recognition), De-identification 
Long Short-Term Memory, Conditional Random Fields 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital, 
Läkartidningen (Journal of the 
Swedish Medical Association) 
Clinical notes 
Swedish 
NO 
YES  
NO 
(10) 
Sweden 
Infection, Oral, 
Musculoskeletal 
conditions 
Information extraction (Named entity 
recognition), De-identification 
Long Short-Term Memory, Conditional Random Fields 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
N/A 
Swedish 
Yes* 
YES  
NO 
(11) 
Sweden 
Cardiac disease, 
Musculoskeletal 
conditions 
Information extraction (Named entity 
recognition), De-identification 
Rule based, Conditional Random Fields, Self-training 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
N/A 
Swedish 
NO 
YES  
Yes 
(12) 
Sweden 
Infection, Oral, 
Musculoskeletal 
conditions 
Information extraction (Named entity 
recognition), De-identification 
Rule-based 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
N/A 
Swedish 
NO 
YES  
Yes 
(13) 
Sweden 
N/A 
Information extraction (Named entity 
recognition), De-identification 
Rule-based, Conditional Random Fields 
Yes 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
N/A 
Swedish 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
(14) 
Sweden 
Cancer, Adverse events 
Information extraction (Named entity 
recognition), De-identification 
Conditional Random Fields 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Clinical notes 
Swedish 
NO 
YES  
NO 
(15) 
Norway 
Musculoskeletal 
conditions 
Information extraction (Medical Concepts, 
Findings/Symptoms), Classification 
(Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Semi-supervised clustering, Rule-based 
NO 
NO 
Sørlandet Hospital Trust 
Admission summaries, Discharge 
summaries, Progress notes, Outpatient 
clinical notes, Medication prescription 
records, Radiology reports, Laboratory 
data reports, Surgery notes, Assessment 
section 
Norwegian 
NO 
YES  
NO 
(16) 
Norway 
Musculoskeletal 
conditions 
Information extraction (Medical Concepts, 
Findings/Symptoms), Classification 
(Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Semi-supervised clustering, Rule-based 
NO 
NO 
Sørlandet Hospital Trust 
Admission summaries, Discharge 
summaries, Progress notes, Outpatient 
clinical notes, Medication prescription 
records, Radiology reports, Laboratory 
data reports, Surgery notes, Assessment 
section 
Norwegian 
NO 
YES  
Yes 
(17) 
Sweden 
N/A 
Resource development (Corpora and 
annotation) 
Not mentioned 
Yes 
NO 
N/A 
Chief complaint, Assessment section, 
Diagnostic notes 
Swedish 
Yes 
YES  
NO 
(18) 
Spain, Sweden, 
Norway 
Gastrointestinal 
Classification (Indexing and coding) 
Convolutional Neural Networks, BERT, PlaBERT (BERT 
with per-label attention) 
Yes 
Yes 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Discharge Summaries 
Spanish, 
Swedish, 
English 
Yes* 
NO 
Yes 
(19) 
Spain, Sweden, 
Norway 
Gastrointestinal 
Classification (Indexing and coding) 
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from 
Transformers (BERT) 
Yes 
Yes 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Discharge Summaries 
Spanish, 
Swedish 
N/A 
NO 
NO 
(20) 
Sweden 
Musculoskeletal 
conditions, Infection, 
Oral, Cardiac disease 
Information extraction (Named entity 
recognition), De-identification 
SweDeClin-BERT 
Yes 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital, 
Linköping University Hospital 
N/A 
Swedish 
N/A 
Yes  
NO 
(21) 
Sweden 
Cardiac disease, Family 
history 
Resource development (Corpora and 
annotation), Information Extraction (Named 
entity recognition), De-identification 
Conditional Random Fields, Rule-based 
Yes 
Yes 
NorSynthClinical PHI 
Family History Notes 
Norwegian 
Yes 
Yes  
NO 
(22) 
Norway, Sweden 
Gastrointestinal 
Classification (Indexing and coding), Context 
Analysis (Negation detection) 
KB/BERT, Support vector machines, Rule-based 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Discharge Summaries 
Swedish 
Yes* 
NO 
NO 
(23) 
Sweden 
Patients’ smoking 
status 
Information extraction (Specific 
characteristics, Named entity recognition), 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Sequential Minimal Optimization, K-NN, Naïve Bayes, 
Decision tree, Rule-based 
NO 
NO 
N/A 
N/A 
Swedish 
N/A 
Yes 
NO 
(24) 
Norway, Sweden 
Gastrointestinal 
Classification (Indexing and coding) 
Swedish KB BERT, Fuzzy string matching, Levenshtein 
distance 
Yes 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Discharge Summaries 
Swedish 
Yes* 
NO 
NO 
(27) 
Norway, Sweden 
N/A 
Information extraction (Named entity 
recognition), De-identification 
Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory with 
conditional random fields 
NO 
Yes 
Karolinska University Hospital, 
Läkartidningen (The Swedish 
scientific medical journal), 
Wikipedia 
Clinical notes 
Swedish 
Yes* 
Yes 
NO 
(28) 
Sweden 
Cancer 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Rule-based 
NO 
NO 
The Cancer Registry of Norway 
Pathology reports 
Norwegian 
N/A 
Yes 
NO 
(29) 
Norway, USA 
N/A 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Support vector machines, Bidirectional long Short-
Term Memory, Convolutional neural network 
NO 
NO 
Akershus University Hospital 
Radiology reports 
Norwegian 
NO 
YES  
NO 
(25) 
Norway, Sweden 
Gastrointestinal 
Classification (Indexing and coding) 
SweDeClin-BERT, LIME, SHAP 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Discharge Summaries 
Swedish 
N/A 
YES  
NO 
(30) 
Denmark 
N/A 
Resource development (Corpora and 
annotation), Information Extraction (Named 
entity recognition), De-identification 
Rule-based, Princeton University Relation Extraction 
system (PURE) NER, Danish BERT 
Yes 
Yes 
Odense University Hospital 
Narrative Clinical Text 
Danish 
NO 
YES 
NO 
(31) 
Denmark 
Bleeding, Cardiac 
disease, Thorat, 
Musculoskeletal 
conditions, 
Gastrointestinal 
Resource development (Corpora and 
annotation) 
Bidirectional gated recurrent neural network 
Yes 
Yes 
Odense University Hospital 
Clinical notes 
Danish 
NO 
YES            
NO 
(32) 
Norway 
Allergies, 
Musculoskeletal 
conditions 
Information extraction (Medical Concept, 
and Findings/Symptoms), classification 
(Phenotyping from EHR text) 
CNN 1D neural network, Naïve Bayes, Decision tree, 
Logistic regression, Random Forest, K-NN, Support 
Vector Machines, Multi-layer perceptron, Long Short-
Term Memory, Long Short-Term Memory CNN, 
Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory, Bidirectional 
Long Short-Term Memory CNN, Bidirectional Long 
Short-Term Memory with Attention Mechanism, 
Gated recurrent unit, Rule-based 
NO 
NO 
Sørlandet Hospital Trust 
Clinical notes 
Norwegian 
NO 
Yes 
Yes 
(33) 
Denmark 
N/A 
Resource development (Corpora and 
annotation), Information Extraction (Named 
entity recognition, and Relations) 
Princeton University Relation Extraction system 
(PURE) NER, Danish Clinical ELECTRA 
NO 
Yes 
Odense University Hospital 
Clinical notes, Nursing notes, Ambulatory 
care contacts, Surgical notes 
Danish 
NO 
YES 
NO 
(34) 
Sweden 
Gastrointestinal, 
Adverse events 
Information extraction (Named entity 
recognition), Classification, De-identification 
SweClin-BERT, SweDeClin-BERT 
NO 
Yes 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Discharge summaries 
Swedish 
NO 
YES 
NO 
(35) 
Denmark 
Bleeding, Venous 
thromboembolism 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Danish clinical ELECTRA (Clin-ELECTRA), Long Short-
Term Memory (LSTM) 
NO 
Yes 
Odense University Hospital 
EHR Narrative 
Danish 
NO 
YES 
NO 
(36) 
Denmark 
Bleeding, Venous 
thromboembolism 
Resource development (Models), 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text) 
BERT, MeDa-BERT, LSTM+MeDa-WE, LSTM+General-
WE 
Yes 
Yes 
Odense University Hospital 
EHR notes, Clinical guidelines 
Danish 
N/A 
YES 
NO 
(37) 
Norway 
Sepsis, Adverse events 
Resource development (Corpora and 
annotation, and methods) 
Semantic annotation guideline design process 
NO 
NO 
Norwegian Hospital, Synthetic 
adverse event notes 
Adverse event reports 
Norwegian 
NO 
YES 
NO 
(38) 
Sweden 
Infection 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Support vector machines, Gradient tree boosting 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Physician’s notes, Microbiological results 
Swedish 
NO 
NO 
NO 
(39) 
Denmark 
Psychiatric disorder 
Resource development (Machine-readable 
dictionaries), Information Extraction (Named 
Entity recognition, Drugs/Adverse events) 
Rule-based 
NO 
NO 
Danish psychiatric hospital 
Clinical narrative 
Danish 
NO 
Yes 
NO 
(40) 
Sweden 
Adverse events 
Information Extraction (Named Entity 
recognition, Drugs/Adverse events, 
Relations) 
Decision tree, Random Forest, Support vector 
machines 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
N/A 
Swedish 
NO 
NO 
NO 
(41) 
Sweden 
N/A 
Information extraction (Named Entity 
Recognition) 
Balanced undersampling, Oversampling, Conditional 
Random Fields, Bidirectional Long Short-Term 
Memory neural network with conditional random 
fields 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
N/A 
Swedish 
NO 
NO 
NO 
(42) 
Sweden 
N/A 
Information extraction (Named Entity 
Recognition) 
BERT 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
N/A 
Swedish 
NO 
NO 
NO 
(43) 
Sweden 
N/A 
Resource development (Lexicons, methods) 
Rule-based, Swedish Clinical Abbreviation and Medi- 
cal Terminology Matcher (SCATM), Swedish statistical 
language model-based compound analysis (NoCM), 
and misspelling resolution (SCATM+NoCAM) 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Physician’s notes 
Swedish 
NO 
NO 
NO 
(44) 
Sweden 
Cardiac disease, 
Infection 
Resource development (Content analysis) 
Rule-based, Quantitative analysis 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Clinical narrative, Dietician notes, Nurse 
notes, Physician notes 
Swedish 
NO 
Yes  
NO 
(45) 
Sweden 
N/A 
Core NLP (Parsing, Part of Speech tagging) 
Rule+based, SweMalt (MaltParser), Granska tagger 
(PoS) 
Yes 
NO 
N/A 
Assessment entries 
Swedish 
NO 
NO 
NO 
(46) 
Sweden 
Oral, Musculoskeletal 
conditions 
Information Extraction (Named Entity 
Recognition) 
Conditional Random Fields 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Clinical notes 
Swedish 
NO 
Yes 
NO 
(47) 
Sweden 
Adverse events 
Information Extraction (Named Entity 
Recognition, Drugs/Adverse events) 
Random forest, Shallow neural networks (skip-gram 
model) 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
N/A 
Swedish 
NO 
NO 
NO 
(48) 
Sweden 
Infection, Oral, 
Musculoskeletal 
conditions 
Information extraction (Named entity 
recognition), De-identification 
Random indexing, Conditional Random Fields, Cosine 
distance 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Clinical notes 
Swedish 
NO 
NO 
NO 
(49) 
Sweden 
N/A 
Classification (Indexing and coding), Context 
Analysis (negation detection) 
Random indexing, Rule-based 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Clinical notes 
Swedish 
NO 
NO 
NO 
(50) 
Sweden 
N/A 
Classification (Indexing and coding) 
Random indexing, Manual dimension optimization 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
N/A 
Swedish 
NO 
NO 
NO 
 
(51) 
Sweden 
N/A 
Classification (Indexing and coding) 
Random indexing, Qualitative analysis 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
N/A 
Swedish 
NO 
NO 
NO 
(52) 
Sweden 
Infection, Oral, 
Musculoskeletal 
conditions 
Information extraction (Named entity 
recognition), De-identification 
Conditional Random Fields 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Nurse notes, Clinical notes 
Swedish 
NO 
Yes 
NO 
(53) 
Sweden 
Adverse events, 
Allergies 
Information extraction (Drugs/Adverse 
events, Named entity recognition, Relations), 
Context Analysis (Negation detection, 
Uncertainty/Assertion, Temporality), 
Resource Development (Corpora and 
annotation) 
Conditional Random Fields 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Physician notes, Admission Notes, 
Patient History, Hypersensitivity and 
Drug Info, Assessment, Discharge Note 
Swedish 
NO 
Yes 
NO 
(54) 
Sweden 
N/A 
Information Extraction (Medical Concepts, 
Relations), Context Analysis (Abbreviation), 
Resource Development (methods) 
Random indexing, Rrandom permutation 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
EHR narrative, Clinical notes 
Swedish 
Yes* 
NO 
NO 
(55) 
Sweden 
N/A 
Resource Development (methods), 
Information Extraction (Medical concept, 
Relations) 
Random indexing, Random permutation 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Clinical notes 
Swedish 
NO 
NO 
NO 
(56) 
Sweden 
Adverse events 
Resource Development (methods), 
Information Extraction (Drugs/Adverse 
events) 
Random forest 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
N/A 
Swedish 
NO 
NO 
NO 
(57) 
Sweden 
Adverse events 
Information extraction (Drugs/Adverse 
events) 
Artificial neural network, Random Forest 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
N/A 
Swedish 
NO 
NO 
NO 
(58) 
Sweden 
Adverse events 
Resource Development (methods), 
Information Extraction (Drugs/Adverse 
events) 
Artificial neural network, Random Forest 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Clinical notes 
Swedish 
NO 
NO 
NO 
(59) 
Sweden 
Infection 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Sparse autoencoders, Restricted Boltzmann machines 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
N/A 
Swedish 
NO 
Yes 
NO 
(60) 
Norway 
Cancer, 
Gastrointestinal 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Smith-Waterman matching algorithm, Naive Bayes 
classifiers 
NO 
NO 
University Hospital of North 
Norway, Norwegian Death 
Registry 
Admission journal, Nurse notes, Doctor 
notes, Descriptive surgical reports, 
Intensive care reports, Discharge notes 
Norwegian 
NO 
NO 
NO 
(61) 
Sweden 
Cardiac disease 
Information extraction (Medical Concepts) 
KDTree, Generalist Swedish pre-trained KB-BERT, 
Swedish pre-trained SweDeClin-BERT 
NO 
NO 
Linköping University Hospital 
N/A 
Swedish 
NO 
Yes 
NO 
(62) 
Sweden 
Skin disorder, Aplastic 
anemia, Adverse events 
Information extraction (Drugs/Adverse 
events) 
Random forest, Random indexing 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
N/A 
Swedish 
NO 
NO 
NO 
(63) 
Sweden 
N/A 
Context analysis (abbreviation), Classification 
Swedish Clinical Abbreviation Normalizer (SCAN), 
Rule-based, Heuristics-based, Lexicon-based 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Radiology reports, Assessment entries 
Swedish 
NO 
NO 
NO 
(64) 
Sweden 
N/A 
Information extraction (Named entity 
recognition), De-identification, Classification 
(indexing and coding), Context analysis 
(uncertainty/assertion classification) 
Clinical KB-BERT model 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Clinical notes, Discharge summaries 
Swedish 
Yes 
NO 
NO 
(65) 
Sweden 
N/A 
Information extraction (Named entity 
recognition), De-identification, Classification 
(indexing and coding) 
Clinical KB-BERT model with modified vocabulary 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Clinical notes, Discharge summaries 
Swedish 
NO 
NO 
NO 
(66) 
Sweden 
Gastrointestinal 
Classification (Indexing and coding), De-
identification, Information Extraction (Named 
entity recognition, Negation detection, 
Findings/Symptoms, Drugs/Adverse events), 
Context Analysis (Negation detection) 
Clinical BERT models for Swedish 
NO 
Yes 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Clinical notes, Discharge summaries, ICD-
10 codes 
Swedish 
Yes* 
NO 
NO 
(67) 
Sweden 
Nutrition 
Resource Development (content analysis), 
Context Analysis (Abbreviation) 
Frequency analysis, Context analysis 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Clinical notes, Radiology reports, Dietetic 
notes 
Swedish 
Yes* 
Yes  
NO 
(68) 
Norway, Spain 
Postoperative delirium 
Information extraction (Findings/Symptoms, 
Medical Concepts, Specific characteristics), 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text) 
k-nearest neighbors (kNN) clustering, Elastic net 
logistic regression 
NO 
NO 
University Hospital of North 
Norway 
Surgical operation notes, Radiology 
report, Semi-structured nurses’ notes, 
ICD-10 codes 
Norwegian 
NO 
Yes  
NO 
(69) 
USA, Sweden 
Infection 
Resource development (Corpora and 
annotation, methods, content analysis), 
Context analysis (Negation detection, 
Uncertainty/Assertion) 
Qualitative comparison study, Grounded theory 
NO 
NO 
N/A 
Emergency department reports, 
Assessment entries 
English, 
Swedish 
Yes 
NO 
NO 
(70) 
Sweden 
Infection, Oral, 
Musculoskeletal 
conditions 
Resource development (Lexicons), Core NLP 
(Part of Speech tagging, Parsing) 
Lexical lookup, Exact matching technique 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Physician notes, Nurse narratives 
Swedish 
Yes* 
NO 
NO 
(71) 
Sweden 
Infection 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Clinical KB-BERT 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Clinical notes 
Swedish 
NO 
NO 
NO 
(72) 
Sweden 
Infection 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Clinical KB-BERT 
NO 
NO 
Hospitals in Stockholm 
Clinical notes, Emergency department 
notes, Radiology notes 
Swedish 
NO 
NO 
NO 
(73) 
Denmark 
Infection 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Universal Language Model Fine-Tuning, Average-
Stochastic Gradient Descent Weight-Dropped Long 
Short-Term Memory 
NO 
NO 
Hospitals in the Capital Region 
of Denmark 
Postoperative chart notes, Admission 
notes, Operative notes, Progress notes, 
Radiology reports, Discharge notes 
Danish 
Yes* 
Yes 
NO 
(74) 
Sweden 
Adverse events 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text), 
Information extraction (Drugs/Adverse 
events) 
Swedish BERT, AER-BERT, Long Short-Term Memory 
neural network, XGBoost 
NO 
NO 
Swedish Medical Products 
Agency 
Adverse event reports 
Swedish 
Yes* 
Yes 
NO 
(75) 
Norway 
N/A 
Resource development (Corpora and 
annotation), Information extraction (Named 
entity recognition), De-identification 
GPT-4, Conditional random fields, Rule-based 
Yes 
Yes 
NorSynthClinical-PHI, Synthetic 
test 
Clinical notes 
Norwegian 
Yes 
Yes 
NO 
(26) 
Norway, Sweden 
Gastrointestinal 
Classification (Indexing and coding) 
Clinical KB-BERT 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Discharge summaries 
Swedish 
Yes* 
Yes 
NO 
(76) 
Norway, Italy, 
Sweden 
Gastrointestinal 
Information extraction (Named entity 
recognition), Classification, De-identification 
SweDeClin-BERT, NorBERT, ScandiBERT 
NO 
Yes 
University Hospital of North 
Norway, Karolinska University 
Hospital, Statistisk sentralbyrå, 
Danish Dependency Treebank, 
NorSynthClinical PHI Corpus, 
Gastro surgery notes 
Norwegian, 
Danish, 
Swedish 
NO* 
Yes 
NO 
(77) 
Denmark 
Bleeding 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text), 
Information Extraction (Findings/Symptoms) 
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs), Convolutional 
neural networks (CNNs), Rule-based 
NO 
Yes 
Hospitals in the Region of 
Southern Denmark 
EHR notes, ICD codes 
Danish 
NO 
Yes 
NO 
(78) 
Denmark, Spain 
Bleeding 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text), 
Information Extraction (Findings/Symptoms), 
Resource development (Corpora and 
annotation) 
Clinical ELECTRA, General BERT, Bidirectional Long 
Short-Term Memory 
NO 
Yes 
Odense University Hospital 
EHR notes 
Danish 
NO 
Yes 
NO 
 
(79) 
Sweden, Spain 
Cancer 
Information extraction (Named entity 
recognition, Classification (Phenotyping from 
EHR text) 
Maximum probability tagger, Conditional random 
fields, Perceptron, Support vector machine, Brown 
trees, K-means clustering 
Yes 
Yes 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Clinical texts 
Spanish, 
Swedish 
Yes* 
Yes 
NO 
(80) 
Norway 
N/A 
Resource development (Lexicons, methods), 
Information extraction (Named entity 
recognition) 
Suffix-based mapping, Keyword-based mapping, 
Manual evaluations 
NO 
NO 
Medisinsk ordbok, FEST 
database for information, 
Synthetic notes 
Family history notes, Clinical notes 
Norwegian 
Yes 
Yes 
NO 
(81) 
Norway, Spain 
Cardiac disease 
Resource development (Corpora and 
annotation, methods)), Information 
extraction (Named entity recognition, 
Relations), Classification (Phenotyping from 
EHR text) 
Support vector machine 
NO 
NO 
Synthetic corpus of clinical text 
N/A 
Norwegian 
Yes 
Yes 
NO 
(82) 
Sweden 
Gastrointestinal 
Classification (Indexing and coding) 
KB-BERT, Support Vector Machines, Decision Trees, 
K-nearest Neighbours 
NO 
Yes 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Clinical notes, Discharge Summaries 
Swedish 
Yes* 
NO 
NO 
(83) 
Denmark 
Psychiatric disorder 
Information extraction (Relations), 
Classification (Cohort stratification, Indexing 
and coding) 
Hierarchical clustering, Cosine similarity 
NO 
NO 
Sct. Hans Hospital 
Epicrisis, Discharge note, Treatment 
note, Nursing note 
Danish 
NO 
NO 
NO 
(84) 
Norway 
Infection 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text), 
Information Extraction (Findings/Symptoms) 
Support Vector Machines 
Yes 
NO 
Akershus University Hospital 
Clinical notes, Somatic nurse notes, 
Somatic physician notes, Discharge 
notes, Admission notes, Intensive nurse 
note, Ward transfer note 
Norwegian 
Yes 
Yes 
NO 
(85) 
Norway 
Infection 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text), 
Information Extraction (Findings/Symptoms) 
Support Vector Machines 
NO 
NO 
Akershus University Hospital 
Clinical notes, Nursing notes, Surgical 
notes, Physician notes, Laboratory 
examination notes, Discharge 
summaries, Admission notes, Transfer 
notes, Reception notes, Palliative notes 
Norwegian 
NO 
Yes  
NO 
(86) 
Sweden 
N/A 
Context Analysis (Negation detection), 
Classification (Medical Concepts) 
Rule-based, Negex 
NO 
Yes 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Assessment field 
Swedish 
Yes* 
Yes  
NO 
(87) 
Sweden 
N/A 
Information extraction (Named entity 
recognition), resource development (Corpora 
and annotation) 
Conditional random fields 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Emergency notes 
Swedish 
NO 
Yes  
NO 
(88) 
Sweden 
N/A 
Core NLP (Parsing) 
Malt-Parser, Dependency Parsing, Multilingual 
NO 
Yes 
Karolinska University Hospital, 
Lakartidnigen (journal from the 
Swedish Medical Association) 
Assessment section 
Swedish 
NO 
NO 
NO 
(89) 
Sweden 
Cardiac disease, 
Musculoskeletal 
conditions 
Information extraction (Named entity 
recognition) 
Conditional random fields, Ran- 
dom indexing, Clustering 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Emergency notes 
Swedish 
NO 
Yes 
NO 
(90) 
Sweden 
N/A 
Resource development (Lexicons) 
Random indexing, Term Replacement, Cosine 
Addition 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital, 
Lakartidningen (journal from the 
Swedish Medical Association) 
N/A 
Swedish 
Yes 
NO 
NO 
(91) 
Sweden 
N/A 
Information extraction (Named entity 
recognition), Resource Development 
(Lexicons), Classification (Indexing and 
coding) 
Rule-based 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Assessment section 
Swedish 
Yes* 
Yes 
NO 
(92) 
Sweden 
N/A 
Information extraction (Named entity 
recognition), Classification (Phenotyping 
from EHR text) 
Conditional random fields 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Clinical notes, Assessment section 
Swedish 
Yes* 
Yes 
NO 
(93) 
Norway, Spain 
Cancer, 
Gastrointestinal 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Support vector machines, Naive Baye, Fisher 
discriminant analysis 
NO 
NO 
University Hospital of North 
Norway 
Nurses notes, Journal notes, Outpatient 
notes, Radiology reports, Referrals, 
Discharge letters, Admission notes 
Norwegian 
Yes 
NO 
NO 
(95) 
Sweden 
N/A 
Resource Development (methods), Context 
Analysis (Negation detection) 
Rule-based, NegEx, PyConTextNLP, SynNeg 
Yes 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Assessment section 
Swedish 
Yes* 
Yes 
NO 
(96) 
Sweden 
N/A 
Resource development (Lexicons), Context 
analysis (Abbreviation) 
Rule-based, Random Indexing, Random Permutation, 
Cosine similarity 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital, 
Lakartidningen (Journal of the 
Swedish Medical Association) 
Radiology reports 
Swedish 
Yes 
NO 
NO 
(97) 
Denmark 
Psychiatric disorder 
Information extraction (Findings/Symptoms, 
Medical Concepts), Context Analysis 
(Negation detection) 
Rule-based 
NO 
NO 
Sct. Hans Hospital 
Doctors notes, Psychiatrists notes, 
Nurses notes, Social workers notes 
Danish 
NO 
Yes 
NO 
(98) 
Sweden 
Adverse events, 
Gastrointestinal 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text), 
Information Extraction (Drugs/Adverse 
events, Relations, Named entity recognition) 
BERT, KB-BERT 
NO 
Yes 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Discharge summaries 
Swedish 
Yes* 
Yes 
NO 
(99) 
Sweden 
Cardiac disease, 
Infection, 
Musculoskeletal 
conditions 
Resource development (Corpora and 
annotation) and Context Analysis (Negation 
detection, Uncertainty/Assertion) 
Descriptive statistics, Pairwise Inter-Annotator 
Agreement 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Assessment section 
Swedish 
Yes* 
Yes 
NO 
(100) 
Sweden 
N/A 
Context Analysis (Temporality) 
Rule-based, Manual evaluation 
Yes, 
Yes 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Nurse’s notes, Doctors notes 
Swedish 
Yes 
Yes 
NO 
(101) 
Sweden 
N/A 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text, 
Indexing and coding), information extraction 
(Drugs/Adverse events) 
Conditional Random Fields 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Assessment section 
Swedish 
Yes 
Yes 
NO 
(102) 
Sweden, USA 
N/A 
Resource development (Lexicons), Context 
Analysis (Uncertainty/Assertion) 
Rule-based, pyConTextNLP, pyConTextSWE 
NO 
Yes 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Diagnostic notes 
Swedish 
NO 
Yes 
NO 
(103) 
Sweden, Finland, 
Norway 
N/A 
Resource development (Corpora and 
annotation), Context Analysis (Temporality) 
Rule-based 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Nurse’s notes, Doctors notes 
Swedish, 
Finnish 
Yes 
Yes 
NO 
(104) 
Sweden 
N/A 
Resource development (Corpora and 
annotation, methods), Context Analysis 
(Uncertainty/Assertion, Negation detection) 
Conditional Random Fields, Rule-based, 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Radiology reports, Assessment section 
Swedish 
NO 
NO 
NO 
(105) 
Sweden 
Cancer 
Information extraction (Findings/Symptoms) 
Rule-based 
NO 
NO 
The Cancer Registry of Norway 
Pathology reports 
Norwegian 
NO 
Yes 
NO 
(106) 
Sweden, Denmark 
Cancer 
Information extraction (Findings/Symptoms), 
Context Analysis (Negation detection) 
Rule-based 
Yes 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Nurse’s notes, Doctors notes 
Swedish 
NO 
Yes  
NO 
(107) 
Sweden, Norway 
Cancer 
Information extraction (Findings/Symptoms, 
Named entity recognition, Specific 
characteristics) 
Rule-based, Levenshtein distance similarity 
NO 
NO 
The Cancer Registry of Norway 
Pathology reports 
Norwegian 
NO 
Yes 
NO 
(108) 
Sweden 
N/A 
Resource Development (Corpora and 
annotation, methods), Context Analysis 
(Uncertainty/Assertion) 
Qualitative analysis 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Assessment section 
Swedish 
NO 
Yes 
NO 
(109) 
Sweden, Spain 
N/A 
Information extraction (Named entity 
recognition) 
Ensemble, Perceptrons, Support vector machines, 
Conditional Random Fields 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
N/A 
Spanish, 
Swedish 
NO 
Yes  
NO 
(110) 
Norway 
Adverse events, Sepsis 
Information extraction (Medical Concepts, 
Findings/Symptoms, and Drugs/Adverse 
events), Resource Development (Corpora and 
annotation) 
Annotation guideline 
NO 
NO 
St. Olavs University Hospital 
Adverse event reports 
Norwegian 
NO 
Yes 
NO 
(111) 
Norway 
Infection 
Information extraction (Medical Concepts, 
Findings/Symptoms, and Drugs/Adverse 
events), Resource Development (Corpora and 
annotation) 
Latent Dirichlet Allocation, Bayesian   optimization 
Yes 
NO 
St. Olavs University Hospital 
Adverse event reports 
Norwegian 
NO 
Yes 
NO 
(112) 
Sweden 
N/A 
Information extraction (Named entity 
recognition), De-identification 
Conditional Random Fields 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Clinical notes 
Swedish 
NO 
Yes  
NO 
(113) 
Sweden 
Oral, Musculoskeletal 
conditions 
Information extraction (Named entity 
recognition), De-identification 
Conditional Random Fields, Random forests 
NO 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Clinical notes 
Swedish 
NO 
No 
NO 
(114) 
USA, Sweden, 
France 
N/A 
Context Analysis (Negation detection), 
Resource development (Lexicons), Content 
Analysis 
Rule-based, NegEx, ConText 
Yes 
NO 
Karolinska University Hospital 
Assessment entries 
English, 
French, 
German, 
Swedish 
NO 
Yes 
NO 
(115) 
Norway, USA 
Cardiac disease 
Resource development (Corpora and 
annotation), Information Extraction (Named 
entity recognition, Relations) 
Conditional Random Fields, Support vector machines 
Yes 
NO 
Oslo University Hospital 
Outpatient notes 
Norwegian 
Yes 
Yes 
NO 
(94) 
Spain, Norway, 
USA 
Adverse events 
Classification (Phenotyping from EHR text) 
Support vector machines, Kernel methods 
NO 
NO 
University Hospital of North 
Norway 
Nurse notes, Journal notes, Outpatient 
notes, Radiology reports, Referrals, 
Discharge letters, Admission notes 
Norwegian 
NO 
Yes 
NO 
• 
Natural Language Processing Techniques - Methods/Model: Country-Specific Developments  
This section presents the country-specific developments and adoption of models for their respective clinical texts. 
Generally, the three countries had started publishing at different timeframes and had varied rates of adoption of various 
methods. A more detailed analysis of the three languages in terms of the adoption of different kinds of NLP models or 
methods is given below. 
Norwegian: Interpretable methods (32.0%, n = 16) are the most widely used methods for Norwegian clinical text, 
followed by rule-based systems (24.0%, n = 12), and deep/nonlinear learning methods (20.0%, n = 10). The fourth 
most popular method is traditional/statistical learning methods (14.0%, n = 7), followed by transformers and large 
language models (8.0%, n = 4), and ensemble methods (2.0%, n = 1). Despite the recent success, studies focusing on 
Norwegian clinical text seem to start late in terms of adopting transformers and large language models, which only 
appeared in 2024, and deep/nonlinear learning methods also became visible only in 2021. Studies focusing on 
Norwegian clinical text started to appear in publications in 2014 with interpretable methods and traditional/statistical 
learning methods. 
 
Figure 1: Evolution of NLP model/methods for Norwegian clinical text. 
 
Swedish: Traditional/statistical learning methods (39.2%, n = 69) are the most widely used methods for Swedish 
clinical text, followed by rule-based systems (24.4%, n = 43). The third most used method is transformers and large 
language models (14.8%, n = 26) followed by interpretable methods (8.5%, n = 15). Deep/nonlinear learning methods 
(6.8%, n = 12), and ensemble methods (6.3%, 11) rank equally as the fifth most used method. Studies focusing on 
Swedish clinical text are leaders in terms of early adoption of transformers and large language models, and 
deep/nonlinear learning methods, which appeared in 2021, and 2015 respectively. Studies focusing on Swedish clinical 
text started appearing in publications in 2010 with rule-based systems and traditional/statistical learning methods. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Evolution of NLP models/methods for Swedish clinical text. 
Danish: Transformers and large language (40.7%, n = 11) models are the most widely used method for Danish clinical 
text, followed by deep/nonlinear learning methods (22.2%, n = 6). Rule-based systems (14.8%, n = 4), and hybrid 
methods (14.8%, n = 4) are ranked equally as the third most popular methods. It is worth mentioning that hybrid 
methods involving combining two or more methods only appeared in studies focusing on Danish clinical text in 2023. 
Traditional/Statistical Learning Methods have a limited appearance (7.4%, n = 2). Despite being a late starter compared 
to studies focusing on Swedish clinical text in adopting transformers and large language, which appeared in 2022, 
studies focusing on Danish clinical text has shown a significant increase afterward. Studies focusing on Danish clinical 
text started to appear in publication in 2011 with traditional/statistical learning methods.  
 
Figure 3: Evolution of NLP models/methods for Danish clinical text. 
• 
Natural Language Processing Tasks Trend: Country-Specific Developments  
This section presents the type of NLP tasks considered across the three languages, as shown in Figures 4, 5, and 6. A 
detailed analysis providing highlights of each NLP task preference for each language is given below.  
Norwegian: Information extraction (41.6%, n = 16) represents a significant portion of all the NLP tasks considered for 
Norwegian clinical text, followed by classification (30.8%, n = 12) task, and resource development (20.5%, n = 8). 
Despite the significant challenges associated with handling health data due to privacy and security reasons, a very 
limited number of studies focusing on Norwegian clinical text have attempted to tackle the task of de-identification 
(7.7%, n = 3). No research has been dedicated to context analysis and core NLP tasks for Norwegian clinical text. 
 
Figure 4: Distribution of NLP tasks for Norwegian clinical text. 
 
Swedish: Like the Norwegian, information extraction (33.3%, n = 45) constitutes a notable portion of all the NLP tasks 
considered for Swedish clinical text, followed by classification (18.5%, n = 25) task. Context analysis (15.6%, n = 21) 
and resource development (17.0%, n = 23) ranked third equally representing a fair share of the studied NLP tasks. 
Compared to the studies focusing on Norwegian and Danish clinical text, de-identification (13.3%, n = 18) got 
significant attention, and there are also some research activities focusing on core NLP (2.2%, n = 3).  
 
Figure 5: Distribution of NLP tasks for Swedish clinical text. 
 
Danish: Both information extraction (32%, n = 8) and classification (32%, n = 8) constitute a significant portion of all 
NLP tasks considered for Danish clinical text, followed by resource development (24%, n = 6) tasks. Like the studies 
focusing on Norwegian clinical text, de-identification (8.0%, n = 2) receives little attention. There is little activity 
focusing on context analysis (4.0%, n = 1). No research has been dedicated to core NLP tasks for Danish clinical text.  
 
Figure 6: Distribution of NLP tasks for Danish clinical text. 
 
• 
Analysis of model/methods usage in various Natural Language Processing Tasks 
Deep/Nonlinear learning methods are highly used in information extraction (48.8%, n = 21) and classification (44.2%, 
n = 19) tasks, and are also employed in de-identification tasks (7.0%, n = 3) to a lesser extent. Ensemble methods are 
mostly adopted in information extraction tasks (68.8%, n = 11) and have also been used in classification (25.0%, n = 
4), and de-identification tasks (6.25%, n = 1) to a lesser extent. Hybrid methods have little appearance compared to the 
other models, and appeared in classification (40.0%, n = 2), de-identification (20.0%, n = 1), and information extraction 
(40.0%, n = 2). The reason behind the less visibility of hybrid methods in these NLP tasks could be related to its late 
adoption in the mainland Scandinavian clinical domain, which starts its visibility in 2023 and onwards. Interpretable 
methods are dominantly used in classification tasks (57.5%, n = 27), emphasizing the importance of model transparency 
and explainability, where understanding the model’s decision-making process is vital. It also appeared significantly in 
the information extraction task (40.4%, n = 19), but to a lesser extent in the context analysis task (2.2%, n = 1). Rule-
based systems are widely used across several NLP tasks, however, with a noticeable presence in context analysis 
(29.11%, n = 23), information extraction (30.4%, n = 24), and classification tasks (22.8%, n = 18). It also appeared in 
de-identification (10.2%, n = 8) and core NLP tasks (7.59%, n = 6) but to a lesser extent. Traditional/Statistical learning 
methods appeared across all the NLP tasks, with a high usage rate in the information extraction task (47.1%, n = 48.), 
and a noticeable presence in classification (17.6%, n = 18), context analysis (18.6%, n = 19), and de-identification 
tasks (14.7%, n = 15), but a reduced presence in core NLP task (2.0%, n = 2). The uniform presence of rule-based 
systems and traditional/Statistical learning methods across all the NLP tasks could be explained by early adoption and 
usage, which started during the initial period, and also the need to incorporate domain knowledge in hand-creating and 
engineering the features. Transformers and large language models are highly employed in classification tasks (44.4%, 
n = 28) and have a significant presence in information extraction (33.3%, n = 21), and de-identification tasks (17.5%, 
n = 11). These models also have appeared in context analysis tasks (4.8%, n = 3) but to a much lesser extent compared 
to the other tasks. 
 
 
Table 5: Utilization of various models in clinical NLP tasks.  
Methos Classification Context 
analysis 
Core NLP 
De-
identification 
Information 
extraction 
Deep/Nonlinear 
Learning Methods 
44.2% (19) 
- 
- 
7.0% (3) 
48.8% (21) 
Ensemble Methods 
25.0% (4) 
- 
- 
6.25% (1) 
68.8% (11) 
Hybrid Methods 
40.0% (2) 
- 
- 
20.0% (1) 
40.0% (2) 
Interpretable 
Methods 
57.5% (27) 
2.2% (1) 
- 
- 
40.4% (19) 
Rule-Based Systems 
15.3% (11) 
31.9% (23) 
8.3% (6) 
11.1% (8) 
33.3% (24) 
Traditional/Statistical 
Learning Methods 
17.6% (18) 
18.6% (19) 
2.0% (2) 
14.7% (15) 
47.1% (48) 
Transformers and 
Large Language 
Models 
39.7% (23) 
5.2% (3) 
- 
19.0% (11) 
36.2% (21) 
 
• 
Distribution of NLP tasks – Type Description 
This section presents a detailed analysis of NLP task type descriptions, which are sub-categories of each of the NLP 
tasks described above. Figure 7 below depicts the overall distribution of the NLP task type description for the mainland 
Scandinavian clinical texts. As can be seen from the figure, the majority of the research focuses on Named Entity 
Recognition-NER (19.4%), followed by risk stratification from EHR text (phenotyping from EHR text) (12.6%). 
Satisfactory efforts have been made to corpora and annotation (8.6%), though much of the efforts came from studies 
focusing on Swedish clinical text. Findings/Symptoms classification and medical coding account for 7.2% of the 
research activities. Drug/Adverse events have also been given satisfactory attention. However, little attention has been 
given to resource development, especially for Norwegian and Danish clinical texts.  
 
 
Figure 7: Overall distribution of NLP tasks for the reviewed studies. 
 
• 
Hospital department/Clinical Unit distribution 
The following figures depict the distribution of the different hospital departments/clinical units targeted by the 
reviewed studies. Studies that didn’t report this information are grouped under the “General services”; other 
department/clinical units that didn’t fit into the available categories are grouped under the “Other specialties” category. 
As can be seen from the figure, Surgical specialties (22.8%) take up the majority followed by Medical specialties 
(19.2%). Intensive and critical care ranked third accounting for 11%, Diagnostic and therapeutic services, and Other 
specialties also got fair attention.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 8: Overall distribution of hospital departments/clinical units targeted by the reviewed studies. 
 
On a similar note, surgical specialties (29.8%) take the highest majority for studies focusing on Norwegian clinical 
text, followed by administrative documents accounting for 17.5%. Intensive and critical care (15.8%), along with 
medical specialties (14.0%) also take a significant proportion.   
 
 
 
Figure 9: Distribution of Norwegian hospital departments/clinical units targeted by the reviewed studies. 
 
 
For the Swedish clinical text, similar to the Norwegian clinical text, surgical specialties (20.3%) take up a significant 
proportion followed by medical specialists (18.1%). Intensive and critical care ranked fourth, accounting for 11.2%.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 10: Distribution of Swedish hospital departments/clinical units targeted by the reviewed studies. 
 
 
For Danish clinical text, surgical specialties (34.6%) and medical specialties (28.8%) cover the significant 
proportions. Unlike the other two, the review identified the utilization of data from women’s health, which accounts 
for 7.7%.  Compared to the other two – Norwegian and Swedish clinical text, this group seems to incorporate less 
diversified categories. 
 
 
 
Figure 11: Distribution of Danish hospital departments/clinical units targeted by the reviewed studies. 
 
