Title: A Natural Language Processing and Deep Learning based Model for Automated Vehicle Diagnostics using Free-Text Customer Service Reports
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2111.14977v1
--------------------------------------------------

Authors: Ali Khodadadi (1), Soroush Ghandiparsi (1), Chen-Nee Chuah
(2) ((1) Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of
California,545 Bainer Hall Dr,Davis,95616,CA,USA)
1
arXiv:2111.14977v1  [eess.SY]  29 Nov 2021
A Natural Language Processing and Deep Learning
based Model for Automated Vehicle Diagnostics using
Free-Text Customer Service Reports
Abstract
Initial fault detection and diagnostics are imperative measures to improve the
eﬃciency, safety, and stability of vehicle operation. In recent years, numerous
studies have investigated data-driven approaches to improve the vehicle diag-
nostics process using available vehicle data. Moreover, data-driven methods
are employed to enhance customer-service agent interactions. In this study,
we demonstrate a machine learning pipeline to improve automated vehicle
diagnostics. First, Natural Language Processing (NLP) is used to automate
the extraction of crucial information from free-text failure reports (generated
during customers’ calls to the service department). Then, deep learning algo-
rithms are employed to validate service requests and ﬁlter vague or mislead-
ing claims. Ultimately, diﬀerent classiﬁcation algorithms are implemented to
classify service requests so that valid service requests can be directed to the
relevant service department. The proposed model- Bidirectional Long Short
Term Memory (BiLSTM) along with Convolution Neural Network (CNN)-
shows more than 18% accuracy improvement in validating service requests
compared to technicians’ capabilities. In addition, using domain-based NLP
techniques at preprocessing and feature extraction stages along with CNN-
BiLSTM based request validation enhanced the accuracy (>25%), sensitivity
(>39%), speciﬁcity (>11%), and precision (>11%) of Gradient Tree Boosting
(GTB) service classiﬁcation model. The Receiver Operating Characteristic
Area Under the Curve (ROC-AUC) reached 0.82.
Keywords:
Customer Service, NLP, CNN, BiLSTM, claim validation,
Classiﬁcation, Vehicle Diagnostic, Content Extraction, Automotive Data
Mining
Preprint submitted to Machine Learning with Applications
December 1, 2021
1. INTRODUCTION
Data science and ML techniques have led to groundbreaking changes in
the automotive industry. By 2030, the automotive sector can upgrade its
products with autonomous mobility solutions, vehicle-to-vehicle, and vehicle–to-
network communication systems [1]. Eﬃcient customer service is a critical
factor for future transportation success. Failed vehicle early-stage diagnos-
tics is crucial for research and development sections to determine product
improvement strategies. In addition, eﬃcient diagnostics leads to the more
successful sale of both products and services. In 2017, U.S. businesses lost
75 billion dollars due to ineﬃcient and lack of timely customer service pro-
cedures that signiﬁcantly raised the level of customer unsatisfactory. For
instance, based on Microsoft state of global customer service reports, 22 %
of clients contacting the customer service section had to repeat their service
request [2]. Current vehicle service systems address vehicle failures via two
main approaches [3]:
• Use On-Board Diagnostic (OBD) systems via speciﬁc toolsets. The
customer or technician needs to communicate with the Electronic Con-
troller Unit (ECU) via a scanner tool. The ECU unit usually provides
fault codes, or the operator can record continuous signals from the
onboard vehicle sensors, actuators, and controllers during diagnosis
operation.
• The client initiates a service request to the service sector, describes the
issue to the best of his knowledge, primarily in free text format, and
pursues “on-the-road” services support if further assistance is required.
1.1. Related Work
There are numerous common limitations on the OBD systems. They are
typically designed for speciﬁc vehicle manufacturers; Thus, they cannot be
used across multiple vehicle companies. Even the OBD-II or J1939 standards
are designed to address generic vehicle issues and are not capable of in-depth
vehicle diagnostics. Moreover, due to vehicle hardware computation limita-
tions, diagnostic logic is statics and not user-friendly. Therefore, customers
typically prefer to contact the service section to solve the problem. However,
extending the “human-based customer service” is not desirable for companies
as each case imposes extra charges, including labor, oﬃce, and on-the-road
support expenses.
3
Improving vehicle customer service will be crucial for the next generation
of intelligent transportation systems. In recent years, researchers have fo-
cused on data-driven fault detection algorithms to enhance diagnostic meth-
ods. However, most of the complex algorithms studied require a large amount
of data to train and ﬁt into an eﬃcient model. Suﬃcient data for such models
is a challenging task in the automotive industry. Thus, most of the research
relies on short-term data logging or generating simulated data [4]. Translat-
ing the customer service reports to practical dataset could oﬀer a solution to
feed data-driven fault detection algorithms.
Recently, due to the rapidly growing vehicles’ technology, the conventional
model/rule-based diagnostics methods are no longer eﬃcient. Some studies
have focused on a speciﬁc component developing diagnostics routines for
maintenance procedures.
Zhang et al.
[5] modeled a permanent magnet
electric motor Using structural analysis to deﬁne a speciﬁc diagnostic system
in electric vehicles. Meinguet et al. [6] feed similar modeling methods with
collected data from a test bench electrical traction system to introduce a
DC-DC inverter diagnostic system. However, their research remained at a
component level.
Data-Driven diagnostic approaches due to the system complexity have
received more attention in recent years. Most of the researches have focused
on a speciﬁc component using the methods that rely on limited proper sen-
sors/controllers’ logged data. Cheng et al. [7] proposed a data-driven fault
detection method, named the ”Deep Slow Feature Analysis” method (DSFA),
for the running gears of high-speed trains. The designed system used statis-
tic algorithms to perform fault detection on the multi-dimensional running
gear data in the test bench. The vehicle is equipped with six extra sensors
to collect the data via timely and expensive test procedures. Prytz et al. [8]
applied supervised ML techniques to detect the failure of commercial trucks’
air compressors.
Logged on-board data collected over three years from a
large number of trucks. Wolf et al. [9] proposed an unsupervised learning
data-driven diagnostics approach to detect faults by transferring the concept
of deep embedded clustering for static data to multivariate in-vehicle time
series. However, the collected data in both studies could not reach suﬃcient
resolution to be applicable for accurate data mining algorithms.
Another approach, Interactive Voice Response (IVR), navigates customers
through predeﬁned options to address their issue, but with limited success
[10]. NLP is a computational technique that converts human language into
smaller pieces, analyzes their relationships, and explores how they combine
4
to form meaningful patterns [11]. The NLP customer service techniques have
been widely used to analyze call transcriptions, classify conversation topics,
and identify customer sentiment. The NLP results could be a reliable source
for companies to make solid decisions and improve customer service. Soysal
[12] has developed a clinical NLP graphical user interface toolkit that helps
users to retrieve meaningful information from medical reports. In [13], the
authors have accessed the radiology reports to create a rule-based algorithm
to classify pulmonary oncology.
Yet, comprehensive approaches to apply the standard NLP methods in
the vehicle diagnostic have not been explored in depth. Green [14] introduced
a pipeline for driver-vehicle voice interactions by concentrating on vehicle op-
erator voice commands. In this way, Zheng [15] developed an ML algorithm
to enhance GPS routing commands for vehicle drivers. Therefore, introduc-
ing ﬁeld-related preprocessing and feature extraction for unique NLP vehicle
diagnostic applications is essential. In a similar study, Jalayer et al. [16]
classiﬁed hydroplaning crashes from free text police accident reports which
include numerous domain-related expressions and abbreviations.
1.2. Contribution
The main contribution of this research is to propose an automated diag-
nostic model that evaluates vehicle failure claims and classiﬁes them to dif-
ferent service departments. This is achieved by introducing domain-related
NLP techniques and applying ML models on the free text vehicle service re-
ports. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the
dataset structures that is used to feed the models. Section III details pre-
processing steps required to extract speciﬁc information from the customer
service reports, and the feature selection process are explored. In Section
III, the Statistical and deep learning models are developed and evaluated to
distinguish valid and vague service claims. Then, we compared classiﬁcation
methods used to diagnose failure groups. The result of diﬀerent models are
discussed and compared in Section IV, and we conclude in Section V.
2. DATASET
This research used a dataset consisting of ten years of customer service
calls to a ﬂeet truck company. The given dataset was obtained from a pri-
vate sector; additional details are omitted due to its proprietary nature. In
5
addition, some of the names and labels are slightly modiﬁed for privacy pro-
tection. The sample data consists of 100,000 recorded service calls. Each call
includes 11 main sections, as follows:
• ”Service Department” speciﬁes one of the 16 possible departments.
Each of them focuses on troubleshooting a speciﬁc vehicular compo-
nent. The departments are shown in Table 1. Also, one department is
titled ”Vague” to represent unknown or unique service requests.
Table 1: Service Departments
1
Controls
2
Vague
3
Harness
4
Hydraulics
5
PTO
6
Boom
7
Maintenance
8
Test
9
Rotation
10
Auger
11
Outrigger
12
Digger
13
Body
14
Chassis
15
Electronics
16
Resale
• ”Service Call Log” contains a couple of words summary entered by
the service representative summarizing the customer’s complaints. It
may be a combination of words, unit number or model, service date,
or service number. It can also be blank if the representative could not
summarize the service call into a sentence. In some cases, it can be
general comments such as ”service needed”. Table 2 shows a couple of
samples of Service Call Logs.
• ”Service Detail” consists of one paragraph to a page description of the
service performed to date on the failed vehicle. Table 2 shows examples
of Service Details. A dash or a new line separates each service task.
Dictation mistakes, connection words, and numbers are included in this
section. Sentences in this section have better formatting compared to
the Service Call Log section. This section usually does not follow a
typical text structure. It may include the service date, vehicle model
or vehicle identiﬁcation number, parts replaced, and action performed
to ﬁx the issue. Technical abbreviations and expressions are often used
in this section.
6
• ”Relation” summarizes whether the Service Call Log and the Service
Detail have the same concept. This section is manually annotated after
service closes with one of the following:
1. ”False claim” The information in Service Detail is diﬀerent from
Service Call Log. It could be due to inaccurate technician diag-
nostic or misleading information from the customer.
2. ”Valid claim” Service Call Log summarises the Service Detail ad-
equately. This information is valuable and can get addressed to
the proper service department.
3. ”Vague claim” Service Call Log does not provide any information
to route to the proper department. ”Empty” Service Call Log or
general terms like ”unit failed” are included in this section
• ”Age of unit” Reﬂects the unit age at the incident. This is used for
failure diagnostics of parts and components. Which would be useful
information for system prognosis.
• ”Vehicle location” contains the postal zip code of the vehicle service
shop. This information reﬂects the geographic location vehicle typically
used during operation.
• ”Customer company” contains the company name associated with the
vehicle since the vehicles are used commercially.
• ”Date of failure” contains the date the vehicle failure was reported to
the service center. In addition, it deﬁnes which day of the week and
year it failed.
• ”Run-time” reﬂects how long the vehicle has been in service since the
service vehicles used are primarily stationary.
• ”Ownership type” deﬁnes whether the vehicle was rented, leased, or
purchased.
• ”Time from last service” describes how long the vehicle was used after
its last service to determine if it was due for service at the time of
failure.
7
• ”Phone operator identiﬁcation” contains an identiﬁcation of the phone
operator or site technician who logged the request. This is useful as ser-
vice reporting is subjective in nature. Both the Service Detail and Ser-
vice Call Log are subject to the interpretation of the service provider.
Table 2: Service Call Log and Service Detail example
Service Call Log Example
SPACE007-Repairs from inspection
24506-replace winch rope unit is down
inoperable
3336-stuck in the air
Service Detail Example
–cut oﬀand replaced damaged area or repair–
–installed new hinges and pained area
replaced and adjusted transfer pin– perform test
replaced gasket PN9700007824–had to cut oﬀ
inpected and cleaned area–cleaned up shaft
970000271 replaced, adjusted system pressure
Unit DWN–HYD inspected – replaced related valve
3. PROPOSED NLP-BASED PIPELINE
A simpliﬁed process ﬂow diagram implemented in this research is depicted
in Figure 1.
3.1. Pre-Processing
Technical abbreviations and expressions are standard in both the Service
Call Log and Service Detail sections. However, it is also evident that gram-
matical variances are present. As a result, preprocessing of data includes
some domain-related and intuitive approaches detailed as follows. We have
deﬁned extra lemmatization steps to enhance the preprocessing eﬃciency.
Lemmatization is a process of reducing inﬂected words to their root and sim-
ple form. It is a process that maps related words to the same stemming root.
As an example, the verb ”break,” ”broken,” and ”breaking” from the dataset
8
Figure 1: A simpliﬁed process ﬂow-diagram implemented in this research. First, prepro-
cessing techniques convert free text to meaningful information. Second, domain- related
feature extraction deﬁnes the most reliable and eﬃcient keywords and features used in the
models. Third, the request validation section deﬁnes if the customer service claim is valid,
fake, or vague. Finally, valid claims can be used for the last stage to perform department
classiﬁcation to route each request to one of the 16 diﬀerent service departments.
maps to the root word ”break.” In this speciﬁc example, we deﬁned ”brk” as
break in lemmatization. This step addresses the issue of adding new terms
to the word lists when two words share the same information. Words such
as ”an” in the majority of texts are deﬁned as a deﬁnition word. Most algo-
rithms recognize it as stop work and take it out from the test. However, in
our application, it is the partial name of a product model. So any time ”an”
follows with a number, the algorithm won’t consider it a stop word. Further-
more, some combinations of words such as ”service needed” are considered
vague or irrelevant. They are removed from the data.
3.2. Feature Extraction
The feature extraction procedure is meant to extract a predeﬁned set of
features from the training text. Since machine learning algorithms cannot
directly work on the raw text, vectors of weighted features are given to pre-
dictive models. The procedure of converting a raw set of selected words into
a matrix (or vector) is also called “word embedding.” Like the preprocess-
ing step, we have improved the eﬃciency of feature extraction by adding
extra steps and techniques. There is no dictionary of staging terms to detect
9
their presence in texts. This problem is well suited to regular expressions,
at least for staging term recognition. We have introduced a speciﬁc library
for this study using automotive expert’s support. The frequency of some of
the words does not represent their importance in the text. For instance, the
word “unit” or “vehicle” does not add any value to the algorithms and is
removed from the feature list. So counting the work does not represent its
importance in the text. Term Frequency Inverse Document Frequency (TF-
IDF) is one of the standard feature extraction techniques in NLP. It reﬂects
how important a word is in a document comparing the entire dataset. We
have not observed relative strength in the word count used in a speciﬁc re-
port compared to all of the dataset. Hence we did not peruse this approach
in our study. Customer reports may contain technical abbreviations that are
uncommon or unknown in traditional NLP tools. In such instances, a Part
of Speech Tagging (POS) may misclassify a word, leading to the unintended
removal of essential terms. We modiﬁed the POS tagger and picked ﬁne ex-
pressions to increase the precision to the point of utilization. POS tagger is
a method to determine the type of terms used in the sentence [17]. Further
issues arise when using a tokenizer to parse the data. A tokenizer is a tool
that separates a sentence into its component word tokens. This can be useful
for extracting the words in a sentence that may then be passed into a POS
tagger. That said, this can be problematic when there is a combination of
words that together represent one expression in the system. For example,
“Upper valve” refers to a speciﬁc component in the vehicle. A standard tok-
enizer, however, would split this phrase into two diﬀerent words. This would
lead to “upper” being classiﬁed as an adjective and “valve” being classiﬁed
as a noun, resulting in the unintended removal of important information. As
another example, “unit down” in the report means the total failure of the
vehicle. Again, a standard tokenizer would split this phrase into two words
leading to “unit” being classiﬁed as a noun and “down” as an adjective. This
illustrates the need to modify the tokenizer by incorporating domain-speciﬁc
terminologies manually. In this case, the most common nouns, adverbs, ad-
jectives, and bigrams have been utilized to extract features from the report.
N-grams are the continuous sequence of n-words in a sentence, considering
it as a single unit [17]. Combinations of two words represent lots of compo-
nents and services. As a result, bigram counts constitute an essential feature
in this approach. For example, “PM Inspection” denotes a separate service
department, and “Rotation Gearbox” represents a unique component in the
vehicle. A summary of the frequency of the diﬀerent types of features in the
10
dataset is presented in Table 3. Table 4 shows the ten most frequent nouns
and bigram features presented in the Service Detail section.
Table 3: Feature extraction summary
Service Call Log
Service Detail
Name
75938
540930
Verb
3536
327446
Adjective
3434
53670
Adverb
245
110095
Unigram
24
228009
Bigram
31435
125075
Table 4: Most frequent nouns and bigrams in Service Detail
Noun
Count
Bigram
Count
Unit
248470
PM Inspection
14850
Boom
87380
Dielectric Test
13201
Service
43760
Unit Function
11890
Check
41326
Hydraulic Leak
10459
Pole
39375
Boom Function
8900
Winch
38541
Upper Control
7927
Inspection
37044
Annual PM
7900
Install
35744
Hydraulic Leak
6566
Hose
34909
Pole Guide
6100
Cylinder
32700
Rotation Gearbox
4300
In the last step of feature extraction, we have investigated diﬀerent di-
mension reduction techniques for this application. It is focused on reducing
dimension of data so that the result data representation retains meaning-
ful properties of the original data. Eﬃcient dimension reduction would lead
to decrease space required to store the data and less computation/training
time.Furthermore, it resolves multicollinearity by removing redundant fea-
tures.
11
Figure 2: χ2 of the ten most signiﬁcant features
Missing Value Ratio (MVR) is known as a primary dimension reduction
method in data mining.
MVR imputes the data or features that have a
high ratio missing value. We have noticed that using this technique would
cause losing meaningful information from the data despite standard text.
For instance, ”piston” has been used much less to other features in the whole
dataset. The failure ratio of this part is rare. However, representation of
this feature in the text has a higher weight typically in classiﬁcation. We
also used the Chi-Squared method to deﬁne the most eﬃcient feature in the
models and dimension reduction. Figure 2 presents the distribution of the
ten most signiﬁcant features using the chi-square method.
Finally, we used a heatmap to represent the correlation coeﬃcient between
the independent feature. It represents the strength of the linear relationship
between two variables.
In the machine learning context, the col-linearity
between features can undermine the quality of a learning model. Usually,
feature selection methods are deployed to reduce high dimensional feature
sets to a smaller set for computational eﬃciency and reducing noise from
redundant features. Figure 3 shows the correlation between the features that
12
Figure 3: Feature correlation heatmap of the most ten important features
are shown in Figure 2.
Figure 4.
represents a sample sentence of the report.
It shows how
a typical POS tagger deﬁnes each element of the sentence.
Field-related
techniques demonstrate in this study enabled us to be able to recognize the
real operator intention.
This speciﬁc example,” can,” was deﬁned in the
dictionary, and a noun term and ”below rotation valve” was picked as a
single trigram feature.
3.3. Request validation
Request validation aims to use the attitude expressed towards a Service
Call Log in the Service Detail section to determine whether or not a request is
valid. This task is similar to stance analysis in other domains. The outcome
of stance analysis can be helpful for a variety of purposes.
It has been
widely used in the news to scale news accuracy and medical records to scale
the diagnostic capability of the medical claim or reports. e.g., Chua [18]
used this technique to prove that tweets stating facts were aﬃrmed by 90%
of the tweets related to them, while tweets conveying false information were
predominantly questioned or denied. Such a methodology can thus be used to
remove vague or false service requests from the dataset. Using this approach,
13
Figure 4: Example of how a common POS tagger recognise each sentence element and
writer the indention
we removed service requests that the Service Call Log did not match the
reports. As a result, the only service requests which the Service Call Log
conﬁrmed the Service Detail is used in the next section to classify the type
of the request and route it to the related service department.
Initially, we approached this problem using an SVM to perform a form of
standard stance detection. We have carried out experiments with four dif-
ferent classiﬁers: SVM, Decision Tree, Gradient Tree Boosting, and Random
Forest classiﬁers.
Each classiﬁer targets various features, including those
based on features extracted in previous sections, unigrams, bigrams, mod-
els, and issue numbers. To evaluate the trained models, we used the ten-fold
cross-validation technique. The initial results of the ﬁve mentioned classiﬁers
were not satisfying and will be detailed in the results section. Therefore, we
attempted to improve performance by producing a state-of-the-art classiﬁer
using CNN and BiLSTM networks. Service Call Log and Service Detail are
the input to the model, which are extracted and tokenized in words. Each
word mapped to a vector representation, e.g., a word embedding, such that
an entire report can be assigned to an s×d sized matrix, where s is the di-
mension of the embedding space and d is the number of words in the report
(d = 500). We applied zero padding such that all reports have the same
dimension x.rs′.d, where we chose s′ = 100. We then applied several con-
volutions of diﬀerent sizes to this matrix. A unique convolution involves a
ﬁltering matrix wrh.d where h is the size of the convolution, indicating the
number of words it spans. The output crs′.h+1 is, hence, a concatenation of
the convolution over all possible window of words in the report. In the paper,
14
we used three ﬁlter sizes, and we used a total of 200 ﬁltering matrices for
each ﬁlter size.
We then applied a max-pooling operation to each convolution. We used
the max-pooling methodology to select the most important features for each
convolution while discarding information about where in the service this fea-
ture is located. Using a CNN, we can eﬃciently extract the most practical
combination of features in the embedding space, which is why we believe
this model would be suitable for sentence classiﬁcation. Finally, we used a
softmax layer to output the diﬀerent class probabilities. We added a dropout
layer after the max-pooling layer and later a fully connected hidden neural
network layer to reduce overﬁtting, with a dropout probability of 50% during
training. In the subsequent phase, the output of the CNN model is fed into
the BiLSTM model.
We now describe the architecture of the LSTM system. The main archi-
tecture consists of two LSTM units. LSTM is a speciﬁc type of Recurrent
Neural Network (RNN) built to work with sequential data by sharing their
internal weights across the sequence. For each component in the series, that
is, for each word in a sentence, an LSTM uses the standard word embedding
and its previous hidden state to compute the next hidden state.
Typical LSTM unit does not consider post word information because
the sentence is fed only in one direction to the model.
It is a drawback
of this algorithm in our application. To resolve this problem, we employ a
Bidirectional LSTM, which is two LSTMs operating in opposite sequential
orders. Finally, the outputs of both models are merged.
Here again, we use dropout to reduce over-ﬁtting; we add a dropout layer
before and after the LSTMs and the fully connected hidden layer, with a
dropout probability of 50 during training. Figure 5 demonstrates the overall
structure of the CNN-BiLSTM architecture that has been used in this study.
3.4. Classiﬁcation Methods
The next phase involves training classiﬁcation models to route the re-
quests to the 16 related service departments. Complex and straightforward
classiﬁcation methods have been implemented on diﬀerent types of texts.
Since there have not been previous attempts to review customer service re-
ports, we compare a set of well-known classiﬁers. We trained four diﬀer-
ent classiﬁers including, SVM, Decision Tree, Gradient Tree Boosting, and
Random Forest using the preprocessed data from selected feature lists. To
evaluate the trained models, we used ten-fold cross-validation.
15
Figure 5: Combined CNN-BiLSTM Model architecture to determine accuracy of a service
claim
4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
To evaluate the model performance, diﬀerent metrics such as Accuracy,
F1-score, Recall, and Precision are used. [16]. Proper evaluation method
is closely tied to the nature of the problem and its expected outcomes. In
this research, weighted accuracy was used to evaluate the model performance.
Weighted accuracy is a standard measure in this study since dataset is routed
to multi-classes and equally distributed across diﬀerent departments [19].
Accuracy =
G
X
k=1
Wi.
X
x:g(x)=k
I(g(x) =
ˆ
g(x))
Here, G is the number of classes, I is the indicator function, which returns
1 if the classes match and 0 otherwise. The average Cost to address a service
request varies across diﬀerent departments. So our model is more sensitive
to the performance of some individual classes. W is the normalized weight
assigned to an individual class which PG
k=1 Wi = 1.
Table 5 summarize
normalized weight used for each department in the studied dataset. As an
example, based on historical service data, average Costs related to “boom”
requests are departments are higher than “electrical” in the studied dataset.
4.1. Service request validation
The performance measures of the Service Validation section are compared
in Table 6. The GTB achieved the highest performance in terms of accuracy,
16
Table 5: Normalized weight associated to each department
Class
Wi
Class
Wi
Controls
0.051
Vague
0.082
Harness
0.032
Hydraulics
0.034
PTO
0.066
Boom
0.091
Maintenance
0.045
Test
0.072
Rotation
0.066
Auger
0.070
Outrigger
0.056
Digger
0.091
Body
0.073
Chassis
0.058
Electronics
0.065
Resale
0.048
around 58%. Meanwhile, RF achieved a relatively low and unsatisfactory
performance. In the next step, we explored deep learning models as a means
of improving performance. Since BiLSTM has achieved impressive results
in other NLP applications such as media and medical, we developed BiL-
STM algorithms on customer reports in this ﬁeld. The BiLSTM used in the
model is detailed in the previous section. This model achieved an initial ac-
curacy of around 63%, which is slightly improved over the other statistical
models. However, it is not signiﬁcant enough to justify using it due to the
computational cost. Looking at the report’s details, we noticed the diﬀerent
combination of the verbiage used in the text makes a signiﬁcant impact in
classiﬁcations. In the next step, we used a CNN to extract a meaningful com-
bination of the features from the text before feeding it into the BiLSTM. The
accuracy of this approach was around 85%, which is a signiﬁcant improve-
ment over the previously tested models. The best performing result used a
batch size of 200 after 15 epochs. Figure 6 shows that the loss function of
the basic BiLSTM architecture for each epoch is improved using combined
CNN-BiLSTM.
Furthermore, loss consistently decreases with the number of training
epochs. Figure 7 also compares the accuracy of the two methods. Similar
to the loss function, the accuracy of the combined CNN-BiLSTM is approx-
imately twice that of the basic BiLSTM model. For both models, accuracy
improves with the number of training epochs.
17
Table 6: Performance measures of diﬀerent models for Service Request validation
Method
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Speciﬁcity
Precision
F-score
CNN-BiLSTM
0.8476
0.8653
0.8313
0.9257
0.8450
BiLSTM
0.6343
0.5991
0.6754
0.6823
0.6379
GTB
0.5843
0.6543
0.5185
0.5606
0.6038
RF
0.4775
0.5029
0.4592
0.4001
0.4456
Table 7: Performance of diﬀerent methods for classifying and routing Service Request
to the relevant service department with and without domain-based NLP techniques at
preprocessing and feature extraction stages along with CNN-BiLSTM based Request Val-
idation
Service
Classiﬁcation
Model
CNN-BiLSTM
Based
Request Validation
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Speciﬁcity
Precision
F-score
GTB
No
0.6018
0.5114
0.7201
0.7168
0.5997
Yes
0.8585
0.9080
0.8375
0.8137
0.8583
RF
No
0.6351
0.6270
0.6433
0.6395
0.6327
Yes
0.8010
0.8548
0.7541
0.7659
0.8079
DT
No
0.5261
0.5290
0.5227
0.5441
0.6407
Yes
0.6293
0.6672
0.5921
0.6162
0.6407
SVM
No
0.4301
0.3882
0.4913
0.5289
0.4478
Yes
0.6121
0.5939
0.6327
0.6461
0.6189
4.2. Classiﬁcation and routing of service requests
Service operators have around 70% chance of predicting and routing the
customer claim to the proper service department. Skilled operators, on av-
erage, have a 90% chance of predicting and routing the customer claim to
the proper service department. It is around 60% for the new operator. In
our initial experiment, the 200 most frequent nouns, verbs, adjectives, and
bigrams were chosen as input features. Classiﬁers achieved an average accu-
racy of around 70% utilizing the most common feature. Our results reveal
that names and bigrams have the most impact on the accuracy of machines
in this application. Comparing the accuracy results of diﬀerent classiﬁers
18
Figure 6: Loss in CNN-BiLSTM is less then BiLSTM machine, it also decreases with the
number of training epochs
with various features, such as nouns, adverbs, and adjectives, revealed that
words reﬂecting sentiments do, in general, impact classiﬁcation performance.
As a result, fewer adverbs and adjectives were chosen as features. Due to
the nature of the text, if a component or part name is mentioned, there is
usually a failure associated with it. On the other hand, adjectives like “bad”
or “failed” do not help classiﬁcation accuracy. We have observed the Ran-
dom Forest accuracy is higher than the decision tree since it eliminates the
variance in error observed with decision trees; however, it takes more time
to train the model. Increased training time was not an issue in this study.
In general, the accuracy level we monitored in the application is slightly dif-
ferent than that of classiﬁcation methods applied in other domains such as
customer review or medical applications. This change is due to the nature
of the text.
The results show by introducing the domain-speciﬁc prepro-
cessing and feature extraction methods (explained in Section 3) in the ﬁrst
stage, the GTB classiﬁer performance increased (25% accuracy, 39% sen-
sitivity, 11% speciﬁcity, 11% precision, and 26% f-Score). Performance of
diﬀerent classiﬁcations with and without domain-based NLP techniques at
19
Figure 7: Accuracy compare in CNN-BiLSTM vs. BiLSTM machine, Accuracy improves
with increasing epochs
preprocessing and feature extraction stages along with CNN-BiLSTM based
request validation are compared in Table 7.
The performance is measured in terms of the average prediction accuracy
in this study. We have also investigated the Area Under the Curve (AUC)
between all 16 departments to decide. Usually, companies pay more atten-
tion to a speciﬁc type of failure considering other none technical decision
factors such as cost to address the issue, severity of downtime of the vehicle.
In that case, other mathematical calculations need to get considered to com-
pare the classiﬁcation methods. Figure 8 represents the AUC of ten service
department classiﬁcation using RF. The model has better success in some
of the departments compared to the others. The AUC diﬀerence is due to
the nature of vehicle failure. For example, high probability of engine failure
if this word is identiﬁed in the text. On the other hand, “battery” does
not have a good AUC. Usually, the majority of electrical component failures
would cause battery failure.
Finally, the combined two-stage model for request validation and classi-
ﬁcation using CNN-BiLSTM/GTB shows 8% improvement in term of accu-
20
Figure 8: Random Forest classiﬁcation results in terms of ROC and ROC-AUC for diﬀerent
Service Departments, respectively.
racy, compared to our previous work [20]. The most relevant study to our
work by Jalayer [16] successfully applied RF to free text police accident re-
ports to classify hydroplaning crashes with an accuracy of 0.6429, precision
of 0.8136, and sensitivity of 0.6234. We do not have access to their code or
dataset to make direct comparisons, but our model achieves a comparable
accuracy level.
5. CONCLUSIONS
We developed domain-speciﬁc taxonomy, deployed speciﬁc preprocess-
ing and feature extraction NLP techniques to extract signiﬁcant information
from free-text reports. Next, the eﬃciency of statistical and deep learning
algorithms in validating customer service claims are compared. The most
eﬀective CNN-BiLSTM model could reach 0.84 accuracy and 0.92 precision
21
in validating customer vehicle service requests.
Diﬀerent classiﬁcation methods are studied to route valid customer re-
quests to the relevant service departments. We attained 85% eﬃciency in
term of accuracy, incorporating two-stage models of CNN-BiLSTM to ﬁlter
fake/vague service claims and GTB to route the valid service claims to the
admissible departments. As a result, CNN-BiLSTM/GTB pipeline exceeds
70% success rate compared to the average operator. The outcome of this
study would beneﬁt future data-driven prognostic and diagnostic research in
the vehicle industry.
6. References
References
[1] J. Greenblatt, S. Saxena, Autonomous taxis could greatly reduce
greenhouse-gas emissions of us light-duty vehicles, in: Nature Climate
Change, July, 2015.
[2] C. Reisenwitz, 16 call center stats to help you stay on top of the trends,
blog.capterra.com, 2018.
[3] E. Chowanietz, Automobile electronics, Butterworth-Heinemann, 1995.
[4] T. Reddy, How chatbots can help reduce customer service costs by 30%,
IBM blogs, October,2017.
[5] J. Zhang, H. Yao, G. Rizzoni, Fault diagnosis for electric drive systems
of electriﬁed vehicles based on structural analysis, in: Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, IEEE, 2015.
[6] F. Meinguet, A. Sandulescu, X. Kestelyn, E. Semail, A method for fault
detection and isolation based on the processing of multiple diagnostic
indices: Application to inverter faults in ac drives, in: Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, IEEE, 2013.
[7] C. Cheng, X. Qiao, C. Zhang, Data-driven incipient fault detection and
diagnosis for the running gear in high-speed trains, in: Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, IEEE, 2020, pp. 9566–95763.
22
[8] R. Prytz, S. Nowaczyk, T. Rognvaldsson, S. Byttner, Predicting the need
for vehicle compressor repairs using maintenance records and logged
vehicle data, in: Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2015.
[9] P. Wolf, A. Chin, B. Baker, J. Tian, Bidirectionally coupled network and
road traﬃc simulation for improved ivc analysis, in: Vehicular Technol-
ogy Conference, IEEE, 2019, pp. 3–15.
[10] A. LaPlante, 6 tips on making interactive voice response (ivr) work for
your smb., Centurylink, 2019.
[11] IBM,
What
is
natural
language
processing,
https://www.ibm.com/cloud/learn/natural-language-processing, 2017.
[12] E. Soysal, J. Wang, M. Jiang, Y. Wu, S. Pakhomov, H. Liu, H. Xu,
Clamp–a toolkit for eﬃciently building customized clinical natural lan-
guage processing pipelines, in: Journal of the American Medical Infor-
matics Association, 2018.
[13] M. Nobe, S. Puts, F. Bakers, S. Robben, Natural language processing in
dutch free text radiology reports: Challenges in a small language area
staging pulmonary oncology, in: Journal Digital Imaging, 2020.
[14] V. Lo, E. Wen, P. Green, Development and evaluation of automotive
speech interfaces: useful information from the human factors and the
related literature, in: International Journal of Vehicular Technology,
2013.
[15] Y. Zheng, Y. Liu, J. Hansen, Natural language processing in dutch free
text radiology reports: Challenges in a small language area staging pul-
monary oncology, in: IEEE Symposium on Intelligent Vehicle, 2017.
[16] S. Das, A. Dutta, M. Jalayer, A. Mudgal, Vehicle involvements in hy-
droplaning crashes: Applying interpretable machine learning, in: Trans-
portation Research Interdisciplinary Perspectives, Elsevier, 2020.
[17] N. Indurkhya, F. Damerau, Handbook of natural language processing,
Chapman, 2010.
[18] N. Nyow, H. Chua, Detecting fake news with tweets’ properties, in:
Conference on Application, Information and Network Security, IEEE,
2019.
23
[19] M.
D¨oring,
Performance
measures
for
multi-class
problems,
in:
https://www.datascienceblog.net/post/machine-learning/performance-
measures-multi-class-problems/, 2018.
[20] A. Khodadadi, C. N. Chuah, A. Dalal, S. H. Woo, Mining vehicle fail-
ure consumer reports for enhanced service eﬃciency, in: 90th Vehicular
Technology Conference, IEEE, 2019.
24
