Title: Spoiler Alert: Using Natural Language Processing to Detect Spoilers in Book Reviews
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2102.03882v1
--------------------------------------------------

Spoiler Alert: Using Natural Language Processing to
Detect Spoilers in Book Reviews
Allen Bao
MScAC (Computer Science)
University of Toronto
Marshall Ho
MScAC (Computer Science)
University of Toronto
Saarthak Sangamnerkar
MScAC (Data Science)
University of Toronto
Abstract
This paper presents an NLP (Natural Language Processing) approach to detecting
spoilers in book reviews, using the University of California San Diego (UCSD)
Goodreads Spoiler dataset. We explored the use of LSTM, BERT, and RoBERTa
language models to perform spoiler detection at the sentence-level. This was con-
trasted with a UCSD paper which performed the same task, but using handcrafted
features in its data preparation. Despite eschewing the use of handcrafted features,
our results from the LSTM model were able to slightly exceed the UCSD team’s
performance in spoiler detection.
1
Introduction
In this report, we will explore the task of spoiler detection using the UCSD Goodreads Spoiler dataset
[1]. A spoiler is a piece of information in a movie or book review which reveals important plot
elements, such as the ending or a major plot twist. Our models are designed to ﬂag spoiler sentences
automatically.
1.1
Related Work
There is little existing work done on spoiler detection. SpoilerNet, a custom network described in
Fine-grained spoiler detection from large-scale review corpora from UCSD, is one of the leading
models in spoiler detection [1]. SpoilerNet is a bi-directional attention based network which features
a word encoder at the input, a word attention layer and ﬁnally a sentence encoder. It achieved an
impressive AUC (area under the curve) score of 0.889, indicating a relatively high true positive:false
positive ratio.
Wan et al. introduced a handcrafted feature: DF-IIF - Document Frequency, Inverse Item Frequency -
to provide their model with a clue of how speciﬁc a word is. This would allow them to detect words
that reveal speciﬁc plot information.
1.2
Novelty
Our models rely less on handcrafted features compared to the UCSD team. We make use of an LSTM
model and two pre-trained language models, BERT and RoBERTa, and hypothesize that we can
have our models learn these handcrafted features themselves, relying primarily on the composition
and structure of each individual sentence. Through these methods, our models could match, or even
exceed the performance of the UCSD team.
2
Data Exploration and Preprocessing
2.1
Dataset
The UCSD Goodreads Spoilers dataset was created as part of the UCSD Book Graph project [2]. The
UCSD team scraped more than 15M records with detailed reviews on books from goodreads.com.
arXiv:2102.03882v1  [cs.CL]  7 Feb 2021
Figure 1: UCSD SpoilerNet
This dataset is very skewed - only about 3% of review sentences contain spoilers. It is also context-
sensitive: spoiler ﬂagging depends heavily upon the book being reviewed. For example, “the main
character died” spoils “Harry Potter” far more than the Bible.
2.2
Exploratory Analysis
The Goodreads Spoiler dataset has 7 columns: book_id, user_id, review_id, rating, has_spoiler,
review_sentences, and timestamp. The most important feature is “review_sentences”, a list of all
sentences in a particular review. Each sentence in the list is preceded by its own “spoiler” ﬂag – “1”
for spoiler, “0” otherwise. Spoiler tags are self-reported by the review authors [1]. The dataset has
about 1.3 million reviews. We extracted a subset of 275,607 reviews randomly and performed an
exploratory analysis. One ﬁnding was that spoiler sentences were typically longer in character count,
perhaps due to containing more plot information, and that this could be an interpretable parameter by
our NLP models.
Table 1: Exploratory data from the Goodreads Spoiler dataset
Unique users
17405 (6.3%)
Reviews per user
15.8 (mean), 8 (median)
Unique books
24873 (9.0%)
Reviews per book
11.1 (mean), 5 (median)
Total sentences
3,534,334
No-spoiler sentences
3,419,580 (96.8%)
Length of spoiler sentences (chars)
88.1 (mean), 74.0 (median)
Length of non-spoiler sentences (chars)
81.4 (mean), 70.0 (median)
2.3
Dataset preparation
Our ﬁnal dataset consists of the review_sentences feature, ﬂattened out so that each sample would
contain one review sentence. Spoiler ﬂags were separated into a separate label array corresponding to
each sentence. We also explored other related UCSD Goodreads datasets, and decided that including
each book’s title as a second feature could help each model learn the more human-like behaviour,
having some basic context for the book ahead of time. This was important as the original dataset’s
only information about the book itself was through a non-descriptive book_id feature. For each of
our models, the ﬁnal size of the dataset used was approximately 270,000 samples in the training set,
and 15,000 samples in the validation and test sets each (used for validating results).
2
3
Models
We found both LSTM [3] and BERT [4] to be capable candidates due to their success with sentiment
analysis in part 1 of our projects. We also aspired to include a model newer than BERT, and decided
to go with the better optimized RoBERTa [5], after considering XLNet [6] as well.
The predictive task for our models is to ﬂag each spoiler sentence individually. We will compare our
work with that of Wan et al. at UCSD. Since the spoiler data is heavily skewed, AUC was used as a
metric. The UCSD team achieved a score of 0.889 [1] and that will be used as our baseline.
3.1
Model 1: LSTM
Long short-term memory (LSTM) is a recurrent neural network (RNN) which excels in processing
sequences [3]. A LSTM cell passes on a hidden state over time steps and the input, output and forget
gates regulate the ﬂow of information into and out of the cell [3]. The LSTM’s major shortcoming
is its size and complexity, taking a substantial amount of time to run compared with other methods.
However, the nature of the input sequences as appended text features in a sentence (sequence) makes
LSTM an excellent choice for the task.
Each text entry was put through the Keras Tokenizer function, which maps each unique vocabulary
word to a numeric entry before vectorizing each sentence to become compatible with the LSTM model.
Hyperparameters for the model included the maximum review length (600 characters, with shorter
reviews being padded to 600), total vocabulary size (8000 words), two LSTM layers containing
32 units, a dropout layer to handle overﬁtting by inputting blank inputs at a rate of 0.4, and the
Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.003. The loss used was binary cross-entropy for the binary
classiﬁcation task.
3.2
Model 2: BERT
In sentiment analysis tasks (seen in part 1 of our course project) pre-trained language models such as
BERT outperformed LSTMs. The attention-based nature of BERT means entire sentences can be
trained simultaneously, instead of having to iterate through time-steps as in LSTMs. The bi-directional
nature of BERT also adds to its learning ability, because the “context” of a word can now come from
both before and after an input word.
We chose to use Hugging Face’s “bert-base-cased” model, which has 12 layers, and 109M parameters,
producing 768-dimensional embeddings with a model size of over 400MB [7]. We fed the same
input – concatenated “book title” and “review sentence” – into BERT. We used a dropout layer and
then a single output neuron to perform binary classiﬁcation. We did not use sigmoid activation for
the output layer, as we chose to use BCEWithLogitsLoss as our loss function which is quicker and
provides more mathematical stability.
3.3
Model 3: RoBERTa
We also wanted to try out a third model, and researched several candidates. We chose RoBERTa, which
is a better-optimized BERT model developed by Facebook’s AI team [7]. We used “roberta-base”
from Hugging Face [8], which has 12 layers and 125 million parameters, producing 768-dimensional
embeddings with a model size of about 500MB. The setup of this model is similar to that of BERT
above.
4
Experiments and Results
We trained our 3 networks with the ﬂattened dataset of 1 million sentences. Metrics for true/false
positives/negatives are collected in order to calculate AUC. We typically ran 5 epochs per training
session. The ﬁrst versions of our models trained on the review sentences only (without book titles);
the results were quite far from the UCSD AUC score of 0.889. Follow-up trials were performed
after tuning hyperparameters such as batch size, learning rate, and number of epochs, but none of
these led to substantial changes. After studying supplementary datasets related to the UCSD Book
Graph project (as described in section 2.3), another preprocessing data optimization method was
found. Including book titles in the dataset alongside the review sentence could provide each model
3
Figure 2: Initial vs ﬁnal model AUC results.
with additional context. For instance, the model could capture the presence of shared words between
each title and review sentence (ex. The word “Harry” appearing in a spoiler-sentence, given the title
“Harry Potter”). The highest AUC score we achieved was approximately 0.91, from the LSTM model.
Each of our 3 team members maintained his own code base. We used a mix of development envi-
ronments (Google Colab, vscode) and platforms (TensorFlow, PyTorch). Our BERT and RoBERTa
models have subpar performance, both having AUC close to 0.5. LSTM was much more promising,
and so this became our model of choice.
5
Discussion
The AUC score of our LSTM model exceeded the lower end result of the original UCSD paper.
While we had been conﬁdent with our innovation of adding book titles to the input data, beating
the original work in such a short period of time exceeded any reasonable expectation we had. This
implies that spoiler detection does not require handcrafted features such as DF-IIF, and that text
sequences are mostly sufﬁcient for predicting labels with a relatively abstract relationship with the
text. Supplemental context (titles) help boost this accuracy even further.
Our LSTM performed substantially better than our BERT and RoBERTa models, for which the AUC
scores placed solidly in the 0.50’s. We are hesitant in drawing bold conclusions, as we would have
spent more time debugging various parts of the model and the metric collection code, given more time.
One possible argument is that BERT, from which RoBERTa is derived, is not pre-trained to handle a
highly skewed dataset (only 3% of sentences contained spoilers). A model trained speciﬁcally for
sentiment analysis or text classiﬁcation on more balanced data, such as BERT, may not have been the
perfect candidate for spotting the intricacies of this dataset.
The deﬁnition of a spoiler is inherently subjective much of the time - and since this dataset was
human-labelled, it is certainly subject to mislabeling. Thankfully, the sheer number of samples likely
dilutes this effect, but the extent to which this occurs is unknown.
5.1
Future Work
The ﬁrst priority for the future is to get the performance of our BERT and RoBERTa models to an
acceptable level. For the scope of this investigation, our efforts leaned towards the winning LSTM
model, but we believe that the BERT models could perform well with proper adjustments as well. We
may also test the inclusion of more features such as user information into the input of our models.
We are also looking forward to sharing our ﬁndings with the UCSD team.
4
Attributions and Code
Each member of our team contributed equally. Allen Bao created our LSTM model and created our
ﬁrst dataset. He also optimized his network to match and exceed UCSD performance. Marshall Ho
studied the problem of our low initial AUC scores and created the second dataset which added book
titles. He also developed our model based on RoBERTa. Saarthak Sangamnerkar developed our
BERT model and the metric reporting framework in pytorch. He is also our LaTeX expert.
Code repository: https://github.com/allenbao64/csc2515-project
References
[1] Mengting Wan, Rishabh Misra, Ndapa Nakashole, and Julian McAuley. Fine-Grained Spoiler
Detection from Large-Scale Review Corpora. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 2605–2610, Florence, Italy, July 2019.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
[2] UCSD. UCSD Book Graph, 2019.
[3] Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long Short-Term Memory. Neural Computation,
9(8):1735–1780, November 1997.
[4] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of
Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding. arXiv:1810.04805 [cs], May
2019. arXiv: 1810.04805.
[5] Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. RoBERTa: A Robustly Optimized BERT
Pretraining Approach. arXiv:1907.11692 [cs], July 2019. arXiv: 1907.11692.
[6] Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Quoc V. Le.
XLNet: Generalized Autoregressive Pretraining for Language Understanding. arXiv:1906.08237
[cs], January 2020. arXiv: 1906.08237.
[7] huggingface bert. BERT — transformers 4.0.0 documentation, 2020.
[8] huggingface roberta. RoBERTa — transformers 4.0.0 documentation, 2020.
5
