Title: Teaching a Massive Open Online Course on Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2104.12846v2
--------------------------------------------------

Teaching a Massive Open Online Course on Natural Language Processing
Ekaterina Artemova1,2∗, Murat Apishev 1, Veronika Sarkisyan 1,
Sergey Aksenov1, Denis Kirjanov3, Oleg Serikov 1,4
1 HSE University, Moscow, Russia
2 Huawei Noah’s Ark lab, Moscow, Russia
3 SberDevices, Sberbank, Moscow, Russia
4 DeepPavlov, MIPT, Dolgoprudny, Russia
https://openedu.ru/course/hse/TEXT/
Abstract
This paper presents a new Massive Open On-
line Course on Natural Language Process-
ing, targeted at non-English speaking students.
The course lasts 12 weeks; every week con-
sists of lectures, practical sessions, and quiz
assignments. Three weeks out of 12 are fol-
lowed by Kaggle-style coding assignments.
Our course intends to serve multiple purposes:
(i) familiarize students with the core con-
cepts and methods in NLP, such as language
modeling or word or sentence representations,
(ii) show that recent advances, including pre-
trained Transformer-based models, are built
upon these concepts; (iii) introduce architec-
tures for most demanded real-life applications,
(iv) develop practical skills to process texts in
multiple languages. The course was prepared
and recorded during 2020, launched by the end
of the year, and in early 2021 has received pos-
itive feedback.
1
Introduction
The vast majority of recently developed online
courses on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI), Natural Lan-
guage Processing (NLP) included, are oriented to-
wards English-speaking audiences. In non-English
speaking countries, such courses’ audience is unfor-
tunately quite limited, mainly due to the language
barrier. Students, who are not ﬂuent in English,
ﬁnd it difﬁcult to cope with language issues and
study simultaneously. Thus the students face seri-
ous learning difﬁculties and lack of motivation to
complete the online course. While creating new on-
line courses in languages other than English seems
redundant and unproﬁtable, there are multiple rea-
sons to support it. First, students may ﬁnd it easier
to comprehend new concepts and problems in their
native language. Secondly, it may be easier to
build a strong online learning community if stu-
dents can express themselves ﬂuently. Finally, and
∗Corresponding author, email: elartemova@hse.ru
more speciﬁcally to NLP, an NLP course aimed at
building practical skills should include language-
speciﬁc tools and applications. Knowing how to
use tools for English is essential to understand the
core principles of the NLP pipeline. However, it is
of little use if the students work on real-life appli-
cations in the non-English industry.
In this paper, we present an overview of an on-
line course aimed at Russian-speaking students.
This course was developed and run for the ﬁrst time
in 2020, achieving positive feedback. Our course
is a part of the HSE university’s online specializa-
tion on AI and is built upon previous courses in the
specialization, which introduced core concepts in
calculus, probability theory, and programming in
Python. Outside of the specialization, the course
can be used for additional training of students ma-
joring in computer science or software engineering
and others who fulﬁll prerequisites.
The main contributions of this paper are:
• We present the syllabus of a recent wide-scope
massive open online course on NLP, aimed at
a broad audience;
• We describe methodological choices made for
teaching NLP to non-English speaking stu-
dents;
• In this course, we combine recent deep learn-
ing trends with other best practices, such as
topic modeling.
The remainder of the paper is organized as fol-
lows: Section 2 introduces methodological choices
made for the course design. Section 3 presents the
course structure and topics in more details. Sec-
tion 4 lists home works. Section 5 describes the
hosting platform and its functionality.
2
Course overview
The course presented in this paper is split into two
main parts, six weeks each, which cover (i) core
arXiv:2104.12846v2  [cs.CL]  4 May 2021
NLP concepts and approaches and (ii) main applica-
tions and more sophisticated problem formulations.
The ﬁrst six weeks’ main goal is to present dif-
ferent word and sentence representation methods,
starting from bag-of-words and moving to word
and sentence embeddings, reaching contextualized
word embeddings and pre-trained language mod-
els. Simultaneously we introduce basic problem
deﬁnitions: text classiﬁcation, sequence labeling,
and sequence-to-sequence transformation. The ﬁrst
part of the course roughly follows Yoav Goldberg’s
textbook (Goldberg, 2017), albeit we extend it with
pre-training approaches and recent Transformer-
based architectures.
The second part of the course introduces BERT-
based models and such NLP applications as ques-
tion answering, text summarization, and informa-
tion extraction. This part adopts some of the ex-
planations from the recent draft of “Speech and
Language Processing” (Jurafsky and Martin, 2000).
An entire week is devoted to topic modeling, and
BigARTM (Vorontsov et al., 2015), a tool for topic
modeling developed in MIPT, one of the top Rus-
sian universities and widely used in real-life ap-
plications. Overall practical sessions are aimed
at developing text processing skills and practical
coding skills.
Every week comprises both a lecture and a prac-
tical session. Lectures have a “talking head” for-
mat, so slides and pre-recorded demos are pre-
sented, while practical sessions are real-time cod-
ing sessions. The instructor writes code snippets in
Jupyter notebooks and explains them at the same
time. Overall every week, there are 3-5 lecture
videos and 2-3 practical session videos. Weeks 3,
5, 9 are extended with coding assignments.
Weeks 7 and 9 are followed by interviews. In
these interviews, one of the instructors’ talks to
the leading specialist in the area. Tatyana Shav-
rina, one of the guests interviewed, leads an R&D
team in Sber, one of the leading IT companies. The
second guest, Konstantin Vorontsov, is a professor
from one of the top universities. The guests are
asked about their current projects and interests, ca-
reer paths, what keeps them inspired and motivated,
and what kind of advice they can give.
The ﬁnal mark is calculated according to the
formula:
# of accepted coding assignment
+0.7mean(quiz assignment mark)
Coding assignments are evaluated on the binary
scale (accepted or rejected), and quiz assignments
are evaluated on the 10 point scale. To earn a cer-
tiﬁcate, the student has to earn at least 4 points.
In practical sessions, we made a special effort to
introduce tools developed for processing texts in
Russian. The vast majority of examples, utilized
in lectures, problems, attempted during practical
sessions, and coding assignments, utilized datasets
in Russian. The same choice was made by Pavel
Braslavski, who was the ﬁrst to create an NLP
course in Russian in 2017 (Braslavski, 2017). We
utilized datasets in English only if Russian lacks
the non-commercial and freely available datasets
for the same task of high quality.
Some topics are intentionally not covered in the
course. We focus on written texts and do not ap-
proach the tasks of text-to-speech and speech-to-
text transformations. Low-resource languages spo-
ken in Russia are out of the scope, too. Besides, we
almost left out potentially controversial topics, such
as AI ethics and green AI problems. Although we
brieﬂy touch upon potential biases in pre-trained
language models, we have to leave out a large body
of research in the area, mainly oriented towards
the English language and the US or European so-
cial problems. Besides, little has been explored in
how neural models are affected by those biases and
problems in Russia.
The team of instructors includes specialists from
different backgrounds in computer science and the-
oretical linguists.
Three instructors worked on
lectures, two instructors taught practical sessions,
and three teaching assistants prepared home assign-
ments and conducted question-answering sessions
in the course forum.
3
Syllabus
Week 1. Introduction.
The ﬁrst introductory
lecture consists of two parts.
The ﬁrst part
overviews the core tasks and problems in NLP,
presents the main industrial applications, such as
search engines, Business Intelligence tools, and
conversational engines, and draws a comparison
between broad-deﬁned linguistics and NLP. To
conclude this part, we touch upon recent trends,
which can be grasped easily without the need to go
deep into details, such as multi-modal applications
(Zhou et al., 2020), cross-lingual methods (Feng
et al., 2020; Conneau et al., 2020) and computa-
tional humor (Braslavski et al., 2018; West and
Horvitz, 2019). Throughout this part lecture, we
try to show NLP systems’ duality: those aimed
at understanding language (or speech) and those
aimed at generating language (or speech). The
most complex systems used for machine transla-
tion, for example, aim at both. The second part
of the lecture introduces such basic concepts as
bag-of-words, count-based document vector repre-
sentation, tf-idf weighting. Finally, we explore
bigram association measures, PMI and t-score.
We point out that these techniques can be used to
conduct an exploratory analysis of a given collec-
tion of texts and prepare input for machine learning
methods.
Practical session gives an overview of text pre-
possessing techniques and simple count-based text
representation models. We emphasize how prepos-
sessing pipelines can differ for languages such as
English and Russian (for example, what is prefer-
able, stemming or lemmatization) and give ex-
amples of Python frameworks that are designed
to work with the Russian language (pymystem3
(Segalovich), pymorphy2 (Korobov, 2015)). We
also included an intro to regular expressions be-
cause we ﬁnd this knowledge instrumental both
within and outside NLP tasks.
During the ﬁrst weeks, most participants are
highly motivated, we can afford to give them more
practical material, but we still need to end up with
some close-to-life clear examples. We use a simple
sentiment analysis task on Twitter data to demon-
strate that even the ﬁrst week’s knowledge (together
with understanding basic machine learning) allows
participants to solve real-world problems. At the
same time, we illustrate how particular steps of
text prepossessing can have a crucial impact on the
model’s outcome.
Week 2. Word embeddings.
The lecture intro-
duces the concepts of distributional semantics and
word vector representations. We familiarize the
students with early models, which utilized sin-
gular value decomposition (SVD) and move to-
wards more advanced word embedding models,
such as word2vec (Mikolov et al., 2013) and
fasttext (Bojanowski et al., 2017). We brieﬂy
touch upon the hierarchical softmax and the hash-
ing trick and draw attention to negative sampling
techniques. We show ways to compute word dis-
tance, including Euclidean and cosine similarity
measures.
We discuss the difference between word2vec
Figure 1: One slide from Lecture 2. Difference be-
tween raw texts (top line), bag-of-words (middle line),
and bag-of-vectors (bottom line). Background words:
text, words, vectors.
and GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014) models and
emphasize main issues, such as dealing with out-
of-vocabulary (OOV) words and disregarding rich
morphology. fasttext is then claimed to ad-
dress these issues. To conclude, we present ap-
proaches for intrinsic and extrinsic evaluation of
word embeddings. Fig. 1 explains the difference
between bag-of-words and bag-of-vectors.
In practical session we explore only ad-
vanced word embedding models (word2vec,
fasttext and GloVe) and we cover three most
common scenarios for working with such models:
using pre-trained models, training models from
scratch and tuning pre-trained models.
Giving
a few examples, we show that fasttext as a
character-level model serves as a better word repre-
sentation model for Russian and copes better with
Russian rich morphology. We also demonstrate
some approaches of intrinsic evaluation of models’
quality, such as solving analogy tasks (like well
known “king - man + woman = queen”) and eval-
uating semantic similarity and some useful tech-
niques for visualization of word embeddings space.
This topic can be fascinating for students when
supplemented with illustrative examples. Explor-
ing visualization of words clusters on plots or solv-
ing analogies is a memorable part of the “classic”
NLP part of most students’ course.
Week 3. Text classiﬁcation.
The lecture con-
siders core concepts for supervised learning. We
begin by providing examples for text classiﬁcation
applications, such as sentiment classiﬁcation and
spam ﬁltering. Multiple problem statements, such
as binary, multi-class, and multi-label classiﬁca-
tion, are stated. To introduce ML algorithms, we
start with logistic regression and move towards neu-
ral methods for text classiﬁcation. To this end, we
introduce fasttext as an easy, out-of-the-box
solution. We introduce the concept of sentence
(paragraph) embedding by presenting doc2vec
model (Le and Mikolov, 2014) and show how such
embeddings can be used as input to the classiﬁca-
tion model. Next, we move towards more sophisti-
cated techniques, including convolutional models
for sentence classiﬁcation (Kim, 2014). We do
not discuss backpropagation algorithms but refer
to the DL course of the specialization to refresh
understanding of neural network training. We show
ways to collect annotated data on crowdsourcing
platforms and speed up the process using active
learning (Esuli and Sebastiani, 2009). Finally, we
conclude with text augmentation techniques, in-
cluding SMOTE (Chawla et al., 2002) and EDA
(Wei and Zou, 2019).
In the practical session we continue working
with the text classiﬁcation on the IMDb movies re-
views dataset. We demonstrate several approaches
to create classiﬁcation models with different word
embeddings. We compare two different ways to
get sentence embedding, based on any word em-
bedding model: by averaging word vectors and
using tf-idf weights for a linear combination of
word vectors. We showcase fasttext tool for
text classiﬁcation using its built-in classiﬁcation
algorithm.
Additionally, we consider use GloVe word em-
bedding model to build a simple Convolutional
Neural Network for text classiﬁcation. In this week
and all of the following, we use PyTorch 1 as a
framework for deep learning.
Week 4. Language modeling.
The lecture fo-
cuses on the concept of language modelling. We
start with early count-based models (Song and
Croft, 1999) and create a link to Markov chains.
We refer to the problem of OOV words and show
the add-one smoothing method, avoiding more
sophisticated techniques, such as Knesser-Ney
smoothing (Kneser and Ney, 1995), for the sake of
time. Next, we introduce neural language models.
To this end, we ﬁrst approach Bengio’s language
model (Bengio et al., 2003), which utilizes fully
connected layers. Second, we present recurrent
neural networks and show how they can be used
for language modeling. Again, we remind the stu-
dents of backpropagation through time and gradi-
ent vanishing or explosion, introduced earlier in
1https://pytorch.org/
the DL course. We claim, that LSTM (Hochre-
iter and Schmidhuber, 1997) and GRU (Chung
et al., 2014) cope with these problems. As a brief
revision of the LSTM architecture is necessary, we
utilize Christopher Olah’s tutorial (Olah, 2015).
We pay extra attention to the inner working of
the LSTM, following Andrej Karpathy’s tutorial
(Karpathy, 2015). To add some research ﬂavor to
the lecture, we talk about text generation (Sutskever
et al., 2011), its application, and different decoding
strategies (Holtzman et al., 2019), including beam
search and nucleus sampling. Lastly, we introduce
the sequence labeling task (Ma and Hovy, 2016)
for part-of-speech (POS) tagging and named entity
recognition (NER) and show how RNN’s can be
utilized as sequence models for the tasks.
The practical session in this week is divided
into two parts. The ﬁrst part is dedicated to lan-
guage models for text generation.
We experi-
ment with count-based probabilistic models and
RNN’s to generate dinosaur names and get familiar
with perplexity calculation (the task and the data
were introduced in Sequence Models course from
DeepLearning.AI 2). To bring things together, stu-
dents are asked to make minor changes in the code
and run it to answer some questions in the week’s
quiz assignment.
The second part of the session demonstrates the
application of RNN’s to named entity recognition.
We ﬁrst introduce the BIO and BIOES annotation
schemes and show frameworks with pre-trained
NER models for English (Spacy 3) and Russian
(Natasha4) languages. Further, we move on to
CNN-biLSTM-CRF architecture described in the
lecture and test it on CoNLL 2003 shared task
data (Sang and De Meulder, 2003).
Week 5.
Machine Translation.
This lecture
starts with referring to the common experience of
using machine translation tools and a historical
overview of the area. Next, the idea of encoder-
decoder (seq2seq) architecture opens the techni-
cal part of the lecture. We start with RNN-based
seq2seq models (Sutskever et al., 2014) and in-
troduce the concept of attention (Bahdanau et al.,
2015). We show how attention maps can be used
for “black box” interpretation. Next, we reveal
the core architecture of modern NLP, namely, the
2https://www.coursera.org/learn/
nlp-sequence-models
3https://spacy.io
4https://natasha.github.io
Transformer model (Vaswani et al., 2017) and ask
the students explicitly to take this part seriously.
Following Jay Allamar’s tutorial (Alammar, 2015),
we decompose the transformer architecture and go
through it step by step. In the last part of the lecture,
we return to machine translation and introduce qual-
ity measures, such as WER and BLEU (Papineni
et al., 2002), touch upon human evaluation and the
fact that BLEU correlates well with human judg-
ments. Finally, we discuss brieﬂy more advanced
techniques, such as non-autoregressive models (Gu
et al., 2017) and back translation (Hoang et al.,
2018). Although we do not expect the student
to comprehend these techniques immediately, we
want to broaden their horizons so that they can
think out of the box of supervised learning and
autoregressive decoding.
In the ﬁrst part of practical session we solve
the following task: given a date in an arbitrary
format transform it to the standard format “dd-mm-
yyyy” (for example, “18 Feb 2018”, “18.02.2018”,
“18/02/2018” →“18-02-2018”). We adopt the code
from PyTorch machine translation tutorial 5 to our
task: we use the same RNN encoder, RNN decoder,
and its modiﬁcation - RNN encoder with atten-
tion mechanism - and compare the quality of two
decoders. We also demonstrate how to visualize
attention weights.
The second part is dedicated to the Transformer
model and is based on the Harvard NLP tutorial
(Klein et al., 2017) that decomposes the article
“Attention is All You Need” (Vaswani et al., 2017).
Step by step, like in the lecture, we go through
the Transformer code, trying to draw parallels with
a simple encoder-decoder model we have seen in
the ﬁrst part. We describe and comment on every
layer and pay special attention to implementing
the attention layer and masking and the shapes of
embeddings and layers.
Week 6. Sesame Street I.
The sixth lecture and
the next one are the most intense in the course.
The paradigm of pre-trained language models is
introduced in these two weeks. The ﬁrst model
to discuss in detail is ELMo (Peters et al., 2018).
Next, we move to BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) and
introduce the masked language modeling and next
sentence prediction objectives. While presenting
BERT, we brieﬂy revise the inner working of Trans-
5https://pytorch.org/tutorials/
intermediate/seq2seq_translation_
tutorial.html
Figure 2:
To spice up the lectures, the lecturer is
dressed in an ELMo costume
former blocks. We showcase three scenarios to
ﬁne-tune BERT: (i) text classiﬁcation by using dif-
ferent pooling strategies ([CLS], max or mean),
(ii) sentence pair classiﬁcation for paraphrase iden-
tiﬁcation and for natural language inference, (iii)
named entity recognition. SQuAD-style question-
answering, at which BERT is aimed too, as avoided
here, as we will have another week for QA systems.
Next, we move towards GPT-2 (Radford et al.)
and elaborate on how high-quality text generation
can be potentially harmful. To make the differ-
ence between BERT’s and GPT-2’s objective more
clear, we draw parallels with the Transformer ar-
chitecture for machine translation and show that
BERT is an encoder-style model, while GPT-2 is a
decoder-style model. We show Allen NLP (Gard-
ner et al., 2018) demos of how GPT-2 generates
texts and how attention scores implicitly resolve
coreference.
In this week, we massively rely on Jay Allamar’s
(Alammar, 2015) tutorial and adopt some of these
brilliant illustrations. One of the main problems,
though, rising in this week is the lack of Russian
terminology, as the Russian-speaking community
has not agreed on the proper ways to translate such
terms as “contextualized encoder” or “ﬁne-tuning”.
To spice up this week, we were dressed in Sesame
Street kigurumis (see Fig. 2).
The main idea of the practical session is to
demonstrate ELMo and BERT models, considered
earlier in the lecture. The session is divided into
two parts, and in both parts, we consider text clas-
siﬁcation, using ELMo and BERT models, respec-
tively.
In the ﬁrst part, we demonstrate how to use
ELMo word embeddings for text classiﬁcation
on the IMBdb dataset used in previous sessions.
We use pre-trained ELMo embeddings by Al-
lenNLP (Gardner et al., 2018) library and imple-
ment a simple recurrent neural network with a GRU
layer on top for text classiﬁcation. In the end, we
compare the performance of this model with the
scores we got in previous sessions on the same
dataset and demonstrate that using ELMo embed-
dings can improve model performance.
The second part of the session is focused on
models based on Transformer architecture. We
use huggingface-transformers library (Wolf et al.,
2020) and a pre-trained BERT model to build a
classiﬁcation algorithm for Google play applica-
tions reviews written in English. We implement
an entire pipeline of data preparation, using a pre-
trained model and demonstrating how to ﬁne-tune
the downstream task model. Besides, we imple-
ment a wrapper for the BERT classiﬁcation model
to get the prediction on new text.
Week 7. Sesame Street II.
To continue diving
into the pre-trained language model paradigm, the
lecture ﬁrst questions, how to evaluate the model.
We discuss some methods to interpret the BERT’s
inner workings, sometimes referred to as BERTol-
ogy (Rogers et al., 2021). We introduce a few
common ideas: BERT’s lower layers account for
surface features, lower to middle layers are respon-
sible for morphology, while the upper-middle lay-
ers have better syntax representation (Conneau
and Kiela, 2018). We talk about ethical issues
(May et al., 2019), caused by pre-training on raw
web texts. We move towards the extrinsic evalua-
tion of pre-trained models and familiarize the stu-
dents with GLUE-style evaluations (Wang et al.,
2019b,a). The next part of the lecture covers dif-
ferent improvements of BERT-like models. We
show how different design choices may affect the
model’s performance in different tasks and present
RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019), and ALBERT (Lan
et al., 2019) as members of a BERT-based family.
We touch upon the computational inefﬁciency of
pre-trained models and introduce lighter models,
including DistillBERT (Sanh et al., 2019). To be
solid, we touch upon other techniques to compress
pre-trained models, including pruning (Sajjad et al.,
2020) and quantization (Zafrir et al., 2019), but do
not expect the students to be able to implement
these techniques immediately. We present the con-
cept of language transferring and introduce multi-
lingual Transformers, such as XLM-R (Conneau
et al., 2020). Language transfer becomes more and
more crucial for non-English applications, and thus
we draw more attention to it. Finally, we cover
some of the basic multi-modal models aimed at
image captioning and visual question answering,
such as the uniﬁed Vision-Language Pre-training
(VLP) model (Zhou et al., 2020).
In the practical session we continue discussing
BERT-based models, shown in the lectures. The
session’s main idea is to consider different tasks
that may be solved by BERT-based models and
to demonstrate different tools and approaches for
solving them. So the practical session is divided
into two parts. The ﬁrst part is devoted to named
entity recognition. We consider a pre-trained cross-
lingual BERT-based NER model from the Deep-
Pavlov library (Burtsev et al., 2018) and demon-
strate how it can be used to extract named entities
from Russian and English text. The second part
is focused on multilingual zero-shot classiﬁcation.
We consider the pre-trained XLM-based model by
HuggingFace, discuss the approach’s key ideas,
and demonstrate how the model works, classify-
ing short texts in English, Russian, Spanish, and
French.
Week 8. Syntax parsing.
The lecture is devoted
to computational approaches to syntactic parsing
and is structured as follows. After a brief intro-
duction about the matter and its possible applica-
tions (both as an auxiliary task and an indepen-
dent one), we consider syntactic frameworks de-
veloped in linguistics: dependency grammar (Tes-
nière, 2015) and constituency grammar (Bloom-
ﬁeld, 1936).
Then we discuss only algorithms
that deal with dependency parsing (mainly because
there are no constituency parsers for Russian), so
we turn to graph-based (McDonald et al., 2005)
and transition-based (Aho and Ullman, 1972) de-
pendency parsers and consider their logics, struc-
ture, sorts, advantages, and drawbacks. Afterward,
we familiarize students with the practical side of
parsing, so we introduce syntactically annotated
corpora, Universal Dependencies project (Nivre
et al., 2016b) and some parsers which perform for
Russian well (UDPipe (Straka and Straková, 2017),
DeepPavlov Project (Burtsev et al., 2018)). The
last part of our lecture represents a brief overview
of the problems which were not covered in previ-
ous parts: BERTology, some issues of web-texts
parsing, latest advances in computational syntax
(like enhanced dependencies (Schuster and Man-
ning, 2016)).
The practical session starts with a quick
overview of CoNLL-U annotation format (Nivre
et al., 2016a): we show how to load, parse and visu-
alize such data on the example from the SynTagRus
corpus 6. Next, we learn to parse data with pre-
trained UDPipe models (Straka et al., 2016) and
Russian-language framework Natasha. To demon-
strate some practical usage of syntax parsing, we
ﬁrst understand how to extract subject-verb-object
(SVO) triples and then design a simple template-
based text summarization model.
Week 9. Topic modelling
The focus of this lec-
ture is topic modeling. First, we formulate the
topic modeling problem and ways it can be used
to cluster texts or extract topics. We explain the
basic probabilistic latent semantic analysis (PLSA)
model (HOFMANN, 1999), that modiﬁes early ap-
proaches, which were based on SVD (Dumais,
2004). We approach the PLSA problem using the
Expectation-Minimization (EM) algorithm and in-
troduce the basic performance metrics, such as per-
plexity and topic coherence.
As the PLSA problem is ill-posed, we famil-
iarize students with regularization techniques us-
ing Additive Regularization for Topic Modeling
(ARTM) model (Vorontsov and Potapenko, 2015)
as an example. We describe the general EM algo-
rithm for ARTM and some basic regularizers. Then
we move towards the Latent Dirichlet Allocation
(LDA) model (Blei et al., 2003) and show that the
maximum a posteriori estimation for LDA is the
special case of the ARTM model with a smoothing
or sparsing regularizer (see Fig. 3 for the explana-
tion snippet). We conclude the lecture with a brief
introduction to multi-modal ARTM models and
show how to generalize different Bayesian topic
models based on LDA. We showcase classiﬁcation,
word translation, and trend detection tasks as multi-
modal models.
In practical session we consider the models dis-
cussed in the lecture in a slightly different order.
First, we take a closer look at Gensim realization
6https://universaldependencies.org/
treebanks/ru_syntagrus/index.html
Figure 3: One slide from Lecture 9. Sparsiﬁcation of
an ARTM model explained.
of the LDA model ( ˇReh˚uˇrek and Sojka, 2010),
pick up the model’s optimal parameters in terms of
perplexity and topic coherence, and visualize the
model with pyLDAvis library. Next, we explore
BigARTM (Vorontsov et al., 2015) library, partic-
ularly LDA, PLSA, and multi-modal models, and
the impact of different regularizers. For all experi-
ments, we use a corpus of Russian-language news
from Lenta.ru 7 which allows us to compare the
models to each other.
Week 10.
In this lecture we discussed mono-
lingual seq2seq problems, text summarization and
sentence simpliﬁcation. We start with extractive
summarization techniques. The ﬁrst approach intro-
duced is TextRank (Mihalcea and Tarau, 2004). We
present each step of this approach and explain that
any sentence or keyword embeddings can be used
to construct a text graph, as required by the method.
Thus we refer the students back to earlier lectures,
where sentence embeddings were discussed. Next,
we move to abstractive summarization techniques.
To this end, we present performance metrics, such
as ROUGE (Lin, 2004) and METEOR (Baner-
jee and Lavie, 2005) and brieﬂy overview pre-
Transformer architectures, including Pointer net-
works (See et al., 2017). Next, we show recent
pre-trained Transformer-based models, which aim
at multi-task learning, including summarization.
To this end, we discuss pre-training approaches of
T5 (Raffel et al., 2020) and BART (Lewis et al.,
2020), and how they help to improve the perfor-
mance of mono-lingual se2seq tasks.
Unfortu-
nately, when this lecture was created, multilingual
versions of these models were not available, so
they are left out of the scope. Finally, we talk about
sentence simpliﬁcation task (Coster and Kauchak,
2011; Alva-Manchego et al., 2020) and its social
impact. We present SARI (Xu et al., 2016) as a
7https://github.com/yutkin/Lenta.
Ru-News-Dataset
metric for sentence simpliﬁcation performance and
state, explain how T5 or BART can be utilized for
the task.
The practical session is devoted to extractive
summarization and TextRank algorithm. We are
urged to stick to extractive summarization, as Rus-
sian lacks annotated datasets, but, at the same time,
the task is demanded by in industry—extractive
summarization compromises than between the need
for summarization techniques and the absence of
training datasets. Nevertheless, we used annotated
English datasets to show how performance metrics
can be used for the task. The CNN/DailyMail ar-
ticles are used as an example of a dataset for the
summarization task. As there is no standard bench-
mark for text summarization in Russian, we have
to use English to measure different models’ per-
formance. We implement the TextRank algorithm
and compare it with the algorithm from the Net-
workX library (Hagberg et al., 2008). Also, we
demonstrate how to estimate the performance of
the summarization by calculating the ROUGE met-
ric for the resulting algorithm using the PyRouge
library8. This practical session allows us to refer
back the students to sentence embedding models
and showcase another application of sentence vec-
tors.
Week 11.
The penultimate lecture approaches
Question-Answering (QA) systems and chat-bot
technologies.
We present multiple real-life in-
dustrial applications, where chat-bots and QA
technologies are used, ranging from simple task-
oriented chat-bots for food ordering to help desk
or hotline automation. Next, we formulate the core
problems of task-oriented chat-bots, which are in-
tent classiﬁcation and slot-ﬁlling (Liu and Lane,
2016) and revise methods, to approach them. Af-
ter that, we introduce the concept of a dialog sce-
nario graph and show how such a graph can guide
users to complete their requests. Without going
deep into technical details, we show how ready-
made solutions, such as Google Dialogﬂow9, can
be used to create task-oriented chat-bots. Next,
we move towards QA models, of which we pay
more attention to information retrieval-based (IR-
based) approaches and SQuAD-style (Rajpurkar
et al., 2016) approaches. Since natural language
generation models are not mature enough (at least
for Russian) to be used in free dialog, we explain
8urlhttps://github.com/andersjo/pyrouge
9https://cloud.google.com/dialogflow
how IR-based techniques imitate a conversation
with a user. Finally, we show how BERT can be
used to tackle the SQuAD problem. The lecture
is concluded by comparing industrial dialog assis-
tants created by Russian companies, such as Yan-
dex.Alisa or Mail.ru Marusya.
In the practical session we demonstrate several
examples of using Transformer-based models for
QA task. Firstly, we try to ﬁnetune Electra model
(Clark et al., 2020) on COVID-19 questions dataset
10 and BERT on SQuAD 2.0 (Rajpurkar et al.,
2018) (we use code from hugginface tutorial 11
for the latter). Next, we show an example of us-
age of pretrained model for Russian-language data
from DeepPavlov project. Finally, we explore how
to use BERT for joint intent classiﬁcation and slot
ﬁlling task (Chen et al., 2019).
Week 12.
The last lecture wraps up the course
by discussing knowledge graphs (KG) and some
of their applications for QA systems. We revise
core information extraction problems, such as NER
and relation detection, and show how they can be
used to extract a knowledge graph from unstruc-
tured texts (Paulheim, 2017). We touch upon the
entity linking problem but do not go deep into de-
tails. To propose to students an alternative view to
information extraction, we present machine read-
ing comprehension approaches for NER (Li et al.,
2019a) and relation detection (Li et al., 2019b), re-
ferring to the previous lecture. Finally, we close
the course by revising all topics covered. We recite
the evolution of text representation models from
bag-of-words to BERT. We show that all the prob-
lems discussed throughout the course fall into one
of three categories: (i) text classiﬁcation or sen-
tence pair classiﬁcation, (ii) sequence tagging, (iii)
sequence-to-sequence transformation. We draw at-
tention to the fact that the most recent models can
tackle all of the problem categories. Last but not
least we revise, how all of these problem statements
are utilized in real-life applications.
The practical session in this week is dedi-
cated to information extraction tasks with Stanford
CoreNLP library (Manning et al., 2014). The ses-
sion’s main idea is to demonstrate using the tool
for constructing knowledge graphs based on natu-
ral text. We consider different ways of using the
10https://github.com/xhlulu/covid-qa
11https://huggingface.co/
transformers/custom_datasets.html#
question-answering-with-squad-2-0
library and experimented with using the library to
solve different NLP tasks that were already con-
sidered in the course: tokenization, lemmatization,
POS-tagging, and dependency parsing. The library
includes models for 53 languages, so we consider
examples of solving these tasks for English and
Russian texts. Besides, relation extraction is consid-
ered using the Open Information Extraction (Ope-
nIE) module from the CoreNLP library.
4
Home works
The course consists of multiple ungraded quiz
assignments, 11 graded quiz assignments, three
graded coding assignments. Grading is performed
automatically in a Kaggle-like fashion.
4.1
Quiz Assignments
Every video lecture is followed by an ungraded
quiz, consisting of 1-2 questions. A typical ques-
tion address the core concepts introduced:
• What kind of vectors are more common for
word embedding models?
A1: dense (true), A2: sparse (false)
• What kind of layers are essential for GPT-2
model?
A1: transformer stacks (true), A2: recurrent
layers (false), A3: convolutional layers (false),
A4: dense layers (false)
A graded test is conducted every week, except
the very last one. It consists of 12-15 questions,
which we tried to split into three parts, being more
or less of the same complexity. First part questions
about main concepts and ideas introduced during
the week. These questions are a bit more compli-
cated than after video ones:
• What part of an encoder-decoder model solves
the language modeling problem, i.e., the next
word prediction?
A1: encoder (false), A2: decoder (true)
• What are the BPE algorithm units?
A1: syllables (false), A2: morphemes (false),
A3: n−grams (true), A4: words (false)
Second part of the quiz asks the students to conduct
simple computations by hand:
• Given a detailed description of an neural archi-
tecture, compute the number of parameters;
• Given a gold-standard NER annotation and
a system output, compute token-based and
span-based micro F1.
The third part of the quiz asks to complete a
simple programming assignment or asks about the
code presented in practical sessions:
• Given a pre-trained language model, compute
perplexity of a test sentence
• Does DeepPavlov cross-lingual NER model
require to announce the language of the input
text?
For convenience and to avoid format ambiguity,
all questions are in multiple-choice format. For
questions, which require a numerical answer, we
provided answer options in the form of intervals,
with one of the endpoints excluded.
Each quiz is estimated on a 10 point scale. All
questions have equal weights.
The ﬁnal week is followed by a comprehensive
quiz covering all topics studied. This quiz is oblig-
atory for those students who desire to earn a certiﬁ-
cate.
4.2
Coding assignments
There are three coding assignments concerning
the following topics: (i) text classiﬁcation, (ii) se-
quence labeling, (iii) topic modeling. Assignments
grading is binary. Text classiﬁcation and sequence
labeling assignments require students to beat the
score of the provided baseline submission. Topic
modeling assignment is evaluated differently.
All the coding tasks provide students with the
starter code and sample submission bundles. The
number of student’s submissions is limited. Sample
submission bundles illustrate the required submis-
sion format and could serve as the random baseline
for each task. Submissions are evaluated using the
Moodle12 (Dougiamas and Taylor, 2003) CodeRun-
ner13 (Lobb and Harlow, 2016) plugin.
4.2.1
Text classiﬁcation and sequence
labeling coding assignments
Text classiﬁcation assignment
is based on the
Harry Potter and the Action Prediction Chal-
lenge from Natural Language dataset (Vilares and
Gómez-Rodríguez, 2019), which uses ﬁction fan-
tasy texts. Here, the task is the following: given
12https://moodle.org/
13https://coderunner.org.nz/
some text preceding a spell occurrence in the text,
predict this spell name.
Students are provided
with starter code in Jupyter notebooks (Pérez and
Granger, 2007). Starter code implements all the
needed data pre-processing, shows how to imple-
ment the baseline Logistic Regression model, and
provides code needed to generate the submission.
Students’ goal is to build three different models
performing better than the baseline. The ﬁrst one
should differ from the baseline model by only hy-
perparameter values. The second one should be a
Gradient Boosting model. The third model to build
is a CNN model. All the three models’ predictions
on the provided testing dataset should be then sub-
mitted to the scoring system. Submissions, where
all the models beat the baseline models classiﬁca-
tion F1-score, are graded positively.
Sequence labeling
Sequence labeling assign-
ment is based on the LitBank data (Bamman et al.,
2019). Here, the task is to given ﬁction texts, per-
form a NER labeling. Students are provided with a
starter code for data pre-processing and submission
packaging. Starter code also illustrates building a
recurrent neural model using the PyTorch frame-
work, showing how to compose a single-layer uni-
directional RNN model.
Students’ goal is to build a bidirectional LSTM
model that would outperform the baseline. Sub-
missions are based on the held-out testing subset
provided by the course team.
4.2.2
Topic modeling assignment
Topic modeling assignment motivation is to give
students practical experience with LDA (Blei et al.,
2003) algorithm. The assignment is organized as
follows: ﬁrst, students have to download and pre-
process Wikipedia texts.
Then, the following experiment should be con-
ducted. The experiment consists of training and
exploring an LDA model for the given collection of
texts. The task is to build several LDA models for
the given data: models differ only in the conﬁgured
number of topics. Students are asked to explore
the obtained models using the pyLDAvis (Sievert
and Shirley, 2014) tool. This stage is not evalu-
ated. Finally, students are asked to submit the topic
labels that LDA models assign to words provided
by the course team. Such a prediction should be
performed for each of the obtained models.
5
Platform description
The course is hosted on OpenEdu 14 - an educa-
tional platform created by the Association “Na-
tional Platform for Open Education”, established
by leading Russian universities. Our course and all
courses on the platform are available free of charge
so that everyone can access all materials (includ-
ing videos, practical Jupyter notebooks, tests, and
coding assessments). The platform also provides
a forum where course participants can ask ques-
tions or discuss the material with each other and
lecturers.
6
Expected outcomes
First of all, we expect the students to understand
basic formulations of the NLP tasks, such as text
classiﬁcation, sentence pair modeling, sequence
tagging, and sequence-to-sequence transformation.
We expect the students to be able to recall core
terminology and use it ﬂuently. In some weeks,
we provide links to extra materials, mainly in En-
glish, so that the students can learn more about
the topic themselves. We hope that after complet-
ing the course, the students become able to read
those materials. Secondly, we anticipate that after
completing the course, the students are comfort-
able using popular Python tools to process texts in
Russian and English and utilize pre-trained mod-
els. Thirdly, we hope that the students can state
and approach their tasks related to NLP, using the
knowledge acquired, conducting experiments, and
evaluating the results correctly.
7
Feedback
The early feedback we have received so far is posi-
tive. Although the course has only been advertised
so far to a broader audience, we know that there
are two groups interested in the course. First, some
students come to study at their own will. Secondly,
selected topics were used in ofﬂine courses in an
inverse classroom format or as additional materials.
The students note that our course is a good starting
point for studying NLP and helps navigate a broad
range of topics and learn the terminology. Some of
the students note that it was easy for them to learn
in Russian, and now, as they feel more comfort-
able with the core concepts, they can turn to read
detailed and more recent sources. Unfortunately,
programming assignments turn out to be our weak
14https://npoed.ru/
Figure 4: The results of survey among course participants. Left: current educational level. Right: professional
area.
spot, as there are challenging to complete, and little
feedback on them can be provided.
We ask all participants to ﬁll in a short survey
after they enroll in the course. So far, we have
received about 100 responses. According to the
results, most students (78%) have previously taken
online courses, but only 24% of them have experi-
ence with courses from foreign universities. The
average age of course participants is 32 years; most
of them already have or are getting a higher educa-
tion (see Fig. 4 for more details). Almost half of the
students are occupied in Computer Science area,
20% have a background in Humanities, followed
by Engineering Science (16%).
We also ask students about their motivation in
the form of a multiple-choice question: almost half
of them (46%) stated that they want to improve
their qualiﬁcation either to improve at their current
job (33%) or to change their occupation (13%), and
20% answered they enrolled the course for research
and academic purposes. For the vast majority of
the student, the reputation of HSE university was
the key factor to select this course among other
available.
8
Conclusion
This paper introduced and described a new massive
open online course on Natural Language Process-
ing targeted at Russian-speaking students. This
twelve-week course was designed and recorded
during 2020 and launched by the end of the year.
In the lectures and practical session, we managed
to document a paradigm shift caused by the discov-
ery and widespread use of pre-trained Transformer-
based language models. We inherited the best of
two worlds, showing how to utilize both static word
embeddings in a more traditional machine learning
setup and contextualized word embeddings in the
most recent fashion. The course’s theoretical out-
come is understanding and knowing core concepts
and problem formulations, while the practical out-
come covers knowing how to use tools to process
text in Russian and English.
Early feedback we got from the students is pos-
itive. As every week was devoted to a new topic,
they did not ﬁnd it difﬁcult to keep being engaged.
The ways we introduce the core problem formula-
tions and showcase different tools to process texts
in Russian earned approval. What is more, the
presented course is used now as supplementary ma-
terial in a few off-line educational programs to the
best of our knowledge.
Further improvements and adjustments, which
could be made for the course, include new home
works related to machine translation or mono-
lingual sequence-to-sequence tasks and the devel-
opment of additional materials in written form to
support mathematical calculations, avoided in the
video lecture for the sake of time.
References
Alfred V Aho and Jeffrey D Ullman. 1972. The theory
of parsing, translation, and compiling.
Jay Alammar. 2015. The illustrated transformer. Jay
Alammar blog.
Fernando Alva-Manchego, Carolina Scarton, and Lu-
cia Specia. 2020. Data-driven sentence simpliﬁca-
tion: Survey and benchmark. Computational Lin-
guistics, 46(1):135–187.
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyung Hyun Cho, and Yoshua
Bengio. 2015.
Neural machine translation by
jointly learning to align and translate. In 3rd Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2015.
David Bamman, Sejal Popat, and Sheng Shen. 2019.
An annotated dataset of literary entities. In Proceed-
ings of the 2019 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1
(Long and Short Papers), pages 2138–2144.
Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. 2005. Meteor: An
automatic metric for mt evaluation with improved
correlation with human judgments. In Proceedings
of the acl workshop on intrinsic and extrinsic evalu-
ation measures for machine translation and/or sum-
marization, pages 65–72.
Yoshua Bengio, Réjean Ducharme, Pascal Vincent, and
Christian Janvin. 2003. A neural probabilistic lan-
guage model. The journal of machine learning re-
search, 3:1137–1155.
David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan.
2003. Latent dirichlet allocation. the Journal of ma-
chine Learning research, 3:993–1022.
Leonard Bloomﬁeld. 1936. Language or ideas? Lan-
guage, pages 89–95.
Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and
Tomas Mikolov. 2017. Enriching word vectors with
subword information. Transactions of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, 5:135–146.
Pavel Braslavski. 2017. Nlp – how will it be in russian?
Habr blog.
Pavel Braslavski, Vladislav Blinov, Valeria Bolotova,
and Katya Pertsova. 2018. How to evaluate humor-
ous response generation, seriously? In Proceedings
of the 2018 Conference on Human Information In-
teraction & Retrieval, pages 225–228.
Mikhail
Burtsev,
Alexander
Seliverstov,
Rafael
Airapetyan, Mikhail Arkhipov, Dilyara Baymurz-
ina, Nickolay Bushkov, Olga Gureenkova, Taras
Khakhulin, Yurii Kuratov, Denis Kuznetsov, et al.
2018.
Deeppavlov: Open-source library for dia-
logue systems. In Proceedings of ACL 2018, System
Demonstrations, pages 122–127.
Nitesh V Chawla, Kevin W Bowyer, Lawrence O Hall,
and W Philip Kegelmeyer. 2002. Smote: synthetic
minority over-sampling technique. Journal of artiﬁ-
cial intelligence research, 16:321–357.
Qian Chen, Zhu Zhuo, and Wen Wang. 2019. BERT
for joint intent classiﬁcation and slot ﬁlling. CoRR,
abs/1902.10909.
Junyoung Chung, Caglar Gulcehre, Kyunghyun Cho,
and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Empirical evaluation of
gated recurrent neural networks on sequence mod-
eling. In NIPS 2014 Workshop on Deep Learning,
December 2014.
Kevin Clark, Minh-Thang Luong, Quoc V. Le, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2020.
ELECTRA: Pre-
training text encoders as discriminators rather than
generators. In ICLR.
Alexis Conneau, Kartikay Khandelwal, Naman Goyal,
Vishrav Chaudhary, Guillaume Wenzek, Francisco
Guzmán, Édouard Grave, Myle Ott, Luke Zettle-
moyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2020. Unsupervised
cross-lingual representation learning at scale.
In
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 8440–
8451.
Alexis Conneau and Douwe Kiela. 2018. Senteval: An
evaluation toolkit for universal sentence representa-
tions. In Proceedings of the Eleventh International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2018).
William Coster and David Kauchak. 2011. Simple en-
glish wikipedia: a new text simpliﬁcation task. In
Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, pages 665–669.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019.
Bert: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages
4171–4186.
Martin Dougiamas and Peter Taylor. 2003.
Moo-
dle: Using learning communities to create an open
source course management system.
Susan T Dumais. 2004. Latent semantic analysis. An-
nual review of information science and technology,
38(1):188–230.
Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2009.
Active
learning strategies for multi-label text classiﬁcation.
In European Conference on Information Retrieval,
pages 102–113. Springer.
Fangxiaoyu Feng, Yinfei Yang, Daniel Cer, Naveen
Arivazhagan, and Wei Wang. 2020.
Language-
agnostic bert sentence embedding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2007.01852.
Matt Gardner, Joel Grus, Mark Neumann, Oyvind
Tafjord, Pradeep Dasigi, Nelson F Liu, Matthew Pe-
ters, Michael Schmitz, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2018.
Allennlp: A deep semantic natural language process-
ing platform. In Proceedings of Workshop for NLP
Open Source Software (NLP-OSS), pages 1–6.
Yoav Goldberg. 2017. Neural network methods for nat-
ural language processing. Synthesis lectures on hu-
man language technologies, 10(1):1–309.
Jiatao Gu, James Bradbury, Caiming Xiong, Vic-
tor OK Li, and Richard Socher. 2017.
Non-
autoregressive neural machine translation.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:1711.02281.
Aric Hagberg, Pieter Swart, and Daniel S Chult. 2008.
Exploring network structure, dynamics, and func-
tion using networkx. Technical report, Los Alamos
National Lab.(LANL), Los Alamos, NM (United
States).
Vu Cong Duy Hoang, Philipp Koehn, Gholamreza
Haffari, and Trevor Cohn. 2018.
Iterative back-
translation for neural machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Neural Machine
Translation and Generation, pages 18–24.
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997.
Long short-term memory.
Neural computation,
9(8):1735–1780.
T HOFMANN. 1999.
Probabilistic latent semantic
analysis. In Proc. Conf. on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (UAI), 1999, pages 289–296.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and
Yejin Choi. 2019. The curious case of neural text de-
generation. In International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations.
Daniel Jurafsky and James H Martin. 2000.
Speech
and language processing: An introduction to natural
language processing, computational linguistics, and
speech recognition.
Andrej Karpathy. 2015.
The unreasonable effective-
ness of recurrent neural networks. Andrej Karpathy
blog, 21:23.
Yoon Kim. 2014. Convolutional neural networks for
sentence classiﬁcation. CoRR, abs/1408.5882.
Guillaume Klein, Yoon Kim, Yuntian Deng, Jean Senel-
lart, and Alexander M. Rush. 2017.
Opennmt:
Open-source toolkit for neural machine translation.
In Proc. ACL.
Reinhard Kneser and Hermann Ney. 1995. Improved
backing-off for m-gram language modeling. In 1995
international conference on acoustics, speech, and
signal processing, volume 1, pages 181–184. IEEE.
Mikhail Korobov. 2015. Morphological analyzer and
generator for russian and ukrainian languages.
In
International Conference on Analysis of Images, So-
cial Networks and Texts, pages 320–332. Springer.
Zhenzhong Lan, Mingda Chen, Sebastian Goodman,
Kevin Gimpel, Piyush Sharma, and Radu Soricut.
2019. Albert: A lite bert for self-supervised learning
of language representations. In International Con-
ference on Learning Representations.
Quoc Le and Tomas Mikolov. 2014. Distributed repre-
sentations of sentences and documents. In Interna-
tional conference on machine learning, pages 1188–
1196. PMLR.
Mike
Lewis,
Yinhan
Liu,
Naman
Goyal,
Mar-
jan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer
Levy, Veselin Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
2020.
Bart: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-
training for natural language generation, translation,
and comprehension. In Proceedings of the 58th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 7871–7880.
Xiaoya Li, Jingrong Feng, Yuxian Meng, Qinghong
Han, Fei Wu, and Jiwei Li. 2019a. A uniﬁed mrc
framework for named entity recognition.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:1910.11476.
Xiaoya Li, Fan Yin, Zijun Sun, Xiayu Li, Arianna
Yuan, Duo Chai, Mingxin Zhou, and Jiwei Li. 2019b.
Entity-relation extraction as multi-turn question an-
swering. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 1340–1350.
Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. Rouge: A package for automatic
evaluation of summaries.
In Text summarization
branches out, pages 74–81.
Bing Liu and Ian Lane. 2016. Attention-based recur-
rent neural network models for joint intent detection
and slot ﬁlling. Interspeech 2016, pages 685–689.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-
dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining ap-
proach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692.
Richard Lobb and Jenny Harlow. 2016. Coderunner:
A tool for assessing computer programming skills.
ACM Inroads, 7(1):47–51.
Xuezhe Ma and Eduard Hovy. 2016. End-to-end se-
quence labeling via bi-directional lstm-cnns-crf. In
Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pages 1064–1074.
Christopher D Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer,
Jenny Rose Finkel, Steven Bethard, and David Mc-
Closky. 2014. The stanford corenlp natural language
processing toolkit. In Proceedings of 52nd annual
meeting of the association for computational linguis-
tics: system demonstrations, pages 55–60.
Chandler May, Alex Wang, Shikha Bordia, Samuel
Bowman, and Rachel Rudinger. 2019. On measur-
ing social biases in sentence encoders. In Proceed-
ings of the 2019 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1
(Long and Short Papers), pages 622–628.
Ryan McDonald,
Koby Crammer,
and Fernando
Pereira. 2005. Online large-margin training of de-
pendency parsers. In Proceedings of the 43rd An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL’05), pages 91–98.
Rada Mihalcea and Paul Tarau. 2004. Textrank: Bring-
ing order into text. In Proceedings of the 2004 con-
ference on empirical methods in natural language
processing, pages 404–411.
Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg Cor-
rado, and Jeffrey Dean. 2013. Distributed represen-
tations of words and phrases and their composition-
ality. In Proceedings of the 26th International Con-
ference on Neural Information Processing Systems-
Volume 2, pages 3111–3119.
Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Filip Gin-
ter, Yoav Goldberg, Jan Hajiˇc, Christopher D. Man-
ning, Ryan McDonald, Slav Petrov, Sampo Pyysalo,
Natalia Silveira, Reut Tsarfaty, and Daniel Zeman.
2016a. Universal Dependencies v1: A multilingual
treebank collection. In Proceedings of the Tenth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC’16), pages 1659–1666, Portorož,
Slovenia. European Language Resources Associa-
tion (ELRA).
Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine De Marneffe, Filip Gin-
ter, Yoav Goldberg, Jan Hajic, Christopher D Man-
ning, Ryan McDonald, Slav Petrov, Sampo Pyysalo,
Natalia Silveira, et al. 2016b. Universal dependen-
cies v1: A multilingual treebank collection.
In
Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’16),
pages 1659–1666.
Christopher Olah. 2015. Understanding lstm networks.
Christopher Olah blog.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the
40th annual meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 311–318.
Heiko Paulheim. 2017. Knowledge graph reﬁnement:
A survey of approaches and evaluation methods. Se-
mantic web, 8(3):489–508.
Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D
Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for word rep-
resentation. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference
on empirical methods in natural language process-
ing (EMNLP), pages 1532–1543.
Fernando Pérez and Brian E. Granger. 2007. IPython:
a system for interactive scientiﬁc computing. Com-
puting in Science and Engineering, 9(3):21–29.
Matthew E Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt
Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2018. Deep contextualized word rep-
resentations. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT, pages
2227–2237.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan,
Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language mod-
els are unsupervised multitask learners.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine
Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou,
Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. 2020. Exploring the lim-
its of transfer learning with a uniﬁed text-to-text
transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
21:1–67.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Robin Jia, and Percy Liang. 2018.
Know what you don’t know: Unanswerable ques-
tions for squad. CoRR, abs/1806.03822.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and
Percy Liang. 2016. Squad: 100,000+ questions for
machine comprehension of text. In Proceedings of
the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 2383–2392.
Radim ˇReh˚uˇrek and Petr Sojka. 2010. Software Frame-
work for Topic Modelling with Large Corpora. In
Proceedings of the LREC 2010 Workshop on New
Challenges for NLP Frameworks, pages 45–50, Val-
letta, Malta. ELRA.
http://is.muni.cz/
publication/884893/en.
Anna Rogers, Olga Kovaleva, and Anna Rumshisky.
2021. A primer in bertology: What we know about
how bert works. Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, 8:842–866.
Hassan Sajjad, Fahim Dalvi, Nadir Durrani, and
Preslav Nakov. 2020.
Poor man’s bert: Smaller
and faster transformer models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.03844.
Erik Tjong Kim Sang and Fien De Meulder. 2003. In-
troduction to the conll-2003 shared task: Language-
independent named entity recognition. In Proceed-
ings of the Seventh Conference on Natural Language
Learning at HLT-NAACL 2003, pages 142–147.
Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and
Thomas Wolf. 2019. Distilbert, a distilled version
of bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1910.01108.
Sebastian Schuster and Christopher D Manning. 2016.
Enhanced english universal dependencies: An im-
proved representation for natural language under-
standing tasks. In Proceedings of the Tenth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC’16), pages 2371–2378.
Abigail See, Peter J Liu, and Christopher D Manning.
2017. Get to the point: Summarization with pointer-
generator networks. In Proceedings of the 55th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1073–
1083.
Ilya Segalovich. A fast morphological algorithm with
unknown word guessing induced by a dictionary for
a web search engine.
Carson Sievert and Kenneth Shirley. 2014.
Ldavis:
A method for visualizing and interpreting topics.
In Proceedings of the workshop on interactive lan-
guage learning, visualization, and interfaces, pages
63–70.
Fei Song and W Bruce Croft. 1999. A general language
model for information retrieval. In Proceedings of
the eighth international conference on Information
and knowledge management, pages 316–321.
Milan Straka, Jan Hajiˇc, and Jana Straková. 2016. UD-
Pipe: Trainable pipeline for processing CoNLL-U
ﬁles performing tokenization, morphological analy-
sis, POS tagging and parsing.
In Proceedings of
the Tenth International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC’16), pages 4290–
4297, Portorož, Slovenia. European Language Re-
sources Association (ELRA).
Milan Straka and Jana Straková. 2017.
Tokenizing,
pos tagging, lemmatizing and parsing ud 2.0 with
udpipe. In Proceedings of the CoNLL 2017 Shared
Task: Multilingual Parsing from Raw Text to Univer-
sal Dependencies, pages 88–99.
Ilya Sutskever, James Martens, and Geoffrey E Hin-
ton. 2011. Generating text with recurrent neural net-
works. In ICML.
Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. 2014.
Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
27:3104–3112.
Lucien Tesnière. 2015. Elements of Structural Syntax.
John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Proceedings of the 31st International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, pages 6000–6010.
David Vilares and Carlos Gómez-Rodríguez. 2019.
Harry Potter and the action prediction challenge
from natural language. In Proceedings of the 2019
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short
Papers), pages 2124–2130, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Konstantin Vorontsov, Oleksandr Frei, Murat Apishev,
Peter Romov, and Marina Dudarenko. 2015.
Bi-
gartm: Open source library for regularized multi-
modal topic modeling of large collections. In Inter-
national Conference on Analysis of Images, Social
Networks and Texts, pages 370–381. Springer.
Konstantin Vorontsov and Anna Potapenko. 2015. Ad-
ditive regularization of topic models.
Machine
Learning, 101(1):303–323.
Alex Wang,
Yada Pruksachatkun,
Nikita Nangia,
Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer
Levy, and Samuel R Bowman. 2019a.
Superglue:
A stickier benchmark for general-purpose language
understanding systems. Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, 32.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix
Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R Bowman. 2019b.
Glue: A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform
for natural language understanding.
In 7th Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2019.
Jason Wei and Kai Zou. 2019. Eda: Easy data augmen-
tation techniques for boosting performance on text
classiﬁcation tasks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and the 9th International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
IJCNLP), pages 6383–6389.
Robert West and Eric Horvitz. 2019.
Reverse-
engineering satire, or “paper on computational hu-
mor accepted despite making serious advances”. In
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial In-
telligence, volume 33, pages 7265–7272.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien
Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pier-
ric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtow-
icz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen,
Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu,
Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame,
Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. 2020.
Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language pro-
cessing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing:
System Demonstrations, pages 38–45, Online. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Wei Xu, Courtney Napoles, Ellie Pavlick, Quanze
Chen, and Chris Callison-Burch. 2016. Optimizing
statistical machine translation for text simpliﬁcation.
Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 4:401–415.
Oﬁr Zafrir, Guy Boudoukh, Peter Izsak, and Moshe
Wasserblat. 2019.
Q8bert:
Quantized 8bit bert.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.06188.
Luowei Zhou, Hamid Palangi, Lei Zhang, Houdong
Hu, Jason Corso, and Jianfeng Gao. 2020. Uniﬁed
Vision-language Pre-training for Image Captioning
and VQA. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, volume 34, pages 13041–
13049.
