Title: Local Interpretations for Explainable Natural Language Processing: A Survey
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2103.11072v3
--------------------------------------------------

Local Interpretations for Explainable Natural Language Processing: A Survey
SIWEN LUO∗, The University of Western Australia, Australia
HAMISH IVISON∗, University of Washington, United States
SOYEON CAREN HAN†, The University of Melbourne, Australia
JOSIAH POON, The University of Sydney, Australia
As the use of deep learning techniques has grown across various fields over the past decade, complaints about the opaqueness of the
black-box models have increased, resulting in an increased focus on transparency in deep learning models. This work investigates
various methods to improve the interpretability of deep neural networks for Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks, including
machine translation and sentiment analysis. We provide a comprehensive discussion on the definition of the term interpretability and
its various aspects at the beginning of this work. The methods collected and summarised in this survey are only associated with local
interpretation and are specifically divided into three categories: 1) interpreting the model’s predictions through related input features;
2) interpreting through natural language explanation; 3) probing the hidden states of models and word representations.
CCS Concepts: • General and reference →Surveys and overviews; • Computing methodologies →Natural language
processing.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Deep Neural Networks, Explainable AI, Local Interpretation, Natural Language Processing
ACM Reference Format:
Siwen Luo, Hamish Ivison, Soyeon Caren Han, and Josiah Poon. 2024. Local Interpretations for Explainable Natural Language
Processing: A Survey. 1, 1 (March 2024), 34 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1
INTRODUCTION
As a result of the explosive development of deep learning techniques over the past decade, the performance of deep
neural networks (DNN) has significantly improved across various tasks. DNN has been broadly applied in different
fields, including business, healthcare, and justice. For example, in healthcare, artificial intelligence startups have raised
$864 million in the second quarter of 2019, with higher amounts expected in the future as reported by the TDC Group1.
However, while deep learning models have brought many foreseeable benefits to both patients and medical practitioners,
such as enhanced image scanning and segmentation, the inability of these models to provide explanations for their
predictions is still a severe risk, limiting their application and utility.
∗Both authors contributed equally to this research.
†Corresponding Author
1https://www.thedoctors.com/articles/the-algorithm-will-see-you-now-how-ais-healthcare-potential-outweighs-its-risk/
Authors’ addresses: Siwen Luo, siwen.luo@uwa.edu.au, The University of Western Australia, 35 Stirling Hwy, Crawley, Perth, WA, Australia, 6009;
Hamish Ivison, hamishiv@cs.washington.edu, University of Washington, 3800 E Stevens Way NE, Seattle, WA, United States, 98195-2355; Soyeon
Caren Han, caren.han@unimelb.edu.au, The University of Melbourne, 700 Swanston Street, Carlton, Melbourne, VIC, Australia, 3010; Josiah Poon,
josiah.poon@sydney.edu.au, The University of Sydney, 1 Cleveland St, Darlington, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 2008.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2024 Association for Computing Machinery.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Manuscript submitted to ACM
1
arXiv:2103.11072v3  [cs.CL]  18 Mar 2024
2
Luo and Ivison, et al.
Before demonstrating the importance of the interpretability of deep learning models, it is essential to illustrate the
opaqueness of DNNs compared to other interpretable machine learning models. Neural networks roughly mimic the
hierarchical structures of neurons in the human brain to process information among hierarchical layers. Each neuron
receives the information from its predecessors and passes the outputs to its successors, eventually resulting in a final
prediction [122]. DNNs are neural networks with a large number of layers, meaning they contain up to billions of
parameters. Compared to interpretable machine learning models such as linear regressions, where the few parameters in
the model can be extracted as the explanation to illustrate influential features in prediction, or the decision trees, where a
model’s prediction process can be easily understood by following the decision rules, the complex and huge computations
done by DNNs are hard to comprehend both for experts and non-experts alike. In addition, the representations used
and constructed by DNNs are often complex and incredibly difficult to tie back to a set of observable variables in image
and natural language processing tasks. As such, vanilla DNNs are often regarded as opaque ‘black-box’ models that
have neither interpretable architectures nor clear features for interpretation of the model outputs.
However, why should we want interpretable DNNs? One fundamental reason is that while the recent application of
deep learning techniques to various tasks has resulted in high levels of performance and accuracy, these techniques still
need improvement. As such, when applying these models to critical tasks where prediction results can cause significant
real-world impacts, they are not guaranteed to provide faultless predictions. Furthermore, given any decision-making
system, it is natural to demand explanations for the decisions provided. For example, the European Parliament adopted
the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) in May 2018 to clarify the right of explanation for all individuals to obtain
“meaningful explanations of the logic involved” for automated decision-making procedures [60]. As such, it is legally
and ethically crucial for the application of DNNs to develop and design ways for these networks to provide explanations
for their predictions. In addition, explanations of predictions would help specialists verify their correctness, allowing
them to judge if a model is making the right predictions for the right reasons. As such, increasing interpretability is
vital for expanding the applicability and correctness of DNNs.
In the past few years, several works have been proposed to improve the interpretability of DNNs. In this survey paper,
we focus on local interpretable methods proposed for natural language processing tasks. As described in the following
sections, we define local methods as those which provide explanations only for specific decisions made by the model -
that is, methods that provide explanations for single instances rather than aiming to provide general descriptions of
the model’s decision-making process. We explore several recent local interpretation methods/techniques in Natural
Language Processing (NLP), which aims to support the normal users with no machine/deep learning expertise2:
• Feature importance methods, which work by determining and extracting the most important elements of an
input instance.
• Natural language explanation, in which models generate text explanations for a given prediction.
• Probing, in which model’s internal states are examined when given certain inputs.
1.1
Definitions of Interpretability
While there has been much study of the interpretability of DNNs, there are no unified definitions for the term
interpretabilty, with different researchers defining it from different perspectives. We summarise the key aspects of
interpretability used by these researchers below.
2Note that there are several local interpretation methods, such as counterfactuals, example-based approaches, have not been included in this article since
only a few initial NLP research tasks have been conducted with these example-based approaches.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Local Interpretations for Explainable Natural Language Processing: A Survey
3
1.1.1
Explainability vs Interpretability. The terms interpretability and explainability are often used synonymously across
the field of explainable AI [1, 27], with both terms being used to refer to the ability of a system to justify or explain the
reasoning behind its decisions3. Overall, the machine learning community tends to use the term interpretability, while
the HCI community tends to use the term explainability [1]. Recent work has suggested more formal definitions of
these terms [27, 46, 60]. Following Doshi-Velez and Kim [46], we define interpretability as ‘the ability [of a model] to
explain or to present [its predictions] in understandable terms to a human.’ We take explainability to be synonymous with
interpretability unless otherwise stated, reflecting its general usage within the field.
1.1.2
Local and Global Interpretability. An essential distinction in interpretable machine learning is between local and
global interpretability. Following Guidotti et al. [60] and Doshi-Velez and Kim [46], we take local interpretability to be
‘the situation in which it is possible to understand only the reasons for a specific decision’ [60]. That is, a locally interpretable
model is a model that can give explanations for specific predictions and inputs. We take global interpretability to be the
situation in which it is possible to understand ‘the whole logic of a model and follow the entire reasoning leading to all the
different possible outcomes’ [60]. A classic example of a globally interpretable model is a decision tree, in which the
general behaviour of the model may be easily understood by examining the decision nodes that make up the tree. As
understanding the whole logic of a model often requires the use of specific models or significant changes to an existing
model, in this paper, we focus on local interpretation methods, as these tend to be more generally applicable to existing
and future NLP models.
1.1.3
Post-hoc vs In-built Interpretations. Another important distinction is whether an interpretability method is applied
to a model after the fact or integrated into the internals of a model. The former is referred as a post-hoc interpretation
method [120], while the latter is an in-built interpretation method. As Post-hoc methods are applied to model the
fact, they generally do not impact the model’s performance. Some post-hoc methods do not require any access to
the internals of the model being explained and so are model-agnostic. An example of a typical post-hoc interpretable
method is LIME [145], which generates the local interpretation for one instance by permuting the original inputs of an
underlying black-box model. In contrast to post-hoc interpretations, in-built interpretations are closely integrated into
the model itself. The interpretation may come from the transparency of the model, where the workings of the model
itself are clear and easy to understand (for example, a decision tree), or may come from an interpretation generated by
the model in an opaque manner (for example, a model that generates a text explanation during its prediction process).
In this survey, we will examine both methods.
1.2
Paper layout
Before examining interpretability methods, we first discuss different aspects of interpretability in Section 2. In Section 3
we summarize and categorize three main interpretable methods in NLP, including 1) improving a model’s interpretability
by identifying the important input features; 2) explaining a model’s predictions by generating direct natural language
explanations; 3) probing the internal state and mechanisms of a model. We also provide a quick summary of datasets
that are commonly used for the study of each method. In Section 4, we summarise several primary methods to evaluate
the interpretability of each method discussed in Section 3. We finally discussed the limitations of current interpretable
methods in NLP in Section 5 and the possible future trend of interpretability development at the end.
3For example, Liu et al. [103], Stadelmaier and Padó [163], Stahlberg et al. [164], Wang et al. [179] primarily use explainability or explainable, while
Camburu et al. [23], Ribeiro et al. [146], Serrano and Smith [152], Tutek and Šnajder [171] primarily use interpretable or interpretability.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
4
Luo and Ivison, et al.
2
ASPECTS OF INTERPRETABILITY
2.1
Interpretability requirements
Before discussing the various aspects of interpretability, it is also essential to consider what problems require interpretable
solutions and what interpretable models best fit these problems. Following [46], we suggest that anyone looking to
build interpretable models first determine the following four points:
(1) Do you need an explanation for a specific instance or understand how a model works? In the former case, local
interpretation methods will likely prove more suitable, while in the latter global interpretation methods will be
required.
(2) How much time does/will a user have to understand the explanation? This, along with the point below, is an
important concern for the usability of an interpretation method. Certain methods lend themselves to quick,
intuitive understanding, while others require some more effort and time to comprehend.
(3) What background and expertise will the users of your interpretable model have? As mentioned, this is an important
usability concern. For example, regression weights have classically been considered ‘interpretable’, but require a
user to have some understanding of regression beforehand. In contrast, decision trees (when rendered in a tree
structure) are often understandable even to non-experts.
(4) What aspects or parts of the problem do you want to explain? It is important to consider what can and cannot
be explained by your model, and prioritise accordingly. For example, explaining all potential judgements a
self-driving car could make in any situation is infeasible, but restricting explanations to certain systems or
situations allows easier measuring and assurance of interpretation quality.
These points allow categorisation of interpretability-related problems, and thus clearer understanding of what is
required from an interpretable system and suitable interpretation methods for the problem itself.
2.2
Dimensions of Interpretability
‘Interpretability’ is not a simple binary or monolithic concept, but rather one that can be measured along multiple
dimensions. Different aspects of interpretability have been identified across the literature, which we condense and
summarise into four key aspects: faithfulness, stability, comprehensibility, and trustworthiness.
2.2.1
Faithfulness. Faithfulness measures how well an interpretation method reflects the decision-making process
used by the underlying model. For example, an image heatmap that highlights parts of the image not genuinely used
by the model would be unfaithful, while highlighting the parts genuinely used by the model would be more faithful.
Traditionally, this has been more a concern for post-hoc methods such as LIME [145] and SHAP [108]. However,
more recent work has called into question the faithfulness of in-built interpretability methods such as attention
weight examination [77, 80, 184]. Faithfulness is essential for claims that an interpretation method accurately reflects a
model’s process to reach a judgement. Explanations provided by an unfaithful method may hide existing biases that
the underlying model uses for judgements, potentially engendering unwarranted trust or belief in these predictions
[77]. Related is the notion of fidelity as defined in Molnar [120]: the extent of how well an interpretable method can
approximate the performance of a black-box model. Underlying this definition is the assumption that a method that
better approximates a black box also must use a similar reasoning process to that underlying model4. As such, this
4This is stated as ‘the model assumption’ in Jacovi and Goldberg [77].
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Local Interpretations for Explainable Natural Language Processing: A Survey
5
definition of fidelity is a more specific form of faithfulness as applied to interpretability methods that construct models
approximating an underlying black-box model, such as LIME [146].
2.2.2
Stability. An interpretation method is stable if it provides similar explanations for similar inputs [120] unless the
difference between the inputs is highly important for the task at hand. For example, an explanation produced by natural
language generation (NLG) would be stable if minor differences in the input resulted in similar text explanations and
would be unstable if the slight differences resulted in wildly different explanations. Stability is a generally desirable
trait important for research [193] and is required for a model to be trustworthy [123]. In addition, the stability of
human explanations for a particular task should be considered, i.e. if explanations written by humans differ significantly
from each other, it is unreasonable to expect a model trained on such explanations to do any better. This is especially
important for highly free-form interpretation methods such as natural language explanations.
2.2.3
Comprehensibility. An interpretation is considered comprehensible if it’s understandable to an end-user. In
order for an explanation to be useful at all, it must be understandable to some degree. However, this is subjective:
there is no global common standard for ‘understandability’. In addition, the background of the end-user matters: a
medical professional will be able to understand an explanation with scientific medical terms far better than a layperson.
Nevertheless, there are still several general ways to rate the interpretability of an explanation: examining its size (how
much a user must process when ‘reading’ the explanation), examining how well a human can predict a model’s prediction
given just the explanation, and examining the understandability of individual features of the explanation [120]. For
example, a sparse linear model with only a few non-zero weights has far fewer components for a user to consider, and
so would be more comprehensible than a linear model with hundreds of weights. Furthermore, comprehensibility is
related to the concept of transparency [102], which refers to how well a person can understand the mechanism by
which a model works. Transparency can be achieved in several ways: through being able to simulate the model in your
mind (for example, a linear regression with few weights), or having deep knowledge of the underlying algorithm used
by the model (for example, proving some property of any solution an algorithm will produce). Models with greater
degrees of transparency are thus also more comprehensible than non-transparent models.
2.2.4
Trustworthiness. An interpretation is considered comprehensible if it is understandable to an end-user. In order
for an explanation to be helpful at all, it must be understandable to some degree. However, this is subjective. In
other words, there is no global shared standard for ‘understandability’. In addition, the background of the end-user
matters: a medical professional will be able to understand an explanation with scientific medical terms far better than a
layperson. Nevertheless, there are still several general ways to rate the interpretability of an explanation: examining
its size (how much a user must process when ‘reading’ the explanation), examining how well a human can predict
a model’s prediction given just the explanation, and examining the understandability of individual features of the
explanation [120]. For example, a sparse linear model with only a few non-zero weights has far fewer components for
a user to consider and would be more comprehensible than a linear model with hundreds of weights. Furthermore,
comprehensibility is related to the concept of transparency [102], which refers to how well a person can understand the
mechanism by which a model works. There are several ways to achieve transparency: through being able to simulate
the model in your mind (for example, a linear regression with few weights) or having deep knowledge of the underlying
algorithm used by the model (for example, proving some property of any solution an algorithm will produce). Models
with greater transparency degrees are thus more comprehensible than non-transparent models.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
6
Luo and Ivison, et al.
Fig. 1. Sample visualizations of identified important features from the inputs detected by four different methods. (a): Rationale
Extraction on sentiment analysis task; (b) Attention Weights on Visual Question Answering task: (c) Word importance from Attribution
methods on machine translation task; (d) Input perturbation on sentiment analysis task and the expansion of counterfactual
explanation.
3
INTERPRETABLE METHODS
3.1
Feature Importance
Identifying the important input features that significantly impact a model’s prediction results is a straightforward
method of improving a model’s local interpretability, directly linking model outputs to inputs. Important features
can be, for example, words for text-based tasks or image regions for image-based tasks. This paper focuses on the
four main different methods of extracting important features as the interpretation for the model’s outputs: rationale
extraction, input perturbation, attribution methods and attention weight extraction. We conclude the typology of feature
importance methods in Figure 2 and present the sample visualisations of extracted features from inputs in Figure 1.
3.1.1
Rationale Extraction. Rationale extractions are usually used as the local interpretable method for NLP tasks of
sentiment analysis and document classification. Rationales are short and coherent phrases from the original textual
inputs and represent the critical textual features that contribute most to the output prediction. These identified textual
features work as the local explanation that interprets the information the model primarily pays attention to when
making the prediction decision for a particular textual input. The good rationales valid for the explanation should lead
to the same prediction results as the original textual inputs. As this work area developed, researchers also made extra
efforts to extract coherent and consecutive rationales to use them as more readable and comprehensive explanations.
The rationale extraction methods can be mainly divided into two streams: 1). a sequential selector-predictor stacked
model, where the selector first selects the rationales from the original textual inputs and then pass to the predictor
for the prediction result; 2). the adversarial-based model that involves the parallel models to calibrate the rationales
extracted by the selector. In this paper, we summarise several iconic and milestone works of rationale extractions for
each stream.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Local Interpretations for Explainable Natural Language Processing: A Survey
7
For the selector-predictor stream, Lei et al. [94] is one of the first works for the rationale extraction in NLP tasks.
The selector process first generates a binary vector of 0 and 1 through a Bernoulli distribution conditioned on the
original textual inputs. This binary vector will then be multiplied over the original inputs where 1 indicates the
selection of input words as rationales and 0 indicates the non-selection, resulting in a sparse input representation that
indicates which textual tokens are selected as rationales and which tokens are not. The predictor will then process
based on such information. Since the selected rationales are represented with non-differentiable discrete values, the
REINFORCE algorithm [186] was applied for optimization to update the binary vectors for the eventually accurate
rational selection. Lei et al. [94] performed rationale extraction for a sentiment analysis task with the training data that
has no pre-annotated rationales to guide the learning process. The training loss is calculated through the difference
between a ground truth sentiment vector and a predicted sentiment vector generated from extracted rationales selected
by the selector model. Such selector-predictor structure is designed to mainly boost the interpretability faithfulness, i.e.
selecting valid rationales that can predict the accurate output as the original textual inputs. To increase the readiness of
the explanation, Lei et al. [94] used two different regularizers over the loss function to force rationales to be consecutive
words (readable phrases) and limit the number of selected rationales (i.e. selected words/phrases). Bastings et al.
[17] followed the same selector-predictor structure as Lei et al. [94]. The main difference is that they used rectified
Kumaraswamy distribution [92] instead of Bernoulli distribution to generate the rationale selection vector, i.e. the
binary vector of 0 and 1 to be masked over textual inputs. Kumaraswamy distribution allows the gradient estimation
for optimization, so there is no need for the REINFORCE algorithm to do the optimization. To boost the short and
coherent rationales for better readability and comprehensibility, Bastings et al. [17] also applied a relaxed form of
𝐿0 regularization [105] and the Lagrangian relaxation to encourage adjacent words selected or not selected together.
Different from the above methods, where rationale extraction is wrapped in an end-to-end model and has not used
annotated rationales during the training of rationale selection, Du et al. [47] uses rationales annotated by external
experts as guidance during the training of rationale selector to generate the local explanations (short and coherent
rationales) that are consistent with these external human-annotated rationales.
For the stream of adversarial-based models, a third module is usually added in addition to the selector-predictor
stacks, functioning as a guide to boost the faithfulness of rationales and improve the comprehensibility of interpretation.
For example, to boost the faithfulness of extracted rationales, Yu et al. [194] inserted the target labels of sentiment
analysis as additional inputs into the rationale selector to boost its participation in prediction. Additionally, to improve
the comprehensibility that prevents the rationale selector from selecting meaningless small snippets, this work added a
third element: a complement predictor. This additional module predicts the labels for original textual inputs based on
non-rationale words. The complement predictor and the generator work much like the discriminative and generative
networks in generative adversarial networks (GANs) [58]: the rationale selector aims to extract as many prediction-
relevant words as possible as rationales to avoid the complement predictor from being able to predict the actual textual
label. Similar to Yu et al. [194], Chang et al. [29] also involved a third module where the target labels of the original inputs
are used as additional inputs, but with the addition that these target labels can be incorrect. This work also proposed a
counterfactual rational generator to extract relevant rationales that cause false predictions. A discriminator is then
applied to discriminate between the actual and counterfactual rationale generator. Recent work such as [154] reduces
the complexity of using three modules but constructs a guider model that operates over the original textual inputs
for prediction and the rationale selector model in the adversarial-based architecture to encourage the final prediction
vectors from two separate models to be close to each other, and thus achieve the faithfulness of extracted rationales. Also,
Manuscript submitted to ACM
8
Luo and Ivison, et al.
to achieve better comprehensibility, [154] proposed language models as a regularizer, which significantly contributes to
the better fluency of the extracted rationale by selecting consecutive tokens that describe the rationale well.
In general, using extracted rationales from original textual inputs as the models’ local interpretations focuses on
the faithfulness and comprehensibility of interpretations. While trying to select rationales that can well represent the
complete inputs in terms of accurate prediction results, extracting short and consecutive sub-phrases is also the key
objective of the current rationale extraction works. Such fluent and consecutive sub-phrases (i.e. the well-extracted
rationales) make this rationales extraction a friendly, interpretable method that provides readable and understandable
explanations to non-expert users without NLP-related knowledge.
3.1.2
Input Perturbation. Another method for identifying important features of textual inputs is input perturbation.
For this method, a word (or a few words) of the original input is modified or removed (i.e. ‘perturbed’), and the resulting
performance change is measured. The more significant the model’s performance drop, the more critical these words are
to the model and therefore are regarded as important features. Input perturbation is usually model-agnostic, which does
not influence the original model’s architecture. The main difference among the proposed input perturbation methods
lies in how to perturb the tokens or phrases from original inputs into the new instances.
Ribeiro et al. [145] proposed a local interpretable model-agnostic explanations (LIME) model that can be used as an
interpretable method for any black-box model. The main idea of LIME is the approximation of a black-box model with
a transparent model using variants of original inputs. For natural language processing tasks such as text classification,
words of original textual inputs are randomly selected and removed from the inputs, using a binary representation
to mark the inclusion of words. Basaj et al. [16] applied LIME to a QA task for identifying the important words in
a question, where the words in the questions are considered to be features, while the associated context (i.e. text
containing the answer to the given question) was held constant. The results indicate that in QA tasks, the complete
sentence of question plays a minor role, and just a small amount of question words are sufficient for correct answer
prediction.
Ribeiro et al. [147] argued that the important features identified by Ribeiro et al. [145] are based on word-level
(single token) instead of phrase-level (consecutive tokens) features. Word-level features relate to only one instance
and cannot provide general explanations, which makes it difficult to extend such explanations to unseen instances.
For example, in sentiment analysis, ‘not’ in ‘The movie is not good’ is a contributing feature for negative sentiment but
is not a contributing feature for positive sentiment in ‘The weather is not bad’. The single token ‘not’ is insufficient
as a general explanation for unseen instances as it will lead to different meanings when combined with different
words. Thus, Ribeiro et al. [147] emphasized the phrase-level features for more comprehensive local interpretations and
proposed a rule-based method for identifying critical features for predictions. Their proposed algorithm iteratively
selects predicates from inputs as key tokens while replacing the rest of the tokens with random tokens that have the
same POS tags and similar word embeddings. If the probability of classifying the perturbed text into the same class as
that of the original text is above a predefined threshold, the selected predicates will be considered as the ultimate key
features to interpret the prediction results.
Similar to Ribeiro et al. [145, 147], Alvarez-Melis and Jaakkola [5] also proposed a model-agnostic interpretable
method to relate inputs to outputs through the use of perturbed inputs generated by a variational auto-encoder applied
to the original input. The perturbed input is supposed to have a similar meaning to the original input. A bipartite
graph is then constructed to link these perturbed inputs and outputs, and the graph is then partitioned to highlight the
relevant parts to show which inputs are relevant to the specific output tokens.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Local Interpretations for Explainable Natural Language Processing: A Survey
9
Feature Importance
Rationale Extraction
Sequential
Selector-Predictor
Lei et al. [94];
Bastings et al.
[17]; Du et al. [47]
Adversarial-based
Yu et al. [194];
Chang et al. [29];
Sha et al. [154]
Input Perturbation
Ribeiro et al. [145];
Basaj et al. [16];
Ribeiro et al. [147];
Alvarez-Melis and
Jaakkola [5]; Feng
et al. [56]; [158]
Generating Coun-
terfactual Expla-
nations based on
Input Perturbation
Wu et al. [188];
Ribeiro et al. [148];
Chen et al. [31]
Attention Weights
Works with atten-
tion explanation
Sentiment Analysis
Luo et al. [109];
Mao et al. [114];
Wang et al. [177]
Question Answering
Tu et al. [170];
Shen et al. [155];
Sydorova et al. [168]
Neural Machine
Translation
Bahdanau et al. [14];
Luong et al. [111]
Visual Ques-
tion Answering
Lu et al. [107]; Yang
et al. [190]; Yu
et al. [195]; [110]
Image Captioning
Xu et al. [189];
Anderson et al. [7]
Debates over
Attention as
valid explanation
Support
Wiegreffe and
Pinter [185]; Jacovi
and Goldberg [78]
Against
Bai et al. [15]; Clark
et al. [35]; Jain and
Wallace [81]; Serrano
and Smith [153]
Works to improve
attention faithfulness
Bai et al. [15];
Chrysostomou
and Aletras [33]
Attribution Methods
Sundararajan et al.
[167]; He et al. [67];
Mudrakarta et al.
[121]; Du et al. [48];
Ding et al. [44];
Bach et al. [13]
Fig. 2. Typology of local interpretable methods by identifying the important features from inputs.
Feng et al. [56] proposed a method to gradually remove unimportant words from original texts while maintaining
the model’s performance. The remaining words are then considered as the important features for prediction. The
importance of each token of the textual input is measured through a gradient approximation method, which involves
taking the dot product between a given token’s word embedding and the gradients of its output with respect to its
Manuscript submitted to ACM
10
Luo and Ivison, et al.
word embedding [49]. The authors show that while the reduced inputs are nonsensical to humans, they are still enough
for a given model to maintain a similar level of accuracy when compared with the original inputs.
The input perturbation method seems straightforward in identifying the significant input features by measuring
the target task’s performance changes with new perturbed instances. However, there are also works questioning
the faithfulness of input perturbation. For example, [158] conducted several experiments and argued that when the
distributions of perturbed instances and original instances are less similar, the explanations of LIME [145] are not
faithful. Another problem of most input perturbation explanations is that the identified important features are mostly
independent tokens instead of coherent phrases like argued by Ribeiro et al. [147], which limits comprehensibility.
The recent new track of local explanation: counterfactual explanations [31, 148, 188] are generated via the approaches
of input perturbation to provide counterfactual explanations to show what would happen if some certain features
are replaced and prove those features are important for particular model decision. These counterfactual explanations
extend beyond the input perturbation from the simple word-level to present the interpretation differently with the
more straightforward counterfactual examples. Such presentation of the input perturbation interpretation would give
normal users a more intuitive understanding.
3.1.3
Attention weights. Attention weight is a weighted sum score of input representation in intermediate layers
of neural networks [14]. Extracting attention weights for inputs to provide local interpretations for predictions is
commonly used among models that utilise attention mechanisms. For NLP tasks with only textual inputs, tokens
with higher attention weights are considered to have more impact on the outputs during the neural network training
and are, therefore, regarded as the more important features. Attention weights have been used for explainability in
sentiment analysis [109, 114, 177], question answering [155, 168, 170], and neural machine translation [14, 111]. In
tasks with both visual and textual inputs, such as Visual Question Answering (VQA) [25, 45, 107, 190, 195] and image
captioning [7, 63, 189], attention weights are extracted from both images and questions to identify the contributing
features from both modalities. In the case of such multi-modal tasks, it is also important to boost the consistency
between the attended image regions and sentence tokens for a plausible explanation. In recent years, different attention
mechanisms have been proposed, including the self-attention mechanism [173] and the co-attention mechanism for
multi-modal inputs [195], aiming for better attention weights calculation that genuinely reflects the contributing factors
to the final prediction.
Though attention mechanisms have proved their effectiveness in performance increment in different tasks and have
been used as the indicators of important features to explain the model’s prediction results, there have always been
debates arguing about the faithfulness of attention weights as the interpretation for neural networks.
Bai et al. [15] proposed the concept of combinatorial shortcuts caused by the attention mechanism. It argued that the
masks used to map the query and key matrices of the self-attention [173] are biased, which would lead to the same
positional tokens being attended regardless of the actual word semantics of different inputs. Clark et al. [35] detected
that the large amounts of attention of BERT [41] focus on the meaningless tokens such as the special token [SEP]. Jain
and Wallace [81] argued that the tokens with high attention weights are not consistent with the important tokens
identified by the other interpretable methods, such as the gradient-based measures. Serrano and Smith [153] applied
the method of intermediate representation erasure and claimed that attention can only indicate the importance of even
intermediate components and are not faithful enough to explain the model’s decision from the level of the actual inputs.
In contrast, Wiegreffe and Pinter [185] proposed the work of ‘Attention is not not explanation’ specifically against
the arguments in [81], arguing that whether attention weights are faithful explanations is dependent on the definition
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Local Interpretations for Explainable Natural Language Processing: A Survey
11
of explanation and conducted four different experiments to prove when attention can be used as the explanation. A
similar view is also proposed by Jacovi and Goldberg [78], illustrating that under some instances, attention maps over
input can be considered as a faithful explanation, which can be verified by the erasure method [9, 56], i.e. whether or
not that erasing the attended tokens from inputs would change the prediction results.
In order to improve the faithfulness of attention as the explanation, some recent works have proposed different
methods. For example, Bai et al. [15] proposed a method of generating unbiased mask distribution by using random mask
distributions to get attention weights through solely training the attention layers while fixing the other downstream
parts of the model, which will therefore scale the attention weights towards tokens that are truly correlated with the
predicted label. Chrysostomou and Aletras [33] introduced three different task-scaling mechanisms that scaled over the
word representations from different aspects before passing to the attention mechanism and claimed that such scaled
word representations help to produce a more faithful attention-based explanation.
Overall, the dilemma of using inputs with high attention weights as the explanation to a black-box model’s decision
is associated with the various definition and inconsistent evaluations of explanation faithfulness from different works.
Jacovi and Goldberg [78] also proposed in their work that the possible approach to solving this issue is to construct a
unified evaluation of the degree of faithfulness either from the level of a specific task or from the level of sub-spaces
of the input space. Nevertheless, regardless of the debates over the faithfulness of attention, explanation by attention
weights has a lower level of readability. Compared to rationale extraction works that explicitly force the consecutive
rationales to be extracted for better comprehensibility, current works using attention as explanation neglect such
interpretability aspect. Therefore, even in some cases where the input tokens with high attention weights could work as
faithful explanations, it would be hard for non-experts to understand the explanation well with non-coherent highlighted
tokens of the textual inputs. However, for the multimodal task such as the visual question answering, some works have
attention maps over the images as the explanation [110] or the part of the explanations [187], the attended region are
usually consecutive pixels of the images, which can be more straightforward to be understood by non-expert users
compared to the attention map over pure texts.
3.1.4
Attribution Methods. Another method of detecting important input features that contribute most to a specific
prediction is attribution methods, which aim to interpret prediction outputs by examining the gradients of a model.
Common attribution methods include DeepLift [157], Layer-wise relevance propagation (LRP) [13], deconvolutional
networks [196] and guided back-propagation [161].
Extracting model gradients allows for identifying high-contributing input features to a given prediction. However,
directly extracting gradients does not work well with regards to two key properties: sensitivity and implementation
invariance. Sensitivity emphasizes that if we have two inputs with one differing feature that lead to different predictions,
this differing feature should be noted as important to the prediction. Implementation invariance means that the outputs
of two models should be equivalent if they are functionally equivalent, whether their implementations are the same
or not. Focusing on these properties, Sundararajan et al. [167] proposed an integrated gradient method. Integrated
gradients are the accumulative gradients of all points on a straight line between an input and a baseline point (e.g. a
zero-word embedding). He et al. [67] applied this method to natural machine translation to find the contribution of each
input word to each output word. Here, the baseline input is a sequence of zero embeddings in the same length as the
input to be translated. Mudrakarta et al. [121] applied integrated gradients to a question-answering task to identify the
critical words in questions and found that only a few words in a question contribute to the model answer prediction.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
12
Luo and Ivison, et al.
Besides extracting the gradients, scoring input contributions based on the model’s hidden states is also used for
attribution. For example, Du et al. [48] proposed a post-hoc interpretable method that leaves the original training model
untouched by examining the hidden states passed along by RNNs. Ding et al. [44] applied LRP [13] to neural machine
translation to provide interpretations using the hidden state values of each source and target word.
The attribution methods are the preliminary approaches for deep learning researchers to explain the neural networks
through the identified input features with outstanding gradients. The idea of the attribution methods were mostly
proposed before the mature development and vast researches of rationale extraction, attention mechanisms and even the
input perturbation methods. Compared to the other input feature explanation methods, the attribution methods hardly
consider the interpretation’s faithfulness and comprehensibility as the other three input feature explanation methods.
Visualizing the identified features from inputs would be at the same plausible level as that of the other three feature
importance methods to non-expert users, but the attribution methods do not work to form the interpretation into
coherent sub-phrases for better readability and easier understanding. Thus, compared to rationale extraction, attention
weights extraction and input perturbation, using attribution methods to generate the interpretation is more like a
diagnosis method for deep learning experts to understand the model’s decision and learn the model’s functionality.
3.1.5
Datasets. Tasks used for examining the interpretable methods discussed above include sentiment analysis, reading
comprehension, natural machine translation, question answering and visual question answering. Below we list and
summarise some common datasets that are used for these tasks:
(1) BeerAdvocate review dataset [117] is a multi-aspect sentiment analysis dataset which contains around 1.5 million
beer reviews written by online users. The average length of each review is about 145 words. These reviews are
associated with the overall review of the beer or a particular aspect, such as the appearance, smell, palate and
taste. Each written review also has a corresponding overall rating for beer and another four different ratings for
the four review aspects, where each rating ranges from 0 to 5.
(2) IMDB [112] is a large movie review usually used for binary sentiment classification. The dataset contains 50k
reviews labelled as positive or negative and is split in half into train and test sets. The average length for each
review is 231 words and 10.7 sentences.
(3) WMT is a workshop for natural machine translation. Tasks announced in these workshops include translation of
different language pairs, such as French to English, German to English and Czech to English in WMT14, and
Chinese to English additionally added in WMT17. The sources are normally news and biomedical publications.
For many papers examining interpretable methods, the commonly used datasets are French to English news and
Chinese to English news.
(4) HotpotQA [191] is a multi-hop QA dataset that contains 113K Wikipedia-based question-answer pairs where
multiple documents are supposed to be used to answer each question. Apart from questions and answers, the
dataset also contains sentence-level supporting facts for each document. This dataset is often used to experiment
with interpretable methods for identifying sentence-level significant features for answer prediction.
(5) SQuAD [142] is a reading comprehension dataset that contains 100k question-answer pairs from Wikipedia
articles. SQuAD v2 [141] proposed in 2018 includes around 50K additional unanswerable questions to find the
answerable questions with similar semantic meanings.
(6) VQA datasets are used for multi-modal tasks with both textual and visual inputs. VQA v1 [8] is the first visual
question-answering dataset. VQA v1 contains 204,721 images, 614,163 questions and 7,964,119 answers, where
most images are authentic images extracted from MS COCO dataset [99] and 50,000 images are newly generated
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Local Interpretations for Explainable Natural Language Processing: A Survey
13
abstract scenes of clipart objects. VQA v2 [59] is an improved version of VQA v1 that mitigates the biased
question problem and contains 1M pairs of images and questions as well as ten answers for each question. Work
on VQA commonly utilises attention weight extraction as a local interpretation method.
3.2
Natural Language Explanation
Natural Language Explanation (NLE) refers to the method of generating free text explanations for a given pair of inputs
and their prediction. In contrast to rational extraction, where the explanation text is limited to that found within the
input, NLE is entirely freeform, making it an incredibly flexible explanation method. This has allowed it to be applied to
tasks outside of NLP, including reinforcement learning [50], self-driving cars [87], and solving mathematical problems
[101]. We focus here on methods in which explanations are generated without any or minimal scaffolding, that is, we
do not cover methods that form ‘natural language explanations’ by filling in templates, but rather cases where the
explanation model is tasked with generating the entirety of the explanation content itself.
3.2.1
Multimodal NLE. Multimodal NLE focuses on generating natural language explanations for tasks that involve
multiple input modalities, including images and video. While explanations may span multiple modalities, we focus on
cases where the explanations significantly involve natural language. Much work, including text-only NLE, stems from
Hendricks et al. [68], which draws upon image captioning research to generate explanations for image classification
predictions of bird images. The model first makes a prediction using an image classification network, and then the
features from the final layers of the network are fed into an LSTM decoder [73] to generate the explanation text. The
explanation is trained with a reinforcement learning-based approach both to match a ground truth correction and
to be able to be used to predict the image label itself. Later work has directly built on this model by improving the
use of image features used during the explanation generation [181], using a critic model to improve the relevance of
the explanations [69], and conditioning on specific image attributes [172]. Park et al. [127] make use of an attention
mechanism to augment the text-only explanations with heatmap-based explanations and find that training a model to
provide both types of explanations improves the quality of both the text and visual-based explanations. Most of these
earlier approaches use learnt LSTM decoders to generate the explanations, learning a language generation module
from scratch. Most of these methods generate their explanations post-hoc, making a prediction before generating an
explanation. This means that while the explanations may serve as valid reasons for the prediction, they may also not
truthfully reflect the reasoning process of the model itself. Wu and Mooney [187] attempt to build a multimodal model
whose explanations better match the model’s reasoning process by training the text generator to generate explanations
that can be traced back to objects used for prediction in the image as determined by gradient-based attribution methods.
They explicitly evaluate their model’s faithfulness using LIME and human evaluation and find that this improves
performance and does indeed result in explanations faithful to the gradient-based explanations.
More recently, NLE datasets have been developed for VQA [74], self-driving car decisions [87], arcade game agents
[51], visual commonsense [197], physical commonsense [140], image manipulation detection [38], explaining facial
biometric scans [119], as well as for more general vision-language benchmarks [86].
The recent rise of large pretrained language models [42, 130, 136] has also impacted multimodal NLE, with recent
approaches replacing the standard LSTM-based decoder with pretrained text generation models such as GPT-2 [12, 86,
116] with a good deal of success. Kayser et al. [86] additionally finds that using a pre-trained unified vision-language
model along with GPT-2 works best over other combinations of vision and language-only models. This suggests that
further utilising the growing number of large pre-trained multimodal models such as VLBERT [166], UNITER [32], or
Manuscript submitted to ACM
14
Luo and Ivison, et al.
MERLOT [198] may lead to improved explanations for multimodal tasks. However, while these models often do yield
higher-quality explanations that better align with human preferences, the use of large unified transformer models means
that the faithfulness of these explanations in representing the reasoning process of the model is hard to determine, as
the exact reasoning processes used by these large models is hard to uncover.
3.2.2
Text-only NLE. Earlier work examining explanations accompanying NLP tasks largely examined integrating them
as inputs for fact-checking, concept learning, and relation extraction [4, 64, 162]. These efforts provided useful datasets
for examining natural language explanations, but the first work examining generating natural language explanations
for NLP tasks in an automated fashion was done by Camburu et al. [23], using a set of explanations gathered for the
SNLI dataset [21] called e-SNLI. Similar to the multimodal models discussed above, the baseline models for e-SNLI
proposed in Camburu et al. [23] are made up of two parts: a predictor module and an explanation module, with the
best performing model first generating explanations and then using these explanations to make predictions. While
this tighter integration of explanation generation into the overall model may suggest more faithful and higher-quality
explanations, Camburu et al. [24] shows that this model can still provide explanations that are inconsistent with their
predictions, suggesting that either the explanations are faulty or the model uses a flawed decision-making process.
Several works try to improve the faithfulness of such models by using generated explanations as inputs to the final
predictor model [91, 139, 201, 202]. By ‘explaining then predicting’, the explanations are by construction used as part
of the prediction process. This may aid overall model performance by exposing latent aspects of the task [65]. Inoue
et al. [76] additionally shows summarisation models can be trained to serve as explanation generation models for this
construction. However, recent work Wiegreffe et al. [183] suggests that jointly producing explanations actually results
in models with a stronger correlation between the predicted label and explanation, suggesting these models are more
faithful than explain-then-predict methods despite the different construction. Further evaluation linking the underlying
model’s predictive mechanics with the generated explanations (e.g. Prasad et al. [134] for highlighted rationales) may
work to investigate further how much these explanations align with the underlying model.
Beyond NLI, other early tasks to which NLE was applied include commonsense QA [139] and user recommendations
[125]. While early work used human-collected explanations, Ni et al. [125] shows that using distant supervision via
rationales can also work well for training explanation-generating models. Li et al. [95] additionally embed extra non-text
features (i.e., user id, item id) by using randomly initialised token embeddings. This provides a way to integrate non-text
features besides the use of large pre-trained multimodal models.
Much like multimodal NLE, large pre-trained language models have also been integrated into text-based NLE
tasks, and most recent papers make use of these models in some way. Rajani et al. [139] introduce an NLE dataset
for commonsense QA (‘cos-e’) and use a pre-trained GPT model [135] to generate explanations used to make a final
prediction. More recently, wT5 [124], which follows the T5 model [137] in framing explanation generation and prediction
as a purely text-to-text task, generates the prediction followed by a text explanation. More recent work has shown that
using these models allows good explanation generation (and even may improve performance) for tasks and settings with
little data [53, 82, 115, 192]. Automatically collecting explanations from existing datasets or generating explanations
using existing models can also provide extra supervision for learning to generate NLEs in limited-data settings [22].
This highlights the strength of NLEs: by framing the explanation as a text generation problem, explanation generation
is as simple as finetuning or even few-shot prompting a large language model to produce explanations, often with fairly
good results. However, while these approaches are often impressive, generated explanations can still ‘hallucinate’ data
not actually present in the training or input data and fail to generalise to challenging test sets such as HANS [204].
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Local Interpretations for Explainable Natural Language Processing: A Survey
15
Table 1. Summary of datasets with natural language explanations for text-based tasks.
Ref.
Year
Dataset Name
Task
Human-written explanations?
[23]
2016
e-SNLI
NLI
✓
[83]
2016
-
Science Exam QA
Extracted from
auxiliary documents
[101]
2017
-
Algebraic Word Problems
✓
[162]
2017
-
Email Phsishing classification
✓
[64]
2018
BabbleLabble
Relation Extraction
✓
[4]
2018
LIAR-PLUS
Fact-checking
Extracted from
auxiliary documents
[139]
2019
cos-e
Commonsense QA
✓
[176]
2019
-
Sense making
✓
[11]
2019
ChangeMyView
Opinion changing
Extracted from
reddit posts
[199]
2020
WinoWhy
Winograd Schema
✓
[90]
2020
PubHealth
Medical claim fact-checking
Extracted from
auxiliary documents
[178]
2020
-
Relation Extraction,
Sentiment Analysis
✓
[165]
2020
e-FEVER
Fact-checking
Generated using GPT-3
[3]
2021
ECQA
Commonsense QA
✓
[22]
2021
e-𝛿-NLI
𝛿-NLI Rationale Generation
Extracted from
auxiliary documents,
automatically generated
3.2.3
NLE in Dialog. While the above work has all assumed a setup where a model is able to generate only one
explanation and has no memory of previous interactions with a user, some work has examined dialog-based setups
where a user is assumed to repetitively interact with a model. Madumal et al. [113] propose a model for the components
of an explanation dialog comprising of two sections: an explanation dialog, which consists mainly of presenting and
accepting explanations; and an argument dialog, where the provided explanation is challenged with an argument.
Rebanal et al. [144] draw on QA systems to design a model for explaining basic algorithms, presenting the model as
an ‘interactive dialog that allows users to ask for specific kinds of explanations they deem useful’. More recently, Li
et al. [97] use feedback from users as explanations to supervise and improve an open domain QA model, showing
how models can improve by taking into account live feedback from users. Given the success of using human-written
instructions to train large models [151, 180], making further use of human feedback to improve and guide the way
explanations are generated may further improve the quality and utility of NLEs.
3.2.4
Datasets. There are a number of NLE datasets for NLP tasks, which we summarise in Table 1. Many of these
datasets consist of human-generated explanations applied to existing datasets, or make use of some automatic extraction
method to retrieve explanations from supporting documents. While most datasets simply present one explanation per
input sample, others present setups where multiple explanations are attached to each sample, but only one is valid
[176, 199]. Wiegreffe and Marasovic [182] also summarise existing NLE-for-NLP datasets, focussing also on text-based
rationale and structured explanation datasets. We also provide a list of datasets for multimodal NLE in Table 2.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
16
Luo and Ivison, et al.
Table 2. Summary of datasets with natural language explanations for multimodal tasks.
Ref.
Year
Dataset Name
Task
Human-written explanations?
[74]
2018
VQA-X
Visual QA
✓
[74]
2018
ACT-X
Activity Recognition
✓
[87]
2018
BDD-X
Self-Driving Car
Decision Explanation
✓
[96]
2018
VQA-E
Visual QA
Generated from captions
[51]
2019
-
Frogger Game
✓
[197]
2019
VCR
Visual Commonsense Reasoning
✓
[140]
2020
ESPIRIT
Physical Reasoning
✓
[93]
2020
VLEP
Event Prediction
✓
[38]
2021
EMU
Understanding edits
✓
[86]
2021
E-ViL
Vision-language Tasks
✓
3.2.5
Challenges and Future work. NLE is very attractive as a human-comprehensible approach to interpretation: rather
than trying to utilise model parameters, NLE-based approaches essentially allow their models to ‘talk for themselves’.
Despite being freely generated, these explanations still display a degree of faithfulness in their agreement with gradient-
based explanation methods and can be quite robust to noise [183]. This suggests that this approach exhibits a degree
of faithfulness and stability despite a lack of formal guarantee that these methods have either quality. Furthermore,
pipeline methods that use explanations for predictions can further guarantee that the generated explanations represent
the information being used for prediction, even if their performance suffers compared to joint prediction models. NLEs
have the benefit of being extremely comprehensible: unlike text rationales or gradient methods, which often require
some understanding of the model being used, natural language explanations can be easily read and understood by
anyone, and tailoring explanations to a specific audience is ‘simply’ a matter of training a model on similar explanations,
which is even possible in low-data scenarios [53, 82, 115, 192]. Finally, the trustworthiness of NLE methods is not
often explicitly evaluated. The focus has been put on the overall ‘explanation quality’ when evaluating NLEs [36, 76].
While rating ‘explanation quality’ may in some ways suggest how trustworthy the annotators find the explanations,
more careful consideration of the type of contract-based trust [79] an NLE-based model may involve is required in
determining the utility of deploying these models in real-world scenarios.
Overall, NLE is a very flexible and attractive explanation method, with the potential to greatly improve model
explainability without requiring complex setups: just train your model to output explanations [124]. However, evaluation
must be carefully considered due to issues with automated metrics [36] and the human-generated explanations
themselves [26]. In addition, further exploring the link between generated NLEs and other explanation or interpretability
methods may further yield insights into models and improve our understanding of the faithfulness of this method.
3.3
Probing
Linguistic probes, also referred to as ‘diagnostic classifiers’ [75] or ‘auxiliary tasks’ [2], are a post-hoc method for
examining the information stored within a model. Specifically, the probes themselves are (often small) classifiers that
take as input some hidden representations (either intermediate representations within a model or word embeddings) and
are trained to perform some small linguistic task, such as verb-subject agreement [57] or syntax parsing [72]. Intuition
follows that if there is more task-relevant information present within the hidden representations, the classifier will
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Local Interpretations for Explainable Natural Language Processing: A Survey
17
Probing
Embedding Probes
Word Embedding
Rubinstein et al.
[149]; Köhn [89];
Gupta et al. [61];
Sommerauer and
Fokkens [159]
Sentence Embedding
Ettinger et al.
[54]; Gupta et al.
[61]; Adi et al. [2];
Conneau et al. [37];
Sorodoc et al. [160]
Model Probes
NMT Models
Shi et al. [156];
Belinkov et al. [18];
Belinkov et al.
[20]; Raganato and
Tiedemann [138];
Dalvi et al. [39]
Language Models
Hupkes et al. [75];
Giulianelli et al.
[57]; Jumelet and
Hupkes [84]; Zhang
and Bowman [200];
Sorodoc et al.
[160]; Belinkov and
Glass [19]; Prasad
and Jyothi [133]
Deep Pre-
trained Models
Peters et al. [129];
Clark et al. [34];
Clark et al. [34]; Lin
et al. [100]; Hewitt
and Manning [72];
Peters et al. [131]; Liu
et al. [104]; Tenney
et al. [169]; Klafka
and Ettinger [88]
Fig. 3. Typology of Probing.
perform better, thus allowing researchers to determine the presence or lack of presence of linguistic knowledge within
both word embeddings and at various layers within a model. However, recent research [72, 132, 143] has shown that
probing experiments require careful design and consideration of truly faithful measurements of linguistic knowledge.
While current probing methods do not provide layperson-friendly explanations, they do allow for research into the
behaviour of popular models, allowing a better understanding of what linguistic and semantic information is encoded
within a model [100]. Hence, the target audience of a probe-based explanation is not a layperson, as is the case with
other interpretation methods discussed in this paper, but rather an NLP researcher or ML practitioner who wishes to
gain a deeper understanding of their model. Note we do not provide a list of common datasets in this section, unlike the
previous sections, as probing research has largely not focused on any particular subset of datasets and can be applied to
most text-based tasks.
3.3.1
Embedding Probes. Early work on probing focused on using classifiers to determine what information could be
found in distributional word embeddings [118, 128]. For example, Gupta et al. [61], Köhn [89], Rubinstein et al. [149] all
investigated the information captured by word embedding algorithms through the use of simple classifiers (e.g. linear
or logistic classifiers) to predict properties of the embedded words, such as part-of-speech or entity attributes (e.g. the
Manuscript submitted to ACM
18
Luo and Ivison, et al.
colour of the entity referred to by a word). These works all found word embeddings captured the properties probed for,
albeit to varying extents. More recently, Sommerauer and Fokkens [159] used both a logistic classifier and a multi-layer
perceptron (MLP) to determine the presence of certain semantic information in Word2Vec embeddings, finding that
visual properties (e.g. colour) were not represented well, while functional properties (e.g. ‘is dangerous’) were. Research
into distributional models has reduced currently due to the rise of pre-trained language models such as BERT [41].
Alongside word embeddings, sentence embeddings have also been the target of analysis via probing. Ettinger et al.
[54] (following Gupta et al. [61]) trains a logistic classifier to classify if a sentence embedding contains specific words
and specific words with specific semantic roles. Adi et al. [2] trains MLP classifiers on sentence embeddings to determine
if the embeddings contain information about sentence length, word content, and word order. They examine LSTM auto-
encoder, continuous bag-of-words (CBOW), and skip-thought embeddings, finding that CBOW is surprisingly effective
at encoding the properties of sentences examined in low dimensions, while the LSTM auto-encoder-based embeddings
perform very well, especially with a larger number of dimensions. Further developing on this work, Conneau et al. [37]
proposes ten different probing tasks, covering semantic and syntactic properties of sentence embeddings and controlling
for various cues that may allow a probe to ‘cheat’ (e.g. lexical cues). In order to determine if encoding these properties
aids models in downstream tasks, the authors also measure the correlation between probing task performance and
performance on a set of downstream tasks. More recently, Sorodoc et al. [160] proposes 14 additional new probing tasks
for examining information stored in sentence embeddings relevant to relation extraction.
3.3.2
Model Probes. Following the work on probing distributional embeddings, Shi et al. [156] extended probing
to NLP models, training a logistic classifier on the hidden states of LSTM-based neural machine translation (NMT)
models to predict various syntactic labels. Similarly, they train various decoder models to generate a parse tree from
the encodings provided by these models. By examining the performance of these probes on different hidden states,
they find that lower-layer states contain more fine-grained word-level syntactic information, while higher-layer states
contain more global and abstract information. Following this, Belinkov et al. [18] and Belinkov et al. [20] both examine
NMT models with probes in more detail, uncovering various insights about the behaviour of NMT models, including a
lack of powerful representations in the decoder, and that the target language of a model has little effect on the source
language representation quality. Rather than a logistic classifier, both papers use a simple neural network with one
hidden layer and a ReLU non-linearity, due to this reporting similar trends as a more simple classifier but with better
performance. More recently, Raganato and Tiedemann [138] analysed transformer-based NMT models using a similar
probing technique alongside a host of other analyses. Finally, Dalvi et al. [39] presented a method for extracting salient
neurons from an NMT model by utilising a linear classifier, allowing examination of not just information present within
a model but also what parts of the model contribute most to both specific tasks and the overall performance of the
model.
Probing is not limited to NMT, however: research has also turned to examining the linguistic information encoded
by language models. Hupkes et al. [75] utilised probing methods to explore how well an LSTM model for solving basic
arithmetic expressions matches the intermediate results of various solution strategies, thus examining how LSTM
models break up and solve problems with nested structures. Utilising the same method, Giulianelli et al. [57] investigated
how LSTM-based language models tracked agreement. The authors trained their probe (a linear model) on the outputs
of an LSTM across timesteps and components of the model, showing how the information encoded by the LSTM model
changes over time and in model parts. Jumelet and Hupkes [84], Zhang and Bowman [200] also probe LSTM-based
models for particular linguistic knowledge, including NPI-licensing and CCG tagging. Importantly, the authors find that
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Local Interpretations for Explainable Natural Language Processing: A Survey
19
even untrained LSTM models contain information probe-based models can exploit to memorise labels for particular
words, highlighting the need for careful control of probing tasks (we discuss this further in the next section). More
recently, Sorodoc et al. [160] probe LSTM and transformer-based language for referential information. We also note
that probing has been applied to speech processing-based models [19, 133].
Finally, probing-based analyses of deep pre-trained language models have also been popular as a method for
understanding how these models internally represent language. Peters et al. [129] briefly utilised linear probes to
investigate the presence of syntactic information in bidirectional LSTM models, finding that POS tagging is learnt in
lower layers than constituent parsing. Recently, both Lin et al. [100] and Clark et al. [34] used probing classifiers to
investigate the information stored in BERT’s hidden representations across both layers and heads. Clark et al. [34]
focused on attention, using a probe trained on attention weights in BERT to examine dependency information, while
Lin et al. [100] focused on examining syntactic and positional information across layers. Hewitt and Manning [72]
examined representations generated by ELMo [131] and BERT, training a small linear model to predict the distance
between words in a parse tree of a given sentence. Liu et al. [104] proposed and examined sixteen different probing
tasks, involving tagging, segmentation, and pairwise relations, utilising a basic linear model. They compared results
across several models, including BERT and ELMo, examining the performance of the models on each task across layers.
Tenney et al. [169] trained two-layer MLP classifiers to predict labels for various NLP tasks (POS tagging, named entity
labelling, semantic role labelling, etc.), using the representations generated by four different contextual encoder models.
They found that the contextualised models improve more on syntactic tasks than semantic tasks when compared to
non-contextual embeddings and found some evidence that ELMo does encode distant linguistic information. Klafka
and Ettinger [88] investigated how much information about surrounding words can be found in contextualised word
embeddings, training MLP classifiers to predict aspects of important words within the sentence, e.g. predicting the
gender of a noun from an embedding associated with a verb in the same sentence.
3.3.3
Probe Considerations and Limitations. The continued growth of probing-based papers has also led to recent work
examining best practices for probes and how to interpret their results. Hewitt and Liang [71] considered how to ensure
that a probe is genuinely reflective of the underlying information present in a model and proposed the use of a control
task, a randomised version of a probe task in which high performance is only possible by memorisation of inputs. Hence,
a faithful probe should perform well on a probe task and poorly on a corresponding control task if the underlying
model does indeed contain the information being probed for. The authors found that most probes (including linear
classifiers) are over-parameterised, and discuss methods for constraining complex probes (e.g. multilayer perceptrons)
to improve faithfulness while still allowing them to achieve similar results.
While most papers we have discussed above follow the intuition that probes should avoid complex probes to prevent
memorisation, Pimentel et al. [132] suggest that instead the probe with the best score on a given task should be chosen
as the tightest estimate, since simpler models may simply be unable to extract the linguistic information present in a
model, and such linguistic information cannot be ‘added’ by more complex probes (since their only input are hidden
representations). In addition, the authors argue that memorisation is an important part of linguistic competence, and
as such probes should not be artificially punished (via control tasks) for doing this. Recent work has also presented
methods that avoid making assumptions about probe complexity, such as MDL probing [106, 175], which directly
measures ‘amount of effort’ needed to achieve some extraction task, or DirectProbe [203], which directly examines
intermediate representations of models to avoid having to deal with additional classifiers.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
20
Luo and Ivison, et al.
Finally, Hall Maudslay et al. [62] compared the structural probe [72] with a lightweight dependency parser (both
given the same inputs) and demonstrated that the parser is generally able to extract more syntactic information from
BERT embedding. In contrast, the probe performs better with a different metric, showing that the choice of metric is
important for probes: when testing for evidence of linguistic information, one should consider not only the nature
of the probe but also the metric used to evaluate it. Furthermore, the significance of well-performing probes is not
clear: models may encode linguistic information not actually used by the end-task [143], showing that the presence of
linguistic information does not imply it is being used for prediction. Some approaches proposed later that integrated the
causal approaches such as amnesiac probing [52], which directly intervene in the underlying model’s representations,
might be a possible solution to distinguish between these cases.
3.3.4
Interpretability of Probes and Future Work. As noted at the beginning of the section, probing is a way for NLP
researchers to investigate models rather than end-users. As such, their comprehensibility is relatively low: understanding
probing results requires understanding the linguistic properties they are probing and the more complex experimental
setups they make use of (as simple metrics such as task accuracy do not show the whole story [71]). However, probes are
naturally fairly faithful in that they directly use the model’s hidden states and are specifically designed to represent only
information present within these hidden states. This faithfulness is degraded somewhat by the fact that this information
may not be used for predictions [143], but recent causal approaches work towards alleviating this. This also suggests
that probing results could be considered trustworthy only when the experimental design is carefully considered, in that
their results can only be relied upon if carefully controlled. Finally, probing methods are often reasonably stable for the
same model and property, as the probe classifier is trained to some convergence. However, across models (even those
with the same architecture but just trained on different data), results can differ quite drastically [52], which shows
differences between pre-trained and finetuned BERT models. This is more likely to be a function of the underlying
models rather than the technique, but also shows that probing results are very specific to the models and properties
being examined.
Overall, probes are exciting and valuable tools for investigating models’ ‘inner workings’. However, much like other
explanation methods, the setup and evaluation of probing techniques must be carefully considered. Some future works
of the probing may be associated with the integration of some causal methods [52] as better approaches to make stronger
statements about what a model is and isn’t using for its predictions, better allowing probing to provide explanations for
model judgements rather than just show what could be potentially used. Combining this with methods that further
reduce the complexity of probing setups [203] may allow even simpler and better ways to get insights into NLP models.
Causal models have been applied to the traditional predictive tasks and covered with the convergence of causal inference
and language processing [55]. Recent NLP works have tried to involve auxiliary causal-based approaches in their models
[55, 70]. Such involvement of causal approaches can be seen as a future trend of interpretable NLP tasks including
probing. However, the essence of causal models is different from the association essence of neural networks. Thus, we
consider a detailed discussion of causal approaches is out of the scope of this survey. But we do notice that this could be
a future trend for the further development of probing.
4
EVALUATION METHODS
4.1
Evaluation of Feature Importance
4.1.1
Automatic Evaluation. Evaluations on the interpretable methods of extracting important features usually align
with the evaluation of the explanation faithfulness, i.e. whether the extracted features are sufficient and accurate
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Local Interpretations for Explainable Natural Language Processing: A Survey
21
enough to result in the same label prediction as the original inputs. When the datasets come with pre-annotated
explanations, the extracted features used as the explanation can be compared with the ground truth annotation through
exact matching or soft matching. The exact matching only considers the validness of the explanation when it is exactly
the same as the annotation, and such validity is quantified through the precision score. For example, the HotpotQA
dataset provides annotations for supporting facts, allowing a model’s accuracy in reporting these supporting facts to
be easily measured. This is commonly used for extracting rationals, where the higher the precision score, the better
the model matches human-annotated explanations, likely indicating improved interpretability. On the country, soft
matching will take the extracted features as a valid explanation if some features (tokens/phrases in the case of NLP)
matched with the annotation. For instance, DeYoung et al. [43] proposed Intersection-Over-Union (IOU) on the token
level, taking the overlap size of the tokens over two spans divided by the union of their token sizes and considering the
extracted rationales as a valid explanation if the IOU score is over 0.5.
However, DeYoung et al. [43] also argued that the matching between the identified features and the annotation
only measures the plausibility of interpretability but not faithfulness. In other words, either the exact matching or
soft matching can reveal if the model’s decisions truly depend on the identified contributing features. Therefore, some
other erasure-based metrics are specifically proposed to evaluate the impact of the identified important features to the
model’s results. For example, Du et al. [48] proposed a faithfulness score to verify the importance of the identified
contributing sentences or words to a given model’s outputs. It is assumed that the probability values for the predicted
class will significantly drop if the truly important inputs are removed. The score is calculated as in equation 1:
𝑆𝐹𝑎𝑖𝑡ℎ𝑓𝑢𝑙𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠= 1
𝑁
𝑁
∑︁
𝑖=1

𝑦𝑥𝑖−𝑦𝑥𝑖
\𝐴

(1)
where 𝑦𝑥𝑖is the predicted probability for a given target class with original inputs and 𝑦𝑥𝑖
\𝐴is the predicted probability
for the target class for the input with significant sentences/words removed.
The Comprehensiveness score proposed by DeYoung et al. [43] in later years is calculated in the same way as the
Faithfulness score [48]. What is to be noted here is that the Comprehensiveness score is not related to the evaluation
of the comprehensibility of interpretability but to measure whether all the identified important features are needed
to make the same prediction results. A high score implies the enormous influence of the identified features, while a
negative score indicates that the model is more confident in its decision without the identified rationales. DeYoung
et al. [43] also proposed a Sufficiency score to calculate the probability difference from the model for the same class
once only the identified significant features are kept as the inputs. Thus, opposite to the Comprehensiveness score or
Faithfulness score, a lower Sufficiency score indicates the higher faithfulness of the selected features.
Apart from using the above-proposed evaluation metrics, another direct way to evaluate the validity of the explana-
tions for a model’s output is to examine the performance decrease of a model based on the tasks standard performance
evaluation metrics after removing or perturbing identified important input features (i.e. words/phrases/sentences). For
example, He et al. [67] measured the change in BLEU scores to examine whether certain input words were essential to
the predictions in natural machine translation.
4.1.2
Human Evaluation. Human evaluation is also a common and straightforward but relatively more subjective
method for evaluating the validity of explanations for a model. This can be done by researchers themselves or by a large
number of crowd-sourced participants (sourced from, e.g. Amazon Mechanical Turk). For example, Chen et al. [30]
asked Amazon Mechanical Turk workers to predict the sentiment based on predicted keywords in a text, examining the
Manuscript submitted to ACM
22
Luo and Ivison, et al.
faithfulness of the selected features as interpretation. Sha et al. [154] sampled 300 input-output-interpretation cases to
ask the human evaluator to examine whether the selected features are useful (to explain the output), complete (enough
to explain the output) and fluent to read).
While faithfulness can be evaluated more easily via automatic evaluation metrics, the comprehensibility and
trustworthiness of interpretations usually are evaluated through human evaluations in the current research works.
Though using large numbers of participants helps remove the subjective bias, this requires the cost of setting up
larger-scale experiments, and it is also hard to ensure that every participant understands the task and the evaluation
criteria. It is undoubtedly that the human evaluation results can provide some hints about the interpretation validity
and comprehensibility, but we cannot erase the suspicion of the existence of subjective bias, which also limits further
references and fair comparison of the human evaluation results for future works.
4.2
Evaluation of NLE
4.2.1
Automatic Evaluation. As NLE involves generating text, the automatic evaluation metrics for NLE are generally
the same metrics used in tasks with free-form text generation, such as machine translation or summarization. As such,
standard automated metrics for NLE are BLEU [126], METEOR [40], ROUGE [98], CIDEr [174], and SPICE [6], with all
five generally being reported in VQA-based NLE papers. Perplexity is also occasionally reported [23, 101], keeping in
line with other natural language generation-based works. However, these automated metrics must be used carefully, as
recent work has found they often correlate poorly with human judgements of explanation quality. Clinciu et al. [36]
suggest that model-based scores such as BLUERT and BERTScore better correlate with human judgements, and Hase
et al. [66] point out that only examining how well the explanation output matches labels does not measure how well
the explanations accurately reflect the model’s behaviour.
Additionally, the quality of the annotated human explanations collected in datasets such as e-SNLI has also come into
question. Carton et al. [26] find that human-created explanations across several datasets perform poorly at metrics such
as sufficiency and comprehensiveness, suggesting they do not contain all that is needed to explain a given judgement.
This suggests that just improving our ability to compare generated explanations with human-generated ones may
not be enough to best measure the quality of a given generated explanation, and further work in improving the gold
annotations provided by explanation datasets could also help.
4.2.2
Human Evaluation. Given the limitations of current automatic evaluation methods, and the free-form nature
of NLE, human evaluation is always necessary to truly judge explanation quality. Such evaluation is most commonly
done by getting crowdsourced workers to rate the generated explanations (either just as correct/not correct or on a
point scale), which allows easy comparison between models. In addition, Liu et al. [103] uses crowdsourced workers to
compare their model’s explanations against another, with workers noting which model’s explanation related best to
the final classification results. Considering BLEU and similar metrics do not necessarily correlate well with human
intuition, all work on NLE should include human evaluation results to some level, even if the evaluation is limited (e.g.
just on a sample of generated explanations).
4.3
Evaluation of Probing
As probing tasks are more tests for the presence of linguistic knowledge rather than explanations, the evaluation of
probing tasks differs according to the tasks. However, careful consideration should be given to the choice of metric. As
Hall Maudslay et al. [62] showed, different evaluation metrics can result in different apparent performances for different
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Local Interpretations for Explainable Natural Language Processing: A Survey
23
methods, so the motivation behind a particular metric should be considered. Beyond metrics, Hewitt and Liang [71]
suggested that the selectivity of probes should also be considered, where selectivity is defined as the difference between
probe task accuracy and control task5 accuracy. While best practices for probes are still being actively discussed in the
community [132], control tasks are undoubtedly helpful tools for further investigating and validating the behaviour of
models uncovered by probes.
5
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
This paper focused on the local interpretable methods commonly used for natural language processing models. In this
survey, we have divided these methods into three different categories based on their underlying characteristics: 1)
explaining the model’s outputs from the input features, where these features could be identified through rationale
extraction, perturbing inputs, traditional attribution methods, and attention weight extraction; 2) generating the natural
language explanations corresponding to each input; 3) using diagnostic classifiers to analyse the hidden information
stored within a model. For each method type, we have also outlined the standard datasets used for different NLP tasks
and different evaluation methods for examining the validity and efficacy of the explanations provided.
By going through the current local interpretable methods in the field of NLP, we identified several limitations and
research gaps to be overcome to develop explanations that can stably and faithfully explain the model’s decisions
and be easily understood and trusted by users. Firstly, as we have stated in section 1.1.1, there is currently no unified
definition of interpretability across the interpretable method works. While some researchers distinguish interpretability
and explainability as two separate concepts [150] with different difficulty levels, many works use them as synonyms
of each other, and our work also follows this way to include diverse works. However, such an ambiguous definition
of interpretability/explainability leads to inconsistent interpretation validity for the same interpretable method. For
example, the debate about whether the attention weights can be used as a valid interpretation/explanation between
Wiegreffe and Pinter [185] and Jain and Wallace [81] is due to the conflicting definition. The argument of Jain and
Wallace [81] is based on the fact that only the faithful interpretable methods are truly interpretable, while Wiegreffe and
Pinter [185] argued that attention is an explanation if we accept that explanation should be plausible but not necessarily
faithful as proposed by [150]. Thus, we need a unified and legible definition of interpretability that should be broadly
acknowledged and agreed to help further develop valid interpretable methods.
Secondly, we need effective evaluation methods that can evaluate the multiple dimensions of interpretability, the
results of which can be reliable for future baseline comparison. However, the existing evaluation metrics measure
only limited interpretability dimensions. Taking the evaluation of rationales as an example, examining the matching
between the extracted rationales and the human rationales only evaluates the plausibility but not faithfulness [43].
However, when it comes to the faithfulness evaluation metrics [10, 33, 43, 153], the evaluation results on the same
dataset can be opposite by using different evaluation metrics. For example, two evaluation metrics DFFOT [153] and
SUFF [43] concludes opposite evaluation results on LIME method of the same dataset [28]. Moreover, the current
automatic evaluation approaches mainly focus on the faithfulness and comprehensibility of interpretation. It can hardly
be applied to evaluate the other dimensions, such as stability and trustworthy. The evaluation of other interpretability
dimensions relies too much on the human evaluation process. Though human evaluation is currently the best approach
to evaluate the generated interpretation from various aspects but can be subjective and less reproducible. In addition,
it is also essential to have efficient evaluation methods that can evaluate the validity of interpretation in different
5A control task being a variant of the probe task which utilises random outputs to ensure that high scores on the task are only possible through
‘memorisation’ by the probe.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
24
Luo and Ivison, et al.
formats. For example, the evaluation of the faithful NLE relies on the BLEU scores to check the similarity of generated
explanations with the ground truth explanations. However, such evaluation methods neglect that the natural language
explanations with different contents from the ground truth explanations can also be faithful and plausible for the same
input and output pair. To sum up, there is still a considerable research gap for developing effective evaluation methods
and frameworks to verify the interpretable methods from various dimensions. and such development would also require
explainable datasets with good-quality annotations. The evaluation framework should provide fair results that can be
reused and compared by future works, and should be user-centric, taking into account the aspects of different groups of
users [85].
6
FUTURE TREND OF INTERPRETABILITY
The future trend of developing interpretable methods cannot avoid further conquering the current limitations. Develop-
ing truly faithful interpretable methods that can precisely explain the model’s decisions is critical to enable the vast
application of deep neural networks to crucial fields, including medicine, justice and finance. Faithful interpretable
methods and easily understandable interpretations are key to bringing users’ trust to the model’s decisions, especially
for users without deep learning knowledge. It is natural for them to question the decisions from an unfamiliar technique.
Providing faithful, comprehensible and stable interpretations of a model helps eliminate the questions and uncertainties
about using a black-box model for any users.
However, apart from the discussed limitations of the current interpretable methods, one existing problem is that
evaluating whether an interpretation is faithful mainly considers the interpretations for the model’s correct predictions.
In other words, most existing interpretable works only explain why an instance is correctly predicted but do not give
any explanations about why an instance is wrongly predicted. If the explanations of a model’s correct predictions
precisely reflect the model’s decision-making process, this interpretable method will usually be regarded as a faithful
interpretable method. However, it is also significant and irradiative to generate explanations of the wrong prediction
results to investigate and examine which parts of the input instances the model attended to when made the wrong
decision and whether those parts can reflect the model’s wrong decision-making process. However, the interpretation
and explanation of the model’s wrong prediction are not considered in any existing interpretable works. Some works
even directly consider the interpretations generated by their interpretable models for the models’ wrong predictions
are invalid and incorrect [86, 116, 127, 187] and therefore, would not being taken into account for the measurement
of intepretbality faithfulness. This seems reasonable when the current works are still struggling with developing
interpretable methods that can at least faithfully explain the model’s correct predictions. However, the interpretation of
a model’s decision should not only be applied to one side but to both correct and wrong prediction results.
This also brings us the reflection that the fundamental reason to develop model interpretability is more than providing
evidence/support/explanation of a correct prediction to users to make them believe the model’s correct decisions, but
also to give them valuable guidance about why the model makes a wrong prediction. The comprehensive interpretations
of a model’s decisions should provide faithful explanations for the model’s both correct and incorrect predictions. Such
comprehensive interpretations from both sides are the key to developing the ultimate trustworthiness for black-box
models and boosting their broader and more stable applications in required fields. Moreover, understanding the reason
for the wrong prediction is also essential for deep learning researchers to learn and adjust the model better in the future
works.
Therefore, the future works of interpretability would be to fill the current research gap and develop interpretable
models that can generate faithful and comprehensible interpretations for both correct and incorrect decisions made by
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Local Interpretations for Explainable Natural Language Processing: A Survey
25
the model, providing reliable information to improve the trust of non-experts in using deep neural networks in crucial
fields and help experts understand and improve the model in a more accurate and better way.
REFERENCES
[1] Amina Adadi and Mohammed Berrada. 2018. Peeking inside the black-box: A survey on Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI). IEEE Access 6
(2018), 52138–52160.
[2] Yossi Adi, Einat Kermany, Yonatan Belinkov, Ofer Lavi, and Yoav Goldberg. 2016. Fine-grained analysis of sentence embeddings using auxiliary
prediction tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.04207 (2016).
[3] Shourya Aggarwal, Divyanshu Mandowara, Vishwajeet Agrawal, Dinesh Khandelwal, Parag Singla, and Dinesh Garg. 2021. Explanations for
CommonsenseQA: New Dataset and Models. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the
11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers). Association for Computational Linguistics, Online,
3050–3065. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.238
[4] Tariq Alhindi, Savvas Petridis, and Smaranda Muresan. 2018. Where is Your Evidence: Improving Fact-checking by Justification Modeling. In
Proceedings of the First Workshop on Fact Extraction and VERification (FEVER). Association for Computational Linguistics, Brussels, Belgium, 85–90.
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W18-5513
[5] David Alvarez-Melis and Tommi Jaakkola. 2017. A causal framework for explaining the predictions of black-box sequence-to-sequence models. In
Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. 412–421.
[6] Peter Anderson, Basura Fernando, Mark Johnson, and Stephen Gould. 2016. Spice: Semantic propositional image caption evaluation. In European
Conference on Computer Vision. Springer, 382–398.
[7] Peter Anderson, Xiaodong He, Chris Buehler, Damien Teney, Mark Johnson, Stephen Gould, and Lei Zhang. 2018. Bottom-up and top-down
attention for image captioning and visual question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition.
6077–6086.
[8] Stanislaw Antol, Aishwarya Agrawal, Jiasen Lu, Margaret Mitchell, Dhruv Batra, C Lawrence Zitnick, and Devi Parikh. 2015. Vqa: Visual question
answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision. 2425–2433.
[9] Leila Arras, Franziska Horn, Grégoire Montavon, Klaus-Robert Müller, and Wojciech Samek. 2017. " What is relevant in a text document?": An
interpretable machine learning approach. PloS one 12, 8 (2017), e0181142.
[10] Vijay Arya, Rachel KE Bellamy, Pin-Yu Chen, Amit Dhurandhar, Michael Hind, Samuel C Hoffman, Stephanie Houde, Q Vera Liao, Ronny Luss,
Aleksandra Mojsilović, et al. 2019. One explanation does not fit all: A toolkit and taxonomy of ai explainability techniques. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.03012 (2019).
[11] David Atkinson, Kumar Bhargav Srinivasan, and Chenhao Tan. 2019. What Gets Echoed? Understanding the “Pointers” in Explanations of
Persuasive Arguments. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP). Association for Computational Linguistics, Hong Kong, China, 2911–2921.
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D19-1289
[12] Hammad A Ayyubi, Md Tanjim, Julian J McAuley, Garrison W Cottrell, et al. 2020. Generating Rationales in Visual Question Answering. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2004.02032 (2020).
[13] Sebastian Bach, Alexander Binder, Grégoire Montavon, Frederick Klauschen, Klaus-Robert Müller, and Wojciech Samek. 2015. On pixel-wise
explanations for non-linear classifier decisions by layer-wise relevance propagation. PloS one 10, 7 (2015).
[14] Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and translate. In ICLR.
[15] Bing Bai, Jian Liang, Guanhua Zhang, Hao Li, Kun Bai, and Fei Wang. 2021. Why attentions may not be interpretable?. In Proceedings of the 27th
ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. 25–34.
[16] Dominika Basaj, Barbara Rychalska, Przemyslaw Biecek, and Anna Wróblewska. 2018. How much should you ask? On the question structure in
QA systems. In BlackboxNLP@EMNLP.
[17] Joost Bastings, Wilker Aziz, and Ivan Titov. 2019. Interpretable Neural Predictions with Differentiable Binary Variables. In Proceedings of the 57th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. 2963–2977.
[18] Yonatan Belinkov, Nadir Durrani, Fahim Dalvi, Hassan Sajjad, and James Glass. 2017. What do Neural Machine Translation Models Learn about
Morphology?. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). Association for
Computational Linguistics, Vancouver, Canada, 861–872. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P17-1080
[19] Yonatan Belinkov and James Glass. 2019. Analysis methods in neural language processing: A survey. Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics 7 (2019), 49–72.
[20] Yonatan Belinkov, Lluís Màrquez, Hassan Sajjad, Nadir Durrani, Fahim Dalvi, and James Glass. 2017. Evaluating Layers of Representation in Neural
Machine Translation on Part-of-Speech and Semantic Tagging Tasks. In Proceedings of the Eighth International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers). Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing, Taipei, Taiwan, 1–10. https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/I17-
1001
Manuscript submitted to ACM
26
Luo and Ivison, et al.
[21] Samuel R Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts, and Christopher D Manning. 2015. A large annotated corpus for learning natural language
inference. In EMNLP.
[22] Faeze Brahman, Vered Shwartz, Rachel Rudinger, and Yejin Choi. 2021. Learning to Rationalize for Nonmonotonic Reasoning with Distant
Supervision. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 35, 14 (May 2021), 12592–12601. https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/
article/view/17492
[23] Oana-Maria Camburu, Tim Rocktäschel, Thomas Lukasiewicz, and Phil Blunsom. 2018. e-SNLI: Natural Language Inference with Natural Language
Explanations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and
R. Garnett (Eds.). Curran Associates, Inc., 9539–9549. http://papers.nips.cc/paper/8163-e-snli-natural-language-inference-with-natural-language-
explanations.pdf
[24] Oana-Maria Camburu, Brendan Shillingford, Pasquale Minervini, Thomas Lukasiewicz, and Phil Blunsom. 2020. Make Up Your Mind! Adversarial
Generation of Inconsistent Natural Language Explanations. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 4157–4165. https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.acl-main.382
[25] Feiqi Cao, Siwen Luo, Felipe Nunez, Zean Wen, Josiah Poon, and Soyeon Caren Han. 2023. Scenegate: Scene-graph based co-attention networks for
text visual question answering. Robotics 12, 4 (2023), 114.
[26] Samuel Carton, Anirudh Rathore, and Chenhao Tan. 2020. Evaluating and Characterizing Human Rationales. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP). Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 9294–9307. https://doi.org/10.
18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.747
[27] S. Chakraborty, R. Tomsett, R. Raghavendra, D. Harborne, M. Alzantot, F. Cerutti, M. Srivastava, A. Preece, S. Julier, R. M. Rao, T. D. Kelley, D.
Braines, M. Sensoy, C. J. Willis, and P. Gurram. 2017. Interpretability of deep learning models: A survey of results. In 2017 IEEE SmartWorld,
Ubiquitous Intelligence Computing, Advanced Trusted Computed, Scalable Computing Communications, Cloud Big Data Computing, Internet of People
and Smart City Innovation (SmartWorld/SCALCOM/UIC/ATC/CBDCom/IOP/SCI). IEEE, San Francisco, CA, USA, 1–6.
[28] Chun Sik Chan, Huanqi Kong, and Liang Guanqing. 2022. A Comparative Study of Faithfulness Metrics for Model Interpretability Methods. In
Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). 5029–5038.
[29] Shiyu Chang, Yang Zhang, Mo Yu, and Tommi Jaakkola. 2019. A Game Theoretic Approach to Class-wise Selective Rationalization. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems. 10055–10065.
[30] Jianbo Chen, Le Song, Martin Wainwright, and Michael Jordan. 2018. Learning to explain: An information-theoretic perspective on model
interpretation. In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 883–892.
[31] Qianglong Chen, Feng Ji, Xiangji Zeng, Feng-Lin Li, Ji Zhang, Haiqing Chen, and Yin Zhang. 2021. KACE: Generating Knowledge Aware Contrastive
Explanations for Natural Language Inference. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th
International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers). 2516–2527.
[32] Yen-Chun Chen, Linjie Li, Licheng Yu, Ahmed El Kholy, Faisal Ahmed, Zhe Gan, Yu Cheng, and Jingjing Liu. 2020. Uniter: Universal image-text
representation learning. In ECCV.
[33] George Chrysostomou and Nikolaos Aletras. 2021. Improving the Faithfulness of Attention-based Explanations with Task-specific Information
for Text Classification. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers). 477–488.
[34] Kevin Clark, Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, and Christopher D. Manning. 2019. What Does BERT Look at? An Analysis of BERT’s Attention. In
Proceedings of the 2019 ACL Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP. Association for Computational Linguistics,
Florence, Italy, 276–286. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W19-4828
[35] Kevin Clark, Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, and Christopher D Manning. 2019. What Does BERT Look at? An Analysis of BERT’s Attention. In
Proceedings of the 2019 ACL Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP. 276–286.
[36] Miruna-Adriana Clinciu, Arash Eshghi, and Helen Hastie. 2021. A Study of Automatic Metrics for the Evaluation of Natural Language Explanations.
In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume. Association for
Computational Linguistics, Online, 2376–2387. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.eacl-main.202
[37] Alexis Conneau, German Kruszewski, Guillaume Lample, Loïc Barrault, and Marco Baroni. 2018. What you can cram into a single $&!#* vector:
Probing sentence embeddings for linguistic properties. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers). Association for Computational Linguistics, Melbourne, Australia, 2126–2136. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P18-1198
[38] Jeff Da, Maxwell Forbes, Rowan Zellers, Anthony Zheng, Jena D. Hwang, Antoine Bosselut, and Yejin Choi. 2021. Edited Media Understanding
Frames: Reasoning About the Intent and Implications of Visual Misinformation. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers). Association for
Computational Linguistics, Online, 2026–2039. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.158
[39] Fahim Dalvi, Nadir Durrani, Hassan Sajjad, Yonatan Belinkov, Anthony Bau, and James Glass. 2019. What is one grain of sand in the desert?
analyzing individual neurons in deep nlp models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 33. 6309–6317.
[40] Michael Denkowski and Alon Lavie. 2014. Meteor Universal: Language Specific Translation Evaluation for Any Target Language. In Proceedings of
the EACL 2014 Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation.
[41] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language
Understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Local Interpretations for Explainable Natural Language Processing: A Survey
27
Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers). Association for Computational Linguistics, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 4171–4186. https:
//doi.org/10.18653/v1/N19-1423
[42] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language
Understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers). Association for Computational Linguistics, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 4171–4186. https:
//doi.org/10.18653/v1/N19-1423
[43] Jay DeYoung, Sarthak Jain, Nazneen Fatema Rajani, Eric Lehman, Caiming Xiong, Richard Socher, and Byron C Wallace. 2020. ERASER: A
Benchmark to Evaluate Rationalized NLP Models. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
4443–4458.
[44] Yanzhuo Ding, Yang Liu, Huanbo Luan, and Maosong Sun. 2017. Visualizing and understanding neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the
55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). 1150–1159.
[45] Yihao Ding, Siwen Luo, Hyunsuk Chung, and Soyeon Caren Han. 2023. VQA: A New Dataset for Real-World VQA on PDF Documents. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2304.06447 (2023).
[46] Finale Doshi-Velez and Been Kim. 2018. Considerations for Evaluation and Generalization in Interpretable Machine Learning. Springer International
Publishing, Cham, 3–17. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98131-4_1
[47] Mengnan Du, Ninghao Liu, Fan Yang, and Xia Hu. 2019. Learning Credible Deep Neural Networks with Rationale Regularization. 2019 IEEE
International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM) (2019), 150–159.
[48] Mengnan Du, Ninghao Liu, Fan Yang, Shuiwang Ji, and Xia Hu. 2019. On attribution of recurrent neural network predictions via additive
decomposition. In The World Wide Web Conference. 383–393.
[49] Javid Ebrahimi, Anyi Rao, Daniel Lowd, and Dejing Dou. 2018. HotFlip: White-Box Adversarial Examples for Text Classification. In Proceedings of
the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers). 31–36.
[50] Upol Ehsan, Brent Harrison, Larry Chan, and Mark O Riedl. 2018. Rationalization: A neural machine translation approach to generating natural
language explanations. In Proceedings of the 2018 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society. 81–87.
[51] Upol Ehsan, Pradyumna Tambwekar, Larry Chan, Brent Harrison, and Mark O. Riedl. 2019. Automated Rationale Generation: A Technique for
Explainable AI and Its Effects on Human Perceptions. In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (Marina del
Ray, California) (IUI ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 263–274. https://doi.org/10.1145/3301275.3302316
[52] Yanai Elazar, Shauli Ravfogel, Alon Jacovi, and Yoav Goldberg. 2021.
Amnesic Probing: Behavioral Explanation with Amnesic Coun-
terfactuals.
Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 9 (03 2021), 160–175.
https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl_a_00359
arXiv:https://direct.mit.edu/tacl/article-pdf/doi/10.1162/tacl_a_00359/1924189/tacl_a_00359.pdf
[53] Karl Fredrik Erliksson, Anders Arpteg, Mihhail Matskin, and Amir H. Payberah. 2021. Cross-Domain Transfer of Generative Explanations Using
Text-to-Text Models. In Natural Language Processing and Information Systems, Elisabeth Métais, Farid Meziane, Helmut Horacek, and Epaminondas
Kapetanios (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 76–89.
[54] Allyson Ettinger, Ahmed Elgohary, and Philip Resnik. 2016. Probing for semantic evidence of composition by means of simple classification tasks.
In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Evaluating Vector-Space Representations for NLP. Association for Computational Linguistics, Berlin, Germany,
134–139. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W16-2524
[55] Amir Feder, Katherine A Keith, Emaad Manzoor, Reid Pryzant, Dhanya Sridhar, Zach Wood-Doughty, Jacob Eisenstein, Justin Grimmer, Roi
Reichart, Margaret E Roberts, et al. 2022. Causal Inference in Natural Language Processing: Estimation, Prediction, Interpretation and Beyond.
Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 10 (2022), 1138–1158.
[56] Shi Feng, Eric Wallace, Alvin Grissom II, Mohit Iyyer, Pedro Rodriguez, and Jordan Boyd-Graber. 2018. Pathologies of Neural Models Make
Interpretations Difficult. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. 3719–3728.
[57] Mario Giulianelli, Jack Harding, Florian Mohnert, Dieuwke Hupkes, and Willem Zuidema. 2018. Under the Hood: Using Diagnostic Classifiers to
Investigate and Improve how Language Models Track Agreement Information. In Proceedings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing
and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP. Association for Computational Linguistics, Brussels, Belgium, 240–248. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W18-
5426
[58] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Generative
adversarial nets. In Advances in neural information processing systems. 2672–2680.
[59] Yash Goyal, Tejas Khot, Douglas Summers-Stay, Dhruv Batra, and Devi Parikh. 2017. Making the V in VQA matter: Elevating the role of image
understanding in Visual Question Answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 6904–6913.
[60] Riccardo Guidotti, Anna Monreale, Salvatore Ruggieri, Franco Turini, Fosca Giannotti, and Dino Pedreschi. 2018. A survey of methods for explaining
black box models. Comput. Surveys 51, 5 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1145/3236009
[61] Abhijeet Gupta, Gemma Boleda, Marco Baroni, and Sebastian Padó. 2015. Distributional vectors encode referential attributes. In Proceedings of
the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics, Lisbon, Portugal, 12–21.
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D15-1002
[62] Rowan Hall Maudslay, Josef Valvoda, Tiago Pimentel, Adina Williams, and Ryan Cotterell. 2020. A Tale of a Probe and a Parser. In Proceedings
of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 7389–7395.
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.659
Manuscript submitted to ACM
28
Luo and Ivison, et al.
[63] Caren Han, Siqu Long, Siwen Luo, Kunze Wang, and Josiah Poon. 2020. VICTR: Visual Information Captured Text Representation for Text-to-Vision
Multimodal Tasks. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Donia Scott, Nuria Bel, and Chengqing Zong (Eds.).
International Committee on Computational Linguistics, Barcelona, Spain (Online), 3107–3117. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.coling-main.277
[64] Braden Hancock, Paroma Varma, Stephanie Wang, Martin Bringmann, Percy Liang, and Christopher Ré. 2018. Training Classifiers with Natural
Language Explanations. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). Association
for Computational Linguistics, Melbourne, Australia, 1884–1895. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P18-1175
[65] Peter Hase and Mohit Bansal. 2022. When Can Models Learn From Explanations? A Formal Framework for Understanding the Roles of Explanation
Data. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Learning with Natural Language Supervision. Association for Computational Linguistics, Dublin,
Ireland, 29–39. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2022.lnls-1.4
[66] Peter Hase, Shiyue Zhang, Harry Xie, and Mohit Bansal. 2020. Leakage-Adjusted Simulatability: Can Models Generate Non-Trivial Explanations of
Their Behavior in Natural Language?. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020. Association for Computational
Linguistics, Online, 4351–4367. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.findings-emnlp.390
[67] Shilin He, Zhaopeng Tu, Xing Wang, Longyue Wang, Michael Lyu, and Shuming Shi. 2019. Towards Understanding Neural Machine Translation
with Word Importance. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP). 952–961.
[68] Lisa Anne Hendricks, Zeynep Akata, Marcus Rohrbach, Jeff Donahue, Bernt Schiele, and Trevor Darrell. 2016. Generating visual explanations. In
European Conference on Computer Vision. Springer, 3–19.
[69] Lisa Anne Hendricks, Ronghang Hu, Trevor Darrell, and Zeynep Akata. 2018. Generating Counterfactual Explanations with Natural Language. In
ICML Workshop on Human Interpretability in Machine Learning. 95–98.
[70] Tom Heskes, Evi Sijben, Ioan Gabriel Bucur, and Tom Claassen. 2020. Causal shapley values: Exploiting causal knowledge to explain individual
predictions of complex models. Advances in neural information processing systems 33 (2020), 4778–4789.
[71] John Hewitt and Percy Liang. 2019. Designing and Interpreting Probes with Control Tasks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP). Association for
Computational Linguistics, Hong Kong, China, 2733–2743. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D19-1275
[72] John Hewitt and Christopher D. Manning. 2019. A Structural Probe for Finding Syntax in Word Representations. In Proceedings of the 2019
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short
Papers). Association for Computational Linguistics, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 4129–4138. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/N19-1419
[73] Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997. Long short-term memory. Neural computation 9, 8 (1997), 1735–1780.
[74] Dong Huk Park, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Zeynep Akata, Anna Rohrbach, Bernt Schiele, Trevor Darrell, and Marcus Rohrbach. 2018. Multimodal
explanations: Justifying decisions and pointing to the evidence. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
8779–8788.
[75] Dieuwke Hupkes, Sara Veldhoen, and Willem Zuidema. 2018. Visualisation and’diagnostic classifiers’ reveal how recurrent and recursive neural
networks process hierarchical structure. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 61 (2018), 907–926.
[76] Naoya Inoue, Harsh Trivedi, Steven Sinha, Niranjan Balasubramanian, and Kentaro Inui. 2021. Summarize-then-Answer: Generating Concise
Explanations for Multi-hop Reading Comprehension. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
Association for Computational Linguistics, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, 6064–6080. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-
main.490
[77] Alon Jacovi and Yoav Goldberg. 2020. Towards Faithfully Interpretable NLP Systems: How Should We Define and Evaluate Faithfulness?. In
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 4198–4205.
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.acl-main.386
[78] Alon Jacovi and Yoav Goldberg. 2020. Towards Faithfully Interpretable NLP Systems: How Should We Define and Evaluate Faithfulness?. In
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. 4198–4205.
[79] Alon Jacovi, Ana Marasović, Tim Miller, and Yoav Goldberg. 2021. Formalizing Trust in Artificial Intelligence: Prerequisites, Causes and Goals of
Human Trust in AI. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (Virtual Event, Canada) (FAccT ’21).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 624–635. https://doi.org/10.1145/3442188.3445923
[80] Sarthak Jain and Byron C. Wallace. 2019. Attention is not Explanation. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers). Association for Computational
Linguistics, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 3543–3556. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/N19-1357
[81] Sarthak Jain and Byron C Wallace. 2019. Attention is not Explanation. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers). 3543–3556.
[82] Myeongjun Jang and Thomas Lukasiewicz. 2021. Are Training Resources Insufficient? Predict First Then Explain! CoRR abs/2110.02056 (2021).
arXiv:2110.02056 https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.02056
[83] Peter Jansen, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Mihai Surdeanu, and Peter Clark. 2016. What’s in an Explanation? Characterizing Knowledge and
Inference Requirements for Elementary Science Exams. In Proceedings of COLING 2016, the 26th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics: Technical Papers. The COLING 2016 Organizing Committee, Osaka, Japan, 2956–2965. https://aclanthology.org/C16-1278
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Local Interpretations for Explainable Natural Language Processing: A Survey
29
[84] Jaap Jumelet and Dieuwke Hupkes. 2018. Do Language Models Understand Anything? On the Ability of LSTMs to Understand Negative Polarity
Items. In Proceedings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP. Association for Computational
Linguistics, Brussels, Belgium, 222–231. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W18-5424
[85] Harmanpreet Kaur, Harsha Nori, Samuel Jenkins, Rich Caruana, Hanna Wallach, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan. 2020. Interpreting interpretability:
understanding data scientists’ use of interpretability tools for machine learning. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI conference on human factors in
computing systems. 1–14.
[86] Maxime Kayser, Oana-Maria Camburu, Leonard Salewski, Cornelius Emde, Virginie Do, Zeynep Akata, and Thomas Lukasiewicz. 2021. E-ViL: A
Dataset and Benchmark for Natural Language Explanations in Vision-Language Tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision (ICCV). 1244–1254.
[87] Jinkyu Kim, Anna Rohrbach, Trevor Darrell, John Canny, and Zeynep Akata. 2018. Textual explanations for self-driving vehicles. In Proceedings of
the European conference on computer vision (ECCV). 563–578.
[88] Josef Klafka and Allyson Ettinger. 2020. Spying on Your Neighbors: Fine-grained Probing of Contextual Embeddings for Information about
Surrounding Words. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Association for Computational
Linguistics, Online, 4801–4811. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.434
[89] Arne Köhn. 2015. What’s in an Embedding? Analyzing Word Embeddings through Multilingual Evaluation. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics, Lisbon, Portugal, 2067–2073. https://doi.org/10.
18653/v1/D15-1246
[90] Neema Kotonya and Francesca Toni. 2020. Explainable Automated Fact-Checking for Public Health Claims. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP). Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 7740–7754. https://doi.org/10.
18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.623
[91] Sawan Kumar and Partha Talukdar. 2020. NILE : Natural Language Inference with Faithful Natural Language Explanations. In Proceedings
of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 8730–8742.
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.acl-main.771
[92] Ponnambalam Kumaraswamy. 1980. A generalized probability density function for double-bounded random processes. Journal of hydrology 46, 1-2
(1980), 79–88.
[93] Jie Lei, Licheng Yu, Tamara Berg, and Mohit Bansal. 2020. What is More Likely to Happen Next? Video-and-Language Future Event Prediction.
In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP). Association for Computational Linguistics,
Online, 8769–8784. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.706
[94] Tao Lei, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. 2016. Rationalizing Neural Predictions. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing. 107–117.
[95] Lei Li, Yongfeng Zhang, and Li Chen. 2021. Personalized Transformer for Explainable Recommendation. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers).
Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 4947–4957. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.383
[96] Qing Li, Qingyi Tao, Shafiq Joty, Jianfei Cai, and Jiebo Luo. 2018. VQA-E: Explaining, Elaborating, and Enhancing Your Answers for Visual
Questions. ECCV (2018).
[97] Zichao Li, Prakhar Sharma, Xing Han Lu, Jackie Cheung, and Siva Reddy. 2022. Using Interactive Feedback to Improve the Accuracy and
Explainability of Question Answering Systems Post-Deployment. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2022. Association
for Computational Linguistics, Dublin, Ireland, 926–937. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2022.findings-acl.75
[98] Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. ROUGE: A Package for Automatic Evaluation of Summaries. In Text Summarization Branches Out. Association for Computational
Linguistics, Barcelona, Spain, 74–81. https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W04-1013
[99] Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. 2014. Microsoft
coco: Common objects in context. In European conference on computer vision. Springer, 740–755.
[100] Yongjie Lin, Yi Chern Tan, and Robert Frank. 2019. Open Sesame: Getting inside BERT’s Linguistic Knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACL
Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP. Association for Computational Linguistics, Florence, Italy, 241–253.
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W19-4825
[101] Wang Ling, Dani Yogatama, Chris Dyer, and Phil Blunsom. 2017. Program Induction by Rationale Generation: Learning to Solve and Explain
Algebraic Word Problems. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers).
158–167.
[102] Zachary C. Lipton. 2018. The mythos of model interpretability. Commun. ACM 61, 10 (2018), 35–43. https://doi.org/10.1145/3233231 arXiv:1606.03490
[103] Hui Liu, Qingyu Yin, and William Yang Wang. 2019. Towards Explainable NLP: A Generative Explanation Framework for Text Classification. In
Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics, Florence, Italy,
5570–5581. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P19-1560
[104] Nelson F. Liu, Matt Gardner, Yonatan Belinkov, Matthew E. Peters, and Noah A. Smith. 2019. Linguistic Knowledge and Transferability of
Contextual Representations. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers). Association for Computational Linguistics, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 1073–1094.
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/N19-1112
Manuscript submitted to ACM
30
Luo and Ivison, et al.
[105] Christos Louizos, Max Welling, and Diederik P Kingma. 2018. Learning Sparse Neural Networks through L_0 Regularization. In International
Conference on Learning Representations.
[106] Charles Lovering, Rohan Jha, Tal Linzen, and Ellie Pavlick. 2021. Predicting Inductive Biases of Pre-Trained Models. In International Conference on
Learning Representations. https://openreview.net/forum?id=mNtmhaDkAr
[107] Jiasen Lu, Jianwei Yang, Dhruv Batra, and Devi Parikh. 2016. Hierarchical question-image co-attention for visual question answering. In Advances
in neural information processing systems. 289–297.
[108] Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. 2017. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. In Advances in neural information processing systems.
4765–4774.
[109] Ling Luo, Xiang Ao, Feiyang Pan, Jin Wang, Tong Zhao, Ningzi Yu, and Qing He. 2018. Beyond Polarity: Interpretable Financial Sentiment Analysis
with Hierarchical Query-driven Attention.. In IJCAI. 4244–4250.
[110] Siwen Luo, Soyeon Caren Han, Kaiyuan Sun, and Josiah Poon. 2020. REXUP: I REason, I EXtract, I UPdate with Structured Compositional Reasoning
for Visual Question Answering. In International Conference on Neural Information Processing. Springer, 520–532.
[111] Minh-Thang Luong, Hieu Pham, and Christopher D Manning. 2015. Effective Approaches to Attention-based Neural Machine Translation. In
Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. 1412–1421.
[112] Andrew Maas, Raymond E Daly, Peter T Pham, Dan Huang, Andrew Y Ng, and Christopher Potts. 2011. Learning word vectors for sentiment
analysis. In Proceedings of the 49th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics: Human language technologies. 142–150.
[113] Prashan Madumal, Tim Miller, Frank Vetere, and Liz Sonenberg. 2018. Towards a Grounded Dialog Model for Explainable Artificial Intelligence.
Workshop on Socio-cognitive Systems IJCAI abs/1806.08055 (2018). arXiv:1806.08055 http://arxiv.org/abs/1806.08055
[114] Qianren Mao, Jianxin Li, Senzhang Wang, Yuanning Zhang, Hao Peng, Min He, and Lihong Wang. 2019. Aspect-Based Sentiment Classification
with Attentive Neural Turing Machines.. In IJCAI. 5139–5145.
[115] Ana Marasovic, Iz Beltagy, Doug Downey, and Matthew Peters. 2022. Few-Shot Self-Rationalization with Natural Language Prompts. In Findings of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics, Seattle, United States, 410–424. https:
//doi.org/10.18653/v1/2022.findings-naacl.31
[116] Ana Marasović, Chandra Bhagavatula, Jae sung Park, Ronan Le Bras, Noah A. Smith, and Yejin Choi. 2020. Natural Language Rationales with
Full-Stack Visual Reasoning: From Pixels to Semantic Frames to Commonsense Graphs. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
EMNLP 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 2810–2829. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.findings-emnlp.253
[117] Julian McAuley, Jure Leskovec, and Dan Jurafsky. 2012. Learning attitudes and attributes from multi-aspect reviews. In 2012 IEEE 12th International
Conference on Data Mining. IEEE, 1020–1025.
[118] Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Corrado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed Representations of Words and Phrases and their
Compositionality. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 26, C. J. C. Burges, L. Bottou, M. Welling, Z. Ghahramani, and K. Q.
Weinberger (Eds.). Curran Associates, Inc., 3111–3119. http://papers.nips.cc/paper/5021-distributed-representations-of-words-and-phrases-and-
their-compositionality.pdf
[119] Hengameh Mirzaalian, Mohamed E. Hussein, Leonidas Spinoulas, Jonathan May, and Wael Abd-Almageed. 2021. Explaining Face Presentation
Attack Detection Using Natural Language. In 2021 16th IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition (FG 2021). 1–8.
https://doi.org/10.1109/FG52635.2021.9667024
[120] Christoph Molnar. 2019. Interpretable Machine Learning. https://christophm.github.io/interpretable-ml-book/.
[121] Pramod Kaushik Mudrakarta, Ankur Taly, Mukund Sundararajan, and Kedar Dhamdhere. 2018. Did the Model Understand the Question?. In
Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). 1896–1906.
[122] John Paul Mueller and Luca Massaron. 2019. Deep Learning For Dummies. John Wiley & Sons.
[123] W. James Murdoch, Chandan Singh, Karl Kumbier, Reza Abbasi-Asl, and Bin Yu. 2019. Definitions, methods, and applications in interpretable
machine learning. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116, 44 (2019), 22071–22080.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1900654116
arXiv:https://www.pnas.org/content/116/44/22071.full.pdf
[124] Sharan Narang, Colin Raffel, Katherine Lee, Adam Roberts, Noah Fiedel, and Karishma Malkan. 2020. WT5?! Training Text-to-Text Models to
Explain their Predictions. arXiv:2004.14546 [cs.CL]
[125] Jianmo Ni, Jiacheng Li, and Julian McAuley. 2019. Justifying Recommendations using Distantly-Labeled Reviews and Fine-Grained Aspects. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP). Association for Computational Linguistics, Hong Kong, China, 188–197. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D19-1018
[126] Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a Method for Automatic Evaluation of Machine Translation. In
Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA, 311–318. https://doi.org/10.3115/1073083.1073135
[127] Dong Huk Park, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Zeynep Akata, Anna Rohrbach, Bernt Schiele, Trevor Darrell, and Marcus Rohrbach. 2018. Multimodal
Explanations: Justifying Decisions and Pointing to the Evidence. In 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 8779–8788.
https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2018.00915
[128] Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher Manning. 2014. GloVe: Global Vectors for Word Representation. In Proceedings of the 2014
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP). Association for Computational Linguistics, Doha, Qatar, 1532–1543.
https://doi.org/10.3115/v1/D14-1162
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Local Interpretations for Explainable Natural Language Processing: A Survey
31
[129] Matthew Peters, Mark Neumann, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Wen-tau Yih. 2018. Dissecting Contextual Word Embeddings: Architecture and Repre-
sentation. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics,
Brussels, Belgium, 1499–1509. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D18-1179
[130] Matthew E. Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2018. Deep Contextualized
Word Representations. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers). Association for Computational Linguistics, New Orleans, Louisiana, 2227–2237. https:
//doi.org/10.18653/v1/N18-1202
[131] Matthew E Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2018. Deep contextualized
word representations. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT. 2227–2237.
[132] Tiago Pimentel, Josef Valvoda, Rowan Hall Maudslay, Ran Zmigrod, Adina Williams, and Ryan Cotterell. 2020. Information-Theoretic Probing for
Linguistic Structure. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Association for Computational
Linguistics, Online, 4609–4622. https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.acl-main.420
[133] Archiki Prasad and Preethi Jyothi. 2020. How Accents Confound: Probing for Accent Information in End-to-End Speech Recognition Systems.
In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics, Online,
3739–3753. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.345
[134] Grusha Prasad, Yixin Nie, Mohit Bansal, Robin Jia, Douwe Kiela, and Adina Williams. 2021. To what extent do human explanations of model
behavior align with actual model behavior?. In Proceedings of the Fourth BlackboxNLP Workshop on Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for
NLP. Association for Computational Linguistics, Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.blackboxnlp-1.1
[135] Alec Radford and Karthik Narasimhan. 2018. Improving Language Understanding by Generative Pre-Training.
[136] Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. 2019. Language Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners.
[137] Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. 2020. Exploring
the Limits of Transfer Learning with a Unified Text-to-Text Transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research 21, 140 (2020), 1–67.
http:
//jmlr.org/papers/v21/20-074.html
[138] Alessandro Raganato and Jörg Tiedemann. 2018. An Analysis of Encoder Representations in Transformer-Based Machine Translation. In Proceedings
of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP. Association for Computational Linguistics, Brussels,
Belgium, 287–297. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W18-5431
[139] Nazneen Fatema Rajani, Bryan McCann, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. 2019. Explain Yourself! Leveraging Language Models for Commonsense
Reasoning. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics,
Florence, Italy, 4932–4942. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P19-1487
[140] Nazneen Fatema Rajani, Rui Zhang, Yi Chern Tan, Stephan Zheng, Jeremy Weiss, Aadit Vyas, Abhijit Gupta, Caiming Xiong, Richard Socher, and
Dragomir Radev. 2020. ESPRIT: Explaining Solutions to Physical Reasoning Tasks. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 7906–7917. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.706
[141] Pranav Rajpurkar, Robin Jia, and Percy Liang. 2018. Know What You Don’t Know: Unanswerable Questions for SQuAD. In Proceedings of the 56th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers). 784–789.
[142] Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. 2016. SQuAD: 100,000+ Questions for Machine Comprehension of Text. In
Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. 2383–2392.
[143] Abhilasha Ravichander, Yonatan Belinkov, and Eduard Hovy. 2021. Probing the Probing Paradigm: Does Probing Accuracy Entail Task Relevance?.
In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume. Association for
Computational Linguistics, Online, 3363–3377. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.eacl-main.295
[144] Juan Rebanal, Jordan Combitsis, Yuqi Tang, and Xiang ’Anthony’ Chen. 2021. XAlgo: A Design Probe of Explaining Algorithms’ Internal States via
Question-Answering (IUI ’21). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 329–339. https://doi.org/10.1145/3397481.3450676
[145] Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. 2016. " Why should I trust you?" Explaining the predictions of any classifier. In Proceedings
of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining. 1135–1144.
[146] Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. 2016. “Why Should I Trust You?”: Explaining the Predictions of Any Classifier. In
Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (San Francisco, California, USA) (KDD ’16).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1135–1144. https://doi.org/10.1145/2939672.2939778
[147] Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. 2018. Anchors: High-precision model-agnostic explanations. In Thirty-Second AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
[148] Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Tongshuang Wu, Carlos Guestrin, and Sameer Singh. 2020. Beyond Accuracy: Behavioral Testing of NLP Models with
CheckList. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. 4902–4912.
[149] Dana Rubinstein, Effi Levi, Roy Schwartz, and Ari Rappoport. 2015. How Well Do Distributional Models Capture Different Types of Semantic
Knowledge?. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 7th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing (Volume 2: Short Papers). Association for Computational Linguistics, Beijing, China, 726–730. https://doi.org/10.3115/
v1/P15-2119
[150] Cynthia Rudin. 2018. Please stop explaining black box models for high stakes decisions. Stat 1050 (2018), 26.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
32
Luo and Ivison, et al.
[151] Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen Bach, Lintang Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai, Antoine Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Arun Raja, Manan Dey,
M Saiful Bari, Canwen Xu, Urmish Thakker, Shanya Sharma Sharma, Eliza Szczechla, Taewoon Kim, Gunjan Chhablani, Nihal Nayak, Debajyoti
Datta, Jonathan Chang, Mike Tian-Jian Jiang, Han Wang, Matteo Manica, Sheng Shen, Zheng Xin Yong, Harshit Pandey, Rachel Bawden, Thomas
Wang, Trishala Neeraj, Jos Rozen, Abheesht Sharma, Andrea Santilli, Thibault Fevry, Jason Alan Fries, Ryan Teehan, Teven Le Scao, Stella Biderman,
Leo Gao, Thomas Wolf, and Alexander M Rush. 2022. Multitask Prompted Training Enables Zero-Shot Task Generalization. In International
Conference on Learning Representations. https://openreview.net/forum?id=9Vrb9D0WI4
[152] Sofia Serrano and Noah A. Smith. 2019. Is Attention Interpretable?. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics, Florence, Italy, 2931–2951. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P19-1282
[153] Sofia Serrano and Noah A Smith. 2019. Is Attention Interpretable?. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics. 2931–2951.
[154] Lei Sha, Oana-Maria Camburu, and Thomas Lukasiewicz. 2021. Learning from the Best: Rationalizing Predictions by Adversarial Information
Calibration.. In AAAI. 13771–13779.
[155] Ying Shen, Yang Deng, Min Yang, Yaliang Li, Nan Du, Wei Fan, and Kai Lei. 2018. Knowledge-aware attentive neural network for ranking question
answer pairs. In The 41st International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research & Development in Information Retrieval. 901–904.
[156] Xing Shi, Inkit Padhi, and Kevin Knight. 2016. Does String-Based Neural MT Learn Source Syntax?. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics, Austin, Texas, 1526–1534. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D16-1159
[157] Avanti Shrikumar, Peyton Greenside, and Anshul Kundaje. 2017. Learning important features through propagating activation differences. In
Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning-Volume 70. JMLR. org, 3145–3153.
[158] Dylan Slack, Sophie Hilgard, Emily Jia, Sameer Singh, and Himabindu Lakkaraju. 2020. Fooling lime and shap: Adversarial attacks on post hoc
explanation methods. In Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society. 180–186.
[159] Pia Sommerauer and Antske Fokkens. 2018. Firearms and Tigers are Dangerous, Kitchen Knives and Zebras are Not: Testing whether Word
Embeddings Can Tell. In Proceedings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP. Association
for Computational Linguistics, Brussels, Belgium, 276–286. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W18-5430
[160] Ionut-Teodor Sorodoc, Kristina Gulordava, and Gemma Boleda. 2020. Probing for Referential Information in Language Models. In Proceedings
of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 4177–4189.
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.384
[161] J Springenberg, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Thomas Brox, and M Riedmiller. 2015. Striving for Simplicity: The All Convolutional Net. In ICLR (workshop
track).
[162] Shashank Srivastava, Igor Labutov, and Tom Mitchell. 2017. Joint Concept Learning and Semantic Parsing from Natural Language Explanations. In
Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics, Copenhagen,
Denmark, 1527–1536. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D17-1161
[163] Josua Stadelmaier and Sebastian Padó. 2019. Modeling Paths for Explainable Knowledge Base Completion. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACL
Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP. Association for Computational Linguistics, Florence, Italy, 147–157.
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W19-4816
[164] Felix Stahlberg, Danielle Saunders, and Bill Byrne. 2018. An Operation Sequence Model for Explainable Neural Machine Translation. In Proceedings
of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP. Association for Computational Linguistics, Brussels,
Belgium, 175–186. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W18-5420
[165] Dominik Stammbach and Elliott Ash. 2020. e-FEVER: Explanations and Summaries for Automated Fact Checking. In TTO.
[166] Weijie Su, Xizhou Zhu, Yue Cao, Bin Li, Lewei Lu, Furu Wei, and Jifeng Dai. 2020. VL-BERT: Pre-training of Generic Visual-Linguistic Representations.
In International Conference on Learning Representations. https://openreview.net/forum?id=SygXPaEYvH
[167] Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. 2017. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference
on Machine Learning-Volume 70. JMLR. org, 3319–3328.
[168] Alona Sydorova, Nina Poerner, and Benjamin Roth. 2019. Interpretable Question Answering on Knowledge Bases and Text. In Proceedings of the
57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. 4943–4951.
[169] Ian Tenney, Patrick Xia, Berlin Chen, Alex Wang, Adam Poliak, R. Thomas McCoy, Najoung Kim, Benjamin Van Durme, Samuel R. Bowman,
Dipanjan Das, and Ellie Pavlick. 2019. What do you learn from context? Probing for sentence structure in contextualized word representations. In
International Conference on Learning Representations. https://openreview.net/forum?id=SJzSgnRcKX
[170] Ming Tu, Kevin Huang, Guangtao Wang, Jing Huang, Xiaodong He, and Bowen Zhou. 2020. Select, Answer and Explain: Interpretable Multi-Hop
Reading Comprehension over Multiple Documents.. In AAAI. 9073–9080.
[171] Martin Tutek and Jan Šnajder. 2018. Iterative Recursive Attention Model for Interpretable Sequence Classification. In Proceedings of the 2018
EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP. Association for Computational Linguistics, Brussels, Belgium,
249–257. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W18-5427
[172] Muneeb ul Hassan, Philippe Mulhem, Denis Pellerin, and Georges Quénot. 2019. Explaining Visual Classification using Attributes. In 2019
International Conference on Content-Based Multimedia Indexing (CBMI). 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1109/CBMI.2019.8877393
[173] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is
all you need. In Advances in neural information processing systems. 5998–6008.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Local Interpretations for Explainable Natural Language Processing: A Survey
33
[174] Ramakrishna Vedantam, C Lawrence Zitnick, and Devi Parikh. 2015. Cider: Consensus-based image description evaluation. In Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 4566–4575.
[175] Elena Voita and Ivan Titov. 2020. Information-Theoretic Probing with Minimum Description Length. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP). Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 183–196. https://doi.org/10.18653/
v1/2020.emnlp-main.14
[176] Cunxiang Wang, Shuailong Liang, Yue Zhang, Xiaonan Li, and Tian Gao. 2019. Does it Make Sense? And Why? A Pilot Study for Sense Making and
Explanation. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics,
Florence, Italy, 4020–4026. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P19-1393
[177] Jingjing Wang, Jie Li, Shoushan Li, Yangyang Kang, Min Zhang, Luo Si, and Guodong Zhou. 2018. Aspect Sentiment Classification with both
Word-level and Clause-level Attention Networks.. In IJCAI, Vol. 2018. 4439–4445.
[178] Ziqi Wang, Yujia Qin, Wenxuan Zhou, Jun Yan, Qinyuan Ye, Leonardo Neves, Zhiyuan Liu, and Xiang Ren. 2020. Learning from Explanations with
Neural Execution Tree. In ICLR.
[179] Zhiguo Wang, Yue Zhang, Mo Yu, Wei Zhang, Lin Pan, Linfeng Song, Kun Xu, and Yousef El-Kurdi. 2019. Multi-Granular Text Encoding for
Self-Explaining Categorization. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACL Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP.
Association for Computational Linguistics, Florence, Italy, 41–45. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W19-4805
[180] Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du, Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V Le. 2022. Finetuned
Language Models are Zero-Shot Learners. In International Conference on Learning Representations. https://openreview.net/forum?id=gEZrGCozdqR
[181] Sandareka Wickramanayake, Wynne Hsu, and Mong Li Lee. 2019. FLEX: Faithful Linguistic Explanations for Neural Net Based Model Decisions.
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 33, 01 (Jul. 2019), 2539–2546. https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33012539
[182] Sarah Wiegreffe and Ana Marasovic. 2021. Teach Me to Explain: A Review of Datasets for Explainable Natural Language Processing. In Thirty-fifth
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 1). https://openreview.net/forum?id=ogNcxJn32BZ
[183] Sarah Wiegreffe, Ana Marasović, and Noah A. Smith. 2021. Measuring Association Between Labels and Free-Text Rationales. In Proceedings of
the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics, Online and Punta Cana,
Dominican Republic, 10266–10284. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.804
[184] Sarah Wiegreffe and Yuval Pinter. 2019. Attention is not not Explanation. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP). Association for Computational
Linguistics, Hong Kong, China, 11–20. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D19-1002
[185] Sarah Wiegreffe and Yuval Pinter. 2019. Attention is not not Explanation. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP). 11–20.
[186] Ronald J Williams. 1992. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement learning. Machine learning 8, 3-4 (1992),
229–256.
[187] Jialin Wu and Raymond Mooney. 2019. Faithful Multimodal Explanation for Visual Question Answering. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACL
Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP. Association for Computational Linguistics, Florence, Italy, 103–112.
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W19-4812
[188] Tongshuang Wu, Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Jeffrey Heer, and Daniel S Weld. 2021. Polyjuice: Generating Counterfactuals for Explaining, Evaluating,
and Improving Models. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers). 6707–6723.
[189] Kelvin Xu, Jimmy Ba, Ryan Kiros, Kyunghyun Cho, Aaron Courville, Ruslan Salakhudinov, Rich Zemel, and Yoshua Bengio. 2015. Show, attend and
tell: Neural image caption generation with visual attention. In International conference on machine learning. 2048–2057.
[190] Zichao Yang, Xiaodong He, Jianfeng Gao, Li Deng, and Alex Smola. 2016. Stacked attention networks for image question answering. In Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 21–29.
[191] Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Christopher D Manning. 2018. HotpotQA: A
Dataset for Diverse, Explainable Multi-hop Question Answering. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing. 2369–2380.
[192] Yordan Yordanov, Vid Kocijan, Thomas Lukasiewicz, and Oana-Maria Camburu. 2021. Few-Shot Out-of-Domain Transfer Learning of Natural
Language Explanations. In NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on Deep Generative Models and Downstream Applications. https://openreview.net/forum?id=
g9PUonwGk2M
[193] Bin Yu. 2013. Stability. Bernoulli 19, 4 (09 2013), 1484–1500. https://doi.org/10.3150/13-BEJSP14
[194] Mo Yu, Shiyu Chang, Yang Zhang, and Tommi Jaakkola. 2019. Rethinking Cooperative Rationalization: Introspective Extraction and Complement
Control. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP). 4085–4094.
[195] Zhou Yu, Jun Yu, Yuhao Cui, Dacheng Tao, and Qi Tian. 2019. Deep modular co-attention networks for visual question answering. In Proceedings of
the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 6281–6290.
[196] Matthew D Zeiler, Dilip Krishnan, Graham W Taylor, and Rob Fergus. 2010. Deconvolutional networks. In 2010 IEEE Computer Society Conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition. IEEE, 2528–2535.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
34
Luo and Ivison, et al.
[197] Rowan Zellers, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. 2019. From Recognition to Cognition: Visual Commonsense Reasoning. In The IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
[198] Rowan Zellers, Ximing Lu, Jack Hessel, Youngjae Yu, Jae Sung Park, Jize Cao, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. 2021. MERLOT: Multimodal Neural
Script Knowledge Models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34.
[199] Hongming Zhang, Xinran Zhao, and Yangqiu Song. 2020. WinoWhy: A Deep Diagnosis of Essential Commonsense Knowledge for Answering Wino-
grad Schema Challenge. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Association for Computational
Linguistics, Online, 5736–5745. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.508
[200] Kelly Zhang and Samuel Bowman. 2018. Language Modeling Teaches You More than Translation Does: Lessons Learned Through Auxiliary
Syntactic Task Analysis. In Proceedings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP. Association
for Computational Linguistics, Brussels, Belgium, 359–361. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W18-5448
[201] Xinyan Zhao and VG Vinod Vydiswaran. 2021. Lirex: Augmenting language inference with relevant explanations. In Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 35. 14532–14539.
[202] Wangchunshu Zhou, Jinyi Hu, Hanlin Zhang, Xiaodan Liang, Maosong Sun, Chenyan Xiong, and Jian Tang. 2020. Towards Interpretable
Natural Language Understanding with Explanations as Latent Variables. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, H. Larochelle,
M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (Eds.), Vol. 33. Curran Associates, Inc., 6803–6814. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
4be2c8f27b8a420492f2d44463933eb6-Paper.pdf
[203] Yichu Zhou and Vivek Srikumar. 2021. DirectProbe: Studying Representations without Classifiers. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies. Association for Computational Linguistics,
Online, 5070–5083. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.401
[204] Yangqiaoyu Zhou and Chenhao Tan. 2021. Investigating the Effect of Natural Language Explanations on Out-of-Distribution Generalization in
Few-shot NLI. In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Insights from Negative Results in NLP. Association for Computational Linguistics, Online
and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, 117–124. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.insights-1.17
Manuscript submitted to ACM
