Title: Welcome to the Modern World of Pronouns: Identity-Inclusive Natural Language Processing beyond Gender
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2202.11923v1
--------------------------------------------------

Welcome to the Modern World of Pronouns:
Identity-Inclusive Natural Language Processing beyond Gender
Anne Lauscher
MilaNLP
Università Luigi Bocconi
Milan, Italy
anne.lauscher@unibocconi.it
Archie Crowley
Linguistics
University of South Carolina
Columbia, SC, USA
acrowley@sc.edu
Dirk Hovy
MilaNLP
Università Luigi Bocconi
Milan, Italy
dirk.hovy@unibocconi.it
Abstract
Trigger warning: This paper contains some ex-
amples which might be offensive to some users.
The worls of pronouns is changing. From a
closed class of words with few members to a
much more open set of terms to reﬂect iden-
tities.
However, Natural Language Process-
ing (NLP) is barely reﬂecting this linguistic
shift, even though recent work outlined the
harms of gender-exclusive language technol-
ogy.
Particularly problematic is the current
modeling 3rd person pronouns, as it largely
ignores various phenomena like neopronouns,
i.e., pronoun sets that are novel and not (yet)
widely established. This omission contributes
to the discrimination of marginalized and un-
derrepresented groups, e.g., non-binary indi-
viduals.
However, other identity-expression
phenomena beyond gender are also ignored
by current NLP technology.
In this paper,
we provide an overview of 3rd person pro-
noun issues for NLP. Based on our observa-
tions and ethical considerations, we deﬁne a
series of desiderata for modeling pronouns in
language technology. We evaluate existing and
novel modeling approaches w.r.t. these desider-
ata qualitatively, and quantify the impact of
a more discrimination-free approach on estab-
lished benchmark data.
1
Introduction
Pronouns are an essential component of many lan-
guages and often one of the most frequent word
classes. Accordingly, NLP has long studied tasks
related to them, e.g., pronoun resolution (e.g.,
Hobbs, 1978). Simplistically, they can be deﬁned
as “a word (such as I, he, she, you, it, we, or they)
that is used instead of a noun or noun phrase”.1
Linguistic studies have pointed out the complex-
ity of pronouns, though (e.g., Postal et al., 1969;
1Essential deﬁnition provided by the Mirriam Webster
Online Dictionaly at https://www.merriam-webste
r.com/dictionary/pronoun
McKay, 1993). Pronouns can carry demographic
information – in English, for example, information
about the number of referees and a single referee’s
(grammatical) gender.2 Even more information can
be conveyed by pronouns in other, non-pro-drop
languages. Consider Arabana-Wangkangurru, a
language spoken in Australia, in which a speaker
uses different pronouns depending on whether the
referee is part of the same social or ritual group
(moiety) (Hercus, 1994). As such, pronouns shape
how we perceive individuals and can even reﬂect
cultural aspects (e.g., Kashima and Kashima, 1998)
and ideologies (e.g., Muqit, 2012). Consequently,
pronoun usage should be considered a sensitive
aspect of natural language use.
Accordingly, in many western societies, these
phenomena have been drawing more and more at-
tention. For instance, in 2020, the American Di-
alect Society voted “(My) Pronouns” as the 2019
Word of the Year and Singular “They” as the Word
of the Decade (Roberts, 2020). Recently, there has
been a shift in pronoun usage (Krauthamer, 2021),
partially due to shifts in the perception of gender,
driven by the queer-feminist discourse (e.g., Butler,
1990, 2004). Related to this is the open discussion
of identity beyond binary gender. For instance, a
person who does not identify their gender within
the gender binary (e.g., a nonbinary or genderqueer
person) might use singular “they” as their pronoun.
Recently, the French dictionary “Le Robert” added
the non-binary pronoun “iel” to its list of words.3
This “social push” to respect diverse gender iden-
tities also affects aspects of NLP. Recent studies
have pointed out the potential harms from the cur-
2Grammatical, biological, and self-identiﬁed gender
should not be confounded, but are often treated interchange-
ably by lay audiences.
3https://dictionnaire.lerobert.com/di
s-moi-robert/raconte-moi-robert/mot-jo
ur/pourquoi-le-robert-a-t-il-integre-le-
mot-iel-dans-son-dictionnaire-en-ligne.h
tml
arXiv:2202.11923v1  [cs.CL]  24 Feb 2022
rent lack of non-binary representation in NLP data
sets, embeddings, and tasks (Cao and Daumé III,
2021; Dev et al., 2021), and the related issue of
unfair stereotyping of queer individuals (Barikeri
et al., 2021). However, the research landscape on
modern pronoun usage is still surprisingly scarce,
hindering progress for a fair and inclusive NLP.
Further linguistic research has identiﬁed iden-
tity aspects of pronouns beyond gender (Miltersen,
2016). Speciﬁcally, nounself pronouns, function-
ally turning pronouns from a closed to an open
word class. To the best of our knowledge, these
aspects have been completely ignored by NLP so
far. We did not ﬁnd a single work systematically
describing all of the currently existing phenomena
even just in English third-person pronoun usage (let
alone other languages).4 In contrast, a fair number
of discussions are taking place in queer Wikis and
forums. While it is still unclear which of these phe-
nomena will persist over the next decades, people
are using and discussing them, and accordingly, we
as a research community should adapt.
Contributions.
In this “living draft”, 1) we are
the ﬁrst to provide a systematic overview of ex-
isting phenomena in English 3rd person pronoun
usage. Our results will inform future NLP research
on ethical NLP and non-binary representation. We
provide the ﬁrst NLP work acknowledging otherkin
identities. We support our observations with a cor-
pus analysis on Reddit. 2) Based on our overview,
we derive ﬁve desiderata for modeling third-person
pronouns. Based on these, 3) we discuss various
existing and novel paradigms for when and how to
model pronouns. 4) Finally, we quantify the impact
of discrimination-free non-modeling of pronouns
on a widely established benchmark.
2
Related Work
While there are some works in NLP on gender-
inclusion (e.g., Dev et al., 2021) and gender bias
in static (e.g., Bolukbasi et al., 2016; Gonen and
Goldberg, 2019; Lauscher et al., 2020, inter alia)
and contextualized (e.g., Kurita et al., 2019; Bordia
and Bowman, 2019; Lauscher et al., 2021, inter
alia) language representations as well as works
focusing on speciﬁc gender bias in downstream
tasks, e.g., natural language inference (Dev et al.,
2020) and co-reference resolution (e.g., Rudinger
et al., 2018; Webster et al., 2018), we are not aware
4For instance, while we found hits for the Google Scholar
query “neopronoun”, we did not get any results for variants
of “nameself pronoun”, or ”emojiself pronoun”.
of any work that deals with the broader ﬁeld of
identity-inclusion. Thus, there is no other NLP
work that deals with a larger variety of pronouns
and acknowledges pronouns as an open word class.
For surveys on the general topic of unfair bias in
NLP we refer to Blodgett et al. (2020) and Shah
et al. (2020). Recently, Dev et al. (2021) pointed
broadly at the harms (Barocas et al., 2017) aris-
ing from gender-exclusivity in NLP. They surveyed
queer individuals and assessed non-binary repre-
sentations in existing data set and language repre-
sentations. In contrast to them, we speciﬁcally look
at third-person pronoun usage and how to model
such phenomena. Webster et al. (2018) provide
a balanced co-reference resolution corpus with a
focus on the fair distribution of pronouns but only
focus on the gendered binary case. Closest to us,
Cao and Daumé III (2021) discuss gender inclusion
throughout the machine learning pipeline beyond
the binary gender conception. While they are also
the ﬁrst to consider non-binary pronouns, includ-
ing some neopronouns, in co-reference resolution,
they do not acknowledge the broader spectrum of
identity-related pronoun phenomena.
3
A Note on Identity and Pronouns
This work focuses on the relationship between iden-
tity and pronouns. Identity refers to an individual’s
self-concept, relating to the question of what makes
each of us unique (Maalouf, 2000). It can be seen
as a two-way process between an individual and
others (Grandstrand, 1998), and relates to different
dimensions, e.g., one’s gender.
Gender Identity.
Gender identity, as opposed to
gender expression or sex, is one’s subjective sense
of gender (Stryker, 2017). In this work, we concep-
tualize gender identities beyond the binary notion
(man, woman), e.g., non-binary gender, transgen-
der, agender, polygender, etc.
Otherkin Identity.
Individuals with otherkin
identity do not entirely identify as human (Lay-
cock, 2012), e.g., vamp. Miltersen (2016) note that
otherkin individuals often identify with nounself
pronouns matching their kin.
Stryker (2017) highlights the strong relationship
between gender identity and pronouns. As Ray-
mond (2016) notes, pronoun choices construct the
individual’s identity in conversations and the rela-
tionship between interlocutors. According to Cao
and Daumé III (2021), pronouns are a way of ex-
pressing referential gender. Referring to an indi-
Nom.
Acc.
Poss.
Poss.
Reﬂexive
(dep.)
(indep.)
Gendered Pronouns
he
him
his
his
himself
she
her
her
hers
herself
Gender-Neutral Pronouns
they
them
their
theirs
themself
Neopronouns
thon
thon
thons
thons
thonself
e
em
es
ems
emself
ae
aer
aer
aers
aerself
co
co
cos
cos
coself
ve/ vi
ver/ vir
vis
vers/ virs
verself/ virself
xe
xem
xyr
xyrs
xemself
ey
em
eir
eirs
emself
e
em
eir
eirs
emself
ze
zir
zir
zirs
zirself
...
Nounself Pronouns
star
star
stars
stars
starself
vam
vamp
vamps
vamps
vampself
...
Emojiself Pronouns
s
s
self
s
s
self
...
Numberself Pronouns
0
0
0s
0s
0self
1
3
1
3
1
3s
1
3s
1
3self
...
Nameself Pronouns
John
John
Johns
Johns
Johnself
...
Table 1: Non-exhaustive overview of phenomena re-
lated to third-person pronoun usage in English.
vidual with sets of pronouns they do not identify
with, e.g., resulting in misgendering, is considered
harmful (Dev et al., 2021).
4
Phenomena in Third-person
Pronoun-Usage
We describe existing phenomena and analyze their
presence in a collection of threads from Reddit.5
4.1
Existing Phenomena
Overall, individuals can choose n sets of pronouns
with n ≥0. If n = 0, the individual does not
identify with any singular 3rd person pronoun. If
n > 1, the individual identiﬁes with more than
one set of pronouns, possibly each set reﬂecting
overlapping or non-overlapping aspects of their
identity. We provide examples of these sets in
Table 1. Note that this list is non-exhaustive and
that the described phenomena are non-exclusive.
5https://www.reddit.com
Gendered Pronouns.
In English,
two sets
of standard gendered pronouns are available,
he/him/himself and she/her/herself.
Gender-Neutral Pronouns.
Given the history of
generic singular they in English (e.g., Who was at
the door? They left a note.), there has been an up-
take of singular they by non-binary individuals as
a gender-netural pronoun option6 (Conrod, 2019;
Konnelly and Cowper, 2020). Further, there has
been increasing institutional recognition with dic-
tionaries and style guides supporting its use.
Neopronouns.
As an alternative to the singular
they, individuals started creating and sharing novel
sets of 3rd person pronouns (McGaughey, 2020).
More traditional and rather well-known sets of neo-
pronouns include, e.g., the so-called Spivak pro-
nouns e/emself (used in (Spivak, 1990)) and related
variations. During our research, we were able to
observe various subcategories of neopronouns, par-
tially described in the academic literature.
Nounself Pronouns. According to Miltersen (2016),
nounself pronouns are pronouns that are “[...] pro-
totypically transparently derived from a speciﬁc
word, usually a noun”. Individuals may identify
with certain nouns, possibly corresponding to dis-
tinct aspects of their identity, e.g., kitten/kittenself,
vamp/vampself. The author notes the difﬁculty of
clearly deﬁning nounself pronouns, neopronouns,
and other phenomena.
The phenomenon is as-
sumed to have ﬁrst appeared in 2013.
Emojiself Pronouns. Similar to nounself pronouns,
individuals may identify with sets of emojis, possi-
bly reﬂecting different aspects of their identity, e.g.,
/
self. Emojiself pronouns are intended for
written communication. Note, that, at the time of
writing this manuscript, there seem to exist no aca-
demic description of emojiself pronouns. However,
we were able to ﬁnd evidence of their existence
on several social media platforms and wikis, e.g.,
Tumblr,7 MOGAI Wiki,8 Twitter,9 and Reddit.10
6https://gendercensus.com/results/202
1-worldwide-summary/
7E.g., https://pronoun-archive.tumblr.com
/post/188520170831
8https://mogai.miraheze.org/wiki/Emoj
iself; according to the article, the origin of emojiself pro-
nouns is unclear but might date back to 2017
9Example of a user complaining about LinkedIn not al-
lowing for emojiself pronouns in the pronoun ﬁeld: https:
//twitter.com/frozenpandaman/status/1412
314202119700480/photo/1
10E.g., https://www.reddit.com/r/QueerVexi
Numberself Pronouns. Another form of neopro-
nouns/ nounself pronouns are numberself pronouns.
Analogous to before, we assume that here, the indi-
vidual identiﬁes or partially identiﬁed with a num-
ber, e.g., 0/0/0s/0s/0self.11
Nameself Pronouns.
Individuals may iden-
tify with pronouns build from their name, e.g.,
John/Johnself, overlapping with nullpronomials.12
Alternating Pronouns.
Given that people can
identify with n > 1 sets of pronouns, the pronouns
they identify with can be either equally identiﬁed-
with sets, or change potentially depending on the
context (mutopronominal). For instance, individu-
als who are also performer may use stage pronouns.
Similarly, genderﬂuid individual may identify with
a certain pronoun at a certain point in time (pro-
noun ﬂuidity, (Cherry-Reid, 2020)). Some individ-
uals identify with the pronouns of the person who
is referring to them (mirrored pronouns). Other in-
dividuals use set(s) of auxiliary pronouns, e.g., for
situations, in which individuals referring to them
have problems with using the most identiﬁed-with
sets of pronouns (e.g., in the case of emojiself pro-
nouns and oral communication). Note that alter-
nating pronoun sets may be even used in the same
sentence for referring to the same individual.13
No Pronouns.
Some individuals do not identify
with any pronouns. In this case, some individuals
identify most with their name being used to refer
to them, nameself pronouns, or avoid pronouns.
4.2
Corpus Analysis: Neopronouns in Reddit
Setup.
We conduct an additional quantitative
analysis for the presence of neopronouns in Reddit.
To this end, we use Reddit threads created between
2010 and 2021, cleaned by previous work and pro-
vided through Huggingface Datasets (127,445,911
lines).14 As we are interested in capturing novel
pronouns and as the list of possible pronouns is
indeﬁnite, we proxy neopronouns via the sufﬁxes
self and selves indicating the reﬂexive case and
llology/comments/p09nek/i_made_a_flag_f
or_the_emojiself_pronoun_set/
11https://pronoun-provider.tumblr.com/
post/148452374817/i-think-numbers-as-pro
nouns-would-be-pretty-cool
12https://pronoun.fandom.com/wiki/Null
pronominal
13https://www.reddit.com/r/NonBinary/c
omments/jasv5r/alternating_pronouns_in_s
ame_sentence/
14https://huggingface.co/datasets/sent
ence-transformers/reddit-title-body
10
0
10
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
Rank (log-scale)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
Count
themself
xemself, catself, ...
kittenself, ...
vampself, ...
wolfself, ...
peachself, ...
Figure 1: Token ranks (log-scale) and rank counts of
the tokens returned against our reﬂexive regular expres-
sion pattern from Reddit with example annotations.
match them through a regular expression. Addi-
tionally, we ﬁlter out non-3rd person pronouns (e.g.,
yourself, ourselves, plural themselves) as well as
common variations of these (e.g., urself) and other
common non-pronoun expressions we found in the
data (e.g., do-it-yourself). This process leaves us
with a total of 9,075 unique tokens with in total
74,768 textual mentions.
Results.
An initial manual analysis reveals that,
unsurprisingly, many of the matches are false pos-
itives, i.e., not real neopronouns (e.g., non-self, a
common concept in Buddhist philosophy, and to-
myself, a common spelling mistake of to myself).
However, our method still ﬁnds relevant cases. Ex-
amples are depicted in Table 2. Many discussions
in which we detect nounself pronouns center on the
phenomena themselves, including, e.g., individuals
stating that they are interested in using a speciﬁc
pronoun or individuals stating that they refuse to
acknowledge the phenomenon. Some discussions
involve people reporting on personal experiences
and problems and seeking advice. To obtain a quan-
titative view of the results, we plot the ranks (i.e.,
number of occurrences of a token) against their
number of tokens (Figure 1). The result is a highly
skewed Zipf’s distribution: while the highest ranks
appear only once (e.g., themself with 24,697 men-
tions), some tokens appear only a couple of times
(e.g., the neopronoun xemself with 24 mentions),
and the vast majority appears only once (e.g., many
Match
Subreddit
Thread Title
Thread Excerpt
meowself
monsterhunterrage Fureedom Mewnite can die
in my litterbox.
I don’t like this game. But I still want meowself to play it,
meow. Cause it’s fun, even though I hate it.
offmychest
Neopronouns are going too
far.
I get some pronouns like ze/zir, xe/xem, etc.
I agree
with those. But why are people using ghost/ghostself and
meow/meowself? That’s really utter bullshit.
bunself
TiADiscussion
I am genderﬂuid, pansex-
ual, and mentally ill. I have
a lot of SJW friends. AMA!
They/them pronouns are coolest with me, but I won’t be angry
if you use he or she. You can use bun/buns/bunself, if you are
feeling special. (That was a joke.)
rpdrcirclejerk
Xi am so proud to announce
that the new word of the
year is.....
–Cinnagender– which means you identify with our beloved
and innocent cinnamon buns.
The pronoun set is
cinne/cinns/cinnself or alternatively bun/buns/bunself i am
so happy to be a member of a community that ignores the
oppressive gender binary, which is a social construct, i.e., it
is not real
zirself
mypartneristrans
Ran into our ﬁrst roadblock
I asked what I could do to help zir lowering the feeling of
disphoria, and ze said ze´d maybe feel better about zirself if
ze´d drink a tea.
Negareddit
No, Redditors.
If you’re
a horrible person online,
you’re probably a horrible
person ofﬂine too.
Hello folks. Omg. I think this person is about to kill zirself!
(emphasis on "zirself". COMEDIC GENIUS)
Table 2: Example neopronouns and corresponding excerpts from Reddit retrieved via our heuristic method. We
slightly modiﬁed the excerpts to lower searchability and increase the privacy of the users.
nounself pronouns such as peachself).
5
How Can and Should We Model
Pronouns?
We devise ﬁve desiderata based on our previous ob-
servations, personal experiences, and expert knowl-
edge from interactions with LGBTQIA+ associates.
Additionally, we collect informal feedback from
individuals who use gender-neutral pronouns. We
then assess how well classic and novel pronoun
modeling paradigms fulﬁl the ﬁve criteria.
5.1
Desiderata
D1.
Refrain from assuming an individual’s
identity and pronouns.
A model should not as-
sume an individual’s identity, e.g., gender, or pro-
nouns based on, e.g., statistical cues about an in-
dividual’s name, also not in a binary gender setup.
Only because the name John typically appears to-
gether with the pronoun he, the model should never
assume that a person with the name John identiﬁes
as a man and that every John uses the pronoun he.
D2. Allow for the existing sets of pronouns as
well as for neopronouns.
A model should be
able to handle not only the existing set of "stan-
dard" pronouns in a language but also other existing
pronouns, e.g., neopronouns.
D3. Allow for novel pronouns at any point in
time.
On top of D2, a model should allow for
novel, i.e., unseen, pronouns to appear at any point
in time. This condition is necessary to handle the
fact that neopronouns are not a ﬁxed set, but evolv-
ing, and because related phenomena (emojiself and
nameself pronouns) turn pronouns from a closed
to an open class part of speech.
D4. Allow for multiple, alternating, and chang-
ing pronouns.
A model should not assume that
the pronoun set for an individuum at time t will be
the same as at time t −1. Even within the same
sequence, pronoun sets might change.
D5.
Provide an option to set up individuals’
sets of pronouns.
While most NLP models are
trained ofﬂine and do not interact with the user,
some are designed to interact with individuals, e.g.,
dialog systems. In this context, setting up indi-
viduals’ sets of pronouns can help avoid harmful
interactions (depending on the concrete sociotech-
nical deployment scenario).
5.2
Modeling Paradigms
We compare four general modeling paradigms with
D1–D5 in Table 3.
Classic Statistical Modeling.
Traditionally, pro-
nouns have been treated as a closed word class.
Generally, statistical models do not make assump-
tions about this (except if the vocabulary is manu-
ally curated). However, in models exploiting cooc-
Paradigm
D1
D2
D3
D4
D5
Classic





Bucketing



?

Delexicalization





Post-hoc





Table 3: Modeling paradigms and how they allow for
fullﬁlling the desiderata D1–D5.
curences, e.g., via word embeddings (GloVe (Pen-
nington et al., 2014)) or deep language models
(BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), RoBERTa (Liu et al.,
2019)), the models will likely misrepresent under-
represented pronoun-related phenomena. Dev et al.
(2021) provided an initial insight by showing that
singular they and the neopronouns xe and ze do not
have meaningful vectors in GloVe and BERT.
Bucketing.
One option, previously discussed by
Dev et al. (2021), is to apply bucketing, i.e., to
decide on a ﬁxed number of majority classes, e.g.,
male pronouns, female pronouns, and one or mul-
tiple classes for the “rest of the pronouns”, e.g.,
other. The advantage of this approach is that it can
map existing and novel pronouns to the other class.
However, it still makes identity assumptions – and
due to unequal representations of main and other
classes, it will inevitably lead to discrimination.
No Modeling – Delexicalization.
Given that the
classic approach and bucketing both lead to unfair
treatment of underrepresented groups, the alterna-
tive is to explicitly not model pronouns in their sur-
face forms. This process, commonly named delexi-
calization, has proved helpful for other tasks where
models capture misleading lexical information, e.g.,
fact veriﬁcation (e.g., Suntwal et al., 2019), or
resource-lean scenarios, e.g., cross-lingual pars-
ing (e.g., McDonald et al., 2011).15 In this case, the
model is forced to not rely on spurious lexical cues
related to gender, e.g., that John occurs most often
with the pronoun he. Instead, the model learns a
single representation for all pronouns and relies
on other task-related conceptual and commonsense
information for disambiguation.
Post-hoc Injection of Modeling Information/
Modeling at Test Time.
For human-to-human
interactions, several LGBTQIA+ guides recom-
mend to (1) ﬁrst try generic pronouns (e.g., singular
they), and (2) switch to other sets of pronouns once
the conversation partner communicates them. For
15In fact, accounting for novel pronouns and novel ways of
using pronouns is a resource-lean scenario.
Train
Dev
Test
Total
PRP
64,476
7,881
8,067
80,424
PRP$
14,535
1,783
1,935
18,253
Total
79,011
9,664
10,002
98,677
Table 4: Number of pronoun replacements in the train-
ing, development, and test portion of OntoNotes 5.0 for
PRP and PRP$, respectively.
uncommon or novel pronouns, several web pages
have explicitly been set up for practising how to
use them.16 In this work, we propose that NLP
systems should work similarly – if technically pos-
sible and depending on the concrete sociotechnical
deployment scenario. To this end, we can use in-
termediate training procedures (e.g., Hung et al.,
2021) for pronoun-related model reﬁnement. E.g.,
we can use synthetic data created through similar
procedures as the ones employed on these websites.
Another option is only model pronouns at test time,
e.g., through simple replacement procedures.
6
How Much Would We Loose?
In §5.2, we discussed delexicalization, i.e., not
modeling lexical surface forms of pronouns, as
one way to counter exclusion in statistical model-
ing and bucketing. However, a possible counter-
argument against this approach is that omitting the
surface forms will lead to poor model performance
on pronoun-related tasks. We experimentally quan-
tify the loss from (fairer) delexicalization compared
to statistical modeling in co-reference resolution.
6.1
Experimental Setup
Task, Dataset, and Measures.
We resort to co-
reference resolution, a task where knowledge about
pronouns and related gender identity assumptions
play an important role. We use the English portion
of the OntoNotes 5.0 dataset (Weischedel et al.,
2012), which consists of texts annotated with co-
reference information across ﬁve domains (news,
conversational telephone speech, weblogs, usenet
newsgroups, broadcast, and talk shows). We pre-
pare three variants: (i) the ﬁrst version consists of
the plain original data; (ii) in the second variant, we
replace all pronouns in the test set with the respec-
tive part-of-speech token, according to the Penn
Treebank Project (Santorini, 1990), i.e., PRP for
personal pronouns, and PRP$ for possessive pro-
nouns. Finally, we provide a version (iii) in which
16E.g., https://www.practicewithpronouns.c
om/#/?_k=66emp7
MUC
CEAFφ4
B3
AVG
P
R
F1
P
R
F1
P
R
F1
P
R
F1
(Dobrovolskii, 2021)
84.9
87.9
86.3
76.1
77.1
76.6
77.4
82.6
79.9
–
–
81.0
- reproduction
84.7
87.5
86.1
75.6
76.7
76.1
77.2
82.0
79.5
79.2
82.1
80.6
- replace test set
69.7
70.7
70.2
63.2
49.1
55.2
50.1
56.1
52.9
61.0
58.6
59.4
∆repl.test−repr.
-15.0
-16.8
-15.9
-12.4
-27.6
-20.9
-27.1
-25.9
-26.6
-18.2
-23.5
-21.2
- replace all
81.6
83.1
82.4
73.08
72.9
73.0
72.3
75.3
73.7
75.7
77.1
76.4
∆repl.all−repr.
-3.1
-4.4
-3.7
-2.5
-3.8
-3.1
-4.9
-6.7
-5.8
-3.5
-5.0
-4.2
Table 5: Results of the delexicalization experiment. We report the results of the RoBERTa large-based word-level
co-reference resolution model as reported by Dobrovolskii (2021), our reproduction, as well as variants trained
and/ or tested on versions of the data set in which we replace the pronouns. All scores were produced using the
ofﬁcal CoNLL-2012 scorer. We report precision (P), recall (R), and F1-score (F1) for MUC, CEAFφ4, and B3,
respectively, as well as the averages (AVG). The rows highlighted in gray indicate the obtained losses.
we replace pronouns in the train, dev, and test splits.
Note that our strategy is pessimistic, as we also
replace non-3rd person pronouns, i.e., I, you, our-
selves, etc. We show the number of replacements
in Table 4. For scoring, we use the ofﬁcial CoNLL-
2012 scorer (Pradhan et al., 2012).
We report
the results in terms of MUC (Vilain et al., 1995),
B3 (Bagga and Baldwin, 1998), and CEAFφ4 (Luo,
2005) precision, recall, and F1-measure, as well as
the averages across these scores.
Models and Baselines.
We want to obtain an in-
tuition about the tradeoffs in the delexicalization
setup, not to outperform previous results. For this
reason, we resort to the recently proposed word-
level co-reference model (Dobrovolskii, 2021), a
highly efﬁcient model competitive with the state-
of-the-art. The model consists of a separate co-
reference resolution module and a separate span
extraction module. In an initial step, we compute
token representations from a Transformer (Vaswani
et al., 2017)-based encoder through aggregation of
initial representations via learnable weights. In a
next step, we compute co-reference relationships.
To this end, the token representations are passed
into an antecedent pruning procedure based on a
bilinear scoring function for obtaining k antecedent
candidates for each token through coarse-grained
scoring. Then an additional feed-forward neural
network computes ﬁner-grained scores. The ﬁnal
antecedent score is the sum of these two scores.
We select the candidate with the highest score as
the antecedent. Negative scores indicate no ante-
cent for a token. Tokens assumed to be part of a
co-reference relationship are passed into the span
extraction module. The module consists of an ad-
ditional feed-forward network, which is followed
by convolutions with two output channels (for start
and end scores). For further details see the origi-
nal work. Our baseline is the model trained and
evaluated on the original OntoNotes portions (re-
production). We compare with the evaluation of
this model on the pronoun-replaced test set (replace
test set) and a version of this model trained on the
replaced training set and evaluated on the replaced
test set, respectively (replace all).
Model Conﬁguration, Training, and Optimiza-
tion.
We choose RoBERTa large (Liu et al.,
2019)17 as the base encoder and ﬁx all other hy-
perparameters to the ones provided in the original
implementation of Dobrovolskii (2021): the win-
dow size is set to 512 tokens, dropout rate to 0.3,
the learning rate of the encoder is set to 1·10−5 and
of the task-speciﬁc layers to 3 · 10−4, respectively.
We train the co-reference module with a combina-
tion of the negative log marginal likelihood and
binary cross-entropy as an additional regulariza-
tion factor (weight set to 0.5). The span extraction
module is trained using cross-entropy loss. We
optimize the sum of the two losses jointly with
Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2015) for 20 epochs and
apply early stopping based on validation set perfor-
mance (word-level F1) with a patience of 3 epochs.
6.2
Results and Discussion
We show the results in Table 5. We are roughly
able to reproduce the results reported by (Dobro-
volskii, 2021), conﬁrming the effectiveness of their
approach and the validity of our experimental setup.
When we replace pronouns in the test set, the re-
sults drop massively, with up to −27.6 percent-
age points CEAFφ4 recall. On average, the re-
sults drop by 21.2 percentage points in F1-measure.
This decrease demonstrates the heavy reliance of
17https://huggingface.co/roberta-large
this model on the lexical surface forms of the pro-
noun sets seen in the training. However, when
we replace the pronouns in the training portion of
OntoNotes with the special tokens, we can mitigate
these losses by a large margin (losses up to −5.8
B3 F1, and on average −4.2 F1). These results
are highly encouraging, given that a) we replaced
all pronouns, including non-third person pronouns,
and b) the model has not been trained on these
placeholders in the pretraining phase. The model
can not rely on possibly discriminating correlations
between names or occupations and pronoun sets
and will represent neopronouns the same way as
it will represent established pronoun sets. So a
delexicalization approach can increase fairness in
co-reference resolution and retain high system per-
formance, as we can expect even smaller drops
from a more careful selection of replacements.
7
Conclusion
This work provides an initial overview of the
plethora of current phenomena in 3rd person pro-
noun usage in the English language. For practical
and ethical reasons, the NLP community should
acknowledge the broad spectrum of possible identi-
ties and the respective manifestations in written and
oral communication. Especially since many emerg-
ing phenomena are still under-researched, and even
while it remains to be seen if and how these become
more established ways of referring to individuals.
Language is consistently evolving, and NLP re-
searchers and practitioners should account for this
to provide genuinely inclusive systems. Notably,
pronouns, traditionally handled as a close class of
words, currently seem to function closer to an open
class. Based on our observations, which originate
from literature research, research in non-academic
publicly available writing, as well as a corpus study,
we have deﬁned a series of ﬁve desiderata and ap-
plied those to the discussion of existing and novel
modeling paradigms. In this context, we raised the
questions when and how to model pronouns and
whether and how to include users in these deci-
sions. We consider this document an initial and
living draft and hope to start a broader discussion
on the topic. Our study can inform future NLP
research and beyond and serve as a starting point
for creating novel modeling procedures. In the fu-
ture, we will look at pronoun-related issues within
concrete tasks and in multilingual scenarios.
Acknowledgments
The work of Anne Lauscher and Dirk Hovy is
funded by the European Research Council (ERC)
under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 re-
search and innovation program (grant agreement
No. 949944, INTEGRATOR). We thank Emily
Bender and Chandler May for sharing their ideas
related to our project.
Further Ethical Discussion
We have described and experimented with phenom-
ena related to third-person pronouns focusing on
the English language only. Naturally, this work
comes with several limitations. For instance, while
we pointed the reader to the variety of pronoun-
related phenomena in other languages, a thorough
multilingual and cross-lingual discussion would
have exceeded the scope of this manuscript. This
lacuna includes the discussion of neopronouns in
other languages.
Similarly, while we acknowl-
edged identities beyond the binary gender as well
as otherkin identities, due to our focus on pronouns,
we did not investigate other identity-related terms.
This aspect includes their handling in NLP and the
range of issues related to identity-exclusivity. Fi-
nally, at the current state of the manuscript, the
desiderata discussed are, as reported, based on
our expert knowledge, our activities within the
LGBTQIA+ community, and informal exchanges
with individuals using gender-neutral pronouns.
In the future, we will validate these assumptions
through a structured survey to present a more inclu-
sive perspective on the discussed issues.
References
Amit Bagga and Breck Baldwin. 1998.
Algorithms
for scoring coreference chains.
In Proc. Linguis-
tic Coreference Workshop at the ﬁrst Conf. on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC), pages
563–566, Granada, Spain.
Soumya Barikeri, Anne Lauscher, Ivan Vuli´c, and
Goran Glavaš. 2021. RedditBias: A real-world re-
source for bias evaluation and debiasing of conver-
sational language models.
In Proceedings of the
59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers), pages 1941–1955, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Solon Barocas, Kate Crawford, Aaron Shapiro, and
Hanna Wallach. 2017. The problem with bias: Al-
locative versus representational harms in machine
learning. In 9th Annual Conference of the Special
Interest Group for Computing, Information and So-
ciety.
Su Lin Blodgett, Solon Barocas, Hal Daumé III, and
Hanna Wallach. 2020.
Language (technology) is
power: A critical survey of “bias” in NLP. In Pro-
ceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 5454–
5476, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Tolga Bolukbasi, Kai-Wei Chang, James Y. Zou,
Venkatesh Saligrama, and Adam Tauman Kalai.
2016. Man is to computer programmer as woman
is to homemaker?
debiasing word embeddings.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems 29: Annual Conference on Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems 2016, December 5-10, 2016,
Barcelona, Spain, pages 4349–4357.
Shikha Bordia and Samuel R. Bowman. 2019. Identify-
ing and reducing gender bias in word-level language
models. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Student Research Work-
shop, pages 7–15, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Judith Butler. 1990. Gender trouble, 1st edition. Rout-
ledge Classics, New York, NY, USA.
Judith Butler. 2004.
Undoing Gender, 1st edition.
Routledge, New York, NY, USA.
Yang Trista Cao and Hal Daumé III. 2021.
To-
ward gender-inclusive coreference resolution: An
analysis of gender and bias throughout the ma-
chine learning lifecycle*.
Computational Linguis-
tics, 47(3):615–661.
Katharine A Cherry-Reid. 2020. Music to Our Ears:
Using a Queer Folk Song Pedagogy to do Gender
and Sexuality Education. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Toronto (Canada).
Kirby Conrod. 2019. Pronouns Raising and Emerging.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Washington.
Sunipa Dev, Tao Li, Jeff M. Phillips, and Vivek Sriku-
mar. 2020. On measuring and mitigating biased in-
ferences of word embeddings. In The Thirty-Fourth
AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AAAI
2020, The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference, IAAI 2020, The
Tenth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances
in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, EAAI 2020, New York, NY,
USA, February 7-12, 2020, pages 7659–7666. AAAI
Press.
Sunipa Dev, Masoud Monajatipoor, Anaelia Ovalle, Ar-
jun Subramonian, Jeff Phillips, and Kai-Wei Chang.
2021. Harms of gender exclusivity and challenges in
non-binary representation in language technologies.
In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
1968–1994, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Re-
public. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019.
BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers),
pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Vladimir Dobrovolskii. 2021. Word-level coreference
resolution. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 7670–7675, Online and Punta Cana, Do-
minican Republic. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Hila Gonen and Yoav Goldberg. 2019. Lipstick on a
pig: Debiasing methods cover up systematic gender
biases in word embeddings but do not remove them.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages 609–614,
Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Ove Grandstrand. 1998.
Identity and deception in
the virtual community. In Peter Kollock and Marc
Smith, editors, Communities in Cyberspace, 1st edi-
tion, chapter 2. Routledge, London, UK.
Luise A Hercus. 1994.
A grammar of the Arabana-
Wangkangurru language, Lake Eyre Basin, South
Australia (Paciﬁc linguistics. Series C), 1st edition.
Dept. of Linguistics, Research School of Paciﬁc and
Asian Studies, Australian National University.
Jerry R Hobbs. 1978. Resolving pronoun references.
Lingua, 44(4):311–338.
Chia-Chien Hung, Anne Lauscher, Simone Paolo
Ponzetto, and Goran Glavaš. 2021. DS-TOD: Efﬁ-
cient domain specialization for task oriented dialog.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.08395.
Emiko S. Kashima and Yoshihisa Kashima. 1998. Cul-
ture and language:
The case of cultural dimen-
sionsand personal pronoun use. Journal of Cross-
Cultural Psychology, 29(3):461–486.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2015. Adam: A
method for stochastic optimization.
In 3rd Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015,
Conference Track Proceedings.
Lex Konnelly and Elizabeth Cowper. 2020. Gender di-
versity and morphosyntax: An account of singular
they. Glossa: a journal of general linguistics, 5(1).
Helene Seltzer Krauthamer. 2021. The Great Pronoun
Shift: The Big Impact of Little Parts of Speech, 1st
edition. Routledge.
Keita Kurita, Nidhi Vyas, Ayush Pareek, Alan W Black,
and Yulia Tsvetkov. 2019. Measuring bias in contex-
tualized word representations. In Proceedings of the
First Workshop on Gender Bias in Natural Language
Processing, pages 166–172, Florence, Italy. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Anne Lauscher, Goran Glavaš, Simone Paolo Ponzetto,
and Ivan Vuli´c. 2020. A general framework for im-
plicit and explicit debiasing of distributional word
vector spaces. In Proceedings of the AAAI Confer-
ence on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pages 8131–8138.
Anne Lauscher, Tobias Lueken, and Goran Glavaš.
2021. Sustainable modular debiasing of language
models. In Findings of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: EMNLP 2021, pages 4782–4797,
Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Joseph P Laycock. 2012. “We are spirits of another
sort”: Ontological rebellion and religious dimen-
sions of the otherkin community.
Nova Religio:
The Journal of Alternative and Emergent Religions,
15(3):65–90.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-
dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining ap-
proach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692.
Xiaoqiang Luo. 2005. On coreference resolution per-
formance metrics. In Proceedings of Human Lan-
guage Technology Conference and Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 25–32, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Amin Maalouf. 2000. On identity, 1st, translated by
barbara bray edition. Vintage.
Ryan McDonald, Slav Petrov, and Keith Hall. 2011.
Multi-source transfer of delexicalized dependency
parsers. In Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 62–72, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Sebastian McGaughey. 2020. Understanding neopro-
nouns.
The Gay & Lesbian Review Worldwide,
27(2):27–29.
John C McKay. 1993. On the term “pronoun” in italian
grammars. Italica, 70(2):168–181.
Ehm Hjorth Miltersen. 2016.
Nounself pronouns:
3rd person personal pronouns as identity expression.
Journal of Language Works-Sprogvidenskabeligt
Studentertidsskrift, 1(1):37–62.
Abd Muqit. 2012.
Ideology and power relation re-
ﬂected in the use of pronoun in osama bin laden’s
speech text. International Journal of Social Science
and Humanity, 2(6):557.
Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher
Manning. 2014.
GloVe: Global vectors for word
representation. In Proceedings of the 2014 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), pages 1532–1543,
Doha,
Qatar. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Paul Postal, David A Reibel, and Sanford A Schane.
1969. On so-called pronouns in english. Readings
in English transformational grammar, pages 12–25.
Sameer Pradhan, Alessandro Moschitti, Nianwen Xue,
Olga Uryupina, and Yuchen Zhang. 2012.
Conll-
2012 shared task:
Modeling multilingual unre-
stricted coreference in ontonotes. In Joint Confer-
ence on EMNLP and CoNLL-Shared Task, pages 1–
40.
Chase Wesley Raymond. 2016. Linguistic reference in
the negotiation of identity and action: Revisiting the
t/v distinction. Language, 92:636–670.
Julie Roberts. 2020. 2019 word of the year is “(my)
pronouns,” word of the decade is singular “they” as
voted by american dialect society.
Press Release,
American Dialect Society.
Rachel Rudinger, Jason Naradowsky, Brian Leonard,
and Benjamin Van Durme. 2018.
Gender bias in
coreference resolution. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers),
pages 8–14, New Orleans, Louisiana. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Beatrice Santorini. 1990. Part-of-speech tagging guide-
lines for the penn treebank project.
Deven Santosh Shah, H. Andrew Schwartz, and Dirk
Hovy. 2020. Predictive biases in natural language
processing models: A conceptual framework and
overview. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 5248–5264, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Michael Spivak. 1990.
The Joy of TeX: A Gourmet
Guide to Typesetting with the AMSTeX Macro Pack-
age, 2nd edition. American Mathematical Society.
Susan Stryker. 2017. Transgender history: The roots
of today’s revolution, 2nd edition. Seal Press.
Sandeep Suntwal, Mithun Paul, Rebecca Sharp, and
Mihai Surdeanu. 2019. On the importance of delex-
icalization for fact veriﬁcation. In Proceedings of
the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing and the 9th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 3413–3418, Hong Kong,
China. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-
9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pages 5998–6008.
Marc Vilain, John D Burger, John Aberdeen, Dennis
Connolly, and Lynette Hirschman. 1995. A model-
theoretic coreference scoring scheme. In Sixth Mes-
sage Understanding Conference (MUC-6): Proceed-
ings of a Conference Held in Columbia, Maryland,
November 6-8, 1995.
Kellie Webster, Marta Recasens, Vera Axelrod, and Ja-
son Baldridge. 2018. Mind the GAP: A balanced
corpus of gendered ambiguous pronouns. Transac-
tions of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 6:605–617.
Ralph Weischedel, Sameer Pradhan, Lance Ramshaw,
Jeff Kaufman, Michelle Franchini, Mohammed El-
Bachouti, Nianwen Xue, Martha Palmer, Jena D
Hwang, Claire Bonial, et al. 2012.
Ontonotes re-
lease 5.0.
