Title: Bridging Fairness and Environmental Sustainability in Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2211.04256v1
--------------------------------------------------

Bridging Fairness and Environmental Sustainability
in Natural Language Processing
Marius Hessenthaler1, Emma Strubell2, Dirk Hovy3, Anne Lauscher4
1Data and Web Science Group, University of Mannheim, Germany
2Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, U.S.
3MilaNLP, Bocconi University, Italy
4Data Science Group, University of Hamburg, Germany
marius.hessenthaler@web.de, strubell@cmu.edu,
dirk.hovy@unibocconi.it, anne.lauscher@uni-hamburg.de
Abstract
Fairness and environmental impact are impor-
tant research directions for the sustainable de-
velopment of artiﬁcial intelligence. However,
while each topic is an active research area in
natural language processing (NLP), there is a
surprising lack of research on the interplay be-
tween the two ﬁelds.
This lacuna is highly
problematic, since there is increasing evidence
that an exclusive focus on fairness can actu-
ally hinder environmental sustainability, and
vice versa.
In this work, we shed light on
this crucial intersection in NLP by (1) inves-
tigating the efﬁciency of current fairness ap-
proaches through surveying example methods
for reducing unfair stereotypical bias from the
literature, and (2) evaluating a common tech-
nique to reduce energy consumption (and thus
environmental impact) of English NLP mod-
els, knowledge distillation (KD), for its impact
on fairness. In this case study, we evaluate the
effect of important KD factors, including layer
and dimensionality reduction, with respect to:
(a) performance on the distillation task (nat-
ural language inference and semantic similar-
ity prediction), and (b) multiple measures and
dimensions of stereotypical bias (e.g., gender
bias measured via the Word Embedding As-
sociation Test). Our results lead us to clarify
current assumptions regarding the effect of KD
on unfair bias: contrary to other ﬁndings, we
show that KD can actually decrease model fair-
ness.
1
Introduction
Fairness and environmental sustainability are criti-
cal to the future of human society, and, thus, also
reﬂected by the United Nations’ 17 Sustainable De-
velopment Goals (e.g., Goal 5: Gender Equality,
and Goal 13: Climate Action).1 Accordingly, both
topics are currently also active research areas in
natural language processing (NLP).
1https://sdgs.un.org/goals
On the one hand, several works have established
that language representations are prone to encode
and amplify stereotypical social biases (e.g., Boluk-
basi et al., 2016), and, consequently, are a source of
representational harm (Barocas et al., 2017; Hovy
and Spruit, 2016; Shah et al., 2020). To address
this issue and provide fairer language technologies,
various approaches have developed methods for
measuring bias (e.g., Caliskan et al., 2017; Nadeem
et al., 2020; Nangia et al., 2020; Nozza et al., 2021,
inter alia) as well as debiasing methods (e.g., Zhao
et al., 2018; Dev and Phillips, 2019, inter alia).
On the other hand, recent advances in NLP
have been fueled largely by increasingly compu-
tationally expensive pre-trained language models
(PLMs). Whereas the original BERT base model
has 110M parameters (Devlin et al., 2019), the
Switch Transformer model, designed as a more ef-
ﬁcient alternative to more recent PLMs, has over a
trillion parameters (Fedus et al., 2022). While these
models consistently obtain superior performance
across a variety of NLP benchmarks (Wang et al.,
2018, 2019), researchers have pointed out the in-
creasing potential CO2 emissions of these models.
Strubell et al. (2019) estimated that pre-training
a BERT base Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017)
using energy with average U.S. carbon intensity
has CO2 emissions comparable to a passenger on
a trans-American ﬂight. More recent calculations
conﬁrm that the energy consumption of PLMs con-
tinues to grow along with their size (Dodge et al.,
2022) and that consumption at inference time is
non-negligible (Tambe et al., 2021). These ﬁndings
have fueled the development of more environmen-
tally sustainable NLP. For instance, tuning only
a few new lightweight adapter layers instead of
the whole architecture (e.g., Houlsby et al., 2019;
Pfeiffer et al., 2021), and compressing models (e.g.,
Gupta and Agrawal, 2022) can reduce the energy
consumption during training or inference.
However, while both fairness and sustainability
arXiv:2211.04256v1  [cs.CL]  8 Nov 2022
are active research ﬁelds in our community,2 it is
extremely surprising that there is so little work on
the intersection of both aspects. We argue that this
lack of focus is problematic, as some fairness ap-
proaches can jeopardize sustainability and sus-
tainability approaches might hinder fairness.
For instance, Webster et al. (2020) propose a
data-driven debiasing approach, which requires pre-
training a fairer model from scratch. Thus, for each
and every stereotype, a novel PLM must be trained,
reducing environmental sustainability. Lauscher
et al. (2021) pointed to potential issues of such an
approach and proposed a modular, and therefore
more sustainable method. In the other direction,
recent work in computer vision has shown that com-
pressed models are less robust, and can even am-
plify algorithmic bias (Hooker et al., 2020; Lieben-
wein et al., 2021). Ahia et al. (2021) investigated
the relationship between pruning and low-resource
machine translation, ﬁnding that pruning can actu-
ally aid generalization in this scenario by reducing
undesirable memorization. However, aside from
few works, there has been no systematic research
on the interplay between the two ﬁelds in NLP.
Contributions.
In this work, we acknowledge
the potential for race conditions between fairness
and environmental sustainability in NLP and call
for more research on the interplay between the
two ﬁelds. To shed light on the problem and to
provide a starting point for fair and environmen-
tally sustainable NLP, (1) we provide a literature
overview and systematize a selection of exemplary
fairness approaches according to their sustainabil-
ity aspects. We show that the surveyed approaches
require energy at various training stages and ar-
gue that fairness research should consider these
aspects. (2) Based on work suggesting the poten-
tial of model compression to increase fairness (Xu
and Hu, 2022), we take a closer look at knowledge
distillation (KD; Hinton et al., 2015) as an exam-
ple method targeting the environmental sustainabil-
ity of language technology. In this approach, a
(smaller) student model is guided by the knowl-
edge of a (bigger) teacher model. We extensively
analyze the effect of KD on intrinsic and extrinsic
bias measures (e.g., Word Embedding Association
Test (e.g., Caliskan et al., 2017), Bias-NLI (Dev
et al., 2020)) across two tasks (Natural Language
2See also the proceedings of dedicated workshops,
e.g.,
SustaiNLP
(https://aclanthology.org/
2021.sustainlp-1.0/,
and
LT-EDI
(https:
//aclanthology.org/2022.ltedi-1.0/))
Inference and Semantic Similarity Prediction). We
investigate important KD-factors, such as the num-
ber of hidden layers of the student and their di-
mensionality. Contrary to concurrent ﬁndings (Xu
and Hu, 2022), we show that KD can actually de-
crease fairness. Thus, fairness in such sustainabil-
ity approaches needs to be carefully monitored.
We hope to inspire and inform future research
into fair and environmentally sustainable language
technology and make all code produced publicly
available at: https://github.com/UhhDS/
knowledge_distillation_fairness.
2
How Fairness Can Harm Sustainability
To illustrate the tight relationship between environ-
mental sustainability and fairness in current NLP,
we conduct an exemplary analysis of current miti-
gation approaches for unfair bias. Here, our goal is
not to conduct an exhaustive survey, but to show-
case when, why, and to what extent fairness ap-
proaches can be environmentally harmful.
2.1
Approach
We query the ACL Anthology3 for “debiasing” and
“bias mitigation” and examine the ﬁrst 20 results
each. We focus on debiasing of unfair societal
stereotypes in monolingual PLMs. Therefore, we
exclude approaches on static embeddings, domain
generalization,4 and solely multilingual PLMs. We
also consider only papers that propose a novel adap-
tation or debiasing approach, and exclude papers
that survey or benchmark mitigation methods (e.g.,
Meade et al., 2022). We remove any duplicates.
This approach left us with 8 relevant publications
(out of the initial 40 ACL Anthology hits). To
diversify the analysis pool, we added one more
paper, based on our expert knowledge.
If a paper proposes multiple methods, we fo-
cus only on a single method. We apply a coarse-
grained distinction between (a) projection-based,
and (b) training-based methods. Projection-based
methods follow an analytical approach in a man-
ner similar to the classic hard debiasing (Bolukbasi
et al., 2016). In contrast, training-based methods
either rely on augmenting training sets (e.g., Zhao
et al., 2018) or on a dedicated debiasing loss (e.g.,
Qian et al., 2019).
For the training-based ap-
proaches, we additionally classify the stage where
the authors demonstrate the debiasing.
3https://aclanthology.org
4As for instance common in the fact veriﬁcation litera-
ture (e.g., Paul Panenghat et al., 2020)
Increased Environmental Costs?
Reference
Method
Type
0. Pre-t. 1. Inter. 2. Fine-t. 3. Inf. Other
Karve et al. (2019)
Conceptor Debiasing
Projection
–
–
–
–
Liang et al. (2020)
Sent-Debias
Projection
–
–
–
–
Kaneko and Bollegala (2021) Debias Context. Embs.
Project. & Train.
–
–
–
–
Webster et al. (2020)
Pre-training CDA
Training
–
–
–
–
Barikeri et al. (2021)
Attribute Distance Deb.
Training
–
–
–
–
Guo et al. (2022)
Auto-Debias
Training
–
–
–
Dinan et al. (2020a)
Biased-controlled Training Training
–
–
–
–
Subramanian et al. (2021)
Bias-constrained Model
Training
–
–
–
–
Lauscher et al. (2021)
Debiasing Adapters
Training
–
(
)
–
Table 1: Overview of examplary debiasing methods w.r.t. their efﬁciency. We provide information on the type
of the approach (Projection vs. Training), and estimate their environmental impact in 3 classes (
–
) in
different stages of the NLP-pipeline: 0. Pre-training, 1. Intermediate Training, 2. Fine-tuning, 3. Inference time,
and Other.
2.2
Results and Discussion
We show the results of our analysis in Table 1.
Underlying Debiasing Approach.
Our small
survey yielded examples from a variety of ap-
proaches: the projection-based approaches are rep-
resented by (Karve et al., 2019), (Liang et al.,
2020), and (Kaneko and Bollegala, 2021). These re-
quire generally only a small amount of energy (
)
for the analytical computation, which, in some
cases, is iteratively applied to improve debiasing
performance (Ravfogel et al., 2020). In this case,
each iteration will marginally decrease the efﬁ-
ciency. Kaneko and Bollegala (2021) explicitly
couple their approach with the model ﬁne-tuning.
In contrast, the other 6 works belong to the cate-
gory of training-based approaches. Here, Webster
et al. (2020) and Lauscher et al. (2021) rely on
CDA (Zhao et al., 2018) and Dinan et al. (2020a)
use control codes to guide the biases. Barikeri
et al. (2021) rely on a loss-based bias mitigation for
equalizing the distance of opposing identity terms
towards sterotypical attributes. Subramanian et al.
(2021) use a two-player zero-sum game approach
for enforcing fairness constraints and Guo et al.
(2022) rely on a prompt-based approach.
Training Stage.
For the projection-based ap-
proaches, the point in time of their application is
not critical to their energy consumption. They can
only be applied on a trained model (stages 1–3)
and, in general, do not require much energy.
However, for the training-based approaches, the
training stage is a vital factor: using them in pre-
training (stage 0) corresponds to training a new
model from scratch. The energy (and correspond-
ing CO2 emissions) to perform full PLM pretrain-
ing can vary widely. Recent estimates range from
37.3 kWh to train BERT small, to 103.5 MWh to
train a 6B parameter Transformer language model
(
) (Dodge et al., 2022). On the positive
side, the model can then be used for a variety of ap-
plications without further debiasing, assuming that
debiasing transfers (Jin et al., 2021). However, this
assumption is under scrutiny (Steed et al., 2022).
Intermediate
training
requires
less
en-
ergy5 (
) as PLMs have already acquired
representation capabilities. However, typically, all
parameters are adjusted (e.g., 110M for BERT),
and the question of transferability still applies.
Debiasing in the ﬁne-tuning stage seems the
most energy efﬁcient (
). Still, all parameters
must be adjusted and the additional objective and
data preparation lead to increased costs. The obvi-
ous disadvantage is that for each downstream task
and stereotype, debiasing needs to be conducted.
Lauscher et al. (2021) propose debiasing adapters.
They require less energy in the debiasing procedure
(
), but add a small overhead at inference time
(ca. 1% more parameters). Whether or not they
add overhead to the ﬁne-tuning depends on whether
developers tune the whole architecture.
Overall, we encourage NLP practitioners to con-
sider the energy efﬁciency of their debiasing ap-
proach in addition to the effectiveness and usability.
Energy and emission estimation tools can be used
to better estimate the environmental impact of pro-
posed approaches (e.g., Lacoste et al., 2019).
3
How Sustainability Can Harm Fairness
Xu and Hu (2022) hint at the potential of model
5Dodge et al. (2022) report 3.1 kWh to ﬁne-tune BERT
small on MNLI, 10x less energy than pre-training
compression to improve fairness.
This ﬁnding
holds promise for bridging the two ﬁelds. Unfortu-
nately, the authors partially use pre-distilled mod-
els (for which they cannot control the experimental
setup), do not systematically investigate the impor-
tant dimensions of compression (e.g., hidden size
and initialization), and do not address the stochas-
ticity of the training procedure. In contrast, Silva
et al. (2021) and Ahn et al. (2022) demonstrate
distilled models to be more biased, but either use
off-the-shelf models, too, or focus on single bias
dimensions and measures only. Gupta et al. (2022)
start from the assumption that compression results
in unfair models and show it for one setup. We
provide the ﬁrst thorough analysis of compression
(using the example of knowledge distillation (KD;
Hinton et al., 2015), employing multiple tasks, bias
dimensions, and measures) and show that some of
these previous assumptions do not hold.
3.1
Knowledge Distillation
The underlying idea of knowledge distillation (KD;
Buciluˇa et al., 2006; Hinton et al., 2015) is to trans-
fer knowledge from a (typically big, pre-trained,
and highly regularized) teacher model to a (typi-
cally much smaller and untrained) student network.
It has been shown that a student network which
can learn from the teacher’s knowledge is likely to
perform better than a small model trained without
a teacher’s guidance. The knowledge transfer hap-
pens through effective supervision from the teacher,
e.g., via comparing output probabilities (e.g., Hin-
ton et al., 2015), comparing the intermediate fea-
tures (e.g., Ji et al., 2021), and initializing the stu-
dent’s layers from the teacher’s layers.
3.2
Experimental Setup
Throughout, we use the following setup.
Distillation Tasks, Data Sets, and Measures.
We test the effects of KD on two distillation tasks:
1) natural language inference (NLI) using the
MNLI data set (Williams et al., 2018), and 2) se-
mantic textual similarity (STS) prediction with the
Semantic Textual Similarity-Benchmark (STS-B;
Cer et al., 2017) data set. We chose these tasks
since they are popular examples of downstream nat-
ural language understanding (NLU) tasks. There
are also dedicated bias evaluation data sets and
measures for the resulting models. For MNLI, we
report the accuracy, and for STS the combined cor-
relation score (average of the Pearson’s correlation
coefﬁcient and Spearman’s correlation coefﬁcient).
Fairness Evaluation.
Given that some of the ex-
isting measures have been shown to be brittle (e.g.,
Ethayarajh et al., 2019), we ensure the validity of
our results by combining intrinsic with extrinsic
measures for assessing stereotypical biases along
four dimensions (gender, race, age, and illness).
Word
Embedding
Association
Test
(WEAT;
Caliskan et al., 2017). WEAT is an intrinsic bias
test that computes the differential association
between two sets of target terms A (e.g., woman,
girl, etc.), and B (e.g., man, boy, etc.), and two sets
of stereotypical attribute terms X (e.g., art, poetry,
etc.), and Y (e.g., science, math, etc.) based on the
mean similarity of their embeddings:
w(A, B, X, Y ) =
X
a∈A
s(a, X, Y ) −
X
b∈B
s(b, X, Y ) ,
(1)
with the association s of term t ∈A or t ∈B as
s(t,X,Y )= 1
|X|
X
x∈X
cos(t, x) −
1
|Y |
X
y∈Y
cos(t, y) .
(2)
The ﬁnal score is the effect size, computed as
µ({s(a, X, Y )}a∈A) −µ({s(b, X, Y )}b∈B)
σ ({s(t, X, Y )}t∈A∪B)
,
(3)
where µ is the mean and σ is the standard devia-
tion. To apply the measure, we follow Lauscher
et al. (2021), and extract word embeddings from
the PLM’s encoder, using the procedure proposed
by Vuli´c et al. (2020). We use WEAT tests 3–106
which reﬂect racial (tests 3–5), gender (tests 6–8),
illness (test 9), and age bias (test 10).
Sentence Embedding Association Test (SEAT; May
et al., 2019). SEAT measures stereotypical bias
in sentence encoders following the WEAT princi-
ple. However, instead of feeding words into the
encoder, SEAT contextualizes the words of the test
vocabularies via simple neutral sentence templates,
e.g., “This is <word>.”, “<word> is here.”, etc.
Accordingly, the ﬁnal score is then based on com-
paring sentence representations instead of word
representations. We use SEAT with the WEAT test
vocabularies from tests 3–10, as before. Addition-
ally, we use SEAT’s additional Heilman Double
Bind (Heilman et al., 2004) Competent and Lik-
able tests which reﬂect gender bias, and SEAT’s
Angry Black Woman Stereotype (e.g., Madison,
2009) test, which reﬂects racial bias.
6WEAT tests 1 and 2 consist of bias types which do not
consider marginalized social groups (ﬂowers vs. insects, and
weapons vs. music instruments)
Bias-STS (Webster et al., 2020). The ﬁrst extrin-
sic test is based on the Semantic Textual Similary-
Benchmark (STS-B; Cer et al., 2017). The idea
is to measure whether a model assigns a higher
similarity to a stereotypical sentence pair ss =
(ss1, ss2) than to a counter-stereotypical pair sc =
(sc1, sc2). Webster et al. (2020) provide templates
(e.g., “A [ﬁll] is walking.”), which they ﬁll with
opposing gender identity terms (e.g., man, woman)
and a profession term (e.g., nurse) from Rudinger
et al. (2018) to obtain 16,980 gender bias test in-
stances consisting of two sentence pairs (e.g., “A
man is walking” vs. “A nurse is walking” and “A
woman is walking” vs. “A nurse is walking”). We
train the models on the STS-B training portion and
collect the predictions on the created Bias-STS test
set. We then follow Lauscher et al. (2021) and re-
port the average absolute difference between the
similarity scores of male and female sentence pairs.
Bias-NLI (Dev et al., 2020). Bias-NLI is another
template-based test set, which allows for measuring
the tendency of models to produce unfair stereo-
typical inferences in NLI. We train models on the
MNLI training portions, and collect the predictions
on the data set. It contains 1, 936, 512 instances,
which we create using the authors’ original code
as follows: we start from templates (“The <sub-
ject> <verb> a/an <object>”) and ﬁll the the verb
and object slots with activities (e.g., “bought a
car”).
To obtain a premise we ﬁll the subject
slot with an occupation (e.g., “physician”), and
to obtain the hypothesis, we provide a gendered
term as the subject (e.g., “woman”). The obtained
premise-hypothesis pair (e.g., “physician bought
a car”, “woman bought a car”) is neutral, as we
can not make any assumption about the gender of
the premise-subject. Accordingly, we can measure
the bias in the model with the fraction neutral (FN)
score — the fraction of examples for which the
model predicts the neutral class — and as net neu-
tral (NN) — the average probability that the model
assigns to the neutral class across all instances.
Thus, in contrast to the other measures, a higher
FN or NN value indicates lower bias.
Models and Distillation Procedure.
We start
from BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) in base conﬁg-
uration (12 hidden layers, 12 attention heads per
layer, hidden size of 768) available on the Hugging-
face hub (Wolf et al., 2020).7 We obtain teacher
7https://huggingface.com
models from the PLM by optimizing BERT’s pa-
rameters on the training portions of the respective
data sets. We train the models with Adam (Kingma
and Ba, 2015) (cross-entropy loss for MNLI, mean-
squared error loss for STS-B) for maximum 10
epochs and apply early stopping based on the
validation set performance (accuracy for MNLI,
combined correlation score for STS-B) with a pa-
tience of 2 epochs. We grid search for the op-
timal batch size bt ∈{16, 32} and learning rate
λt ∈{2 · 10−5, 3 · 10−5, 5 · 10−5}. For ensur-
ing validity of our results (Reimers and Gurevych,
2017) we conduct this procedure 3 times starting
from different random initializations. As a result,
for each of the two tasks, we obtain 3 optimized
teacher models. For all distillation procedures, we
use the TextBrewer (Yang et al., 2020) framework’s
GeneralDistiller. We optimize the following hy-
perparameters: batch size bd ∈{64, 128} and tem-
perature td ∈{4, 8}. We distill for maximum 60
epochs and apply early stopping based on the val-
idation score with a patience of 4 epochs. If we
initialize the students’ layers, we only apply the
task-speciﬁc loss on the difference between the
teacher’s and the student’s output. If no layers are
initialized, we add a layer matching loss based on
Maximum Mean Discrepancy (Huang and Wang,
2017). We use Adam with a learning rate of 1·10−4
(warm up over 10% of the total number of steps
and linearly decreasing learning rate schedule).
Dimensions of Analysis.
We focus on 3 dimen-
sions: (1) we test the effect of reducing the number
of layers of the student model and report results
on students with 12–1 hidden layers for MNLI
and 10–1 hidden layers for STS. All other param-
eters stay ﬁxed: we set the hidden size to 768
and the number of attention heads per layer to
12 (as in the teacher). We either initialize all lay-
ers of the student randomly (for MNLI)8 or map
teacher’s layers to student layers for the initializa-
tion (for MNLI and STS) according to the scheme
provided in the Appendix.
(2) The number of
layers corresponds to a vertical reduction of the
model size. Analogously, we study horizontal com-
pression reﬂected by the hidden size of the layers.
We analyze bias in students with a hidden size
h ∈[768, 576, 384, 192, 96]. Here, we ﬁx the num-
ber of hidden layers to 4. We follow Turc et al.
(2019) and set the number of self-attention heads
8Not mapping the layers, i.e., random initialization,
yielded sub par performance for STS
(a) MNLI
(b) Bias-NLI (Gender)
(c) WEAT (Gender & Race)
(d) WEAT (Age & Illness)
(e) SEAT (Gender)
(f) SEAT (Race)
Figure 1: Results for our KD analysis (number of student hidden layers) on MNLI without initialization of the
layers. We depict (a) the accuracy on MNLI, (b) the fraction neutral and net neutral scores on Bias-NLI, (c) WEAT
effect sizes averaged over tests 3–5 (race) and 6–8 (gender), (d) WEAT effect sizes for tests 9 (illness) and 10
(age), (e) SEAT effect sizes averaged over tests 6–8 (gender) and the Heilmann Double Bind tests, and (f) SEAT
effect sizes for tests 3–5 (race) and the Angry Black Woman stereotype test. All results are shown as average with
90% conﬁdence interval for the 3 teacher models (dashed lines) and 1–12 layer student models distilled from the
teachers.
to h/64 and the feed-forward ﬁlter-size to 4h. (3)
Finally, we test the effect of the layer initializa-
tion. To this end, we constrain the student model to
have 4 hidden layers, and a hidden size of 768. We
then initialize each of the students layers ls ∈[0, 4]
(where 0 is the embedding layer) either individually
or all together with the teacher’s layers lt ∈[0, 12]
for each experiment with the following mapping
(lt →ls): 0 →0, 3 →1, 6 →2, 9 →3, and
12 →4. For all dimensions, we compare the stu-
dents’ scores with the ones of the teacher model.
3.3
Results
We discuss the results of our KD analysis.
Varying the Number of Hidden Layers.
Fig-
ures 1a–1f show the MNLI distillation experiments,
where we vary the number of student layers (with-
out initializing them). We report the overall perfor-
mance reﬂected by MNLI (accuracy) and the bias
measured with Bias-NLI, WEAT (Tests 3–10), and
SEAT (Tests 3–8, Heilman Double Bind Competent
and Likable, and Angry Black Woman Stereotype).
We provide the additional SEAT results (Tests 9
and 10) as well as the scores for the other tasks,
STS and MNLI with initialization in the Appendix.
The accuracy indicates that we successfully ran
the distillation (Figure 1a). Students with 12 hidden
layers (no compression) reach roughly the same
performance as their teachers. Generally, we ob-
serve that the performance variation among stu-
dents is higher than among teachers, with the high-
est variation for students with 3 to 5 hidden layers.
Looking at the bias measures (see Figures 1b–
1f), we note that the variation of the scores is even
higher, especially among the teacher models. This
observation suggests lower numerical stability of
the bias measures tested. (The test set for Bias-NLI
contains ∼2 Million instances, so this aspect can-
not be attributed to lower test set sizes). Unsurpris-
ingly, the bias results of the students are generally
in roughly the same areas than the ones of their
teachers. This shows that students inherit their
teachers biases in the distillation process. Group-
ing the test results by measure (e.g., WEAT, etc.)
and dimension (e.g., race) results in roughly the
same patterns of biases measurable. E.g., in Fig-
(a) MNLI
(b) Bias-NLI (Gender)
(c) WEAT (Gender & Racism)
(d) WEAT (Age & Illness)
(e) SEAT (Gender)
(f) SEAT (Race)
Figure 2: Results for our KD analysis (varying hidden size) on MNLI (without initialization of student layers, 4
hidden layers). We depict (a) the accuracy on MNLI, (b) the fraction neutral and net neutral scores on Bias-NLI,
(c) WEAT effect sizes averaged over tests 3,4,5 (race) and 6,7,8 (gender), (d) WEAT effect sizes for tests 9 (illness)
and 10 (age), (e) SEAT effect sizes averaged over tests 6–8 (gender) and the Heilmann Double Bind tests, and (f)
SEAT effect sizes for tests 3–5 (race) and the Angry Black Woman stereotype test. All results shown as average
with 90% conﬁdence interval for the 3 teacher models (dashed lines) and 96–768 hidden size student models.
(a) MNLI
(b) Bias-NLI (Gender)
(c) WEAT (Gender & Racism)
Figure 3: Results MNLI-KD when varying initialization of the student layers. We depict (a) the accuracy on
MNLI, (b) the FN and NN scores on Bias-NLI, and (c) WEAT effect sizes averaged over tests 3,4,5 (race) and
6,7,8 (gender). All results are averages with 90% conﬁdence interval for the 3 teacher models (dashed lines) and
students distilled from the teachers where either a single layer was initialized ([0], [1], [2], [3], or [4]) or all layers
([0, 1, 2, 3, 4]).
ure 1f, the results of the aggregated tests 3, 4, and 5
follow the same pattern as the Angry Black Woman
Stereotype test. We hypothesize that this is due
to the partially overlapping term sets. However,
across measures and dimensions we ﬁnd roughly
the same bias behavior: students with 12 to 6 hid-
den layers often exhibit a higher bias than their
teachers (for NLI, this corresponds to a lower FN)!
The exception to this rule is WEAT test 9, illness.
For most tests, the highest bias arises with 4 hidden
layers. Students with lower number of layers are
mostly less biased across all tests. However, from
this point on, the accuracy on MNLI also drops
more strongly. These ﬁndings are in stark contrast
to the results of Xu and Hu (2022).
Varying the Hidden Size.
We show the results
of KD when varying the hidden size of the student
models (number of hidden layers is ﬁxed to 4) in
Figures 2a–2f. As before, we provide additional
results in the Appendix. Generally, we note that the
performance curve (Figure 2a) is again in-line with
our expectations. As in the previous experiment
we note high variations of the scores and students
biases mostly seem to be located in roughly the
same ball park as their teachers’ scores. However,
we again note that the concrete behavior of the bias
curves depends on bias measure and dimension.
Interestingly, the curves when varying the hidden
size look (with some exceptions) similar to the ones
when varying the number of hidden layers. We
thus hypothesize, that both vertical and horizontal
compression have a similar affect on fairness.
Varying the Initialization.
As a last aspect of
our analysis, we look at the effect of initializing
various layers of the student with the weights of the
teacher. We depict some of the scores in Figures 3a–
3c. Interestingly, changing the initialization has a
large effect both on the MNLI accuracy, as well
as on the bias measures. These ﬁndings highlight
again that monitoring fairness after KD is crucial.
Overall, our ﬁndings show that the devil is in
the detail. While generally, the amount of bias
in the distilled models is inherited from the
teacher’s biases and the biases measurable seem
to roughly group by social bias dimension and
measure, biases still need to be carefully tested.
Most importantly, while Xu and Hu (2022) point at
the potential of KD for increasing fairness, we can-
not conﬁrm this observation. In contrast, across
most bias measures tested, the student models
start from a higher amount of bias than the
teacher. A possible explanation for this behav-
ior is that weak learners, i.e., models with limited
capacity, generally show a stronger tendency to
exploit biases in the data set during the learning
process than models with higher capacity (Sanh
et al., 2020).
4
Related Work
Fairness in NLP. There exists a plethora of works
on increasing the fairness of NLP models, most
prominently focused on the issue of unfair stereo-
types in the models (e.g., Caliskan et al., 2017;
Zhao et al., 2017; Dev et al., 2020; Nadeem et al.,
2020, inter alia). We only provide an overview
and refer the reader to more comprehensive sur-
veys on the topic (e.g., Sun et al., 2019; Blodgett
et al., 2020; Shah et al., 2020). Bolukbasi et al.
(2016) were the ﬁrst to point to the issue of stereo-
types encoded in static word embeddings, which
led to a series of works focused on measuring
and mitigating these biases (e.g., Dev and Phillips,
2019; Lauscher et al., 2020a), as well as assess-
ing the reliability of the tests (Gonen and Gold-
berg, 2019; Ethayarajh et al., 2019; Antoniak and
Mimno, 2021; Delobelle et al., 2021; Blodgett et al.,
2021). For instance, Caliskan et al. (2017) pro-
posed the well-known WEAT. Recent works focus
on measuring and mitigating bias in contextualized
language representations (Kurita et al., 2019; Bor-
dia and Bowman, 2019; Qian et al., 2019; Webster
et al., 2020; Nangia et al., 2020; Sap et al., 2020)
and in downstream scenarios, e.g., for dialog (e.g.,
Sheng et al., 2019; Dinan et al., 2020a; Barikeri
et al., 2021), co-reference resolution (Zhao et al.,
2018), and NLI (Rudinger et al., 2017; Dev et al.,
2020). Similarly, researchers have explored multi-
lingual scenarios (e.g., Lauscher and Glavaš, 2019;
Lauscher et al., 2020c; Ahn and Oh, 2021), more
ﬁne-grained biases (Dinan et al., 2020b), and more
biases, beyond the prominent sexism and racism
dimensions (e.g., Zhao et al., 2018; Rudinger et al.,
2018), like speciesist bias (Takeshita et al., 2022).
Sustainability in NLP. Strubell et al. (2019) have
called for more awareness of NLP’s environmental
impact. Reducing the energy consumption can be
achieved through efﬁcient pre-training (Di Liello
et al., 2021), smaller models and employing less
pre-training data considering the speciﬁc needs of
the task at hand (e.g., Pérez-Mayos et al., 2021;
Zhang et al., 2021). If a PLM is already in-place,
one can rely on sample-efﬁcient methods (e.g.,
Lauscher et al., 2020b), or refrain from fully ﬁne-
tuning the model (e.g, Houlsby et al., 2019; Pfeiffer
et al., 2021). Similarly, one can compress the mod-
els via distillation (e.g., Hinton et al., 2015; Sanh
et al., 2019; He et al., 2021), pruning (e.g., Fan
et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020),
and quantization (e.g., Zhang et al., 2020), to in-
crease energy-efﬁciency of later training stages or
at inference time. A survey is provided by Gupta
and Agrawal (2022). In the area of distillation,
researchers have explored distillation in different
setups, e.g., for a speciﬁc task (e.g., See et al.,
2016), on a meta-level (e.g., He et al., 2021), or
for a speciﬁc resource scenario (e.g., Wasserblat
et al., 2020). Other efforts focused on accurate en-
ergy and emission measurement and provide tools
for monitoring energy consumption (e.g., Lacoste
et al., 2019; Cao et al., 2020). While most research
in the area of NLP focuses on reducing operational
costs, i.e., carbon emissions due to the energy re-
quired to develop and run models, downstream
impacts of model deployment stand to have a much
larger impact on the environment (Kaack et al.,
2022). See Rolnick et al. (2022) for a detailed
presentation of how machine learning can help to
counter climate change more broadly, including a
disucussion of NLP applications.
Bridging Fairness and Sustainability.
To the
best of our knowledge, there are currently only
few works that are located at the intersection of the
two ﬁelds in NLP: Lauscher et al. (2021) proposed
to use adapters for decreasing energy consump-
tion during training-based debiasing and increasing
the reusability of this knowledge, which has been
proven effective by Holtermann et al. (2022). Re-
cently, the unpublished work of Xu and Hu (2022)
asks whether compression can improve fairness. In
contrast, Silva et al. (2021) ﬁnd that off-the-shelf
distilled models, such as DistilBERT, exhibit higher
biases, but do not provide a systematic evaluation
of the effect of KD dimensions. Concurrent to our
work, Ahn et al. (2022) demonstrate similar trends,
but focus on gender bias (quantiﬁed through a sin-
gle measure) and the number of hidden layers in the
student, only. Starting from the assumption that
compression can lead to biased models, Gupta et al.
(2022) propose a fairness-increasing KD loss and
demonstrate their baselines to be more biased. In
a similar vein, Xu et al. (2021) discuss the robust-
ness of BERT compression. In computer vision,
researchers have shown that compression exacer-
bates algorithmic bias (e.g., Hooker et al., 2020).
E.g., Liebenwein et al. (2021) demonstrate pruned
models to be brittle to out-of-distribution points.
Ahia et al. (2021) present the most relevant work in
this space, exploring the low-resource double-bind:
individuals with the least access to computational
resources are also likely to have scarce data re-
sources. They ﬁnd that model pruning can lead to
better performance on low-resource languages by
reducing undesirable memorization of rare exam-
ples. This study represents a valuable step towards
better understanding the intersection of fairness
and sustainability. In this work, we argue that more
research is needed to understand the complex rela-
tionships between the two ﬁelds.
5
Conclusion
Fairness and environmental sustainability are
equally important goals in NLP. However, the vast
majority of research in our community focuses ex-
clusively on one of these aspects. We argue that
bridging fairness and environmental sustainability
is thus still an unresolved issue. To start bringing
these ﬁelds together in a more holistic research
on ethical issues in NLP, we conducted a two-step
analysis: ﬁrst, we provided an overview on the efﬁ-
ciency of exemplary fairness approaches. Second,
we ran an empirical analysis of the fairness of KD,
as a popular example of methods to enhance sus-
tainability. We ﬁnd that use of KD can actually
decrease fairness, motivating our plea for research
into joint approaches. We hope that our work in-
spires such research on the interplay between the
two ﬁelds for fair and sustainable NLP.
Acknowledgements
This work is in part funded by the European Re-
search Council under the European Union’s Hori-
zon 2020 research and innovation program (grant
agreement No. 949944, INTEGRATOR). The work
of Anne Lauscher is funded under the Excellence
Strategy of the Federal Government and the Länder.
At the time of writing, DH and AL were members
of the Data and Marketing Insights unit of the Boc-
coni Institute for Data Science and Analysis. We
thank the anonymous reviewers for their insightful
comments.
Limitations
Our work deals with the general relationship be-
tween environmental sustainability and fairness.
As a showcase, we explore the effect of KD on
stereotypical bias measures. This does not imply
that KD is the only or the most egregious method,
and more research into other approaches is needed.
In this context, we resorted to established bias mea-
sures, which treat gender as a binary variable. This
is due to the limitations of the established data
sets, some of which allow for measuring “classic”
sexism and do not reﬂect the large spectrum of pos-
sible identities (Lauscher et al., 2022). We further
acknowledge that, in this research, we only worked
with examples to highlight the importance of con-
sidering both sustainability goals. We acknowl-
edge that to truly understand the relationship be-
tween fairness and environmental sustainability, it
requires more in-depth studies. We thus encourage
future research to explore the interplay between the
ﬁelds more, for other societal biases, including but
not limited to queerphobia and non-binary exclu-
sion (Dev et al., 2021), and for other sustainability
and fairness approaches and aspects.
References
Orevaoghene Ahia, Julia Kreutzer, and Sara Hooker.
2021. The low-resource double bind: An empirical
study of pruning for low-resource machine transla-
tion. In Findings of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: EMNLP 2021, pages 3316–3333,
Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Jaimeen Ahn, Hwaran Lee, Jinhwa Kim, and Alice Oh.
2022.
Why knowledge distillation ampliﬁes gen-
der bias and how to mitigate from the perspective
of DistilBERT.
In Proceedings of the 4th Work-
shop on Gender Bias in Natural Language Process-
ing (GeBNLP), pages 266–272, Seattle, Washington.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jaimeen Ahn and Alice Oh. 2021. Mitigating language-
dependent ethnic bias in BERT. In Proceedings of
the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing, pages 533–549, Online
and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Maria Antoniak and David Mimno. 2021. Bad seeds:
Evaluating lexical methods for bias measurement.
In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics and the
11th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
1889–1904, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Soumya Barikeri, Anne Lauscher, Ivan Vuli´c, and
Goran Glavaš. 2021. RedditBias: A real-world re-
source for bias evaluation and debiasing of conver-
sational language models.
In Proceedings of the
59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers), pages 1941–1955, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Solon Barocas, Kate Crawford, Aaron Shapiro, and
Hanna Wallach. 2017. The problem with bias: Al-
locative versus representational harms in machine
learning. In 9th Annual Conference of the Special
Interest Group for Computing, Information and So-
ciety.
Su Lin Blodgett, Solon Barocas, Hal Daumé III, and
Hanna Wallach. 2020.
Language (technology) is
power: A critical survey of “bias” in NLP. In Pro-
ceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 5454–
5476, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Su Lin Blodgett, Gilsinia Lopez, Alexandra Olteanu,
Robert Sim, and Hanna Wallach. 2021. Stereotyp-
ing Norwegian salmon: An inventory of pitfalls in
fairness benchmark datasets. In Proceedings of the
59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers), pages 1004–1015, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Tolga Bolukbasi, Kai-Wei Chang, James Y. Zou,
Venkatesh Saligrama, and Adam Tauman Kalai.
2016. Man is to computer programmer as woman
is to homemaker?
debiasing word embeddings.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems 29: Annual Conference on Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems 2016, December 5-10, 2016,
Barcelona, Spain, pages 4349–4357.
Shikha Bordia and Samuel R. Bowman. 2019. Identify-
ing and reducing gender bias in word-level language
models. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Student Research Work-
shop, pages 7–15, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Cristian Buciluˇa,
Rich Caruana,
and Alexandru
Niculescu-Mizil. 2006. Model compression. In Pro-
ceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Min-
ing, KDD ’06, page 535–541, New York, NY, USA.
Association for Computing Machinery.
Aylin
Caliskan,
Joanna
J.
Bryson,
and
Arvind
Narayanan. 2017. Semantics derived automatically
from language corpora contain human-like biases.
Science, 356(6334):183–186.
Qingqing Cao, Aruna Balasubramanian, and Niranjan
Balasubramanian. 2020. Towards accurate and reli-
able energy measurement of NLP models. In Pro-
ceedings of SustaiNLP: Workshop on Simple and
Efﬁcient Natural Language Processing, pages 141–
148, Online. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Daniel Cer, Mona Diab, Eneko Agirre, Iñigo Lopez-
Gazpio, and Lucia Specia. 2017.
SemEval-2017
task 1: Semantic textual similarity multilingual and
crosslingual focused evaluation.
In Proceedings
of the 11th International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation (SemEval-2017), pages 1–14, Vancouver,
Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Pieter Delobelle,
Ewoenam Kwaku Tokpo,
Toon
Calders, and Bettina Berendt. 2021. Measuring fair-
ness with biased rulers: A survey on quantifying bi-
ases in pretrained language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2112.07447.
Sunipa Dev, Tao Li, Jeff M. Phillips, and Vivek Sriku-
mar. 2020. On measuring and mitigating biased in-
ferences of word embeddings. In The Thirty-Fourth
AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AAAI
2020, The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference, IAAI 2020, The
Tenth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances
in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, EAAI 2020, New York, NY,
USA, February 7-12, 2020, pages 7659–7666. AAAI
Press.
Sunipa Dev, Masoud Monajatipoor, Anaelia Ovalle, Ar-
jun Subramonian, Jeff Phillips, and Kai-Wei Chang.
2021. Harms of gender exclusivity and challenges in
non-binary representation in language technologies.
In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
1968–1994, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Re-
public. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Sunipa Dev and Jeff M. Phillips. 2019.
Attenuating
bias in word vectors.
In The 22nd International
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics,
AISTATS 2019, 16-18 April 2019, Naha, Okinawa,
Japan, volume 89 of Proceedings of Machine Learn-
ing Research, pages 879–887. PMLR.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019.
BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers),
pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Luca Di Liello, Matteo Gabburo, and Alessandro Mos-
chitti. 2021.
Efﬁcient pre-training objectives for
transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.09694.
Emily Dinan, Angela Fan, Adina Williams, Jack Ur-
banek, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston. 2020a.
Queens are powerful too: Mitigating gender bias in
dialogue generation.
In Proceedings of the 2020
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP), pages 8173–8188, On-
line. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Emily Dinan, Angela Fan, Ledell Wu, Jason Weston,
Douwe Kiela, and Adina Williams. 2020b. Multi-
dimensional gender bias classiﬁcation. In Proceed-
ings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages
314–331, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Jesse Dodge, Taylor Prewitt, Remi Tachet des Combes,
Erika Odmark, Roy Schwartz, Emma Strubell,
Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, Noah A. Smith, Nicole
DeCario, and Will Buchanan. 2022. Measuring the
carbon intensity of ai in cloud instances. In ACM
Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Trans-
parency (ACM FAccT).
Kawin Ethayarajh, David Duvenaud, and Graeme Hirst.
2019. Understanding undesirable word embedding
associations.
In Proceedings of the 57th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 1696–1705, Florence, Italy. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Angela Fan, Edouard Grave, and Armand Joulin. 2019.
Reducing transformer depth on demand with struc-
tured dropout.
In International Conference on
Learning Representations.
William Fedus, Barret Zoph, and Noam Shazeer. 2022.
Switch transformers: Scaling to trillion parameter
models with simple and efﬁcient sparsity. Journal
of Machine Learning Research, 23(120):1–39.
Hila Gonen and Yoav Goldberg. 2019. Lipstick on a
pig: Debiasing methods cover up systematic gender
biases in word embeddings but do not remove them.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages 609–614,
Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Yue Guo, Yi Yang, and Ahmed Abbasi. 2022. Auto-
debias: Debiasing masked language models with
automated biased prompts.
In Proceedings of the
60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
1012–1023, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Manish Gupta and Puneet Agrawal. 2022. Compres-
sion of deep learning models for text: A survey.
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data, 16(4).
Umang Gupta, Jwala Dhamala, Varun Kumar, Apurv
Verma, Yada Pruksachatkun, Satyapriya Krishna,
Rahul Gupta, Kai-Wei Chang, Greg Ver Steeg, and
Aram Galstyan. 2022.
Mitigating gender bias in
distilled language models via counterfactual role re-
versal.
In Findings of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: ACL 2022, pages 658–678,
Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Haoyu He, Xingjian Shi, Jonas Mueller, Sheng Zha,
Mu Li, and George Karypis. 2021. Distiller: A sys-
tematic study of model distillation methods in natu-
ral language processing. In Proceedings of the Sec-
ond Workshop on Simple and Efﬁcient Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 119–133, Virtual. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Madeline E Heilman, Aaron S Wallen, Daniella Fuchs,
and Melinda M Tamkins. 2004. Penalties for suc-
cess:
reactions to women who succeed at male
gender-typed tasks. Journal of applied psychology,
89(3):416.
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. 2015.
Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv
e-prints, pages arXiv–1503.
Carolin Holtermann, Anne Lauscher, and Simone
Ponzetto. 2022.
Fair and argumentative language
modeling for computational argumentation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pages 7841–7861, Dublin, Ireland. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Sara Hooker, Nyalleng Moorosi, Gregory Clark, Samy
Bengio, and Emily Denton. 2020.
Characterising
bias in compressed models. In Fifth Workshop on
Human Interpretability in Machine Learning (WHI).
Neil Houlsby, Andrei Giurgiu, Stanislaw Jastrzebski,
Bruna Morrone, Quentin de Laroussilhe, Andrea
Gesmundo, Mona Attariyan, and Sylvain Gelly.
2019. Parameter-efﬁcient transfer learning for NLP.
In Proceedings of the 36th International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, ICML 2019, 9-15 June
2019, Long Beach, California, USA, volume 97 of
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages
2790–2799. PMLR.
Dirk Hovy and Shannon L. Spruit. 2016. The social
impact of natural language processing. In Proceed-
ings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Pa-
pers), pages 591–598, Berlin, Germany. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Zehao Huang and Naiyan Wang. 2017. Like what you
like: Knowledge distill via neuron selectivity trans-
fer. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.01219.
Mingi Ji, Byeongho Heo, and Sungrae Park. 2021.
Show, attend and distill: Knowledge distillation via
attention-based feature matching. In Proceedings of
the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol-
ume 35, pages 7945–7952.
Xisen Jin, Francesco Barbieri, Brendan Kennedy, Aida
Mostafazadeh Davani, Leonardo Neves, and Xiang
Ren. 2021. On transferability of bias mitigation ef-
fects in language model ﬁne-tuning. In Proceedings
of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, pages 3770–3783,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Lynn H Kaack, Priya L Donti, Emma Strubell, George
Kamiya, Felix Creutzig, and David Rolnick. 2022.
Aligning artiﬁcial intelligence with climate change
mitigation. Nature Climate Change.
Masahiro Kaneko and Danushka Bollegala. 2021. De-
biasing pre-trained contextualised embeddings. In
Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Main Volume, pages 1256–1266, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Saket Karve, Lyle Ungar, and João Sedoc. 2019. Con-
ceptor debiasing of word representations evaluated
on WEAT.
In Proceedings of the First Workshop
on Gender Bias in Natural Language Processing,
pages 40–48, Florence, Italy. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2015. Adam: A
method for stochastic optimization.
In 3rd Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015,
Conference Track Proceedings.
Keita Kurita, Nidhi Vyas, Ayush Pareek, Alan W Black,
and Yulia Tsvetkov. 2019. Measuring bias in contex-
tualized word representations. In Proceedings of the
First Workshop on Gender Bias in Natural Language
Processing, pages 166–172, Florence, Italy. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Alexandre
Lacoste,
Alexandra
Luccioni,
Victor
Schmidt, and Thomas Dandres. 2019. Quantifying
the carbon emissions of machine learning.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:1910.09700.
Anne Lauscher, Archie Crowley, and Dirk Hovy. 2022.
Welcome to the modern world of pronouns: Identity-
inclusive natural language processing beyond gen-
der. In Proceedings of the 29th International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics, pages 1221–
1232, Gyeongju, Republic of Korea. International
Committee on Computational Linguistics.
Anne Lauscher and Goran Glavaš. 2019. Are we con-
sistently biased?
multidimensional analysis of bi-
ases in distributional word vectors. In Proceedings
of the Eighth Joint Conference on Lexical and Com-
putational Semantics (*SEM 2019), pages 85–91,
Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Anne Lauscher, Goran Glavaš, Simone Paolo Ponzetto,
and Ivan Vuli´c. 2020a. A general framework for im-
plicit and explicit debiasing of distributional word
vector spaces. In Proceedings of the AAAI Confer-
ence on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pages 8131–8138.
Anne Lauscher, Tobias Lueken, and Goran Glavaš.
2021. Sustainable modular debiasing of language
models. In Findings of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: EMNLP 2021, pages 4782–4797,
Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Anne Lauscher, Vinit Ravishankar, Ivan Vuli´c, and
Goran Glavaš. 2020b. From zero to hero: On the
limitations of zero-shot language transfer with mul-
tilingual Transformers. In Proceedings of the 2020
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP), pages 4483–4499, On-
line. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Anne Lauscher,
Raﬁk Takieddin,
Simone Paolo
Ponzetto, and Goran Glavaš. 2020c.
AraWEAT:
Multidimensional analysis of biases in Arabic word
embeddings.
In Proceedings of the Fifth Arabic
Natural Language Processing Workshop, pages 192–
199, Barcelona, Spain (Online). Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Bingbing Li, Zhenglun Kong, Tianyun Zhang, Ji Li,
Zhengang Li, Hang Liu, and Caiwen Ding. 2020. Ef-
ﬁcient transformer-based large scale language repre-
sentations using hardware-friendly block structured
pruning.
In Findings of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pages 3187–
3199, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Paul Pu Liang, Irene Mengze Li, Emily Zheng,
Yao Chong Lim, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Louis-
Philippe Morency. 2020.
Towards debiasing sen-
tence representations. In Proceedings of the 58th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 5502–5515, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Lucas Liebenwein, Cenk Baykal, Brandon Carter,
David Gifford, and Daniela Rus. 2021. Lost in prun-
ing: The effects of pruning neural networks beyond
test accuracy. In Proceedings of Machine Learning
and Systems, volume 3, pages 93–138.
D. Soyini Madison. 2009.
Crazy patriotism and an-
gry (post)black women. Communication and Crit-
ical/Cultural Studies, 6(3):321–326.
Chandler May, Alex Wang, Shikha Bordia, Samuel R.
Bowman, and Rachel Rudinger. 2019. On measur-
ing social biases in sentence encoders. In Proceed-
ings of the 2019 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1
(Long and Short Papers), pages 622–628, Minneapo-
lis, Minnesota. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Nicholas Meade, Elinor Poole-Dayan, and Siva Reddy.
2022. An empirical survey of the effectiveness of de-
biasing techniques for pre-trained language models.
In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
1: Long Papers), pages 1878–1898, Dublin, Ireland.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Moin Nadeem, Anna Bethke, and Siva Reddy. 2020.
Stereoset:
Measuring stereotypical bias in pre-
trained language models.
Nikita Nangia, Clara Vania, Rasika Bhalerao, and
Samuel R. Bowman. 2020.
CrowS-pairs: A chal-
lenge dataset for measuring social biases in masked
language models. In Proceedings of the 2020 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), pages 1953–1967, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Debora Nozza, Federico Bianchi, and Dirk Hovy. 2021.
HONEST: Measuring hurtful sentence completion
in language models.
In Proceedings of the 2021
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, pages 2398–2406, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Mithun Paul Panenghat,
Sandeep Suntwal,
Faiz
Raﬁque, Rebecca Sharp, and Mihai Surdeanu. 2020.
Towards the necessity for debiasing natural language
inference datasets. In Proceedings of the 12th Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation Conference, pages
6883–6888, Marseille, France. European Language
Resources Association.
Laura Pérez-Mayos, Miguel Ballesteros, and Leo Wan-
ner. 2021. How much pretraining data do language
models need to learn syntax?
In Proceedings of
the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 1571–1582, Online
and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Jonas Pfeiffer, Aishwarya Kamath, Andreas Rücklé,
Kyunghyun
Cho,
and
Iryna
Gurevych.
2021.
AdapterFusion: Non-destructive task composition
for transfer learning.
In Proceedings of the 16th
Conference of the European Chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume,
pages 487–503, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Yusu Qian, Urwa Muaz, Ben Zhang, and Jae Won
Hyun. 2019.
Reducing gender bias in word-level
language models with a gender-equalizing loss func-
tion. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Stu-
dent Research Workshop, pages 223–228, Florence,
Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Shauli Ravfogel, Yanai Elazar, Hila Gonen, Michael
Twiton, and Yoav Goldberg. 2020.
Null it out:
Guarding protected attributes by iterative nullspace
projection. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 7237–7256, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2017.
Reporting
score distributions makes a difference: Performance
study of LSTM-networks for sequence tagging. In
Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
338–348, Copenhagen, Denmark. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
David Rolnick, Priya L. Donti, Lynn H. Kaack,
Kelly Kochanski, Alexandre Lacoste, Kris Sankaran,
Andrew Slavin Ross,
Nikola Milojevic-Dupont,
Natasha Jaques, Anna Waldman-Brown, Alexan-
dra Sasha Luccioni, Tegan Maharaj, Evan D. Sher-
win, S. Karthik Mukkavilli, Konrad P. Kording,
Carla P. Gomes, Andrew Y. Ng, Demis Hassabis,
John C. Platt, Felix Creutzig, Jennifer Chayes, and
Yoshua Bengio. 2022. Tackling climate change with
machine learning. ACM Comput. Surv., 55(2).
Rachel Rudinger,
Chandler May,
and Benjamin
Van Durme. 2017. Social bias in elicited natural lan-
guage inferences. In Proceedings of the First ACL
Workshop on Ethics in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 74–79, Valencia, Spain. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Rachel Rudinger, Jason Naradowsky, Brian Leonard,
and Benjamin Van Durme. 2018.
Gender bias in
coreference resolution. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers),
pages 8–14, New Orleans, Louisiana. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and
Thomas Wolf. 2019. Distilbert, a distilled version
of bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1910.01108.
Victor Sanh, Thomas Wolf, Yonatan Belinkov, and
Alexander M Rush. 2020.
Learning from others’
mistakes: Avoiding dataset biases without modeling
them. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations.
Maarten Sap, Saadia Gabriel, Lianhui Qin, Dan Ju-
rafsky, Noah A. Smith, and Yejin Choi. 2020. So-
cial bias frames: Reasoning about social and power
implications of language.
In Proceedings of the
58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 5477–5490, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Abigail See, Minh-Thang Luong, and Christopher D.
Manning. 2016.
Compression of neural machine
translation models via pruning.
In Proceedings
of The 20th SIGNLL Conference on Computational
Natural Language Learning, pages 291–301, Berlin,
Germany. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Deven Santosh Shah, H. Andrew Schwartz, and Dirk
Hovy. 2020. Predictive biases in natural language
processing models: A conceptual framework and
overview. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 5248–5264, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Emily Sheng, Kai-Wei Chang, Premkumar Natarajan,
and Nanyun Peng. 2019.
The woman worked as
a babysitter: On biases in language generation. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the
9th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 3407–
3412, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Andrew Silva, Pradyumna Tambwekar, and Matthew
Gombolay. 2021. Towards a comprehensive under-
standing and accurate evaluation of societal biases
in pre-trained transformers. In Proceedings of the
2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies, pages 2383–2389, On-
line. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ryan Steed, Swetasudha Panda, Ari Kobren, and
Michael Wick. 2022. Upstream Mitigation Is Not
All You Need: Testing the Bias Transfer Hypothesis
in Pre-Trained Language Models. In Proceedings
of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 3524–3542, Dublin, Ireland. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Emma Strubell, Ananya Ganesh, and Andrew McCal-
lum. 2019.
Energy and policy considerations for
deep learning in NLP. In Proceedings of the 57th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 3645–3650, Florence, Italy.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Shivashankar Subramanian, Xudong Han, Timothy
Baldwin, Trevor Cohn, and Lea Frermann. 2021.
Evaluating debiasing techniques for intersectional
biases. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 2492–2498, Online and Punta Cana, Domini-
can Republic. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Tony Sun, Andrew Gaut, Shirlyn Tang, Yuxin Huang,
Mai ElSherief, Jieyu Zhao, Diba Mirza, Elizabeth
Belding, Kai-Wei Chang, and William Yang Wang.
2019.
Mitigating gender bias in natural language
processing: Literature review.
In Proceedings of
the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 1630–1640, Florence,
Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Masashi Takeshita, Rafal Rzepka, and Kenji Araki.
2022.
Speciesist language and nonhuman animal
bias in english masked language models.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2203.05140.
Thierry Tambe, Coleman Hooper, Lillian Pentecost,
Tianyu Jia,
En-Yu Yang,
Marco Donato,
Vic-
tor Sanh, Paul Whatmough, Alexander M. Rush,
David Brooks, and Gu-Yeon Wei. 2021. Edgebert:
Sentence-level energy optimizations for latency-
aware multi-task nlp inference. In MICRO-54: 54th
Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Mi-
croarchitecture, MICRO ’21, page 830–844, New
York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machin-
ery.
Iulia Turc, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina
Toutanova. 2019.
Well-read students learn better:
On the importance of pre-training compact models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.08962.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-
9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pages 5998–6008.
Ivan Vuli´c, Simon Baker, Edoardo Maria Ponti, Ulla
Petti, Ira Leviant, Kelly Wing, Olga Majewska, Eden
Bar, Matt Malone, Thierry Poibeau, Roi Reichart,
and Anna Korhonen. 2020. Multi-SimLex: A large-
scale evaluation of multilingual and crosslingual lex-
ical semantic similarity. Computational Linguistics,
46(4):847–897.
Alex Wang,
Yada Pruksachatkun,
Nikita Nangia,
Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer
Levy, and Samuel Bowman. 2019.
Superglue: A
stickier benchmark for general-purpose language un-
derstanding systems. In Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran As-
sociates, Inc.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Fe-
lix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel Bowman. 2018.
GLUE: A multi-task benchmark and analysis plat-
form for natural language understanding.
In Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop Black-
boxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Net-
works for NLP, pages 353–355, Brussels, Belgium.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ziheng Wang, Jeremy Wohlwend, and Tao Lei. 2020.
Structured pruning of large language models.
In
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP),
pages 6151–6162, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Moshe Wasserblat, Oren Pereg, and Peter Izsak. 2020.
Exploring the boundaries of low-resource BERT dis-
tillation. In Proceedings of SustaiNLP: Workshop
on Simple and Efﬁcient Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 35–40, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Kellie Webster, Xuezhi Wang, Ian Tenney, Alex Beu-
tel, Emily Pitler, Ellie Pavlick, Jilin Chen, Ed Chi,
and Slav Petrov. 2020.
Measuring and reducing
gendered correlations in pre-trained models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2010.06032.
Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman.
2018. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sen-
tence understanding through inference. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume
1 (Long Papers), pages 1112–1122, New Orleans,
Louisiana. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien
Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pier-
ric Cistac, Tim Rault, Remi Louf, Morgan Funtow-
icz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen,
Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu,
Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame,
Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander Rush. 2020. Trans-
formers: State-of-the-art natural language process-
ing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing:
System Demonstrations, pages 38–45, Online. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Canwen Xu, Wangchunshu Zhou, Tao Ge, Ke Xu, Ju-
lian McAuley, and Furu Wei. 2021.
Beyond pre-
served accuracy: Evaluating loyalty and robustness
of BERT compression. In Proceedings of the 2021
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 10653–10659, Online and
Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Guangxuan Xu and Qingyuan Hu. 2022. Can model
compression improve nlp fairness.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2201.08542.
Ziqing Yang, Yiming Cui, Zhipeng Chen, Wanxiang
Che, Ting Liu, Shijin Wang, and Guoping Hu. 2020.
TextBrewer: An Open-Source Knowledge Distilla-
tion Toolkit for Natural Language Processing.
In
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics:
System
Demonstrations, pages 9–16, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Wei Zhang, Lu Hou, Yichun Yin, Lifeng Shang, Xiao
Chen, Xin Jiang, and Qun Liu. 2020.
Ternary-
BERT: Distillation-aware ultra-low bit BERT.
In
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP),
pages 509–521, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Yian Zhang,
Alex Warstadt,
Xiaocheng Li,
and
Samuel R. Bowman. 2021. When do you need bil-
lions of words of pretraining data?
In Proceed-
ings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics and the 11th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1112–1125,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jieyu Zhao, Tianlu Wang, Mark Yatskar, Vicente Or-
donez, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2017.
Men also like
shopping: Reducing gender bias ampliﬁcation using
corpus-level constraints. In Proceedings of the 2017
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 2979–2989, Copenhagen,
Denmark. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Jieyu Zhao, Tianlu Wang, Mark Yatskar, Vicente Or-
donez, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2018. Gender bias in
coreference resolution:
Evaluation and debiasing
methods.
In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers), pages 15–20,
New Orleans, Louisiana. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
A
Links to Data, Models, and Code
Bases
We provide the links to datasets and code bases
used in this work in Table 2.
In all distilla-
tion experiments, we start from BERT in base
conﬁguration: https://huggingface.co/
bert-base-uncased. Our code is provided in
the GitHub repository linked in the main body of
the manuscript.
A.1
Details on the Initialization
When varying the hidden layers of the student and
fully initializing the layers, the layer initialization
is dependent on the student’s size. Following com-
mon practice, the mapping is spread across the
layers of the teacher. We provide the mapping here
(lt →ls):
• 10 student layers: 0 →0, 2 →1, 3 →2,
4 →3, 5 →4, 6 →5, 7 →6, 8 →7, 9 →8,
10 →9 12 →10
• 8 student layers: 0 →0, 2 →1, 4 →2,
5 →3, 6 →4, 7 →5, 8 →6, 10 →7,
12 →8
• 6 student layers: 0 →0, 2 →1, 4 →2,
6 →3, 8 →4, 10 →5, 12 →6
• 5 student layers: 0 →0, 3 →1, 5 →2,
7 →3, 9 →4, 12 →5
• 4 student layers: 0 →0, 3 →1, 6 →2,
9 →3, 12 →4
• 3 student layers: 0 →0, 4 →1, 8 →2,
12 →3
• 2 student layers: 0 →0, 6 →1, 12 →2
• 1 student layer: 0 →0, 6 →1
B
Additional Results
We provide the additional results for our distillation
experiments.
B.1
Varying the Number of Student Layers
The additional results for the MNLI distillation,
i.e., the SEAT scores for tests 9 and 10 are shown
in Figure 4. The MNLI results when initializing all
layers are depicted in Figure 6.
B.2
Varying the Hidden Size
We provide the additional results for MNLI when
varying the student’s hidden size (without initializa-
tion of student layers, 4 hidden layers) in Figure 5.
Figure 4: Additional results for our KD analysis (num-
ber of hidden layers w/o initialization). We show the
MNLI distillation results for SEAT tests 9 and 10.
Figure 5: Additional results for our KD analysis (vary-
ing hidden size) on MNLI (without initialization of stu-
dent layers, 4 hidden layers). We show the MNLI dis-
tillation results for SEAT tests 9 and 10.
B.3
Varying the Initialization
We provide the additional results when varying the
initialization for MNLI in Figure 7.
B.4
Semantic Textual Similarity
Finally, we also provide the results of our distilla-
tion on STS in Figure 8.
Purpose
Name
URL
Natural Language Inference Data
MNLI
https://huggingface.co/
datasets/glue
Semantic Similarity Prediction Data
STS-B
https://huggingface.co/
datasets/glue
Intrinsic Bias Test Terms
WEAT
https://www.science.org/doi/10.
1126/science.aal4230
Intrinsic Bias Test Sentences
SEAT
https://github.com/W4ngatang/
sent-bias
Extrinsic Bias Code for Data
Bias-NLI
https://github.com/sunipa/
On-Measuring-and-Mitigating-
Biased-Inferences-of-
Word-Embeddings
Extrinsic Bias Templates
Bias-STS
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2010.
06032.pdf
General Code Base
Transformers
https://transformer.
huggingface.co
Code Base for Distillation
TextBrewer
https://github.com/airaria/
TextBrewer
Table 2: Links to the datasets and code bases used in our work.
(a) MNLI
(b) Bias-NLI
(c) WEAT (Gender & Racism)
(d) WEAT (Age & Illness)
(e) SEAT (Gender)
(f) SEAT (Race)
(g) SEAT (Age & Illness)
Figure 6: Results for our KD analysis (number of hidden layers) on MNLI distillation with initialization of all
layers. We depict (a) the accuracy on MNLI, (b) the fraction neutral and net neutral scores on Bias-NLI, (c) WEAT
effect sizes averaged over tests 3,4,5 (race) and 6,7,8 (gender), (d) WEAT 9 and 10 (age and illness), (e) SEAT
scores for tests 6,7,8 and the Heilmann Double Bind tests (gender), (f) SEAT scores for 3,4,5 and Angry Black
Woman Stereotype, and (g) SEAT 9 and 10 (age and illness). All results are shown as average with 90% conﬁdence
interval for the 3 teacher models (dashed lines) and 1–12 layer student models distilled from the teachers.
(a) WEAT (Age & Illness)
(b) SEAT (Gender)
(c) SEAT (Race)
(d) SEAT (Age & Illness)
Figure 7: Results for our KD analysis (varying initialization of the student layers) on MNLI. We depict (a) WEAT
Age & Illness, (b) SEAT Gender, (c) SEAT Race, and (d) SEAT Age & Illness. All results are shown as average
with 90% conﬁdence interval for the 3 teacher models (dashed lines) and student models distilled from the teachers
where either a single layer was initialized ([1], [2], [3], or [4]) or all layers ([1, 2, 3, 4]).
(a) STS-B
(b) Bias-STS (Gender)
(c) WEAT (Gender & Racism)
(d) WEAT (Age & Illness)
(e) SEAT (Gender)
(f) SEAT (Race)
(g) SEAT (Age & Illness)
Figure 8: Results for our KD analysis (number of hidden layers) on STS-B distillation with initialization of all
layers. We depict (a) the correlation on STS (measured as average of the Pearson and Spearman correlation
coefﬁcients), (b) the average absolute difference on Bias-STS, (c) WEAT effect sizes averaged over tests 3,4,5
(race) and 6,7,8 (gender), (d) WEAT 9 and 10 (age and illness), (e) SEAT scores for tests 6,7,8 and the Heilmann
Double Bind tests (gender), (f) SEAT scores for 3,4,5 and Angry Black Woman Stereotype, and (g) SEAT 9 and 10
(age and illness) All results are shown as average with 90% conﬁdence interval for the 3 teacher models (dashed
lines) and 1–12 layer student models distilled from the teachers.
