Title: Entity Identifier: A Natural Text Parsing-based Framework For Entity Relation Extraction
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2307.04892v1
--------------------------------------------------

Highlights
Entity Identifier: A Natural Text Parsing-based Framework For Entity Relation Extraction
El Mehdi Chouham,Jessica López Espejel,Mahaman Sanoussi Yahaya Alassan,Walid Dahhane,El Hassane Ettifouri
• We have presented Entity Identifier, a pipeline method for transforming requirements specifications in natural language
into a model diagram that incorporates Stanford Scene Graph Parsing.
• We create a dataset and define evaluation metrics to assess the effectiveness of our approach and facilitate future
research in this area.
• Our method achieves high scores on simple requirement statements, but struggles in handling complex Wikipedia
paragraphs.
arXiv:2307.04892v1  [cs.CL]  10 Jul 2023
Entity Identifier: A Natural Text Parsing-based Framework For Entity
Relation Extraction⋆
El Mehdi Chouhama, Jessica López Espejela, Mahaman Sanoussi Yahaya Alassana, Walid Dahhanea
and El Hassane Ettifouria,∗
aNovelis Research and Innovation Lab, 207 Rue de Bercy, Paris, 75012, , France
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Entity Relation
Extraction Entity Tree
Natural Language Processing
A B S T R A C T
The field of programming has a diversity of paradigms that are used according to the working
framework. While current neural code generation methods are able to learn and generate code directly
from text, we believe that this approach is not optimal for certain code tasks, particularly the generation
of classes in an object-oriented project. Specifically, we use natural language processing techniques
to extract structured information from requirements descriptions, in order to automate the generation
of CRUD (Create, Read, Update, Delete) class code. To facilitate this process, we introduce a pipeline
for extracting entity and relation information, as well as a representation called an "Entity Tree" to
model this information. We also create a dataset to evaluate the effectiveness of our approach.
1. Introduction
In Natural Language Processing (NLP), many tasks put
effort on converting input text into a more readily under-
standable form for humans. Examples of such tasks include
translation (Vaswani et al., 2017), summarization (Zhang
et al., 2019; Espejel et al., 2021), question answering (Wang
et al., 2021), text rephrasing (Laugier et al., 2021), and
named entity recognition (Tan et al., 2023). However, only a
relatively small number of tasks, such as sequence and token
classification, may be primarily useful for machines. We
believe that the development of automatic methods to model
natural language for machine use has the potential to enable
a wide range of future applications. These models may
allow for the creation of systems that can understand and
interpret human language and leverage this knowledge for
downstream use, potentially leading to new and innovative
applications in various industries and sectors.
For instance, in the field of text-to-code generation,
current AI models such as CodeBERT (Feng et al., 2020),
CodeT5 (Wang et al., 2021), JaCoText (Espejel et al., 2023),
and Codex (Chen et al., 2021) have shown promising results,
but still struggle with lack of optimization, inconsistency,
and syntax issues. The latest is a major limitation, as syntac-
tically correct code is necessary for a machine to execute it.
Additionally, practical considerations such as code structure,
clearness, and readability are important aspects of software
development that these models have not yet been able to fully
address. We believe that incorporating a structuring phase
⋆<tnote text>
∗Corresponding author
∗Corresponding author
Email addresses: elchouham@novelis.io (E.M. Chouham);
jlopezespejel@novelis.io (J. López Espejel); syahaya@novelis.io (M.
Yahaya Alassan); wdahhane@novelis.io (W. Dahhane);
eettifouri@novelis.io (E.H. Ettifouri)
ORCID(s): 0000-0001-6285-0770 (J. López Espejel);
0000-0001-5387-3380 (W. Dahhane); 0000-0001-5299-9053 (E.H. Ettifouri)
1
for natural language inputs could significantly advance the
capabilities of tasks like text-to-code generation.
In this work, we work on automating the job of re-
quirement analysis by extracting key information that can
be directly used to build UML (United Modeling Language)
Class diagram and generate class code for CRUD (Create,
Read, Update, Delete) operations from natural language
requirement specifications. Our primary goal is exploring
the benefits of structuring natural language for code genera-
tion. Specifically, we aim to extract entities and relationship
triplets, including their characteristics, in a manner similar
to the joint entity and relation extraction task (Krebs et al.,
2018). In addition, we aim to extract common unnamed
entities, data types, class attributes, and database relations
between entities, in order to build a rich representation, we
refer to as an Entity Tree. This representation can be useful
for downstream tasks. Figure 1 illustrates an example of the
Entity Tree representation.
In development workflows, diagrams such as UML and
MCD (Merise Conceptual Diagram) are extensively used
for engineering and visualization purposes. These diagrams
enable collaborators to analyze, refine, and plan different
aspects of a project more effectively. Our approach not only
grants direct access to these diagram types but also simplifies
the generation of class code and database structure using
template heuristics. This liberates developers from repetitive
tasks, allowing them to concentrate on more challenging
ones. The key advantage of this approach in code generation
task is the creation of more dependable code with fewer
syntax errors.
In this work, we present a parsing framework that con-
structs an Entity Tree (ET) from natural language text. To
the best of our knowledge, there are currently no datasets
available for common entity and relation extraction. There-
fore, we create a dataset and define evaluation metrics to
assess the effectiveness of our approach and facilitate future
research in this area. Our method achieves notable results in
the overall extraction of triplets.
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 1 of 8
Entity Identifier: A Natural Text Parsing-based Framework For Entity Relation Extraction
Figure 1: Entity Tree representation of the sentence : “A new customer buys a product. It has a text description, a category and
a price. A customer is person." with a focus on the relation (customer, buy, product)
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In section
2, we present the related work. In section 3, we provide a
comprehensive formulation of the problem. In Section 4, we
describe in details our proposed method. In Section 5, we
present the experimental protocol and the proposed dataset.
In Section 6, we provide obtained results and discuss them.
Finally, We conclude in Section 7 and present and some
future directions.
2. Related Work
There is a significant amount of prior research on system
requirements parsing, but most existing models do not antic-
ipate the use of an entirely natural language input. Videira
et al. (2006) proposed a framework for requirement parsing
that utilizes a set of word processing tools and typing rules.
This approach involves the user in typing the input, with the
system providing error messages and highlighting patterns to
enforce adherence to what the paper refers to as a controlled
natural language for requirements’ specifications. This ap-
proach relies on the user to follow specific typing rules and
may not be suitable for users who want a fully natural user
experience while typing the input.
In More and Phalnikar (2012), a greater emphasis
is placed on the use of natural language processing and
ontology techniques with OpenNLP to build the parsing
architecture. This approach allows for more flexibility for the
user, but the parsers rely on transforming complex sentences
into simple sequences rather than consistently representing
the information. Additionally, the approach does not utilize
coreference resolution, meaning that splitting sentences can
result in loss of linking information. Furthermore, the use
of rules to ignore certain concept words later in the pipeline
may lead to error propagation and confusion. Overall, this
approach may require more user intervention to ensure
accurate parsing of the input.
Similarly, AmrutaAmune and Naik (2016) uses a suite of
natural language processing tools to extract UML diagrams
directly. Their approach involves the use of heuristic rules
for identifying classes, relationships, and objects. However,
our research posits that it is more effective to extract entities
and relationships jointly, as the semantics of a sentence are
dependent on the combination of both. Furthermore, while
the aforementioned tool is presented as software specifically
designed for the creation of UML diagrams, our research
aims to output the extracted elements in a more widely-used
representation.
The approach presented in Arora et al. (2016) addresses
the issue of information loss through the use of a coref-
erence resolver in the pipeline. The pipeline utilizes both
dependency parsing and syntactic parsing during the parsing
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 2 of 8
Entity Identifier: A Natural Text Parsing-based Framework For Entity Relation Extraction
phase, and employs a set of rules to construct a Domain
Model in a subsequent phase. However, the approach has
some limitations, including the fact that coreference reso-
lution is performed after segmentation, and the reliance on
noun phrases and verbs instead of a compact representation
for building the domain model.
In our research, we focus on a fundamental task of
common entity and relation extraction. Unlike traditional
entity and relation extraction, our task aims to extract all
entities and relationships in a text, not just named entities.
We use the extracted sets of entities and relationships to build
a model of the system. We believe that this approach can
highlight the potential utility of jointly extracting unnamed
entities and relations as a distinct task within the field of
knowledge extraction. After optimizing our pipeline for this
task, we then build our domain model equivalent referred to
as the Entity Tree.
3. Problem Formulation
Our goal is to design a mechanism that translates a
natural language description of system requirements into a
structured representation called an Entity Tree (as shown in
Figure 1). This representation will enable us to easily gener-
ate UML, MCD, CRUD diagrams, and database structures.
Let 𝑆be a sequence and 𝐸= {𝑒1, 𝑒2, ..., 𝑒|𝑆|} the set of
its entities’ components. An Entity Component 𝑒1 is defined
by 4 elements:
• Attributes - set of descriptive labels representing the
entity.
• Extends - the entity it extends, if it has a parent entity.
• Name - the entity name.
• Relationships - set of relationships with other entities.
We define a relationship as the link between two entities.
Here we refer to the entity containing the list of relationships
as the subject 𝑒𝑠, the target entity as the object 𝑒𝑜and the
predicate as the relation 𝑟. We explicitly define a relationship
as a dictionary of the following eight items:
• Extract number - the exact number of the subject
entities 𝑒𝑠, if mentioned.
• Primitivity - it indicates if the 𝑒𝑜is primitive. An
entity is primitive if it is a literal such as a number,
a date, a boolean, etc. In other words, when it is not a
Class instance. Values which are considered primitive
can be redefined by the user.
• Min - cardinality on the 𝑒𝑠side.
• Max - cardinality on the 𝑒𝑜side.
• Object attributes - set of labels describing 𝑒𝑜.
• Object name - the 𝑒𝑜name.
• Relationship type - the predicate 𝑟.
• Type - the type notion refers to the parent class of
𝑒𝑜if it has one, otherwise it assigns a corresponding
primitive type.
The Entity Tree models the entities and relationships
of a sentence in a very rich way as it describes every item
and its relation with other items. Its data structure serves as
a representation of entities and their relationships within a
sentence or piece of text. Its utilization allows for a more
intricate and comprehensive depiction of sentence structure,
surpassing conventional approaches such as parsing trees. In
the example "The cat sat on the mat.", the words "cat" and
"mat" are entities, and the relationship between them is "sat
on". In our case, the Entity Tree can also include additional
information about each entity, such as its type or attributes.
This presentation offers valuable applications in tasks such
as information extraction, text summarization, and question
answering.
4. Proposed method
Our approach uses a combination of multiple natural
language processing (NLP) tools to extract entities, relation-
ships, and their characteristics. An overview of our pipeline
is shown in Figure 2. Firstly, the input text undergoes
coreference resolution to replace each pronoun with the
word to which it refers. Secondly, the text is segmented
into sentences. Thirdly, for each sentence, we use a Scene
Graph Parser (SGP)1 (Schuster et al., 2015) to obtain the
corresponding scene graph. An aggregator is used to fuse
different scene graphs. Finally, we apply additional methods
to double-check features extraction, generate cardinality, and
build up the Entity Tree representation of the input. We detail
each component of our system in the following subsections.
4.1. Text Segmentation
To use the CoreNLP scene graph parser for building
a scene graph, the input should adhere to the scene graph
parser’s input format. According to the official documen-
tation, the implementation only works on single sentences.
For this reason, the input goes through sequential methods, a
sentence segmentation function and a coreference resolver.
Firstly, the text goes through Spacy’s integrated sentence
sequencer. The latter ensures that the text will not only be
split based on dots. Instead, the split is done using regular
expressions while taking into consideration links, phone
numbers, decimal numbers, etc.
Secondly, pronouns are replaced by the nominal group
to which they refer to in sentences starting with a pronoun.
This prevents sending to the scene graph parser sentences
with no nominal groups and spread confusing downstream.
The text segmentation block outputs a list of clear sen-
tences, that can be semantically understood without the need
for the rest of the text. In the next step, each sentence will be
sent to the scene graph parser.
1A Stanford’s CoreNLP tool
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 3 of 8
Entity Identifier: A Natural Text Parsing-based Framework For Entity Relation Extraction
Figure 2: Pipeline architecture. Best viewed in color.
4.2. Scene Graph Parsing
The scene graph parser extracts knowledge from a sen-
tence into a scene graph. As its name suggests, the scene
graph can be thought of as a representation of the scene
described in the input sentence. Various implementations
are available. In our work, we stick with the rule-based
scene graph parser since its implementation showed the best
stability. Practically, the CoreNLP implementation returns a
list of relationships. A relationship consists of a subject, the
predicate and the object, and a list of attributes built similarly
with a list of sets, each containing a subject, the predicate and
an attribute.
Scene graph parser starts by building an enhanced ver-
sion of a dependency tree of the sentence (Klein and Man-
ning, 2003), only then it resolves quantificational modifiers,
coreferences and plural.
4.2.1. Quantificational modifiers
Dependency tree parsers treat noun expression quan-
tificational modifiers such as “both of” or “a bunch of”
like noun phrases leading to the latent dependency trees
containing root pronouns instead of the subject. Scene graph
parser tackles this issue by checking if a noun expression
is a quantification modifier against a precompiled list. This
addition guarantees an intermediate dependency tree were
the head component is an entity.
4.2.2. Coreference
The parser performs a coreference resolution on the
pronouns of the dependency tree, disambiguating pronouns
and other words that might be ambiguous without context.
It uses an adaptation of the Hobbs (1978) algorithm for
dependency trees, to save underlying semantic link between
sentences, clear up any confusions and improve the accuracy
of downstream natural language processing tasks.
4.2.3. Plural resolution
In the context of plural resolution, the scene graph
parser is tasked with addressing the challenge of "collective-
distributive" ambiguity, which refers to the difficulty of
determining whether a group noun refers to a single entity
that is comprised of multiple individual parts (collective)
or multiple distinct entities (distributive). On the one hand,
in the example sentence "Two guys in police uniforms", the
parser would need to determine that the noun "guys" refers
to two distinct individuals, each of whom is wearing a police
uniform. On the other hand, in the example sentence "Two
passengers in the backseat of the car", the parser would need
to recognize that the noun "passengers" refers to two distinct
individuals, but that there is only one backseat entity. The
scene graph parser only considers that the distributive plural
is far more common. This is convenient as it aligns with the
common nature of specifications’ descriptions.
At this stage the parser outputs what is referred to as a
Semantic Graph. From this point, the semantic graph will
undergo a set of methods to extract objects and attributes.
4.2.4. Rule-based Parser
The goal of these procedure is to extract object entities,
relations, and attributes from the input sentence using a
semantic graph and Semgrex2 expressions. As of the time
this research was conducted, Semgrex2 expressions were
able to capture a wide range of pattern constructions. It
supports the following patterns:
• Adjectival modifiers
• Subject-predicate-object constructions
• Subject-predicate constructions
• Copular constructions
• Prepositional phrases
• Possessive constructions
• Passive constructions
• Clausal modifiers of nouns
In addition to the rule-based approach, the CoreNLP
library offers a classifier-based approach for extracting re-
lations between entities. However, we have found that the
rule-based approach is more reliable, as the classifier-based
approach may overlook complex patterns and underlying
semantics. The output of this process is a scene graph, which
consists of a list of relationships and a list of attributes.
We transform the scene graph into a list of entities,
each of which has a sub-list of attributes and a sub-list of
relationships. A relationship is a link between two entities,
consisting of an object entity and a predicate verb describing
the connection between the subject entity and the object
entity.
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 4 of 8
Entity Identifier: A Natural Text Parsing-based Framework For Entity Relation Extraction
4.3. Cardinality Extraction
The scene graph produced at this stage does not include
information about the cardinality of entities, as the process
converts the corresponding words into their lowercase stem.
To address this issue, our cardinality extractor iterates
through the list of relationships and the corresponding
sentences to determine cardinality. Plural noun expressions
are assigned a cardinality of "*", while singular noun
expressions are assigned a cardinality of "1". Additionally,
for database structure purposes, if an object is described
as "optional" in the sentence, the corresponding entity is
assigned a cardinality of "0".
This will help easily deduce database cardinality types’
downstream if needed. For example, in "A level has multiple
bosses" we can deduce a many-to-one type of cardinality.
Furthermore, this module also extracts and preserves any
indicated numerical quantifiers as the "Exact Number" entry
of the Entity Tree.
4.4. Inheritance Resolver
Attributes in a scene graph can be either noun expres-
sions or adjectives. However, in our case, for a noun attribute
to be considered as an adjective, it should not be mentioned
else where as an entity, otherwise it will primarily be con-
sidered as a parent class to the described entity instead of an
attribute.
We implement an engine that uses a pre-defined set
of rules to iterate through scene graph attributes. It looks
up for relationships containing a “to be” predicate and
applies rules to determine the entity’s relative position in
the inheritance hierarchy. In this way, we to build up the
inheritance.
4.5. Type description
Similar to a variable type in programming, we assign to
entities the kind of data that they can hold. If there are types
explicitly described through specific attributes appearing in
a list pre-defined by the user (such as Date, Long, Short, and
Int), the corresponding entity is marked as primitive and is
assigned this type. Object Entities which appear as subjects
elsewhere in the text are not assigned a type. Thus, their
value is defaulted to "String".
The Entity Tree produced reflects domain model-like
information, including class attributes and relationships with
additional entries. Heuristics can be applied to this Entity
Tree to generate consistent class code or UML class dia-
grams from directly system requirements. With simple rules
script, we easily generate the UML class diagram illustrated
in Figure 3.
5. Experimental Protocol
In this section, we will present our dataset, as well as the
metrics used to evaluate our method.
Figure 3: UML class diagram of the sentence: “A new customer
buys a product“. It has a text description, a category and a
price. A customer is person.
5.1. Dataset
5.1.1. Entity relation triplet dataset
We aim to evaluate our entity relation extraction work on
a dataset specifically tailored for this purpose. However, we
have found that existing datasets such as WebNLG (Gardent
et al., 2017) and New York Times (Sandhaus, 2008) primar-
ily concentrate on the extraction of named entities, which
is not appropriate for our use case. For this reason, we con-
structed a dataset consisting of randomly selected Wikipedia
paragraphs and labeled each paragraph with its correspond-
ing (𝑒𝑠, 𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠ℎ𝑖𝑝, 𝑒𝑜) triple for evaluation purposes. Our
dataset, contains :
• Text theme
• The text content
• The corresponding (𝑒𝑠, 𝑟, 𝑒𝑜) triplets
• Scene Graph Extracted Dependencies
The dataset contains a total of 198 examples. The dataset is
only intended for evaluation. We therefore consider that this
amount of examples is sufficient to evaluate an algorithm
that does not contain a training phase.
5.1.2. Patterns set
A close examination of Wikipedia paragraphs reveals
that they can be quite complex, which is at odds with
the more precise, concise, and syntactically clear nature of
system requirements descriptions. To evaluate the perfor-
mance of our parser on a more representative way, we have
developed an additional checklist of six patterns.
5.2. Metrics
For evaluation, we define some metrics to evaluate the
extraction accuracy. We believe that a successful information
extraction of the sentence resides in a consistent extraction
of the triplet (𝑒𝑠, 𝑟, 𝑒𝑜). Therefore, we focus on evaluating
this aspect. We propose metrics based on Intersection over
Union as well as BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) score. The
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 5 of 8
Entity Identifier: A Natural Text Parsing-based Framework For Entity Relation Extraction
approach of using BLEU is motivated by the idea that our
task can be viewed as a type of translation, and the BLEU
metric is well-suited to evaluating the quality of translations.
• Pair IoU - First of all, we introduce an IoU metric to
evaluate the number of exactly detected pairs.
𝐼𝑜𝑈𝑃𝑎𝑖𝑟(𝐴, 𝐵) = 𝐴∩𝐵
𝐴∪𝐵
where 𝐴is reference entity pairs’ set, and 𝐵is candidate
entity pairs’ set. For the sake of readability, 𝑒𝑠, 𝑒𝑜refer to
the concatenation of the name and the attribute of each of
the subject entity and the object entity respectively.
• Pairs mean BLEU - We acknowledge that detecting
exact pairs in complex text can be challenging, particularly
when the entities are compound. Despite this, we believe that
the use of the BLEU metric may provide a more suitable
approach for comparing texts in this context compared to
other methods. In this context, we introduce a BLEU mean
of pairs metric.
𝐵𝐿𝐸𝑈𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑛(𝐷𝑥, 𝐷𝑦) =
∑
𝑖∈𝐷𝑥
∑
𝑖∈𝐷𝑦
[
𝐵(𝑒𝑖
𝑠,𝑒𝑗
𝑠)≥𝑘
]
×
[
𝐵(𝑒𝑖
𝑜,𝑒𝑗
𝑜)≥𝑘
]
||||
𝐷𝑥
||||
with :
𝐵(𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖, 𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑗) = 𝐵𝐿𝐸𝑈(𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖,𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑗)+𝐵𝐿𝐸𝑈(𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑗,𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖)
2
𝐷𝑥is the reference sentences’ set, 𝐷𝑦is the candidate
sentences’ set, and 𝑘is the threshold parameter. Compar-
isons with B() values that are less than k are omitted.
• Pairs exclusive BLEU - We introduce another BLEU-
based metric that only takes into account max BLEU value
of the two permutations of reference and generated pair.
𝐵𝐿𝐸𝑈𝐸𝑥𝑐𝑙𝑢𝑠𝑖𝑣𝑒(𝐷𝑥, 𝐷𝑦) =
∑
𝑖∈𝐷𝑥
∑
𝑖∈𝐷𝑦
[
𝐵(𝑒𝑖
𝑠,𝑒𝑗
𝑠)≥𝑘
]
×
[
𝐵(𝑒𝑖
𝑜,𝑒𝑗
𝑜)≥𝑘
]
||||
𝐷𝑥
||||
with :
𝐵(𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖, 𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑗) = 𝑚𝑎𝑥
[
𝐵𝐿𝐸𝑈(𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖, 𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑗), 𝐵𝐿𝐸𝑈(𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑗, 𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖)
]
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦refers to the concatenation of the name and the
attribute of entity.
• Triplet BLEU - Finally, we introduce a similar metric
that evaluates both entities and their relation based on BLEU
value of their concatenation.
𝐵𝐿𝐸𝑈𝑇𝑟𝑖𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑡(𝐷𝑥, 𝐷𝑦) =
∑
𝑖∈𝐷𝑥
∑
𝑖∈𝐷𝑦
[
𝐵(𝑊(𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑡𝑖),𝑊(𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑡𝑗))≥𝑘
]
||||
𝐷𝑥
||||
WikiTriplet dataset
Patterns’ set
𝐼𝑜𝑈𝑃𝑎𝑖𝑟
0.004
0.905
𝐵𝐿𝐸𝑈𝐸𝑥𝑐𝑙𝑢𝑠𝑖𝑣𝑒@0.6
0.036
0.929
𝐵𝐿𝐸𝑈𝐸𝑥𝑐𝑙𝑢𝑠𝑖𝑣𝑒@0.6
0.036
0.929
𝐵𝐿𝐸𝑈𝑇𝑟𝑖𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑡
0.806
1.00
Table 1
Evaluation of our parser on both datasets. 𝐵𝐿𝐸𝑈𝐸𝑥𝑐𝑙𝑢𝑠𝑖𝑣𝑒@0.6
and 𝐵𝐿𝐸𝑈𝐸𝑥𝑐𝑙𝑢𝑠𝑖𝑣𝑒@0.6 refer to the corresponding scores at a
threshold of k=0.6
with :
𝐵(𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑡𝑖, 𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑡𝑗) = 𝑚𝑎𝑥
[
𝐵𝐿𝐸𝑈(𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑡𝑖, 𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑡𝑗), 𝐵𝐿𝐸𝑈(𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑡𝑗, 𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑡𝑖)
]
where: 𝑊(.) is the concatenation of 𝑒𝑠, 𝑟and 𝑒𝑜of a triplet
through white space characters, 𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑡refers to the concate-
nation of the name and the attribute of each entity and the
relationship.
6. Results and discussion
Our entity identification pipeline achieves high scores
on the basic patterns set, with scores of 0.905, 0.929, and
0.929 using the metrics 𝐼𝑜𝑈𝑃𝑎𝑖𝑟, 𝐵𝐿𝐸𝑈𝐸𝑥𝑐𝑙𝑢𝑠𝑖𝑣𝑒@0.6 and
𝐵𝐿𝐸𝑈𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑛@0.6, respectively. It also performed exception-
ally well in identifying triplets, earning a perfect score.
These results demonstrate that the pipeline is capable of
handling simple requirement statements, which is necessary
for achieving our final goal.
However, when applied to complex Wikipedia para-
graphs, the model encounters challenges and struggles to
maintain the same level of performance. While the pipeline
still manages to achieve decent results in terms of the overall
extraction metric 𝐵𝐿𝐸𝑈𝑇𝑟𝑖𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑡on the WikiTriplet dataset,
it performs poorly when it comes to detecting entity pairs.
Specifically, it obtains scores of 0.004, 0.036, and 0.036
on the 𝐼𝑜𝑈𝑃𝑎𝑖𝑟, 𝐵𝐿𝐸𝑈𝐸𝑥𝑐𝑙𝑢𝑠𝑖𝑣𝑒@0.6, and 𝐵𝐿𝐸𝑈𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑛@0.6
metrics, respectively, indicating a significant drop in perfor-
mance for entity pair identification in complex text.
Our objective is to build a parser that performs well
on simple sentences while also being adaptable to complex
entries. For this reason, we have adopted an iterative opti-
mization approach. This approach focuses on continuously
improving the parser’s performance based on its perfor-
mance on the basic patterns list. The idea behind this strategy
is to establish a solid basis in optimizing the pipeline’s
performance on simpler inputs and then gradually enhancing
it to handle more complex text.
7. Conclusions and Perspectives
We have presented Entity Identifier, a pipeline method
for transforming requirements specifications in natural lan-
guage into a model diagram that incorporates Stanford Scene
Graph Parsing. The latter is a natural text parser originally
used for extracting scene information from image queries.
We propose a novel task called common entities and rela-
tions extraction that aims to extract all related entities in a
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 6 of 8
Entity Identifier: A Natural Text Parsing-based Framework For Entity Relation Extraction
text and their relationship, this task will help better model
natural text for machine use. While our entity identification
pipeline demonstrates impressive capabilities in handling
simple requirement statements, it encounters difficulties
when confronted with complex Wikipedia paragraphs. Thus,
an improvement of the current work would be to expand this
task into all entities extraction including common words. In
addition, it would be interesting to expand our evaluation
dataset to include more examples from different sources.
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 7 of 8
Entity Identifier: A Natural Text Parsing-based Framework For Entity Relation Extraction
References
AmrutaAmune, Naik, R., 2016. Reflecting natural language text in to uml
diagrams .
Arora, C., Sabetzadeh, M., Briand, L., Zimmer, F., 2016.
Extract-
ing domain models from natural-language requirements: Approach
and industrial evaluation.
Association for Computing Machinery ,
250–260URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/2976767.2976769, doi:10.1145/
2976767.2976769.
Chen, M., Tworek, J., Jun, H., Yuan, Q., Pinto, H.P.d.O., Kaplan, J.,
Edwards, H., Burda, Y., Joseph, N., Brockman, G., Ray, A., Puri, R.,
Krueger, G., Petrov, M., Khlaaf, H., Sastry, G., Mishkin, P., Chan, B.,
Gray, S., Ryder, N., Pavlov, M., Power, A., Kaiser, L., Bavarian, M., Win-
ter, C., Tillet, P., Such, F.P., Cummings, D., Plappert, M., Chantzis, F.,
Barnes, E., Herbert-Voss, A., Guss, W.H., Nichol, A., Paino, A., Tezak,
N., Tang, J., Babuschkin, I., Balaji, S., Jain, S., Saunders, W., Hesse,
C., Carr, A.N., Leike, J., Achiam, J., Misra, V., Morikawa, E., Radford,
A., Knight, M., Brundage, M., Murati, M., Mayer, K., Welinder, P.,
McGrew, B., Amodei, D., McCandlish, S., Sutskever, I., Zaremba, W.,
2021. Evaluating large language models trained on code. URL: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374, doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2107.03374.
Espejel, J.L., Alassan, M.S.Y., Dahhane, W., Ettifouri, E.H., 2023. Jacotext:
A pretrained model for java code-text generation 17, 100 – 105. URL:
https://publications.waset.org/vol/194.
Espejel, J.L., de Chalendar, G., Flores, J.G., Ruiz, I.V.M., Charnois, T.,
2021. Saucissonnage of long sequences into a multi-encoder for neural
text summarization with transformers, in: Extraction et Gestion des
Connaissances (EGC), Montpellier, France,.
Feng, Z., Guo, D., Tang, D., Duan, N., Feng, X., Gong, M., Shou, L., Qin,
B., Liu, T., Jiang, D., Zhou, M., 2020. Codebert: A pre-trained model
for programming and natural languages. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2002.08155, doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2002.08155.
Gardent, C., Shimorina, A., Narayan, S., Perez-Beltrachini, L., 2017. Cre-
ating training corpora for NLG micro-planners, in: Proceedings of the
55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), Association for Computational Linguistics,
Vancouver, Canada. pp. 179–188.
URL: https://aclanthology.org/
P17-1017, doi:10.18653/v1/P17-1017.
Hobbs, J.R., 1978.
Resolving pronoun references.
Lingua 44,
311–338.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
0024384178900062, doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/0024-3841(78)90006-2.
Krebs, A., Lenci, A., Paperno, D., 2018. SemEval-2018 task 10: Capturing
discriminative attributes, in: Proceedings of the 12th International Work-
shop on Semantic Evaluation, Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, New Orleans, Louisiana. pp. 732–740. URL: https://aclanthology.
org/S18-1117, doi:10.18653/v1/S18-1117.
Laugier, L., Pavlopoulos, J., Sorensen, J., Dixon, L., 2021. Civil rephrases
of toxic texts with self-supervised transformers, in: Merlo, P., Tiede-
mann, J., Tsarfaty, R. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 16th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Main Volume, EACL 2021, Online, April 19 - 23, 2021, Association for
Computational Linguistics. pp. 1442–1461.
More, P., Phalnikar, R., 2012.
Generating uml diagrams from natural
language specifications. International Journal of Applied Information
Systems 1, 19–23.
Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., Zhu, W.J., 2002. Bleu: a method for
automatic evaluation of machine translation, in: Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Sandhaus, E., 2008. The new york times annotated corpus. Linguistic Data
Consortium, Philadelphia 6, e26752.
Schuster, S., Krishna, R., Chang, A., Fei-Fei, L., Manning, C.D., 2015.
Generating semantically precise scene graphs from textual descriptions
for improved image retrieval, in: Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop
on Vision and Language, Association for Computational Linguistics,
Lisbon, Portugal. pp. 70–80. URL: https://aclanthology.org/W15-2812,
doi:10.18653/v1/W15-2812.
Tan, Z., Huang, S., Jia, Z., Cai, J., Li, Y., Lu, W., Zhuang, Y., Tu, K.,
Xie, P., Huang, F., Jiang, Y., 2023. DAMO-NLP at semeval-2023 task
2: A unified retrieval-augmented system for multilingual named entity
recognition. CoRR abs/2305.03688.
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N.,
Kaiser, Ł., Polosukhin, I., 2017. Attention is all you need, in: Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 5998–6008.
Videira, C., Ferreira, D., Silva, A., 2006. Patterns and parsing techniques
for requirements specification 2.
Wang, Y., Wang, W., Joty, S., Hoi, S.C.H., 2021. Codet5: Identifier-aware
unified pre-trained encoder-decoder models for code understanding
and generation. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.00859, doi:10.48550/
ARXIV.2109.00859.
Zhang, J., Zhao, Y., Saleh, M., Liu, P.J., 2019.
Pegasus: Pre-
training with extracted gap-sentences for abstractive summarization.
arXiv:1912.08777.
First Author et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 8 of 8
