Title: A natural language processing and geospatial clustering framework for harvesting local place names from geotagged housing advertisements
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1809.02824v1
--------------------------------------------------

September 11, 2018
0:41
International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ms
International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 00, No. 00, Month 2018, 1–24
RESEARCH ARTICLE
A natural language processing and geospatial clustering
framework for harvesting local place names from geotagged
housing advertisements
Yingjie Hu 1, Huina Mao 2, and Grant McKenzie 3
1 GSDA Lab, Department of Geography, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN
37996, USA
2 Geographic Information Science and Technology Group, Oak Ridge National
Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37830, USA
3 Department of Geographical Sciences, University of Maryland, College Park,
MD 20742, USA
(Received 00 Month 200x; ﬁnal version received 00 Month 200x)
Abstract: Local place names are frequently used by residents living in a geo-
graphic region. Such place names may not be recorded in existing gazetteers,
due to their vernacular nature, relative insigniﬁcance to a gazetteer covering
a large area (e.g., the entire world), recent establishment (e.g., the name of a
newly-opened shopping center), or other reasons. While not always recorded,
local place names play important roles in many applications, from supporting
public participation in urban planning to locating victims in disaster response.
In this paper, we propose a computational framework for harvesting local place
names from geotagged housing advertisements. We make use of those advertise-
ments posted on local-oriented websites, such as Craigslist, where local place
names are often mentioned. The proposed framework consists of two stages:
natural language processing (NLP) and geospatial clustering. The NLP stage
examines the textual content of housing advertisements, and extracts place
name candidates. The geospatial stage focuses on the coordinates associated
with the extracted place name candidates, and performs multi-scale geospatial
clustering to ﬁlter out the non-place names. We evaluate our framework by
comparing its performance with those of six baselines. We also compare our
result with four existing gazetteers to demonstrate the not-yet-recorded local
place names discovered by our framework.
Keywords: Local place name; gazetteer; natural language processing; named entity
recognition; geospatial clustering; geospatial semantics.
ISSN: 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online
c
⃝2018 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/1365881YYxxxxxxxx
http://www.informaworld.com
arXiv:1809.02824v1  [cs.IR]  8 Sep 2018
September 11, 2018
0:41
International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ms
1
1.
Introduction
Place names play important roles in geographic information science and systems. While
computers use numeric coordinates to represent places, people generally refer to places
via their names. Digital gazetteers provide organized collections of place names, place
types, and their spatial footprints, and ﬁll the critical gap between formal computa-
tional representation and informal human discourse (Hill 2000, Goodchild and Hill 2008,
Janowicz and Keßler 2008, Keßler et al. 2009a). Accordingly, digital gazetteers (hereafter
gazetteers) are widely used in many applications.
A number of gazetteers have been developed by government agencies, commercial com-
panies, and research communities. The Geographic Names Information System (GNIS)
is a gazetteer developed by the U.S. Geological Survey and the U.S. Board on Geo-
graphic Names, which covers the major place names inside the United States. By contrast,
GEOnet Names Server (GNS), developed by the U.S. National Geospatial-Intelligence
Agency, is a gazetteer covering place names outside the U.S. Some social media com-
panies, such as Foursquare, have developed their own gazetteers which often focus on
points of interest (POI), such as restaurants and stores (McKenzie et al. 2015). GeoN-
ames is an open gazetteer which contains over 10 million place names throughout the
world (http://www.geonames.org/about.html). It incorporates gazetteers from multi-
ple countries, such as the U.S. (including GNIS), the U.K., Australia, and Canada, and
also contains open data from some commercial companies, such as hotels.com. Who’s
On First (WOF) (https://whosonfirst.mapzen.com) is an open gazetteer started by
the mapping company Mapzen in 2015, and contains place entries from Quattroshapes,
Natural Earth, GeoPlanet, GeoNames, and the Zetashapes project. WOF selectively
merges subsets of place entries from these sources rather than directly combining all of
their data (Cope and Kelso 2015). The Getty Thesaurus of Geographic Names (TGN) is
a gazetteer developed and maintained by the Getty Research Institute, which contains
both current and historical place names. There also exist other gazetteers, such as the
Alexandria Digital Library Gazetteer (ADL) (Jan´ee et al. 2004) and DBpedia Places
(Lehmann et al. 2015, Zhu et al. 2016).
Some local place names, however, are not recorded in existing gazetteers. There are
at least three reasons that can be attributed. First, some place names are vernacular
in nature (Hollenstein and Purves 2010). They can be non-standard place names (e.g.,
“WeHo” for “West Hollywood”), abbreviations (e.g., “BSU” for “Boise State Univer-
sity”), nicknames (e.g., “K-Town” for “Koreatown”), portmanteaus (e.g., “TriBeCa” for
“Triangle Below Canal Street”), or others. These vernacular places can have vague ge-
ographic boundaries that are hard to delineate accurately (Twaroch et al. 2009). Thus,
while frequently used, vernacular place names are often not oﬃcially recorded. Second,
some gazetteers are designed to cover a large geographic extent rather than a local area.
For example, GNIS aims to cover place names in the entire U.S., and some local geo-
graphic features or locally-used names may be considered as relatively “insigniﬁcant” and
are thus omitted. Third, keeping a gazetteer up-to-date takes a considerable amount of
time and human resources. Consequently, the names of some newly-constructed entities
may not be included.
Local place names have great values to a variety of applications. In disaster response,
local place names are often observed in incident reports in short text messages or tweets
(whose length limitation also prompts the use of local place names that are often shorter
than oﬃcial names) (Gelernter and Mushegian 2011). Meanwhile, disaster response teams
can come from other cities, states, or even countries, and may not be familiar with the
September 11, 2018
0:41
International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ms
2
place names used by local residents. A gazetteer containing local place names, thus, can
help automatically interpret the incident reports and locate the people in need. Local
place names can also be used in public participation GIS (PPGIS) (Rinner and Bird 2009,
Hu et al. 2015, Kar et al. 2016), especially its application in urban planning. Consider a
scenario in which both professionals and local residents are engaged in a public meeting
to discuss a city planning project. Residents may use local place names to refer to certain
local areas. A PPGIS, with the capability of understanding and locating these local place
names, can facilitate the discussion between professionals and residents (Brown 2015).
Local place names can be useful in other applications as well, such as locating transitory
obstacles by geoparsing volunteer-contributed text messages to assist blind or vision-
impaired pedestrians (Rice et al. 2012, Aburizaiza and Rice 2016).
This paper proposes a computational framework for harvesting local place names
which can be used for enriching gazetteers. Speciﬁcally, we make use of geotagged
housing advertisements posted on local-oriented websites, such as Craigslist (https:
//www.craigslist.org). Our main contributions are twofold:
• From a methodological perspective, this paper contributes a two-stage computational
framework that integrates natural language processing and geospatial clustering for
harvesting local place names.
• From an application perspective, this paper proposes an innovative use of geotagged
and local-oriented housing advertisements on the Web for extracting local place names
and enriching gazetteers.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related work on
place name extraction, disambiguation, and gazetteer enrichment. Section 3 presents our
framework, and explains the methodological details of the two-stage process. Section 4
applies the proposed framework to an experimental dataset of geotagged housing adver-
tisements collected from six diﬀerent geographic regions, and discusses the experiment
results. Finally, section 5 summarizes this work and discusses future directions.
2.
Related work
Place names (or toponyms) are widely used in various types of texts, such as news articles
(Lieberman and Samet 2011, Liu et al. 2014), travel blogs (Leidner and Lieberman 2011,
Adams and Janowicz 2012), social media posts (Keßler et al. 2009b, Zhang and Gelernter
2014), housing advertisements (Medway and Warnaby 2014, Madden 2017), historical
archives (Southall 2014, DeLozier et al. 2016), Wikipedia pages (Hecht and Raubal 2008,
Salvini and Fabrikant 2016), and others (Gregory et al. 2015). Recognizing place names
from texts and linking them to spatial footprints are important steps for automatically
understanding the semantics of natural language texts, and are studied in both computer
science and GIScience (Larson 1996, McCurley 2001, Jones and Purves 2008, Vasardani
et al. 2013, Karimzadeh et al. 2013, Melo and Martins 2017, Wallgr¨un et al. 2018).
Gazetteers, as geographic knowledge bases, are frequently used for the task of place
name recognition. One straightforward usage is to determine the qualiﬁcation of a word
or a phrase as a place name, which is often done by checking its existence in a gazetteer
(Li et al. 2002, Stokes et al. 2008, Lieberman and Samet 2011). A more advanced usage
of gazetteers is place name disambiguation (or toponym resolution). Since multiple place
names can refer to the same place instance and the same place name can refer to diﬀerent
place instances, it is challenging to determine which place instance was referred to by
a name in the text (Amitay et al. 2004, Leidner 2008, Hu et al. 2014). Gazetteers have
September 11, 2018
0:41
International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ms
3
been used in many ways for supporting place name disambiguation. Based on the related
places in a gazetteer (e.g., higher administrative units), researchers developed methods,
such as co-occurrence models (Overell and R¨uger 2008) and conceptual density (Buscaldi
and Rosso 2008), to disambiguate the mentioned place names. Based on the spatial foot-
prints of place instances, researchers designed heuristics for place name disambiguation,
e.g., place names mentioned in the same document generally share the same geographic
context (Leidner 2008, Lieberman et al. 2010, Paradesi 2011, Santos et al. 2015, Awa-
mura et al. 2015). The metadata of places contained in a gazetteer, such as population,
are also used for disambiguation, e.g., by assigning prominent instances as the default
senses of place names or using metadata as additional features to determine the correct
place instances (Li et al. 2002, Ladra et al. 2008, Zhang and Gelernter 2014). Some place
name recognition methods were designed without using a gazetteer. For example, Adams
and Janowicz (2012) and DeLozier et al. (2015) statistically summarized the geographic
distributions of words over the surface of the Earth using Wikipedia and travel blog
articles. Such geographic distributions can be utilized for disambiguating a target place
name based on its context words. Inkpen et al. (2015) used both a gazetteer and word
features (e.g., part of speech, left words, and right words) to train a conditional random
ﬁeld model which can extract cities, states, and countries from texts.
Many other studies focused on enriching gazetteers with additional information. One
important topic is representing the vague boundaries of vernacular places so that they
can be added to a gazetteer. Montello et al. (2003) identiﬁed the common core area
of “downtown Santa Barbara” by inviting human participants to draw the boundaries
of downtown in their beliefs on a map. Jones et al. (2008) used a Web search engine
to harvest geographic entities (e.g., hotels) related to a vague place name (e.g., “Mid-
Wales”), and utilized the locations of these harvested entities to construct the vague
boundary. Flickr photo data present a natural link between textual tags and locations,
and are used in many studies on identifying boundaries for vague places (Grothe and
Schaab 2009, Keßler et al. 2009b, Intagorn and Lerman 2011, Li and Goodchild 2012).
Existing studies, however, often assume that a place name is already given and the task
is to construct the best spatial footprint for this place name. In this work, we examine
a diﬀerent question, namely given a geographic region, what are the local place names
used by residents there but not yet recorded in gazetteers? Some researchers have looked
into this problem. Twaroch and Jones (2010) developed a Web-based platform, called
“People’s Place Names” (http://www.yourplacenames.com), which explicitly invites
local people to contribute vernacular place names. While such a platform is useful, it
can be challenging to constantly encourage people to contribute, especially over a long
time period. In another study, Gelernter et al. (2013) proposed a matching algorithm
which can compare the tags in OpenStreetMap and Wikimapia with the place entries in
a gazetteer, and can add the place information that are not contained in a gazetteer. Our
work aligns with the general direction of these two studies, but utilizes geotagged housing
advertisements posted on local-oriented websites for harvesting local place names. In the
following, we present our methods and describe the advantages of using geotagged housing
advertisements for collecting local place names.
September 11, 2018
0:41
International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ms
4
3.
Methods
3.1.
Overall architecture
We develop a two-stage computational framework which takes the geotagged housing ad-
vertisements from a target geographic region as the input, and outputs the identiﬁed local
place names and their rough spatial footprints. Figure 1 shows the overall architecture
of this framework.
Figure 1. Overall architecture of the proposed two-stage framework.
3.2.
Input: geotagged housing advertisements
One unique feature of the proposed framework is the use of geotagged housing advertise-
ments posted on local-oriented websites. In this work, a geotagged housing advertisement
is an advertisement tagged with the location (a latitude-longitude pair) of the advertised
housing property. This type of data is available in many housing websites nowadays. For
housing advertisements without geotagged locations, it is possible to assign coordinates
to them by geocoding the addresses of the advertised properties. There are several ad-
vantages in using housing advertisements for extracting local place names. First, local
place names are often mentioned in these advertisements. Location is commonly recog-
nized as the most important factor in making housing decisions. Thus, writers of housing
advertisements are fully motivated to demonstrate the location convenience of the ad-
vertised property by describing its neighborhood and nearby facilities, and local place
names are often used in these descriptions. Second, housing advertisements can be found
in many geographic areas where people live, and often have digital versions online. This
increases the applicability of the proposed framework: to harvest local place names in an
area, we can ﬁrst collect the housing advertisements in that area (e.g., by crawling local
housing websites), and then apply our framework to the collected data. Finally, housing
advertisements can help discover newly-established place names, since they are posted
constantly.
Local place names also exist in other data sources, such as social media. However,
such data often contain too much noise and cannot be directly used for collecting local
place names. For example, a tweet geotagged to a neighborhood can be talking about
any topics, not necessarily related to the local neighborhood. In addition, a user can
mention a place from almost anywhere without having to physically stay there. While
data from Flickr, a photo sharing website, present a stronger connection between texts
and locations than tweets, they often reﬂect the perspectives of tourists rather than of
local people (Girardin et al. 2008). Data from Instagram also contain a lot of noise. Due
September 11, 2018
0:41
International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ms
5
to these limitations of social media data, we use geotagged housing advertisements as
the input for the proposed framework.
3.3.
Stage 1: Natural language processing
Each geotagged housing advertisement in the input dataset consists of two parts: a
textual description and a geographic location. The ﬁrst stage of our framework examines
the textual descriptions of the advertisements. The goal is to identify as many place
names as possible from these descriptions. From a perspective of information retrieval,
this stage aims to increase the recall of the extracted place names.
A major challenge of Stage 1 is that we cannot use an existing gazetteer (or any
methods that purely rely on gazetteers) to extract place names. This is because the goal
of this work is to identify the local place names that are not yet recorded in gazetteers.
Accordingly, we resort to natural language processing (NLP) models which can extract
place names beyond those in a gazetteer. Since false positives (non-place names) can also
be included by NLP models, we consider their output as place name candidates. Another
challenge lies in the informal format of housing advertisements, especially those posted
by individuals on local websites. For example, some housing advertisements use capital
letters for the entire posts (e.g., “BEAUTIFUL STUDIO IN DOWNTOWN BOISE ...”),
while some use capital letters to emphasize certain phrases (e.g.,“This apartment has a
HUGE bedroom.”). In these situations, the performance of a NLP model trained using
well-formated texts (e.g., news articles) can be limited.
To address the two challenges, we use a combination of oﬀ-the-shelf and retrained
named entity recognition (NER) models. The input of a NER model is the textual de-
scription of a housing advertisement, and the output is the text with annotated entities.
Figure 2 shows an example of identifying locations from two sentences of a housing ad-
vertisement in New York City using the default (oﬀ-the-shelf) Stanford NER model. As
Figure 2. An example of named entity recognition using the default Stanford NER model.
can be seen, place names, such as “Lower Manhattan”, “SoHo”, and “TriBeCa”, are
identiﬁed, while two other place names, “FiDi” (Financial District) and “LES” (Lower
East Side), are missed by this default model. To identify as many place name candi-
dates as possible, we make use of four NER models: spaCy NER, default Stanford NER,
case-insensitive Stanford NER, and Twitter-retrained Stanford NER. In the following,
we provide more details about each of them.
1) spaCy NER. spaCy (https://spacy.io/) is an open source software library for
natural language processing in Python and Cython. spaCy NER uses linear models
for named entity recognition, with weights learned using the averaged perceptron algo-
rithm. It identiﬁes PERSON, NORP (e.g., nationalities and political groups), FACILITY
(e.g., buildings, airports, and highways), ORG (e.g., companies, agencies, and institu-
tions), GPE (e.g., countries, cities, and states), LOC (e.g., non-GPE locations, mountain
ranges, and bodies of water), and other types of entities. spaCy NER is trained on the
OntoNotes 5.0 corpus (https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC2013T19) using the part-
of-speech (POS) tag and Brown cluster of words as training features. Given our interest
in place names, we keep only FACILITY, ORG, GPE, and LOC in the extracted entities.
September 11, 2018
0:41
International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ms
6
2) Default Stanford NER. Compared to spaCy NER which started in 2014, Stanford
NER has been used for over a decade, with its ﬁrst release in 2006 followed by mul-
tiple updated versions (https://nlp.stanford.edu/software/CRF-NER.shtml). Stan-
ford NER is one of the state-of-the-art tools, which uses conditional random ﬁeld (CRF)
models and distributional similarity features to improve entity recognition accuracy and
eﬃciency (Finkel et al. 2005). The training features of Stanford NER include word fea-
tures (e.g., current and surrounding words), orthographic features, preﬁxes and suﬃxes,
POS tags, and lots of feature conjunctions. A CRF is a sequence model that aims to ﬁnd
the most likely state sequence given some observations (Laﬀerty et al. 2001). In the task
of NER, observations are a sequence of words, and the states to be found are a sequence
of entity tags. Let x = {x0, x1, ..., xn} represent a sentence (xi represents a word), and let
y = {y0, y1, ..., yn} represent the corresponding entity tags of the words. The probability
of y given x can be calculated using Equation 1:
Pcrf (y|x) ∝
n
Y
i=1
φ(yi−1, yi)
(1)
where φ(yi−1, yi) is the probability between an adjacent pair of states at positions i −1
and i. Based on this equation, the Viterbi algorithm (Forney 1973) is used to infer the
most likely state sequence. A major advantage of using CRF for detecting named entities
is that each word is not treated independently but is considered within a sequence.
Stanford NER has three-class (i.e., LOCATION, PERSON, ORGANIZATION), four-
class, and seven-class models. In this work, we use the three-class model and keep only
LOCATION and ORGANIZATION in the extracted result.
3) Case-insensitive Stanford NER. The default Stanford NER model was trained
using well-formatted text data, such as CoNLL 2003 (Tjong Kim Sang and De Meulder
2003). As discussed previously, housing advertisements posted on local websites are often
written in informal formats. To better detect local place names, we employ the case-
insensitive version of Stanford NER which ignores the case of words and was trained
using only lowercase texts.
4) Twitter-retrained Stanford NER. Case-insensitive Stanford NER can help iden-
tify place names from the descriptions that are informally capitalized. However, it was
still trained based on relatively well-structured sentences with subject, predicate, and
object, and with mostly formal word spelling. In a local housing advertisement, one sen-
tence can be followed by more than one exclamation marks (e.g., “An Apartment You
Must See!!!”), may contain abbreviations and irregular spellings (e.g., “asap” and “The
price is soooooo low!”), or may omit part of the subject-predicate-object structure (e.g.,
“Great location in NoHo.”). Previous research has shown that retraining NER models
using annotated informal texts can signiﬁcantly boost their performances in similar text
environments (Lingad et al. 2013). In this work, we retrain the default Stanford NER
model using a human annotated Twitter dataset from the ALTA 2014 Twitter Location
Detection shared task (Molla and Karimi 2014).
With the four NER models prepared, we take a union strategy by applying them to
the same housing advertisement and combining the extracted place name candidates. In
the Experiments section later, we will systematically evaluate the performances of the
four individual models, as well as the performances of the combined models.
September 11, 2018
0:41
International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ms
7
3.4.
Stage 2: Geospatial clustering
Stage 1 identiﬁes place name candidates which also contain false positives. A major
reason for this result is because the NER models have to tolerate many variations and
irregularities of the local place names mentioned in housing advertisements, such as
“Nolita” and “K-Town”. Besides, place names do not necessarily follow prepositions like
“in” or “at”, especially given the informal language in local housing advertisements. To
accommodate these various situations, the NER models inevitably include words and
phrases that are not place names. The goal of Stage 2, therefore, is to ﬁlter out as many
of these false positives as possible. From a perspective of information retrieval, Stage 2
aims to increase the precision of the extracted place names.
The main data examined in Stage 2 is the location coordinates associated with the
place name candidates. In the output of Stage 1, each place name candidate is linked to
a number of points which are the geotagged locations of the housing advertisements that
mention this particular place name candidate. In Stage 2, we analyze the distribution
patterns of these coordinates to identify the true place names. Intuitively, the coordinates
associated with a true place name, such as “K-Town”, are more likely to show a geospatial
cluster, since it is often mentioned in advertisements whose housing properties are located
in or near these areas. In contrast, a non-place name, such as “Central AC” (the linguistic
pattern of this phrase is, in fact, similar to a true place name, such as “Downtown LA”),
can show up in almost any housing advertisements, and the associated locations are
more likely to be scattered around the entire study region. Based on this intuition, we
formalize the task of Stage 2 as a geospatial clustering problem. However, one critical
challenge is that the clusters can be at diﬀerent geographic scales. For example, the
coordinates associated with “K-Town” may form a cluster at the neighborhood scale,
while the coordinates associated with “Towne Square Mall” may form a cluster at a
point-of-interest scale. Examining the coordinates of “K-Town” at the point-of-interest
scale may not reveal a cluster. Thus, we cannot use the clustering methods which detect
clusters based on a single distance value.
To address this challenge, we employ and modify the scale-structure identiﬁcation (SSI)
algorithm to rank the geo-indicativeness of the place name candidates. SSI algorithm
was initially proposed by Rattenbury et al. (2007) from Yahoo! Research to identify
the place semantics of Flickr tags. It attempts to cluster point coordinates at multiple
geographic scales and examines their overall “clusterness”, and therefore can overcome
the challenge that coordinates may form clusters at diﬀerent scales. In the following, we
brieﬂy explain the mechanism of SSI. Let x represent a place name candidate (a term for
short), and let Lx represent a set of points associated with x. SSI functions as follows:
1) let R = {rk|k = 1, 2, 3, ..., K} be an ordered set of distances that deﬁne the multiple
clustering scales, and rk = αk, α > 1 (we use α = 2 meters in this work); 2) consider
the points in Lx as the nodes of a graph, calculate the pair-wise distances between all
points, and let dij represent the distance between point i and j; 3) iterate k from 1 to
K, and at each distance threshold rk, build an edge between point i and j if dij <= rk;
4) calculate the entropy Ek of the graph at scale k using Equation 2:
Ek = −
X
y∈Yk
|y|
|Lx|log |y|
|Lx|
(2)
where Yk represents a set of connected components of the graph under scale k, and y
represents a connected component. |y| is the number of points in this connected compo-
September 11, 2018
0:41
International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ms
8
nent, and |Lx| represents the total number of points associated with term x; 5) ﬁnally,
the geo-indicativeness of the term x is quantiﬁed by summing up Ek at all scales: P
k Ek.
Figure 3 illustrates SSI by comparing the clustering processes of a true place name and
a non-place one.
Figure 3. Illustration of the scale-structure identiﬁcation algorithm.
In Fig. 3, the gray outline represents the target geographic area (e.g., the Greater Los
Angeles Area). As can be seen, the points associated with a true place name, e.g., “K-
Town”, tend to cluster at a sub region of the study area, while the points associated with
a non-place name, e.g., “Central AC”, can be scattered around the entire area. When
SSI starts from r1 (e.g., a distance of 2 meters), all nodes of both the true place and none
place examples are disconnected, and thus each single node is an individual component.
As rk increases, the nodes of a true place quickly become connected and eventually form
one single connected component. By contrast, the nodes of a none place only connect
slowly as rk increases. Note that r1 < rk1 < rk2 < r′
k1 < r′
k2. If we calculate the sum
of entropies at all the scales, the true place will have a smaller entropy sum than that
of the none place, since after the scale of rk2 all entropies become 0. Thus, we can rank
place name candidates based on their entropy sums in an ascending order, and true place
names should show up at higher ranks.
While SSI is theoretically sound, our pilot experiments identiﬁed a limitation of this
algorithm when the number of points associated with a term is small (e.g., fewer than 10).
Consider the example in Fig. 4 in which both A and B are true place names, but B has
more points than A. It can be seen that the points of A and B are distributed in a similar
geographic pattern, and both become one single connected component under the same
distance threshold rk2. In an ideal case, A and B should have similar geo-indicativeness.
However, the current SSI penalizes the place names associated with more points. In Fig.
4, the entropy of true place A at r1 is −P4
i=1(1
4 × log 1
4) = 2.00, whereas the entropy of
true place B at r1 is −P6
i=1(1
6 × log 1
6) = 2.59. Thus, B has a higher entropy than A
based on existing SSI. This is not a problem in the original work by Rattenbury et al.
(2007), since in their dataset one Flickr tag is associated with in average 232.26 points
(e.g., log
1
232 = −7.858, log
1
233 = −7.864). In our case, a lot of place name candidates are
associated with fewer than 10 points. To mitigate this issue, we modify the existing SSI
September 11, 2018
0:41
International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ms
9
Figure 4. Illustration of a limitation of the scale-structure identiﬁcation algorithm.
into Equation 3.
Ex =
1
p
|Lx|
K
X
k=1
Ek
(3)
where the original sum of entropies PK
k=1 Ek is adjusted based on the number of points.
The square root dampens the eﬀect of the point count, and helps ensure that point
count does not dominate the entropy sum. This square-root adjustment is determined
empirically, and we also tested other approaches, such as 1/|Lx| and 1/ log |Lx|. We will
present the empirical comparisons in the Experiments section. With our modiﬁed SSI,
place A and place B now have entropy sums, 1.00 and 1.06, which are more similar. This
modiﬁed SSI can also be considered as modeling two factors: the degree of clusterness and
the count of endorsements. The terms, which are highly clustered and which are endorsed
by many advertisement writers (each mention can be seen as one endorsement), are more
likely to be true place names.
3.5.
Output: Place names with rough spatial footprints
Stage 2 ranks the geo-indicativeness of the place name candidates based on their entropy
sums calculated using the modiﬁed SSI. We can then deﬁne a threshold, and return
place names whose entropy sums are lower than this threshold. Such a threshold can be
determined based on precision-recall curves, which will be demonstrated in the following
section. In addition, since each place name is associated with a number of point locations,
we can construct rough spatial footprints for the extracted place names. A number of
methods, such as convex hull (Jarvis 1973), concave hull (Duckham et al. 2008), and
kernel density estimation (KDE) (Sheather and Jones 1991), have been used in previous
research for constructing spatial footprints (Jones et al. 2008, Li and Goodchild 2012,
McKenzie and Adams 2017). Figure 5 shows three polygons created based on the point
locations associated with the term “Greenbelt” in Boise, Idaho, USA, using three diﬀerent
methods. We can then choose a method that ﬁts the need of a project. Here, we only
demonstrate the feasibility of constructing rough spatial footprints for the extracted place
names. Identifying the suitable parameters for delineating the best spatial footprint for
a place name is beyond the scope of this work and is worth further investigation.
September 11, 2018
0:41
International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ms
10
Figure 5. Three methods for constructing rough spatial footprints for the place name, “Green-
belt”, based on the associated housing advertisement locations.
4.
Experiments
In this section, we apply the proposed two-stage framework to a dataset of geotagged
housing advertisements in six diﬀerent geographic regions to extract local place names.
We ﬁrst describe the dataset and then present the multiple experiments conducted for
evaluating the performance of the framework.
4.1.
Dataset
The experimental dataset was collected from Craigslist which is a local-oriented adver-
tisement website. There is one Craigslist website instance for each geographic region
deﬁned by Craigslist. We selected 6 diﬀerent regions that contain 6 U.S. cities, which
are: New York City (NY), Los Angeles (CA), Chicago (IL), Richmond (VI), Boise (ID),
and Spokane (WA). These regions were selected based on the population rankings of
the contained major cities: the former three cities rank as top 3 among all U.S. cities,
while the latter three rank as 98th, 99th, and 101th (the city that ranks as 100th is
San Bernardino, which is a California city close to Los Angeles; thus we replaced it with
Spokane). These 6 regions are in 6 diﬀerent U.S. states, and the housing advertisements
are retrieved from 6 Craigslist websites respectively.
The data collection took about three and a half months (from Feb. 18th, 2017 to May
30th, 2017). A Java Web crawler was developed using the library of HtmlUnit to re-
trieve housing advertisements from Craigslist websites. Figure 6 shows an example of
a geotagged housing advertisement on the Los Angeles website of Craigslist. As can be
seen, the left side of the advertisement provides a textual description on the housing
property, which mentions multiple place names including local place names such as “K-
Town”. On the right side, a map shows the location of the housing property. Our Web
crawler extracts the textual description and the latitude and longitude of the housing
location embedded in the HTML page, and no additional geocoding is involved. A re-
trieved housing advertisement contains the post ID, repost ID (if this is a repost), post
time, longitude, latitude, and post content. Some advertisements do not provide location
coordinates and are not used in our experiments. In total, we collected more than 2 GB
data with over 3 million housing advertisements for the six study regions. The collected
data are stored in individual comma-separated values ﬁles.
September 11, 2018
0:41
International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ms
11
Figure 6. A geotagged housing advertisement from a Craigslist website.
Table 1.: Counts of the distinct geotagged housing advertisements in the 6 study regions.
New York
Los Angeles
Chicago
Richmond
Boise
Spokane
6205
9301
8973
4712
3373
3288
Figure 7. Geographic distributions of the distinct housing advertisements in the 6 study regions.
September 11, 2018
0:41
International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ms
12
The raw data contain a lot of duplications, since a user tends to repost the same
advertisement if no response is received after a few days. In addition, some apartment
rental companies post a large number of advertisements which dominate the raw data.
To reduce the potential bias, we remove the advertisements which are reposts (based on
their repost ID) and those whose ﬁrst 50 characters exactly overlap with the existing
posts. These two ﬁlters removed a large number of posts, and the ﬁnal counts of distinct
advertisements are summarized in Table 1. Figure 7 shows the geographic distributions
of the distinct housing advertisements.
4.2.
Experiment Procedure
With the distinct geotagged housing advertisements, we ﬁrst apply the four NER models
in Stage 1 to the textual description of each post. We combine the place name candidates
extracted, and associate each name with the locations of the housing advertisements that
mention this name. After Stage 1, we obtain a set of place name candidates for each of
the six study regions, and each name is associated with a number of point locations.
In Stage 2, we examine the geo-indicativeness of the place name candidates based on
the associated point locations. Before running the modiﬁed SSI algorithm, we ﬁrst apply
a spatial ﬁlter to the locations to reduce the noise contained in Craigslist data. This is
because some advertisements may tag the housing properties with wrong locations, and
sometimes an advertisement writer may overly exaggerate the location convenience of the
housing property (e.g., by saying that the property is close to a shopping mall even though
it is in fact far away). We perform the following operations to reduce the data noise: 1)
identify the medoid of all the points associated with a place name candidate (the medoid
is identiﬁed by ﬁrst calculating the Euclidean distance between every point pair and then
selecting the point with the smallest sum of distances to all other points); 2) ﬁnd the third
quartile distance based on the distances from all other points to the medoid; 3) remove
the points whose distances to the medoid are larger than the third quartile distance.
These three steps preserve the majority of points close to the medoid, and reduce the
number of noise points included. We also remove the place name candidates associated
with fewer than 3 points after this ﬁltering process. The modiﬁed SSI algorithm is then
applied to the data, and the place name candidates are ranked based on their adjusted
entropy sums in an ascending order.
After the two stages, we have obtained a ranked list of place name candidates for each
region. We can then determine a threshold for the adjusted entropy sum to identify the
candidates that will be considered as true place names. The process of determining the
entropy threshold will be discussed in the following subsection. With the identiﬁed place
names, we can construct rough spatial footprints for them using methods such as convex
hull.
4.3.
Performance evaluation
In this subsection, we evaluate the performance of the proposed two-stage framework. We
start the evaluation by obtaining a ground-truth dataset. 120 Craigslist advertisements,
with 20 randomly selected from each study region, were manually annotated by 3 human
annotators. Each annotator reads and annotates the 120 advertisements independently.
Thus, each advertisement receives annotations from 3 human judges. We then adopt a
rule of majority vote, and the place names which are identiﬁed by at least two annotators
are kept, while those labeled by only one annotator are discarded. The obtained 120
September 11, 2018
0:41
International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ms
13
annotated advertisements are used as the ground truth for evaluation experiments1.
While this dataset is a small sample, it nevertheless enables us to quantitatively measure
the performances of the proposed framework. Further evaluation experiments can be
conducted when more human-annotated advertisements have become available.
To quantify the performance of a model, we employ three metrics from information
retrieval, which are precision, recall, and F-score (Equations 4 to 6).
Precision = |Retrieved Relevant|
|All Retrieved|
(4)
Recall = |Retrieved Relevant|
|All Relevant|
(5)
F-score = 2 · Precision × Recall
Precision + Recall
(6)
Precision measures the percentage of correctly identiﬁed place names among all the
names returned by a model. Recall measures the percentage of correctly identiﬁed place
names among all the place names that should be identiﬁed (i.e., the ground-truth place
names labeled out by human judges). F-score is the harmonic mean of precision and
recall. F-score is high when both precision and recall are fairly high, and is low if either
of the two is low.
With the ground-truth data and the evaluation metrics, we ﬁrst quantify the perfor-
mances of the four NER models in Stage 1. Evaluating the performance of each stage can
help us understand the functioning details of the entire framework. We test the perfor-
mance of each individual NER model (Table 2), and the performances of the combined
models (Table 3).
Table 2.: Performance of each NER model.
spaCy
Stanford
Stanford
Case-insensitive
Stanford
Twitter-retrained
Precision
0.396
0.570
0.536
0.451
Recall
0.663
0.672
0.522
0.668
F-score
0.496
0.617
0.529
0.538
Table 3.: Performances of the combined NER models.
spaCy
spaCy
+ Stanford
Former 2
+ Case-insensitive
Former 3
+ Twitter-retrained
Precision
0.396
0.399
0.377
0.336
Recall
0.663
0.839
0.864
0.932
F-score
0.496
0.541
0.525
0.494
The goal of Stage 1 is to identify as many place name candidates as possible. Thus, we
focus on the evaluation metric of recall. As can be seen from these two tables, using the
NER models individually achieves a recall from 0.522 to 0.672, while combining the four
models gives us a much higher value, 0.932. It is worth noting that similar recall values
do not mean that the NER models extract the almost same set of place name candidates.
1The dataset is available at: https://github.com/YingjieHu/LocalPlaceName
September 11, 2018
0:41
International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ms
14
For example, spaCy NER and the default Stanford NER have a recall of 0.663 and 0.672
respectively. A combination of the two produces a recall of 0.839, suggesting that each
NER model extracts certain place name candidates which are not identiﬁed by the other
model. By combining multiple NER models, we can identify more place name candidates
(thus, higher recall). Meanwhile, such a union combination introduces more noise terms
into the output of Stage 1 (thus, lower precision).
We continue to evaluate the performance of Stage 2, which also determines the ﬁnal
performance of the framework. The goal of Stage 2 is to “weed out” the false positives
included in the output of Stage 1. With diﬀerent thresholds for the adjusted entropy sum,
diﬀerent sets of place name candidates can be returned as the ﬁnal output of Stage 2. We
normalize the adjusted entropy sums into [0, 1] based on the minimum and maximum
values, and iterate the threshold from 0 to 1 with a step 0.01. At each threshold, we can
obtain a precision, a recall, and a F-score. Using recall as the x coordinate and precision
as the y coordinate, we can plot out a precision-recall curve to show the performances of
Stage 2 (also the entire framework) at diﬀerent thresholds. Figure 8 shows the precision-
recall curve of our proposed two-stage framework (the blue curve). For comparison, we
Figure 8. Performances of the proposed framework and the 6 baseline models.
also plot out the precision-recall curves of the original SSI (without adjusting the entropy
sums using the point counts) and two other possible ways for adjusting the entropy sums
(i.e., point count, 1/|Lx|, and log point count, 1/ log(|Lx|)). In addition, we compare
our framework with two other NER models, DBpedia Spotlight (Daiber et al. 2013) and
Open Calais (http://www.opencalais.com), which extract only the entities contained
in Wikipedia. The performance of Stage 1 (NERs only) is also plotted for comparison.
It is easy to notice that the performances of some models are represented as points
while those of others are as curves in Fig. 8. DBpedia Spotlight and Open Calais are
represented as points, because they are oﬀ-the-shelf tools which directly output the rec-
ognized entities. Thus, their results are quantiﬁed by one precision and one recall. A
September 11, 2018
0:41
International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ms
15
similar situation applies to the combined NER models of Stage 1 (the pink triangle in
the ﬁgure). The results of the two-stage models are represented as curves, because diﬀer-
ent thresholds can be used to control the returned place name candidates. Thus, there
is one precision and one recall at each threshold, which allow the plotting of curves.
We can evaluate the proposed two-stage framework by comparing its precision-recall
curve with the performances of the other models. Overall, our framework outperforms
DBpedia Spotlight and Open Calais in both precision and recall. This result suggests
that our framework can correctly identify more local place names than the two NER
models that rely on an existing knowledge base. In addition, the 3 modiﬁed SSI models
all outperform the original SSI which does not adjust the entropy sums. In particular, the
proposed adjustment (using 1/
p
|Lx|) shows a better performance than the two tested
alternatives (using 1/|Lx| or 1/ log(|Lx|)).
We determine a threshold for the adjusted entropy sum to generate the ﬁnal output.
Such a threshold can be determined based on application needs. An application that
favors a high percentage of correctness in the output can use a threshold that produces
high precision (but low recall). In contrast, an application that favors high coverage of
the result can use a threshold that gives high recall (but low precision). For a balanced
performance, one can choose the threshold with the highest F-score. In this work, both
precision and recall are important, but we favor recall slightly more since a higher recall
allows us to extract more local place names. Thus, we determine the threshold using the
following procedure: 1) we rank the thresholds based on their F-scores, and identify those
that achieve the top 10 F-scores; 2) among the 10 thresholds, we identify the one that
produces the highest recall. Using this procedure, we select a ﬁnal threshold 0.67 which
gives a precision 0.600, a recall 0.684, and a F-score 0.639. Generally, false positives
happen when a non-place term also shows certain clusterness based on the geotagged
advertisement locations. For example, the names of some realtors are included in the
ﬁnal result. By examining the associated locations, we ﬁnd that these points do cluster
at some neighborhoods, since a realtor is often in charge of one or several neighborhoods.
On the other hand, false negatives often happen when a place name is not mentioned
by enough housing advertisements. These place names are directly removed during the
ﬁltering process since they are associated with only one or two points.
We also compare the ﬁnal performance of the two-stage framework with using Stage
1 alone. Using a combination of the four NER models, Stage 1 achieves a precision
0.336 and a very high recall 0.932. Adding Stage 2 increases the precision to 0.600 but
also decreases the recall to 0.684. In an ideal case, Stage 2 will only weed out the false
positives, and thus we should see an increased precision and no-decrease (or slightly-
decreased) recall. In practice, however, Stage 2 also removes some true place names in
the weeding-out process. While Stage 2 has decreased the recall, it largely reduces the
number of place name candidates included in the output. To give a concrete example, the
output of Stage 1 for the Los Angeles study region contains 27823 place name candidates,
while only 832 names are kept after Stage 2. Thus, Stage 2 largely ﬁlters out the false
positives, although it also mistakenly removes some true place names. For the purpose
of enriching gazetteers, the output of Stage 1 contains too many noise terms and cannot
be directly utilized. While the output of the two-stage framework also contains some
non-place names, it is feasible to go through the relatively small numbers of extracted
place names, and identify the false positives that have slipped away from Stage 2. Table 4
shows the total numbers of terms (with both true place and non-place names) identiﬁed
by the two-stage framework for the study regions.
September 11, 2018
0:41
International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ms
16
Table 4.: Counts of terms extracted for the 6 study regions.
New York
Los Angeles
Chicago
Richmond
Boise
Spokane
408
832
448
239
222
178
4.4.
Comparison with existing gazetteers
One important goal of the proposed framework is to enrich existing gazetteers with ad-
ditional place names, especially local place names. In this subsection, we compare the
place names extracted for the six regions with the place names in four existing gazetteers,
which are Foursquare venues, GeoNames, TGN, and WOF. Foursquare venues are main-
tained by the location-based social media company Foursquare, but a vast majority of
place entries are contributed by its users. GeoNames is a combination of multiple ex-
isting gazetteers from both authorities and commercial companies. TGN represents the
gazetteers developed by a single authority which uses strict editorial rules to control
the included place entries. WOF is an open gazetteer from Mapzen with place entries
selected from a variety of sources such as Quattroshapes and Natural Earth.
Additional considerations are necessary for comparing the extracted place names with
the existing gazetteer entries. As discussed previously, the output place names from
our experiments still contain non-place names. Thus, simply counting the number of
extracted place names that do not have counterparts in the gazetteers can result in an
overestimation. To provide a more robust estimation, we count only those names that are
indeed place names. To do so, we perform the following steps using Foursquare venues.
(1) Compare each extracted place name with Foursquare, and identify the place
names that have a direct match (case insensitive) in Foursquare. For example,
“ann morrison park” from our output is a direct match with “Ann Morrison
Park” in Foursquare.
(2) Compare the rest of the extracted place names with Foursquare, and identify
the place names that are indirect matches with Foursquare entries. For example,
“bsu” from our output is an indirect match with “Boise State University (BSU)
Education Building” in Foursquare.
(3) For the rest of the extracted place names, we verify each by searching online to
determine whether it is indeed a place name.
We use Foursquare venues (instead of the other gazetteers), because it is designed
to provide a search-and-discovery service for local places. Meanwhile, local users also
contribute many place entries to Foursquare. Thus, we expect that Foursquare contains
the most comprehensive local places among the compared gazetteers. As a result, we can
minimize the number of place names that need to be manually veriﬁed. Strict rules are
also used in step (3) to eliminate certain place names, which are as follows:
• Small streets in an apartment complex are not considered as new place entries. For ex-
ample, we identiﬁed 11 small streets for Spokane, which are not contained in Foursquare
venues. Such small streets are not counted as the discovered new place names.
• Alternative spellings, which simply add or remove spaces, are not counted as new place
entries. For example, “Green Belt” is used in multiple housing advertisements in Boise,
but it is not considered as a new place name, since the proper spelling “Greenbelt”
is already included in Foursquare. However, alternative names, such as “K-Town” for
“Koreatown”, is counted as a discovered new place name.
The above rules are adopted to help generate a robust estimation on the number of new
September 11, 2018
0:41
International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ms
17
place names discovered by our framework. These rules, however, are not meant to be
ﬁxed and can be adjusted based on practical needs (e.g., one could also consider “Green
Belt” as a valid local name in an application).
The numbers of discovered new place names in comparison with Foursquare are re-
ported in Table 5. To compare with GeoNames, TGN, and WOF, we count the extracted
place names that do not have any match (both direct and indirect matches) in these three
gazetteers but have a direct match in Foursquare or are veriﬁed as true place names in
step (3).
Table 5.: Estimated numbers of new local place names discovered using the proposed
framework in comparison with four existing gazetteers.
Foursquare
GeoNames
TGN
WOF
New York
3
51
148
99
Los Angeles
6
159
330
175
Chicago
3
75
134
81
Richmond
6
53
81
56
Boise
2
59
68
58
Spokane
2
20
45
38
Compared with Foursquare venues, the proposed framework only discovered a hand-
ful of new local place names. As a location-based social media and a local search service
provider, Foursquare already contains many place names extracted by our approach. The
small number of new place names not contained in Foursquare include districts, such as
“Bell School District” in Chicago and “Central Business District” in Richmond. We also
discovered quite a few alternative place names, including “K-Town” for “Koreatown”,
“Lamplighter Coﬀee” for “Lamplighter Roasting Co.”, and “Bio Park” for “Virginia
BioTechnology Research”. While our approach does not extract many new places com-
pared with Foursquare, it has values in three aspects. First, Foursquare dataset is a
commercial product which has usage restrictions, while our place names are extracted
from publicly available local housing advertisements using open methods. Second, some
geographic regions may have very few or no Foursquare users, while housing advertise-
ments can be found in almost anywhere people live. Third, Foursquare provides only
point representations for most place names, while our approach allows the construction
of rough spatial footprints. Figure 9(a) shows the convex hull constructed based on the
housing advertisement locations associated with “Nolita” (for “North of Little Italy”) in
New York City, while Foursquare represents “Nolita” as one point. Figure 9(b) shows the
boundary of “Nolita” on Google Maps. It is interesting to see that the convex hull does
not exactly match the boundary of “Nolita” on Google Maps, but includes some housing
properties that seem to be outside of “Nolita”. One possible reason is that advertisement
writers may describe their properties as “nearby” or even “within” a neighborhood so
that the advertised housing property could become more attractive to potential buyers
or renter. Such a phenomenon was also found by researchers of The Neighborhood Project
(https://hood.theory.org). On the other hand, there is no guarantee that the bound-
aries on Google Maps are absolutely correct, since neighborhood boundaries are usually
fuzzy (Greene and Pick 2012).
In comparison with GeoNames, TGN, and WOF, our method discovers considerable
numbers of new place names ranging from 20 to 330. It can be seen from Table 5,
more place names are discovered for TGN than for GeoNames or WOF. Such a result
is understandable since TGN was designed to store place names often with important
September 11, 2018
0:41
International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ms
18
Figure 9. (a) Convex hull of “Nolita” constructed based on housing advertisement locations and
the point representation of “Nolita” in Foursquare; (b) “Nolita” on Google Maps.
historical meaning rather than local or informal place names. In addition, more names
are identiﬁed for the ﬁrst three study regions containing megacities than for the other
three regions which contain smaller cities. Below we list some example place names that
are discovered by our approach:
• Local neighborhoods: “Hyde Park” in Boise, “West Loop” in Chicago, “Silicon
Beach” in Los Angeles, “Museum District” in Richmond.
• Parks: “Elm Grove Park” in Boise, “Pan Paciﬁc Park” in Los Angeles, “Deep Run
Park” in Richmond.
• Schools: “Loyola Law School” in Los Angeles, “Sawtooth Middle School” in Boise,
“Prairie View Elementary” in Spokane.
• Points of interest: “Plum Market” in Chicago, “Barclay Center” in New York,
“Howard Hughes Center” in Los Angeles.
• Alternative names: “FiDi” in New York, “Central Bench” in Boise, “DTLA” in Los
Angeles.
5.
Conclusions and future work
Local place names can support important geospatial applications in disaster response,
urban planning, and many other areas. This paper presents a two-stage computational
framework for extracting local place names in a given geographic region based on geo-
tagged housing advertisements posted on local-oriented websites, such as Craigslist. The
ﬁrst stage of the framework focuses on the textual content of the advertisements, and uses
a combination of oﬀ-the-shelf and retrained named entity recognition models to identify
place name candidates from the text. The second stage examines the point locations
associated with each place name candidate, and uses a geospatial clustering algorithm,
modiﬁed scale-structure identiﬁcation, to quantify the geo-indicativeness of the place
name candidates. A threshold can then be decided to ﬁlter out non-place names. We
applied the proposed two-stage framework to geotagged housing advertisements in six
diﬀerent regions, and evaluated its performances in terms of precision, recall, and F-score.
We also compared the extracted place names with the entries in four existing gazetteers,
September 11, 2018
0:41
International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ms
REFERENCES
19
which are Foursquare venues, GeoNames, TGN, and WOF, to demonstrate the local
place names discovered by the proposed framework.
The contributions of this paper can be seen from two perspectives. From the perspec-
tive of application, this paper presents an innovative use of geotagged housing advertise-
ments for extracting local place names. This type of data contains local place names, is
widely available, and captures newly-constructed geographic entities. From the perspec-
tive of methodology, this work presents an integration of natural language processing
and geospatial clustering methods. As indicated by the experiment results, integrating
geospatial clustering with NLP methods has a better performance in extracting local
place names than using the methods based on linguistic features alone.
The proposed framework has its limitations and can be improved in the near future.
First, the ﬁnal output of the framework still contains quite some non-place names. Some
terms slipped through the ﬁltering process of Stage 2, because they show certain geo-
indicativeness similar to those of the true place names (e.g., realtor names). Further
studies can be conducted on removing these and other false positives. Second, deeper
natural language analysis can be performed on the textual descriptions of the housing
advertisements. For example, we can diﬀerentiate the housing advertisements which state
“... is located within Nolita” from those which state “... is located close to Nolita” in order
to obtain a more accurate spatial footprint of the place name. While further research can
be conducted, we hope that this paper has made a modest contribution to harvesting
local place names.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the three anonymous reviewers for their constructive
suggestions and comments. This research is supported by the Professional and Scholarly
Development Award (Award Number: R011038-002) from the University of Tennessee,
Knoxville.
References
Aburizaiza, A.O. and Rice, M.T., 2016. Geospatial footprint library of geoparsed text
from geocrowdsourcing. Spatial Information Research, 24 (4), 409–420.
Adams, B. and Janowicz, K., 2012. On the Geo-Indicativeness of Non-Georeferenced
Text. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Web and Social Media
(ICWSM) AAAI Press, 375–378.
Amitay, E., et al., 2004. Web-a-where: geotagging web content. In: Proceedings of the
27th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in
information retrieval ACM, 273–280.
Awamura, T., et al., 2015. Location name disambiguation exploiting spatial proximity
and temporal consistency. SocialNLP 2015@ NAACL, 1–9.
Brown, G., 2015. Engaging the wisdom of crowds and public judgement for land use plan-
ning using public participation geographic information systems. Australian Planner,
52 (3), 199–209.
Buscaldi, D. and Rosso, P., 2008. A conceptual density-based approach for the disam-
biguation of toponyms. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 22
(3), 301–313.
September 11, 2018
0:41
International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ms
20
REFERENCES
Cope, A. and Kelso, N., 2015. Who’s On First. Mapzen Blog, Online: https://mapzen.
com/blog/who-s-on-first; Accessed on: 2017-11-05.
Daiber, J., et al., 2013. Improving eﬃciency and accuracy in multilingual entity extrac-
tion. In: Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Semantic Systems ACM,
121–124.
DeLozier, G., Baldridge, J., and London, L., 2015. Gazetteer-Independent Toponym Res-
olution Using Geographic Word Proﬁles.. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI), AAAI Press, 2382–2388.
DeLozier, G., et al., 2016. Creating a novel geolocation corpus from historical texts. In:
Proceedings of The 10th Linguistic Annotation Workshop Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, 188–198.
Duckham, M., et al., 2008. Eﬃcient generation of simple polygons for characterizing the
shape of a set of points in the plane. Pattern Recognition, 41 (10), 3224–3236.
Finkel, J.R., Grenager, T., and Manning, C., 2005. Incorporating non-local information
into information extraction systems by gibbs sampling. In: Proceedings of the 43rd
annual meeting on association for computational linguistics, Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, 363–370.
Forney, G.D., 1973. The viterbi algorithm. Proceedings of the IEEE, 61 (3), 268–278.
Gelernter, J., et al., 2013. Automatic gazetteer enrichment with user-geocoded data.
In: Proceedings of the Second ACM SIGSPATIAL International Workshop on Crowd-
sourced and Volunteered Geographic Information ACM, 87–94.
Gelernter, J. and Mushegian, N., 2011. Geo-parsing Messages from Microtext. Transac-
tions in GIS, 15 (6), 753–773.
Girardin, F., et al., 2008. Digital footprinting: Uncovering tourists with user-generated
content. IEEE Pervasive computing, 7 (4).
Goodchild, M.F. and Hill, L.L., 2008. Introduction to digital gazetteer research. Inter-
national Journal of Geographical Information Science, 22 (10), 1039–1044.
Greene, R.P. and Pick, J.B., 2012. Exploring the urban community: A GIS approach.
Prentice Hall.
Gregory, I., et al., 2015. Geoparsing, GIS, and textual analysis: Current developments in
spatial humanities research. International Journal of Humanities and Arts Computing,
9 (1), 1–14.
Grothe, C. and Schaab, J., 2009. Automated footprint generation from geotags with ker-
nel density estimation and support vector machines. Spatial Cognition & Computation,
9 (3), 195–211.
Hecht, B. and Raubal, M., 2008. GeoSR: Geographically explore semantic relations in
world knowledge. The European Information Society, 95–113.
Hill, L.L., 2000. Core elements of digital gazetteers: placenames, categories, and foot-
prints. In: International Conference on Theory and Practice of Digital Libraries
Springer, 280–290.
Hollenstein, L. and Purves, R., 2010. Exploring place through user-generated content:
Using Flickr tags to describe city cores. Journal of Spatial Information Science, 2010
(1), 21–48.
Hu, Y., Janowicz, K., and Prasad, S., 2014. Improving Wikipedia-based place name
disambiguation in short texts using structured data from DBpedia. In: Proceedings of
the 8th workshop on geographic information retrieval ACM, 1–8.
Hu, Y., et al., 2015. A multistage collaborative 3D GIS to support public participation.
International Journal of Digital Earth, 8 (3), 212–234.
Inkpen, D., et al., 2015. Location detection and disambiguation from Twitter messages.
September 11, 2018
0:41
International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ms
REFERENCES
21
Journal of Intelligent Information Systems, 1–17.
Intagorn, S. and Lerman, K., 2011. Learning boundaries of vague places from noisy
annotations. In: Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGSPATIAL international conference
on advances in geographic information systems ACM, 425–428.
Jan´ee, G., Frew, J., and Hill, L.L., 2004. Issues in georeferenced digital libraries. D-Lib
Magazine, 10 (5), 1082–9873.
Janowicz, K. and Keßler, C., 2008. The role of ontology in improving gazetteer interac-
tion. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 22 (10), 1129–1157.
Jarvis, R.A., 1973. On the identiﬁcation of the convex hull of a ﬁnite set of points in the
plane. Information processing letters, 2 (1), 18–21.
Jones, C.B. and Purves, R.S., 2008. Geographical information retrieval. International
Journal of Geographical Information Science, 22 (3), 219–228.
Jones, C.B., et al., 2008. Modelling vague places with knowledge from the Web. Inter-
national Journal of Geographical Information Science, 22 (10), 1045–1065.
Kar, B., et al., 2016. Public Participation GIS and Participatory GIS in the Era of
GeoWeb. The Cartographic Journal, 53 (4), 296–299.
Karimzadeh, M., et al., 2013. GeoTxt: a web API to leverage place references in text.
In: Proceedings of the 7th workshop on geographic information retrieval ACM, 72–73.
Keßler, C., Janowicz, K., and Bishr, M., 2009a. An agenda for the next generation
gazetteer: Geographic information contribution and retrieval. In: Proceedings of the
17th ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference on Advances in Geographic Infor-
mation Systems ACM, 91–100.
Keßler, C., et al., 2009b. Bottom-up gazetteers: Learning from the implicit semantics of
geotags. GeoSpatial semantics, 83–102.
Ladra, S., et al., 2008. A toponym resolution service following the OGC WPS standard.
In: International Symposium on Web and Wireless Geographical Information Systems
Springer, 75–85.
Laﬀerty, J., et al., 2001. Conditional random ﬁelds: Probabilistic models for segmenting
and labeling sequence data. In: Proceedings of the Eighteenth International Conference
on Machine Learning Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 282–289.
Larson, R.R., 1996. Geographic information retrieval and spatial browsing. Geographic
information systems and libraries: patrons, maps, and spatial information [papers pre-
sented at the 1995 Clinic on Library Applications of Data Processing, April 10-12,
1995].
Lehmann, J., et al., 2015. DBpedia–a large-scale, multilingual knowledge base extracted
from Wikipedia. Semantic Web, 6 (2), 167–195.
Leidner, J.L., 2008. Toponym resolution in text: Annotation, evaluation and applications
of spatial grounding of place names. Universal-Publishers.
Leidner, J.L. and Lieberman, M.D., 2011. Detecting geographical references in the form
of place names and associated spatial natural language. SIGSPATIAL Special, 3 (2),
5–11.
Li, H., et al., 2002. Location normalization for information extraction. In: Proceedings of
the 19th international conference on Computational linguistics-Volume 1 Association
for Computational Linguistics, 1–7.
Li, L. and Goodchild, M.F., 2012. Constructing places from spatial footprints. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 1st ACM SIGSPATIAL international workshop on crowdsourced and
volunteered geographic information ACM, 15–21.
Lieberman, M.D. and Samet, H., 2011. Multifaceted toponym recognition for streaming
news. In: Proceedings of the 34th international ACM SIGIR conference on Research
September 11, 2018
0:41
International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ms
22
REFERENCES
and development in Information Retrieval ACM, 843–852.
Lieberman, M.D., Samet, H., and Sankaranarayanan, J., 2010. Geotagging with local
lexicons to build indexes for textually-speciﬁed spatial data. In: Data Engineering
(ICDE), 2010 IEEE 26th International Conference on IEEE, 201–212.
Lingad, J., Karimi, S., and Yin, J., 2013. Location extraction from disaster-related mi-
croblogs. In: Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on world wide web ACM,
1017–1020.
Liu, Y., et al., 2014. Analyzing Relatedness by Toponym Co-Occurrences on Web Pages.
Transactions in GIS, 18 (1), 89–107.
Madden, D.J., 2017. Pushed oﬀthe map: Toponymy and the politics of place in New
York City. Urban Studies, p. Online First.
McCurley, K.S., 2001. Geospatial mapping and navigation of the web. In: Proceedings of
the 10th international conference on World Wide Web ACM, 221–229.
McKenzie, G. and Adams, B., 2017. Juxtaposing thematic regions derived from spatial
and platial user-generated content. In: Proceedings of the 13th International Conference
on Spatial Information Theory Schloss Dagstuhl.
McKenzie, G., et al., 2015. POI pulse: A multi-granular, semantic signature–based infor-
mation observatory for the interactive visualization of big geosocial data. Cartograph-
ica: The International Journal for Geographic Information and Geovisualization, 50
(2), 71–85.
Medway, D. and Warnaby, G., 2014. What’s in a name? Place branding and toponymic
commodiﬁcation. Environment and Planning A, 46 (1), 153–167.
Melo, F. and Martins, B., 2017. Automated geocoding of textual documents: A survey
of current approaches. Transactions in GIS, 21 (1), 3–38.
Molla, D. and Karimi, S., 2014. Overview of the 2014 ALTA shared task: identifying
expressions of locations in tweets. In: Australasian Language Technology Association
Workshop 2014 ACL, p. 151.
Montello, D.R., et al., 2003. Where’s downtown?: Behavioral methods for determining
referents of vague spatial queries. Spatial Cognition & Computation, 3 (2-3), 185–204.
Overell, S. and R¨uger, S., 2008. Using co-occurrence models for placename disambigua-
tion. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 22 (3), 265–287.
Paradesi, S.M., 2011. Geotagging Tweets Using Their Content.. In: FLAIRS conference
AAAI Press.
Rattenbury, T., Good, N., and Naaman, M., 2007. Towards automatic extraction of event
and place semantics from ﬂickr tags. In: Proceedings of the 30th annual international
ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval ACM,
103–110.
Rice, M.T., et al., 2012. Supporting Accessibility for Blind and Vision-impaired People
With a Localized Gazetteer and Open Source Geotechnology. Transactions in GIS, 16
(2), 177–190.
Rinner, C. and Bird, M., 2009. Evaluating community engagement through argumenta-
tion mapsa public participation GIS case study. Environment and Planning B: Plan-
ning and Design, 36 (4), 588–601.
Salvini, M.M. and Fabrikant, S.I., 2016. Spatialization of user-generated content to un-
cover the multirelational world city network. Environment and Planning B: Planning
and Design, 43 (1), 228–248.
Santos, J., Anast´acio, I., and Martins, B., 2015. Using machine learning methods for
disambiguating place references in textual documents. GeoJournal, 80 (3), 375–392.
Sheather, S.J. and Jones, M.C., 1991. A reliable data-based bandwidth selection method
September 11, 2018
0:41
International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ms
REFERENCES
23
for kernel density estimation. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B
(Methodological), 683–690.
Southall, H., 2014. Rebuilding the Great Britain Historical GIS, Part 3: integrating
qualitative content for a sense of place. Historical Methods: A Journal of Quantitative
and Interdisciplinary History, 47 (1), 31–44.
Stokes, N., et al., 2008. An empirical study of the eﬀects of NLP components on Geo-
graphic IR performance. International Journal of Geographical Information Science,
22 (3), 247–264.
Tjong Kim Sang, E. and De Meulder, F., 2003. Introduction to the CoNLL-2003 shared
task: Language-independent named entity recognition. In: Proceedings of the seventh
conference on Natural language learning at HLT-NAACL 2003-Volume 4 Association
for Computational Linguistics, 142–147.
Twaroch, F.A. and Jones, C.B., 2010. A web platform for the evaluation of vernacu-
lar place names in automatically constructed gazetteers. In: Proceedings of the 6th
Workshop on Geographic Information Retrieval ACM, p. 14.
Twaroch, F.A., Jones, C.B., and Abdelmoty, A.I., 2009. Acquisition of vernacular place
names from web sources. In: I. King and R. Baeza-Yates, eds. Weaving Services and
People on the World Wide Web. Springer, 195–214.
Vasardani, M., Winter, S., and Richter, K.F., 2013. Locating place names from place
descriptions. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 27 (12), 2509–
2532.
Wallgr¨un, J.O., et al., 2018. GeoCorpora: building a corpus to test and train microblog
geoparsers. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 32 (1), 1–29.
Zhang, W. and Gelernter, J., 2014. Geocoding location expressions in Twitter messages:
A preference learning method. Journal of Spatial Information Science, 2014 (9), 37–70.
Zhu, R., et al., 2016. Spatial signatures for geographic feature types: Examining gazetteer
ontologies using spatial statistics. Transactions in GIS, 20 (3), 333–355.
