Title: HealthPrompt: A Zero-shot Learning Paradigm for Clinical Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2203.05061v1
--------------------------------------------------

 
 
 
HealthPrompt: A Zero-shot Learning Paradigm for Clinical Natural 
Language Processing 
Sonish Sivarajkumar1, Yanshan Wang, PhD, FAMIA1,2,3* 
1Intelligent Systems Program, School of Computing and Information, University of 
Pittsburgh, PA; 2Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Pittsburgh, PA; 
3Department of Health Information Management, University of Pittsburgh, PA 
Abstract 
Deep learning algorithms are dependent on the availability of large-scale annotated clinical text datasets. The lack 
of such publicly available datasets is the biggest bottleneck for the development of clinical Natural Language 
Processing(NLP) systems. Zero-Shot Learning(ZSL) refers to the use of deep learning models to classify instances 
from new classes of which no training data have been seen before. Prompt-based learning is an emerging ZSL 
technique where we define task-based templates for NLP tasks. We developed a novel prompt-based clinical NLP 
framework called HealthPrompt and applied the paradigm of prompt-based learning on clinical texts. In this 
technique, rather than fine-tuning a Pre-trained Language Model(PLM), the task definitions are tuned by defining a 
prompt template. We performed an in-depth analysis of HealthPrompt on six different PLMs in a no-data setting. Our 
experiments prove that prompts effectively capture the context of clinical texts and perform remarkably well without 
any training data. 
 
Introduction 
The necessity for vast amounts of annotated text is the fundamental restriction of applying deep neural networks to 
clinical Natural Language Processing (NLP). Despite some good quality and publicly available clinical corpora, such 
as i2b21 datasets, MIMIC-III2 datasets, and BioNLP3 datasets, more annotated clinical text datasets from real-world 
Electronic Health Records (EHRs) are needed to build clinical NLP systems. Most of the existing machine learning-
based clinical NLP systems are based on the supervised approach, requiring abundant data for reasonable accuracy.  
Supervised learning has been used in clinical NLP for different applications, including disease identification4, cohort 
selection5, drug regimen selection6, etc. These systems have proved to be accurate and effective in scenarios with 
abundant training data availability. However, the reality is that most clinical NLP projects have only a small number 
of annotated clinical documents due to the expensive and time-consuming manual annotation process. Therefore, 
building clinical NLP systems with few or no annotated documents remains a top focus in informatics research.  
A Pre-trained Language Model (PLM)7 is a neural network trained on a vast amount of unannotated data (such as 
Wikipedia data or PubMed data) in an unsupervised way. This process is called pre-training, which allows the model 
to learn the general structure of a language (or domain), including the usage of vocabulary in that domain-specific 
context. The state-of-the-art biomedical and clinical PLMs like BioBERT8 and Clinical BERT 9 have been trained using 
millions of clinical texts, including EHRs and radiology reports. The model is then transferred for a downstream NLP 
task, where a smaller task-specific labelled dataset is used to tune the PLM and thus construct the final model capable 
of executing the downstream task. This process is called fine-tuning a PLM. The entire paradigm is called transfer 
learning, as the model learns a general context during pre-tuning, and this knowledge is transferred for a specific NLP 
task by fine-tuning the model in a low-data regime. For example, Clinical BERT has been pre-trained largely on 
unlabeled clinical text datasets like MIMIC, during which it has learned clinical linguistic characteristics from clinical 
narratives such as physician’s notes. Later, this general clinical knowledge could be transferred for specific tasks like 
adverse event detection10 or clinical Named Entity Recognition (NER)11 tasks, by finetuning the PLM with a lesser 
amount of task-specific annotated data.  
The approach described above with few annotated documents is usually called few-shot learning (FSL). While in real-
world scenarios, there may not be any annotated data for a medical concept. Zero-shot learning (ZSL)12 is emerging 
research in NLP which doesn’t require any laborious data annotation by experts. In ZSL, models pretrained from 
unlabeled data can be used for making predictions on unseen data. This technique gained popularity after PLMs have 
been successfully applied on cross-domain adaptation tasks13. Researchers have proved that PLMs can be effectively 
used for sentiment analysis tasks in a zero-shot cross-lingual setting14. In clinical NLP, there are numerous medical 
 
* Corresponding author: Yanshan Wang, PhD, FAMIA; yanshan.wang@pitt.edu 
 
 
 
concepts that need to be extracted from clinical notes and meanwhile, very few annotated datasets are available. 
However, ZSL has been rarely investigated in clinical NLP. Therefore, there is an urgent need to investigate the use 
of ZSL systems in clinical NLP, which doesn’t require annotated data for downstream applications. 
In this paper, we investigate the use of the ZSL technique in addressing the issue of the lack of annotated datasets for 
clinical NLP tasks. We prove that clinical text classification can be executed in a no-data setting by tuning a PLM to 
predict the probability of classifying a text. We used prompt-based learning as the ZSL approach. Prompt-based 
learning15 is one of the latest zero-shot learning methods, which involves creating templates for a given NLP task. 
This process of building prompting functions or templates for the input text data is called prompt engineering. We can 
define a mapping function that maps this set of tokens to the expected prediction for the downstream task. In short, 
prompt-based learning can be defined as a two-step process, where we apply a template with input and output [Z] slots 
and use the knowledge learned by a pre-trained language model to predict the token that can be filled in the slot [Z].  
An example of the prompt-based learning process is illustrated in Table 1. We make the PLMs to fill in the masked 
tokens in sequences like “The patient has cough and expanded chest that does not deflate when he exhales. This is the 
symptom of [MASK] disorder”. Then the PLM constructs an explicit word-context or word co-occurrence matrix from 
the pre-trained embeddings. Using prompt-based learning, we try to tune the PLMs to make predictions by defining 
these sequences or prompts. Till the date of writing this paper, prompts have not been used for NLP systems in the 
clinical domain to the best of our knowledge.  
Table 1. An example of the prompt-based learning process. We define prompting functions or templates, which 
transform the original input text into forms that can be filled by a PLM that predicts the probabilities of texts that 
can be served in the slot. 
Description 
Input 
Input text which needs to be classified 
“The patient has cough and expanded chest  
that does not deflate when he exhales.” 
We can define a Prompting Function 
[text]. This is a symptom of [Z] disorder. 
Now the transformed prompt becomes 
“The patient has a cough and expanded chest  
that does not deflate when he exhales. This is a symptom 
of [Z] disorder” 
The language models predict a token, phrase or 
 sentence that fills the slot [Z] 
“lung”, “asthma”, or “respiratory”. 
 
Background 
With the development of PLMs, in other words Neural Language Models, various architectures have been proposed 
to solve NLP tasks. The first-generation PLMs like Skip-Gram16 and GloVe17 were based on word embeddings. A 
major drawback of these models was that they are not capable of understanding complex linguistic concepts and the 
underlying contexts behind these embeddings. Nevertheless, they were effective in comprehending the semantic 
meaning of a word/sentence.  
The second-generation PLMs are based on contextual embeddings. These models can differentiate the semantic 
meaning of words in different contexts. BERT18, GPT-219, RoBERTa20, XLNet21, T522 are examples of the second-
generation PLMs that can be fine-tuned for various NLP tasks. These models have achieved state-of-the-art 
performance for various NLP tasks. Table 2 is a summary of the six PLMs used in this study. 
Prompt-based learning is one of the latest developments in the field of Natural Language Processing and has not been 
effectively explored for many Natural Language Inference (NLI) applications. There have been multiple attempts to 
use pre-trained language models are unsupervised learners.  
Radford et al.23 demonstrated that pretrained language models could be used for many NLP tasks by “task 
descriptions”, without the need for fine-tuning They have used this method for reading comprehension, translation, 
summarization, question answering tasks, etc. and found that GPT-2 could produce good results in most of these tasks 
without any explicit supervision. 
 
 
 
Researchers have also tried to use semi-supervised training procedures with cloze-style templates for Text 
classification and NLI tasks24. This few-shot approach outperformed supervised learning in a low-resource setting by 
a large margin. GPT-325, with its 125-175 Billion parameters, had achieved good results in the zero-shot and one-shot 
settings and occasionally outperformed state-of-the-art models in the few-shot scenario25. During the LAMBADA 
dataset test, GPT-3 shows 86.4% accuracy in the few-shot settings, an increase of 18% over previous state-of-the-art 
(SOTA) models.  
Table 2. A summary of PLMs used in this study. 
PLM 
Description 
BERT 18 
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers(BERT) is a pre-trained 
language model developed by Google, which was trained using 800 million words from 
the BookCorpus dataset and 2.5 billion words from Wikipedia. It is based on 
Transformer architecture26, a neural network architecture for language interpretation 
built on a self-attention mechanism.  
RoBERTa 20 
Robustly Optimized BERT Pre-training Approach(RoBERTa) is based on BERT 
architecture. It is trained with a bigger batch size and longer text sequences without 
Next Sentence Prediction(NSP). It contains more parameters than BERT (123 million 
for RoBERTa base and 354 million for RoBERTa large). It is trained using dynamic 
masking patterns, in which the masked token is altered with each iteration of the input. 
BioBERT 8 
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers for Biomedical Text Mining 
(BioBERT) has the same architecture as BERT but is mainly pre-trained on Biomedical 
texts. It is trained on PubMed abstracts (PubMed) and PubMed Central full-text articles 
(PMC), apart from the Wikipedia and BookCourpus data. 
Clinical BERT 9  
This BERT model is primarily trained on clinical texts, EHRs and discharge summaries 
and thus produces better performance than other models on EHR text corpus. 
GPT-2 19 
This is essentially a decoder-only transformer. The model is built by stacking up the 
transformer decoder blocks. Unlike the self-attention used by transformers, GPT-2 uses 
masked self-attention. It is an autoregressive language model. 
T5 22 
Text-to-Text Transfer Transformer (T5) is one of the latest PLMs released by Google, 
which outputs a text string instead of a label or a span of the input to the input sentence. 
Thus, it is a seq2seq model. Instead of employing task-specific architecture for 
different sorts of language tasks, it was built to have one standard architecture to learn 
many tasks 
 
Based on unlabeled corpora and a pre-defined label schema, researchers have shown that the prompt-learning approach 
of Zero-shot learning can automatically learn and summarize entity kinds27. This approach could outperform even 32-
shot fine-tuning. They have also shown that text classification tasks can be formulated as a prompt -based learning 
problem, given by: 
𝑝(𝑦∈𝒴∣𝑥) = 𝑝*[MASK] = 𝑤∈𝒱! ∣𝑇(𝑥)4 
where 𝑦∈𝒴 is a label, and 𝒱!= [l1, l2,..ln] is the label word set with labels l1, l2,..ln. A prompt template T modifies the 
input text x and creates a prompt function T(x), with additional tokens than x. [MASK] can be considered the slot here, 
which is predicted by the pre-trained language model from the label set 𝒱. 
Methods 
HealthPrompt Paradigm 
We propose a novel clinical NLP framework using the prompt-based zero-shot learning named HealthPrompt. The 
architecture of the HealthPrompt framework is shown in Figure 1. HealthPrompt comprises the following components: 
 
 
 
1. EHR Chunk Encoder: Each EHR document is split into segments of texts or chunks. This forms a chunk-
level representation of an EHR. Details will be discussed in the following sections. 
2. Label Definition: A label set is created, containing the labels to be predicted by the zero-shot clinical text 
classification model. 
3. PLM Selection: Choosing a PLM to predict the prompt class. Different PLMs have different properties, and 
hence, they perform differently in each task. E.g., BioBERT works better on Biomedical data, while 
Clinical BERT works best on clinical data. 
4. Template Definition: The most crucial part of the framework. Prompt templates are the text templates that 
modify the input text before being fed into a PLM. These templates need to be carefully engineered for the 
downstream task.  
5. Inference: PLM infers the most appropriate label that fits the prompt template. This is done based on an 
answer search technique, which is discussed in the following sections. 
 
The key feature of the HealthPrompt NLP framework is that it does not require any training data. We can directly feed 
the unlabeled EHR corpus to the framework after defining the prompt template and label set. Thus, HealthPrompt is 
a ZSL framework based on prompt-based NLP on Clinical texts. The input EHR document is first split into chunks of 
sentences. These chunks or segments of sentences are then passed into the prompt-based model, which infers the label 
of the clinical texts. 
HealthPrompt can be used for any clinical NLP task that can be formulated as a classification problem, including 
clinical Named Entity Recognition (NER), clinical text classification, and Adverse Drug Event (ADE) detection. In 
our implementation, the Openprompt24 python library was used to build a prompt-based zero-shot model. This unified 
python library gives the flexibility to define the prompt templates and verbalizers (i.e., label sets). 
 
Figure 1. The architecture of the HealthPrompt framework.    
Chunk Encoder and Pooling 
Most PLMs are limited by the maximum length of input text due to hardware limitations. BERT, for instance, supports 
only 512 tokens at a time. But EHR documents usually contain thousands of tokens. For instance, each document in 
MIMIC-III contains 8,131 tokens on average. 
Chunk-level pooling28 is a solution to this problem. In this technique, Chunk Encoder splits each EHR document into 
chunks(segments) of equal lengths. The hierarchical encoding and pooling framework was originally designed to 
overcome the limitation of the PLMs to be trained on long documents. We adopted this chunk representation in the 
HealthPrompt framework,  such that each chunk is passed to the prompt-based model, and the predicted label of all 
the chunks of a document are collected as a label set or collection set of the document, as illustrated in Figure 2. Chunk 
Pooler aggregates the predicted labels from the label collection. We use maximum pooling to combine the chunk 
labels into document labels, and thus perform a document-level classification of long clinical text documents. Short  
documents or clinical texts can also be classified using HealthPrompt, where they will be split into a smaller number 
of chunks. HealthPrompt is flexible for sentence-level clinical text classification, where the chunk encoder considers 
the sentence as one chunk, and hence no splitting is performed on the clinical text.  
The labels corresponding to each chunk of the document is then normalized with respect to their number of 
occurrences in the label collection set of the document, and the label with maximum probability is chosen as the final 
 
 
 
label of the entire document. Let L be the label set with L1, L2,.., Ln labels corresponding to chunk C1, C2, …, Cn. 
The final label Lf is given by: 
Lf = Max[P(Ln /L)] 
The type of encoder and the pooling mechanism used by HealthPrompt determines how a document is represented. 
Though we have used maximum pooling, HealthPrompt gives the flexibility to use other pooling mechanisms like 
average pooling, transformer encoder, Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM), and Convoluational Neural Network 
(CNN) based pooling. 
 
 
Figure 2. The architecture of Chunk-level pooling in HealthPrompt. 
Template Definition: A Prompt Engineering Step 
Prompt Engineering is related to the Template Definition of the HealthPrompt NLP framework. Different templates 
can be used to express the same concept. Hence it is essential to carefully design the templates for exploiting the zero-
shot capability of a language model.  
Cloze Prompt. Cloze prompts are templates with slots in a continuous textual string. This can be viewed as a fill-in-
the-blank query on the LM. Cloze prompts have been effective in an open-domain question answering system29. 
Researchers have also proved that cloze templates using 
BART achieve competitive results on the NER benchmark 
and outperform traditional sequence labelling methods30. 
In general, Cloze prompts are used for text classification 
and NLU (Natural Language Understanding) tasks. “[X]. 
This is [Z] disease.” is an example of cloze prompts. 
Prefix Prompt. In prefix prompts31, tokens predicted by a 
PLM fill the subsequent masks. These are commonly used 
for text generation and sequence prediction tasks. Li et al.32 
experimented with prefix tuning and showed that these 
prompts could improve generalization on Natural 
Language Generation (NLG) tasks. “[X]. Disease: [Z]” Is 
an example of prefix prompts. 
In this study, we created four different prompts for a 
clinical text classification task, whereby each patient note 
is classified into different disease labels using prompt-based learning without training the model. Among these 
prompts, two were cloze prompts, and two were prefix prompts, which are given in Table 3. 
Prompt Template 
Type 
'{"text"}. Disease : {"mask"}' 
Prefix 
Prompt 
'{"text"} : This effects {"mask"}' 
Prefix 
Prompt 
'{"text"} : {"mask"} disorder' 
Cloze 
Prompt 
'{"text"} : {"mask"} type of disease' 
Cloze 
Prompt 
Table 3. Four different prompt templates used for 
the experiment. 
 
 
 
Pretrained Language Models (PLM) 
The proposed HealthPrompt Clinical NLP framework could embed any PLM. In this study, we experimented with six 
PLMs, namely BERT, BioBERT, Clinical BERT, RoBERTa, GPT-2 and T5. We used these language models for the 
clinical text classification tasks, and evaluated the four prompt templates using the six PLMs considered in this study. 
We would like to validate whether careful prompt engineering is effective for clinical NLP tasks and which PLM has 
the best performance in the HealthPrompt framework. 
Inference using Answer search 
A prompt task is defined by a label set and by prompt engineering. A label set is a list of labels on which the input 
text has to be classified. Once the label set and prompt template are defined, PLMs generate multiple tokens that can 
fill a prompt template. For instance, “Patient has severe headache and nausea. This is a symptom of [MASK]”. In this 
case, a PLM can fill the [MASK] with tokens like malaria, brain injury, brain aneurism, etc.  
Answer search is the process by which a PLM selects the token which fits best for a task definition. It is performed 
over the set of potential answers based on the probability of each value in completing the prompt. A verbalizer33 
function is defined for the PLM to predict the probability distribution over the label set. This set of logits is then 
mapped to the corresponding labels. The label with the highest probability is selected as the predicted token. 
Dataset 
We used the phenotype annotation dataset for patient 
notes in the MIMIC-III database34 as the testing dataset. 
This dataset identifies whether a patient has a given 
phenotype based on their patient note. The patient notes 
were retrieved from MIMIC-III, a dataset collected from 
Intensive Care Units of a large tertiary care hospital in 
Boston. Those notes were manually annotated for the 
presence of several high-context phenotypes relevant to 
treatment and risk of re-hospitalization. We randomly 
sampled a subset of 347 patient notes and the 
corresponding phenotype annotations to evaluate the 
performance of our zero-shot HealthPrompt framework. 
These long patient notes had around 7651 tokens on 
average. This subset consisted of 10 classes of different 
diseases. The distribution of the dataset and its labels is 
shown in Table 4. 
These documents are split by the Chunk-level enoding 
mechanism of the HealthPrompt to get chunk level 
labels, which is aggregated to by the pooling mechanism 
to fetch the final document label. 
Evaluation 
We used the entire dataset with 347 patient notes as the testing set for the HealthPrompt clinical NLP framework. All 
four prompts were evaluated on the testing set, with each of the six PLMs we considered for this study. Accuracy, 
precision, recall, and F1 score were calculated for each experiment. The following are the definitions of these metrics: 
𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦=
𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒+ 𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒 𝑁𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒
𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒+ 𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒 𝑁𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒+ 𝐹𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒+ 𝐹𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒 𝑁𝑎𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 
𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛=
𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒
𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒+ 𝐹𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 
𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙=
𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒
𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒+ 𝐹𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒 𝑁𝑎𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 
𝐹1 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒=
2 ∙𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒
2 ∙𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒+ 𝐹𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒+ 𝐹𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒 𝑁𝑎𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 
Results 
Phenotype Category  
Number of 
documents 
Chronic Neurological Dystrophies    
54 
Advanced Heart Disease 
49 
Depression                       
41 
Advanced Cancer                      
38 
Advanced Lung Disease                
38 
Chronic Pain Fibromyalgia              
35 
Obsesity                           
33 
Non-Adherence                    
24 
Alchohol Abuse                       
24 
Dementia                               
11 
Table 4. Distribution of different phenotype 
categories in the MIMIC-III phynotype subset used 
in this study. 
 
 
 
We report all models’ performance in Table 5 for four prompt templates. For the MIMIC-III phenotype dataset, we 
report the average accuracy, precision, recall, and Macro F1 score across the ten classification labels. Cloze prompt 
“[X]. [MASK] type of disease” was the best performing prompt for the phenotype classification task with the best F1 
score of 0.86 and an accuracy of 0.85. The prefix prompt was also able to perform well, with the best F1 score of 0.81 
and accuracy of 0.81. The other two prompts received comparatively low performance with all the models, with 
accuracy scores in the range of 0.50-0.75. Hence, it is clear that cloze prompts produce results comparable to the state-
of-the-art clinical text classification models by tuning them using a prompt definition. 
Table 5. Results on the MIMIC-III phenotype subdataset with six PLMs. 
 
Clinical BERT showed the best performance in all evaluation metrics in all the prompts, including F1-score and 
accuracy. BioBERT also produced comparable results to Clinical BERT. Despite having a complex model and 
significantly a greater number of parameters, GPT-2 and T5 showed poor performance compared to others. The 
potential reason is that GPT-2 and T5 models are autoregressive and seq2seq models, respectively. Our prompt 
approach mainly relied on masking a token in the prompt template. Hence, Masked Language Models (MLM) 
performed better than GPT-2 and T5. Within Masked Language Models, Clinical BERT and BioBERT performed 
better because these models were explicitly trained on Biomedical and Clinical literature.  
These results show that prompt-based learning can effectively apply the Clinical BERT model to clinical text 
classification tasks in a no training data setting. Using HealthPrompt, we directly utilized the pre-trained language 
models and tuned the task definitions with prompts. This alignment of clinical task definition to pre-trained language 
models produced significantly high performance, on par with any of the text classification models in the general 
domain. 
Discussion 
Recently prompt-based ZSL has become a hot research area in NLP. Most existing prompt-based NLP research 
focused on simple sentence-level classification tasks. However, clinical texts from EHRs are mostly long text 
documents that differ from these sentence-level data in the general domain. This is one of the biggest challenges when 
Prompt Template 
PLM Model 
Accuracy 
Precision 
Recall 
F1-score 
'{"text"}. Disease : {"mask"}' 
BERT 
BioBERT 
Clinical BERT 
RoBERTa 
GPT-2 
T5 
0.61 
0.78 
0.81 
0.69 
0.68 
0.63 
0.68 
0.78 
0.79 
0.71 
0.67 
0.64 
0.69 
0.71 
0.83 
0.71 
0.57 
0.66 
0.68 
0.74 
0.81 
0.71 
0.62 
0.65 
'{"text"} : This effects {"mask"}' 
BERT 
BioBERT 
Clinical BERT 
RoBERTa 
GPT-2 
T5 
0.55 
0.71 
0.73 
0.61 
0.51 
0.65 
0.45 
0.70 
0.72 
0.60 
0.50 
0.69 
0.41 
0.71 
0.72 
0.57 
0.61 
0.61 
0.43 
0.70 
0.72 
0.58 
0.55 
0.65 
'{"text"} : {"mask"} disorder' 
BERT 
BioBERT 
Clinical BERT 
RoBERTa 
GPT-2 
T5 
0.61 
0.71 
0.75 
0.58 
0.69 
0.68 
0.68 
0.69 
0.73 
0.51 
0.71 
0.69 
0.69 
0.70 
0.72 
0.48 
0.71 
0.70 
0.68 
0.69 
0.72 
0.49 
0.71 
0.69 
'{"text"} : {"mask"} type of disease’ 
BERT 
BioBERT 
Clinical BERT 
RoBERTa 
GPT-2 
T5 
0.70 
0.77 
0.85 
0.71 
0.73 
0.71 
0.74 
0.73 
0.86 
0.71 
0.73 
0.71 
0.73 
0.73 
0.86 
0.69 
0.75 
0.72 
0.73 
0.73 
0.86 
0.70 
0.74 
0.71 
 
 
 
applying prompt-based ZSL and PLM to clinical NLP. In the HealthPrompt framework, we incorporated chunk-level 
encoding and pooling to tackle this problem. 
HealthPrompt can serve as a general NLP framework for any clinical NLP tasks, when we do not have any training 
data at the initial stages of a project. Particularly, at the beginning of the outbreak of COVID-19 pandemic, the 
HealthPrompt could be rapidly applied to classify new disease and phenotypes based on the clinical texts. In addition, 
most of the clinical text datasets are not publicly available and may require many agreements and attestations to access 
the data, which is one of the biggest impediments in Clinical NLP research. The proposed HealthPrompt framework 
can be effectively used in most of the clinical NLP tasks by carefully designing different prompt templates, regardless 
of the data availability and NLP expertise. 
Limitations and Future Work 
There are three major limitations in this study. First, only six PLMs were tested in the HealthPrompt framework. 
Among the six PLMs, four were general domain PLMs, namely BERT, RoBERTa, GPT-2, and T5, and two were 
clinical domain PLMs, namely BioBERT and Clinical BERT. This was due to the lack of availability of clinical 
domain-specific PLMs. Nevertheless, we were able to produce results close to SOTA clinical NLP systems with 
Clinical BERT and BioBERT, without using any training data. Specific target-domain PLMs have been developed for 
domain-specific NLP tasks. For example, COVID-Twitter-BERT35  is a such attempt, where a transformer-based PLM 
was developed by pretraining on a vast corpus of COVID-19 related tweets. Researchers have also released fine-tuned 
PLMs that can be used for specific applications, as BioBERT finetuned on COVID-19 datasets. These finetuned 
domain-specific PLMs could produce better results on the HealthPrompt framework for the corresponding 
downstream task, which will be tested in our future work. 
Second, only four prompt templates were designed and utilized in the HealthPrompt framework. The reason is that 
testing different prompt templates is out of scope of this study as our primary goal is to develop a prompt-based ZSL 
clinical NLP framework. More evaluations with the new prompt templates and with the development of new domain-
specific PLMs are subject to a future work. 
Third, the testing dataset used in this paper is relatively small. Only 347 clinical documents from the MIMIC-III 
phnotype dataset was used to test the HealthPrompt framework. The reason is that most documents are lengthy 
documents with hundreds of sentences and the chunk encoding and pooling component in HealthPrompt is 
computationally expensive to process these document.  In the future work, we would like to investigate more efficient 
way of processing lengthy documents and test HealthPrompt on larger datasets.  
Conclusion 
The lack of such publicly available datasets is the biggest bottleneck for the development and widespread adoption of 
deep learning techniques in clinical NLP systems. In this study, we developed a novel prompt-based clinical NLP 
framework called HealthPrompt and applied the paradigm of prompt-based learning on clinical texts. In this technique, 
rather than fine-tuning or re-training a PLM, the task definitions are tuned by defining a prompt template. We find 
that, by carefully designing the prompt templates, PLMs can be effectively used for clinical text classification tasks. 
We performed an in-depth analysis of HealthPrompt on six different pre-trained language models in a no-data setting. 
Our experiments indicate that prompts could effectively capture the context of clinical texts in a zero-shot setting and 
perform well on clinical text classification without any training data. To the best of our knowledge, prompt-based ZSL 
has not been effectively applied to clinical NLP tasks, and hence the proposed HealthPrompt framework may be 
viewed as the foundation for a new paradigm for Clinical NLP, especially for NLU and NLI tasks. 
Acknowledgment 
This project was partially supported by the University of Pittsburgh Momentum Seed Funds and the National Institutes 
of Health through Grant Number UL1TR001857 funds. The funders had no role in the design of the study, collection, 
analysis, and interpretation of data and in preparation of the manuscript. The views presented in this report are not 
necessarily representative of the funder’s views and belong solely to the authors. 
References 
1.  
Uzuner Ö, South BR, Shen S, DuVall SL. 2010 i2b2/VA challenge on concepts, assertions, and relations in 
clinical text. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association. 2011;18(5):552-556. 
2.  
Johnson AEW, Pollard TJ, Shen L, et al. MIMIC-III, a freely accessible critical care database. Scientific 
data. 2016;3(1):1-9. 
 
 
1 
3.  
Nédellec C, Bossy R, Kim JD, et al. Overview of BioNLP shared task 2013. In: Proceedings of the BioNLP 
Shared Task 2013 Workshop. ; 2013:1-7. 
4.  
Savova GK, Fan J, Ye Z, et al. Discovering peripheral arterial disease cases from radiology notes using 
natural language processing. In: AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings. Vol 2010. American Medical 
Informatics Association; 2010:722. 
5.  
Stubbs A, Filannino M, Soysal E, Henry S, Uzuner Ö. Cohort selection for clinical trials: n2c2 2018 shared 
task track 1. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association. 2019;26(11):1163-1171. 
6.  
Wang X, Hripcsak G, Markatou M, Friedman C. Active computerized pharmacovigilance using natural 
language processing, statistics, and electronic health records: a feasibility study. Journal of the American 
Medical Informatics Association. 2009;16(3):328-337. 
7.  
Qiu X, Sun T, Xu Y, Shao Y, Dai N, Huang X. Pre-trained models for natural language processing: A 
survey. Science China Technological Sciences. 2020;63(10):1872-1897. 
8.  
Lee J, Yoon W, Kim S, et al. BioBERT: a pre-trained biomedical language representation model for 
biomedical text mining. Bioinformatics. 2020;36(4):1234-1240. 
9.  
Alsentzer E, Murphy JR, Boag W, et al. Publicly available clinical BERT embeddings. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:190403323. Published online 2019. 
10.  
Fan B, Fan W, Smith C. Adverse drug event detection and extraction from open data: A deep learning 
approach. Information Processing & Management. 2020;57(1):102131. 
11.  
Sun C, Yang Z. Transfer learning in biomedical named entity recognition: an evaluation of BERT in the 
PharmaCoNER task. In: Proceedings of The 5th Workshop on BioNLP Open Shared Tasks. ; 2019:100-104. 
12.  
Xian Y, Lampert CH, Schiele B, Akata Z. Zero-shot learning—a comprehensive evaluation of the good, the 
bad and the ugly. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence. 2018;41(9):2251-2265. 
13.  
Socher R, Ganjoo M, Manning CD, Ng A. Zero-shot learning through cross-modal transfer. Advances in 
neural information processing systems. 2013;26. 
14.  
Pelicon A, Pranjić M, Miljković D, Škrlj B, Pollak S. Zero-shot learning for cross-lingual news sentiment 
classification. Applied Sciences. 2020;10(17):5993. 
15.  
Liu P, Yuan W, Fu J, Jiang Z, Hayashi H, Neubig G. Pre-train, prompt, and predict: A systematic survey of 
prompting methods in natural language processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:210713586. Published online 2021. 
16.  
Guthrie D, Allison B, Liu W, Guthrie L, Wilks Y. A closer look at skip-gram modelling. In: LREC. Vol 6. 
Citeseer; 2006:1222-1225. 
17.  
Pennington J, Socher R, Manning CD. Glove: Global vectors for word representation. In: Proceedings of the 
2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP). ; 2014:1532-1543. 
18.  
Devlin J, Chang MW, Lee K, Toutanova K. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for 
language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:181004805. Published online 2018. 
19.  
Radford A, Wu J, Child R, Luan D, Amodei D, Sutskever I. Language models are unsupervised multitask 
learners. OpenAI blog. 2019;1(8):9. 
20.  
Liu Y, Ott M, Goyal N, et al. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:190711692. Published online 2019. 
21.  
Yang Z, Dai Z, Yang Y, Carbonell J, Salakhutdinov RR, Le Q v. Xlnet: Generalized autoregressive 
pretraining for language understanding. Advances in neural information processing systems. 2019;32. 
22.  
Raffel C, Shazeer N, Roberts A, et al. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text 
transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:191010683. Published online 2019. 
23.  
Radford A, Wu J, Child R, Luan D, Amodei D, Sutskever I. Language models are unsupervised multitask 
learners. OpenAI blog. 2019;1(8):9. 
24.  
Schick T, Schütze H. Exploiting cloze questions for few shot text classification and natural language 
inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:200107676. Published online 2020. 
25.  
Brown T, Mann B, Ryder N, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information 
processing systems. 2020;33:1877-1901. 
26.  
Vaswani A, Shazeer N, Parmar N, et al. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information 
processing systems. 2017;30. 
27.  
Ding N, Chen Y, Han X, et al. Prompt-learning for fine-grained entity typing. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:210810604. Published online 2021. 
28.  
Su X, Miller T, Ding X, Afshar M, Dligach D. Classifying Long Clinical Documents with Pre-trained 
Transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:210506752. Published online 2021. 
29.  
Petroni F, Rocktäschel T, Lewis P, et al. Language models as knowledge bases? arXiv preprint 
arXiv:190901066. Published online 2019. 
 
 
1 
30.  
Cui L, Wu Y, Liu J, Yang S, Zhang Y. Template-based named entity recognition using BART. arXiv 
preprint arXiv:210601760. Published online 2021. 
31.  
Lester B, Al-Rfou R, Constant N. The power of scale for parameter-efficient prompt tuning. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:210408691. Published online 2021. 
32.  
Li XL, Liang P. Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for generation. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:210100190. Published online 2021. 
33.  
Hu S, Ding N, Wang H, Liu Z, Li J, Sun M. Knowledgeable prompt-tuning: Incorporating knowledge into 
prompt verbalizer for text classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:210802035. Published online 2021. 
34.  
Moseley E, Celi LA, Wu J, Dernoncourt F. Phenotype annotations for patient notes in the MIMIC-III 
database. PhysioNet. Published online 2020. 
35.  
Müller M, Salathé M, Kummervold PE. Covid-twitter-bert: A natural language processing model to analyse 
covid-19 content on twitter. arXiv preprint arXiv:200507503. Published online 2020. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
