Title: Wastewater Pipe Rating Model Using Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2202.13871v2
--------------------------------------------------

1 
 
Wastewater Pipe Defect Rating Model for Pipe 
Maintenance Using Natural Language 
Processing 
Sai Nethra Betgeri1, Shashank Reddy Vadyala1, John C. Mattews2, Hongfang Lu3 
 
1. Graduate Assistant, Department of Computational Analysis and Modeling, Louisiana Tech 
University, Ruston, LA, United States 
2. Director, Trenchless Technology Center, Ruston, LA, United States 
3. Associate Professor, Southeast University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China 
 
Abstract: 
 
Closed-circuit video (CCTV) inspection has been the most popular technique for visually 
evaluating the interior status of pipelines in recent decades. Certified inspectors prepare the pipe 
repair document based on the CCTV inspection. The traditional manual method of assessing 
structural wastewater conditions from pipe repair documents takes a long time and is prone to 
human mistakes. The automatic identification of necessary texts has received little attention. 
Computer Vision based Machine Learning models failed to estimate structural damage because 
they are not entirely understood and have difficulty providing high data needs. Hence, they have 
problems providing physically consistent findings due to their high data needs. Currently, a very 
small curated annotated image and video data set with well-defined, precisely labeled categories 
to test Computer Vision based Machine Learning models. This study provides a valuable method 
to determine the pipe defect rating of the pipe repair documents by developing an automated 
framework using Natural Language Processing (NLP) on very small curated annotated image , 
video data and more text data. The text used in this study is broken into grammatical units using 
NLP technologies. The next step in the analysis entails using words to find the frequency of pipe 
defect and then classify into respective defect rating for pipe maintenance. The proposed model 
achieved 95.0% accuracy,94.9% recall, 95% specificity, 95.9% precision score, and 95.7% F1 
score, showing the potential of the proposed model to be used in large-scale pipe repair documents 
for accurate and efficient pipeline failure detection to improve the quality of the pipeline. 
 
Keywords: Defect detection, Wastewater pipe inspection, Natural language processing (NLP), 
Text recognition 
 
1. Introduction: 
 
The underground pipeline system forms a significant part of the infrastructure because it includes 
thousands of miles in the United States. Sanitary wastewater collects wastewater from public and 
private users as part of wastewater infrastructure systems[1, 2]. About 500,000 miles of private 
wastewater laterals and 800,000 miles of municipal wastewater lines. [3]. By 2032, 56 million 
people are expected to use centralized treatment plants[4-6]. Water supply and wastewater water 
2 
 
pipelines are essential for society's survival, and their security and efficiency are critical for human 
health and economic growth[7-15]. Using risk-based asset management, the most critical assets to 
take the most efficient course of action are identified by prioritizing the highest risk of failure by 
considering all the parameters. 
 
Using the traditional manual method, the number of failures received by wastewater management 
can increase rapidly, making pipe failure handling imperative because the inspectors manually 
produce them by checking through CCTV films, manually recognizing and classifying such 
failures through pipe repair paperwork, and extracting the information connected to those pipe 
failures is difficult. As a result, the manual extraction procedure has a high potential for human 
mistakes, time consumption, and information loss. This issue can be resolved by substituting 
autonomous computational extraction for these manual procedures. The difficulty of 
computationally extracting information from free-text narratives is addressed by the field of study 
known as information extraction (IE), a subfield of natural language processing (NLP). 
 
NLP can be an efficient way of automatically extracting information from large-scale pipe repair 
documents. NLP is a computer-assisted approach for facilitating the processing of human (natural) 
language. NLP may be a research area developing techniques accustomed to analyzing and 
extracting valuable data from text and speech in natural languages. Several NLP applications 
include information extraction, language translation, and opinion mining [16-20]. Text 
classification using NLP has been used for many problems within pipeline construction: To 
classify construction documentation based on priority[21, 22]. To support field inspection and data 
extraction of the inspection[23]. Information from work hazard analyses is processed using an 
ontology-based text categorization approach [24]. NLP methods are often divided into two main 
categories: (1) Rule-based and (2) Machine learning (ML) [25]. Systems that rely only on hand-
coded syntactic rules are known as rule-based systems[26, 27]. As a result, their performance is 
underwhelming. Languages and linguistic grammar are unimportant in the Machine Learning-
based approach[28] because patterns are often quickly learned from unclear training examples 
because they outperform the state-of-the-art model like K-NN. 
Nevertheless, NLP is a valuable technique for extracting and processing information from natural 
language into a more organized format for study. Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK) systems may 
be automated to parse textual content and search for keywords and phrases to extract data using 
predefined computer algorithms. The following is how key phrase extraction may be expressed as 
a sequence labeling task. Predict a sequence of labels, one label for each word in the input, where 
each label key phrase word) or non-KP, given an input sequence x, where each x represents the 
input vector of the keyphrase word). The task formulation for sequence labeling considers the 
correlations between nearby labels. It enables the joint decoding of the optimal sequence of labels 
for the input sequence rather than decoding each label individually.  
 
Inspired by advancements in natural language processing, some researchers have more recently 
applied recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to wastewater pipe assessment documents for extraction 
and classification [29-33]. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) include Long Short-Term Memory 
Networks (LSTMs)  that solve the problem of RNNs' gradient disappearing. Additional memory 
cells in LSTMs are used to store memories from long-distance phrases. Because LSTMs may store 
information from past sequence inputs in the current input state, they have proven a natural option 
for data applications such as speech recognition, language modeling, and trial option [34]. An 
3 
 
LSTM has a hidden layer, an input layer,  and an output layer[35]. The hidden state in a forward 
LSTM network only saves information from the past. With the regular LSTM, input flows either 
in backward or forward directions. In bidirectional, input flows in two directions, creating a Bi-
LSTM different from the regular LSTM. A bi-directional LSTM network with a forward hidden 
layer and a backward hidden layer to capture information flow in both directions is utilized [36-
38]. The first model learns the sequence of the input provided, and the second model learns the 
reverse of that sequence. Data in the model is unstructured data to extract information from both 
sides at the entity level. The nodes in the hidden layer are linked, which is how long-distance 
information is kept in the matrix weights. 
 
A comparison is performed between an LSTM and Bi-LSTM in pipe defect rating applications. 
LSTM and Bi-LSTM used many-to-many configurations for flaw detection and localization on 
simulated ultrasonic A-scans of holes and cracks. In their case, each exhibited perfect performance 
in the outputs of an LSTM in a many-to-many configuration as input to a dense decision-making 
layer for defect extraction, and assigning defect ratings on wastewater pipe assessment documents 
has historically proven to be challenging. It is unknown how these models generate particular 
decisions of defect classification and rating assignment because it is tough to interpret these data-
driven models and how the rating is assigned to each defect characteristic. In addition, these 
methods are trained on small, curated data, and their generalization ability on unseen data is often 
limited  [39, 40]. 
 
2. Objective 
 
This paper proposed an ontology-based framework to improve efficiency and support decision-
making regarding extraction and assign defect rating by automating the text classification by 
considering a complete set of defect Lexicon. The proposed pipe defect rating model uses the deep 
representation of entities using a knowledge base to reduce human efforts for labeled data creation 
and feature engineering. To illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed model, empirical 
experiments are conducted on a real dataset from the Department of Engineering & Environmental 
Services in Shreveport, Louisiana.  
 
 
3. Methods and Materials 
 
3.1 Data Set and Data Preprocessing: 
  
A total of 3100 pipe repair documents were extracted from the Dept. of Engineering & 
Environmental Services' approved database by removing records with insufficient and missing 
information for further analysis. There was no complete information about the defect location, so 
130 documents were reoved, and finally had 2970 pipe repair documents. Table 1 shows the 
information included in the pipe repair document. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Table 1: Description of pipe inspection document 
Section 
Description 
Pipe Characteristics 
Information about the physical pipe properties (Ex: Diameter, Depth, 
Length) 
Emergency Repair 
Information about the Emergency Repair (Ex: Immediate Leakage fixes) 
Smoke Testing 
Assessment 
Information about any smoke Observed from pipes (Ex: Medium smoke 
observed emanating from Cleanout) 
Defects 
Information about the pipes using CCTV Cameras (Ex: Multiple Defects) 
Composite 
Assessment 
Information about the Composite Material around the pipe  
Criticality 
Assessment 
Information about the risk value of the pipe (Ex: Medium) 
Capacity 
Information about the pipe capacity 
Summary 
Information about total Major and Minor Defects 
 
A PACP incorporated Comprehensive rating protocol was established to provide a standardized 
way of documenting features and assign defect ratings during the inspection to schedule 
maintenance. Comprehensive and PACP allows wastewater professionals to classify, evaluate and 
manage inspection data. The most used defect scale is the Comprehensive and PACP Protocol 
manual listed in Table 2. 
 
 
Table 2: PACP incorporated Comprehensive rating protocol 
Defect Rating 
Description 
Defect rating 1 
Reassess in ten years 
Defect rating 2 
Rehabilitate or replace in six to ten years 
Defect rating 3 
Rehabilitate or replace in three to five years. 
Defect rating 4 
Rehabilitate or replace in zero to two years. 
Defect rating 5 
Rehabilitate or replace immediately. 
 
Next, Data preprocessing for the text from pipe repair documents is performed. Data preprocessing 
is crucial when dealing with text data because text data is unstructured data and the interpretations 
of the documents by different inspectors. Next,  all special characters in the pipe repair documents 
(e.g., commas in a list) are removed. Misprint in the dataset included typographical errors (e.g., 
"Leaks" instead of "Laeks"), and NLTK handles the correction of the spelling errors. Then, 
boundary detection using Stanford parser's sentence detection is performed since it is a reasonably 
accurate tool in NLP[3]. Pipe repair documents contain many negation statements (no leaks, no 
defects...etc.). To identify such terms, entities, or sentences, the Negex function is used [41].  
 
3.2 Annotation: 
 
Next, Standard documents are manually annotated for entities and pipe defect ratings. Manual 
annotation of pipe repair documents provided a gold standard to benchmark the proposed model 
5 
 
for pipe defect rating. Two annotators manually mark the list of lexical units and assign a defect 
rating using the Comprehensive and PACP Protocol to each record. The meaning of sentences and 
defect ratings can be interpreted differently by different ways inspectors. Annotating final size 
2970 pipe repair documents at the entity and record levels and calculating the kappa coefficient 
for each document and entity. If there is any disagreement between the experts, documents must 
be annotated again, which is a time taking process. So, a random selection of 500 records is 
considered a golden standard, annotating each document at the entity and document level. A 
statistical measure of Cohen's kappa coefficient is used to find the agreement between the two-
annotator in Inter Annotator Agreement (IAA)[42]. Inter Annotator Agreement for our entities is 
shown in Table 3. Kappa coefficients are considered for evaluating agreement coefficients between 
the expert’s opinions compared for each entity level and record level annotation. So,  randomly 
500 pipe repair documents were selected for the proposed model. 80 percent of the pipe repair 
documents were used as training data and 20 percent as test data to evaluate the proposed 
framework for defect rating, as shown in Figure 1. 
 
Table 3: Annotator agreement table 
Entities and defect rating 
IAA 
Defect 
0.78 
Size defects 
0.82 
Locations of defect 
0.84 
Defect rating 1 
0.75 
Defect rating 2 
0.79 
Defect rating 3 
0.84 
Defect rating 4 
0.83 
Defect rating 5 
0.92 
 
 
6 
 
 
Figure 1. Training and testing data selection. 
 
3.3 Lexicon generation 
 
Knowledge bases for pipe defects are built by collecting information from documents and 
structured sources. The creation of a general list of defect attributes is referred to as a defect lexicon 
or seed words. Secondly, a list of defects was hand-picked for inspectors from traditional sources. 
After manually selecting defect attributes, each attribute was expanded with the appropriate verb, 
noun, and adjective where possible, e.g., leak, leaking, leaked. Then, a knowledge-based method 
for identifying the new defect attributes is used. Knowledge-based methods exploit available 
lexicographical resources such as WordNet or HowNet. A lexicon was developed by searching 
WordNet for a term's synonyms and antonyms [43]. According to [44], the closer two words means 
fewer iterations are needed to identify the synonymous connection between those two words. The 
relationship between terms in a knowledge base was employed in both investigations. As 
illustrated in Figure.2, these systems' basic technique is to use seed sets of pipe fault terms and 
their orientations to expand this collection of defect characteristics by searching for synonyms and 
antonyms in a knowledge base.  
3100 pipe 
repiar 
documents
Remove 130 
documents 
with missing 
value
Final dataset 
(2970 
documents)
Randomly 
select 500 
documents for 
annotation
100 documents 
for testing 
dataset
400 documents 
for training 
dataset
7 
 
 
Figure 2. Sample knowledge base construction for defect term "Rupture" 
There were a lot of synonyms that needed to be more on-topic and unconnected. After manual 
tracking of individual seed keywords, a problem is discovered. Their synonyms revealed 
ambiguous synonyms such as homonyms and antagonyms and incorrect or fuzzily interpreted 
synonyms. By making different blacklists for each synonym, including redundant, misunderstood, 
and fuzzily understood terms, the problem is fixed. Unnecessary processing of undesirable terms 
is avoided in this way. The lexicon knowledge file of pipe defect ontology is shown in Table 4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rupture
bust
tear
snap
breach
rift
failing out
break
severance
8 
 
Table 4: Description of Pipe defect Ontology 
Location 
Frequency of defects 
Defects 
Mid-point, 
Upstream, 
Downstream, 
Depth category, 
Pipe length at 
longitudinal, 
Spiral, 
Circumferential,  
Rarely,  
Several, 
Frequently, 
Often, 
Moderate, 
Very rarely 
 
Fractures,  
Sags,  
Smoke,  
Leaks,  
Water level,  
Sags,  
Deposits,  
Joint offset,  
Deposits attached Encrustation,  
Deposits settled,  
compacted,  
Infill runner,  
Intruding sealing hanging, 
Intruding sealing ring loss/poorly fitting, 
Tap factory defective,  
Corrosion,  
Pitting,  
Gap,  
Hole,  
Stain,  
Rough spot,  
Foible, 
Rupture, No defect 
 
 
3.4 Entity Extraction: 
 
Entity Extraction aims to identify entities mentioned in the text and classify them into predefined 
entity types, as shown in Table.5. Manual rules are created to fix the problem of dealing with 
unstructured pipe repair documents from multiple inspectors. Sentences and specific items from 
the text employed in defect rating calculations are to be identified; for example, "Leak" should be 
recognized as a defect. Entity extraction graphical representation is shown in Figure.3. 
 
 
Table 5. Description of the entities 
Entities 
Description 
Defect 
Keywords (e.g., Leakage, Rupture, etc.) 
Location of defect 
Keywords (e.g., junction, end, etc.) or distance from the end of 
the pipe 
Frequency of defects  Keywords (e.g, Rarely, Frequently etc.) 
 
9 
 
 
Figure 3. Graphical representation of the overview of entity extraction 
 
 
Lastly, a Bi-LSTM neural network is implemented. The output vector from both forward and 
backward sequences is adjoined to obtain the final entity representation vector using the lexicon 
file generated in section 3.1. The Bi-LSTM model is composed of two LSTM networks and is 
capable of reading input reviews in both directions, forward and backward. The forward LSTM 
processes information from left to right and its hidden s,tate and it is shon  s ℎ"⃗! = 𝐿𝑆𝑇𝑀(𝑥!, ℎ"⃗!"#) 
and the backward LSTM processes information by reading from right to left and its hidden state 
can be expressed as ℎ⃖"! = 𝐿𝑆𝑇𝑀(𝑥!, ℎ⃖"!"#). Finally, the output of Bi-LSTM can be summarized 
by concatenating the forward and backward states as ℎ! = [ℎ"⃗!, ℎ⃖"!] and the data frame for each 
sentence consisting of information such as (defects, size of defect, location of defect, and 
frequency of defects) are created, which will be used for defect rating calculation. The structure of 
a Bi-LSTM network is shown in Figure 4. The parameter settings for the entity extraction model 
are shown in Table 6. 
 
Figure.4. Layers in a Bi-LSTM neural network 
 
 
 
 
Output
Hidden
Input
Forward
Backward
y1
y2
yn-1
yn
x1
x2
xn-1
xn
10 
 
Table 6. Parameter setting of the entity extraction model. 
Parameter 
Value 
Word vector embedding size 
200 
Dictionary feature vector embedding size 
100 
# Hidden neurons for each hidden layer 
300 
Batch size 
100 
Tag Indices 
4 
Learning Rate 
0.005 
Number of epochs 
10 
Optimizer 
Adam optimizer 
 
 
 
3.5 Defect Rating: 
 
The proposed defect rating calculation employs three aspects of within pipe repair document defect 
term frequency (𝑤$%&'(&)*+&,), the importance of a defect term (𝑤-&$&*!,), and the location of the 
defect (𝑤./*0!+/)) within the pipe, which are developed using term frequency algorithm [45]. 
 
The location of the defect plays an important role in defect rating. For locations, the weights are 
assigned based on the scores mentioned in Pipeline Assessment - NASSCO [32, 40, 46]. Table 7 
shows the randomly assigned weights based on the pipe defect location. When no location is found 
𝑤./*0!+/)= 1.0 because it could be entered as multiple locations.  Table 8 shows the randomly 
assigned weights based on the frequency of defect occurance. Similarly, the defects factor is 
randomly chosen based on the pipe failure. Table 9 shows the random weights assignment based 
on defect lexicon units found. Table 10 shows the defect ratings assigned based on 
𝑤$%&'(&)*+&,,  𝑤./*0!+/) ,  𝑤-&$&*!. 
 
Table 7: Weights assignment based on location of the defect. 
Location 
Assigned weight 
One location 
𝑤!"#$%&"'= 0.9 
Multiple locations 
𝑤!"#$%&"'= 1.0 
No location 
𝑤!"#$%&"'= 1.0  
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
Table 8: Weights assignment based on frequency of the defects outcome 
Frequency outcome 
Assigned weight 
Very rarely or none 
w0 = 0.1 
Rarely 
w1 = 0.25 
Moderate 
w2 = 0.50 
Moderate to Frequently 
w3 = 0.75 
Frequently, More or very Frequently/ Several/ 
Oftenly 
w4 = 0.99 
 
 
Table 9: Weights assignment based on lexicon units found 
Lexicon or Defect found 
Assigned weight 
No lexicon unit 
wdefect =  0.5 
One lexicon unit 
wdefect = 0.8 
Multiple lexicon unit 
wdefect = 1.0 
 
 
Table 10: Defect Rating assignment based on 𝑤$%&'(&)*+&,,  𝑤./*0!+/) ,  𝑤-&$&*! 
Defect Rating 
𝒘𝒇𝒓𝒆𝒒𝒖𝒆𝒏𝒄𝒊𝒆𝒔,  𝒘𝒍𝒐𝒄𝒂𝒕𝒊𝒐𝒏 ,  𝒘𝒅𝒆𝒇𝒆𝒄𝒕 
Defect rating 1 
𝑤$%&'(&)*+&, = 0.1, 𝑤./*0!+/) = 0.9 or 1.0, wdefect =  0.5 
Defect rating 2 
𝑤$%&'(&)*+&, = 0.25, 𝑤./*0!+/) = 0.9 or 1.0, wdefect = 0.8 or 1.0 
Defect rating 3 
𝑤$%&'(&)*+&, = 0.5, 𝑤./*0!+/) = 0.9 or 1.0, wdefect = 0.8 or 1.0 
Defect rating 4 
𝑤$%&'(&)*+&, = 0.75, 𝑤./*0!+/) = 0.9 or 1.0, wdefect = 0.8 or 1.0 
Defect rating 5 
𝑤$%&'(&)*+&, = 0.99, 𝑤./*0!+/) = 0.9 or 1.0, wdefect = 0.8 or 1.0 
 
Defect Rating Score example, 05CCD pipe inspection document contains the following 
information, as shown in Box.1.  
 
Very Frequently, there is a leakage in pipe at 10 feet away from pipe installation 
Box 1: Sample pipe repair document 
 
It consists of only one sentence, and the location factor is 0.9 because it has only one location. The 
𝑤$%&'(&)*+&, term weights 0.99 for w4, which matches frequently. The defect term (leakage) 
matches with the lexicon unit and has a 1.0 (seed term) weight, so the  𝑤-&$&*! is 0.8 
So, for the example shown the rating assigned for Pipe 05CCD is 5, which means it needs an 
immediate replacement or rehabilitation. 
 
12 
 
Figure.5 illustrates the entire schema of the proposed framework. 
 
 
Figure 5. A framework for the proposed defect rating  
 
4. Results and Discussions: 
 
The proposed framework defect rating model was trained on the training subset. Finally, the 
trained models were evaluated on the test subset. To test the defect rating model, precision, recall, 
accuracy, specificity, and F1 score presented in Eq. 4-8 were utilized [47].  
 
  𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦= 
?@AB DEFGHGIB  J   ?@AB KBLMHGIB
?@AB DEFGHGIB   J ?@AB KBLMHGIB   J   NMOFB PEFGHGIB  J  NMOFB KBLMHGIB 
 
           
Eq.4 
𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛= True positive   +   True Negative
True positive   +   False Positive  
 
Eq.5 
𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙= 
True positive 
True positive    +    False Negative  
 
Eq.6 
𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑓𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦= 
True Negative
True positive    +    False Negative  
Eq.7 
𝐹1 𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒=  2 × 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙 ×  Precision 
Precision +  Recall  
 
Eq.8 
To accurately assess the quality of pipes for scheduling maintenance, it is essential to extract 
detailed information from pipe repair documents using entity extraction. The entity extraction 
model identifies pipe repair attribute entities from the pipe repair documents. The entity extraction 
model's overall average accuracy for all entities is 95.1%. The F1 scores of defects, defect size, 
13 
 
location of the defect, and frequency of defect terms/entities are 93.6%, 92.4%, 93.6%, and 95.2%, 
as shown in Table 11. The entity extraction calculates the defect scores and assigns the defect 
rating. 
 
Table 11. Results of entity extraction model units (%) 
Entity tags 
Accuracy 
Recall 
Specificity 
Precision 
F1 
Defects 
92.0 
94.1 
92.3 
95.0 
93.6 
Location of defect 
95.0 
91.1 
96.9 
97.5 
93.6 
Frequency of defects 
96.2 
95.6 
93.0 
94.2 
95.2 
 
The defect statements' representation varied from inspection to inspection. Pipes, for example, can 
be represented in a variety of ways, such as a 'pipeline,' a 'sewer Line,' or a 'waterline.' The entity 
extraction model adapted well to different inspector reporting styles and languages. Findings show 
that accuracy, precision, F1-score, and recall have all improved significantly. The entity extraction 
accuracy of the Bi-LSTM entity model was consistently higher. Experiments revealed that using 
sentence boundary detection, entities, and a domain dictionary in the tasks improved accuracy 
considerably, demonstrating the use of merging techniques and domain dictionaries in entity 
extraction tasks. 
 
A defect rating must be correct for it to be considered accurate. Precision, recall, accuracy, and F1 
score were calculated to evaluate the models' performance. The proposed defect rating model 
achieved higher accuracy by 97.0%, 92.0%, 93.0%, 95.0%, and 98.0% for the defect rating 1, 
defect rating 2, defect rating 3, defect rating 4, and defect rating 5, respectively, as shown in Table 
9. After a deep analysis of the results, a conclusion was made that misclassified records have 
complicated sentences, which are very hard for the model to understand and classify, For example. 
multiple is used for both defects and locations. Table 12 shows the results of the defect rating 
assignment. 
 
Table 12: Results for defect rating model units (%) 
Defect Rating Score 
Accuracy  
Recall 
Specificity Precision F1 
Defect rating 1 
97.0 
97.5 
97.0 
97.0 
97.5 
Defect rating 2 
92.0 
93.0 
92.5 
94.0 
93.0 
Defect rating 3 
93.0 
94.0 
95.5 
95.5 
95.5 
Defect rating 4 
95.0 
93.0 
92.5 
95.0 
94.5 
Defect rating 5 
98.0 
97.0 
97.5 
98.0 
98.0 
 
The results indicate that defect rating can be accurately calculated with the help of the entity 
extraction model. However, the defect rating model struggled to accurately calculate defect rating 
pipe repair documents due to fewer defect attributes in pipe repair documents, high disagreement 
between inspectors who annotated pipe repair documents, and not mentioning the frequency of the 
defect in a few pipe repair documents.  
14 
 
 
Waste water pipe maintenance is a critical issue faced by many utilities in the United States. PACP 
protocol, PACP incorporated Comprehensive rating protocol was developed a few years back to 
resolve the issue by the utilities. Both developed methods follow manual inspection. The defect 
occurrence frequency is a vital determinant in determining the severity of the pipe failure. The 
variety of defects essentially invalidates the assumptions of text mining approaches such as 
decision trees because a single defect could be divided into multiple categories.  
Frequency as an indicator of severity helps to favor the automation process such as tf-idf[48, 49]. 
tf-idf determines the uniqueness of a text through frequently or rarely. tf-idf would detect the pipe 
failure but not the severity of the pipe failure and tf-idf. In our approach, the words often, 
frequently, rarely, etc capture the frequency of the defect.  Negation and Location play a vital role 
not considering them could create data noise.  
A disadvantage of the Machine Learning method approach is focusing on correlations, which 
means results are based on statistics. An inspector may have difficulty understanding the 
correlations; however, a grammatical approach used in this work can be more understandable. 
 
5. Strength and Limitations: 
This study is groundbreaking in several ways. This is the first study to look at the validity of NLP 
for numerous defect entities while investigating pipe repair papers for defecting ratings. Secondly, 
NLP research in pipe repair documents concentrates exclusively on a single defect condition, such 
as leaks. With the help of lexicon generation using WordNet, a completed set of defect Lexicon is 
created and used in defect rating. There are multiple drawbacks also to the proposed model. Firstly, 
To address accurate defect detection and recognition of wastewater defects that deals with pipe 
assessment document data, an approach for detecting and recognizing defects, including pipe 
geographical location, is essential and is not considered in the proposed model. Secondly, the 
present level of wastewater system management differs from city to city. The algorithm must be 
trained to improve by collecting more pipe-related lexicon terms from different cities and must be 
applied to different cities data. 
 
 
6. Conclusions and Future Work: 
 
Since the health state of the wastewater pipe is assessed and recorded as the basis for decision-
making in this process, wastewater pipe assessment is the foundation for creating an effective 
maintenance plan. The proposed model is a reliable and accurate approach to detecting pipe repair 
documents and assigning defect ratings. The proposed model is suitable for actual pipe repair 
documents —in terms of performance, inference speed, and simplicity in output interpretation, 
which can accurately characterize a particular location and defect. This model is tailored to solve 
the challenges in the wastewater infrastructure. The lexicon generation step is the core for data 
integration to the proposed model, where the defect ontology entities and semantic rules are 
developed for representing different types of information related to the specific location, which 
helps the user to customize the defect lexicon according to location. However, more study is 
needed to assess the applicability and validity of NLP approaches for trenchless or building 
projects. In the future, there is a chance to improve the proposed algorithm by collecting more 
pipe-related lexicon terms from data from different cities and adding pipe-specific geographical 
locations. Secondly, a framework that consists of data extractions of CCTV videos using Deep 
15 
 
Learning Algorithms and feeds the data for assessing the Suitability of Trenchless Technologies 
by the Decision Support System for installing, replacing, or rehabilitating each pipe and reducing 
the methods of costs and evaluating all the 70 technologies and helps in selecting the appropriate 
techniques  would be developed.  
 
Reference: 
 
1. 
Mohammadi, M.M., et al., Condition prediction of sanitary sewer pipes, in Pipelines 
2019: Condition Assessment, Construction, and Rehabilitation. 2019, American Society 
of Civil Engineers Reston, VA. p. 117-126. 
2. 
Moradi, S., et al., Automated Anomaly Detection and Localization in Sewer Inspection 
Videos Using Proportional Data Modeling and Deep Learning–Based Text Recognition. 
Journal of Infrastructure Systems, 2020. 26(3): p. 04020018. 
3. 
Malek Mohammadi, M., et al., Sewer pipes condition prediction models: A state-of-the-
art review. Infrastructures, 2019. 4(4): p. 64. 
4. 
Nicklow, J., et al., State of the art for genetic algorithms and beyond in water resources 
planning and management. Journal of Water Resources Planning and Management, 2010. 
136(4): p. 412-432. 
5. 
Vladeanu, G.J. and J.C. Matthews, Consequence-of-failure model for risk-based asset 
management of wastewater pipes using AHP. Journal of Pipeline Systems Engineering 
and Practice, 2019. 10(2): p. 04019005. 
6. 
Sai Nethra Betgeri, J.C.M., David B. Smith. Comparison of Sewer Conditions Ratings 
with Repair Recommendation Reports. in North American Society for Trenchless 
Technology (NASTT) 2021. 2021. https://member.nastt.org/products/product/2021-TM1-
T6-01. 
7. 
Cheng, J.C. and M. Wang, Automated detection of sewer pipe defects in closed-circuit 
television images using deep learning techniques. Automation in Construction, 2018. 95: 
p. 155-171. 
8. 
Vladeanu, G. and J. Matthews, Wastewater pipe condition rating model using 
multicriteria decision analysis. Journal of Water Resources Planning and Management, 
2019. 145(12): p. 04019058. 
9. 
Hassan, S.I., et al., Underground sewer pipe condition assessment based on 
convolutional neural networks. Automation in Construction, 2019. 106: p. 102849. 
10. 
Li, S., H. Cai, and V.R. Kamat, Integrating natural language processing and spatial 
reasoning for utility compliance checking. Journal of Construction Engineering and 
Management, 2016. 142(12): p. 04016074. 
11. 
Li, D., A. Cong, and S. Guo, Sewer damage detection from imbalanced CCTV inspection 
data using deep convolutional neural networks with hierarchical classification. 
Automation in Construction, 2019. 101: p. 199-208. 
12. 
Boskabadi, A., et al., Design of a distribution network in a multi-product, multi-period 
green supply chain system under demand uncertainty. Sustainable Operations and 
Computers, 2022. 3: p. 226-237. 
13. 
Betgeri, S.N., et al., Wastewater Pipe Condition Rating Model Using K-Nearest 
Neighbors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.11049, 2022. 
16 
 
14. 
Betgeri, S.N., Analytic Hierarchy Process is not a Suitable method for the 
Comprehensive Rating. 2022. 
15. 
Betgeri, S.N., D.B.N. PARAMESHWARI, and D.V. Yugandhar. Statistical Software 
Packages for Research In Social Sciences. in Recent Research Advancements in 
Information Technology. 2014. 
16. 
Cambria, E. and B. White, Jumping NLP curves: A review of natural language 
processing research. IEEE Computational intelligence magazine, 2014. 9(2): p. 48-57. 
17. 
Vadyala, S.R. and S.N. Betgeri, Physics-Informed Neural Network Method for Solving 
One-Dimensional Advection Equation Using PyTorch. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.09662, 
2021. 
18. 
Vadyala, S.R., et al., A Review of Physics-based Machine Learning in Civil Engineering. 
arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04600, 2021. 
19. 
Vadyala, S.R. and S.N. Betgeri, Predicting the spread of COVID-19 in Delhi, India using 
Deep Residual Recurrent Neural Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.05477, 2021. 
20. 
Vadyala, S.R. and E.A. Sherer, Natural Language Processing Accurately Categorizes 
Indications, Findings and Pathology Reports from Multicenter Colonoscopy. arXiv 
preprint arXiv:2108.11034, 2021. 
21. 
V Yugandhar, B.P., BS Nethra. Statistical Software Packages for Research In Social 
Sciences. in Recent Research Advancements in Information Technology. 2014. 
22. 
Vadyala, S.R., et al., Prediction of the number of covid-19 confirmed cases based on k-
means-lstm. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.14752, 2020. 
23. 
Zhong, B., et al., Convolutional neural network: Deep learning-based classification of 
building quality problems. Advanced Engineering Informatics, 2019. 40: p. 46-57. 
24. 
Caldas, C.H. and L. Soibelman, Automating hierarchical document classification for 
construction management information systems. Automation in Construction, 2003. 12(4): 
p. 395-406. 
25. 
Chi, N.-W., K.-Y. Lin, and S.-H. Hsieh, Using ontology-based text classification to assist 
Job Hazard Analysis. Advanced Engineering Informatics, 2014. 28(4): p. 381-394. 
26. 
Ponzetto, S.P. and R. Navigli. Large-Scale Taxonomy Mapping for Restructuring and 
Integrating Wikipedia. in IJCAI. 2009. 
27. 
Le, T. and H. David Jeong, NLP-based approach to semantic classification of 
heterogeneous transportation asset data terminology. Journal of Computing in Civil 
Engineering, 2017. 31(6): p. 04017057. 
28. 
Marcus, M., New trends in natural language processing: statistical natural language 
processing. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 1995. 92(22): p. 10052-
10059. 
29. 
Chahinian, N., et al. WEIR-P: An information extraction pipeline for the wastewater 
domain. in International Conference on Research Challenges in Information Science. 
2021. Springer. 
30. 
Dang, L.M., et al., Utilizing text recognition for the defects extraction in sewers CCTV 
inspection videos. Computers in Industry, 2018. 99: p. 96-109. 
31. 
Graves, A., A.-r. Mohamed, and G. Hinton. Speech recognition with deep recurrent 
neural networks. in 2013 IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech and signal 
processing. 2013. Ieee. 
32. 
Cosham, A. and P. Hopkins. An overview of the pipeline defect assessment manual 
(PDAM). in 4th international pipeline technology conference. 2004. 
17 
 
33. 
Jallan, Y., Text mining of the securities and exchange commission financial filings of 
publicly traded construction firms using deep learning to identify and assess risk. 2020, 
Georgia Institute of Technology. 
34. 
Niu, S. and V. Srivastava, Ultrasound classification of interacting flaws using finite 
element simulations and convolutional neural network. Engineering with Computers, 
2022: p. 1-10. 
35. 
Endalie, D., G. Haile, and W. Taye, Bi-directional long short term memory-gated 
recurrent unit model for Amharic next word prediction. Plos one, 2022. 17(8): p. 
e0273156. 
36. 
Yang, L. and Q. Zhao, A novel PPA method for fluid pipeline leak detection based on 
OPELM and bidirectional LSTM. IEEE Access, 2020. 8: p. 107185-107199. 
37. 
Yildirim, Ö., A novel wavelet sequence based on deep bidirectional LSTM network model 
for ECG signal classification. Computers in biology and medicine, 2018. 96: p. 189-202. 
38. 
Shafiei Alavijeh, M., et al., Using machine learning to automate ultrasound-based 
classification of butt-fused joints in medium-density polyethylene gas pipes. The Journal 
of the Acoustical Society of America, 2021. 150(1): p. 561-572. 
39. 
Tscheikner-Gratl, F., et al., Sewer asset management–state of the art and research needs. 
Urban Water Journal, 2019. 16(9): p. 662-675. 
40. 
Wang, M., Ontology-based modelling of lifecycle underground utility information to 
support operation and maintenance. Automation in Construction, 2021. 132: p. 103933. 
41. 
Toutanova, K., et al. Feature-rich part-of-speech tagging with a cyclic dependency 
network. in Proceedings of the 2003 Human Language Technology Conference of the 
North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics. 2003. 
42. 
Kılıç, S., Kappa testi. Journal of Mood Disorders, 2015. 5(3). 
43. 
Hu, M. and B. Liu. Mining and summarizing customer reviews. in Proceedings of the 
tenth ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. 
2004. 
44. 
Kamps, J., et al. Using WordNet to measure semantic orientations of adjectives. in LREC. 
2004. Citeseer. 
45. 
Azam, N. and J. Yao, Comparison of term frequency and document frequency based 
feature selection metrics in text categorization. Expert Systems with Applications, 2012. 
39(5): p. 4760-4768. 
46. 
Lepot, M., N. Stanić, and F.H. Clemens, A technology for sewer pipe inspection (Part 2): 
Experimental assessment of a new laser profiler for sewer defect detection and 
quantification. Automation in Construction, 2017. 73: p. 1-11. 
47. 
Sokolova, M., N. Japkowicz, and S. Szpakowicz. Beyond accuracy, F-score and ROC: a 
family of discriminant measures for performance evaluation. in Australasian joint 
conference on artificial intelligence. 2006. Springer. 
48. 
Robertson, S., Understanding inverse document frequency: on theoretical arguments for 
IDF. Journal of documentation, 2004. 
49. 
Zhang, W., T. Yoshida, and X. Tang, A comparative study of TF* IDF, LSI and multi-
words for text classification. Expert systems with applications, 2011. 38(3): p. 2758-
2765. 
  
