Title: Self-Improving-Leaderboard(SIL): A Call for Real-World Centric Natural Language Processing Leaderboards
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2303.10888v1
--------------------------------------------------

Self-Improving-Leaderboard (SIL): A Call for Real-World Centric
Natural Language Processing Leaderboards
Chanjun Park1,2, Hyeonseok Moon1, Seolhwa Lee3,
Jaehyung Seo1, Sugyeong Eo1, Heuiseok Lim1,†∗
1Korea University, 2Upstage ,3Technical University of Darmstadt
{bcj1210, glee889, seojae777, whiteldark, djtnrud, limhseok}@korea.ac.kr
chanjun.park@upstage.ai
Abstract
Leaderboard systems allow researchers to ob-
jectively evaluate Natural Language Process-
ing (NLP) models and are typically used to
identify models that exhibit superior perfor-
mance on a given task in a predetermined set-
ting. However, we argue that evaluation on a
given test dataset is just one of many perfor-
mance indications of the model. In this paper,
we claim leaderboard competitions should also
aim to identify models that exhibit the best per-
formance in a real-world setting. We highlight
three issues with current leaderboard systems:
(i) the use of a single, static test set, (ii) discrep-
ancy between testing and real-world applica-
tion (iii) the tendency for leaderboard-centric
competition to be biased towards the test set.
As a solution, we propose a new paradigm
of leaderboard systems that addresses these is-
sues of current leaderboard system. Through
this study, we hope to induce a paradigm shift
towards more real -world-centric leaderboard
competitions.
1
Introduction
Leaderboard systems allow researchers to compete
with artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) models. The gen-
eral purpose of leaderboard competition is to iden-
tify models that exhibit superior performance on
a given task (Liu et al., 2021; Mazumder et al.,
2022). Most of these competitions focus on solving
real-world task, such as a machine reading com-
prehension (Rajpurkar et al., 2016) or a question-
answering task (Lai et al., 2017). As a represen-
tative of the real-world task, most of each cur-
rent leaderboard system propose a test dataset that
serves as a measure of model performance for the
corresponding task (Park et al., 2021b; Wang et al.,
2018).
However, we should investigate that whether
the current leaderboard competition system suf-
ﬁciently considers the intended goal. While most
∗† Corresponding author
leaderboard systems use a single test set for the
model evaluation in each task (Rajpurkar et al.,
2016; Wang et al., 2018), this may derive biased
evaluation (Beyer et al., 2020; van der Goot, 2021).
In particular, in utilizing a single-static test dataset,
we are exposed to various sources of bias, includ-
ing annotation bias (Gururangan et al., 2018; Hovy
and Prabhumoye, 2021)
We argue that this setting may derive the leader-
board competition to be recognized as a race for the
higher rankings rather than the consortium for de-
veloping better models for the objective real-world
task (van der Goot, 2021).
In this paper, we extend this discussion to ana-
lyze the differences in the current NLP leaderboard
ranking system from the perspective of real-world
applications in the following three aspects.
First, several leaderboards adopt static test
dataset (Wang et al., 2018; Farhad et al., 2021).
Hundreds of millions of data points are generated
every day in the real world (Agababov et al., 2015;
Ramkumar et al., 2019; Liu and Demosthenes,
2022). In several industrial services, data are gener-
ated and evolved daily, and the newly gained user
history acts as the key to the model performance
(Resnick and Varian, 1997; Shin et al., 2021). How-
ever, we ﬁnd that existing leaderboards are stuck
with outdated data and do not reﬂect the current
situation. In other words, while real-world data are
dynamic and continuously accumulating, leader-
board data remain static.
Second, current leaderboards hardly reﬂects real-
world environments (Raji et al., 2021; Thompson
et al., 2020). As data are continuously accumulated
via several sources, such as users or industries, we
can ﬁnd that edge cases and outliers continue to
occur (Lyu et al., 2020). In particular, errors, ty-
pos, and noisy data always exist in the industrial
services, which require models that are sufﬁciently
ﬂexible to deal with them. The current leaderboard
system, which operates only on clean data, does
arXiv:2303.10888v1  [cs.CL]  20 Mar 2023
not have a way to measure this ﬂexibility in mod-
els (Loïc et al., 2020). Optimal models should be
able to adapt to real-world data that is continuously
generated, changing, and evolving (Grispos et al.,
2019; Budach et al., 2022).
Finally, existing systems are leaderboard-centric.
For instance, several models were adjusted to the
test set to correspond to the leaderboard (Zhang
et al., 2017; Khashabi et al., 2021). However, this
approach can accelerate overﬁtting, resulting in test
set ﬁtted-only model while gives deteriorated per-
formance on the real-world data. In other words,
the current leaderboard system is not operated
in a real-world centric manner but rather in a
leaderboard-centric manner. Thus, we have to de-
termine whether the current system of competition
is meaningful
To address these issues, we propose a new
paradigm for leaderboards: the Self-Improving
Leaderboard (SIL). SIL is based on a continuously
self-improving test dataset, with rankings updated
every 24 hours according to the data of that day.
The key feature of this leaderboard is that the rank-
ings are constantly updated while the model re-
mains ﬁxed. In other words, this concept addresses
the inherent ﬂaws of conventional leaderboards by
retaining the model characteristics and permitting
the data to evolve.
2
Hurdles to developing
Real-World-Centric Leaderboards
In this section, we analyze current leaderboard com-
petitions and identify their limitations from the per-
spective of real-world environment. In particular,
three challenges are identiﬁed.
Static Dataset
Most leaderboards and bench-
mark data have been tested and veriﬁed by nu-
merous models over a long period of time since
their release. However, it is important to note that
these data may not reﬂect the changes that occur
in real-world scenarios. In practice, systems that
constantly update models based on new data, such
as data ﬂywheel systems and continual learning
methods, are often used to keep models current
and improve their performance (Kreuzberger et al.,
2022).
As various services are provided in the real-
world, new data is constantly generated and the
model is continuously improving through contin-
ual learning, creating a structure called a data ﬂy-
wheel (Agababov et al., 2015). While many compa-
nies are adopting this process. we argue that current
leaderboard systems are not able to consider this
dynamic characteristics of data.
In other words, current leaderboard systems do
not reﬂect these data-ﬂywheel systems as whole
evaluation is performance based on a single test
set (van der Goot, 2021). This limits the objective
evaluation on the practical usability of a model in
an actual setting.
Discrepancy between testing and real-world ap-
plication
When evaluating the performance of a
model, most of them are evaluated on clean data as
a common practice. The purpose here is to measure
the performance in a state where errors or biases
present in the test data are removed as much as
possible. However, this may be a suitable method
for evaluating excellence in targeting tasks, but it
can be difﬁcult to evaluate whether the model can
produce robust performance in real-world settings
where various errors exist.
In other words, data without any errors or bi-
ases is often referred to as “gold” data, and using
it to evaluate a model’s performance is considered
to be the most objective way to measure its capa-
bilities (Gehrmann et al., 2021; Koo et al., 2022).
Hence, the quality of data is regarded in all areas
of NLP, and methods for improving data to meet
speciﬁc needs are actively studied (Koehn et al.,
2020).
However, when considering real-world applica-
tions, this strict focus on clean text may be consid-
ered as an additional bias, since even real-world
data is not cleaned (Liu et al., 2022). Currently,
most NLP models are trained using clean texts in
general (Petroni et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2019),
while real-world setting include noisy or inconsis-
tency data (Stickland et al., 2022). This may exacer-
bates the gap between the data on which the model
performs well and the data on which the model
should perform. We argue that models need to be
robust to noise to actually solve— “the problems
that the dataset aims to solve” (Wang et al., 2020).
From this perspective, test data in current use
are not as suitable for validating the performance
of real-world centric models. In other words, there
can be a discrepancy between the performance of
a model when it is evaluated on clean data during
testing and its performance when it is applied in
the real-world.
Leaderboard-Centric Competition
As leader-
boards operate over longer periods, the number of
participating models increases. However, the em-
phasis is placed solely on evaluating performance
of each model on the given test dataset, neglecting
performance in other environments or test sets. As
a result, the original goal of the competition, which
is to develop models that can effectively address
real-world challenges, is obscured by the empha-
sis on achieving high performance on a single test
dataset.
In particular, earlier studies have highlighted
that employing a ﬁxed single test dataset are ex-
tremely vulnerable to biases inherent in NLP ap-
plication (Hovy and Prabhumoye, 2021). As the
number of competition trials using such limited
data increases, studies on the leaderboard are likely
to overﬁt the proposed test dataset, not the corre-
sponding task itself (Rodriguez et al., 2021; Rosen-
man et al., 2011). We should note that the testset is
selected as a representative of the given task. Adop-
tion of test dataset in evaluating each model is not
problematic (Lee et al., 2019), but it becomes com-
plicated in the leaderboard competition where the
veriﬁcation work should indispensably be repeated
several times (van der Goot, 2021).
Furthermore, existing works suggest more se-
vere situations including annotation artifacts that
the data selected to constitute the test set cannot
sufﬁciently reﬂect objective of the intended real-
world task (Chen and Ritter, 2020; Gururangan
et al., 2018). Competitions based on such data fun-
damentally result in an imbalanced focus on the
given static dataset (Rosenman et al., 2011). In
other words, as the number of teams participating
in ranking through static test sets increases, these
biases are exacerbated, and all models are likely
to overﬁt the publicly released static dataset as a
benchmark (Scargle, 1999).
3
Self-Improving Leaderboard (SIL)
Considering the purpose of using the existing
leaderboard ranking system, we propose that model
performance evaluation should move beyond—
“model learning for the model” and towards “model
learning for real world applications.” Accordingly,
we propose three characteristics that would address
the problems of the existing leaderboard system: an
evolving test dataset, periodic ranking system, and
comprehensive evaluation. Based on these charac-
teristics, we introduce the SIL as an ideal leader-
board system, which is based on self-improving test
datasets.
3.1
Evolving Test Dataset
As previously mentioned, most models that have
proven their capability through leaderboards suffer
from excessive overﬁtting of task data (Roelofs
et al., 2019; Raji et al., 2021). Despite being in
the same domain and task, they do not perform
well when tested in real-world scenarios (Engstrom
et al., 2020). Therefore, we propose to overcome
this limitation by introducing a evolving test dataset
that enables the evaluation of various aspects. We
proposed two methods for data transformation and
evaluation: an “External Test Dataset” and “Noise
Injection”.
External Test Dataset
First, we propose to use
an outsourced test dataset, i.e., an external source
of test data for the target task. External sources
include using task-related test data provided by in-
dividuals or companies in the veriﬁcation phase
or generated test data through prompts from large
language models (LLMs) such as GPT3 (Yoo et al.,
2021). In particular, large language models, such
as GPT3 and ChatGPT 1, are currently being used
in various ﬁelds with decent performance in NLP
tasks, and are often show human-replaceable level
of performance (Elkins and Chun, 2020; Wang
et al., 2021). In this sense, evaluating model perfor-
mance via distillation of the knowledge in a large
language model can aid us in comprehensively eval-
uating various aspects (Meyer et al., 2022).
Noise Injected Test Dataset
Real-world data al-
ways contain noise (Yue et al., 2020). Considering
that, data integrity may not guarantee fair evalu-
ation, but can deepen the gap between the eval-
uation and the real-world suitability (Zhou et al.,
2018). We argue that evaluation with noised set-
ting should be considered to match the evaluation
environment with the real-world setting. We pro-
pose to separately evaluate each model participated
in the leaderboard competition, with noised data.
Through this process, we can estimate each model’s
robustness to simple changes as well as its ability
to maintain its performance in unstable situations
(Xie et al., 2017).
The method of injecting noise can be easily im-
plemented by applying the approaches proposed
in the ﬁelds of adversarial attack and spelling cor-
1https://chat.openai.com/
Evolving Test Dataset
Noised 
Test Dataset
External 
Test Dataset
SIL Leaderboard
2
3
1
1
2
3
Model
Daily
Rank
Periodic Rank
Update Flow
Final 
Rank
Final Rank
 Flow
Daily
Update
Update per
3 months
Comprehensive Evaluation
Periodic Ranking System
Factor 1
Factor 2
Factor 3
Prompt
Inference
Test set
Outsourcing
Large
language
model
Self-Improving
Figure 1: Architecture of the Self-Improving Leaderboard (SIL).
rection (Morris et al., 2020; Park et al., 2021a).
Additionally, only about 15% of the original test
data accumulated per day is augmented with noise
injection. It is hard to measure the exact number of
noise errors that occur in real-world NLP systems,
since they may not always be easily spotted or re-
ported. Therefore, the 15% ﬁgure should be taken
as an example rather than a precise measurement.
3.2
Periodic Ranking System
Over time, the evaluation data on leaderboards
gradually become outdated (Beyer et al., 2020).
Furthermore, as more competitors participate, the
performance on the leaderboard hardly reveals the
corresponding suitability to the real-world setting
(van der Goot, 2021). In alleviating these, we pro-
pose to set a regular performance update cycle for
the evaluation data that considers the characteristics
of constantly changing data.
We judged that it would be reasonable to up-
date the ranking every 24 hours, since new logs
or data are accumulated every day when perform-
ing actual NLP services. Participants in the leader-
board, whose rankings are updated daily, will have
to devise a new methodology beyond changing
the model architecture (i.e. model-centric) or data-
cleansing approach (i.e. data-centric (Mazumder
et al., 2022)) to improve their ranking. We believe
that these considerations eventually promote real-
world centric research.
Consequently, the dynamic capabilities of mod-
els can be evaluated through periodic evaluations,
rather than determining their capabilities at the ini-
tial evaluation point (Beyer et al., 2020). The new
ranking system also reﬂects instability and poten-
tial for changes in real-world data (Thompson et al.,
2020).
3.3
Comprehensive Evaluation
In evaluating the performance of the model through
multiple test datasets (i.e., evolving test dataset and
periodic ranking system), we propose to eliminate
the approach of determining the ranking of partic-
ipating models based on a single performance or
condition (Vajjala and Balasubramaniam, 2022). In-
stead, we aim to obtain a comprehensive score for
all validation environments to determine whether
the model can maintain superior performance even
when faced with data that may change constantly
and include unexpected errors.
In summary, the testset and ranking change every
24 hours. However, the comprehensive evaluation
is conducted quarterly (every 3 months). In other
words, the ﬁnal ranking is released every 3 months
and the evaluation factors can include "how long
the ranking has been maintained in the top posi-
tion", "how small the range of ranking changes has
been", and so on. It may also be possible to apply
a medal system similar to Kaggle 2 based on the
ﬁnal ranking.
In the end, our suggested procedure is not ended
as a one-time ranking process (never-ending rank-
ing system), unlike the existing leaderboard, while
the ﬁnal ranking is determined every quarter, the
test set will continuously evolve, so the competi-
tion will not end. Medals will be awarded every
three months, but the competition will continue
indeﬁnitely (Mitchell et al., 2018).
3.4
Overall Process of SIL
Our suggested procedure for the leaderboard rank-
ing process is as follows in Figure 1.
Firstly, the evolving test dataset is supplied by
2https://www.kaggle.com/progression
the company or through the prompts using Large
Language Model (LLM) to preserve the quality of
the test dataset. In speciﬁc, the above test set is
growing like self-improving every 24 hours cycle
and is separated into an external test dataset and
a noised test dataset, respectively (black colored
direction).
Secondly, the periodic ranking system scores the
daily rank of the models using an up-to-date test
set (i.e., evolving test dataset) with daily cycles
to check the model’s robustness (green colored
direction).
Thirdly, the ﬁnal rank is derived quarterly (every
three months) through comprehensive evaluation
using the above daily ranks and many different
factors, mentioned in Section. 3.3 (blue colored
direction). Consequently, models are updated in
SIL leaderboard dynamically.
Our proposed SIL is real-world centric compared
with existing leaderboards in the following ways.
First, “data are the most up-to-date”. In SIL, the
data are maintained as the most updated version.
Second, “data are real-world similar”. SIL offers
data that are not of high quality, but rather data that
are consistent with actual situations in contrast to
the noise-cleaned gold test sets. Lastly, “data are
not static and are subjected to less biases”.
4
Conclusions
This paper is a position paper, discussed the limi-
tations of conventional NLP leaderboards and pro-
posed a new paradigm for leaderboard systems
called SIL. Conventional leaderboards bears sev-
eral challenges in real-world scenarios as they eval-
uate the performance of participating models solely
with a single test dataset. We argue that this lead to
even challenging estimation of model robustness
and reproducibility in real-world environments. An-
other problem is that competition accelerates over-
ﬁtting, i.e., the model performs well only within
the test set provided by the leaderboard. To address
these problems, we proposed a new paradigm of
leaderboard system called SIL, which continuously
improves by updating the test data and reevaluating
the models and rankings daily. This new type of
leaderboard operates in a more real-world-centric
manner rather than solely focusing on ranking up
within the leaderboard. Hopefully, this work can
trigger NLP community to apply this paradigm
widely in real-world.
Limitations
As a position paper, we present a new perspective
on the leaderboard systems. While there is certainly
room for additional empirical analysis, we argue
that the insights provided in this work would serve
as a starting step toward the new perspective. We
contend that the novel perspectives on leaderboard
systems presented in this paper will foster the emer-
gence of leaderboards that are better suited to real-
world centric and offer insight into the concept of
valuable competition.
With the Breakthrough emerging of ChatGPT,
many researchers and people without expertise in
NLP knowledge have been astonished by its abil-
ities. Now they consider using ChatGPT in their
real world life indeed, not just as an okay assistant.
Likewise, our community is growing fastly, and we
need to go through more real-world centric models
and suitable cases for its evaluation.
Ethics Statement
There are no ethical issues to declare.
References
Victor Agababov, Michael Buettner, Victor Chud-
novsky, Mark Cogan, Ben Greenstein, Shane Mc-
Daniel, Michael Piatek, Colin Scott, Matt Welsh,
and Bolian Yin. 2015.
Flywheel:{Google’s} data
compression proxy for the mobile web.
In 12th
USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design
and Implementation (NSDI 15), pages 367–380.
Lucas Beyer, Olivier J Hénaff, Alexander Kolesnikov,
Xiaohua Zhai, and Aäron van den Oord. 2020.
Are we done with imagenet?
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.07159.
Lukas Budach, Moritz Feuerpfeil, Nina Ihde, Andrea
Nathansen, Nele Noack, Hendrik Patzlaff, Hazar
Harmouch, and Felix Naumann. 2022. The effects
of data quality on machine learning performance.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.14529.
Yang Chen and Alan Ritter. 2020. Model selection for
cross-lingual transfer using a learned scoring func-
tion.
Katherine Elkins and Jon Chun. 2020. Can gpt-3 pass
a writer’s turing test? Journal of Cultural Analytics,
5(2):17212.
Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, Shibani Santurkar,
Dimitris Tsipras, Jacob Steinhardt, and Aleksander
Madry. 2020. Identifying statistical bias in dataset
replication.
In International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, pages 2922–2932. PMLR.
Akhbardeh Farhad, Arkhangorodsky Arkady, Biesial-
ska Magdalena, Bojar Ondˇrej, Chatterjee Rajen,
Chaudhary Vishrav, Marta R Costa-jussa, España-
Bonet Cristina, Fan Angela, Federmann Christian,
et al. 2021.
Findings of the 2021 conference on
machine translation (wmt21). In Proceedings of the
Sixth Conference on Machine Translation, pages 1–
88. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Sebastian Gehrmann, Tosin Adewumi, Karmanya Ag-
garwal, Pawan Sasanka Ammanamanchi, Aremu
Anuoluwapo, Antoine Bosselut, Khyathi Raghavi
Chandu, Miruna Clinciu, Dipanjan Das, Kaustubh D
Dhole, et al. 2021. The gem benchmark: Natural lan-
guage generation, its evaluation and metrics. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2102.01672.
George Grispos, William Bradley Glisson, and Tim
Storer. 2019.
How good is your data? investigat-
ing the quality of data generated during security
incident response investigations.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1901.03723.
Suchin Gururangan, Swabha Swayamdipta, Omer
Levy, Roy Schwartz, Samuel Bowman, and Noah A
Smith. 2018.
Annotation artifacts in natural lan-
guage inference data. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers),
pages 107–112.
Dirk Hovy and Shrimai Prabhumoye. 2021.
Five
sources of bias in natural language processing. Lan-
guage and Linguistics Compass, 15(8):e12432.
Daniel Khashabi, Gabriel Stanovsky, Jonathan Bragg,
Nicholas Lourie, Jungo Kasai, Yejin Choi, Noah A
Smith, and Daniel S Weld. 2021. Genie: A leader-
board for human-in-the-loop evaluation of text gen-
eration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.06561.
Philipp Koehn, Vishrav Chaudhary, Ahmed El-Kishky,
Naman Goyal, Peng-Jen Chen, and Francisco
Guzmán. 2020. Findings of the wmt 2020 shared
task on parallel corpus ﬁltering and alignment. In
Proceedings of the Fifth Conference on Machine
Translation, pages 726–742.
Seonmin Koo, Chanjun Park, Jaehyung Seo, Seungjun
Lee, Hyeonseok Moon, Jungseob Lee, and Heuiseok
Lim. 2022.
K-nct: Korean neural grammatical er-
ror correction gold-standard test set using novel
error type classiﬁcation criteria.
IEEE Access,
10:118167–118175.
Dominik Kreuzberger, Niklas Kühl, and Sebastian
Hirschl. 2022. Machine learning operations (mlops):
Overview, deﬁnition, and architecture.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2205.02302.
Guokun Lai, Qizhe Xie, Hanxiao Liu, Yiming Yang,
and Eduard Hovy. 2017. Race: Large-scale reading
comprehension dataset from examinations.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:1704.04683.
Seung B Lee, Xiaofan Gui, Megan Manquen, and
Eric R Hamilton. 2019. Use of training, validation,
and test sets for developing automated classiﬁers in
quantitative ethnography. In International Confer-
ence on Quantitative Ethnography, pages 117–127.
Springer.
Fang Liu and Panagiotakos Demosthenes. 2022. Real-
world data: a brief review of the methods, applica-
tions, challenges and opportunities. BMC Medical
Research Methodology, 22(1):1–10.
Pengfei Liu, Jinlan Fu, Yang Xiao, Weizhe Yuan,
Shuaicheng Chang, Junqi Dai, Yixin Liu, Zihuiwen
Ye, Zi-Yi Dou, and Graham Neubig. 2021. Explain-
aboard: An explainable leaderboard for nlp. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2104.06387.
Xiaogeng Liu, Haoyu Wang, Yechao Zhang, Fangzhou
Wu, and Shengshan Hu. 2022.
Towards ef-
ﬁcient
data-centric
robust
machine
learning
with noise-based augmentation.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.03810.
Barrault Loïc, Biesialska Magdalena, Bojar Ondˇrej, Fe-
dermann Christian, Graham Yvette, Grundkiewicz
Roman, Haddow Barry, Huck Matthias, Joanis Eric,
Kocmi Tom, et al. 2020. Findings of the 2020 con-
ference on machine translation (wmt20).
In Pro-
ceedings of the Fifth Conference on Machine Trans-
lation, pages 1–55. Association for Computational
Linguistics,.
Sungwon Lyu, Bokyung Son, Kichang Yang, and
Jaekyoung Bae. 2020. Revisiting modularized mul-
tilingual nmt to meet industrial demands.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2010.09402.
Mark Mazumder, Colby Banbury, Xiaozhe Yao, Bo-
jan Karlaš, William Gaviria Rojas, Sudnya Diamos,
Greg Diamos, Lynn He, Douwe Kiela, David Jurado,
et al. 2022. Dataperf: Benchmarks for data-centric
ai development. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.10062.
Selina Meyer, David Elsweiler, Bernd Ludwig, Marcos
Fernandez-Pichel, and David E Losada. 2022. Do
we still need human assessors? prompt-based gpt-3
user simulation in conversational ai. In Proceedings
of the 4th Conference on Conversational User Inter-
faces, pages 1–6.
Tom Mitchell, William Cohen, Estevam Hruschka,
Partha Talukdar, Bishan Yang, Justin Betteridge, An-
drew Carlson, Bhavana Dalvi, Matt Gardner, Bryan
Kisiel, et al. 2018. Never-ending learning. Commu-
nications of the ACM, 61(5):103–115.
John X Morris, Eli Liﬂand, Jin Yong Yoo, Jake Grigsby,
Di Jin, and Yanjun Qi. 2020. Textattack: A frame-
work for adversarial attacks, data augmentation,
and adversarial training in nlp.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.05909.
Chanjun Park, Kuekyeng Kim, YeongWook Yang,
Minho Kang, and Heuiseok Lim. 2021a.
Neural
spelling correction: translating incorrect sentences
to correct sentences for multimedia.
Multimedia
Tools and Applications, 80(26):34591–34608.
Sungjoon Park, Jihyung Moon, Sungdong Kim, Won Ik
Cho, Jiyoon Han, Jangwon Park, Chisung Song, Jun-
seong Kim, Yongsook Song, Taehwan Oh, et al.
2021b. Klue: Korean language understanding evalu-
ation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.09680.
Fabio Petroni, Aleksandra Piktus, Angela Fan, Patrick
Lewis, Majid Yazdani, Nicola De Cao, James
Thorne, Yacine Jernite, Vladimir Karpukhin, Jean
Maillard, et al. 2020. Kilt: a benchmark for knowl-
edge intensive language tasks.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2009.02252.
Inioluwa Deborah Raji, Emily Denton, Emily M Ben-
der, Alex Hanna, and Amandalynne Paullada. 2021.
Ai and the everything in the whole wide world
benchmark. In Thirty-ﬁfth Conference on Neural In-
formation Processing Systems Datasets and Bench-
marks Track (Round 2).
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and
Percy Liang. 2016. Squad: 100,000+ questions for
machine comprehension of text.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.05250.
Prem N Ramkumar, Heather S Haeberle, Michael R
Bloomﬁeld, Jonathan L Schaffer, Atul F Kamath,
Brendan M Patterson, and Viktor E Krebs. 2019. Ar-
tiﬁcial intelligence and arthroplasty at a single in-
stitution: real-world applications of machine learn-
ing to big data, value-based care, mobile health, and
remote patient monitoring. The Journal of arthro-
plasty, 34(10):2204–2209.
Paul Resnick and Hal R Varian. 1997. Recommender
systems.
Communications of the ACM, 40(3):56–
58.
Pedro Rodriguez, Joe Barrow, Alexander Miserlis
Hoyle, John P Lalor, Robin Jia, and Jordan Boyd-
Graber. 2021. Evaluation examples are not equally
informative: How should that change nlp leader-
boards? In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
and the 11th International Joint Conference on Nat-
ural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers).
Rebecca Roelofs, Vaishaal Shankar, Benjamin Recht,
Sara Fridovich-Keil, Moritz Hardt, John Miller, and
Ludwig Schmidt. 2019. A meta-analysis of overﬁt-
ting in machine learning. Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, 32.
Robert Rosenman, Vidhura Tennekoon, and Laura G
Hill. 2011. Measuring bias in self-reported data. In-
ternational journal of behavioural & healthcare re-
search, 2(4):320.
Jeffrey D Scargle. 1999.
Publication bias (the" ﬁle-
drawer problem") in scientiﬁc inference.
arXiv
preprint physics/9909033.
Kyuyong Shin, Hanock Kwak, Kyung-Min Kim,
Su
Young
Kim,
and
Max
Nihlen
Ramstrom.
2021. Scaling law for recommendation models: To-
wards general-purpose user representations. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2111.11294.
Asa Cooper Stickland, Sailik Sengupta, Jason Krone,
Saab Mansour, and He He. 2022.
Robustiﬁcation
of multilingual language models to real-world noise
with robust contrastive pretraining. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.04782.
William Hedley Thompson, Jessey Wright, Patrick G
Bissett, and Russell A Poldrack. 2020.
Meta-
research: dataset decay and the problem of sequen-
tial analyses on open datasets. Elife, 9:e53498.
Sowmya Vajjala and Ramya Balasubramaniam. 2022.
What do we really know about state of the art ner?
arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.00034.
Rob van der Goot. 2021. We need to talk about train-
dev-test splits. In Proceedings of the 2021 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 4485–4494.
Alex Wang, Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia,
Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer
Levy, and Samuel Bowman. 2019.
Superglue: A
stickier benchmark for general-purpose language un-
derstanding systems. Advances in neural informa-
tion processing systems, 32.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix
Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R Bowman. 2018.
Glue: A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform
for natural language understanding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1804.07461.
Shuohang Wang, Yang Liu, Yichong Xu, Chenguang
Zhu, and Michael Zeng. 2021. Want to reduce label-
ing cost? gpt-3 can help. In Findings of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2021,
pages 4195–4205.
Yu Wang, Yuelin Wang, Jie Liu, and Zhuo Liu. 2020. A
comprehensive survey of grammar error correction.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.06600.
Ziang Xie, Sida I Wang, Jiwei Li, Daniel Lévy, Aiming
Nie, Dan Jurafsky, and Andrew Y Ng. 2017. Data
noising as smoothing in neural network language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.02573.
Kang Min Yoo, Dongju Park, Jaewook Kang, Sang-
Woo Lee, and Woomyoung Park. 2021. Gpt3mix:
Leveraging large-scale language models for text aug-
mentation. In Findings of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: EMNLP 2021, pages 2225–
2239.
Zongsheng Yue, Qian Zhao, Lei Zhang, and Deyu
Meng. 2020. Dual adversarial network: Toward real-
world noise removal and noise generation. In Euro-
pean Conference on Computer Vision, pages 41–58.
Springer.
Yuhao Zhang, Victor Zhong, Danqi Chen, Gabor An-
geli, and Christopher D Manning. 2017. Position-
aware attention and supervised data improve slot ﬁll-
ing. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing.
Lei Zhou, Anmin Fu, Shui Yu, Mang Su, and Boyu
Kuang. 2018. Data integrity veriﬁcation of the out-
sourced big data in the cloud environment: A sur-
vey.
Journal of Network and Computer Applica-
tions, 122:1–15.
