Title: SECNLP: A Survey of Embeddings in Clinical Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1903.01039v4
--------------------------------------------------

1 
 
SECNLP:  A Survey of Embeddings in Clinical Natural Language Processing 
Kalyan KS, S. Sangeetha  
Text Analytics and Natural Language Processing Lab 
Department of Computer Applications 
National Institute of Technology Tiruchirappalli, INDIA. 
kalyan.ks@yahoo.com, sangeetha@nitt.edu 
 
ABSTRACT 
Traditional representations like Bag of words are high dimensional, sparse and ignore the order as well as syntactic 
and semantic information. Distributed vector representations or embeddings map variable length text to dense fixed 
length vectors as well as capture prior knowledge which can transferred to downstream tasks. Even though 
embedding has become de facto standard for representations in deep learning based NLP tasks in both general and 
clinical domains, there is no survey paper which presents a detailed review of embeddings in Clinical Natural 
Language Processing. In this survey paper, we discuss various medical corpora and their characteristics, medical 
codes and present a brief overview as well as comparison of popular embeddings models. We classify clinical 
embeddings into nine types and discuss each embedding type in detail. We discuss various evaluation methods 
followed by possible solutions to various challenges in clinical embeddings. Finally, we conclude with some of the 
future directions which will advance the research in clinical embeddings.  
Keywords: embeddings, distributed representations, medical, natural language processing, survey  
1. INTRODUCTION 
Distributed vector representation or embedding is one of the recent as well as prominent addition to 
modern natural language processing. Embedding has gained lot of attention and has become a part of NLP 
researcher’s toolkit.   According to distributed hypothesis [71, 72], semantic similarity between two words can be 
expressed in terms of their contexts (i.e.) words with similar contexts have similar meaning. Word embeddings which 
are based on distributed hypothesis, represent words as dense, low dimensional and fixed length vectors in a 
continuous vector space and make sure that words with similar meaning are nearby. A word embedding typically 
consists of hundreds of dimensions and each dimension represents a feature. So, in word embedding the meaning 
of a word is distributed across dimensions. Word embedding is particularly suitable for deep learning models which 
consists of   multiple layers employing matrix operations to find the high level representations of text data. 
For the past few decades, researchers employed machine learning approaches with traditional 
representations like bag-of-words for NLP tasks. In one hot representation of words, a vocabulary of all the unique 
words in the corpus is generated and each word is represented as vector of 0s and 1s where the dimension 
corresponding to the word is set to 1 and all others set to 0.  Bag of words feature vector of a document is the sum 
of one hot vectors of all the words and has 1 only for the words occurring in the document.  For a better 
representation, 0s and 1s can be replaced with other measures like word frequency, tf-idf measure, N-grams etc.  All 
these representations are high dimensional, sparse and ignore order as well as syntactic and semantic similarities of 
the words.  
 
Preprint submitted to Arxiv 
 
This paper got published in Journal of Biomedical Informatics.
Updated version is available @ https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2019.103323
2 
 
In contrast, embedding maps the variable length text to dense vector representations and overcome curse 
of dimensionality and lack of syntactic and semantic information in representations. Moreover, embeddings are 
learned in an unsupervised manner which capture the knowledge in a large unlabeled corpus and it can be 
transferred to the downstream tasks with small labeled data sets.  Hence, embedding has become an unavoidable 
choice for text representation in the recent times of deep learning era. 
1.1 Literature Selection 
       
We collected papers from various sources like PubMed, Google Scholar, ScienceDirect, ACL Web Anthology, 
and AAAI .We confined to the papers which are published in the period January 2014 to Nov 2018 because of the 
recent popularity of embeddings. We used keywords like “deep learning,” “medical”, “clinical,” “embeddings”, 
“natural language processing”, “distributed representations” and “health” to retrieve the relevant papers and 
gathered   230 articles.  After the removal of duplicate articles as well as the articles which are not related to clinical 
natural language processing, the number of articles reduced to 120. Finally, we included the most relevant 80 papers 
after a manual review of all the remaining articles. 
Even though embeddings have become de facto standard for text representations for deep learning based NLP 
tasks in both general and medical domains, there is no survey paper which presents a detailed review of embeddings 
in the form of classification of embeddings as well as the challenges to be solved. To the best of our best knowledge, 
we are the first to present a detailed review of embeddings in Clinical Natural Language Processing. Our survey 
includes 
 
Classification as well as comparison of Medical Corpora (Section 2) 
 
Overview of various Medical Codes (Section 3) 
 
Overview as well as comparison of various Embedding Models  (Section 4) 
 
Classification of Embeddings in Clinical Natural Language Processing (Section 5) 
 
Evaluation Methods of Embeddings in Clinical Natural Language Processing (Section 6) 
 
Discussion  (Section 7) 
 
Conclusion and Future Work (Section 8) 
2. MEDICAL CORPORA 
In this section, we classify medical corpora into four types as shown in figure 1 and then discuss each type followed 
by a comparison (Table I) 
Embeddings are inferred using any of the embeddings models over a large unlabeled corpus. Quality of 
embeddings inferred, depends on two properties of corpus like size and whether it is general or domain specific. A 
large corpus provides better vocabulary coverage while a domain related corpus provides better semantic 
representation of terms. Medical corpora can be classified into four categories. 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Classification of Medical Corpora 
2.1 Electronic Health Record (EHR) 
 
In the recent times, Electronic Health Records has become the first option to store patient details in the 
most of the hospitals [73]. EHRs include both structured data like diagnostic codes, procedure codes, medication 
codes, laboratory results etc. as well as unstructured data like clinical notes written by health professionals [74]. 
EHRs containing rich clinical information have become an invaluable source of data for many clinical informatics 
applications [75 and76]. Some of the research studies have used publicly available EHR data while others have used 
private EHR data.  MIMIC Dataset [77 and 78] is the largest publicly available EHR dataset and is described below 
2.1.1 MIMIC Dataset 
Multiparameter Intelligent Monitoring in Intensive Care (MIMIC) [77 and 78] is a publicly available ICU 
dataset developed by the MIT Lab. It includes demographics, vital signs, laboratory tests, medications, and more. 
MIMIC-II [77] contains data collected from Intensive Care Units of Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center from 2001 
to 2008 while MIMIC III [78] consists of data collected in between 2001 and 2012. The data in MIMIC datasets is de-
identified and can be used for research purpose. But prior to access, agreement to data use and completion of a 
training course is mandatory.  
2.2 Medical related Social Media Corpus 
In the recent times, social media evolved as a medium of expression for internet users. Medical related 
Social Media corpus includes tweets posted by individuals, questions and answers in discussion forums related to 
health issues. In Twitter1, users express health related concerns in short text of 140 characters while health 
discussion forums consists of health related questions raised and the corresponding answers.  Some of the popular 
health discussion forums are MedHelp2, DailyStrength3, AskAPatient4 and WebMD5.  
------------------------------------- 
1https://twitter.com  
2https://www.medhelp.org 
3https://www.dailystrength.org/ 
4https://www.askapatient.com/   
5https://www.webmd.com/ 
 
 
4 
 
Social media text is highly informal and conversational in nature with lot of misspelled words, irregular 
grammar, non-standard abbreviations and slang words. Moreover, the users describe their experiences in non-
standard and descriptive words. Analysis of medical social media text which contains rich medical information can 
provide new medical insights and improved health care.  
2.3 Online Medical Knowledge Sources 
 
Online medical knowledge sources contain medicine and health related information which is created and 
maintained by medical professionals. Merriam-Webster Medical Thesaurus6, Merriam-Webster Medical Dictionary7 
and Merck Manual8 are some of the online medical knowledge sources.  Merriam-Webster Medical Thesaurus 
consists of word definition along with example sentence, synonyms, related words and antonyms while Merriam-
Webster Medical Dictionary consists of word definition along with multiple example sentences and synonyms.  
Merck Manual which is a medical text book consists of articles related to various topics including disorders, drugs 
and tests. From these sources, corpus can be built and adopted by any embedding model to generate the 
embeddings of variable length text sequences like words, phrases and sentences in the corpus.   
eMedicine9 is an online website which consists of almost 6,800 (by December 2018) articles related to 
various topics in medicine like Emergency medicine , Internal medicine etc. Each article is authored by a certified 
specialist in the concerned area which undergoes four levels of peer view which includes review by Doctor of 
Pharmacy. Medical Subject Headings (MeSH)10 is created and maintained by United States National Library of 
Medicine11.  It is a controlled vocabulary used for indexing articles in PubMed and classifying diseases in 
clinicaltrials.gov 
MedlinePlus12 maintained by United States National Library of Medicine offers reliable and updated 
information on various topics related to health in an easy to understand language. It is a medical encyclopedia that 
has information over 1000 diseases and conditions.  Sciencedaily13 and Medscape14 are two other online sources 
that provides latest news related to medicine. 
2.4 Scientific Literature 
PubMed15 maintained by United States National Library of Medicine, is a search engine for citations and abstracts of 
------------------------------- 
6https://www.merriam-webster.com/thesaurus 
7https://www.merriam-webster.com/medical 
8https://www.msdmanuals.com/ 
9https://emedicine.medscape.com/ 
10https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/mesh 
11https://www.nlm.nih.gov/ 
12https://medlineplus.gov/ 
13https://www.sciencedaily.com/ 
14https://www.medscape.com/ 
15https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/ 
 
 
5 
 
research articles published in the areas of life sciences and biomedicine. As of December 2018, PubMed has 14.2 
million articles with links to full-text. Apart from this, it provides access to books with full text available. PubMed 
Central (PMC)16 is a digital repository of research papers published in the areas of biomedicine and life sciences and 
it provides free access. As of December 2018, it has over 5.2 million articles. Table I gives a comparison of various 
medical corpora. 
TABLE I 
COMPARISION OF MEDICAL CORPORA 
S.No. 
Medical Corpus 
Contains 
Language 
Used 
Noisy 
Access 
Authors 
Example 
1 
Electronic Medical 
Records (EMR) 
Patient information  
in the form of  
medical 
codes, 
laboratory results  
and clinical notes 
Professional 
Yes , with lot of 
unstandardized 
abbreviations and 
misspelled words 
in clinical notes 
Restricted 
access 
because of 
sensitive 
information 
Trained 
medical 
professionals 
in hospitals 
MIMIC II[77] 
and  
MIMIC III[78] 
2 
Medical Social 
Media  
i)Views 
and 
opinions related to 
health in the form 
of tweets 
ii) Health related 
questions 
and 
answers in Health 
Discussion Forums 
Colloquial 
Yes, with irregular 
grammar, 
slang 
words 
and 
misspelled words 
Free Access  
Common 
Public  
Twitter1, 
AskAPatient4, 
WebMD5, 
MedHelp2 and 
DailyStrength3 
3 
Online Medical 
Knowledge 
Sources 
i)Medical 
words 
definitions, 
synonyms 
and  
related words   
ii) Medical Articles 
iii) Latest Medical 
News 
Professional 
No  
Free Access 
Trained 
Medical  
Professionals 
Merriam 
Webster 
Dictionary6 and 
Thesaurus7, 
eMedicine9, 
Medscape14, 
MedLinePlus12, 
Sciencedaily13, 
MeSH10 and 
MerckManuals8 
4 
Scientific 
Literatures 
Abstracts,  
Citations as well as 
full text of life 
sciences 
and 
biomedical 
research articles 
Professional 
No 
Free Access 
Researchers in 
life 
sciences 
and 
biomedical 
areas  
PubMed15 and 
PubMed 
Central16 
 
3. MEDICAL CODES 
The primary motive behind EHR [70] is to record the patient information right from admission to discharge 
in a systematic way. Several classification schemes are available for recording the relevant clinical information. For 
example, ICD (International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems) - diagnosis codes, CPT 
(Current Procedural Terminology) - procedure codes, LOINC (Logical Observation Identifiers Names and Codes) -
laboratory codes, and RxNorm- medical codes.  Table II gives brief summary of the medical codes. 
------------- 
16https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/ 
6 
 
TABLE II 
SUMMARY OF MEDICAL CODES 
Schema 
Description 
Number of Codes 
Examples 
ICD-10 (Diagnosis) 
Prepared 
by 
World 
Health 
Organization(WHO) and  contains codes 
for disease, signs and symptoms etc. 
68,000 
‘R070’  : Pain in Throat 
‘H612’ : Impacted cerumen 
 
CPT(Procedures) 
Prepared 
by 
American 
Medical 
Association(AMA) and contain codes for 
medical, surgical and diagnostic services 
9,641 
‘90658’  :Flue Shot 
‘90716’  : Chicken Pox Vaccine 
LOINIC (Laboratory) 
Prepared by Regenstrief Institute, a US 
nonprofit medical research organization 
and 
contain 
codes 
for 
laboratory 
observations 
80,868 
‘8310-5’ : Body Temperature 
‘5792-7’ : Glucose 
RxNorm 
(Medications) 
Prepared by US National Library of 
Medicine and is a part of UMLS. Contains 
codes for all the medications available in 
US market.  
1,16,075 
‘1191’ : Aspirin 
‘215256’ : Anacin 
These standardized codes are used to ensure consistency in recording patient information and other 
applications like reimbursement claims.  Most of the US health care payment systems are based on these 
standardized codes.  As an example, the health care insurance companies pay the reimbursements based on the 
medical codes assigned to the clinical reports [28]. 
4. EMBEDDING MODELS 
This section gives a brief overview as well as comparison of various embedding models like word2vec (section 4.1), 
paragraph2vec (Section 4.2), glove (Section 4.3), fasttext (Section 4.4) and Elmo (Section 4.5). Table IV gives a 
summary of various embedding models and Table V gives a comparison of various embedding models.  
Embedding is one of the promising applications of unsupervised learning as well as transfer learning 
because embeddings are induced from large unlabeled corpora and the prior knowledge captured in embeddings 
can be transferred to downstream tasks involving small datasets. Embedding models can be classified into Prediction 
based and Count based [129]. Prediction based models learn embeddings by predicting target word based on context 
words or vice versa. Count based models learn embeddings by leveraging global information such as word context 
co-occurrences in a corpus. 
Research in learning distributed vector representations started with Rumelhart et al. [79].  Several research 
studies [80]-[86] laid foundation for research in embeddings. Bengio et al. [82] proposed a neural network based 
model for the task of next word prediction. The model consists of hidden layer with tanh activation and output layer 
with softmax activation.  The output layer produces the probability of all the words in the vocabulary for the given 
n-1 input words. In doing so, the model learns distributed representations of the words. The model overcomes the 
problems of curse of dimensionality and unseen sentences. 
 
7 
 
Collobert and Weston [85] were the first to demonstrate the usage of pre trained word embeddings. They 
proposed CNN based model which takes a sentence as input and outputs parts of speech tags, named entity tags, 
chunks etc. Finally, the model proposed by Mikolov et al. [62] gained lot of attention, brought immense popularity 
and made embeddings the first choice for text representation. Later, Glove [87] proposed by Pennington et al., 
FastText [88] proposed by Bojanowski et al. and ELMo [123] proposed by Peters et al. have become other popular 
embedding models.  
4.1 Word2Vec 
Inspired by distributed hypothesis [71, 72] and neural language models, Mikolov et al. [62] proposed 
word2vec, a simple and efficient algorithm for inferring dense vector representations of words from a large 
unlabeled corpus. It is a shallow neural network model that learns the word representations by optimizing the 
objective function which involves both target word and context word. Word2vec builds vocabulary out of the corpus 
and learns the word representations by training a three layered neural network. Word2vec offers two models 
namely Continuous Bag of Words (CBOW) and Skip-gram. CBOW learns the representations by predicting the target 
word based on its context words while skipgram learns representations by predicting each of the context words 
based on the target word. So, one has to choose one of the architectures and set values for hyper parameters like 
embedding size, context size , minimum frequency for a word to be included in the word vocabulary to generate the 
word embeddings from a large corpus of unlabeled data.  Table III gives a summary of various hyper parameters in 
word2vec model.  
TABLE III 
SUMMARY OF HYPER PARAMETERS IN WORD2VEC 
Parameter 
Default Value 
Meaning 
size 
100 
Dimension of vectors 
window 
5 
Size of context window 
min_count 
5 
Minimum frequency of a word to be included in the 
vocabulary 
workers 
3 
Number of threads to train the model 
sg 
0 
0 means CBOW model is used and 1 means skipgram is 
used. 
hs 
0 
 1 for hierarchical softmax 
 0 and ‘negative’  with non-zero value means, negative 
sampling is used 
negative 
5 
 0 means, no negative sampling  
 >0 means negative sampling is applied and the value 
represents the number of noise words to be used. 
 
 
In Word2vec, there are two options to evaluate the generated representations namely, distance and analogy. 
Distance option allow to retrieve the most semantically similar words for a given word in the corpus along with the 
cosine similarity score. In this context, cosine similarity score represents the degree of semantic similarity between 
the two words.  Analogy option allows to find the linguistic regularities like ‘king-man+women=?’ 
8 
 
4.1.1 Continuous Bag of Words (CBOW) 
CBOW model learns embeddings by predicting the target word against its context words. CBOW model can 
be viewed as supervised model with the context words as input and the target word as output.  
As in figure 2, CBOW model consists of three layers namely input layer, hidden layer and output layer.  The layers 
are connected by two weight matrices W and W’. The input layer takes the one hot vectors of context words as input 
and the output layer applying softmax function predicts the one hot vector of target word. Error between the original 
and predicted vectors is back propagated to update the weight matrices W as well as W’.  Finally for each word in 
the vocabulary of given corpus, two vectors Vc and Vw are obtained (i.e., Vc is from W and Vw is from W’). The 
objective function of CBOW model is  
𝐽= 1
𝑉∑𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑝(𝑤𝑖 | 𝑤𝑖−𝑛, … 𝑤𝑖−2, 𝑤𝑖−1 ,  𝑤𝑖+1,𝑤𝑖+2, … 𝑤𝑖+𝑛)
𝑉
𝑖=1
 
where V is the size of vocabulary and n is the window size. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. CBOW Model [110]                                                                                  Figure 3. Skipgram Model [110] 
 
 
For example, consider the sentence, “the black pen is on the red table”. With a context window of 
size 2, the (context, target words) pairs are ([black, pen], the), ([the, pen, is], black), ([the, black, 
is, on], pen) and so on. 
9 
 
4.1.2 Skipgram  
As in figure 3, Skip-gram model works exactly opposite to CBOW and learns the embeddings by predicting the context 
words against the target word.  Skipgram model can be viewed as supervised model with the target word as input 
and the context words as output. 
 The objective function of skipgram model is  
𝐽= 1
𝑉 ∑   
∑
𝑙𝑜𝑔 𝑝(𝑤𝑖+𝑗
−𝑛≤𝑗≤𝑛,≠0
𝑉
𝑖=1
 | 𝑤𝑗) 
where V is the size of vocabulary and n is window size. 
Each of CBOW and Skipgram models have their own advantages and disadvantages. In both the models, 
learning output vectors is computationally expensive. To address this issue, two methods namely Negative sampling 
and Hierarchical softmax is proposed. Negative sampling limits the number of output vectors to be updated while 
Hierarchical softmax is based on Huffman tree. Negative sampling works well with in-frequent words, whereas 
Hierarchical softmax works well with frequent words [130].  
4.2 Doc2Vec 
        Paragraph2vector popularly known as Doc2vec, is an extension to Word2vec [62] and is proposed by Le et al. 
[89]. It is an unsupervised model which maps the variable length text like sentences, paragraphs and documents to 
dense vector representations. Doc2vec learns the dense vectors representations for both variable length text and 
the words in the text. It offers two models namely Distributed Bag of Words (DBOW) and Distributed Memory (DM). 
4.2.1 Distributed Memory (DM) 
          DM model is similar to Continuous Bag of Words model of Word2vec [62]. CBOW predicts the center word 
from the context words while DM predicts the next word using the concatenation or average of the vectors of 
paragraph and context words.  As in figure 4, it consists of three layers. First layer takes the vectors of paragraph 
and context words as input. Second layer concatenates or average both these vectors. The final layer which is a 
classifier, predicts the vector for the next word.  
 
For example, consider the sentence, “the black pen is on the red table”. With a context window of 
size 2, the (target_word, context) pairs are (the, [black, pen]), (black, [the, pen, is]), (pen, [the, 
black, is, on]) and so on. 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Figure 4. DM Model [89]                                                                                              Figure 5. DBOW Model [89] 
4.2.2 Distributed Bag of Words (DBOW) 
 
DBOW model is similar to Skipgram model of Word2vec [62]. Skipgram predicts the context words from the 
center word while DBOW predicts the context words using the paragraph.  As in figure 5, it consists of three layers. 
First layer takes the vector of paragraph as input. Second layer is the hidden layer. The final layer which is a classifier, 
predicts the vectors of the context words.  
In both the DBOW and DM models, the matrix D has dense vector representations. Each column of D is an embedding 
of the variable length text. Compared to DM model, DBOW model is simple, needs less memory. DM model stores 
softmax weights as well as word vectors while DBOW model stores only softmax weights. According to Le et al., [89] 
DM works well for most of the tasks but recommended to use a combination of vectors from DM and DBOW, as the 
combination gives consistent results across tasks. 
4.3 Glove 
Global Vectors for word representations popularly knowns as “Glove” [87] is proposed by Pennington et al. 
Methods like LSA which uses matrix factorization utilize global co-occurrence statistics but perform poorly in word 
analogy task. While methods like Word2vec [62] do well in word analogy tasks but poorly utilize the global co-
occurrence statistics. The Glove model combines the advantages of Word2vec model in learning representations 
based on context as well as matrix factorization methods in leveraging the global co-occurrence statistics.  
In Glove, a word occurrence matrix is generated in which rows represent the words and columns represent 
the context. Each value in the matrix represent how frequently a word co-occurs with a context. Factorization of the 
word co-occurrence matrix results in a low dimensional matrix where rows represent words and columns represent 
features. Each row in low dimensional word-feature matrix represents the dense vector representation of word 
where the size of feature can be preset to the required value. The objective function in Glove model is 
11 
 
𝐽=  ∑𝑓(𝑋𝑖𝑗) (𝑤𝑖
𝑇𝑤̃𝑗+ 𝑏𝑖+ 𝑏̃𝑗−log 𝑋𝑖𝑗 )2
𝑉
𝑖,𝑗=1
 
Here f is a weighting function and  wi, wj, bi and bj  are the learned where wi and wj are vectors for main and context 
words, bi and  bj are biases for the main and context words. 
Glove and word2vec has a similarity. Both the models learns the representations based on the contexts. 
But, Word2vec leverage local contexts whereas Glove utilize the global contexts in the form of global co-occurrence 
statistics. 
4.4 FastText 
FastText embedding [88] as well as FastText classifier [90] is proposed by Facebook researchers in 2016. 
FastText embedding is essentially an extension and improvement of the word2vec model [62] proposed by Mikolov 
et al.   In models like word2vec and glove, words are treated as atomic entities and mapped to dense vector 
representations. So, these models ignore morphological information which is a concern for languages with large 
vocabulary and many rare words. In FastText model, each word is treated as a bag of character n-grams. Each 
character n-gram is mapped to dense vector and the sum of these dense vectors represent the word.  
FastText by leveraging the sub word information, offer better representations for rare words because even if the 
words are rare, their character ngrams appear across the words in the corpus. Further, representations for out of 
vocabulary words can be obtained using the sum of character ngrams.  
4.5 ELMo 
Embeddings models like Word2Vec[62], Glove[87], FastText[88] assign a single vector representation to a 
word independent of the context in which it is used. However, meaning of a word changes according to the context 
in which it is used. In the recent times, a number of models like CoVE [125], TagLM[128], Context2vec[127] have 
been proposed to generate context dependent representations. However these models have some drawbacks. CoVE 
needs labeled data to generate context dependent representations and use zero vectors for OOV words. Further 
CoVE, TagLM and Context2vec models make use of only the last layer representations.  
Peters et al. [123] proposed ELMo (figure 6)  which generates embeddings for words considering its 
context, by making use of Character embeddings and BiLSTM. ELMo model consists of L-layers of BiLSTMs with 
character level word embeddings as input.  Contextualized embedding of each word is obtained as a weighted sum 
of character level word embeddings and the hidden states of BiLSTM. 
For example, the vector for the word ‘mango’ is sum of the vectors of  ‘<man’, ‘mang’, ‘ango’, 
‘ngo>’, mango, ‘ango>’ etc. (assuming  values of 4 and 5 for the hyper parameters  minn and maxn 
which represents the sizes of smallest and largest character ngrams) 
12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. ELMo Model [123] 
TABLE IV 
SUMMARY OF EMBEDDING MODELS 
Model 
Architecture 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
CBOW [62] 
Log Bilinear 
 Faster compared to skipgram model. 
 Represents frequent words well. 
 Ignore morphological information 
as well as polysemy nature of 
words. 
 No embeddings for OOV, misspelled 
and rare words. 
Skipgram [62] 
Log Bilinear 
 Efficient with small training datasets. 
 Represents infrequent words well. 
 Ignore morphological information 
as well as polysemy nature of 
words. 
 No embeddings for OOV, misspelled 
and rare words. 
PV-DM [89] 
Log Bilinear 
 PV-DM alone give good results for many of 
the tasks. 
 Compared to PV-DBOW, requires 
more memory as it is needed to 
store Softmax weights and word 
vectors. 
PV-DBOW [89] 
Log Bilinear 
 Need to store only the word vectors and so 
requires less memory. 
 Compared    to PV-DM, it is simple and faster. 
 Need to be used along with PV-DM 
to give consistent results across 
tasks. 
Glove [87] 
Log Bilinear 
 Combines the advantages of word2vec 
model in learning representations based on 
context as well as matrix factorization 
methods in leveraging global co-occurrence 
statistics. 
 
 Ignore morphological information 
as well as polysemy nature of 
words. 
 No embeddings for OOV, misspelled 
and rare words. 
FastText [88] 
Log Bilinear 
 Encode morphological information in word 
vectors. 
 Embeddings for OOV, misspelled and rare 
words. 
 Pretrained word vectors for 157 languages. 
 
 Computationally 
intensive 
and 
memory requirements increases 
with the size of corpus. 
 Ignore the polysemy nature of the 
words. 
ELMo [123] 
BiLSTM 
 Generate 
context 
dependent 
vector 
representations and hence account for 
polysemy nature of words. 
 Embeddings for OOV, misspelled and rare 
words. 
 Computationally 
intensive 
and 
hence require more training time. 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
𝐸𝐿𝑀𝑜𝑘
𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑘= 𝑟𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑘  ∑𝑠𝑗
𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑘
𝐿
𝑗=0
ℎ𝑘𝑗
𝐿𝑀  
Here j and k are the indices of the word and the BiLSTM layers,  𝑟𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑘 is a task specific scaling factor, 𝑠𝑗
𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑘 represents 
softmax normalized weights. 
5. CLASSIFICATION OF MEDICAL EMBEDDINGS 
As shown in figure 7, medical embeddings can be classified into nine categories with each category mapping variable 
length text (e.g. character, words, phrases, sentences or documents) or medical codes or CUIs to dense vector 
representations. In this section, we discuss about various types of clinical embeddings. Table VI contains a summary 
of various clinical embeddings and Table VII contains a summary of various clinical NLP tasks with embeddings as 
input features. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Classification of Clinical Embeddings 
5.1 Character Embeddings 
Character embedding models consider character as an atomic unit and maps it to a fixed length dense 
vector. Vector representation for a word is obtained from the embeddings of the constituting characters using CNN 
or LSTM. As a result, character embedding models can generate embeddings for Out of Vocabulary (OOV) words, 
rare words and misspelled words. 
Niu et al. [111] proposed deep learning framework based on multi-task character level attention mechanism 
to map medical concept mention to standard medical vocabulary. Character level embeddings avoids the OOV issue 
while attention mechanism exploits the morphological information by generating the attention weights on domain 
14 
 
related positions which aids the concept normalization. The input concept is encoded into character embedding 
matrix and it is added with the attention weights. The augmented character embedding matrix is taken as input by 
character level CNN and then assign the corresponding label. Evaluation on three real world datasets showed the 
effectiveness of the model. 
Table V 
COMPARISON OF EMBEDDING MODELS 
 
 
 
5.1 Word Embeddings 
Word embeddings models map words to dense vector representations as well as capture syntactic and 
semantic information. Context independent word embedding models like word2vec [62], glove [87] and fasttext [88] 
assign single vector representation for a word ignoring the context in which it appears. Context dependent word 
embeddings models like Elmo [123] assign different representations for a word depending on the context in which 
it appears. 
Huang et al. [1] experimented with embeddings induced from various corpora in order to evaluate the 
effectiveness of embeddings in modelling medical terms and relations. Using Word2Vec, generated word 
embeddings separately over the text collected from health discussion forum, PubMed15 abstracts and Wikipedia 
corpus.  The text in these corpora vary greatly in terms of   style and vocabulary of the language used. Results 
demonstrated that the model learned over health forum text represent popular medical terms from Ranker17  
----------------- 
17 https://www.ranker.com 
Model 
Type 
Generate 
Embeddings for 
Vectors for OOV  
Words 
Encode 
Morphological 
Information 
Use of global 
co-occurrence 
statistics 
Context Independent /  
Context Dependent 
Word Vectors 
CBOW 
Prediction 
based 
Words 
No 
No 
No 
Context Independent 
Skipgram 
Prediction 
based 
Words 
No 
No 
No 
Context Independent 
PV-DM 
Prediction 
based 
Sentences, 
Paragraphs and 
Documents 
- 
No 
No 
- 
PV-DBOW 
Prediction 
based 
Sentences, 
Paragraphs and 
Documents 
- 
No 
No 
- 
Glove 
Count 
based 
Words 
No 
No 
Yes 
Context Independent 
FastText 
Prediction 
based 
Characters N-
grams and 
Words 
Sum of character n-
grams in the word 
Yes 
No 
Context Independent 
ELMo 
Prediction 
based 
Words 
Generated over 
character embeddings 
using CNN or BiLSTM 
Yes 
No 
Context Dependent 
15 
 
significantly better compared to the model learned over PubMed abstracts authored by professionals. Further, the 
word spaces induced by the health forum text and PubMed abstracts better model the medical terms compared to 
the word space induced by general purpose Wikipedia Corpus. 
Lee et al. [4] explored the use of word embeddings generated from various medical knowledge sources 
using Word2Vec, for the task of medical concept normalization. Medical Concept normalization maps the health 
condition expressed in lay terms to the standard medical concepts and is treated as multi label classification 
problem.  Evaluation on two standard datasets Twitter [11] and AskAPatient [91]  showed  that RNN and CNN models 
trained over the embedding learned from combined clinical data sources outperformed the baselines.   
Miftahutdinov et al. [10] proposed novel architectures based on LSTM and GRU with attention to the 
problem of mapping disease mention in free form social media text to standard UMLS (Unified Medical Language 
System)18 concepts. Experimented with two publicly available word embeddings. First one is HealthVec [17]: learned 
over the corpus consisting of medical related user comments in health websites. Second one is PubMedVec[39]: 
trained over the PubMed abstracts. Experimental results demonstrate the superior performance of LSTM and GRU 
based models with attention compared to the baselines based on CNN. Further, showed that the addition of UMLS 
based semantic similarity features improved the performance. 
Limsopatham at al. [11] demonstrated the importance of semantic level information in the task of medical 
concept normalization with the use of CNN and RNN based neural network models. Experimented with two word 
embeddings. First one is GNews19, a publicly available word embeddings generated from Google News Corpus using 
word2vec and the other is BMC, word embeddings trained on biomedical literature downloaded from BioMed 
Central20 using word2vec. Evaluated the models on three datasets having text extracted from Twitter and blog posts. 
Results showed that CNN with GNews word embeddings gave the best performance across all the three data sets. 
Further updating the word embeddings (allowing the model to update) improved the performance only on large test 
data. 
Belousov at al. [12] presented an ensemble system based on multinomial log regression and Bi-GRU deep 
learning model for the mapping of informal mentions in free text obtained from drug related tweets to MedDRA11 
codes. Used three pre trained word embeddings namely GNews (trained on Google News Corpus), Twitter [63] 
(trained on general purpose tweets) and DrugTwitter [18] (trained on drug related tweets).  Multinomial log 
regression trained on all the three embeddings which are combined using mean rule outperformed Bi-GRU trained 
on GNews. Further, ensemble of both the models based on mean rule achieved the highest accuracy. 
--------------------------------- 
18 https://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/ 
19 https://code.google.com/archive/p/word2vec/ 
20 https://www.biomedcentral.com 
16 
 
TABLE VI 
SUMMARY OF CLINICAL EMBEDDINGS 
Embeddings 
Type of Embedding 
Key Points 
Papers 
Char Embeddings 
 Include 
morphological 
information and can generate 
embeddings for OOV, misspelled 
and rare words.   
 Meaning is not encoded. 
[111] 
Word Embeddings 
 Incorporate 
syntactic 
and 
semantic information but not 
morphological information. 
 No embeddings for OOV and 
misspelled words. 
 
[1, 3, 4, 10, 11, 12, 14-23, 26, 
29, 31, 32, 34, 35, 37,39-41, 49, 
51, 60, 61, 112, 114-117, 119, 
120, 122, 124  and 126] 
Code Embedding 
 Finds applications in various 
tasks in health care analytics. 
 Ignoring sequential information 
in codes affects the quality of 
inferred embeddings. 
[8, 9 ,43, 45 and  47] 
CUI Embeddings 
 Use of CUI embeddings includes 
domain knowledge from the 
controlled vocabularies. 
 Finds applications in information 
retrieval and analytics related to 
clinical domain. 
[9 and 13] 
Augmented Embeddings 
 Improved quality of embeddings 
with the addition of domain 
knowledge. 
 No rule of thumb regarding the 
best way of including domain 
knowledge. 
[2, 5, 36, 44, 55 and 56] 
Patient Embeddings 
 Finds applications in many tasks 
related to clinical domains. 
 Ignoring 
the 
sequential 
information 
in 
codes 
can 
potentially affect the quality of 
inferred embeddings. 
[7, 30, 33, 38, 48, 52, 54, 58 and 
59] 
Phrase Embeddings 
 Phrase 
embedding 
can 
be 
generated from the aggregation 
of embeddings of words in the 
phrases 
or 
directly 
using 
word2vec 
or 
paragraph2vec 
models. 
[113 and  121] 
Sentence Embeddings 
 Sentence embedding can be 
generated from the aggregation 
of embeddings of words in the 
sentence 
or 
directly 
using 
paragraph2vec model. 
[24, 50 and 57] 
Document Embeddings 
 Document embedding can be 
generated from the aggregation 
of embeddings of sentences or 
directly 
using 
paragraph2vec 
model. 
[25, 42, 46 and 118] 
 
Minarro-Giménez et al. [14] generated three word embedding models using word2vec from the three 
corpora (PubMed, Wikipedia and combined) comprising of clinically relevant text obtained from PubMed, Wikipedia, 
Merck Manuals and Medscape. Evaluated the learned representations in identifying pharmaceuticals properties like 
relationships to diseases or physiological processes through comparison with National Drug File – Reference  
17 
 
Terminology (NDF-RT)21 ontology and embeddings induced from combined corpora gave better results. 
Sentences in medical text are comparatively short in length and lacks contextual information which results 
in feature sparseness and semantic ambiguity.  Shen et al. [15] proposed cluster based semantic expansion method 
to include more semantic information and enhance the word embeddings. Generated the word embeddings using 
skipgram over the corpus consisting of medical records and medical text book. Generated the word clusters using 
Hierarchical Agglomerative Clustering and then added cluster center vectors to the word embeddings of each word.  
LSTM with word cluster embeddings outperformed the baselines with just word embeddings in short text 
classification in both general and medical domain which highlights the importance of adding more semantic 
information in the form of word embedding cluster centers. 
Liang et al. [16] improved the disease text classification with the novel method consisting of rule based 
features and knowledge based deep learning techniques. Generated word embeddings from MIMIC III [78] dataset 
using skip gram. Experimented with different word embedding sizes 100, 200, 300, 400, 500 and 600 dimensions 
and found that 200 dimension embedding gave the best results.  Trained the multi view CNN using the pre trained 
MIMIC III embeddings and the UMLS CUI embeddings [13]. Evaluation on 2008 i2b2 Obesity Challenge [92] 
demonstrated the superior performance of the proposed model. The results showed that addition of domain 
knowledge in the form of CUI embeddings improved the performance. 
Miftahutdinov et al. [17] proposed a CRF architecture with hand crafted features and word embeddings for 
the task of identifying disease and drug related expressions in user comments. Treated the problem as sequence 
labelling and employed CRF which takes a sequence of tokens as input, calculates and assigns the label with highest 
probability. Experimented with two word embeddings namely HealthVec and PubMed[39]. HealthVec is obtained 
using CBOW Word2Vec over the corpus having the comments collected from various websites and PubMed is 
learned over the PubMed biomedical literature.  Experimental results show that CRF model with handcrafted 
features and HealthVec word embeddings outperformed the baselines. 
Nikfarjam  at al. [18] proposed, a novel architecture  called ADRMine based on CRF for extracting adverse 
drug reaction mentions in social media posts. Experimented with different features which includes lexicon based, 
contextual, grammatical and semantic. Word clusters based on the word embeddings generated from unlabeled 
user comments in social media using word2vec gives the semantic features.  ADRMine outperformed all the 
baselines with an F-measure of 0.82. Further analysis showed that contextual and word cluster features significantly 
contributed for the improved performance. 
--------------------------------------------- 
21 https://bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologies/NDFRT 
 
18 
 
Nikhil et al.[19]  viewed the problem of inferring the associated medical persona through the lens of multi 
label classification. Experimented with feature based and neural network based methods on blog and tweets 
datasets. Tried five different pre trained word embeddings learned over medical corpora as well as generic corpora 
[93], [87], [39]. For blog data set, averaged word2vec model with Glove Embeddings trained on Web Crawl2 and for 
tweet dataset CNN model with Glove Embeddings trained on Web Craw2 gave better results. Experimental results 
showed that diversity of text used for word embedding generation is more important compared to the coverage of 
medical concepts. 
Yuan Li[20] proposed a novel data driven technique based on CNN for disease diagnosis prediction from 
admission notes. Formulated the problem of disease diagnosis prediction as multi class classification with ten 
categories. Generated embeddings with a dimension of 128 using FastText on the MIMIC III [78] corpus. Initialized 
the embedding layer of CNN model with these embeddings for multi class classification. Results demonstrated that 
CNN model with FastText embeddings trained on MIMIC III outperformed the baselines. 
Amitabha [21] viewed the problem of ICD 9 code assignment through multi label multi class classification 
lens and experimented with different models including CNN with attention. As word embeddings were missing for 
more than half of domain specific words in Glove pre trained word embeddings, generated word embeddings using 
Glove algorithm on MIMIC III corpus. Found that CNN with attention gave the best performance in assigning ICD 9 
codes to discharge notes. 
Limsopatham et al. [22] studied the use of generic word embeddings in domain specific tasks. The author 
experimented with two approaches that combined the generic and domain embeddings at the input layer and fully 
connected layer of CNN model for sentence classification. The author used the GNews embedding as generic 
embedding and generated the domain specific embeddings from two medical corpora using skip gram model from 
word2vec. For out of vocabulary words, used a vector of random values sampled from [-0.25.0.25].  CNN with word 
embeddings combined at fully connected layer outperformed all other methods in ADR tweet classification [94] and 
showed that generic word embeddings provide a good coverage of vocabulary and domain specific word 
embeddings provide effective semantic representation of domain words. 
Miftahutdinov at al.[23] studied the problem of ICD 10 coding of death certificates using LSTM based 
encoder-decoder model. Formulated the problem of ICD 10 coding as sequence labelling. Experimented with 
different pre trained word embeddings like HealthVec[17], PubMedVec[39] and GNews. Included prior knowledge 
in the form of cosine similarity vectors between text and dictionary entry. Used randomly sampled vectors for out 
of vocabulary words. Evaluation on standard dataset from CLEF eHealth 2017[95] challenge shows that the proposed 
model with PubMedVec embeddings and prior knowledge outperformed all other methods. 
Jagannatha et al. [26] studied various models based on LSTM and CRF with word embeddings as input for 
sequence labeling in clinical text. LSTM models the long term dependencies and extract the features. With the 
19 
 
extracted features as input, CRF calculates the probabilities and assign the label with the highest probability. Word 
embeddings with a dimension of 200 were inferred using skip-gram model over a combined corpus of PubMed 
articles, Wikipedia articles and clinical notes from electronic health records. Results showed that LSTM-CRF models 
with embeddings trained over combined corpora outperformed the baselines. 
Jagannatha et al. [27] explored the effectiveness of LSTM and GRU models for medical event detection in 
electronic health records. Inferred word embeddings with a context window of size 10 and dimension of 200   using 
skip gram model from a combined corpus of PubMed articles, English Wikipedia and unlabeled EHR notes. Initialized 
the embedding layers of LSTM and GRU models with these embeddings. LSTMs and GRU models are trained both at 
sentence and document levels. Both the RNN models outperformed the CRF baselines and in particular GRU model 
trained at document level gave the best performance. 
Sandeep and Olive[28] explored the use of LSTM based architecture in the task of assigning ICD 9 codes to 
discharge summary notes from MIMIC III. To initialize the word embedding layer, pre trained Glove word 
embeddings trained over Common Crawl with a dimension of 300 is used.  Used zero vectors for words with missing 
word embeddings.  Experimental results showed that the proposed model with pre-trained Glove embeddings 
achieved considerable improvement in the performance. 
Zhang [29] studied Convolutional residual model for assigning disease codes for plain medical text and 
treated problem as a multi label classification. Convolutional residual model consists of CNN with Deep Residual 
Network on its top. CNN encodes the plain medical text into fixed length vector. CNN embedding layer is initialized 
with GoogleNewVec and is further tuned during training. Deep residual network capture label correlation and 
incorporate information from the encoded sentence vector. Evaluation on a real EHR data demonstrated the 
effectiveness of the proposed model. 
Newman et al. [31] applied  LSTM based architecture [96] for extracting the entities related to patient 
mobility from clinical notes. Explored various domain adaption methods of word embeddings to make up for the  
small size of medical corpora. Using word2vec and fasttext, generated different embeddings over various corpora 
which includes in-domain and out-of domain corpora. Experimental results shows that domain adaption of word 
embeddings improved the performance. Further, the methods like concatenation and pre initialization achieve 
highest performance, nonlinear mapping method showed consistent performance across experiments. 
Yuan Luo [32] explored LSTM based sentence and segment level models for relation classification in clinical 
notes.  Experimented with general domain GoogleNewsVec embeddings as well as the medical domain embeddings 
generated from MIMIC III corpus using word2vec. Both the embeddings are of dimension 300. Evaluation on i2b2 
relation classification dataset [97] showed that segment level LSTM outperformed all the baselines including 
sentence level LSTM. Further showed that medical domain word embeddings improved the performance compared 
to general domain embeddings. 
20 
 
Wang et al. [34] studied word embeddings induced from various corpora like clinical notes, biomedical 
research papers, Wikipedia articles and news articles and provided a comparison. Using skip gram algorithm, inferred 
embeddings from clinical notes and biomedical literature and used the pretrained Glove and GoogleNews 
embeddings. Evaluated the embeddings both qualitatively and quantitatively. Experimental results showed that 
embeddings inferred from clinical notes and biomedical research papers model the medical terms better compared 
to Glove and GoogleNews embeddings. Further, the embeddings induced from biomedical corpora do not 
necessarily outperform the embeddings inferred from general corpora in any biomedical NLP application. 
Mullenbach et al. [35] proposed CAML(Convolutional Attention for Multi-Label Classification) for assigning 
medical codes to the clinical text. Generated word embeddings using CBOW word2vec methods over the 
preprocessed discharge summaries from MIMIC II and MIMIC III. In the proposed architecture, CNN gathers the 
information from the discharge summary and attention mechanism select relevant text fragments for the possible 
codes. Evaluation on the discharge summaries of MIMIC datasets showed the superior performance of the model. 
Further, the model also provides the satisfactory code assignments by making use of  attention mechanism. 
In general, the semantic meaning of a word depends on the words in the context. However, in biomedical 
domain, the semantic meaning of word is influenced by chunks and named entities in the context.  Jiang et al. [37] 
proposed a simple and novel method based on skip gram model to jointly learn the word embeddings for words, 
chunks and named entities from Medline documents. Experimental results showed that the proposed embedding 
outperformed the general skipgram, cbow and glove embeddings. 
Pyysalo et al.[39] created first set of embeddings in biomedical domain  using the entire biomedical 
literature available (by September 2013) from PubMed and PubMed Central Open Access(PMC OA). Initially, 
collected abstracts from PubMed and full text from PMC OA, removed the duplicates forming a corpus of 5.5 billion 
tokens. Using word2vec, generated three different word embeddings from PubMed abstracts, PMC OA full texts and 
a combination of PubMed abstracts and PMC OA full texts. Evaluation on three biomedical domain corpora in the 
task of named entity recognition showed the effectiveness of generated embeddings. 
Shweta et al.[40] studied Elman [98] and Jordan [99]  RNN architectures to the task of patient data de-
identification in clinical records. Viewed the problem as sequence labelling task where the proposed method predicts 
the appropriate labels for the words. Experimented with different word embeddings like RNNLM [86] trained on 
Broad News Corpus and CBOW trained on Google news corpus. Evaluation on 2014 i2b2 challenge data set [100] 
showed that both RNN architectures outperformed the CRF baseline. Further, CBOW embeddings gave better 
performance compared to RNNLM embeddings. 
Zhao et al. [41] proposed a novel method which includes text skeleton and RNN for the patient data de-
identification. Text skeleton represents the structure of the medical record. The proposed model consists of two 
branches with each having RNN layer and embedding layer. The outputs of both the branches are taken by the 
21 
 
softmax layer to predict the labels. Here, the word embeddings were  learned in an unsupervised way and then fine-
tuned during the training. Experimental results showed that model performed well on three different standard 
datasets indicating the strong generalization ability of the model. 
Dernoncourt et al. [49] proposed LSTM based architecture with character and word embeddings for patient 
data de identification. The character enhanced token embeddings layer maps token to feature vectors which is 
obtained by the concatenation of two embeddings. The first one directly encodes token to vector while second one 
comes from character level token encoder. The token embeddings are pre initialized with Glove embeddings trained 
on Wikipedia. The label prediction layer with the sequence of embeddings as input, outputs the sequence of 
probability vectors and finally sequence optimization layer outputs the sequence of labels. The proposed model  with 
character and word embeddings evaluated on MIMIC III and i2b2 challenge datasets outperformed the baselines. 
Nikolenko et al. [51] viewed the task of extracting adverse drug reactions as a sequence labelling problem 
and explored Bi-LSTM CRF model for that. Used the word embeddings generated from 2.5 million health related 
reviews[17]. With the health2vec word embeddings as input, Bi-LSTM encode the words into fixed length vectors 
and CRF operates on these vectors to assign the labels. Evaluation on CSIRO Adverse Drug Event Corpus (CADEC) 
corpus having reviews from AskaPatient.com[91], demonstrated the effectiveness of the model. Further, the use of 
character level embeddings generated using CNN [101] along with health2vec embeddings improved the 
performance. 
Kirk Roberts [60] conducted experiments to assess corpus size vs similarity trade-off in the generation of 
clinical word embeddings. In general, the corpus size is one of the crucial factors influencing the quality of word 
embeddings. However, in clinical NLP, only small data sets are available because of restrictions to access EHR data 
and this forces a choice between small but representative corpora and large but unrepresentative corpora for 
inferring word embeddings. To assess the corpus size vs similarity trade off, conducted two experiments (i2b2 2010 
concept and assertion tasks) using RNN and CNN model respectively. The experiments make use of word embeddings 
inferred independently using word2vec CBOW from six corpora ranging from small size representative i2b2 corpus 
to large size unrepresentative Google News Corpus. Empirical results show that combination of corpora are effective, 
but the single best corpus is generally task-dependent. 
Finley et al. [61] studied embeddings induced from various corpora to study of effect of genre of corpus in 
representing medical terms. Using word2vec CBOW, generated separately from three corpora (Clinical Notes, 
PubMed Central Articles and Wikipedia). Evaluated the generated word embeddings using the tasks of semantic 
similarity and relatedness, clinical document retrieval and biomedical word sense disambiguation task. Empirical 
results showed that generating word embeddings from domain corpora results in  improvement in performance 
compared to the word embeddings from a related, but not domain corpora. 
22 
 
Liu et al. [112] studied the use of LSTM for the recognition of clinical entities and protected health 
information. LSTM consists of three layers. First layer maps each word in the sequence to fixed length vector which 
is a concatenation of word level and character level embedding, the second layer output the vector sequence having 
the context information and finally the last layer assigns the labels to each word. Here the word level embedding 
and character level embedding are inferred using word2vec and CNN or Bi-LSTM. Results showed that use of 
character level embeddings along with word level embedding improved the performance. 
Lee et al. [114] proposed LSTM based framework for patient data de-identification which makes use of 
human engineered features besides dense vector representations. For each token, a binary feature vector having all 
the human engineered features is computed. With this binary feature vector as input, feed forward neural network 
outputs a vector which is concatenated with word and character level embeddings of the token. Here the word 
embeddings are pre-trained Glove embeddings and character embeddings are generated by Bi-LSTM. Results 
showed that addition of human engineered features improved the performance of the model. 
Xie et al. [115] proposed a deep learning model based on Bi-LSTM to identify e-cigarette components and 
adverse events in social media text. Generated the word embeddings using skipgram of word2vec over the corpus 
collected from E-cigarette forum. With the word embeddings as input, Bi-LSTM model identified the entities with a 
recall of 91.80% and outperformed all the baselines. 
Chalapathy et al. [116] explored the use of Bi-LSTM CRF for clinical concept extraction with embeddings 
inferred from out of domain corpus. Experimented with pre-trained word2vec embeddings inferred from Google 
News Corpus and Glove embeddings inferred from general domain corpus. Evaluation on 2010 i2b2 V/A challenge 
showed that the model outperformed all the recent approaches and was close to the best submission from the 
original challenge. Use of embeddings inferred from domain specific corpus like MIMIC III can improve the 
performance further. 
Chalapathy et al. [117] experimented with Elman and Jordan RNN architectures and Bi-LSTM CRF models 
for identifying drug names. All the models are initialized with embeddings randomly sampled with in the range [-
1,1]. Experimental results showed that Bi-LSTM model outperform other models and ranked close to the start of art 
system in SemEval 2013 Task 9.1. Use of  pre-trained word2vec or glove embeddings or embeddings inferred from 
domain specific corpus like MIMIC III can improve the performance further. 
Unanue et al. [119] proposed Bi-LSTM CRF with specialized word embedding and hand crafter features as 
input, for identifying health related named entities. Specialized word embedding is obtained by the concatenation 
of pre-trained Glove embeddings inferred from common crawl, MIMIC III embeddings inferred using Glove and 
character embeddings level word embeddings generated using Bi-LSTM. Hand crafted features include 
morphological, semantic and word embedding clusters. Experimental results showed the effectiveness of specialized 
embeddings and also hand features doesn’t improve the performance much. 
23 
 
Cocos et al. [120] experimented with Bi-LSTM model for identifying and classifying adverse drug reactions 
in tweets. Evaluated the model with i) randomly initialized embeddings ii) fixed or updated pre trained embeddings 
inferred from 400 million general tweets [28].  Results showed that Bi-LSTM model with fixed embeddings 
outperformed all others and further, the model achieved optimal performance with fewer training examples. 
Henghui et al. [122] used Bi-LSTM CRF model with domain specific ELMo embeddings as input, for the 
extraction of clinical concepts like problems, treatments and tests. As the Pretrained ELMo embeddings were 
induced from out of domain corpus, induced domain specific ELMo embeddings from a corpus having medical 
related Wikipedia pages, discharge summaries and radiology reports from MIMIC III. Experimental results showed 
that domain specific ELMo embeddings boosted the performance of the model. 
Yifeng et al. [126] experimented with LSTM CRF model for the task of clinical concept extraction. The hidden 
state of LSTM with pretrained ELMo embeddings as input is concatenated with low dimensional representation of 
ontology based features and then fed into CRF to get the label. Here, sparse and high dimensional features built 
from medical ontology are mapped to low dimensional vector using a dense layer with dropout.  Evaluation showed 
that use of ELMo embeddings and ontology based features improved the performance of the model. 
5.2 Code Embeddings 
EHRs contain patient information in the form of free text as well as medical codes. Medical codes are used 
to ensure consistency in recording the patient information. Dense vector representations of the medical codes finds 
applications in various tasks in health care analytics.  
Edward Choi et al. [8] proposed a GRU based framework for early detection of heart failure. Traditional 
machine learning methods use aggregation of medical concepts (diagnosis codes, procedure codes, medical codes) 
in an observation window as features without considering the sequence of events in the observation window. Used 
skip gram technique to learn the fixed length vectors representations of the medical events like diagnosis codes, 
procedure codes and medication codes and GRU to model the temporal relations among the medical events. 
Experimental results show the improved performance of GRU model compared to the machine learning techniques 
and demonstrate the importance of temporal information. 
Youngduck Choi [9] applied skip gram algorithm on a private medical claims data set to embed all the 
medical concepts (diagnosis codes, procedure codes, laboratory codes, drug codes) in the same continuous vector 
space.  High quality representations of medical concepts find applications in various tasks in health care analytics.  
For example, as all the medical concepts are embeded in the same space, a medication to a disease can be found by 
finding the nearest neighbors to the specific disease code. 
Xiangrui Cai et al.[43] proposed an architecture based on CBOW model with attention to jointly learn the 
embedding and temporal scope for each medical concept. The proposed model uses the attention mechanism to 
24 
 
learn the temporal scope for medical concepts. The model is evaluated on two datasets in the tasks of clustering and 
nearest neighbors search and the results obtained are competitive. 
Zhengping Che et al. [47] studied CNN with medical event embeddings in the task of risk prediction. A corpus 
of medical events is obtained from a real EHR data set. Used CBOW Word2Vec with a context windows of size 20 to 
generate the representations of size 200 for all the events with atleast a frequency of five. In the prediction of 
diabetes and congestive failure, the proposed model outperformed the baselines SVM and Logistic Regression(LR). 
5.3 CUI Embeddings 
UMLS consists of Metathesaurus, Semantic Network, Specialist Lexicon and a set of software tools like 
Metamap. Metathesaurus consists of over 5 million concept names incorporated from 100 controlled vocabularies 
like SNOMED CT, ICD, Rx-Norm etc. It clusters all the synonym concepts from different vocabularies into a single 
concept and assigns a unique identifier called Concept Unique Identifier. CUI maps synonym concept names in 
different vocabularies and thus it acts as a mapping structure between controlled vocabularies.  CUI consists of 8 
characters starting with C followed by 7 digits. For example, CUI of head pain is C0018681.  Mapping CUIs to dense 
vector representations and use of CUI embeddings includes the domain knowledge from the controlled vocabularies. 
Choi et al.[9] learned representation of UMLS concepts using co-occurrence counts of concepts with in fixed 
time intervals derived from clinical narratives [102]. These outperformed the embeddings learned by De Vine et 
al.[13] in the tasks of medical relatedness and similarity. 
De Vine [13] presented concept based Skip-gram model to map UMLS CUIs to dense vector representations.  
In contrast to the traditional skip-gram which learns embeddings for words, this model learns the embeddings for 
UMLS concepts extracted from clinical records and medical journal abstracts. Using MetaMap v11.2 [103], converted 
free text into sequence of concepts and then applied skip gram model. Evaluation on two medical word similarity 
datasets showed the effectiveness of UMLS CUI embeddings. This model finds applications in Information Retrieval 
and Analytics related to clinical domain. 
5.4 Augmented Embeddings 
Word embeddings are induced from unlabeled corpus and the size of corpus is one of the determining 
factors in the quality of the inferred embeddings. The size of corpus is limited in clinical domain. In order to make 
up for the size of corpus and improve the quality of inferred embeddings, domain specific as well as task specific 
information can be included. Some of the possible ways to include information is tuning pre trained off-the-shelf 
word embeddings [2] or make use of domain knowledge from ontologies like UMLS [5, 36, 44 and 53]. 
5.4.1 Augmented Word Embeddings 
25 
 
Patel et al.[2] adapted CBOW algorithm proposed by Mikolov et al. [62]  to include task and domain specific 
information to the pre-trained word embeddings in order to improve their utility in medical coding, which is a 
domain specific task.  Information added include the coding data from private medical claims data set and the 
information from ICD-10 ontology.  Evaluated the approach on five different pre-trained word embeddings which 
include GNews pretrained embeddings and the remaining embeddings proposed by Pyysalo et al. [39]. Results 
demonstrated the better performance of modified word embeddings on a private medical claims dataset and proved 
that adding domain specific information is useful.   
Boag  et al. [5] explored  the addition of domain knowledge to word embeddings to make up for the small 
sizes of the clinical corpus. Levy et al. [104] introduced Word2Vecf (an extension to Word2Vec which uses 
dependency based contexts instead of linear contexts.) Generated word embeddings with word2vecf using the 
corpus having (w,c) pairs and (w,CUI) pairs generated from MIMIC  III and UMLS respectively.  Here ‘w’ represents 
word, ‘c’ represents the context and CUI represent Concept Unique Identifier. Evaluation on MayoSRS dataset 
showed the superior performance of augmented word embedding compared to the baselines. 
Ling et al. [36] explored the idea of improving word2vec model with the addition of domain knowledge in 
the form of a graph using graph regularization.  Initially generated a weighted graph from knowledge base such that 
related word, opposite words, weakly related words are connected by edges with the weight values 1, -1 and 0.5 
respectively. After that, integrated the graph into original word2vec using graph regularization. Evaluation on four 
general data sets and two biomedical NLP tasks showed better performance of the model. 
 Eneldo et al. [55] adapted All-in-Text proposed by Nam et al. [105] to produce word embeddings. The 
method makes use of both word-occurrence information as well as the association between the labeled documents 
and their labels from sources such as PubMed. Inspired by paragraph2vec model [89], All-in -Text jointly learns the 
embeddings for words, documents and the labels. The model is trained on BioASQ data set consisting of title and 
abstracts of PubMed articles labeled with associated Medical Subjet Headings (MeSH) Ontology terms. Evaluation 
on two similarity and relatedness datasets demonstrated the effectiveness of the model. 
Bin He et al. [56] proposed CNN with multi pooling operation for medical relation classification. The 
introduced multi pooling operation is good at capturing the position information of local features relative to the 
concept pair which is crucial for relation classification. The model makes use of word representation which is 
obtained by the concatenation of three embeddings namely word embedding and the two positional word 
embeddings. Word embeddings were generated using word2vec [62] and MIMIC III [78] corpus. Evaluation on i2b2 
2010 corpus [92] demonstrated substantial improvement over the baselines. 
5.4.2 Augmented Code Embeddings 
Choi et al. [44] proposed GRAM- Graph based attention model to learn the medical concept embedding 
using knowledge from medical Ontology and electronic medical records. The proposed model represents a medical 
26 
 
concept as a weighted sum of its ancestors in ontology using attention mechanism so that representations learned 
by the model aligns with the medical knowledge. Glove [87] algorithm was used to get embeddings of the ancestors. 
The predictive model along with attention was trained in an end to end manner and evaluated on two sequence 
prediction tasks and one heart failure prediction task. Results demonstrate superior performance of the model.  
Feng et al. [53] proposed MG-CNN, a deep learning based framework to study the influence of patient 
characteristics on total hospital costs and Length of stay (LOS). The framework uses multi-granularity embedding 
method which adds the prior medical knowledge from the four levels of ICD Ontology and maps the medical concepts 
to fixed length vectors. Initially, four fine grained codes are obtained for each ICD code in the data set and then 
sentences are constructed in four levels. Skip-gram operates on these sentences and generates the medical concept 
embeddings at each level. Experimental results demonstrate the superior performance of the model in prediction 
tasks for patient with rare medical events. Further, visualization using t-SNE [106] algorithms showed that related 
medical concepts are closer.   
5.7 Patient Embeddings 
Patient information right from admission to discharge is recorded in EHR using free text as well as medical 
codes. Dense vector representation of patients is required in applications like prediction of clinical events and next 
visit time [33], prediction of unplanned readmission [30] etc. Patient embeddings encode the patient information 
recorded in free text [52] or medical codes [7, 33, 48, 54, 58 ] or both [38] into dense fixed length vectors. 
Choi et al.[9] achieved better predictive performance using the visit representations obtained by the 
aggregating code representations in the visit .However, it  not optimal as it  completely ignores sequential 
relationship among the visits.  Edward Choi et al. [7] proposed a simple and scalable two layer neural network based 
architecture to learn dense and interpretable representations of both medical codes and patient visits using large 
real  EHR  data sets. The model learns better representations with the inclusion of code co-occurrence as well as the 
patient visit sequence information. Experimental results show that learned representations are efficient with 
improved performances in two clinical prediction problems compared to several baselines. 
Nguyen et al.[30] proposed  Deepr, a CNN based model for medical records. Time gap between the patient 
visits is random and to handle this, time gaps and transfers are represented as special words. With this 
representation, patient is represented as sequence of phrases  separated by special words where each phrase 
represents a visit. Generated embeddings using word2vec over a real EHR data. CNN encodes the sequence of codes 
into feature vector, which is then used by the classifier to predict the future risk. Evaluation shows the effectiveness 
of the proposed model in unplanned readmission. 
Edward Choi et al.[33] proposed Doctor AI: GRU based predictive model that learns patient representations 
from real EHR data and predicts clinical events and next visit time. Generated code embeddings using word2vec[62] 
over the real EHR data collected from a private hospital. GRU model takes patient encounters (sequence of diagnosis 
27 
 
and medication codes) as input and the output of hidden layers is the patient representation which is given to a 
softmax layer to predict the codes and ReLU to predict the next visit time. Experimental results showed the superior 
performance of the model as well as the adaptability of the model across hospitals. 
Dligach et al. [38] proposed a simple and novel neural network architecture to low dimensional, dense 
representations of a patient from clinical text. The model takes a set of CUIs extracted from patient notes and 
predicts the billing codes. Initially, CUIs are mapped to embeddings which are averaged and passed on to a hidden 
layer. The output of hidden layer, a 1000 dimensional vector is used by the output layer to predict the billing codes. 
Here, the 1000 dimensional vector produced by hidden layer represents the patient. CUI embeddings are generated 
using word2vec over a corpus of CUIs extracted from MIMIC III [78] clinical notes. Experimental results demonstrated 
the effectiveness of learned patient representations. 
Stojanovic et al. [48] proposed disease+procedure2vec (dp2v), a novel method based on skip gram 
model[62] to embed disease and procedure codes into the same low dimensional space. Each patient record is 
represented as a sequence of disease and procedure codes. Treating each patient record as a sentence and codes 
as words, skipgram model learns the representations of the disease and procedure codes. Generated the patient 
vector by adding the vectors of disease and procedure codes in each record. With the patient feature vectors as 
input, the classifier predicts the length of stay, total incurred charges and mortality rates. 
Madhumita et al. [52] studied Stacked Denoising Autoencoder as well as Paragraph2vec models [89] to 
encode patient information in clinical notes into task-independent, dense fixed length vectors. Initially build a corpus 
having only the clinical notes of adult patient (>=18) with only one hospital admission and transformed it into bag of 
words and bag of CUIs. Then, patient representations are generated using the two unsupervised models. Feed 
forward neural networks with dense patient representations as input are evaluated on multi independent tasks to 
demonstrate the task-independent nature of patient representations. Results showed that there is not much 
difference in performance while using bag of CUIs compared to bag of words. 
Zhu et al. [54] proposed deep learning based framework to find the clinical similarities between patients in 
a way that EHR temporal properties are preserved. Initially, concept embeddings are generated using word2vec[62] 
over a real EHR dataset. Using the generated embeddings, medical events of patients are mapped to fixed length 
vectors. Finally, patient representation is obtained by stacking all the fixed length vectors of the medical events as a 
matrix. To obtain the patient similarity, studied both unsupervised methods like RV coefficient[107] , dCov efficient 
[108] and supervised methods like CNN. Evaluation on real EHR dataset showed the superior performance of the 
proposed framework.   
Dubois et al. [58] studied two methods embed-and-aggregate and RNN to learn patient representations 
that can be used in the prediction of various clinical events. In embed-and-aggregate method, aggregate operation 
on code embeddings results in note level representation and further aggregation of note level representation results 
28 
 
in patient representations. Here aggregate operation is an element-wise min, max or mean.  Code embeddings are 
obtained using Glove[87] and Stanford EHR data. In second method, RNN [98] is applied to learn the representations 
of concepts, notes and patients simultaneously from Stanford EHR data. Results showed that embed-and-aggregate 
embeddings is competitive with RNN embeddings and moreover, it is simple to compute. 
Miotto et al. [59] proposed a novel unsupervised deep learning method to infer patient representations 
from a real EHR data which can improve medical events prediction. The proposed model is a multi-layer neural 
network comprising of denoising autoencoders. Each layer of denoising autoencoder produce a more abstract 
representation than the previous level by applying more non-linear operations and the output of the final layer 
results in the patient representations referred to as “Deep Patient”. The generated representations are evaluated 
by predicting the probability of patients to develop various diseases. Results showed that the learned patient 
representations outperformed other methods. 
5.8 Phrase Embeddings 
Phrase embeddings maps phrases to fixed length dense vectors. Phrase embeddings can be generated from 
the aggregation of embeddings of words in the phrases or directly using word2vec or paragraph2vec models. 
Limsopatham et al. [113] experimented with phrase based MT (Koehn et al. 2003) for the task of medical 
concept normalization. Initially, similarity score is computed between twitter phrase and the description medical 
concept and then cosine similarity is calculated between twitter phrase and the description. Finally, twitter phrase 
is mapped to medical concept based on the linear combination of two the similarity scores. Here they have 
experimented with word embeddings generated using word2vec, glove on drug related tweets dataset and BioMed 
Central literature dataset. 
Henry et al. [121] studied various dimensionality reduction techniques like skipgram, cbow, svd, explicit co-
occurrence vectors and various aggregation multi term aggregation methods like sum, average, direct construction 
using compoundify tool or Meta Map in the context of semantic relatedness. Evaluation showed that i)none of the 
multi term aggregation method is better than the other while gives the flexibility in choosing the methods ii) cbow 
embeddings with a size of 200 outperformed others. 
5.9 Sentence Embeddings 
Sentence embedding maps sentence to fixed length dense vectors. Sentence embedding can be generated from the 
aggregation of embeddings of words in the sentence or directly using paragraph2vec model.  
Hughes et al. [24] explored convolutional neural networks with word embeddings for task of medical text 
classification at sentence level. Generated word embeddings from 15k research articles obtained from PubMed using 
word2vec[62].  Explored other embeddings like sentence embeddings, mean word embeddings and word 
embeddings with BOW features. Sentence word embeddings are generated using doc2vec[89]. Mean word 
29 
 
embeddings (ZeroMean /EliminateMean) are calculated by taking the average of the word embeddings of all the 
words in the sentence. In ZeroMean, zero vectors are used for out of vocabulary words and in EliminateMean, words 
without embeddings are removed.  Experimental results show that CNN with word embeddings outperformed all 
other methods. 
Zhang et al. [50] proposed unsupervised deep learning based framework for identifying psychiatric 
symptoms in clinical text. Initially, the seed symptoms are collected various sources like MedLinePlus, Mayo Clinic 
and American Psychiatric Association. Generated sentence level and phrase level embeddings using paragraph2vec 
[89] from psychiatric notes  from CEGS N-GRID 2016 Challenge [109], psychiatric forum data from WebMD and 
MIMIC II [77] incrementally. Using the generated embeddings, both seed symptoms and candidate symptoms are 
encoded as fixed length vectors. Finally, using the cosine based semantic similarity most probable psychiatric 
symptoms are identified. Evaluation on CEGS N-Grid data demonstrated the effectiveness of the model and revealed 
two interesting things. One is the performance of embeddings reduced with the use of MIMIC II data and sentence 
level embeddings outperformed the phrase level embeddings. 
Luo et al. [57] proposed a deep learning framework to map disease and procedure names in Chinese 
Discharge Summaries to standard names. The proposed model makes use of tensor generator, multi-view CNN and 
multi-task framework. Tensor generator generates matching tensors for two mention-entity pairs for disease and 
procedure by making use of character, word and sentence embeddings. Character and word embeddings are 
generated using word2vec and Chinese medical corpora, sentence embeddings using Bi-LSTM.  Multi view CNN 
operators on matching tensors and generate vectors based on which multi task framework produces the matching 
score. 
5.10 Document Embedding 
Document embedding maps documents to fixed length dense vectors. Document embedding can be generated from 
the aggregation of embeddings of sentences or directly using paragraph2vec model. 
Wang et al. [25] explored the effectiveness of different embeddings like word2vec [62], glove [87], doc2vec 
[89] and the proposed Ariadne embeddings in different tasks.  Ariadne is a count based word embedding generating 
method that applies random projection over the global co-occurrence matrix.  Applied CBOW from word2vec, glove 
and doc2vec algorithms to the corpus having Medline articles to generate word and document embeddings. In word 
analogy task, word2vec embeddings outperformed the proposed word embeddings. In Information Retrieval task, 
the proposed word embeddings performed as wells as doc2vec embeddings. Results shows that one has to consider 
the requirements while choosing one of the many word embedding models. 
Baumel et al.[42] proposed Hierarchical Attention –bidirectional Gated Recurrent Unit(HA-GRU) model for 
the task of assigning ICD codes to medical text. The proposed model consist of two GRU layers. The first GRU layer 
encodes the input sentences  into fixed length vector and the second GRU layer encode all these sentence vectors 
30 
 
into another fixed length vector which represents the documents. Finally with the document vector as input, the 
classifier which is a fully connected layer with softmax assigns the labels. Evaluation on the discharge summaries of 
MIMIC II [77] and MIMIC III [78] datasets shows the effectiveness of the proposed model. Results shows that 
tokenization and hierarchical segmentation contributed to the improved performance of the model. 
Li et al. [46] proposed DeepLabeler, a deep learning based method to assign ICD-9 codes to medical 
discharge summaries. DeepLabeler consists of CNN as well as Doc2Vec[89].  CNN through convolution and pooling 
operations encodes the medical record into feature vectors which contains the local features. Doc2Vec which is 
trained over the entire corpus, encodes the medical documents into document vectors which contains global 
features. Both the vectors are concatenated and given to a classifier which assign the ICD 9 codes.  The novelty of 
this mode lies in the combination of local and global features which are crucial in the ICD 9 code assignment.  
Banerjee et al. [118] proposed intelligent word embedding which combines semantic dictionary mapping 
and neural embedding to map radiology reports to dense vectors. Initially, radiology report is condensed using a 
series of preprocessing steps and using semantic dictionary mapping, words in corpus are mapped to terms in 
domain specific dictionary which reduces the size of vocabulary and handles the OOV issue. After that using 
word2vec, word embeddings are generated. Finally, the average of word embeddings gives the dense vector 
representation of the radiology report. 
6. EVALUATION OF EMBEDDINGS 
The quality of embeddings can be assessed in two ways namely intrinsic and extrinsic. Intrinsic evaluation 
looks how well the induced embeddings are able to encode syntactic and semantic information. Some of the tasks 
used in intrinsic evaluation are Clustering [43], Nearest Neighbor Search (NNS) [43], Similarity and Relatedness [5, 9, 
13, 36 and 55]. Similarity and Relatedness are the most commonly used tasks in intrinsic evaluation. For example, 
the datasets used in the word similarity or word relatedness evaluation tasks like UMNSRS Similarity [131], UMNSRS 
Relatedness [131], MayoSRS [132], Pedersen’s dataset [133], Hliaoutakis’s dataset [124] consists of word pairs along 
with a similarity or relatedness score assigned by medical experts. Correlation between the cosine similarity of word 
vectors and expert assigned score is a measure of the quality of embeddings [5, 36 and 55]. Table VIII shows the 
number of words pairs in each of the word similarity or relatedness datasets. 
In extrinsic evaluation methods, embeddings are used as input features in downstream tasks like Named 
Entity Recognition, Medical Concept Normalization, Medical Text Classification etc. and improvement in the 
performance of the model is a measure of the quality of embeddings. Extrinsic evaluation is necessary to find the 
effectiveness of embeddings in real world tasks. Table IX shows the intrinsic and extrinsic evaluation tasks in various 
clinical embeddings 
 
31 
 
TABLE VII 
SUMMARY OF CLINCAL NLP TASKS 
Task 
Research 
Paper 
Type of Embedding 
Embedding Model 
Corpus  
Clinical Abbreviation 
Expansion 
[3] 
Word Embeddings 
Word2Vec 
Clinical Notes, Wikipedia Articles, ICU related 
Books and papers 
 
 
 
Medical Concept 
Normalization 
[4] 
 
 
 
Word Embeddings 
 
 
 
 
Word2Vec 
 
Merriam-Webster Thesaurus, Merriam-Webster 
Medical Dictionary, Clinical Text, Health Related 
Tweets 
[10] 
Health related Reviews, PubMed Literature 
[11] 
Google News Corpus , BioMed Literature 
[12] 
Google News Corpus, Generic Tweets and Drug 
Related Tweets 
[57] 
Character, Word and Sentence 
Embeddings 
Word2Vec and Bi-
LSTM 
Chinese Medical Corpora 
 
 
 
 
 
Text Classification 
[15] 
Word Embeddings 
 
Word2Vec 
 
Two private EMR datasets and medical text book 
(the 7th edition of internal medicine) 
[16] 
Word Embeddings and CUI 
Embeddings 
MIMIC III  
[19] 
Word Embeddings 
Word2Vec and 
Glove 
Medical and Generic Corpus 
[22] 
Word Embeddings 
Word2Vec  
Google News Corpus and Medical Corpus 
[24] 
Word Embeddings and 
Sentence Embeddings 
Word2Vec and 
Doc2Vec 
 
PubMed Literature and Merck Manuals 
[46] 
Word and Document 
Embeddings 
MIMIC II and MIMIC III 
 
 
 
Named Entity 
Recognition 
[17] 
 
 
 
 
Word Embeddings 
 
 
 
Word2Vec 
 
Health related Reviews, PubMed Literature 
[18] 
Drug related Reviews and  Tweets 
[26] 
PubMed articles, Wikipedia articles and clinical 
notes 
[27] 
PubMed articles, Wikipedia articles and clinical 
notes 
[31] 
Word2Vec and 
FastText 
Wikipedia, MIMIC III, PubMed and medical corpus 
[51] 
Word2Vec  
Health Related Reviews 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ICD Coding 
[2] 
Augmented Word Embeddings 
Word2Vec 
Google News Corpus , PubMed Literature and 
Wikipedia 
[20] 
 
 
 
Word Embeddings 
 
FastText 
MIMIC III 
[21] 
Glove 
MIMIC III 
[23] 
Word2Vec 
Health Related Reviews, PubMed Literature , 
Wikipedia and Google News Corpus 
[28] 
Glove 
Common Crawl  
[29] 
Word2Vec 
 
Google News Corpus 
[35] 
MIMIC II and MIMIC III 
[42] 
MIMIC II and MIMIC III 
[46] 
Word and Document 
Embeddings 
Word2Vec and 
Doc2Vec 
MIMIC II and MIMIC III 
Information Retrieval 
[25] 
Word and Sentence 
Embeddings 
Word2Vec, Glove 
and Doc2Vec 
MEDLINE Articles 
 
 
 
Clinical Predictions 
[8] 
Code Embeddings 
Word2Vec 
 
Private EHR dataset 
[30] 
Patient Embeddings 
 
Private EHR dataset 
[33] 
Private EHR dataset 
[47] 
 Code Embeddings 
Private EHR dataset 
[53] 
Patient Embeddings 
Private EHR dataset 
[59] 
Patient Embeddings 
Stacked Denoising 
Auto Encoders 
Private EHR dataset 
Relation Classification 
[32] 
Word Embeddings 
 
Word2vec 
 
Google News Corpus and MIMIC III 
[56] 
 MIMIC III 
[40] 
Word Embeddings 
Word2Vec, RNNLM 
Google News Corpus and Broadcast News Corpus  
32 
 
Patient De-
identification 
[41] 
 
RNN Encoder and 
Decoder[22] 
Medical Corpus 
[49] 
Glove 
Wikipedia 
Patient Similarity 
[54] 
Patient Embeddings 
Word2Vec 
Private EHR Dataset 
 
TABLE VIII 
WORD SIMILARITY /RELATEDNESS DATASETS 
Dataset 
# Word Pairs 
Word Similarity / Relatedness 
UMNSRS Similarity [131] 
566 
Word Similarity 
UMNSRS Relatedness [131] 
588 
Word Relatedness 
MayoSRS [132]  
101 
Word Relatedness 
Pedersen’s dataset [133]  
30 
Word Similarity 
Hliaoutakis’s dataset [124] 
34 
Word Similarity 
 
TABLE IX 
INTRINSIC AND EXTRINSIC EVALUATION IN CLINICAL EMBEDDINGS 
Type of Embedding 
Intrinsic Evaluation 
Extrinsic Evaluation 
Character 
- 
MCN[111] 
Word 
Similarity and Relatedness [34]  
Clinical Abbreviation Expansion [3] 
Medical Concept Normalization [4, 10, 11 and 12] 
Medical Text Classification [15, 19 and 22] 
Named Entity Recognition [17,18,26, 27, 31 and 51] 
ICD Coding [20, 21, 23, 28, 29, 35 and  42] 
Relation Classification [32 and 56]  
Patient De-identification [40, 41 and 49] 
Code 
Similarity and Relatedness [9] Clustering 
and Nearest Neighbor Search(NNS)[43] 
Heart Failure Detection[8] 
Risk Prediction[47] 
CUI 
Similarity and Relatedness[9]  
Similarity[13]  
- 
Augmented WE 
Relatedness[5] 
Similarity and Relatedness[36 and 55] 
 
Medical Coding[2] 
Biomedical IR[36] 
Medical Relation Classification[56] 
Augmented CE 
- 
Sequence prediction task and Heart failure prediction 
task [44] 
Prediction of total hospital costs and length of stay 
(LOS) [53] 
Patient Embeddings 
- 
Clinical Predictions[9] 
Unplanned Readmission[30] 
Medical Event Prediction[59] 
Prediction of  clinical events and Next Visit time[33] 
Comorbidity detection task [38] 
Prediction of length of stay, total incurred charges and 
mortality rates [48] 
Phrase Embeddings 
Similarity and Relatedness [121] 
Medical Concept Normalization [113] 
 
Sentence Embeddings 
- 
Medical Text Classification[24] 
Identifying psychiatric symptoms[50] 
Medical Concept [57] 
Document Embeddings 
- 
ICD Coding [42 and 46] 
Radiology Report Classification[118] 
 
 
 
33 
 
7. DISCUSSION 
In this section, we discuss various aspects related to embeddings and highlight the possible solutions from the 
surveyed research papers to various challenges in embeddings. 
7.1 Genre of Corpus 
The semantic information captured by word embeddings depends on the genre of the corpus from which 
they are induced. The use of language and the expertise of the author varies from corpus to corpus. For example, 
health discussion forums contains medical terms in colloquial language authored by general public whereas PubMed 
contains medical terms in professional language authored by researchers. So, embeddings induced from health 
forum can better model the colloquial medical terms where as embeddings induced from PubMed can better model 
the professional medical terms [1]. 
7.2 Size of Corpus 
Embeddings are induced from large unlabeled corpus and the size of corpus is one of the factors which 
influence the quality of the inferred embeddings. A large corpus results in better coverage of vocabulary while a 
domain related corpus results in better representation of terms by capturing more semantic information. In clinical 
domain, the available corpora are small in size compared to general corpora. So, there is a tradeoff between large 
unrepresentative corpus and small representative corpus. Possible solutions to make up for the small of clinical 
corpora are defined below 
7.2.1 Use of combined corpora 
Medical domain related text is available in various sources like Wikipedia, Medical Thesaurus, Medical 
Dictionary, PubMed and PMCOA, Clinical Notes from EHR. As the availability of large amount of text from a single 
source is not there, combining text from various sources and inferred embeddings from the combined corpora can 
potentially improve the quality of the embeddings induced [4, 26, 27 and 50].  
7.2.2 Inclusion of Domain Knowledge 
Domain knowledge can be added either during inferring or updating embeddings as described below 
7.2.2.1 Inclusion of Domain knowledge while inferring embeddings 
UMLS Metathesaurus clusters the concepts from over 100 controlled vocabularies like SNOMED CT, Rx-
Norm etc and assigns all the concepts with same meaning, a CUI (Concept Unique Identifier). ICD contains disease 
and symptoms information, CPT contains procedures information, LOINIC contains laboratory observations 
information and Rx-Norm contains drugs related information. So, use of the information from these medical 
34 
 
ontologies which contain abundant domain knowledge can make up for the size of corpora and improve the quality 
of the embeddings inferred [5, 13, 16, 36, 44, 53 and 55].  
7.2.2.2 Inclusion of Domain knowledge while updating embeddings 
Pre-trained embeddings released with embeddings models like Word2vec, Glove, FastText are trained on 
large unrepresentative corpora and as a result the quality of inferred embeddings is poor. However, as these 
embeddings are trained on large unlabeled corpora, they provide large coverage of vocabulary which we don’t want 
to miss. So, pre-trained embeddings can be tuned in a supervised domain related task [2, 11, 29, 31 and 41] which 
incorporates the domain knowledge and improve the quality of embeddings.  
7.2.3 Ensemble of Word Embeddings 
Ensemble of word embeddings allow the model to make use of different information encoded in 
embeddings induced from different corpora. Pre-trained word embeddings provide large coverage of vocabulary 
while domain specific word embeddings better represent the terms. Further, the genre of medical corpora effects 
the word embeddings induced. For example, health discussion forum embeddings better model the colloquial 
medical terms while PubMed embeddings better models professional medical terms. So, using an ensemble of 
generic and domain specific word embeddings [12, 22] or an ensemble of embeddings induced from different genre 
of medical corpora improves the quality of embeddings [60].  
7.2.4 Semantic Features based on Word Embedding Clusters 
Word embeddings induced from small domain corpus can be improved further with the addition of clusters 
center vectors to the embedding of each word [15, 18]. Here adding cluster center vectors increase the amount of 
semantic information encoded in the vector representations and these vectors are obtained by applying any of the 
clustering algorithms on word embeddings.  
7.3 Multi Sense Embeddings 
A medical concept may have more than one meaning, referred to as multi sense. For example, aspirin can 
be used a medicine for both fever and cardiovascular disease. However models like word2vec, glove, fasttext assign 
a single representation ignoring the multi sense nature which reduces the quality of inferred embeddings and affects 
the performance of the model in downstream tasks.  [7]- [9] generated embeddings for medical codes without 
considering the multi sense nature of the codes i.e., assigned only one representation for the codes with multi sense. 
[45] Using the context and topic information, learned the multi sense embeddings for the codes. 
 
 
35 
 
7.4 Combined Vector Space 
Medical concepts namely diagnosis codes, procedure codes, laboratory codes and drug codes can be 
embedded into separate spaces. However, these concepts have a relation among them. For example, aspirin with 
the drug code ‘1191’ is used to cure fever with the diagnosis code ‘R50.80’. Having a separate embedding space 
results in difficulty in finding the relation between various medical codes. Advantage of having a combined vector 
space of all the medical codes is that, a medication to a disease can be found by finding the nearest neighbors to the 
specific disease code [9]. Further, learning the vector representations of medical words and codes jointly, improve 
the quality of both the vector representations [6] 
7.5 Out of Vocabulary Words 
It is common to have an induced vector space to have missing for words. For example, embeddings for 
domain specific words is missing in out of domain pre-trained embeddings (eg. phenacetin is not present in pre-
trained vectors released by Google [2]). Further embeddings will be missing for rare words, misspelled words and 
different noun and verb forms even in the vector space inferred from domain related corpora. However, assigning 
vectors of randomly sampled values [11, 22 and 23] or zeros [12, 15 and 28] for such words is not an optimal solution 
because assigning such a representation ignores the meaning of the word. Possible solution for this is use of 
character embeddings [111] or contextualized embeddings [122] or use of semantic dictionary mapping [118].   
7.6 Embedding Size 
There is no rule of thumb to choose the optimal size of embeddings.  Small embeddings are unable to 
capture much of the syntactic and semantic information, while large embeddings increase the complexity of the 
model. Most of the research studies tried embeddings of different sizes and then chose the dimension which gave 
the best results. However, generating and experimenting with embeddings of different sizes consumes lot of time 
and resources. So, there is a need of methods which find the optimal size of embeddings.  
7.7 Ensemble of character and word embeddings 
Character embeddings capture the morphological information like prefix, suffix and root besides having the 
embeddings for misspelled and rare words. However character embeddings doesn’t capture the semantic 
information. Word embeddings treat word as an atomic unit due to which morphological information is lot and 
encode only the semantic information with no embeddings for misspelled words and rare words. So using an 
ensemble of character and word embeddings provides better vector representation [49, 51, 57, 112, 114 and 119]. 
7.8 Domain specific vs Off-the-shelf pretrained embeddings in Clinical NLP 
Embeddings inferred from medical related corpus need not outperform off-the-shelf pretrained 
embeddings inferred from general corpus in any of the Clinical NLP tasks [11, 19 and 34]. For example, Google News 
36 
 
embeddings outperformed BMC embeddings in the task of medical concept normalization [11]. The possible reason 
for this is that the corpus from which the pretrained embeddings are inferred includes domain related text also in 
the form of news articles and blog posts.  
7.9 Use of Off-the-shelf pretrained embeddings in Clinical NLP  
Despite being inferred from out of domain corpus, off-the-shelf pretrained embeddings released with 
models like word2vec, glove can be used in clinical NLP tasks owing to their ability to provide large coverage of 
vocabulary. These embeddings can be used a) by concatenating with domain specific embeddings [22,119] b) by 
adapting to clinical domain using the methods like fine tuning, linear mapping or nonlinear mapping [2,31] c) by 
using them as it is  [11,19,28, 29, 40,49,116 and 120] without use of domain adaptation methods or concatenation 
with domain specific embeddings. 
7.10 Use of task specific information to improve embeddings 
The quality of domain specific embeddings can be improved further with the addition of task specific 
information which boots the performance of downstream task [2 and 3]. For example, in the task of medical coding 
[2], embeddings are improved with the addition of information from ICD-10 codes and in the task of clinical 
abbreviation expansion [3], the size of corpus is increased with the addition of Wikipedia articles of all candidate 
expansions of the abbreviations identified. 
8. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this survey paper, we presented a detailed review of embeddings in Clinical Natural Language Processing. 
We classified medical corpora into four types, discussed each medical corpus in detail and then provided a 
comparison of them. We classified embeddings into nine types, discussed each embedding type in detail by 
highlighting the key aspects. We discussed various evaluation methods of embeddings which includes intrinsic as 
well as extrinsic methods. We discussed various aspects related to embeddings and highlighted possible solutions 
to the various challenges in embeddings. The possible solutions for the small size of corpus in clinical domain are use 
of combined corpora for inferring embeddings, inclusion of domain knowledge, ensemble of embeddings and 
generating semantic features from clusters of embeddings. The problem of missing embeddings for OOV words, 
misspelled words and different noun and verb forms can be solved using character embeddings or Elmo embeddings. 
Character embeddings lack semantic information, while word embeddings lack morphological information and 
hence using a combination of character and word embeddings can provide better vector representations.  
Interpretability of embeddings, domain adaptation methods and methods to find the optimal size for 
embeddings are some of the promising research directions. Though embeddings capture prior knowledge in the 
form of syntactic and semantic information, it is still not known what each dimension represents. Poor 
interpretability of embeddings makes it a black box and limits its utility in domains where interpretability is a 
37 
 
concern. Even though out-of-the shelf pretrained embeddings provide large coverage of vocabulary, there will be 
either no or poor quality embeddings for domain specific words. Not all the dimensions in an embeddings carry 
useful information and further use of large size embeddings require more computational resources and time.  
References  
[1] J. Huang, K. Xu, and V. V. Vydiswaran, “Analyzing multiple medical corpora using word embedding,” in 
proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Health Informatics (ICHI), pp. 527–533, 2016.  
 [2] K. Patel, D. Patel, M. Golakiya, P. Bhattacharyya, and N. Birari, “Adapting pre-trained word embeddings for use 
in medical coding,” in proceedings of BioNLP, pp. 302–306, 2017.  
[3] Y. Liu, T. Ge, K. Mathews, H. Ji, and D. McGuinness, “Exploiting taskoriented resources to learn word embeddings 
for clinical abbreviation expansion,” in proceedings of BioNLP, pp. 92–97, 2015.  
[4] K. Lee, S. A. Hasan, O. Farri, A. Choudhary, and A. Agrawal, “Medical concept normalization for online user-
generated texts,” in proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Healthcare Informatics (ICHI), pp. 462–469, 
2017,  
[5] W. Boag and H. Kan´e, “Awe-cm vectors: Augmenting word embeddings with a clinical metathesaurus,” CoRR, 
vol. abs/1712.01460, 2017.  
[6] T. Bai, A. K. Chanda, B. L. Egleston, and S. Vucetic, “Joint learning of representations of medical concepts and 
words from ehr data,” in proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM), 
pp. 764–769, 2017.  
[7] E. Choi, M. T. Bahadori, E. Searles, C. Coffey, M. Thompson, J. Bost, J. Tejedor-Sojo, and J. Sun, “Multi-layer 
representation learning for medical concepts,” in Proceedings of the 22Nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference 
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, ser. KDD ’16. ACM, pp. 1495–1504, 2016.  
[8] E. Choi, J. Sun, A. Schuetz, and W. F. Stewart, “Using recurrent neural network models for early detection of heart 
failure onset,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 361–370, 2016.  
[9] Y. Choi, C. Y.-I. Chiu, and D. Sontag, “Learning low-dimensional representations of medical concepts,” AMIA 
Summits on Translational Science Proceedings, p. 41, 2016.  
[10] E. Tutubalina, Z. Miftahutdinov, S. Nikolenko, and V. Malykh, “Medical concept normalization in social media 
posts with recurrent neural networks,” Journal of Biomedical Informatics, vol. 84, pp. 93 – 102, 2018.  
[11] N. Limsopatham and N. Collier, “Normalising medical concepts in social media texts by learning semantic 
representation,” in Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,  pp. 
1014–1023, 2016. 
[12] M. Belousov, W. G. Dixon, and G. Nenadic, “Using an ensemble of linear and deep learning models in the smm4h 
2017 medical concept normalisation task.” in SMM4H@ AMIA, pp. 54–58, 2017.  
[13] L. De Vine, G. Zuccon, B. Koopman, L. Sitbon, and P. Bruza, “Medical semantic similarity with a neural language 
model,” in Proceedings of the 23rd ACM International Conference on Conference on Information and Knowledge 
Management, ser. CIKM, 2014, pp. 1819–1822.  
[14] J. A. Minarro-Gimenez, O. Marin-Alonso, and M. Samwald, “Exploring the application of deep learning 
techniques on medical text corpora,” Studies in health technology and informatics, vol. 205, pp. 584–588, 2014.  
38 
 
[15] Y. Shen, Q. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. Huang, Y. Lu, and K. Lei, “Improving medical short text classification with semantic 
expansion using wordcluster embedding,” in Information Science and Applications. Springer, pp. 401–411, 2018.  
[16] L. Yao, C. Mao, and Y. Luo, “Clinical text classification with rulebased features and knowledge-guided 
convolutional neural networks,” in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Healthcare Informatics 
Workshop (ICHI-W), pp. 70–71, 2018.  
[17] Z. Miftahutdinov, E. Tutubalina, and A. Tropsha, “Identifying diseaserelated expressions in reviews using 
conditional random fields,” in Proceedings of International Conference on Computational Linguistics and Intellectual 
Technologies Dialog, vol. 1, no. 16, pp. 155–166,  2017.  
[18] A. Nikfarjam, A. Sarker, K. O’Connor, R. Ginn, and G. Gonzalez, “Pharmacovigilance from social media: mining 
adverse drug reaction mentions using sequence labeling with word embedding cluster features,” Journal of the 
American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 671–681, 2015.  
[19] N. Pattisapu, M. Gupta, P. Kumaraguru, and V. Varma, “Medical persona classification in social media,” in 
Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining 
2017, ser. ASONAM ’17. ACM, pp. 377–384, 2017.  
[20] C. Y. Li, D. Konomis, G. Neubig, P. Xie, C. Cheng, and E. P. Xing, “Convolutional neural networks for medical 
diagnosis from admission notes,” CoRR, vol. abs/1712.02768, 2017.  
[21] A. Karmakar, “Classifying medical notes into standard disease codes using machine learning,” CoRR, vol. 
abs/1802.00382, 2018.  
[22] N. Limsopatham and N. Collier, “Modelling the combination of generic and target domain embeddings in a 
convolutional neural network for sentence classification,” in Proceedings of the 15th Workshop on Biomedical  
Natural Language Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 136–140, 2016.  
[23] Z. Miftahutdinov and E. Tutubalina, “Kfu at clef ehealth 2017 task 1: Icd-10 coding of english death certificates 
with recurrent neural networks.” 
[24] M. Hughes, I. Li, S. Kotoulas, and T. Suzumura, “Medical text classification using convolutional neural networks,” 
Studies in health technology and informatics, vol. 235, pp. 246–250, 2017. [25] S. Wang and R. Koopman, “Semantic 
embedding for information retrieval,” in BIR@ECIR, pp. 122–132, 2017.  
[26] A. Jagannatha and h. yu, “Structured prediction models for rnn based sequence labeling in clinical text,” in 
Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Association for 
Computational Linguistics, pp. 856–865, 2016.  
[27] A. N. Jagannatha and H. Yu, “Bidirectional rnn for medical event detection in electronic health records,” in 
Proceedings of the 2016 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: 
Human Language Technologies. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 473–482, 2016.  
[28] S. Ayyar and O. Bear, “Tagging patient notes with icd-9 codes,” in Proceedings of the 29th Conference on Neural 
Information Processing Systems, 2017.  
[29] X. Zhang, R. Henao, Z. Gan, Y. Li, and L. Carin, “Multi-label learning from medical plain text with convolutional 
residual models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.05062, 2018.  
[30] P. Nguyen, T. Tran, N. Wickramasinghe, and S. Venkatesh, “Deepr: A convolutional net for medical records,” 
IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 22–30, Jan 2017.  
39 
 
[31] D. Newman-Griffis and A. Zirikly, “Embedding transfer for low-resource medical named entity recognition: A 
case study on patient mobility,” in Proceedings of the BioNLP’18 workshop. Association for Computational 
Linguistics, pp. 1–11, 2018.  
[32] Y. Luo, “Recurrent neural networks for classifying relations in clinical notes,” J. of Biomedical Informatics, vol. 
72, pp. 85–95, 2017.  
[33] E. Choi, M. T. Bahadori, A. Schuetz, W. F. Stewart, and J. Sun, “Doctor ai: Predicting clinical events via recurrent 
neural networks,” in Proceedings of the 1st Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference, vol. 56. PMLR, pp. 301–
318, 2016. 
[34] Y. Wang, S. Liu, N. Afzal, M. Rastegar-Mojarad, L. Wang, F. Shen, P. Kingsbury, and H. Liu, “A comparison of word 
embeddings for the biomedical natural language processing,” Journal of Biomedical Informatics, vol. 87, pp. 12 – 20, 
2018.  
[35] J. Mullenbach, S. Wiegreffe, J. Duke, J. Sun, and J. Eisenstein, “Explainable prediction of medical codes from 
clinical text,” in Proceedings of the Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies. Association for Computational Linguistics,   
pp. 1101–1111,  2018.  
 
[36] Y. Ling, Y. An, M. Liu, S. A. Hasan, Y. Fan, and X. Hu, “Integrating extra knowledge into word embedding models 
for biomedical nlp tasks,” in Proceedings of International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp. 968–
975, 2017.  
[37] Z. Jiang, L. Li, D. Huang, and L. Jin, “Training word embeddings for deep learning in biomedical text mining tasks,” 
in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM), pp. 625–628, 2015.  
[38] D. Dligach and T. Miller, “Learning patient representations from text,” in Proceedings of the Seventh Joint 
Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics. Association for Computational Linguistics,  
pp. 119–123, 2018.  
 
[39] S. Moen and T. S. S. Ananiadou, “Distributional semantics resources for biomedical text processing,” in 
Proceedings of the 5th International Symposium on Languages in Biology and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan, pp. 39–43. 
2013. 
[40] S. Yadav, A. Ekbal, S. Saha, and P. Bhattacharyya, “Deep learning architecture for patient data de-identification 
in clinical records,” in Proceedings of the Clinical Natural Language Processing Workshop (ClinicalNLP). The COLING 
2016 Organizing Committee, pp. 32–41, 2016.  
[41] Y.-S. Zhao, K.-L. Zhang, H.-C. Ma, and K. Li, “Leveraging text skeleton for de-identification of electronic medical 
records,” BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making, vol. 18, no. 1, p. 18, 2018.  
[42] T. Baumel, J. Nassour-Kassis, R. Cohen, M. Elhadad, and N. Elhadad, “Multi-label classification of patient notes: 
case study on icd code assignment,” in Workshops at the Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 
2018.  
[43] X. Cai, J. Gao, K. Y. Ngiam, B. C. Ooi, Y. Zhang, and X. Yuan, “Medical concept embedding with time-aware 
attention,” Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2018. 
[44] E. Choi, M. T. Bahadori, L. Song, W. F. Stewart, and J. Sun, “Gram: Graph-based attention model for healthcare 
representation learning,” in Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery 
and Data Mining, ser. KDD ’17. New York, NY, USA: ACM, pp. 787–795, 2017.  
40 
 
[45] F. Qian, C. Gong, L. Liu, L. Sha, and M. Zhang, “Topic medical concept embedding: Multi-sense representation 
learning for medical concept,” in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine 
(BIBM), pp. 404–409, 2017.  
[46] M. Li, Z. Fei, M. Zeng, F. Wu, Y. Li, Y. Pan, and J. Wang, “Automated icd-9 coding via a deep learning approach,” 
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, pp. 1–1, 2018. 
 [47] Z. Che, Y. Cheng, Z. Sun, and Y. Liu, “Exploiting convolutional neural network for risk prediction with medical 
feature embedding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.07474, 2017. 
 [48] J. Stojanovic, D. Gligorijevic, V. Radosavljevic, N. Djuric, M. Grbovic, and Z. Obradovic, “Modeling healthcare 
quality via compact representations of electronic health records,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational Biology 
and Bioinformatics, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 545–554, 2017.  
[49] F. Dernoncourt, J. Y. Lee, O. Uzuner, and P. Szolovits, “De-identification of patient notes with recurrent neural 
networks,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 2016.  
[50] Y. Zhang, O. Zhang, Y. Wu, H.-J. Lee, J. Xu, H. Xu, and K. Roberts, “Psychiatric symptom recognition without 
labeled data using distributional representations of phrases and on-line knowledge,” J. of Biomedical Informatics, 
vol. 75, pp. 129–137, 2017. 
 [51] E. Tutubalina and S. Nikolenko, “Combination of deep recurrent neural networks and conditional random fields 
for extracting adverse drug reactions from user reviews,” Journal of Healthcare Engineering, 2017. 
[52] M. Sushil, S. Suster, K. Luyckx, and W. Daelemans, “Patient represen- ˇ tation learning and interpretable 
evaluation using clinical notes,” Journal of Biomedical Informatics, vol. 84, pp. 103 – 113, 2018.  
[53] Y. Feng, X. Min, N. Chen, H. Chen, X. Xie, H. Wang, and T. Chen, “Patient outcome prediction via convolutional 
neural networks based on multi-granularity medical concept embedding,” in Proceedings of IEEE International 
Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM), pp. 770–777, 2017,.  
[54] Z. Zhu, C. Yin, B. Qian, Y. Cheng, J. Wei, and F. Wang, “Measuring patient similarities via a deep architecture with 
medical concept embedding,” in Proceedings of IEEE 16th International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), pp. 749–
758, 2016. 
[55] E. Menc´ıa, G. De Melo, and J. Nam, “Medical concept embeddings via labeled background corpora,” in 
Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, LREC 2016. European 
Language Resources Association (ELRA), pp. 4629–4636, 2016.  
[56] B. He, Y. Guan, and R. Dai, “Classifying medical relations in clinical text via convolutional neural networks,” 
Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, 2018.  
[57] Y. Luo, G. Song, P. Li, and Z. Qi, “Multi-task medical concept normalization using multi-view convolutional neural 
network,” in AAAI, 2018.  
[58] S. Dubois, N. Romano, D. C. Kale, N. Shah, and K. Jung, “Learning effective representations from clinical notes,” 
arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.07025, 2017. 
[59] R. Miotto, L. Li, B. A. Kidd, and J. T. Dudley, “Deep patient: an unsupervised representation to predict the future 
of patients from the electronic health records,” Scientific reports, vol. 6, p. 26094, 2016.  
[60] K. Roberts, “Assessing the corpus size vs. similarity trade-off for word embeddings in clinical nlp,” in Proceedings 
of the Clinical Natural Language Processing Workshop (ClinicalNLP). The COLING 2016 Organizing Committee, pp. 
54–63, 2016. 
41 
 
[61] S. V. S. Pakhomov, G. P. Finley, R. McEwan, Y. Wang, and G. B. Melton, “Corpus domain effects on distributional 
semantic modeling of medical terms,” Bioinformatics, vol. 32 23, pp. 3635–3644, 2016.  
[62] T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Efficient estimation of word representations in vector space,” in 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2013),  
pp. 1–12, 2013.  
 
[63] F. Godin, B. Vandersmissen, W. De Neve, and R. Van de Walle, “Multimedia lab @ acl wnut ner shared task: 
Named entity recognition for twitter microposts using distributed word representations,” in Proceedings of the 
Workshop on Noisy User-generated Text, pp. 146–153, 2015. 
 [64] A. Nikfarjam, A. Sarker, K. O’connor, R. Ginn, and G. Gonzalez, “Pharmacovigilance from social media: mining 
adverse drug reaction mentions using sequence labeling with word embedding cluster features,” Journal of the 
American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 671–681, 2015.  
[65] H. Moen, F. Ginter, E. Marsi, L.-M. Peltonen, T. Salakoski, and S. Salanter¨a, “Care episode retrieval: 
distributional semantic models for information retrieval in the clinical domain,” BMC Medical Informatics and 
Decision Making, vol. 15, no. 2, 2015. 
[66] Y. Wu, J. Xu, M. Jiang, Y. Zhang, and H. Xu, “A study of neural word embeddings for named entity recognition in 
clinical text,” in AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings. American Medical Informatics Association, p. 1326, 2015.  
[67] M. M. Ghassemi, R. G. Mark, and S. Nemati, “A visualization of evolving clinical sentiment using vector 
representations of clinical notes,” in Proceedings of Computing in Cardiology Conference (CinC),  
pp. 629–632, 2015.  
[68] A. Henriksson, “Representing clinical notes for adverse drug event detection,” in Proceedings of the Sixth 
International Workshop on Health Text Mining and Information Analysis. Association for Computational Linguistics, 
pp. 152–158, 2015. 
 [69] E. Choi, A. Schuetz, W. F. Stewart, and J. Sun, “Medical concept representation learning from electronic health 
records and its application on heart failure prediction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.03686, 2016.  
[70] B. Shickel, P. J. Tighe, A. Bihorac, and P. Rashidi, “Deep ehr: A survey of recent advances in deep learning 
techniques for electronic health record (ehr) analysis,” IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, vol. 22, 
no. 5, pp. 1589–1604, 2018.  
[71] J. R. Firth, “A synopsis of linguistic theory, 1930-1955,” Studies in linguistic analysis, 1957.  
[72] Z. S. Harris, “Distributional structure,” Word, vol. 10, no. 2-3, pp. 146– 162, 1954.  
[73] D. Charles, M. Gabriel, and M. F. Furukawa, “Adoption of electronic health record systems among us non-federal 
acute care hospitals: 2008- 2012,” ONC data brief, vol. 9, pp. 1–9, 2013.  
[74] G. S. Birkhead, M. Klompas, and N. R. Shah, “Uses of electronic health records for public health surveillance to 
advance public health,” Annual review of public health, vol. 36, pp. 345–359, 2015.  
[75] T. Botsis, G. Hartvigsen, F. Chen, and C. Weng, “Secondary use of ehr: data quality issues and informatics 
opportunities,” Summit on Translational Bioinformatics, vol. 2010, p. 1, 2010.  
[76] P. B. Jensen, L. J. Jensen, and S. Brunak, “Mining electronic health records: towards better research applications 
and clinical care,” Nature Reviews Genetics, vol. 13, no. 6, p. 395, 2012. 
42 
 
 [77] M. Saeed, M. Villarroel, A. T. Reisner, G. Clifford, L.-W. Lehman, G. Moody, T. Heldt, T. H. Kyaw, B. Moody, and 
R. G. Mark, “Multiparameter intelligent monitoring in intensive care ii (mimic-ii): a publicaccess intensive care unit 
database,” Critical care medicine, vol. 39, no. 5, p. 952, 2011. 
[78] A. E. Johnson, T. J. Pollard, L. Shen, H. L. Li-wei, M. Feng, M. Ghassemi, B. Moody, P. Szolovits, L. A. Celi, and R. 
G. Mark, “Mimic-iii, a freely accessible critical care database,” Scientific data, vol. 3, p. 160035, 2016.  
[79] D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, and R. J. Williams, “Learning representations by back-propagating errors,” nature, 
vol. 323, no. 6088, p. 533, 1986.  
[80] J. L. Elman, “Distributed representations, simple recurrent networks, and grammatical structure,” Machine 
learning, vol. 7, no. 2-3, pp. 195–225, 1991.  
[81] A. M. Glenberg and D. A. Robertson, “Symbol grounding and meaning: A comparison of high-dimensional and 
embodied theories of meaning,” Journal of memory and language, vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 379–401, 2000.  
[82] Y. Bengio, R. Ducharme, P. Vincent, and C. Jauvin, “A neural probabilistic language model,” Journal of machine 
learning research, vol. 3, pp. 1137–1155, 2003.  
[83] D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan, “Latent dirichlet allocation,” Journal of machine Learning research, vol. 3, 
pp. 993–1022, 2003.  
[84] S. T. Dumais, “Latent semantic analysis,” Annual review of information science and technology, vol. 38, no. 1, 
pp. 188–230, 2004.  
[85] R. Collobert and J. Weston, “A unified architecture for natural language processing: Deep neural networks with 
multitask learning,” in Proceedings of the 25th international conference on Machine learning. ACM, pp. 160–167, 
2008. 
 [86] T. Mikolov, M. Karafi´at, L. Burget, J. Cernock`y, and S. Khudanpur, “Recurrent neural network based language 
model,” in Eleventh Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication Association, vol. 2, p. 3, 2010.  
[87] J. Pennington, R. Socher, and C. Manning, “Glove: Global vectors for word representation,” in Proceedings of 
the conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP),  
pp. 1532–1543, 2014.  
 
[88] P. Bojanowski, E. Grave, A. Joulin, and T. Mikolov, “Enriching word vectors with subword information,” 
Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 5, pp. 135–146, 2017. 
 [89] Q. Le and T. Mikolov, “Distributed representations of sentences and documents,” in International Conference 
on Machine Learning, pp. 1188–1196 ,2014. 
[90] E. Grave, T. Mikolov, A. Joulin, and P. Bojanowski, “Bag of tricks for efficient text classification,” in Proceedings 
of the 15th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, EACL, pp. 3–7, 
2017.  
[91] S. Karimi, A. Metke-Jimenez, M. Kemp, and C. Wang, “Cadec: A corpus of adverse drug event annotations,” 
Journal of biomedical informatics, vol. 55, pp. 73–81, 2015.  
[92] O. Uzuner, I. Goldstein, Y. Luo, and I. Kohane, “Identifying patient smok- ¨ ing status from medical discharge 
records,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 14–24, 2008.  
[93] N. Limsopatham and N. Collier, “Adapting phrase-based machine translation to normalise medical terms in social 
media messages,” in Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. 
Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 1675–1680, 2015.  
43 
 
[94] R. Ginn, P. Pimpalkhute, A. Nikfarjam, A. Patki, K. O’Connor, A. Sarker, K. Smith, and G. Gonzalez, “Mining twitter 
for adverse drug reaction mentions: a corpus and classification benchmark,” in Proceedings of the fourth workshop 
on building and evaluating resources for health and biomedical text processing. Citeseer, 2014.  
[95] A. N´ev´eol, A. Robert, R. Anderson, B. Cohen, C. Grouin, T. Lavergne, C. Rondet, and P. Zweigenbaum, “CLEF 
eHealth 2017 Multilingual Information Extraction task Overview: ICD10 Coding of Death Certificates in English and 
French.” in Workshop of the Cross-Language Evaluation Forum. Dublin, Ireland: CEUR-WS, Jan. 2017.  
[96] F. Dernoncourt, J. Y. Lee, and P. Szolovits, “Neuroner: an easy-to-use program for named-entity recognition 
based on neural networks,” in Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language 
Processing: System Demonstrations. Association for Computational Linguistics,  
pp. 97–102, 2017.  
 
[97] O. Uzuner, B. R. South, S. Shen, and S. L. DuVall, “2010 i2b2  challenge on concepts, assertions, and relations in 
clinical text,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 552–556, 2011.  
[98] J. L. Elman, “Finding structure in time,” Cognitive science, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 179–211, 1990.  
[99] M. I. Jordan, “Serial order: A parallel distributed processing approach,” in Advances in psychology. Elsevier, vol. 
121, pp. 471–495, 1997.  
[100] A. Stubbs, C. Kotfila, and O. Uzuner, “Automated systems for the ¨ de-identification of longitudinal clinical 
narratives: Overview of 2014 i2b2 health shared task track 1,” Journal of biomedical informatics, vol. 58, pp. S11–
S19, 2015. 
[101] X. Ma and E. Hovy, “End-to-end sequence labeling via bi-directional lstm cnns-crf,” in Proceedings of the 54th 
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 
1064–1074, 2016.  
[102] S. G. Finlayson, P. LePendu, and N. H. Shah, “Building the graph of medicine from millions of clinical narratives,” 
Scientific data, vol. 1, p. 140032, 2014.  
[103] A. R. Aronson and F.-M. Lang, “An overview of metamap: historical perspective and recent advances,” Journal 
of the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 229–236, 2010.  
[104] O. Levy and Y. Goldberg, “Dependency-based word embeddings,” in Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting 
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 2, pp. 302–308, 2014.  
[105] J. Nam, E. L. Menc´ıa, and J. F¨urnkranz, “All-in text: Learning document, label, and word representations 
jointly,” in Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 1948–1954, 2016.  
[106] L. v. d. Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-sne,” Journal of machine learning research, vol. 9, pp. 
2579–2605, 2008.  
[107] J. Josse and S. Holmes, “Measures of dependence between random vectors and tests of independence. 
literature review,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1307.7383, 2013. 
 [108] G. J. Sz´ekely, M. L. Rizzo, N. K. Bakirov et al., “Measuring and testing dependence by correlation of distances,” 
The annals of statistics, vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 2769–2794, 2007.  
[109] E. K. Proctor, J. Landsverk, G. Aarons, D. Chambers, C. Glisson, and B. Mittman, “Implementation research in 
mental health services: an emerging science with conceptual, methodological, and training challenges,” 
Administration and Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health Services Research, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 24–34, 2009.  
[110] X. Rong, “word2vec parameter learning explained,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.2738, 2014.  
44 
 
[111] J. Niu, Y. Yang, S. Zhang, Z. Sun, and W. Zhang, “Multi-task character level attentional networks for medical 
concept normalization,” Neural Processing Letters, pp. 1–18, 2018.  
[112] Z. Liu, M. Yang, X. Wang, Q. Chen, B. Tang, Z. Wang, and H. Xu, “Entity recognition from clinical texts via 
recurrent neural network,” BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making, vol. 17, no. 2, p. 67, 2017. 
[113] N. Limsopatham and N. Collier, “Adapting phrase-based machine translation to normalise medical terms in 
social media messages,” in Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language 
Processing. Lisbon, Portugal: Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 1675–1680, 2015.  
[114] J. Y. Lee, F. Dernoncourt, O. Uzuner, and P. Szolovits, “Feature augmented neural networks for patient note 
de-identification,” in Proceedings of the Clinical Natural Language Processing Workshop (ClinicalNLP). Osaka, Japan: 
The COLING 2016 Organizing Committee, pp. 17–22, 2016. 
[115] J. Xie, X. Liu, and D. Dajun Zeng, “Mining e-cigarette adverse events in social media using bi-lstm recurrent 
neural network with word embedding representation,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 
vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 72–80, 2017.  
[116] R. Chalapathy, E. Zare Borzeshi, and M. Piccardi, “Bidirectional lstm crf for clinical concept extraction,” in 
Proceedings of the Clinical Natural Language Processing Workshop (ClinicalNLP). The COLING 2016 Organizing 
Committee, pp. 7–12, 2016.  
[117] R. Chalapathy, E. Z. Borzeshi, and M. Piccardi, “An investigation of recurrent neural architectures for drug name 
recognition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.07585, 2016.  
[118] I. Banerjee, M. C. Chen, M. P. Lungren, and D. L. Rubin, “Radiology report annotation using intelligent word 
embeddings: Applied to multiinstitutional chest ct cohort,” Journal of biomedical informatics, vol. 77, pp. 11–20, 
2018.  
[119] I. J. Unanue, E. Z. Borzeshi, and M. Piccardi, “Recurrent neural networks with specialized word embeddings for 
health-domain named-entity recognition,” Journal of biomedical informatics, vol. 76, pp. 102–109, 2017.  
[120] A. Cocos, A. G. Fiks, and A. J. Masino, “Deep learning for pharmacovigilance: recurrent neural network 
architectures for labeling adverse drug reactions in twitter posts,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics 
Association, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 813–821, 2017.  
[121] S. Henry, C. Cuffy, and B. T. McInnes, “Vector representations of multiword terms for semantic relatedness,” 
Journal of biomedical informatics, vol. 77, pp. 111–119, 2018.  
[122] H. Zhu, I. C. Paschalidis, and A. Tahmasebi, “Clinical concept extraction with contextual word embedding,” 
arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.10566, 2018. 
[123] M. Peters, M. Neumann, M. Iyyer, M. Gardner, C. Clark, K. Lee, and L. Zettlemoyer, “Deep contextualized word 
representations,” in Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 2227–
2237, 2018.  
[124] A. Hliaoutakis, “Semantic similarity measures in mesh ontology and their application to information retrieval 
on medline,”Master’s thesis, 2005. 
 [125] B. McCann, J. Bradbury, C. Xiong, and R. Socher, “Learned in translation: Contextualized word vectors,” in 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 6294–6305, 2017.  
[126] Y. Tao, B. Godefroy, G. Genthial, and C. Potts, “Effective feature representation for clinical text concept 
extraction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.00070, 2018.  
45 
 
[127] O. Melamud, J. Goldberger, and I. Dagan, “context2vec: Learning generic context embedding with bidirectional 
lstm,” in Proceedings of The 20th SIGNLL Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning. Association for 
Computational Linguistics, pp. 51–61, 2016.  
[128] M. Peters, W. Ammar, C. Bhagavatula, and R. Power, “Semi-supervised sequence tagging with bidirectional 
language models,” in Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. 
Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 1756–1765, 2017. 
[129]  M.  Baroni,  G.  Dinu,  and  G.  Kruszewski,  “Don’t  count,  predict!   a  systematic  comparison  of  context-
counting  vs.  context-predicting  semanticvectors,”  inProceedings  of  the  52nd  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Association 
for  Computational  Linguistics.Association for Computational Linguis-tics,  pp. 238–247,2014. 
[130]  T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Distributed representations of words and phrases 
and their compositionality,” inPro-ceedings of the 26th International Conference on Neural Information Pro-cessing 
Systems - Volume 2, ser. NIPS’13 , pp. 3111–3119, 2013. 
[131]  S.  Pakhomov,  B.  McInnes,  T.  Adam,  Y.  Liu,  T.  Pedersen,  and  G.  B.Melton, “Semantic similarity and 
relatedness between clinical terms:  anexperimental study,” inAMIA annual symposium proceedings, vol. 
2010.American Medical Informatics Association, p. 572,2010. 
[132]  S. V. Pakhomov, T. Pedersen, B. McInnes, G. B. Melton, A. Ruggieri, andC. G. Chute, “Towards a framework for 
developing semantic relatednessreference standards,”Journal of biomedical informatics, vol. 44, no. 2, pp.251–265, 
2011. 
[133]  T. Pedersen, S. V. Pakhomov, S. Patwardhan, and C. G. Chute, “Measures of semantic similarity and relatedness 
in the biomedical domain,”Journalof biomedical informatics, vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 288–299, 2007. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
