Title: A Machine Learning, Natural Language Processing Analysis of Youth Perspectives: Key Trends and Focus Areas for Sustainable Youth Development Policies
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2211.14321v1
--------------------------------------------------

A Machine Learning, Natural Language Processing Analysis of Youth 
Perspectives: Key Trends and Focus Areas for Sustainable Youth Development 
Policies
Kushaagra Gupta, International Development Researcher, Foothill College IHS 
(corresponding author)
kushgks@gmail.com	 
(510) 458 – 0658
12345 El Monte Road,
Los Altos Hills, CA, 94022
Abstract
Investing in children and youth is a critical step towards inclusive, equitable, and 
sustainable development for current and future generations. Several international 
agendas for accomplishing common global goals emphasize the need for active youth 
participation and engagement for sustainable development. The 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development emphasizes the need for youth engagement and the inclusion 
of youth perspectives as an important step toward addressing each of the 17 
Sustainable Development Goals.  The Addis Ababa Action Agenda also recognizes the 
1
significance of investing in children and youth for achieving equitable sustainable 
development.  The aim of this study is to analyze youth perspectives, values, and 
2
sentiments towards issues addressed by each of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals 
through social network analysis using machine learning. Social network data collected 
during 7 major sustainability conferences aimed at engaging children and youth is 
analyzed using natural language processing techniques for sentiment analysis. This data 
is then categorized using a natural language processing text classifier trained on a 
sample dataset of social network data during the 7 youth sustainability conferences for a 
deeper understanding of youth perspectives in relation to each of the 17 Sustainable 
Development Goals. Machine learning identified demographic and location attributes 
and features are utilized in order to identify bias and demographic differences between 
ages, gender, and race among youth. Using natural language processing, the qualitative 
data collected from over 7 different countries in 3 languages are systematically 
translated, categorized, and analyzed, revealing key trends and focus areas for 
sustainable youth development policies. The obtained results reveal the general youth's 
depth of knowledge on sustainable development and their attitudes towards each of the 
17 Sustainable Development Goals. The findings of this study serve as a guide toward 
better understanding the interests, roles, and perspectives of children and youth in 
achieving the goals of Agenda 2030.
 Desa, U. N. "Transforming our world: The 2030 agenda for sustainable 
1
development." (2016).
 United Nations. Department of Economic and Social Affairs. World youth report: Youth 
2
and the 2030 agenda for sustainable development. New York: United Nations 
Publications, 2018.
I. INTRODUCTION
Following the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), the international community 
introduced the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).  With 17 goals and 169 targets, 
3
the Sustainable Development Goals aim to build upon the Millennium Development 
Goals through various objectives. The main objectives include: ending poverty and 
hunger, protecting the planet from degradation, ensuring peace and prosperity, and 
implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development through Global 
Partnership.  In order to achieve these objectives for sustainable development, 
4
investment in the youth is critical step.  Both the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
5
Development and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference 
on Financing for Development  identify investing in the youth as a critical step towards 
6
the realization of these goals and targets for sustainable development. Due to different 
nations' economic and cultural features, multiple definitions of youth in terms of upper 
age limit are accepted in practice. For this study, people between 13 and 25 years of age 
are categorized as youth. The significance of youth involvement and participation in 
reaching the Sustainable Development Goals has been highlighted among numerous 
relevant documents (i.e. Agenda 21, Addis Ababa Action Agenda, etc.), yet their current 
role, future positions, and general sentiment regarding each of the Sustainable 
Development Goals remain largely unrecognized.  The attitudes and perceptions of 
7
young people surrounding the Sustainable Development Goals are ambiguous, and 
youth engagement in policymaking is limited and relatively scarce.  However, it is 
8
evident that youth engagement is important for the success of the Sustainable 
Development Goals.  
9
 Sachs, Jeffrey D. "From millennium development goals to sustainable development 
3
goals." The lancet 379, no. 9832 (2012): 2206-2211.
 Desa, U. N. "Transforming our world: The 2030 agenda for sustainable 
4
development." (2016).
 Raikes, Abbie, Hirokazu Yoshikawa, Pia Rebello Britto, and Iheoma Iruka. "Children, 
5
Youth and Developmental Science in the 2015-2030 Global Sustainable Development 
Goals. Social Policy Report. Volume 30, Number 3." Society for Research in Child 
Development (2017).
 Agenda, Addis Ababa Action. "Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the third international 
6
conference on financing for development." UN. development 2 (2015).
 Petković, Jasna, Nataša Petrović, Ivana Dragović, Kristina Stanojević, Jelena Andreja 
7
Radaković, Tatjana Borojević, and Mirjana Kljajić Borštnar. "Youth and forecasting of 
sustainable development pillars: An adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system 
approach." PloS one 14, no. 6 (2019).
 Martin, Shanetta, Karen Pittman, Thaddeus Ferber, and Ada McMahon. "Building 
8
Effective Youth Councils: A Practical Guide To Engaging Youth In Policy Making." 
In Forum for youth investment. Forum for Youth Investment. The Cady-Lee House, 7064 
Eastern Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20012-2031, 2007.
 Petrova, Yu, D. Dzhioeva, and L. Edilsultanova. "The role of youth leadership in 
9
achieving sustainable development, environmental safety." In AIP Conference 
Proceedings, vol. 2442, no. 1, p. 060001. AIP Publishing LLC, 2021
A. Youth Communication Channels
With over 1.2 billion people between the ages of 13 and 25, children and youth younger 
than 25 years of age constitute over 42% of the global population.  Young people have 
10
grown up in the digital era and are quick adopters to new innovation in technology. 
Access to the internet and mobile phones is spreading, particularly in regions with 
rapidly growing youth populations, such as the Sub-Saharan Africa. For a majority of the 
global youth population, the social media and the internet have become more popular 
news sources than newspapers. Digital media and social networks have impacted 
political participation among the youth across the globe.   However, the internet’s 
11 12
proliferation and growth of digital media have fractured the global media landscape.  As 
13
a result, communicating with broad audiences has grown increasingly challenging. Yet, 
the segmentation of media outlets allows communication with precise target audiences.
Social media has been an effective platform for garnering youth interest towards 
frameworks such as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and greater youth 
participation in policy-making. This study aims to utilize social media data to analyze 
youth trends based on age, race, and gender.
B. Social Network Analysis
Mining, processing, and analyzing data from social networks have aided studies in 
politics, policymaking, transportation, economics, marketing, education, and disaster 
relief.  Public data mined from Twitter and Facebook have been utilized to monitor 
14
public health,  forecast stock prices  and reveal public opinions surrounding politics. 
15
16
 These studies demonstrate the value of mining data from public social networks on a 
17
 Ritchie, Hannah, and Max Roser. "Age structure." Our World in Data (2019).
10
 Kahne, Joseph, and Ellen Middaugh. "Digital media shapes youth participation in 
11
politics." Phi Delta Kappan 94, no. 3 (2012): 52-56.
 Kamau, Samuel C. "Democratic engagement in the digital age: youth, social media 
12
and participatory politics in Kenya." Communicatio 43, no. 2 (2017): 128-146.
 Albarran, Alan B. The social media industries. Edited by Alan B. Albarran. New York: 
13
Routledge, 2013.
 Gundecha, Pritam, and Huan Liu. "Mining social media: a brief introduction." New 
14
directions in informatics, optimization, logistics, and production (2012): 1-17.
 Paul, Michael J., Abeed Sarker, John S. Brownstein, Azadeh Nikfarjam, Matthew 
15
Scotch, Karen L. Smith, and Graciela Gonzalez. "Social media mining for public health 
monitoring and surveillance." In Biocomputing 2016: Proceedings of the Pacific 
symposium, pp. 468-479. 2016.
 Wang, Yaojun, and Yaoqing Wang. "Using social media mining technology to assist in 
16
price prediction of stock market." In 2016 IEEE International conference on big data 
analysis (ICBDA), pp. 1-4. IEEE, 2016.
 McGregor, Shannon C. "“Taking the temperature of the room” how political campaigns 
17
use social media to understand and represent public opinion." Public Opinion 
Quarterly 84, no. S1 (2020): 236-256.
national or global scale to augment or outperform conventional survey approaches in 
circumstances when they are impractical due to temporal or geographic size.
Relatively recent advancements in machine learning and deep learning based natural 
language processing, such as word-level-embeddings, the Seq2Seq Framework, 
Continuous Bag-of-Words (CBOW), and recurrent neural networks, have transformed 
the way researchers analyze data.  Through transfer learning, researchers are able to 
18
utilize preexisting state of the art transformer models such as the Bidirectional Encoder 
Representations from Transformers and the Robustly Optimized Bidirectional Encoder 
Representations from Transformers Pre-training Approach without needing to develop a 
new natural language processing model from the beginning. Both the Bidirectional 
Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) and the Robustly Optimized 
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers Pre-training Approach 
(RoBERTa) allow researchers to utilize massive unlabeled datasets such as WikiText 
which consists of over 3.3 billion words.  Through BERT and other models based off of 
19
BERT-architecture, researchers have access to state-of-the-art models which can be 
fine-tuned for classification tasks such as sentiment analysis and question-and-answer 
tasks such as creating chatbots. BERT based models have been used to predict text in 
emails, quickly summarize legal documents, and translate over 100 languages.
Using natural language processing techniques on social media data, identifying 
keywords and overarching topics, classifying social media posts, and analyzing 
sentiment on a large population is possible. Additionally, through webpage traffic 
information, network analysis, and ethnicity-classification character-based recurrent 
neural networks, identifying demographics of social media users is possible. 
Demographic data extracted from social media platforms such as Twitter and Facebook 
have been used by researchers to research political polarization, racial segregation, 
public health, and urbanization.  Given the widely documented racial and socio-
20
economic differences in global environmental movements, identifying the demographics 
of those engaged in sustainable development topics on social media in real-time may 
provide valuable insights into how diverse groups engage with sustainable development 
concerns.
II. METHODOLOGY
A. Data Collection 
This study used raw data gathered from Twitter during an 8 month period between 1 July 
2021 and 3 March 2022 from 7 major youth sustainability organizations and their 
corresponding network. Using Twitter’s public API, relevant tweets along with user 
profiles from these 7 organizations were compiled and analyzed throughout the study 
period. 
 Torfi, Amirsina, Rouzbeh A. Shirvani, Yaser Keneshloo, Nader Tavaf, and Edward A. 
18
Fox. "Natural language processing advancements by deep learning: A survey." arXiv 
preprint arXiv:2003.01200 (2020).
 Tenney, Ian, Dipanjan Das, and Ellie Pavlick. "BERT rediscovers the classical NLP 
19
pipeline." arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.05950 (2019).
 Murthy, Dhiraj, Alexander Gross, and Alexander Pensavalle. "Urban social media 
20
demographics: An exploration of Twitter use in major American cities." Journal of 
Computer-Mediated Communication 21, no. 1 (2016): 33-49.
Twitter's real-time filter stream was utilized, which allows users to select a list of people, 
keywords, and places to track. Four filter streams were developed to collect Tweets 
which mentioned specific users, were posted by a specified user, contained a selected 
keyword, and were posted from a specified location (See Table 1).
B. Data Cleaning
To decrease the noise in the social media data, all accounts, posts, and tweets which 
had no engagement in terms of likes, retweets, and comments were filtered out of the 
dataset. Additionally, retweets and comments which would connect a user to another 
account were used to connect the two users or nodes using edges in a graph. Prior 
research has displayed the connection between retweet networks, political ideology, and 
election results.    Using similar techniques, a retweet and comment network where 
21 22
Twitter users were categorized into groups centred around the most retweeted or replied 
to twitter user. To filter out Twitter bots and irrelevant topic discussions, topics not 
containing words related to the keywords or the influential twitter user of the group were 
filtered out for manual review before being removed. Using a label propagation algorithm 
for community detection in social networks based on influence  , all groups with over 
23 24
120 individuals were stored. The 3 communities with over 120 active youth users were 
identified: the largest was centered around United Nation Agencies (e.g. World Health 
 Conover, Michael D., Bruno Gonçalves, Jacob Ratkiewicz, Alessandro Flammini, and 
21
Filippo Menczer. "Predicting the political alignment of twitter users." In 2011 IEEE third 
international conference on privacy, security, risk and trust and 2011 IEEE third 
international conference on social computing, pp. 192-199. IEEE, 2011.
 Tumasjan, Andranik, Timm Sprenger, Philipp Sandner, and Isabell Welpe. "Predicting 
22
elections with twitter: What 140 characters reveal about political sentiment." 
In Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media, vol. 4, 
no. 1, pp. 178-185. 2010.
 Wu, Zhi-Hao, You-Fang Lin, Steve Gregory, Huai-Yu Wan, and Sheng-Feng Tian. 
23
"Balanced multi-label propagation for overlapping community detection in social 
networks." Journal of Computer Science and Technology 27, no. 3 (2012): 468-479.
 Zhang, Xian-Kun, et al. "Label propagation algorithm for community detection based 
24
on node importance and label influence." Physics Letters A 381.33 (2017): 2691-2698.
Table 1 Data collection streams, timeframe, and number of collected tweets
Stream
Description
Timeframe
Tweets
1
Keywords: YOUNGO, UK Youth Climate 
Coalition, SDSN Youth, SustainUS, Youth 
Climate Movement, UK Student Climate 
Network, Southern Africa Youth Forum, GLF 
Youth, etc.
1 July- 3 March
30,149
2
Accounts: YOUNGO, UKYCC, SDSN, 
SustainUS, COY, UKSCN1, GLF, etc.
1 July- 3 March
13,493
3
112 keywords related to youth sustainable 
development
1 April- 1 March
187,329
4
Tweets geolocated in 7 youth conference 
locations
48-hour period 
prior to event
139,602
Organization), second was the Global  Landscapes Forum (GLF), and third largest was 
the Children and Youth constituency to United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (YOUNGO). Combined, these communities compromised of over 
18,305 youth users and over 308,403 tweets.
C. Identifying Influential Users, User Demographics, and Topics from Twitter Data
By creating a retweet and comment network where Twitter users were categorized into 
groups centred around the most retweeted or replied to twitter user, influential users 
could be identified by the PageRank algorithm.   Each user in the dataset was given 
25 26
a PageRank score which determines the relative influence and authority from a scale of 
0 to 10. The score is proportional to the chance of randomly reaching a node in the 
retweet and comment network. Thus, users with larger PageRank scores are more 
interconnected and have greater engagement than those with lower scores, identifying 
them as more influential and “authoritative” (See Table 2).
Using the pigeo Python library tweets were geolocated by country.  To obtain gender 
27
and age data, a computer vision approach was taken. A computer vision model pre-
trained on the IMDB-WIKI dataset of 100,000 images of faces labeled by gender, age, 
and race. The validation-error for gender was 8% and the validation-error for age was 
6.38 years. Tweets from users without a face in their profile picture and users with 
multiple faces in their profile picture did not have age or gender data. Users’ first names 
and last names were  contrasted with the U. S. Census data and were used as input for 
a text-based natural language processing recurrent neural network classier which infers 
gender and race based on historical data. Race was categorized into 5 categories: 
Asian, Hispanic, African, White, and Inconclusive. The Asian category encompassed 
people who are Indian, Japanese, and East Asian. The Hispanic category contained 
people whose names appeared in the Latino registered voters list, as well as the names 
which were classified as Hispanic European. African category contained people who in 
se names appeared in the Black registered voters list, as well as the names which were 
classified as Greater African. The White category encompassed people who had 
European names (except Hispanic Europeans) and people whose names appeared on 
the white registered voters list. This method of incorporating U. S. Census Bureau 
information with the text classifier has been an effective method for researchers in the 
health care setting.  Computer vision based approaches to infer race had less 
28
accuracy than name-based approaches in testing, so the text-based approach is 
employed.
 Wang, Rui, Weilai Zhang, Han Deng, Nanli Wang, Qing Miao, and Xinchao Zhao. 
25
"Discover community leader in social network with PageRank." In International 
conference in Swarm intelligence, pp. 154-162. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013.
 Heidemann, Julia, Mathias Klier, and Florian Probst. "Identifying key users in online 
26
social networks: A pagerank based approach." (2010).
 
27
Rahimi, Afshin, Trevor Cohn, and Timothy Baldwin. "pigeo: A python geotagging tool." 
In Proceedings of ACL-2016 System Demonstrations, pp. 127-132. 2016.
 Wong, Eric C., Latha P. Palaniappan, and Diane S. Lauderdale. "Using name lists to 
28
infer Asian racial/ethnic subgroups in the healthcare setting." Medical care 48, no. 6 
(2010): 540.
Twitter user accounts without proper nouns in their name were filtered out. Additionally, 
users with no profile picture, ambiguous profile pictures or profile pictures with multiple 
individuals were removed. Tweets from users estimated to be aged over 25 were also 
filtered out. This resulted in a dataset with 11,406 twitter accounts and over 102,948 
tweets.
Tweet content data was cleaned using “ekphrasis”, a python library which utilizes a 
recurrent neural network trained on over one billion tweets to correct spelling and 
grammatical errors. Using the Universal Sentence Encoder (USE), a pre-trained 
transformer based model, along with the K-Nearest-Neighbor algorithm, tweet data was 
clustered and tested by reading random stratified subsamples of 30 topics. With k set to 
250, the model performed best based upon manual validation techniques. All analysis 
was performed in python 3.6 and TensorFlow 2.9.
III. RESULTS
A. Influential Accounts
In order to maintain privacy, individual accounts which are not representing public 
figures, governmental organizations, nonprofits, or corporations have been labelled as 
“Individual” (Table 2). Most of the 5 highest ranked twitter accounts for influence of youth 
twitter users are international organizations (e.g. UNFCCC, UN, UN Climate Change, 
UN Human Rights, BBCWorld, UN Human Rights, etc.). UNYouth being categorized 
amongst the five most influential accounts for youth twitter users based on PageRank 
displays the PageRank algorithm’s effectiveness, as UNYouth has substantially less 
followers than twitter accounts run by organizations (ie. BBCWorld, UNFCCC, etc.). 
Additionally, individuals ranked amongst the top ten most influential accounts for youth 
twitter users using PageRank, included multiple youth leaders and a youth activist 
displaying accounts run by individuals also have influence over youth twitter users.
Table 2 Most Retweeted and Influential Accounts for Youth Twitter Users
Rank
Retweeted
PageRank
Tweet Volume
1
UN Climate Change
UN
BBCWorld
2
UNFCCC
UN Climate Change WorldBank
3
UN
WorldBank
UN
4
BBCWorld
Individual
UN Human Rights
5
Erik Solheim
UNYouth
estherclimate
Youth Tweet Locations
Europe
North America
Africa
Asia
Oceania
South America
User Percentage
0
10
20
30
40
Fig. 1 Continental distributions of studied youth 
Twitter users during 8 month study period 
Ethnicity Breakdown of Youth 
Twitter Profiles
Asian
African
Caucasian
Latino
Other
User Percentage
0
10
20
30
40
Fig. 2 Ethnicity distributions of studied youth 
Twitter users during 8 month study period 
determined by RNN classifier.
B. Topic Engagement Based on Demographics
Youth participation and involvement in topics which tended to go viral such as 
“#TeamSeas” and Political Unrest was disproportionately higher than other topics. Youth 
representation in topics such as World Bank Statistics and BBC World Breaking News 
was disproportionately less than other topics (Fig. 2). Young women were 
disproportionately more likely than young men to engage with tweets which were about 
topics such as: Animal rights, Food security, and Climate Change. They were 
disproportionately less likely than young men to engage with tweets which were about 
topics such as: Statistics and Data, Agriculture, and Corruption in Government. 
Caucasian people were disproportionately more likely than other races to engage with 
topics such as the United Nations, Data and Statistics, and Policy. They were 
disproportionately less likely than other races to engage with Industrial Pollution, 
Women’s Rights, and Food Security. Additionally, Caucasians constituted a large 
majority of youth twitter profiles engaging in and participating in youth events and 
programs. Africans were a significant minority of youth twitter profiles engaging in youth 
events and programs for sustainable development. 
IV. CONCLUSION
This work demonstrates how social media analysis using natural language processing 
can aid researchers in realizing how inclusive certain sustainable development programs 
and events are. Additionally, this study shows social media analysis provides an effective 
way to find sustainable development topics which disproportionately engage specific 
Fig. 3 Topics related to study with disproportionate youth representation. 
demographics, and this work shows how social media analysis can effectively find well-
connected users who have large amounts of influence over certain demographics. This 
work highlighted the disproportionate engagement of certain demographics (e.g. 
Caucasian) as well as the topics which disproportionately engage and disengage the 
youth who are critical to the success of the Sustainable Development Goals. If 
organizations aiming to leverage youth support and input utilize these methods and 
appeal to lesser represented youth demographics, youth participation in achieving the 17 
SDGs will increase in unprecedented ways.
V. REFERENCES
Agenda, Addis Ababa Action. "Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the third international 
conference on financing for development." UN. development 2 (2015).
Albarran, Alan B. The social media industries. Edited by Alan B. Albarran. New York: 
Routledge, 2013.
Conover, Michael D., Bruno Gonçalves, Jacob Ratkiewicz, Alessandro Flammini, and 
Filippo Menczer. "Predicting the political alignment of twitter users." In 2011 IEEE third 
international conference on privacy, security, risk and trust and 2011 IEEE third 
international conference on social computing, pp. 192-199. IEEE, 2011.
Desa, U. N. "Transforming our world: The 2030 agenda for sustainable 
development." (2016).
Gundecha, Pritam, and Huan Liu. "Mining social media: a brief introduction." New 
directions in informatics, optimization, logistics, and production (2012): 1-17.
Kahne, Joseph, and Ellen Middaugh. "Digital media shapes youth participation in 
politics." Phi Delta Kappan 94, no. 3 (2012): 52-56.
Kamau, Samuel C. "Democratic engagement in the digital age: youth, social media and 
participatory politics in Kenya." Communicatio 43, no. 2 (2017): 128-146.
Martin, Shanetta, Karen Pittman, Thaddeus Ferber, and Ada McMahon. "Building 
Effective Youth Councils: A Practical Guide To Engaging Youth In Policy Making." 
In Forum for youth investment. Forum for Youth Investment. The Cady-Lee House, 7064 
Eastern Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20012-2031, 2007.
Paul, Michael J., Abeed Sarker, John S. Brownstein, Azadeh Nikfarjam, Matthew Scotch, 
Karen L. Smith, and Graciela Gonzalez. "Social media mining for public health 
monitoring and surveillance." In Biocomputing 2016: Proceedings of the Pacific 
symposium, pp. 468-479. 2016.
Ritchie, Hannah, and Max Roser. "Age structure." Our World in Data (2019).
Sachs, Jeffrey D. "From millennium development goals to sustainable development 
goals." The lancet 379, no. 9832 (2012): 2206-2211.
Tenney, Ian, Dipanjan Das, and Ellie Pavlick. "BERT rediscovers the classical NLP 
pipeline." arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.05950 (2019).
Tumasjan, Andranik, Timm Sprenger, Philipp Sandner, and Isabell Welpe. "Predicting 
elections with twitter: What 140 characters reveal about political sentiment." 
In Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media, vol. 4, 
no. 1, pp. 178-185. 2010.
Wong, Eric C., Latha P. Palaniappan, and Diane S. Lauderdale. "Using name lists to 
infer Asian racial/ethnic subgroups in the healthcare setting." Medical care 48, no. 6 
(2010): 540.
Wu, Zhi-Hao, You-Fang Lin, Steve Gregory, Huai-Yu Wan, and Sheng-Feng Tian. 
"Balanced multi-label propagation for overlapping community detection in social 
networks." Journal of Computer Science and Technology 27, no. 3 (2012): 468-479.
Zhang, Xian-Kun, et al. "Label propagation algorithm for community detection based on 
node importance and label influence." Physics Letters A 381.33 (2017): 2691-2698.
