Title: Design a Sustainable Micro-mobility Future: Trends and Challenges in the United States and European Union Using Natural Language Processing Techniques
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2210.11714v2
--------------------------------------------------

Design a Sustainable Micro-mobility Future: Trends and Challenges in
the US and EU
Lilit Avetisyan
Industrial and Manufacturing Systems Engineering, University of Michigan-Dearborn
Chengxin Zhang
Industrial and Manufacturing Systems Engineering, University of Michigan-Dearborn
Sue Bai
Honda Research Institute USA, Inc., Industrial and Manufacturing Systems
Engineering, University of Michigan-Dearborn
Ehsan Moradi Pari
Honda Research Institute USA, Inc.
Fred Feng
Industrial and Manufacturing Systems Engineering, University of Michigan-Dearborn
Shan Bao
Industrial and Manufacturing Systems Engineering, University of Michigan-Dearborn,
University of Michigan Transportation Research Institute
Feng Zhou
Industrial and Manufacturing Systems Engineering, University of Michigan-Dearborn
arXiv:2210.11714v2  [cs.CL]  29 Oct 2022
2
ABSTRACT
Micro-mobility is promising to contribute to sustainable cities in the future with
its eﬃciency and low cost. To better design such a sustainable future, it is necessary to
understand the trends and challenges. Thus, we examined people’s opinions on
micro-mobility in the US and the EU using Tweets. We used topic modeling based on
advanced natural language processing techniques and categorized the data into seven
topics: promotion and service, mobility, technical features, acceptance, recreation,
infrastructure and regulations. Furthermore, using sentiment analysis, we investigated
people’s positive and negative attitudes towards speciﬁc aspects of these topics and
compared the patterns of the trends and challenges in the US and the EU. We found
that 1) promotion and service included the majority of Twitter discussions in the both
regions, 2) the EU had more positive opinions than the US, 3) micro-mobility devices
were more widely used for utilitarian mobility and recreational purposes in the EU than
in the US, and 4) compared to the EU, people in the US had many more concerns
related to infrastructure and regulation issues. These ﬁndings help us understand the
trends and challenges and prioritize diﬀerent aspects in micro-mobility to improve their
safety and experience across the two areas for designing a more sustainable
micro-mobility future.
Keywords: Micro-mobility, Social media, Sustainability, Natural Language
Processing.
3
INTRODUCTION
The growth of transportation has raised the need for compact, ﬂexible, and more
sustainable forms of transportation. Recent developments in the micro-mobility industry
show that these devices might address this issue and oﬀer people safer and cheaper trips
with reduced travel time. According to the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE)
deﬁnition (Society of Automotive Engineers, 2019), micro-mobility refers to a range of
small, less than 500 pounds (227 kg) lightweight, fully motorized or motor-assisted
devices operating at a speed below 30 mph (48 km/h) and ideal for trips up to 10 km.
Typical examples include e-bikes, e-scooters, e-unicycles and e-skateboards, and some of
them are widely used as personal or shared transportation devices (Price, Blackshear,
Blount Jr, & Sandt, 2021). The global micro-mobility market has been increasing over
the years. According to the NACTO (National Association of City Transportation
Oﬃcials, 2020), 136 million trips were generated by shared micro-mobility in 2019 in
the U.S., which was 60% more than 2018. Thus, micro-mobility devices can be well
integrated into the overall urban design process of smart and sustainable transportation
in the near future. With the sustainable design and development goal, we should not
only consider technical challenges and requirements (e.g., battery and material), but
also complement and constrain the design and development process by social,
infrastructural, and political schemes for a sustainable future (Jiao, Luo, Malmqvist,
Johan, & Summers, 2022). Hence, it is important to investigate such factors that
inﬂuence the trend of and the challenges associated with micro-mobility so far.
Micro-mobility device have been shown to improve the overall sustainability goal
in many urban areas around the world thanks to its various beneﬁts. The light weight
and small size of those devices provide options for short distance as well as “last mile”
travels (Gössling, 2020). Micro-mobility devices are popular among riders because they
are convenient and eﬃcient; some customers express that they can “ride at higher speed
with less eﬀort”, especially in hilly areas (Ling, Cherry, MacArthur, & Weinert, 2017).
People also use those devices for recreation and exercise purposes, and feel relaxed and
fun while riding (Haustein & Møller, 2016). The spread of micro-mobility sharing
4
programs reduces the cost of short-distance travel and makes them a cost-eﬀective mode
of transportation (Tark, 2020). It is also beneﬁcial from a business point of view
because the design and development cost of micro-mobility devices is considerably lower
compared to cars. In many metropolitan areas, micro-mobility plays an important role
for urban sustainability by providing solutions for traﬃc congestion and reducing
carbon emissions (Abduljabbar, Liyanage, & Dia, 2021). Since those devices do not
depend on fossil fuels, they are more sustainable compared to motor vehicles.
However, in order to include micro-mobility devices in the sustainable design
process in the future urban areas, it is important to investigate the challenges
associated with them nowadays. Abduljabbar et al. (2021) showed that the key barriers
were vandalism and theft, redistribution, availability, safety concerns, and relevant
regulations dealing with those issues. Pimentel and Lowry (2020) examined
micro-mobility related laws in the US and pointed out that the improper parking of
bicycles, e-bikes, or e-scooters in sidewalks or other shared paths was one of the key
barriers about shared micro-mobility systems. Pimentel and Lowry (2020) also pointed
out that one of the potential challenges for shared micro-mobility was the lack of legal
infrastructure, the unclear regulation and design of riding and parking areas may reduce
the motivation of potential users. In terms of safety, Kröyer (2021) conducted a
systematic review of transportation safety of micro-mobility, they found that single
accidents not involving other vehicles accounted for the majority of the accidents.
Crashes with motor vehicles accounted less than one third of the total accidents, but
they led to most of the fatal accidents involved micro-mobility. Moreover, the authors
also found that many safety investigations regarding micro-mobility reported a low
usage of helmet, which were more vulnerable to infrastructure defects, such as potholes
and ditches. U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (2020) summarized the
statistics of injuries and crash patterns of micro-mobility from 2017 to 2019, and they
concluded that the leading causes of micro-mobility involved injuries were unspeciﬁed
falls, accompanied with other notable hazards, such as loss of controls, collision with
motor vehicles, and road surface quality issues. Thus, a more systematic approach to
5
addressing the safety issues associated with micro-mobility might be more eﬀective by
integrating vehicle and infrastructure design to the overall socio-technical system in the
urban areas.
Previous studies examined literature and/or related laws about the beneﬁts and
challenges associated with the design and development of micro-mobility. In this study,
we aim to examine the self-reported data of e-bike and e-scooter (the major forms of
micro-mobility) users through social media across the US and the EU (i.e., tweets
collected in Italy, Germany, France, Estonia, Belgium, Croatia, Ireland, Malta, The
Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Sweden, Finland, Czech Republic, Bulgaria,
Luxembourg, Austria, Denmark, Spain, Romania, Latvia, Lithuania, Greece, Slovenia,
Hungary, Cyprus, Slovakia, and United Kingdom) for comparisons. We used social
media platforms as a data source since previous studies (Drus & Khalid, 2019; Zhou,
Ayoub, Xu, & Yang, 2020; Zhou, Jiao, & Linsey, 2015) showed that such data provided
valuable insights into customer needs with various products and determine key aspects
of their interests for redesign and improvement. Then, we applied natural language
processing (NLP) techniques based on the state-of-the-art deep learning models. Such
models have proved to be eﬀective in transportation (Ayoub et al., 2022; Zhang, Yang,
& Zhou, 2022) to uncover insights.
In summary, the contributions of this study are:
• We collected and analyzed data from Twitter and developed a taxonomy of main
topics for micro-mobility in the US and the EU.
• We investigated the sentiment of collected data in both regions to understand
users’ attitudes regarding diﬀerent aspects of micro-mobility devices and services.
• We provided insights into the similarities and diﬀerences of the US and the EU for
regional comparisons, including predominant causes of particular sentiments and
attitudes in the two regions to provide recommendations for designing a
sustainable micro-mobility future.
6
Related Work
E-bikes
A limited number of studies have examined the development and challenges of
e-bike, such as adoption, safety, infrastructure. Ling et al. (2017) investigated usage and
expectation diﬀerences between e-bike and conventional bike owners in the USA and
pointed out that ﬁnancial issues were the main hindrance aﬀecting e-bike purchases,
such as the purchase prices cycling distance per battery charge, and maintenance costs,
followed by availability concerns that no e-bikes or no desire modes of e-bikes were
available in the living areas. MacArthur, Cherry, Harpool, and Scheppke (2018)
conducted an online survey to explore that motivation for people to buy or use e-bikes.
The ﬁndings showed three main issues: 1) required services for e-bikes (e.g., the electric
and battery issues), 2) the concerns of the range of the battery, and 3) safety concerns
that about one third of the users had experienced crashes and about one tenth of the
users believed e-bikes had contributed to their crashes. Other issues included 1) the
weight of e-bikes, 2) the diﬃculty in riding under inclement weather, and 3) the cost
and relatively short travel distance. Zagorskas and Burinskien˙e (2019) investigated the
issues accompanied with increased use of e-powered personal mobility in Europe cities
and found that most of the micro-mobility devices (i.e., e-bikes, e-mopeds, and
e-scooters) usually have small wheels to be fordable and compact. However, those small
wheels were very sensitive to road surfaces. Riding these small devices on uneven
pavements was not smooth, causing the discomfort and risks of falling.
E-scooters
E-scooters are another emerging mode of the micro-mobility devices, and previous
studies explored user satisfaction and experience, safety concerns, and public
acceptance. For example, Aman, Smith-Colin, and Zhang (2021) analyzed about 12,026
reviews from the Lime and Bird App store and found that safety issues signiﬁcantly
inﬂuenced satisfaction of the e-scooter users, such as the lack of regulations on speed
and helmet, lane usage, and minimum age to ride. Other factors that inﬂuenced user
7
experience were also identiﬁed, including quality of the battery, especially the charge
level, pricing and payment of shared rides, customer service and refund, maps in ﬁnding
available e-scooters. Gössling (2020) studied on the internet media reports from ten
major cities in Europe and the US, and they also found that the expensive cost of
battery replacement was one of the major barriers for users. Kopplin, Brand, and
Reichenberger (2021) conducted an e-scooter survey through Facebook and collected
data from 749 responses, and their result showed that e-scooter users expressed negative
feedback on e-scooter damage and pollution that caused by the random disposal of
e-scooters. Dahl and Haug (2020) investigated the secondary data of e-scooters based
on previous studies and indicated that the short lifespan, improper parking, and
concerns about potential crash were the main barriers of e-scooter usage. Compared to
the safety issues of e-bikes, besides the single accidents, collision with vehicles and
visibility condition seem to have more impact on e-scooter related injuries. H. Yang et
al. (2020) analyzed the e-scooter crashes from 169 news reports from 2017 to 2019, the
news crashes showed that colliding with vehicles and falling-oﬀwere the two leading
causes of e-scooter involved crashes. They also stated that the accident rate at night
was high, which related to collision with inanimate objects under low visibility.
Blomberg et al. (2019) conducted a survey study through emergency medical
departments by collecting information from 468 scooter injuries from 2016 to 2019,
including 112 e-scooters related injuries. They found that the most frequent injure type
was falling oﬀfrom the e-scooters, which accounted for about 86.6% of total e-scooter
incidents, followed by collision with vehicles or moving objects (8.9%) and collision with
objects (4.5%). The result also showed that about one third of the e-scooter accidents
happened at nighttime (between 23:00 and 07:00 hours). Despite the fact that the
survey’s ﬁndings in the EU indicated that e-scooters were more frequently utilized for
shopping and entertainment than for commuting, some EU countries (e.g., France and
Germany) implemented minimum speed and age restrictions on e-scooters in order to
facilitate a quick and smooth integration in public transportation (Raptopoulou,
Basbas, Stamatiadis, & Nikiforiadis, 2020). Useche et al.(2022) conducted a systematic
8
review of US and EU studies and pointed out that poor risk perception and lack of
regulations were the main factors aﬀecting e-scooter riders’ safety. Furthermore, they
indicated that most of the e-scooter riders were young, male and highly educated people
living in urban areas, and used the devices for short distances and leisure purposes.
Campisi, Skoufas, Kaltsidis, and Basbas (2021) investigated the use of e-scooters among
females in Italy and identiﬁed a gender equality issue in micro-mobility since the
perceived safety and comfort were low, and concluded that these results should be taken
into consideration when designing micro-mobility schemes (e.g., infrastructure, devices).
Micro-mobility Sharing Programs
Previous researchers also examined micro-mobility sharing programs and other
electric micro personal devices. Abduljabbar et al. (2021) found that the damage and
theft were one of the issues for bike-sharing programs, better maintenance and lock
protection were needed. Moreover, information sharing about availability, careless
parking, and disposal issues caused public concerns as well. While Tuncer and Brown
(2020) reported that rental e-scooters intensiﬁed the conﬂict with public space, user
experience was important to attract more users as an enjoyable way of hacking the city.
Sunio, Laperal, and Mateo-Babiano (2020) presented a bike-sharing program with a
more explicit social enterprise model to achieve a broad impact for sustainability.
Boglietti, Barabino, and Maternini (2021) reviewed 90 studies between 2014 and 2020
and identiﬁed issues associated with the spread of e-powered micro-mobility devices,
such as e-scooter, e-kick scooters and self-balancing devices. The results indicated that
the lack of legislation on speed or other requirements, spatial issues with other road
users, and related economic concerns prevented the diﬀusion of e-powered
micro-mobility devices to a large extent. Loustric and Matyas (2020) studied about city
propensity of adopting micro-electric devices, including e-bikes, scooters, hover-boards,
and micro electric devices. The authors pointed out that the major consumer challenge
for micro-mobility was their limited power and the limitation on travel distance
compared to other motor vehicles. Handy and Fitch (2022) believed that increasing
9
awareness of e-bikes would increase their adoption. The inﬂuence on considering
commuting by e-bikes was not signiﬁcant, even though the experiment of installing an
e-bike sharing system in smart phones increased awareness three times. They suggested
that the increase of charging stations and numbers of available e-bikes should change
the results.
METHOD
The overall process of the method is shown in Figure 1 and we describe each
section below in details.
Data Collection
In this study, we mined and analyzed Twitter data that were related to
micro-mobility in the USA and the EU. Twitter.com is one of the biggest media
platforms, where users can post (tweet) their opinions and experience with
micro-mobility and shared systems, as well as for manufacturers to keep the audience up
to date with new updates and industry trends. Moreover, Twitter grants programmatic
access to their huge public database, enabling data collection and analysis in details.
Through the Twitter API (Application Programming Interface), we identiﬁed and
extracted a total of 481,951 tweets in English, containing at least one of the
micro-mobility keywords (i.e., e-bike, e-scooter, micro-mobility) from January 2015 to
May 2021. Since our targets were the USA and the EU, we applied additional location
ﬁltering, which resulted in a total of 13,611 tweets (i.e, US: 6,520 and EU: 7,091).
Data Preprocessing
The collected data was processed by text analysis using NLP, aiming to uncover
insights from unstructured data. There are two main text analysis techniques used in
this study: 1) Topic modeling is a process of clustering text data based on similar
characteristics of individual tweets, and classifying them relevant to their associations to
particular topics, and 2) sentiment analysis or opinion mining is a process to determine
10
Figure 1. Study Procedure.
the polarity of the text data (i.e., positive, neutral, or negative). The following two
sections describe in details the implementations of these methods on our data set.
Topic modeling.
In order to extract the topics in the collected tweet data, we
used two unsupervised learning techniques for topic modeling, including LDA (Latent
Dirichlet Allocation) (Blei, Ng, & Jordan, 2003) and BERTopic (Grootendorst, 2020)
The LDA model is a Bayesian probabilistic three-level hierarchical model, which maps
texts to diﬀerent topics followed by mapping of separate words in the text to that
topics. This model is a kind of "bag-of-words", method where the order of words is not
considered. BERTopic was built on BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from
Transformers) (Devlin, Chang, Lee, & Toutanova, 2019) embeddings for a document,
where BERT was a transformer-based machine learning model, pre-trained on large
corpora for diﬀerent types of NLP tasks.
First, BERTopic used the sentence-transformers package in Pytorch with 512
dimensions. In order to balance the computational resources and performance,
Distilbert was used instead as the model to transform raw text data into sentence
embeddings in Python in Google Colab. The embeddings at the sentence level worked
much better than word level encoding. Second, once the sentence embeddings were
obtained, their dimensions needed to be reduced due to the fact that clustering was
often performed poorly in high dimensions due to the so-called curse of dimensionality,
where all distances were large in suﬃciently high dimensional space. Uniform Manifold
11
Approximation and Projection (UMAP) (McInnes, Healy, & Melville, 2018) was used in
BERTopic to search a low dimensional projection of the embeddings that had the
closest possible equivalent fuzzy topological structure. The model reduced the
dimensionality to 5 while keeping the size of the local neighborhood at 15. Third, the
model used the HDBSCAN (Hierarchical Density-Based Spatial Clustering of
Applications with Noise) (McInnes, Healy, & Astels, 2017) algorithm to cluster similar
embeddings together after dimension reduction. HDBSCAN was able to cluster the
embeddings meaningfully with minimal parameter tuning. It did not need to specify the
number of clusters (unlike k-means) or thresholds to be in a neighborhood and it could
identify noisy members that were far away from the neighbors. However, it might end
up with a large number of embeddings without a speciﬁc cluster. Fourth, after the
documents were clustered, the model applied class-based TF-IDF scores to ﬁnd the
most important words within each cluster to represent the topics. The model might
produce a large number of granular clusters. In order to merge possible similar topics
together, we can increase one parameter, i.e., the minimal number of members within a
cluster, to produce a smaller number of clusters based on the previous results. Thus,
Step 3 and Step 4 can be iterated in order to tune the results.
We used both BERTopic and LDA to identify topics from the US tweets. During
this process, we tuned the results with diﬀerent granularity levels in order to determine
the appropriate number of topics. Then, within each topic, we manually read the most
relevant tweets to interpret the results and assigned a topic name as the label of the
cluster. The BERTopic model performed much better than the LDA model. The overall
process was eﬃcient and eﬀective. However, in order to further improve the accuracy of
the topic modeling, we manually checked all the labels generated by the BERTopic
model with four human raters independently with 98.75% agreement. In such a way, we
have a set of labeled topics that were used to train a supervised topic models (see
Twitter-roBERTa below) to predict the labels for the EU tweets.
Sentiment analysis.
We performed sentiment analysis using the VADER
(Valence Aware Dictionary and sEntiment Reasoner)(Hutto & Gilbert, 2014) lexicon
12
and rule-based sentiment analysis tool. Unlike machine learning methods, the VADER
approach was especially built for social media data with an emotion dictionary and with
a set of ﬁve heuristics (i.e., punctuation, capitalization, intensiﬁers, conjunctions,
negation), which determined the sentiment polarity of sentences and an intensity score
at the same time. Based on the output of the VADER score, we then manually checked
and relabeled 3,000 randomly selected US tweets. In order to improve the reliability of
the labels, the data was relabeled by four human raters independently. Furthermore,
additional discussion sessions were involved to resolve inconsistent labels with an
inter-rater reliability of 97.6%.
Supervised Model Development and Prediction
We further ﬁne-tuned sentiment and topic prediction using the labeled data
obtained previously. A total of six transformer-based ML models (i.e. BERT,
BERTweet (Nguyen, Vu, & Nguyen, 2020), DistilBert (Sanh, Debut, Chaumond, &
Wolf, 2019), DistilRoberta (Sanh et al., 2019), Twitter-roBERTa (Barbieri,
Camacho-Collados, Neves, & Espinosa-Anke, 2020) and XLNet (Z. Yang et al., 2019))
were tested and used for comparison.Transformers were ﬁrst introduced in 2017 by
Google researchers (Vaswani et al., 2017) and became turning point in NLP by
processing large scale of documents with high performance and accuracy. Transformer’s
architecture includes two main segments called encoder and decoder that process the
input and output sequences respectively and generate one item at the time. First, the
encoder takes the word sequence as input and chooses on what tokens the model should
pay “attention” to learn and predict the next word. Second, decoder begins with a start
token and takes a list of previous outputs as inputs, as well as the encoder outputs that
contain the attention information from the input, applies positional encoding to
determine the right positions of the word in the sequence, and stops decoding when it
generates a token as an output. During the model evaluation, diﬀerent hyperparameters
were tested (i.e., maximum sequence length (128, 256, 512), epochs (5-10) and learning
rate ( 5 × 10−5, 3 × 10−5, 2 × 10−5)), aiming to ﬁnd the best training parameters for our
13
data set and ﬁne-tune the models.
Results showed that the Twitter-RoBERTa model had the highest f1 performance
score (see Table 1) both for topic and sentiment prediction, and was selected for further
prediction for the EU tweets. This model was developed on RoBERTa model and was
trained on 58M tweets to evaluate Twitter-speciﬁc data. The RoBERTa model uses the
BERT’s strategy of masked language modeling and prediction with diﬀerent
hyperparameters, but excludes the next sentence prediction task included in the BERT
architecture using full sentences or documents as an input for training data. The model
was trained on 160GB language corpora with larger batches. To improve the
performance, RoBERTa also switched to the dynamic data masking technique, which
encodes the input data 10 times, each time using diﬀerent encoding pattern to avoid
masking the same words in the sequence. This allows RoBERTa to achieve better
performance in language modeling tasks compared to BERT. Barbieri et al. (2020)
developed the Twitter-RoBERTa model by post-training the general RoBERTa model
with a large Twitter corpus.
Finally, we reviewed the negative and positive tweets per topic for the purpose of
ﬁnding out the main causes of the complaints and the factors that attracted people in
micro-mobility. The aim of the detailed investigation was to point out the vulnerable
areas that might inﬂuence the progress of micro-mobility development and improvement
in the future.
Comparisons Between US and EU
Two comparison processes were applied to understand the diﬀerences between two
regions with statistical analysis. First, for each region, we identiﬁed the usage patterns,
main trends, and challenges under each topic, then we compared the results to identify
the regional diﬀerences. Second, we performed Chi-squared tests to analyse the
distributions and associations of positive, negative, and neutral tweets across the seven
topics in each region. Finally, we performed Chi-squared tests to identify the statistical
diﬀerences of regions regarding sentiment and topic distributions.
14
RESULTS
Micro-mobility topics
US results.
In the topic modeling process, the LDA and BERTopic
unsupervised models were performed on the 3,000 US tweets. The results of manual
labeling showed that BERTopic performed better than LDA. The BERTopic model
resulted in 103 ﬁne-grained topics that share common characteristics with similarity
value above 0.915, and 1,237 tweets did not belong to any of the topics. Furthermore,
we manually evaluated and relabeled the results and removed addition 161 tweets
because of irrelevant content. The manual re-grouping at the lower granularity level of
the remaining 1,602 tweets resulted in a total of 17 topics (i.e., Advertising, Recreation,
Transportation, Infrastructure, New Release, New Customer, Mobility, Acceptance,
Financing, Customer Service, Safety, Regulations, Body features, Battery, Speed,
Power, and Sharing). However, the visual map of inter-topic distance indicated that
majority of the topic clusters were fairly close to one another (e.g., body features, speed,
power and battery were mapped on top of each other) and several topics contained only
a small number of tweets (e.g., customer service: 9, sharing: 12) comparing to others,
which negatively inﬂuenced the performance of supervised models. To resolve this issue,
we merged topics with a small numbers considering the distances among them. We
ﬁnally identiﬁed seven topics, including 1) Promotion and service, 2) Mobility, 3)
Technical features, 4) Acceptance, 5) Recreation, 6) Infrastructure, and 7) Regulations.
Figure 2 shows the distribution of the topics in the US. The distribution was as
follows: promotion and service was the largest topic with 650 tweets (40.6%), mobility
had 301 (18.8%) tweets, technical features had 173 (10.8%) tweets, public acceptance
had 168 (10.5%) tweets, recreation had 149 (9.3%) tweets, infrastructure had 82 (5.1%)
tweets, and the remaining 79 (4.9%) represented the regulations topic.
Promotion and service is the largest category we identiﬁed, which accounts for
40.6% in the US. This tends to be consistent with the fact that many of the tweets were
generated by micro-mobility companies, who wanted to promote their sales. This topic
includes manufacturer updates about new releases, dealerships’ advertisements and
15
Figure 2. Distribution of tweets in the US and EU across seven topics.
promotions (e.g., “Airwheel E3 backpacking ebike, with a radical design, makes a good
start for integration of intelligent vehicles into popular daily life.”), as well as tweets
related to new customers (e.g., “ I’m also trying to decide which cargo ebike to buy. I
even made a spreadsheet to compare. Haha. Here is a video I created so if you’re still
looking, you take a look”). Furthermore, this category also includes customer service
(e.g., “At least I’ll know I can ﬁnd my next ebike purchase elsewhere. I can’t support a
company with such a cancellation culture. Bye”) and ﬁnancial issues, such as absence of
subsidy programs and higher sale prices and rental costs (e.g. “ Any EV subsidy
program that doesn’t also have an ebike subsidy is a massive policy failure”). This topic
contains a large number of tweets, indicating that manufacturers and dealers actively
use the social media to promote their products and services.
The mobility topic describes the beneﬁts and opportunities of micro-mobility
brought, such as the sustainability and eﬃciency of e-bikes and e-scooters compared to
cars (e.g., “Transportation revolutions Driverless EV Shared Mobility together can cut
CO2 80 percent”, “ Yes and an ebike is sometimes (most of the time!) the fastest way
to get around a city - hello dedicated lane- so it could improve eﬃciency for the busiest
people”). At the same time, people also shared their experience of using e-bikes and
e-scooters as a primary way of transportation (e.g., “We are a 1 car 2 ebike household.
16
The car sits most days, and kids get dropped of at daycare on e cargobike. A bike doesn’t
have to replace 100% of trips to be helpful.”, “ In SF, there are not enough ebikes. I
would be very curious about the take rate. I assumed that EVERYONE would choose
ebike if there was a choice at the dock. There is so much opportunity to get more people
on board micromobility. But little/no outreach beyond...”). Additionally, this topic
discusses the safety beneﬁts (e.g., “I feel waaay safer going consistently 15-20mph on
my ebike than I do doing 9-13mph on a normal one. The better acceleration alone
makes city streets feel much safer”) and concerns (e.g., “All these 6’ wide bike lanes will
quickly become too narrow with widespread ebike adoption. 20mph is really fast on a
bike in the city.”) of micro-mobility devices.
The topic of technical features covers the discussions related to micro-mobility
devices, such as body (i.e, breaks, weight, cargo space) (e.g., “Modern hydraulic discs
are so great. Also good choice considering ebike speeds.”,“Weight was a main factor in
choosing my Trek over an ebike right now. Some days it’s hard enough carrying my
XXL sized Trek up 3 ﬂights of stairs. Can’t imagine doing that with an ebike just yet.
But seeing its usefulness on days when I wanna bike run.”,“Nice design but no basket or
storage area? Hard to invest in an eBike that I can’t do family shopping with.” ), drive
system (i.e, battery, power, speed) (e.g., “Batteries are also aﬀected by the cold.
Straight out of the house, the ebike would zip along at its 28 mph limit. But once it
cooled down to freezing it would max out at 23 mph.”,“Most ebikes will struggle with a
grade that high (20%!) And it’s hard to know if it would provide any notable boost at
all, weak motors may burn. But a mid-drive ebike with a 750-1000watt motor would
make it, you’ll still have to pedal but it should be notably easier.”,“In my exp the average
speed of an ebike is higher than a reg bike bc ebikes accelerate to their top speed more
quickly. Riding at top speed for more time means the rider faces a lot more risk if they
crash.”.), and eﬀects of diﬀerent e-bike classes that were deﬁned by government based
on its characteristics in order to regulate the usage (e.g., “Weight, speed, but also
throttle sensitivity (especially on pedal assist class 1 bike)”).
Acceptance contains positive and supporting tweets about micro-mobility and
17
expresses public attitudes and preferences towards the micro-mobility devices, especially
e-bikes and e-scooters, and its integration into the transportation system (e.g., “I see
the ebike as more a car replacement, I’ve still got a non electric road bike I plan to still
use for run rides with friends at the weekend”).
Recreation refers to tweets about fun, leisure, tours, and sports. For instance,
people discussed and shared stories about their active lifestyles with e-bikes and
e-scooters with trips, such as morning cycling and weekend sightseeing tours. Example
tweets include “Beautiful views riding around North Portland today. We rode all the
way up and over the St. John’s Bridge!”, “We passed a lady in her 70s on an ebike
going through the rollers on 36 Saturday. She had a huge smile on her face and was
cruising along. Was awesome”, “Today’s incredible ride from Ullapool harbour involved
grit and determination at points!! ?? But Wow, the views more than made up for it!!”.
For the infrastructure topic, we identiﬁed tweets related to road structures and
sharing services that supported the usage of micro-mobility devices. These covered the
discussions about necessity of new road architectures that included separated lanes for
such type of transportation (e.g., “Oh, and ebike use can’t expand to its full potential
without infrastructure changes to make non-car travel safer.”) and necessity of
additional pick-up, drop-oﬀ, and parking zones (e.g., “oﬃcially released a map of the
designated parking spaces for electric scooters! Many thanks to our community for all
the support. SMU ? PonyUp ElectricScooter”), as well as updates about new
micro-mobility hubs (e.g., “Completing ’s ﬁrst of two MicroMobility Parking Hubs watch
for scooters ebikes this First Friday”).
The regulations topic discusses the laws, rules, and the traﬃc restrictions for
diﬀerent type of micro-mobility vehicles. Example tweets are “economy mode is limited
to a top speed of 20 mph, 1,000 watts to comply with California ebike regulations.”,“We
go by bicycle/ebike laws for now. There are no real laws regarding the EUC’s. Its
always good to have a light if riding at night.”, “I can’t park my motorcycle inside my
oﬃce! USA needs a uniform law limiting top ebike assist speed. EU is 15.5 mph.”,“This
18
passed in 2005 and will be reconsidered along with other regulation over the course of
the dockless shared mobility pilot”,“BMW and Mercedes limit their cars to 155 mph.
Meanwhile, the government limits my ebike to 28 mph so I don’t hurt someone.”
EU results.
Using the labeled tweets from the US as ground truth, we
ﬁne-tuned six pre-trained models from transformers, and tested with diﬀerent
parameters. Table 1 summarizes the f1-scores for all the tested models for predicting
topics, where we used 5-fold cross-validation with max sequence length = 256, learning
rate = 3 × 10−5 and epoch = 10. The Twitter-roBERTa model had the best
performance among all the models resulting in f1-score = .90 prediction performance.
Then, we used the trained Twitter-roBERTa model to predict the topics of the
micro-mobility tweets posted in the EU (see Figure 1).
The EU results were generally similar to the US, but with some distinct patterns.
First, both promotion and service was the largest topic that social media was widely
used for promotion and service updates in EU also with 40.8 % of the tweets.
Respectively, mobility accounted for 16.0%, acceptance accounted for 11.3%, technical
features accounted for 9.0%, infrastructure accounted for 2.8%, and regulations
accounted for 1.9% (see Figure 2). In the EU, the distribution of tweets for mobility,
technical features and acceptance topics was slightly diﬀerent from the US result.
Therefore, we proceeded with a detailed analysis for each topic independently and
compared the ﬁndings in the discussion section. However, the percentage of recreation
related tweets was 18.2%, which was almost twice as much as that in the US, indicating
that micro-mobility usage for recreation purposes was more developed in the EU than
that in the US. Also, infrastructure and regulations in the US were much more in the
US than in the EU. In general, EU has clearly established laws for micro-mobility
devices while the US is still in the process of deﬁning laws and rules regarding the usage
of micro-mobility devices and their subcategories on roads or in public areas.
19
Figure 3. Distribution of positive, neutral and negative tweets in the US and EU.
Sentiment analysis
US results.
With regard to sentiment analysis, results indicated that 47.4% of
all the US tweets were assessed as neutral, 43.4% were positive and 9.0% were negative
(see Figure 3), indicating that almost half of the users tended to favor the current
e-bikes and e-scooters.
EU results.
We replicated the supervised learning and prediction process to
predict sentiment polarities in the EU using sentiment labels in the US data. Here, we
replaced Twitter-roBERTa base model with the sentiment-oriented version since it was
speciﬁcally pre-trained for sentiment evaluation. Table 1 illustrates the prediction
performance for models and shows that Twitter-roBERTa model outperforms others by
having f1-score = 0.91 in prediction. In the EU, prediction results showed that majority
of tweets were categorized as positive and was accounted for 55.0% of EU tweets. Since
in the US lots of tweets were neutral (47.4%), people in the EU had more positive
experience using micro-mobility devices, and were more satisﬁed with micro-mobility
integration than in the US. Respectively, 39.6% were predicted as neutral, and 5.4% as
negative (see Figure 3) indicating that in the EU people were facing problems 60% less
than in the US.
In addition, we conducted a Chi-Square analysis to determine the associations
20
Table 1: The f1-scores and ROC_AUC scores of evaluated models for the topic and
sentiment
BERT
BERTweet
DistilBert
DistilRoberta
Twitter-Roberta
XLNet
f1-score
roc_auc
f1-score
roc_auc
f1-score
roc_auc
f1-score
roc_auc
f1-score
roc_auc
f1-score
roc_auc
Topic
0.79
0.91
0.88
0.89
0.88
0.87
0.84
0.90
0.90
0.93
0.82
0.83
Sentiment
0.89
0.73
0.84
0.93
0.86
0.94
0.85
0.93
0.91
0.98
0.80
0.90
between sentiment polarities and topics. Although we could not ﬁnd statistical
diﬀerence per topic (χ2 = 1.16, p = .978) and per sentiment (χ2 = 3.04, p = .218
between the US and EU, there was a signiﬁcant diﬀerence within each region.
In the US, the results showed that topics were signiﬁcantly associated with their
sentiments (χ2 = 665.90, p < .001). The post-hoc analysis showed that mobility had
signiﬁcantly more (p < .001) negative tweets, and recreation had signiﬁcantly fewer
negative tweets (compared with Infrastructure (p = .011) and the remaining topics
(p < .001)). The strong association between promotion and service with neutral
sentiment in Figure 4 indicated that the topic included the largest amount of neutral
tweets than other topics (p < .000). Regarding to the positive sentiment, distribution of
tweets was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent among all topics (p < .013). While recreation
(p < .000) and promotion and service (p < .000) were leading by a signiﬁcantly larger
amount of positive tweets, the association of regulations, infrastructure and technical
features with positive sentiment was signiﬁcantly weak (p < .000).
We also found signiﬁcant diﬀerences for associations between topics and
sentiments in the EU (χ2 = 659.19, p < .001). Post-hoc analysis showed that the
positive tweets were strongly associated with recreation and acceptance than with other
topics. The neutral sentiment was mainly associated with technical features and
regulations. Nevertheless, mobility included the largest amount of negative tweets than
other, the negative sentiment had the strongest association with regulations topic
followed by infrastructure. Figure 4 represents the topic and sentiment associations in
each region based on Pearson residuals shown in circles. The positive values,
demonstrated in blue, indicated positive association between topic and sentiment, and
the larger the value was, the stronger the association was. For instance, regulations
were strongly associated with negative sentiment and were weakly associated with the
21
Figure 4. Associations between topics and sentiments.
neutral sentiment. Likewise, the negative values, demonstrated in red, indicate the
negative associations and the size showed the strength of association. For instance,
mobility was negatively associated with the neutral sentiment in the EU.
DISCUSSIONS
With the BertTopic model and manual labelling, we identiﬁed seven topics that
people from the US and the EU mainly discussed in the social media. We also found
that Twitter-Roberta and Twitter-Roberta (sentiment) models performed the best on
our data. The sections below provide detailed explanations of results for each region
and their similarities and diﬀerences.
22
US
Our proposed method identiﬁed relevant topics that positively impacted
micro-mobility integration with the transportation system. Results showed that
mobility was the ﬁrst major topic acknowledged in the US tweets as a major beneﬁt of
micro-mobility. In particular, people highlighted the cost-eﬃciency of using
micro-mobility devices compared to cars and other transportation modes (e.g., “Oddly
enough.. I drive my car about 75% less since I got my ebike. Between that and
ride-sharing, not sure you need to own a car anymore. That’s in CA, at least. Ebikes
might take down the entire auto industry”). As a part of mobility, the sharing option
also had an important role for long-distance rides because users did not need to worry
about charging. The literature review also supported this ﬁnding as recent years people
switched more from public transportation to micro-mobility devices and shared mobility
modes, particularly during and COVID-19 pandemic (Nikitas, Tsigdinos, Karolemeas,
Kourmpa, & Bakogiannis, 2021).
The second topic with a major positive sentiment was technical features. The
design concept, such as folding frames, was appreciated by many people as it was easy
to carry and store. Also, the pedal assistance feature was valued since users could take
over control of the power used by the e-bike’s drive system and save battery more
mileages. (e.g.,“I can go on a slow roll group ride on an ebike with 100 other regular
bikes and nobody even notices it’s electric. Pretty sure I could not do that with a
motorcycle”).
Third, in the acceptance topic, we found that people tended to use e-bikes to
maintain an active and healthy lifestyle with less eﬀorts compared to regular bikes (e.g.,
“I think eBikes could be huge in the US, because we have a) hills and b) humidity.
Speciﬁcally, I suspect many professionals can’t (or don’t want to) shower at work to
rinse oﬀafter biking to the oﬃce, while an eBike would allow them to commute without
getting sweaty”). In addition, recent design updates satisﬁed critical requirements to
replace cars. For example, e-bikes with cargo racks could easily haul other passengers
and groceries, which were previously mentioned as a main concern of replacing cars
23
with micro-mobility devices.
Fourth, using e-bikes and e-scooters for recreational purposes became popular
among people in the US. E-bike riders were more motivated to spend leisure time
having short trips in nearby areas or go for weekend trips in groups while regular
bicycles were used for utilitarian purposes (e.g., “Another Friday, another full and fun
weekend of valuable eTrike time ahead of us!! Happy Friday everyone!”).
However, in some topics, people often faced challenges by using micro-mobility
vehicles in the US. In detail, with regard to technical features, the battery issues were
mostly discussed in social media pointing out that cold weather signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced
battery lifetime (e.g., “Batteries are also aﬀected by the cold. Straight out of the house,
the ebike would zip along at its 28 mph limit. But once it cooled down to freezing it
would max out at 23 mph.”), causing faster discharge or complete damage. This resulted
in extra expenses which disappointed users. Previous studies (Loustric & Matyas, 2020;
MacArthur et al., 2018) reported concerns about distance per battery, but there was no
indication about battery issues under diﬀerent weather conditions. The heavyweight
was the second major factor mentioned in the tweets which was consistent with the
literature. Though it is well known that e-bikes are heavier than regular bicycles due to
the motor system and battery, riders were expecting lighter e-bikes in the market (e.g.,
“Weight was a main factor in choosing my Trek over an ebike right now. Some days it’s
hard enough carrying my XXL sized Trek up 3 ﬂights of stairs...”).
Second, the ﬁnancial burden as mentioned in the promotion and service category
was another concern. The e-bike purchase price as well as the rent and maintenance
cost were notably higher than a regular bicycle and were not aﬀordable for many
middle-income users (e.g., “$15/mo + $2 per ebike ride I’m disappointed by the rollout
of ebike pricing in NYC. I know we’re going to need to pay more for ebikes but the
communication and structure of this change misses the mark.”). The major complaint
was that unlike the electric vehicles, there were no subsidy programs for e-bikes or
e-scooters oﬀered by the government (e.g., “on to the tax code. If you buy a luxury EV
the government will cut you a check for $7k. Almost no where has subsidies for folks
24
who want to buy an ebike”). Although Ling et al. (2017), already pointed out the
ﬁnancial issues (i.e., price and maintenance cost) as a major barrier, our ﬁndings
provided more details about people’s expectations.
Third, infrastructure-related problems hamper the use and integration of
micro-mobility devices. The main problems were a lack of dedicated lanes (mentioned
by both car drivers and micro-mobility device owners), safe parking zones, and charging
stations (e.g., “We should absolutely convert a car lane. Replacing car infra with ebike
infra is exactly the climate action we need”, “Addressing shared mobility when planning
for the future of transportation is important. When planning for transportation are we
adjusting requirements for parking?”). Abduljabbar et al. (2021) also pointed out the
parking safety concerns and mentioned that availability of micro-mobility devices (i.e.,
e-bikes and e-scooters) was a problem for micro-mobility development. Regulation
issues were also highlighted as a barrier. We found contradicted opinions about speed
limit regulations, as for owners, it limited the mobility advantage they were getting
from micro-mobility devices while pedestrians were complaining that the deﬁned limits
were not safe enough to prevent them from severe injuries (e.g., “So I can now legally
ride my cargo carrying ebike that weighs less than 80lbs up to 12 mph on the sidewalk?
sweet. Also, how much is the value of a dead/injured pedestrian or cyclist? $1000?
$1500? $2000?”). Moreover, there were no federal laws deﬁned to regulate accidents
that included e-bikes or e-scooters. In contrast, previous studies only (Aman et al.,
2021; Boglietti et al., 2021) included concerns related to the lack of speed legislation
and regulations with other road users.
EU
In the EU, micro-mobility devices, particularly e-bikes, were widely accepted
among the elderly and people in special medical conditions. In the acceptance topic, we
found that people with various health problems (e.g., “Sometimes walking is harder for
people than cycling like my wife who had spinal surgery, her ebike allows her to get
around easier”) switched to e-bikes by doctors’ suggestion and found it extremely
25
helpful. Meantime, people also paid more attention to the fact that these devices were
an eco-friendly transportation mode (e.g., “We won’t stop working towards our goal to
make our everyday life more #sustainable and our world a more livable place. Thanks
to our electric micromobility services we will reduce the carbon emissions caused by
existing urban transportation networks and make them more eﬃcient.”). Unlike the US,
mobility-related tweets showed that time-eﬃciency was a key factor in using
micro-mobility devices for utilitarian purposes (e.g., “Compared to using our PHEV (as
an electric car) then using the ebike is saving 3.5kWh for the return trip to the oﬃce or
approx 1kgCO2 and of course better for me and taking up less road space etc. So
assuming I manage 100 return trips to work per year then that 100kgCO2...!”). For
e-bikes, people also found it safer to use in the winter and in the long distance rides
(i.e., more than 20 miles) rather than regular bicycles. The EU had a well-developed
recreation network. Activities, such as multi-city e-bike touring, were common among
diﬀerent countries (e.g., “We’re excited to announce as well as #ebike hire, we now do
guided electricbike tours. We have lots of tours in the pipeline across the South. If you
have any special requests, we’d love to hear from you.”), and because many cafes and
restaurants were providing charging points, it was convenient to use for long-distance
recreation purposes (e.g., “Interesting concept. batteries being charged in a local bakery.
Can I please get some background (prices, terms and conditions) please? #smartcity
#micromobility #escooter”).
However, the EU needs improvements for the expansion of micro-mobility.
Although the infrastructure supports micro-mobility usage in many countries, there was
still a need to redesign the roads for safer integration (e.g., “Are you any more likely to
be hit by an ebike than a regular bike in the UK? I imagine same policy applies. No
number plates required here. I suppose the separated, dedicated lanes here mean
collisions rarely occur.”). Moreover, there was a lack of maintenance services for
damaged stations. Another major issue was about parking stations’ security, where
people mentioned that their parked e-bikes were stolen (e.g., “This seemed sensible until
I remembered that an eBike is so easily stolen. I’d love to go to the shops on a bike
26
return with wares in a rucksack. But there’s no way at all I can leave an eBike for more
than a few seconds even while locked. Secure storage is an eBike necessity.”). There is a
lack of such information in the literature. Users were also facing technical issues, such
as battery overheating that resulted in shorter lifetime than manufacturers mentioned
(e.g., “Don’t forget your #ebike #batteries in this weather. Remember the cold will also
aﬀect the range you get out of your battery, so make sure you keep them topped up
too.”). Furthermore, some complaints were about maximum speed capability that
weight (i.e., obese people or carrying extra batteries) notably reduced the speed (e.g.,
“My ebike slows me down, as it is slower than my other bikes due to the weight of the
motor and battery.”). Finally, issues related to regulating e-bikes and e-scooters with
unclear deﬁnitions and legalization were not addressed, resulting in penalties (e.g.,
“Electric scooters are illegal in the UK and users face a £300 ﬁxed penalty and 6 points
on their driving license! I am surprised as I see people using these daily!.”).
Design a Sustainable Micro-mobility Future
The trends and challenges of micro-mobility across the US and the EU help better
understand diﬀerent priorities in designing a sustainable micro-mobility future in
several aspects. First, micro-mobility vehicles reduce people’s dependence on traditional
vehicles (especially for short distance travels) by as much as 30% (Fitt & Curl, 2019),
which is more evident in the EU and now many big cities in the US. This will improve
environmental sustainability by reducing carbon dioxide emissions. Further work needs
to be done in this aspect in both areas, such as designing and building more related
transportation infrastructure across diﬀerent cities, including dedicated lanes, safe
parking zones, charging stations, and repair shops. Related laws and regulations about
micro-mobility should also be proposed and deﬁned. Second, micro-mobility and its
sharing programs should be well designed to connect the public transportation system
to solve the ﬁrst and last mile problems so that users can travel across a longer distance
with ﬂexibility and low costs. Such design might well address systemic issues around
transportation equality. The ﬁnancial burden was found as one concern compared to
27
traditional bicycles. In this aspect, government subsidy programs like those for electric
cars should be considered for micro-mobility devices as well. Another perspective is
through innovative design, such as more lightweight materials, more eﬃcient battery
technologies, autonomous damage sensors, and puncture proof tires for more sustainable
rides. Third, as shown in the EU, many elderly people with diﬀerent health conditions
were still able to maintain an active and healthy lifestyle through micro-mobility.
Through proper promotion by commercials and recommendations by doctors, not only
younger people, but also the elderly are able to make everyday life more sustainable.
Limitations and Future Work
This study also has limitations that can be examined in future studies. First, the
data was collected only from the Twitter social media platform since other possible
sources could not provide geographic information about data. The vast majority of the
collected data did not include geographic information and were excluded from analysis.
Since the study was aimed to compare the trends and challenges in the EU and the US,
all the tweets from unknown locations were excluded from the analysis. Thus, it might
have selection biases in reporting the results based only with the current collected
Twitter data. Therefore, for future research, 1) additional sources, such as articles from
big media agencies or comments from YouTube videos can be collected, 2) additional
data inspection process is needed in order to identify the possible origin before
proceeding to the analysis, and 3) further investigations are needed to understand the
possible issues especially in the EU and its eﬀects on the overall trend.
Second, we ﬁltered and analyzed tweets in English which remarkably reduced the
amount of EU tweets. One possible reason could be that English is not a national
language for most of the EU countries. Therefore, it is worthwhile to include tweets in
countries’ native languages for further investigation. Third, only US tweets, which had
imbalanced topics, were used for the supervised models’ training which might result in
biased models and eventually aﬀect the prediction accuracy. The labels of the models
were also provided by subjective labeling. In the future, more data with relatively
28
balanced labels and more reliable human raters should be used to train the model to
improve the overall performance in the future.
CONCLUSION
In this study, we investigated the micro-mobility trends and challenges in the US
and the EU and aimed to identify the diﬀerences between these two regions using tweet
data. We applied the state-of-the-art NLP methods to analyse the collected data and
extract main areas of people’s interests in micro-mobility, and explored the polarity of
their opinions related to particular topics. We identiﬁed seven major topics (i.e.,
promotion and service, mobility, technical features, acceptance, recreation,
infrastructure and regulations) based on Twitter data set that contained micro-mobility
information. Next, we explored the sentiment polarity (i.e., positive, neutral, and
negative) of the data and determined their distributions across the two regions. We
found that the EU was dominated by positive opinions about micro-mobility. However,
topics, such as infrastructure, regulations and technical features were dominated by
negative opinions in both regions. These ﬁndings showed that our method
complemented the challenges and trends that were found in the literature, and provided
better understanding from the users’ point of view expressed in social media.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the University of Michigan Mcity. The views
expressed are those of the authors and do not reﬂect the oﬃcial policy or position of
Honda.
29
References
Abduljabbar, R. L., Liyanage, S., & Dia, H. (2021). The role of micro-mobility in
shaping sustainable cities: A systematic literature review. Transportation research
part D: transport and environment, 92, 102734.
Aman, J. J., Smith-Colin, J., & Zhang, W. (2021). Listen to e-scooter riders: Mining
rider satisfaction factors from app store reviews. Transportation research part D:
transport and environment, 95, 102856.
Ayoub, J., Wang, Z., Li, M., Guo, H., Sherony, R., Bao, S., & Zhou, F. (2022).
Cause-and-eﬀect analysis of adas: A comparison study between literature review
and complaint data. In Proceedings of the 14th international conference on
automotive user interfaces and interactive vehicular applications (pp. 139–149).
Barbieri, F., Camacho-Collados, J., Neves, L., & Espinosa-Anke, L. (2020). Tweeteval:
Uniﬁed benchmark and comparative evaluation for tweet classiﬁcation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2010.12421.
Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y., & Jordan, M. I. (2003, mar). Latent dirichlet allocation. J.
Mach. Learn. Res., 3, 993–1022.
Blomberg, S. N. F., Rosenkrantz, O. C. M., Lippert, F., & Christensen, H. C. (2019).
Injury from electric scooters in copenhagen: a retrospective cohort study. BMJ
open, 9(12), e033988.
Boglietti, S., Barabino, B., & Maternini, G. (2021). Survey on e-powered micro
personal mobility vehicles: Exploring current issues towards future developments.
Sustainability, 13(7). doi: 10.3390/su13073692
Campisi, T., Skoufas, A., Kaltsidis, A., & Basbas, S. (2021). Gender equality and
e-scooters: Mind the gap! a statistical analysis of the sicily region, italy. Social
Sciences, 10(10), 403.
Dahl, A., & Haug, J. A. (2020). E-scooter–convenience versus environment: a green
innovation value chain analysis of transportation in urban areas (Unpublished
master’s thesis). Handelshøyskolen BI.
Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., & Toutanova, K. (2019). Bert: Pre-training of deep
30
bidirectional transformers for language understanding. ArXiv, abs/1810.04805.
Drus, Z., & Khalid, H. (2019). Sentiment analysis in social media and its application:
Systematic literature review. Procedia Computer Science, 161, 707–714.
Fitt, H., & Curl, A. (2019). E-scooter use in new zealand: Insights around some
frequently asked questions. University of Canterbury: Christchurch, New Zealand.
Gössling, S. (2020). Integrating e-scooters in urban transportation: Problems, policies,
and the prospect of system change. Transportation Research Part D: Transport
and Environment, 79, 102230.
Grootendorst, M. (2020). Bertopic: Leveraging bert and c-tf-idf to create easily
interpretable topics. Zenodo. Retrieved from
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4381785 doi: 10.5281/zenodo.4381785
Handy, S. L., & Fitch, D. T. (2022). Can an e-bike share system increase awareness and
consideration of e-bikes as a commute mode? results from a natural experiment.
International Journal of Sustainable Transportation, 16(1), 34–44.
Haustein, S., & Møller, M. (2016). E-bike safety: individual-level factors and incident
characteristics. Journal of Transport & Health, 3(3), 386–394.
Hutto, C., & Gilbert, E. (2014). Vader: A parsimonious rule-based model for sentiment
analysis of social media text. In Proceedings of the international aaai conference
on web and social media (Vol. 8, pp. 216–225).
Jiao, R., Luo, J., Malmqvist, Johan, & Summers, J. (2022). New design: Opportunities
for engineering design in an era of digital transformation. Journal of Engineering
Design, xx(x), 1-5.
Kopplin, C. S., Brand, B. M., & Reichenberger, Y. (2021). Consumer acceptance of
shared e-scooters for urban and short-distance mobility. Transportation research
part D: transport and environment, 91, 102680.
Kröyer, H. (2021). Bicycles, e-bikes and micromobility, a traﬃc safety overview. In
R. Vickerman (Ed.), International encyclopedia of transportation (p. 125-138).
Oxford: Elsevier. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-102671-7.10102-2
Ling, Z., Cherry, C. R., MacArthur, J. H., & Weinert, J. X. (2017). Diﬀerences of
31
cycling experiences and perceptions between e-bike and bicycle users in the united
states. Sustainability, 9(9), 1662.
Loustric, I., & Matyas, M. (2020). Exploring city propensity for the market success of
micro-electric vehicles. European Transport Research Review, 12. Retrieved from
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12544-020-00416-8 doi:
10.1186/s12544-020-00416-8
MacArthur, J., Cherry, C. R., Harpool, M., & Scheppke, D. (2018). A north american
survey of electric bicycle owners (Tech. Rep.). Portland, OR 97207: National
Institute for Transportation and Communities (NITC).
McInnes, L., Healy, J., & Astels, S. (2017). hdbscan: Hierarchical density based
clustering. The Journal of Open Source Software, 2(11), 205.
McInnes, L., Healy, J., & Melville, J. (2018, February). UMAP: Uniform Manifold
Approximation and Projection for Dimension Reduction. ArXiv e-prints.
National Association of City Transportation Oﬃcials. (2020). Shared Micromobility in
the U.S.: 2019 (Tech. Rep.). 120 Park Avenue 21st Floor, New York, NY 10017:
National Association of City Transportation Oﬃcials.
Nguyen, D. Q., Vu, T., & Nguyen, A. T. (2020). Bertweet: A pre-trained language
model for english tweets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.10200.
Nikitas, A., Tsigdinos, S., Karolemeas, C., Kourmpa, E., & Bakogiannis, E. (2021).
Cycling in the era of covid-19: Lessons learnt and best practice policy
recommendations for a more bike-centric future. Sustainability, 13(9), 4620.
Pimentel, D., & Lowry, M. (2020). Taming and tapping the bikeshare explosion: Review
of shared micro-mobility laws (Tech. Rep.). Seattle, WA: Paciﬁc Northwest
Transportation Consortium.
Price, J., Blackshear, D., Blount Jr, W., & Sandt, L. (2021). Micromobility: A travel
mode innovation. Public Roads, 85(1).
Raptopoulou, A., Basbas, S., Stamatiadis, N., & Nikiforiadis, A. (2020). A ﬁrst look at
e-scooter users. In Conference on sustainable urban mobility (pp. 882–891).
Sanh, V., Debut, L., Chaumond, J., & Wolf, T. (2019). Distilbert, a distilled version of
32
bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01108.
Society of Automotive Engineers. (2019, 11). Taxonomy and Classiﬁcation of Powered
Micromobility Vehicles (Tech. Rep.). 400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA
15096: Society of Automotive Engineers.
Sunio, V., Laperal, M., & Mateo-Babiano, I. (2020). Social enterprise as catalyst of
transformation in the micro-mobility sector. Transportation Research Part A:
Policy and Practice, 138, 145–157.
Tark, J. (2020). Micromobility products-related deaths, injuries, and hazard patterns:
2017–2019 (Tech. Rep.). 4330 East-West Hwy, Bethesda, MD 20814, United
States: U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission.
Tuncer, S., & Brown, B. (2020). E-scooters on the ground: Lessons for redesigning
urban micro-mobility. In Proceedings of the 2020 chi conference on human factors
in computing systems (pp. 1–14).
Useche, S. A., Gonzalez-Marin, A., Faus, M., & Alonso, F. (2022). Environmentally
friendly, but behaviorally complex? a systematic review of e-scooter riders’
psychosocial risk features. PLoS one, 17(5), e0268960.
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., . . .
Polosukhin, I. (2017). Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 30.
Yang, H., Ma, Q., Wang, Z., Cai, Q., Xie, K., & Yang, D. (2020). Safety of
micro-mobility: Analysis of e-scooter crashes by mining news reports. Accident
Analysis & Prevention, 143, 105608.
Yang, Z., Dai, Z., Yang, Y., Carbonell, J., Salakhutdinov, R. R., & Le, Q. V. (2019).
Xlnet: Generalized autoregressive pretraining for language understanding.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 32.
Zagorskas, J., & Burinskien˙e, M. (2019). Challenges caused by increased use of
e-powered personal mobility vehicles in european cities. Sustainability, 12(1), 273.
Zhang, Y., Yang, X. J., & Zhou, F. (2022). Disengagement cause-and-eﬀect
relationships extraction using an nlp pipeline. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
33
Transportation Systems.
Zhou, F., Ayoub, J., Xu, Q., & Yang, J. X. (2020). A machine learning approach to
customer needs analysis for product ecosystems. Journal of Mechanical Design,
142(1).
Zhou, F., Jiao, R., & Linsey, J. S. (2015). Latent customer needs elicitation by use case
analogical reasoning from sentiment analysis of online product reviews. Journal of
Mechanical Design, 137(7), 071401.
