Title: Natural Language Processing using Hadoop and KOSHIK
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1608.04434v1
--------------------------------------------------

Natural Language Processing using Hadoop and KOSHIK 
Hong Shi, Emre Erturk  
Eastern Institute of Technology, New Zealand 
 
Abstract 
Natural language processing, as a data analytics related technology, is used widely in many 
research areas such as artificial intelligence, human language processing, and translation. At 
present, due to explosive growth of data, there are many challenges for natural language 
processing. Hadoop is one of the platforms that can process the large amount of data required for 
natural language processing. KOSHIK is one of the natural language processing architectures, and 
utilizes Hadoop and contains language processing components such as Stanford CoreNLP and 
OpenNLP. This study describes how to build a KOSHIK platform with the relevant tools, and provides 
the steps to analyze wiki data. Finally, it evaluates and discusses the advantages and disadvantages 
of the KOSHIK architecture, and gives recommendations on improving the processing performance.  
1. Introduction 
1.1. Natural Language Processing 
Natural language processing (NLP) is a technique to analyze readable text that is generated by 
humans for artificial intelligence, language processing, and translation (Behzadi, 2015). In order to 
accurately analyze the text, there are some methods for NLP to use in order to deal with the 
challenges such as the collection and storage of the text corpus, and analysis. NLP techniques also 
gain experience and benefits through research in linguistics, computational statics, artificial 
intelligence, machine learning and other sciences (Behzadi, 2015). However, at present, because 
of the information explosion, the use of traditional NLP faces many challenges such as the volume 
of structured and unstructured data, velocity of processing data, accuracy of the results. In addition, 
there are many slangs and ambiguous expressions used on social media networks, which give NLP 
pressure to analyze the meanings, which may also be hard for some people. Moreover, people 
nowadays heavily depend on search engines like Google and Bing (which use NLP as their core 
technique) in their daily study, work, and entertainment. All of these factors encourage computer 
scientists and researchers to find more robust, efficient and standardized solutions for NLP.  
1.2. Big Data 
Big Data is designed as generic platform to resolve the issues of volume, velocity, variety, 
veracity and value in data analytics (IBM, 2012). The data is collected from different sources, for 
example, daily logs, social media, and business transactions. Big Data demands the ability to hoard 
large amounts of data. With advanced storage technologies, the data size could be as high as 
terabytes (1012 bytes), petabytes (1015 bytes) and exabytes (1018 bytes). Furthermore, research on 
NLP often overlaps with research on or the use of Big Data platforms. Big Data handles all types of 
formats which are structured and unstructured. The structured data is readable and well-designed 
that is commonly stored in traditional relationship databases. Unstructured data does not have a 
predefined format. This type of data can be found in, for example, emails, images, and videos. Big 
Data is widely used in business forecasts, scientific research, analysis of social issues, healthcare, 
and meteorology. While promoting advances in NLP, it is also important to be aware of ethical 
issues around the potential misuse and dual-use of big data and NLP tools (Hovy & Spruit, 2016). 
1 
 
Some of these issues can be very interesting for information technology students to debate and 
learn more about (Erturk, 2013).  
1.3. Hadoop 
Hadoop is a application created using Java, and provides a set of tools to do data processing 
which includes data storage, access, analysis (White, 2012). According to White (2012), the main 
components in Hadoop are HDFS (Hadoop distributed file system) and MapReduce. HDFS is solid 
and fault-tolerant, and provides a Java-based API that integrates with MapReduce to process the 
large data in parallel using a cluster of servers (Taylor, 2010). As Murthy, Padmakar and Reddy (2015) 
observed, traditional relational databases, which store structured data, could also be used together 
with Hadoop HDFS with full database management systems (DBMS) features. MapReduce is 
created with inspiration from the theory published by Google, and it provides functions that split 
large set of data computing into small computing tasks (White, 2012).  
1.4. Natural Language Processing on Hadoop 
Idealy, Hadoop, with the features of distributed storage system, multi-tasks processing system, 
generic platform and open source, can be used for NLP research. There are many papers discussing 
the solutions which utilize Hadoop for NLP. For example, HDFS is used in the research of Markham, 
Kowolenko and Michaelis (2015) to manage large amount of unstructured data, which was 
collected from the Internet with Hadoop tools. Idris, Hussain, Siddiqi, Hassan, Bilal and Lee (2015) 
designed a system named MRPack which gives an end-to-end MapReduce processing model for 
text processing, which includes a job task for NLP. MRPack shows it has better performance in data 
accessing, data managing and data writing, as well as less programming work and demanding for 
I/O management (Idris et al., 2015). 
This study reviews KOSHIK, a Hadoop based framework which has been developed from the 
paper written by Exner and Nugues (2014). Then it gives the findings for what Hadoop components 
this framework used, and recommendations to improve the NLP performance. Finally, it shows the 
steps to test KOSHIK.  
2. Literature Review 
2.1. Introduction 
It is described that “KOSHIK is a framework for batch-oriented large scale-processing and 
querying of unstructured natural language documents. In particular, it builds on the Hadoop 
ecosystem and takes full advantage of the data formats and tools present in this environment to 
achieve its task” (Exner & Nugues, 2014, p. 463). KOSHIK tries to resolve the common challenges 
in NLP such as volume, velocity, and variety by adopting Hadoop for the system infrastructure, 
using a batch-oriented annotation model to continually add annotations and enabling a generic 
algorithm platform to analyze the variety of text (Exner & Nugues, 2014). It is also argued that 
before developing KOSHIK, there were many other NLP frameworks such as MULTEXT, GATE, and 
UIMA, which were important for document retrieval, indexing, and querying of processed 
information applications (Exner & Nugues, 2014). 
2 
 
2.2. KOSHIK Architecture 
 
Figure 1. An overview of the KOSHIK architecture. (Exner & Nugues, 2014). 
Exner and Nugues (2014) stated that “KOSHIK supports a variety of NLP tools implemented 
atop of the Hadoop distributed computing framework. The requirements on KOSHIK were driven 
by the desire to support scalability, reliability, and a large number of input formats and processing 
tasks”. KOSHIK supports different kinds of documents such as CoNLL-X, CoNLL 2008 and 2009 and 
Wikipedia dump files (Exner & Nugues, 2014; Buchholz and Marsi, 2006; Surdeanu et al., 2008). In 
order to analyze different kinds of language, KOSHIK involves a large set of filters, tokenizers, 
taggers, parsers, and coreference solvers through several language specific NLP tools such as 
OpenNLP, Mate Tools, Stanford CoreNLP, etc. (Exner & Nugues, 2014). With the developed 
annotation model in KOSHIK, this framework could simplify the process of content processors, 
which only require computing resource focus on the input and output of annotated documents 
(Exner & Nugues, 2014). 
KOSHIK utilizes Hadoop as its distributed computing framework, which not only used for a 
better performance on large corpus analysis, but also for the division and distribution of a set of 
documents, management of processing jobs, and to get the process result (Exner & Nugues, 2014). 
Pig and Hive which are core members of Hadoop ecosystem are adopted into this framework to 
manage the workflows for processing large data-sets and easily query information by SQL-like 
language respectively (Exner & Nugues, 2014). 
3. Key Terms 
After evaluating this paper, Hive and Pig which are data querying components of Hadoop, and 
OpenNLP and Stanford CoreNLP which are NLP process tools are identified for future research. 
According to Thusoo et al. (2009), Hive is a data warehouse infrastructure built based on 
Hadoop for providing data summarization, query, and analysis. It could be used to deal with large 
distributed data such as HDFS and traditional file systems like FAT, NTFS and exFat (Thusoo et al., 
2009). In addition, HiveQL, a SQL-like language, is created to query data on Hadoop which will 
translate the query to MapReduce jobs for high performance (Thusoo et al., 2009). 
 
3 
 
The Pig is a high-level declarative querying language inspired by SQL which will translate the 
query to MapReduce jobs (Pis Olston, Reed, Srivastava, Kumar & Tomkins, 2008). According to 
Gates et al. (2009), there are many data analysis projects which adopted Pig because it is easy to 
learn and use, and could quickly implement different versions of algorithms. 
Lingad, Karimi and Yin (2013) found that “OpenNLP is a Java based library for various natural 
language processing tasks, such as tokenization, part-of-speech (POS) tagging, and named entity 
recognition. For named entity recognition, it trains a Maximum Entropy model using the 
information from the whole document to recognize entities in documents”. Although OpenNLP 
provides many functions for NLP, the model to process the document should be considered that 
Verspoor (2012) argued that OpenNLP has low quality to divide sentence into parts, but it could 
improve the performance by using annotator. 
Stanford CoreNLP is a NLP tool and utilizes annotation to analyse text that it provides most of 
the common core NLP steps, from tokenization through to coreference resolution (Manning, 2014). 
It is also described that Stanford CoreNLP provides a complete toolkit and tools for grammatical 
analysis, accurate analysis, and supports different kinds of languages (Manning, 2014).  
4. Testing KOSHIK 
4.1. Preparing the Hardware Environment 
According to Exner and Nugues (2014), KOSHIK runs on Hadoop with Hive, and requires other 
NLP process libraries (OpenNLP, Mate and Stanford CoreNLP). The experimental environment 
(including hardware, software, and test data) used in this paper is described in the following tables.  
 
Hardware Environment 
Hardware 
Description 
CPU 
INTEL i5 quad cores 2.7Ghz  
Hard disk 
SATA 500G 
Memory 
DDR3 16G 
Graphic Card 
NVidia 940 
Network 
1G LAN 
 
Software Environment 
Operation 
System/application/library 
Version 
Operation System 
Centos 6.7 
KOSHIK 
1.01 
JAVA 
1.80 
Hadoop 
2.60 
Hive 
1.1.0 
Cloudera 
5.70 
Hue 
3.90 
VirtualBox 
5.0.20 
Stanford CoreNLP 
3.6 
OpenNLP 
1.5.0 
Mate 
 
 
Test Data 
Item 
Description 
Wiki Data 
12GB English wiki data. 
 
4 
 
In this test environment, Cloudera Quickstart VM is utilized to quickly construct the software 
environment. According to Cloudera (2016), Cloudera Quickstart VM is a virtual machine which 
installed most of the applications related to Hadoop such as Hive, Spark, HBase. One benefit to use 
this virtual machine is that it has already configured Hadoop and integrated with Hive, HBase and 
Hue, which is a management tool for applications in Hadoop ecosystem (Cloudera, 2016). 
Therefore, it is an ideal platform for researching and making proof of concept. 
4.2. Preparing the Software 
4.2.1. Download software and wiki data 
The following table list the download links for the required software. 
Software 
Link 
KOSHIK 
https://github.com/peterexner/KOSHIK 
Cloudera Quickstart VM 
http://www.cloudera.com/downloads/quickstart_vms/5-
7.html 
VirtualBox 
https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads 
Stanford CoreNLP 
http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/corenlp.shtml 
OpenNLP 
http://opennlp.sourceforge.net/models-1.5/ 
Mate 
https://code.google.com/p/mate-tools/downloads/list 
WikiData 
https://dumps.wikimedia.org/enwiki/20160501/enwiki-
20160501-pages-articles.xml.bz2 
 
4.2.2. Configure software 
The following table describes steps to configure the required software. 
Software 
Step Description 
VirtualBox 
1. Unzip Cloudera Quickstart VM. 
2. Import the unzipped Cloudera Quickstart 
VM into VirtualBox. 
KOSHIK required libraries 
1. Create a folder anywhere named model. 
2. Create a folder named is2 in model folder 
and put downloaded files CoNLL2009-ST-
English-ALL.anna-3.3.lemmatizer.model, 
CoNLL2009-ST-English-ALL.anna-
3.3.parser.model, CoNLL2009-ST-English-
ALL.anna-3.3.postagger.model in it. 
3. Create a folder named lth in model folder 
and put downloaded file CoNLL2009-ST-
English-ALL.anna-3.3.srl-4.1.srl.model in 
it. 
4. Create a folder named opennlp in model 
folder and put downloaded file en-
sent.bin in it. 
5. Compress the model folder to model.zip. 
Virtual Machine. 
1. Start virtual machine. 
2. Create a folder named koshik_test. 
3. Copy 
enwiki-20160501-pages-
articles.xml.bz2 to koshik_test folder. 
4. Copy downloaded KOSHIK to koshik_test 
folder. 
5. Copy model.zip to koshik_test folder. 
Hadoop 
1. Under koshik_test folder, copy enwiki-
20160501-pages-articles.xml.bz2 
to 
Hadoop file system. 
5 
 
 
4.3. Testing 
The following show the steps to test KOSHIK to analyze the WIKI data. Steps 4, 5, and 6 are similar 
to those mentioned by Nugues (2014).  
 
Step 
Description 
Command 
1 
Import WIKI data 
into KOSHIK. 
hadoop jar Koshik-1.0.1.jar se.lth.cs.koshik.util.Import -input 
/enwiki-20160501-pages-articles.xml -inputformat wikipedia -
language eng -charset utf-8 -output /enwiki_avro 
2 
Start KOSHIK map-
reduce 
jobs 
to 
analyze the data. 
hadoop jar Koshik-1.0.1.jar se.lth.cs.koshik.util.EnglishPipeline -D 
mapred.reduce.tasks=12 -D mapred.child.java.opts=-Xmx8G -
archives model.zip -input /enwiki_avro -output 
/enwiki_semantic 
3 
Import 
the 
analyzed 
result 
into 
Hive 
for 
querying. 
CREATE EXTERNAL TABLE koshikdocs ROW FORMAT SERDE 
'org.apache.hadoop.hive.serde2.avro.AvroSerDe' 
STORED 
AS 
INPUTFORMAT 
'org.apache.hadoop.hive.ql.io.avro.AvroContainerInputFormat' 
OUTPUTFORMAT 
'org.apache.hadoop.hive.ql.io.avro.AvroContainerOutputFormat' 
LOCATION 
'/hivetablekoshik' 
TBLPROPERTIES('avro.schema.url'='hdfs:///AvroDocument.avsc'); 
LOAD DATA INPATH '/enwiki_semantic/*.avro' INTO TABLE 
koshikdocs; 
4 
Query number of 
analyzed articles. 
SELECT count(identifier) from koshikdocs; 
SELECT count(key) FROM (SELECT explode(ann) AS (key,value) 
FROM 
(SELECT 
ann 
FROM 
koshikdocs 
LATERAL 
VIEW 
explode(annotations.features) annTable as ann) annmap) 
decmap WHERE key='POSTAG' AND value LIKE 'NN%'; 
5 
Query number of 
sentences 
SELECT 
count(ann) 
FROM 
koshikdocs 
LATERAL 
VIEW 
explode(annotations.layer) annTable as ann WHERE ann LIKE 
'%Sentence'; 
6 
Query number of 
nouns. 
SELECT count(key) FROM (SELECT explode(ann) AS (key,value) 
FROM (SELECT ann FROM koshikdocs LATERAL VIEW 
explode(annotations.features) annTable as ann) annmap) 
decmap WHERE key='POSTAG' AND value LIKE 'NN%'; 
 
5. Findings: Advantages and Disadvantages of KOSHIK 
KOSHIK provides an architecture which utilizes Hadoop and related tools as well as individual 
NLP tools and language models, and simplifies the construction of a whole NLP system. By adopting 
this architecture, people who work with an NLP system could focus on their own professional areas. 
For example, linguists could focus on creating effective language models to improve the accuracy 
of NLP, while algorithm designers could provide high performance NLP analysis components. When 
KOSHIK uses the sentence detection component from Mate and Stanford, it has the potential to 
process other human languages in the future, if the NLP tools continue to add new language 
models. Another advantage is that KOSHIK supports different kinds of document types, and it is 
given related APIs to expand the compatible document types. Moreover, with HDFS, KOSHIK has 
the ability to analyze a large sets of data with high input and output performance. The data 
processing can be passed on to MapReduce, which will provide more computing power as required.  
Currently, KOSHIK has not yet become a mature product that is ready to be used by businesses. 
6 
 
First, it lacks support and documentation, and the learning curve for this tool is high. For example, 
this tool utilizes the language models of Mate, OpenNLP and Stanford CoreNLP. However, there are 
too many components for the user to discern which one KOSHIK is using for a particular task. 
Perhaps only its developers can see it from the source code. Secondly, since the last recorded 
change of code, this tool has not been maintained regularly, and there has not been any update 
for almost two years. It is uncertain whether this tool will have more functions and a stable version. 
6. Conclusions 
Natural language processing plays an important role in search engines, speech to text 
conversion tools, intelligent assistants, and artificial intelligence. It will continue to influence the 
user experience on the internet. With more and more data generated, there will be different kinds 
of data processed on Big Data platforms. Hadoop provides useful tools and has a mature ecosystem 
which is ideal for natural language processing. There are already some research reports, and 
software tools for natural language processing utilizing Hadoop. KOSHIK is one that provides an 
NLP architecture which utilizes Hadoop and Hive to process large amount of data. It is friendly for 
developers and linguists because it can separate these two types of work and allow each of them 
to focus on their own areas, thereby increasing the performance of NLP system. The architecture 
of KOSHIK is expandable; so it provides APIs to add new functions for the system. By utilizing 
OpenNLP, Mate and Stanford CoreNLP, KOSHIK supports different types of natural language 
processing. Documentation for KOSHIK is required to learn this tool, and to enable other 
developers to contribute toward it. However, because the source code has not been updated for a 
while, it is not ready for business use, but rather for personal testing and development. 
7. Recommendations 
Based on the architecture of KOSHIK and the process speed of large data, this architecture 
could increase processing speed by adopting Spark and GPU processing. 
Spark is a cluster computing system maintained by Apache and it supports in-memory 
computing. This can improve the data analysis speed as high as possible, compared to the original 
MapReduce method in Hadoop (Zaharia, Chowdhury, Franklin, Shenker & Stoica, 2010). Based on 
the test results of Zaharia et al. (2010) where they used Spark to analyze a 39 GB wiki data, the 
query time using Spark was 0.5 to 1 second. The Hadoop query took 35 seconds; therefore, Spark 
is much faster than Hadoop.  
At present, GPUs are successfully integrated into Hadoop and MapReduce frameworks which 
could increase the data processing speed (Yadav, Bhadoria & Suri, 2015). In addition, Yadav, 
Bhadoria and Suri (2015) found that there are some libraries such as JCUDA and Java Aparapi that 
provide APIs to interact with GPUs and extract better performance from them to support high 
performance computing within Hadoop. 
 
 
 
7 
 
References 
Behzadi, F. (2015). Natural language processing and machine learning: A review. 
International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security, 13(9), 101-
106.  
Cloudera. (2016). Overview of Cloudera and the Cloudera Documentation Set. 
Retrieved from 
http://www.cloudera.com/documentation/enterprise/latest/topics/introduction
.html. 
Erturk, E. (2013). The impact of intellectual property policies on ethical attitudes 
toward internet piracy. Knowledge Management: An International Journal, 
12(1), 101-109.  
Exner, P., & Nugues, P. (2014). KOSHIK: A large-scale distributed computing 
framework for NLP. In 3rd International Conference on Pattern Recognition 
Applications and Methods, 463-470. 
Gates, A. F., Natkovich, O., Chopra, S., Kamath, P., Narayanamurthy, S. M., Olston, 
C., ... & Srivastava, U. (2009). Building a high-level dataflow system on top of 
Map-Reduce: The Pig experience. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 2(2), 
1414-1425. 
Hashem, I. A. T., Yaqoob, I., Anuar, N. B., Mokhtar, S., Gani, A., & Khan, S. U. (2015). 
The rise of “big data” on cloud computing: Review and open research issues. 
Information Systems, 47, 98-115. 
Hovy, D., & Spruit, S. (2016). The Social Impact of Natural Language Processing. 
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Berlin, 
Germany.  
IBM (2012). What is big data. Retrieved from http://www-
01.ibm.com/software/data/bigdata/what-is-big-data.html. 
Idris, M., Hussain, S., Siddiqi, M. H., Hassan, W., Bilal, H. S., & Lee, S. (2015). MRPack: 
Multi-algorithm execution using compute-intensive approach in MapReduce. 
PLoS One, 10(8). http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0136259. 
Lingad, J., Karimi, S., & Yin, J. (2013). Location extraction from disaster-related 
microblogs. In Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on World Wide 
Web companion, 1017-1020. 
Manning, C. D., Surdeanu, M., Bauer, J., Finkel, J. R., Bethard, S., & McClosky, D. 
(2014, June). The Stanford CoreNLP Natural Language Processing Toolkit. ACL 
(System Demonstrations), 55-60. 
Markham, S. K., Kowolenko, M., & Michaelis, T. L. (2015). Unstructured text analytics 
to support new product development decisions. Research Technology 
Management, 58(2), 30-38.  
Mell, P. & Grance, T. (2011). The NIST Definition of Cloud Computing: 
Recommendations of the National Institute of Standards and Technology. 
Retrieved from 
http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/Legacy/SP/nistspecialpublication800-145.pdf. 
8 
 
Murthy, B. V. R., Padmakar, V., & Reddy, M. A. (2015). Hadoop architecture and its 
functionality. International Journal of Computer Science and Information 
Security, 13(4), 97-103.  
Nugues, P. (2014). Question answering and the development of the Hajen system. 
Retrieved from 
http://cst.ku.dk/projekter/semantikprojekt/arrangementer/information/Copenh
ague20141103.pdf  
Olston, C., Reed, B., Srivastava, U., Kumar, R., & Tomkins, A. (2008, June). Pig latin: a 
not-so-foreign language for data processing. In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM 
SIGMOD international conference on Management of data, 1099-1110. 
Taylor, R. C. (2010). An overview of the Hadoop/MapReduce/HBase framework and 
its current applications in bioinformatics. BMC Bioinformatics, 11. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-11-S12-S1. 
Thusoo, A., Sarma, J. S., Jain, N., Shao, Z., Chakka, P., Anthony, S., ... & Murthy, R. 
(2009). Hive: a warehousing solution over a map-reduce framework. 
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 2(2), 1626-1629. 
Verspoor, K., Cohen, K. B., Lanfranchi, A., Warner, C., Johnson, H. L., Roeder, C., . . . 
Hunter, L. E. (2012). A corpus of full-text journal articles is a robust evaluation 
tool for revealing differences in performance of biomedical natural language 
processing tools. BMC Bioinformatics, 13, 207. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1471-
2105-13-207. 
White, T. (2012). Hadoop: The definitive guide. O'Reilly Media: Sepastopol, USA. 
Zaharia, M., Chowdhury, M., Franklin, M. J., Shenker, S., & Stoica, I. (2010). Spark: 
Cluster Computing with Working Sets. HotCloud, 10, 10-10.  
