Title: Experimental Standards for Deep Learning in Natural Language Processing Research
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2204.06251v2
--------------------------------------------------

Experimental Standards for Deep Learning in
Natural Language Processing Research
Dennis Ulmer☼
Elisa Bassignana☼
Max Müller-Eberstein☼
Daniel Varab☼
Mike Zhang☼
Rob van der Goot☼
Christian Hardmeier☼
Barbara Plank☼SÄ
☼Department of Computer Science, IT University of Copenhagen, Denmark
SCenter for Information and Language Processing (CIS), LMU Munich, Germany
ÄMunich Center for Machine Learning (MCML), Munich, Germany
dennis.ulmer@mailbox.org
Abstract
The ﬁeld of Deep Learning (DL) has under-
gone explosive growth during the last decade,
with a substantial impact on Natural Language
Processing (NLP) as well.
Yet, compared
to more established disciplines, a lack of
common experimental standards remains an
open challenge to the ﬁeld at large. Starting
from fundamental scientiﬁc principles, we
distill ongoing discussions on experimental
standards in NLP into a single,
widely-
applicable methodology. Following these best
practices is crucial to strengthen experimental
evidence, improve reproducibility and support
scientiﬁc progress. These standards are further
collected in a public repository to help them
transparently adapt to future needs.
1
Introduction
Spurred by the advances in Machine Learning (ML)
and Deep Learning (DL), the ﬁeld of Natural Lan-
guage Processing (NLP) has seen immense growth
over the span of the last ten years, as illustrated by
the number of publications in Figure 2. While such
progress is remarkable, rapid growth comes at a
cost: Akin to concerns in other disciplines (John
et al., 2012; Jensen et al., 2021), several authors
have noted major obstacles with reproducibility
(Gundersen and Kjensmo, 2018; Belz et al., 2021)
and a lack of signiﬁcance testing (Marie et al.,
2021) or published results not carrying over to dif-
ferent experimental setups, for instance in text gen-
eration (Gehrmann et al., 2022) and with respect
to new model architectures (Narang et al., 2021).
Others have questioned commonly-accepted proce-
dures (Gorman and Bedrick, 2019; Søgaard et al.,
2021; Bouthillier et al., 2021; van der Goot, 2021)
as well as the (negative) impacts of research on
society (Hovy and Spruit, 2016; Mohamed et al.,
2020; Bender et al., 2021; Birhane et al., 2021) and
environment (Strubell et al., 2019; Schwartz et al.,
2020; Henderson et al., 2020). These problems
Data
Hypothesis
Model
Analysis
Experiment
Evidence
Publication
Reproducibility
Replicability
42
41
43
Figure 1: Visualization of the Scientiﬁc Process in
Deep Learning. Uncertainty is introduced at each step,
inﬂuencing the resulting evidence as well as the docu-
mentation required for reproducibility or replicability.
have not gone unnoticed—many of the mentioned
works have proposed a cornucopia of solutions. In
a quickly-moving environment however, keeping
track and implementing these proposals becomes
challenging. In this work, we weave these open
issues together into a cohesive methodology for
gathering stronger experimental evidence, that can
be implemented with reasonable effort.
Based on the scientiﬁc method (Section 2), we
divide the empirical research process—obtaining
evidence from data via modeling—into four steps,
which are depicted in Figure 1: Data (Section 3),
including dataset creation and usage, Codebase
& Models (Section 4), Experiments & Analysis
(Section 5) and Publication (Section 6). For each
step, we survey contemporary ﬁndings and sum-
marize them into actionable practices for empirical
research. Using insights from adjacent sub-ﬁelds
of ML / DL, we extract useful insights to help over-
come current challenges with replicability in NLP.
Contributions
1 We survey and summarize a
wide array of proposals regarding the improvement
of the experimental (and publishing) pipeline in
NLP research into a single accessible methodology
applicable for a wide and diverse readership. At the
end of every section, we provide a summary with
the most important points, marked with ⋄to indi-
cate that they should be seen as a minimal require-
arXiv:2204.06251v2  [cs.LG]  17 Oct 2022
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
Year
0
200
400
600
800
Publications
Development of NLP Publications (2012-2022)
EMNLP
TACL
CL
CoNLL
NAACL
EACL
ACL
COLING
Figure 2: Development of NLP publications. Shown
is the development of NLP measured by the number of
peer-reviewed publications between 2012–2022 based
on the data collected by Rei (2022).
ment, and ⋆for additional recommended actions.
2 We create, point to, or supply useful resources
to support everyday research activities and improve
soundness of research in the ﬁeld. We furthermore
provide examples and case studies illustrating these
methods in Appendix A. We also provide an addi-
tional list of resources in Appendix C. The same
collection as well as checklists derived from the
actionable points at the end of sections are also
maintained in an open-source repository,1 and we
invite the research community to discuss, modify
and extend these resources. 3 We discuss current
trends and their implications, hoping to initiate a
more widespread conversation about them in the
NLP community to facilitate common standards
and improve the quality of research.
2
Preliminaries
Our proposed methodology must be built on the sci-
entiﬁc principles for generating strong evidence for
the general advancement of knowledge, as deﬁned
by the following terms:
The Scientiﬁc Method
Knowledge can be ob-
tained through several ways including theory build-
ing, qualitative methods, and empirical research
(Kuhn, 1970; Simon, 1995). Here, we focus on the
latter aspect, in which (exploratory) analyses lead
to falsiﬁable hypotheses that can be tested and iter-
ated upon (Popper, 1934).2 This process requires
that anyone must be able to back or dispute these
hypotheses in the light of new evidence.
1https://github.com/Kaleidophon/experimental-
standards-deep-learning-research
2While such hypothesis-driven science is not always ap-
plicable or possible (Carroll, 2019), it is a strong common
denominator that encompasses most empirical ML research.
In the following, we focus on the evidence-based
evaluation of hypotheses and how to ensure the sci-
entiﬁc soundness of the experiments which gave
rise to the original empirical evidence, with a focus
on replicability and reproducibility. In computa-
tional literature, one term requires access to the
original code and data in order to re-run experi-
ments exactly, while the other requires sufﬁcient
information in order to reproduce the original ﬁnd-
ings even in the absence of code and original data
(see also Figure 1).3
Replicability
Within DL, we take replicability
to mean the exact replication of prior reported ev-
idence. In a computational environment, access
to the same data, code and tooling should be suf-
ﬁcient to generate prior results. However, many
factors, such as hardware differences, make exact
replication difﬁcult to achieve. Nonetheless, we
regard experiments to be replicable if a practitioner
is able to re-run them to produce the same evidence
within a small margin of error dependent on the
environment, without the need to approximate or
guess experimental details.
Reproducibility
In comparison, we take repro-
ducibility to mean the availability of all neces-
sary and sufﬁcient information such that an exper-
iment’s ﬁndings can be independently reafﬁrmed
when the same research question is asked. As dis-
cussed later, the availability of all components for
replicability is rare—even in a computational set-
ting. An experiment then is reproducible if anyone
with access to the publication is able to re-identify
the original evidence, i.e. exact results differing,
but patterns across experiments being equivalent.
We assume that the practitioner aims to fol-
low these principles in order to ﬁnd answers to
a well-motivated research question by gathering
the strongest possible evidence for or against their
hypotheses. The following methods therefore aim
to reduce uncertainty in each step of the experi-
mental pipeline in order to ensure reproducibility
and/or replicability (visualized in Figure 1).
3
Data
Frequently, it is claimed that a model solves a par-
ticular cognitive task, however in reality it merely
3Strikingly, these central terms already lack agreed-upon
deﬁnitions (Peng, 2011; Fokkens et al., 2013; Liberman, 2015;
Cohen et al., 2018), however we follow the prevailing deﬁni-
tions in the NLP community (Drummond, 2009; Dodge and
Smith, 2020) as the underlying ideas are equivalent.
scores higher than others on some speciﬁc dataset
according to some predeﬁned metric (Schlangen,
2021).
Of course, the broader goal is to im-
prove systems more generally by using individ-
ual datasets as proxies. Admitting that our exper-
iments cover only a small slice of the real-world
sample space will help more transparently mea-
sure progress towards this goal. In light of these
limitations and as there will always be private or
otherwise unavailable datasets which violate repli-
cability, a practitioner must ask themselves: Which
key information about the data must be known in
order to reproduce an experiment’s ﬁndings? In
this section we deﬁne requirements for putting this
question into practice during dataset creation and
usage such that anyone can draw the appropriate
conclusions from a published experiment.
Choice of Dataset
The choice of dataset will
arise from the need to answer a speciﬁc research
question within the limits of the available resources.
Such answers typically come in the form of com-
parisons between different experimental setups
while using the equivalent data and evaluation met-
rics. Using a publicly available, well-documented
dataset will likely yield more comparable work,
and thus stronger evidence. In absence of public
data, creating a new dataset according to guidelines
which closely follow prior work can also allow for
useful comparisons. Should the research question
be entirely unexplored, creating a new dataset will
be necessary. In any case, the data itself must con-
tain the information necessary to generate evidence
for the researcher’s hypothesis. For example, a
model for a classiﬁcation task will not be learn-
able unless there are distinguishing characteristics
between data points and consistent labels for eval-
uation. Therefore, an exploratory data analysis is
recommended for assessing data quality and antic-
ipating problems with the research setup. Simple
baseline methods such as regression analyses or
simply manually verifying random samples of the
data may provide indications regarding the suit-
ability and difﬁculty of the task and associated
dataset (Caswell et al., 2021).
Metadata
At a higher level, data sheets and state-
ments (Gebru et al., 2020; Bender and Friedman,
2018) aim to standardize metadata for dataset au-
thorship in order to inform future users about as-
sumptions and potential biases during all levels
of data collection and annotation—including the
research design (Hovy and Prabhumoye, 2021). Si-
multaneously, they encourage reﬂection on whether
the authors are adhering to their own guidelines
(Waseem et al., 2021). Generally, higher-level doc-
umentation should aim to capture the dataset’s rep-
resentativeness with respect to the global popula-
tion. This is especially crucial for “high-stakes”
environments in which subpopulations may be dis-
advantaged due to biases during data collection and
annotation (He et al., 2019; Sap et al., 2021). Even
in lower–stake scenarios, a model trained on only
a subset of the global data distribution can have
inconsistent behaviour when applied to a different
target data distribution (D’Amour et al., 2020; Koh
et al., 2020). For instance, domain differences have
a noticeable impact on model performance (White
and Cotterell, 2021; Ramesh Kashyap et al., 2021).
Increased data diversity can improve the ability of
models to generalize to new domains and languages
(Benjamin, 2018), however diversity is difﬁcult to
quantify (Gong et al., 2019) and full coverage is
unachievable. This highlights the importance of
documenting representativeness in order to ensure
reproducibility—even in absence of the original
data. For replicability using the original data, fur-
ther considerations include long-term storage and
versioning, as to ensure equal comparisons in fu-
ture work (see Appendix A.1 for case studies).
Instance Annotation
Achieving high data qual-
ity entails that the data must be accurate and rele-
vant for the task to enable effective learning (Puste-
jovsky and Stubbs, 2012; Tseng et al., 2020) and re-
liable evaluation (Bowman and Dahl, 2021; Basile
et al., 2021).
Since most datasets involve hu-
man annotation, a careful annotation design is cru-
cial (Pustejovsky and Stubbs, 2012; Paun et al.,
2022). Ambiguity in natural language poses inher-
ent challenges and disagreement is genuine (Basile
et al., 2021; Specia, 2021; Uma et al., 2021). As
insights into the annotation process are valuable,
yet often inaccessible, we recommend to release
datasets with individual-coder annotations, as also
put forward by Basile et al. (2021); Prabhakaran
et al. (2021) and to complement data with insights
like statistics on inter-annotator coding (Paun et al.,
2022), e.g., over time (Braggaar and van der Goot,
2021), or coder uncertainty (Bassignana and Plank,
2022). When creating new datasets such infor-
mation strengthens the reproducibility of future
ﬁndings, as they transparently communicate the
inherent variability instead of obscuring it.
Pre-processing
Given a well-constructed or
well-chosen dataset, the ﬁrst step of an exper-
imental setup will be the process by which a
model takes in the data. This must be well doc-
umented or replicated—most easily by publish-
ing the associated code—as perceivably tiny pre-
processing choices can lead to huge accuracy dis-
crepancies (Pedersen, 2008; Fokkens et al., 2013).
Typically, this involves decisions such as sentence
segmentation, tokenization and normalization. In
general, the data setup pipeline should ensure that
a model “observes” the same kind of data across
comparisons. Next, the dataset must be split into
representative subsamples which should only be
used for their intended purpose, i.e., model train-
ing, tuning and evaluation (see Section 5). In order
to support claims about the generality of the results,
it is necessary to use a test split without overlap
with other splits. Alternatively, a tuning / test set
could consist of data that is completely foreign to
the original dataset (Ye et al., 2021), ideally even
multiple sets (Bouthillier et al., 2021). It should be
noted that even separate, static test splits are prone
to unconscious “overﬁtting” if they have been in
use for a longer period of time, as people aim to
beat a particular benchmark (Gorman and Bedrick,
2019). If a large variety of resources are not avail-
able, it is also possible to construct challenging
test sets from existing data (Ribeiro et al., 2020;
Kiela et al., 2021; Søgaard et al., 2021). Finally,
the metrics by which models are evaluated should
be consistent across experiments and thus beneﬁt
from standardized evaluation code (Dehghani et al.,
2021). For some tasks, metrics may be driven by
community standards and are well-deﬁned (e.g.,
classiﬁcation accuracy). In other cases, approxi-
mations must stand in for human judgment (e.g.,
in machine translation). In either case—but espe-
cially in the latter—dataset authors should inform
users about desirable performance characteristics
and recommended metrics.
Appropriate Conclusions
The results a model
achieves on a given data setup should ﬁrst and fore-
most be taken as just that. Appropriate, broader
conclusions can be drawn using this evidence pro-
vided that biases or incompleteness of the data are
addressed (e.g., results only being applicable to
a subpopulation). Even with statistical tests for
the signiﬁcance of comparisons, properties such as
the size of the dataset and the distributional char-
acteristics of the evaluation metric may inﬂuence
the statistical power of any evidence gained from
experiments (Card et al., 2020). It is therefore im-
portant to keep in mind that in order to claim the
reliability of the obtained evidence, for example,
larger performance differences are necessary on
less data than what might sufﬁce for a large dataset,
or across multiple comparisons (see Section 5). Fi-
nally, a practitioner should be aware that a model’s
ability to achieve high scores on a certain dataset
may not be directly attributable to its capability
of simulating a cognitive ability, but rather due to
spurious correlations in the input (Ilyas et al., 2019;
Schlangen, 2021; Nagarajan et al., 2021). By for
instance only exposing models to a subset of fea-
tures that should be inadequate to solve the task, we
can sometimes detect when they take unexpected
shortcuts (Fokkens et al., 2013; Zhou et al., 2015).
Communicating the limits of the data helps future
work in reproducing prior ﬁndings more accurately.
Best Practices: Data
⋄Consider dataset and experiment limitations when
drawing conclusions (Schlangen, 2021);
⋄Document task adequacy, representativeness and pre-
processing (Bender and Friedman, 2018);
⋄Split the data such as to avoid spurious correlations;
⋄Publish the dataset accessibly & indicate changes;
⋆Perform exploratory data analyses to ensure task ade-
quacy (Caswell et al., 2021);
⋆Publish the dataset with individual-coder annotations,
besides aggregation;
⋆Claim signiﬁcance considering the dataset’s statistical
power (Card et al., 2020).
4
Codebase & Models
The NLP community has historically taken pride
in promoting open access to papers, data, code,
and documentation, but some have also noted
room for improvement (Wieling et al., 2018; Belz
et al., 2020). One practice has been to open-source
all components of the experimental procedure
in a repository, consisting of all code, necessary
scripts, and detailed documentation. The beneﬁt
of such a repository is in its ability to enable direct
replication. In particular, a comprehensive code
base directly enables replicability. In practice, such
documentation is often communicated through a
README ﬁle, in which user-oriented information
is described.4 In DL, full datasets can be large
4In Appendix B, we propose minimal requirements for a
README ﬁle and give pointers on ﬁles and code structure.
and impractical to share. Due to their importance
however, it is essential to carefully consider how
one can share the data with researchers in the
future. Therefore, repositories for long-term data
storage backed by public institutions should be
preferred (e.g., LINDAT/CLARIN by Váradi
et al., 2008, more examples in Appendix C).
Nevertheless, practitioners often can not distribute
data due to privacy, legal, or storage reasons. In
such cases, practitioners must instead carefully
consider how to distribute data and tools to allow
future research to produce accurate replications of
the original data (Zong et al., 2020).
Hyperparameter Search
Hyperparameter tun-
ing strategies remain an open area of research (e.g.,
Bischl et al., 2021), but are central to the replication
of contemporary models. The following rules of
thumb exist: Grid search or Bayesian optimization
can be applied if few parameters can be searched
exhaustively under the computation budget. Other-
wise, random search is preferred, as it explores the
search space more efﬁciently (Bergstra and Bengio,
2012). Advanced methods like Bayesian Optimiza-
tion (Snoek et al., 2012) and bandit search-based
approaches (Li et al., 2017) can be used as well
if applicable (Bischl et al., 2021). To avoid un-
necessary guesswork, the following information
is expected: Hyperparameters that were searched
per model (including options and ranges), the ﬁnal
hyperparameter settings used, number of trials, and
settings of the search procedure if applicable. As
tuning of hyperparameters is typically performed
using speciﬁc parts of the dataset, it is essential to
note that any modeling decisions based on them
automatically invalidate their use as test data.
Models
Contemporary models (e.g., Vaswani
et al., 2017; Devlin et al., 2019; Dosovitskiy et al.,
2021; Chen et al., 2021) have very large computa-
tional and memory footprints. To avoid retraining
models, and more importantly, to allow for replica-
bility, it is recommended to save and share model
weights. This may face similar challenges as those
of datasets (namely, large ﬁle sizes), but it remains
an impactful consideration. In most cases, simply
sharing the best or most interesting model could
sufﬁce. It should be emphasized that distributing
model weights should always complement a well-
documented repository as libraries and hosting sites
might not be supported in the future.
Model Evaluation
The exact model and task
evaluation procedure can differ signiﬁcantly (e.g.
Post, 2018). It is important to either reference the
exact evaluation script used (including parameters,
citation, and version, if applicable) or include the
evaluation script in the codebase. Moreover, to ease
error or post-hoc analyses, we highly recommend
saving model predictions whenever possible and
making them available at publication (Card et al.,
2020; Gehrmann et al., 2022).
Model Cards
Apart from quantitative evalua-
tion and optimal hyperparameters, Mitchell et al.
(2019) propose model cards: A type of standard-
ized documentation, as a step towards responsible
ML and AI technology, accompanying trained ML
models that provide benchmarked evaluation in a
variety of conditions, across different cultural, de-
mographic, or phenotypic and intersectional groups
that are relevant to the intended application do-
mains. They can be reported in the paper or project,
and can help to collect important information for
reproducibility, such as preprocessing and evalu-
ation results. We refer to Mitchell et al. (2019);
Menon et al. (2020) for examples of model cards.
Best Practices: Codebase & Models
⋄Publish a code repository with documentation and
licensing to distribute for replicability;
⋄Report all details about hyperparameter search and
model training;
⋄Specify the hyperparameters for replicability;
⋄Publish model predictions and evaluation scripts.;
⋆Use model cards;
⋆Publish models;
5
Experiments & Analysis
Experiments and their analyses constitute the core
of most scientiﬁc works, and empirical evidence is
valued especially highly in ML research (Birhane
et al., 2021).
Therefore, we discuss the most
common issues and counter-strategies at different
stages of an experiment.
Model Training
For model training, it is advis-
able to set a random seed for replicability, and
train multiple initializations per model in order
to obtain a sufﬁcient sample size for later statis-
tical tests. The number of runs should be adapted
based on the observed variance: Using for instance
bootstrap power analysis, existing model scores
are raised by a constant compared to the original
sample using a signiﬁcance test in a bootstrapping
procedure (Yuan and Hayashi, 2003; Tufféry, 2011;
Henderson et al., 2018). If the percentage of signif-
icant results is low, we should collect more scores.5
Bouthillier et al. (2021) further recommend to vary
as many sources of randomness in the training pro-
cedure as possible (i.e., data shufﬂing, data splits
etc.) to obtain a closer approximation of the true
model performance. Nevertheless, any drawn con-
clusion are still surrounded by a degree of statistical
uncertainty, which can be combated by the use of
statistical hypothesis testing.
Signiﬁcance Testing
Using deep neural net-
works, a number of (stochastic) factors such as
the random seed (Dror et al., 2019) or even the
choice of hardware (Yang et al., 2018) or frame-
work (Leventi-Peetz and Östreich, 2022) can inﬂu-
ence performance and need to be taken into account.
First of all, the size of the dataset should support
sufﬁciently powered statistical analyses (see Sec-
tion 3). Secondly, an appropriate signiﬁcance test
should be chosen. We give a few rules of thumb
based on Dror et al. (2018): When the distribution
of scores is known, for instance a normal distri-
bution for the Student’s t-test, a parametric test
should be chosen. Parametric tests are designed
with a speciﬁc distribution for the test statistic in
mind, and have strong statistical power (i.e. a lower
Type II error). The underlying assumptions can
sometimes be hard to verify (see Dror et al., 2018
§3.1), thus when in doubt non-parametric tests can
be used. This category features tests like the Boot-
strap, employed in case of a small sample size, or
the Wilcoxon signed-rank test (Wilcoxon, 1992),
when plenty observations are available. Depending
on the application, the usage of specialized tests
might furthermore be desirable (Dror et al., 2019;
Agarwal et al., 2021). We also want to draw atten-
tion to the fact that comparisons between multiple
models and/or datasets, require an adjustment of
the conﬁdence level, for instance using the Bonfer-
roni correction (Bonferroni, 1936), which is a safe
and conservative choice and easily implemented
for most tests (Dror et al., 2017; Ulmer et al., 2022).
Azer et al. (2020) provide a guide on how to ad-
equately word insights when a statistical test was
used, and Greenland et al. (2016) list common pit-
falls and misinterpretations of results. Due to spa-
5The resulting tensions with modern DL hardware require-
ments are discussed in Section 7.
tial constraints, we here refer to Appendix A.4 for
a number of easy-to-use software packages and
further reading on the topic.
Critiques & Alternatives
Although statistical
hypothesis testing is an established tool in many
disciplines, its (mis)use has received criticism
for decades (Berger and Sellke, 1987; Demšar,
2008; Ziliak and McCloskey, 2008). For instance,
Wasserstein et al. (2019) criticize the p-value as re-
inforcing publication bias through the dichotomy of
“signiﬁcant” and “not signiﬁcant”, i.e., by favoring
positive results (Locascio, 2017). Instead, Wasser-
stein et al. (2019) propose to report it as a contin-
uous value and with the appropriate scepticism.6
In addition to statistical signiﬁcance, another ap-
proach advocates for reporting effect size (Berger
and Sellke, 1987; Lin et al., 2013), so for instance
the mean difference, or the absolute or relative gain
in performance for a model compared to a baseline.
The effect size can be modeled using Bayesian anal-
ysis (Kruschke, 2013; Benavoli et al., 2017), which
better ﬁt the uncertainty surrounding experimental
results, but requires the speciﬁcation of a plausi-
ble statistical model producing the observations 7
and potentially the usage of Markov Chain Monte
Carlo sampling (Brooks et al., 2011; Gelman et al.,
2013). Benavoli et al. (2017) give a tutorial for
applications to ML and supply an implementation
of their proposed methods in a software package
(see Appendix C) and guidelines for reporting de-
tails are given by Kruschke (2021), including for
instance the choice of model and priors.
Best Practices: Experiments & Analysis
⋄Report mean & standard dev. over multiple runs;
⋄Perform signiﬁcance testing or Bayesian analysis and
motivate your choice of method;
⋄Carefully reﬂect on the amount of evidence regarding
your initial hypotheses.
6
Publication
In this section, we discuss some additional trends in
the DL ﬁeld that researchers should consider when
6Or, as Wasserstein et al. (2019) note: “statistically signiﬁ-
cant—don’t say it and don’t use it”.
7Here, we are not referring to a neural network, but instead
to a process generating experimental observations, specifying
a prior and likelihood for model scores. Conclusions are drawn
from the posterior distribution over parameters of interest (e.g.,
the mean performance), as demonstrated by Benavoli et al.
(2017).
publishing their work, even though they might not
directly be related to reproducibility & replicability.
Citation Control
While frequently, researchers
cite non-archival versions of papers, the published
version of a paper is peer-reviewed, increasing the
probability that any mistakes or ambiguities have
been resolved. In Appendix C, we suggest tools to
verify the version of any cited papers.
Hardware Requirements
The paper should re-
port the computing infrastructure used. At mini-
mum, the speciﬁcs about the CPU and GPU. This
is for indicating the amount of compute necessary
for the project, but also for the sake of replicabil-
ity issues due to the non-deterministic nature of
the GPU (Jean-Paul et al., 2019; Wei et al., 2020).
Moreover, Dodge et al. (2019) demonstrate that
test performance scores alone are insufﬁcient for
claiming the dominance of a model over another,
and argue for reporting additional performance de-
tails on validation data as a function of computation
budget, which can also estimate the amount of com-
putation required to obtain a given accuracy.
Environmental Impact
The growth of compu-
tational resources required for DL over the last
decade has led to ﬁnancial and carbon footprint
discussions in the AI community. Schwartz et al.
(2020) introduce the distinction between Red AI—
AI research that seek to obtain state-of-the-art re-
sults through the use of massive computational
power—and Green AI—AI research that yields
novel results without increasing computational cost.
In the paper the authors propose to add efﬁciency
as an evaluation criterion alongside accuracy mea-
sures. Hershcovich et al. (2022) advocate for the us-
age of a climate performance model card, in which
energy and emission statistics are being detailed.
Strubell et al. (2019) approximate ﬁnancial and en-
vironmental costs of training a variety of models
(e.g., BERT, GPT-2). In conclusion, to reduce costs
and improve equity, they propose (1) Reporting
training time and sensitivity to hyperparameters,
(2) Equitable access to computation resources, and
(3) Prioritizing computationally efﬁcient hardware
and algorithms (Appendix C includes a tool for
CO2 estimation of computational models).
Social Impact
The widespread of DL studies and
their increasing use of human-produced data (e.g.,
from social media and personal devices) means the
outcome of experiments and applications have di-
rect effects on the lives of individuals. Addressing
and mitigating biases in ML is near-impossible as
subjectivity is inescapable and thus converging in a
universal truth may further harm already marginal-
ized social groups (Waseem et al., 2021; Parmar
et al., 2022). As a follow-up, Waseem et al., 2021
argue for a reﬂection on the consequences the imag-
inary objectivity of ML has on political choices.
Hovy and Spruit (2016) analyze and discuss the
social impact research may have beyond the more
explored privacy issues. They make an ethical anal-
ysis on social justice, i.e., equal opportunities for in-
dividuals and groups, and underline three problems
of the mutual relationship between language, soci-
ety and individuals: exclusion, over-generalization
and overexposure.
Ethical Considerations
There has been effort
on the development of concrete ethical guidelines
for researchers within the ACM Code of Ethics and
Professional Conduct (Association for Computing
Machinery, 2022). The Code lists seven principles
stating how fundamental ethical principles apply to
the conduct of a computing professional (like DL
and NLP practitioners) and is based on two main
ideas: computing professionals’ actions change
the world and the public good is always the pri-
mary consideration. Mohammad (2021) discusses
the importance of going beyond individual models
and datasets, back to the ethics of the task itself.
As a practical recommendation, he presents Ethics
Sheets for AI Tasks as tools to document ethical
considerations before building datasets and devel-
oping systems. In addition, researchers are invited
to collect the ethical considerations of the paper in
a cohesive narrative, and elaborate them in a para-
graph, usually in the Introduction/Motivation, Data,
Evaluation, Error Analysis or Limitations section
(Mohammad, 2020; Hardmeier et al., 2021).
Best Practices: Publication
⋄Avoid citing pre-prints (if applicable);
⋄Describe the computational requirements;
⋄Consider the potential ethical & social impact;
⋆Consider the environmental impact and prioritize com-
putational efﬁciency;
⋆Include an Ethics and/or Bias Statement.
7
Discussion
Since previous sections have emphasized the need
to overhaul some experimental standards, we ded-
icate this last section to discuss some structural
issues that might pose obstacles to this.
Compute Requirements
Speciﬁcally with re-
gard to statistical signiﬁcance in Section 5, there
is a stark tension between the hardware require-
ments of modern methods (Sevilla et al., 2022) and
the computational budget of the average researcher.
Only the best-funded research labs can afford the
increasing computational costs to account for the
statistical uncertainty of results and to reproduce
prior works (Hooker, 2021). Under these circum-
stances, it becomes difﬁcult to judge whether the
results obtained via larger models and datasets actu-
ally constitute substantial progress or just statistical
ﬂukes. At the same time, such experiments can cre-
ate environmental concerns (Strubell et al., 2019;
Schwartz et al., 2020).8 The community must de-
cide collectively whether these factors, including
impeded reproducibility and weakened empirical
evidence, constitute a worthy price for the knowl-
edge obtained from training large neural networks.
Incentives in Publishing
As demonstrated by
Figure 2, NLP has gained traction as an empiri-
cal ﬁeld of research. At such a point, more rigor-
ous standards are necessary to maintain high lev-
els of scholarship. Unfortunately, we see this pro-
cess lagging behind, illustrated by repeated calls
for improvement (Gundersen and Kjensmo, 2018;
Narang et al., 2021). Why is that so? We specu-
late that the reason for many of these problems are
caused by adverse incentives set by the current pub-
lishing environment: As the career of researchers
hinges on their publications and more rigorous ex-
perimental standards are often not required to get
published, reproducing and reproducible works are
not rewarded. Instead, actors are tempted to “rig
the benchmark lottery” (Dehghani et al., 2021),
since achieving state-of-the-art results remains im-
portant for publishing (Birhane et al., 2021). As
of now, better experimental standards often do not
increase the acceptance probability: The more de-
tails are provided for replicability purposes, the
more potential points of criticism are exposed to
reviewers. This state of affairs might still seem like
progress to some, but Chu and Evans (2021) show
how an increased amount of papers actually leads
to slowed progress in a ﬁeld, making it harder for
new, promising ideas to break through. Further-
8E.g., GPT-3’s training was estimated to have cost ca. 12M
USD (Turner, 2020) or 188,702 kWh (Anthony et al., 2020).
more, Raff (2022) shows that reproducible work
can actually have a positive impact on a paper’s
citation rates, and thus should be more embraced.
Culture Change
How can we change this trend?
As researchers, we can start implementing the rec-
ommendations in this work in order to drive bottom-
up change and reach a critical mass (Centola et al.,
2018). As reviewers, we can shift focus from re-
sults to more rigorous methodologies (Rogers and
Augenstein, 2021), and allow more critiques and
reproductions of past works and meta-reviews to
be published (Birhane et al., 2021; Lampinen et al.,
2021). As a community, we can change the in-
centives around research and experiment with new
initiatives. Rogers and Augenstein (2020) and Su
(2021) give recommendations on how to improve
the peer-review process by better paper-reviewer
matching and paper scoring. Other attempts are
currently undertaken to encourage reproduction of
past works.9 Other ideas change the publishing pro-
cess more fundamentally, for instance by splitting
it into two steps: The ﬁrst part, where authors are
judged solely on the merit of their research ques-
tion and methodology; and the second one, during
which the analysis of their results is evaluated (Lo-
cascio, 2017). In a similar vein, van Miltenburg
et al. (2021) recommend a procedure similar to
clinical studies, where whole research projects are
pre-registered, i.e., specifying the parameters of re-
search before carrying out any experiments (Nosek
et al., 2018). The implications of these ideas are
not only positive, however, as a slowing rate of
publishing might disadvantage junior researchers
(Chu and Evans, 2021).
8
Conclusion
Being able to (re-)produce empirical ﬁndings is
critical for scientiﬁc progress, particularly in fast-
growing ﬁelds like NLP (Manning, 2015). To re-
duce the risks of a reproducibility crisis and unre-
liable research ﬁndings (Ioannidis, 2005), experi-
mental rigor is imperative. Being aware of possible
harmful implications and to avoid them is therefore
important. Every step carries possible biases (Hovy
and Prabhumoye, 2021; Waseem et al., 2021). This
paper aims at providing a toolbox of actionable
recommendations for each research step, and a
reﬂection and summary of the ongoing broader
9See for instance the reproducibility certication of the
TMLR journal (TMLR, 2022) or NAACL 2022 reproducibility
badges (Association for Computational Linguistics, 2022).
discussion. With concrete best practices to raise
awareness and call for uptake, we hope to aid re-
searchers in their empirical endeavors.
Limitations
This work comes with two main limitations: On the
one hand, it can only take a snapshot of an ongoing
discussion. On the other hand, this work was aimed
to primarily serve the NLP community, although
other disciplines using DL might also proﬁt from
these guidelines. With these limitations in mind,
we invite members of the community to contribute
to our open-source repository.
Ethics Statement
We do not foresee any immediate negative ethical
consequences in lieu with our work.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Giovanni Cinà, Rotem
Dror, Miryam de Lhoneux, and Tanja Samardži´c
for their feedback on this draft. Furthermore, we
would like to express our gratitude to the NLPnorth
group in general for frequent discussions and feed-
back on this work. MZ and BP are supported by
the Independent Research Fund Denmark (DFF)
grant 9131-00019B. EB, MME, and BP are sup-
ported by the Independent Research Fund Denmark
(DFF) Sapere Aude grant 9063-00077B. BP is sup-
ported by the ERC Consolidator Grant DIALECT
101043235.
References
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Cas-
tro, Aaron C Courville, and Marc Bellemare. 2021.
Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the sta-
tistical precipice. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 34.
Lasse F Wolff Anthony, Benjamin Kanding, and
Raghavendra Selvan. 2020. Carbontracker: Track-
ing and predicting the carbon footprint of train-
ing
deep
learning
models.
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2007.03051.
Marianna Apidianaki, Saif Mohammad, Jonathan May,
Ekaterina Shutova, Steven Bethard, and Marine
Carpuat. 2018. Proceedings of the 12th international
workshop on semantic evaluation. In Proceedings of
The 12th International Workshop on Semantic Eval-
uation.
Association for Computational Linguistics. 2022. Re-
producibility criteria.
https://2022.naacl.org/
calls/papers/#reproducibility-criteria.
Accessed: 2022-02-09.
Association for Computing Machinery. 2022.
Acm
code of ethics and professional conduct.
https:
//www.acm.org/code-of-ethics. Accessed: 2022-
02-10.
Erfan Sadeqi Azer, Daniel Khashabi, Ashish Sabhar-
wal, and Dan Roth. 2020. Not all claims are created
equal: Choosing the right statistical approach to as-
sess hypotheses. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, ACL 2020, Online, July 5-10, 2020, pages
5715–5725. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Valerio Basile, Michael Fell, Tommaso Fornaciari,
Dirk Hovy, Silviu Paun, Barbara Plank, Massimo
Poesio, Alexandra Uma, et al. 2021. We need to con-
sider disagreement in evaluation. In 1st Workshop
on Benchmarking: Past, Present and Future, pages
15–21. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Elisa Bassignana and Barbara Plank. 2022. CrossRE:
A Cross-Domain Dataset for Relation Extraction. In
Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: EMNLP 2022. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Christine Basta, Marta R Costa-jussà, and Noe Casas.
2019. Evaluating the underlying gender bias in con-
textualized word embeddings. In Proceedings of the
First Workshop on Gender Bias in Natural Language
Processing, pages 33–39.
Anya Belz, Shubham Agarwal, Anastasia Shimorina,
and Ehud Reiter. 2020. ReproGen: Proposal for a
shared task on reproducibility of human evaluations
in NLG. In Proceedings of the 13th International
Conference on Natural Language Generation, pages
232–236, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Anya Belz, Shubham Agarwal, Anastasia Shimorina,
and Ehud Reiter. 2021. A systematic review of re-
producibility research in natural language process-
ing. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the
European Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Main Volume, EACL 2021, On-
line, April 19 - 23, 2021, pages 381–393. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Alessio Benavoli, Giorgio Corani, Janez Demsar, and
Marco Zaffalon. 2017. Time for a change: a tutorial
for comparing multiple classiﬁers through bayesian
analysis. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 18:77:1–77:36.
Alessio Benavoli, Giorgio Corani, Francesca Mangili,
Marco Zaffalon, and Fabrizio Ruggeri. 2014.
A
bayesian wilcoxon signed-rank test based on the
dirichlet process. In International conference on ma-
chine learning, pages 1026–1034. PMLR.
Emily M. Bender and Batya Friedman. 2018.
Data
statements for natural language processing: Toward
mitigating system bias and enabling better science.
Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 6:58–04.
Emily M Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-
Major, and Shmargaret Shmitchell. 2021.
On the
dangers of stochastic parrots: Can language models
be too big? In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Confer-
ence on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency,
pages 610–623.
Martin Benjamin. 2018. Hard numbers: Language ex-
clusion in computational linguistics and natural lan-
guage processing. In Proceedings of the LREC 2018
Workshop “CCURL2018–Sustaining Knowledge Di-
versity in the Digital Age, pages 13–18.
James O Berger and Thomas Sellke. 1987. Testing a
point null hypothesis: The irreconcilability of p val-
ues and evidence. Journal of the American statisti-
cal Association, 82(397):112–122.
James Bergstra and Yoshua Bengio. 2012.
Random
search for hyper-parameter optimization. Journal of
machine learning research, 13(2).
Abeba Birhane,
Pratyusha Kalluri,
Dallas Card,
William Agnew, Ravit Dotan, and Michelle Bao.
2021. The values encoded in machine learning re-
search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.15590.
Bernd Bischl,
Martin Binder,
Michel Lang,
To-
bias Pielok, Jakob Richter, Stefan Coors, Janek
Thomas, Theresa Ullmann, Marc Becker, Anne-
Laure Boulesteix, et al. 2021.
Hyperparame-
ter optimization:
Foundations, algorithms, best
practices and open challenges.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2107.05847.
Carlo Bonferroni. 1936. Teoria statistica delle classi
e calcolo delle probabilita. Pubblicazioni del R Is-
tituto Superiore di Scienze Economiche e Commeri-
ciali di Firenze, 8:3–62.
Xavier Bouthillier, Pierre Delaunay, Mirko Bronzi, As-
sya Troﬁmov, Brennan Nichyporuk, Justin Szeto,
Nazanin Mohammadi Sepahvand, Edward Raff,
Kanika Madan, Vikram Voleti, et al. 2021. Account-
ing for variance in machine learning benchmarks.
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems, 3.
Samuel R. Bowman and George Dahl. 2021. What will
it take to ﬁx benchmarking in natural language un-
derstanding?
In Proceedings of the 2021 Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, pages 4843–4855, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Anouck Braggaar and Rob van der Goot. 2021. Chal-
lenges in annotating and parsing spoken, code-
switched, Frisian-Dutch data. In Proceedings of the
Second Workshop on Domain Adaptation for NLP,
pages 50–58, Kyiv, Ukraine. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Steve Brooks, Andrew Gelman, Galin Jones, and Xiao-
Li Meng. 2011. Handbook of markov chain monte
carlo. CRC press.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah,
Jared
D
Kaplan,
Prafulla
Dhariwal,
Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry,
Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-
Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon
Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu,
Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric
Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess,
Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish,
Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei.
2020. Language models are few-shot learners. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
volume 33, pages 1877–1901. Curran Associates,
Inc.
Dallas Card, Peter Henderson, Urvashi Khandelwal,
Robin Jia, Kyle Mahowald, and Dan Jurafsky. 2020.
With little power comes great responsibility. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2020,
Online, November 16-20, 2020, pages 9263–9274.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Sean M Carroll. 2019. Beyond falsiﬁability: Normal
science in a multiverse. Why trust a theory, pages
300–314.
Isaac Caswell, Theresa Breiner, Daan van Esch, and
Ankur Bapna. 2020.
Language ID in the wild:
Unexpected challenges on the path to a thousand-
language web text corpus.
In Proceedings of
the 28th International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 6588–6608, Barcelona,
Spain (Online). International Committee on Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Isaac Caswell, Julia Kreutzer, Lisa Wang, Ahsan Wa-
hab, Daan van Esch, Nasanbayar Ulzii-Orshikh, Al-
lahsera Tapo, Nishant Subramani, Artem Sokolov,
Claytone Sikasote, Monang Setyawan, Supheak-
mungkol Sarin, Sokhar Samb, Benoît Sagot, Clara
Rivera, Annette Rios, Isabel Papadimitriou, Sa-
lomey Osei,
Pedro Javier Ortiz Suárez,
Iroro
Orife, Kelechi Ogueji, Rubungo Andre Niyongabo,
Toan Q. Nguyen, Mathias Müller, André Müller,
Shamsuddeen Hassan Muhammad, Nanda Muham-
mad, Ayanda Mnyakeni, Jamshidbek Mirzakhalov,
Tapiwanashe Matangira, Colin Leong, Nze Lawson,
Sneha Kudugunta, Yacine Jernite, Mathias Jenny,
Orhan Firat, Bonaventure F. P. Dossou, Sakhile
Dlamini, Nisansa de Silva, Sakine Çabuk Ballı,
Stella Biderman, Alessia Battisti, Ahmed Baruwa,
Ankur Bapna, Pallavi Baljekar, Israel Abebe Azime,
Ayodele Awokoya, Duygu Ataman, Orevaoghene
Ahia, Oghenefego Ahia, Sweta Agrawal, and Mofe-
toluwa Adeyemi. 2021. Quality at a glance: An au-
dit of web-crawled multilingual datasets.
Damon Centola, Joshua Becker, Devon Brackbill, and
Andrea Baronchelli. 2018. Experimental evidence
for tipping points in social convention.
Science,
360(6393):1116–1119.
Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee,
Aditya Grover, Misha Laskin, Pieter Abbeel, Ar-
avind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. 2021. Decision
transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence
modeling. Advances in neural information process-
ing systems, 34.
Johan SG Chu and James A Evans. 2021.
Slowed
canonical progress in large ﬁelds of science. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
118(41).
K Bretonnel Cohen, Jingbo Xia, Pierre Zweigenbaum,
Tiffany J Callahan, Orin Hargraves, Foster Goss,
Nancy Ide, Aurélie Névéol, Cyril Grouin, and
Lawrence E Hunter. 2018.
Three dimensions of
reproducibility in natural language processing. In
LREC... International Conference on Language Re-
sources & Evaluation:[proceedings]. International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation,
volume 2018, page 156. NIH Public Access.
Giorgio Corani and Alessio Benavoli. 2015.
A
bayesian approach for comparing cross-validated al-
gorithms on multiple data sets. Machine Learning,
100(2):285–304.
Alicia Curth, David Svensson, James Weatherall, and
Mihaela van der Schaar. 2021. Really doing great at
estimating cate? a critical look at ml benchmarking
practices in treatment effect estimation.
Alicia Curth and Mihaela van der Schaar. 2021a. Non-
parametric estimation of heterogeneous treatment ef-
fects: From theory to learning algorithms. In Pro-
ceedings of the 24th International Conference on Ar-
tiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS). PMLR.
Alicia Curth and Mihaela van der Schaar. 2021b. On
inductive biases for heterogeneous treatment effect
estimation.
Alexander
D’Amour,
Katherine
A.
Heller,
Dan
Moldovan, Ben Adlam, Babak Alipanahi, Alex Beu-
tel, Christina Chen, Jonathan Deaton, Jacob Eisen-
stein, Matthew D. Hoffman, Farhad Hormozdiari,
Neil Houlsby, Shaobo Hou, Ghassen Jerfel, Alan
Karthikesalingam, Mario Lucic, Yi-An Ma, Cory Y.
McLean, Diana Mincu, Akinori Mitani, Andrea
Montanari, Zachary Nado, Vivek Natarajan, Christo-
pher Nielson, Thomas F. Osborne, Rajiv Raman,
Kim Ramasamy, Rory Sayres, Jessica Schrouff, Mar-
tin Seneviratne, Shannon Sequeira, Harini Suresh,
Victor Veitch, Max Vladymyrov, Xuezhi Wang, Kel-
lie Webster, Steve Yadlowsky, Taedong Yun, Xiao-
hua Zhai, and D. Sculley. 2020.
Underspeciﬁca-
tion presents challenges for credibility in modern
machine learning. CoRR, abs/2011.03395.
Mostafa Dehghani, Yi Tay, Alexey A Gritsenko, Zhe
Zhao, Neil Houlsby, Fernando Diaz, Donald Met-
zler, and Oriol Vinyals. 2021. The benchmark lot-
tery.
Janez Demšar. 2008. On the appropriateness of statisti-
cal tests in machine learning. In Workshop on Evalu-
ation Methods for Machine Learning in conjunction
with ICML, page 65. Citeseer.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019.
Bert: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages
4171–4186.
Jesse Dodge, Suchin Gururangan, Dallas Card, Roy
Schwartz, and Noah A. Smith. 2019.
Show your
work: Improved reporting of experimental results.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the
9th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 2185–
2194, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Jesse Dodge and Noah A. Smith. 2020. Reproducibil-
ity at emnlp 2020.
https://2020.emnlp.org/
blog/2020-05-20-reproducibility.
Alexey
Dosovitskiy,
Lucas
Beyer,
Alexander
Kolesnikov,
Dirk
Weissenborn,
Xiaohua
Zhai,
Thomas Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias
Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob
Uszkoreit, and Neil Houlsby. 2021.
An image is
worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recog-
nition at scale.
In 9th International Conference
on Learning Representations, ICLR 2021, Virtual
Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021. OpenReview.net.
Rotem Dror, Gili Baumer, Marina Bogomolov, and Roi
Reichart. 2017.
Replicability analysis for natural
language processing: Testing signiﬁcance with mul-
tiple datasets.
Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics,
5:471–486.
Rotem Dror, Gili Baumer, Segev Shlomov, and Roi
Reichart. 2018.
The hitchhiker’s guide to testing
statistical signiﬁcance in natural language process-
ing. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL
2018, Melbourne, Australia, July 15-20, 2018, Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers, pages 1383–1392. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Rotem Dror, Lotem Peled-Cohen, Segev Shlomov, and
Roi Reichart. 2020. Statistical signiﬁcance testing
for natural language processing. Synthesis Lectures
on Human Language Technologies, 13(2):1–116.
Rotem Dror, Segev Shlomov, and Roi Reichart. 2019.
Deep dominance - how to properly compare deep
neural models. In Proceedings of the 57th Confer-
ence of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, ACL 2019, Florence, Italy, July 28- August 2,
2019, Volume 1: Long Papers, pages 2773–2785. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Chris Drummond. 2009.
Replicability is not repro-
ducibility: Nor is it good science. Proceedings of
the Evaluation Methods for Machine Learning Work-
shop at the 26th ICML.
ELRA. 1995. The european language resources asso-
ciation (elra). http://www.elra.info/en/about/.
Accessed: 2022-02-10.
Antske Fokkens, Marieke van Erp, Marten Postma, Ted
Pedersen, Piek Vossen, and Nuno Freire. 2013. Off-
spring from reproduction problems: What replica-
tion failure teaches us. In Proceedings of the 51st
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
1691–1701, Soﬁa, Bulgaria. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Timnit
Gebru,
Jamie
Morgenstern,
Briana
Vec-
chione, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, Hanna Wal-
lach, Hal Daumé III, and Kate Crawford. 2020.
Datasheets for datasets. Computing Research Repos-
itory, arxiv:1803.09010. Version 7.
Sebastian Gehrmann, Elizabeth Clark, and Thibault
Sellam. 2022. Repairing the cracked foundation: A
survey of obstacles in evaluation practices for gener-
ated text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.06935.
Andrew Gelman, John B Carlin, Hal S Stern, David B
Dunson, Aki Vehtari, and Donald B Rubin. 2013.
Bayesian data analysis. Chapman Hall, London.
Zhiqiang Gong, Ping Zhong, and Weidong Hu. 2019.
Diversity in machine learning.
IEEE Access,
7:64323–64350.
Kyle Gorman and Steven Bedrick. 2019. We need to
talk about standard splits. In Proceedings of the 57th
annual meeting of the association for computational
linguistics, pages 2786–2791.
Sander Greenland, Stephen J Senn, Kenneth J Roth-
man, John B Carlin, Charles Poole, Steven N Good-
man, and Douglas G Altman. 2016. Statistical tests,
p values, conﬁdence intervals, and power: a guide to
misinterpretations. European journal of epidemiol-
ogy, 31(4):337–350.
Odd Erik Gundersen and Sigbjørn Kjensmo. 2018.
State of the art: Reproducibility in artiﬁcial intelli-
gence. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, volume 32.
Suchin
Gururangan,
Ana
Marasovi´c,
Swabha
Swayamdipta, Kyle Lo, Iz Beltagy, Doug Downey,
and Noah A. Smith. 2020. Don’t stop pretraining:
Adapt language models to domains and tasks.
In
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
8342–8360, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Christian Hardmeier, Marta R. Costa-jussà, Kellie Web-
ster, Will Radford, and Su Lin Blodgett. 2021. How
to write a bias statement: Recommendations for sub-
missions to the workshop on gender bias in NLP.
CoRR, abs/2104.03026.
Jianxing He, Sally L Baxter, Jie Xu, Jiming Xu, Xing-
tao Zhou, and Kang Zhang. 2019. The practical im-
plementation of artiﬁcial intelligence technologies
in medicine. Nature medicine, 25(1):30–36.
Peter Henderson, Jieru Hu, Joshua Romoff, Emma
Brunskill, Dan Jurafsky, and Joelle Pineau. 2020.
Towards the systematic reporting of the energy and
carbon footprints of machine learning. Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 21(248):1–43.
Peter Henderson, Riashat Islam, Philip Bachman,
Joelle Pineau, Doina Precup, and David Meger.
2018. Deep reinforcement learning that matters. In
Proceedings of the Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, (AAAI-18), the 30th inno-
vative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IAAI-
18), and the 8th AAAI Symposium on Educational
Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (EAAI-18), New
Orleans, Louisiana, USA, February 2-7, 2018, pages
3207–3214. AAAI Press.
Daniel Hershcovich, Nicolas Webersinke, Mathias
Kraus, Julia Anna Bingler, and Markus Leippold.
2022. Towards climate awareness in nlp research.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.05071.
Sara Hooker. 2021. The hardware lottery. Communica-
tions of the ACM, 64(12):58–65.
Dirk Hovy and Shrimai Prabhumoye. 2021.
Five
sources of bias in natural language processing. Lan-
guage and Linguistics Compass, 15(8):e12432.
Dirk Hovy and Shannon L. Spruit. 2016. The social
impact of natural language processing. In Proceed-
ings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Pa-
pers), pages 591–598, Berlin, Germany. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Andrew Ilyas, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras,
Logan Engstrom, Brandon Tran, and Aleksander
Madry. 2019.
Adversarial examples are not bugs,
they are features.
In Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems 2019,
NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver,
BC, Canada, pages 125–136.
John P. A. Ioannidis. 2005. Why most published re-
search ﬁndings are false. PLOS Medicine, 2(8):null.
Nathalie Japkowicz and Mohak Shah. 2011. Evaluat-
ing learning algorithms: a classiﬁcation perspective.
Cambridge University Press.
S Jean-Paul, T Elseify, I Obeid, and J Picone. 2019. Is-
sues in the reproducibility of deep learning results.
In 2019 IEEE Signal Processing in Medicine and Bi-
ology Symposium (SPMB), pages 1–4. IEEE.
Theis Ingerslev Jensen, Bryan T Kelly, and Lasse Heje
Pedersen. 2021.
Is there a replication crisis in ﬁ-
nance?
Technical report, National Bureau of Eco-
nomic Research.
Leslie K John, George Loewenstein, and Drazen Prelec.
2012.
Measuring the prevalence of questionable
research practices with incentives for truth telling.
Psychological science, 23(5):524–532.
Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Yinhan Liu, Daniel S.
Weld, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Omer Levy. 2020.
SpanBERT: Improving pre-training by representing
and predicting spans. Transactions of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, 8:64–77.
Douwe Kiela, Max Bartolo, Yixin Nie, Divyansh
Kaushik, Atticus Geiger, Zhengxuan Wu, Bertie Vid-
gen, Grusha Prasad, Amanpreet Singh, Pratik Ring-
shia, Zhiyi Ma, Tristan Thrush, Sebastian Riedel,
Zeerak Waseem, Pontus Stenetorp, Robin Jia, Mo-
hit Bansal, Christopher Potts, and Adina Williams.
2021.
Dynabench: Rethinking benchmarking in
NLP.
In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, pages 4110–4124, Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Pang
Wei
Koh,
Shiori
Sagawa,
Henrik
Mark-
lund, Sang Michael Xie, Marvin Zhang, Akshay
Balsubramani, Weihua Hu, Michihiro Yasunaga,
Richard Lanas Phillips, Sara Beery, Jure Leskovec,
Anshul Kundaje, Emma Pierson, Sergey Levine,
Chelsea Finn, and Percy Liang. 2020. WILDS: A
benchmark of in-the-wild distribution shifts. CoRR,
abs/2012.07421.
John K Kruschke. 2010. Bayesian data analysis. Wi-
ley Interdisciplinary Reviews:
Cognitive Science,
1(5):658–676.
John K Kruschke. 2013.
Bayesian estimation super-
sedes the t test. Journal of Experimental Psychol-
ogy: General, 142(2):573.
John K Kruschke. 2021. Bayesian analysis reporting
guidelines. Nature human behaviour, 5(10):1282–
1291.
John K Kruschke and Torrin M Liddell. 2018.
Bayesian data analysis for newcomers.
Psycho-
nomic bulletin & review, 25(1):155–177.
Thomas S Kuhn. 1970. The structure of scientiﬁc revo-
lutions, volume 111. Chicago University of Chicago
Press.
Andrew Kyle Lampinen, Stephanie CY Chan, Adam
Santoro, and Felix Hill. 2021. Publishing fast and
slow: A path toward generalizability in psychology
and ai.
A-M Leventi-Peetz and T Östreich. 2022. Deep learn-
ing reproducibility and explainable ai (xai). arXiv
preprint arXiv:2202.11452.
Quentin Lhoest, Albert Villanova del Moral, Patrick
von Platen, Thomas Wolf, Yacine Jernite, Ab-
hishek Thakur, Lewis Tunstall, Suraj Patil, Mariama
Drame, Julien Chaumond, Julien Plu, Joe Davi-
son,
Simon Brandeis,
Teven Le Scao,
Victor
Sanh, Kevin Canwen Xu, Nicolas Patry, Angelina
McMillan-Major, Philipp Schmid, Sylvain Gugger,
Steven Liu, Nathan Raw, Sylvain Lesage, Théo Ma-
tussière, Lysandre Debut, Stas Bekman, and Clé-
ment Delangue. 2021. huggingface/datasets: 1.12.1.
Lisha Li, Kevin Jamieson, Giulia DeSalvo, Afshin Ros-
tamizadeh, and Ameet Talwalkar. 2017. Hyperband:
A novel bandit-based approach to hyperparameter
optimization. The Journal of Machine Learning Re-
search, 18(1):6765–6816.
Mark Liberman. 2015. Replicability vs. reproducibil-
ity — or is it the other way around?
https://
languagelog.ldc.upenn.edu/nll/?p=21956.
Ac-
cessed: 2022-02-21.
Mingfeng Lin, Henry C Lucas Jr, and Galit Shmueli.
2013. Research commentary—too big to fail: large
samples and the p-value problem. Information Sys-
tems Research, 24(4):906–917.
Joseph J Locascio. 2017.
Results blind science
publishing.
Basic and applied social psychology,
39(5):239–246.
Eric L Manibardo, Ibai Laña, and Javier Del Ser. 2021.
Deep learning for road trafﬁc forecasting: Does it
make a difference?
IEEE Transactions on Intelli-
gent Transportation Systems.
Christopher D. Manning. 2015. Last words: Computa-
tional linguistics and deep learning. Computational
Linguistics, 41(4):701–707.
Benjamin Marie, Atsushi Fujita, and Raphael Rubino.
2021. Scientiﬁc credibility of machine translation
research: A meta-evaluation of 769 papers. In Pro-
ceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics and the 11th In-
ternational Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing, ACL/IJCNLP 2021, (Volume 1: Long
Papers), Virtual Event, August 1-6, 2021, pages
7297–7306. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Sachit Menon, Alexandru Damian, Shijia Hu, Nikhil
Ravi, and Cynthia Rudin. 2020.
Pulse:
Self-
supervised photo upsampling via latent space explo-
ration of generative models. In Proceedings of the
ieee/cvf conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 2437–2445.
Margaret Mitchell, Simone Wu, Andrew Zaldivar,
Parker Barnes, Lucy Vasserman, Ben Hutchinson,
Elena Spitzer, Inioluwa Deborah Raji, and Timnit
Gebru. 2019. Model cards for model reporting. In
Proceedings of the conference on fairness, account-
ability, and transparency, pages 220–229.
Shakir Mohamed, Marie-Therese Png, and William
Isaac. 2020. Decolonial ai: Decolonial theory as so-
ciotechnical foresight in artiﬁcial intelligence. Phi-
losophy & Technology, 33(4):659–684.
Saif M. Mohammad. 2020. What is a research ethics
statement and why does it matter?
Saif M. Mohammad. 2021. Ethics sheets for AI tasks.
CoRR, abs/2107.01183.
Vaishnavh
Nagarajan,
Anders
Andreassen,
and
Behnam Neyshabur. 2021.
Understanding the
failure modes of out-of-distribution generalization.
In 9th International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May
3-7, 2021. OpenReview.net.
Sharan Narang, Hyung Won Chung, Yi Tay, Liam
Fedus, Thibault Févry, Michael Matena, Karishma
Malkan, Noah Fiedel, Noam Shazeer, Zhenzhong
Lan, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, Nan Ding, Jake Mar-
cus, Adam Roberts, and Colin Raffel. 2021.
Do
transformer modiﬁcations transfer across implemen-
tations and applications?
In Proceedings of the
2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, EMNLP 2021, Virtual Event
/ Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, 7-11 November,
2021, pages 5758–5773. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Adrian Nilsson, Simon Smith, Gregor Ulm, Emil Gus-
tavsson, and Mats Jirstrand. 2018. A performance
evaluation of federated learning algorithms. In Pro-
ceedings of the second workshop on distributed in-
frastructures for deep learning, pages 1–8.
Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Filip Gin-
ter, Jan Hajiˇc, Christopher D. Manning, Sampo
Pyysalo, Sebastian Schuster, Francis Tyers, and
Daniel Zeman. 2020. Universal Dependencies v2:
An evergrowing multilingual treebank collection.
In Proceedings of the 12th Language Resources
and Evaluation Conference, pages 4034–4043, Mar-
seille, France. European Language Resources Asso-
ciation.
Brian A Nosek, Charles R Ebersole, Alexander C De-
Haven, and David T Mellor. 2018.
The prereg-
istration revolution.
Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 115(11):2600–2606.
Mihir Parmar, Swaroop Mishra, Mor Geva, and Chitta
Baral. 2022.
Don’t blame the annotator: Bias al-
ready starts in the annotation instructions.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2205.00415.
Silviu Paun, Ron Artstein, and Massimo Poesio. 2022.
Statistical methods for annotation analysis.
Syn-
thesis Lectures on Human Language Technologies,
15(1):1–217.
Ted Pedersen. 2008.
Last words:
Empiricism is
not a matter of faith.
Computational Linguistics,
34(3):465–470.
Roger D Peng. 2011. Reproducible research in compu-
tational science. Science, 334(6060):1226–1227.
Jonas Pfeiffer, Andreas Rücklé, Clifton Poth, Aish-
warya
Kamath,
Ivan
Vuli´c,
Sebastian
Ruder,
Kyunghyun
Cho,
and
Iryna
Gurevych.
2020.
Adapterhub: A framework for adapting transform-
ers. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing:
System Demonstrations, pages 46–54.
Barbara Plank, Kristian Nørgaard Jensen, and Rob
van der Goot. 2020. DaN+: Danish nested named
entities and lexical normalization. In Proceedings
of the 28th International Conference on Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 6649–6662, Barcelona,
Spain (Online). International Committee on Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Karl Popper. 1934. Karl Popper: Logik der Forschung.
Mohr Siebeck, Tübingen, Germany.
Matt Post. 2018. A call for clarity in reporting BLEU
scores. In Proceedings of the Third Conference on
Machine Translation: Research Papers, pages 186–
191, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Aida Mostafazadeh Davani,
and Mark Diaz. 2021. On releasing annotator-level
labels and information in datasets. In Proceedings
of The Joint 15th Linguistic Annotation Workshop
(LAW) and 3rd Designing Meaning Representations
(DMR) Workshop, pages 133–138, Punta Cana, Do-
minican Republic. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
James Pustejovsky and Amber Stubbs. 2012.
Natu-
ral Language Annotation for Machine Learning: A
guide to corpus-building for applications. O’Reilly
Media, Inc.
Edward Raff. 2022.
Does the market of cita-
tions reward reproducible work?
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.03829.
Abhinav Ramesh Kashyap, Devamanyu Hazarika, Min-
Yen Kan, and Roger Zimmermann. 2021. Domain
divergences: A survey and empirical analysis. In
Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
pages 1830–1849, Online. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Sebastian Raschka. 2018. Model evaluation, model se-
lection, and algorithm selection in machine learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.12808.
Marek Rei. 2022.
Ml and nlp publications in
2021. https://www.marekrei.com/blog/ml-and-
nlp-publications-in-2021/.
Kenneth Reitz and Tanya Schlusser. 2016. The Hitch-
hiker’s guide to Python: best practices for develop-
ment. " O’Reilly Media, Inc.".
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Tongshuang Wu, Carlos Guestrin,
and Sameer Singh. 2020.
Beyond accuracy: Be-
havioral testing of NLP models with CheckList. In
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 4902–
4912, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Stefan Riezler and Michael Hagmann. 2021. Validity,
reliability, and signiﬁcance.
Stefan Riezler and John T Maxwell III. 2005. On some
pitfalls in automatic evaluation and signiﬁcance test-
ing for mt. In Proceedings of the ACL workshop on
intrinsic and extrinsic evaluation measures for ma-
chine translation and/or summarization, pages 57–
64.
Anna Rogers and Isabelle Augenstein. 2020. What can
we do to improve peer review in nlp? In Findings
of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
EMNLP 2020, Online Event, 16-20 November 2020,
volume EMNLP 2020 of Findings of ACL, pages
1256–1262. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Anna Rogers and Isabelle Augenstein. 2021.
How
to review for acl rolling review?
https://
aclrollingreview.org/reviewertutorial.
Ac-
cessed: 2022-02-21.
Maarten Sap, Swabha Swayamdipta, Laura Vianna,
Xuhui Zhou, Yejin Choi, and Noah A Smith. 2021.
Annotators with attitudes: How annotator beliefs
and identities bias toxic language detection. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2111.07997.
David Schlangen. 2021. Targeting the benchmark: On
methodology in current natural language processing
research. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
and the 11th International Joint Conference on Nat-
ural Language Processing (Volume 2: Short Papers),
pages 670–674, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Victor Schmidt, Kamal Goyal, Aditya Joshi, Boris
Feld, Liam Conell, Nikolas Laskaris, Doug Blank,
Jonathan Wilson, Sorelle Friedler, and Sasha Luc-
cioni. 2021. CodeCarbon: Estimate and Track Car-
bon Emissions from Machine Learning Computing.
Roy Schwartz, Jesse Dodge, Noah A. Smith, and
Oren Etzioni. 2020.
Green AI.
Commun. ACM,
63(12):54–63.
Thibault Sellam, Steve Yadlowsky, Jason Wei, Naomi
Saphra, Alexander D’Amour, Tal Linzen, Jasmijn
Bastings, Iulia Turc, Jacob Eisenstein, Dipanjan
Das, et al. 2021.
The multiberts:
Bert repro-
ductions for robustness analysis.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2106.16163.
Jaime Sevilla, Lennart Heim, Anson Ho, Tamay Be-
siroglu, Marius Hobbhahn, and Pablo Villalobos.
2022.
Compute trends across three eras of ma-
chine learning.
arXiv:2202.05924 [cs].
ArXiv:
2202.05924.
Anastasia Shimorina, Yannick Parmentier, and Claire
Gardent. 2021.
An error analysis framework for
shallow surface realization. Transactions of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, 9:429–446.
Herbert A Simon. 1995.
Artiﬁcial intelligence: an
empirical science. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 77(1):95–
127.
Jasper Snoek, Hugo Larochelle, and Ryan P. Adams.
2012. Practical bayesian optimization of machine
learning algorithms. In Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems 25: 26th Annual Con-
ference on Neural Information Processing Systems
2012. Proceedings of a meeting held December 3-
6, 2012, Lake Tahoe, Nevada, United States, pages
2960–2968.
Anders Søgaard, Sebastian Ebert, Jasmijn Bastings,
and Katja Filippova. 2021. We need to talk about
random splits. In Proceedings of the 16th Confer-
ence of the European Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume, EACL
2021, Online, April 19 - 23, 2021, pages 1823–1832.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Lucia Specia. 2021. Disagreement in human evalua-
tion: blame the task not the annotators. NoDaLiDa
keynote.
Emma Strubell, Ananya Ganesh, and Andrew McCal-
lum. 2019.
Energy and policy considerations for
deep learning in NLP. In Proceedings of the 57th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 3645–3650, Florence, Italy.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Weijie Su. 2021.
You are the best reviewer of your
own papers: An owner-assisted scoring mechanism.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
34.
TMLR. 2022.
Submission guidelines and editorial
policies.
https://jmlr.org/tmlr/editorial-
policies.html. Accessed: 2022-02-09.
Tina Tseng, Amanda Stent, and Domenic Maida. 2020.
Best practices for managing data annotation projects.
CoRR, abs/2009.11654.
Stéphane Tufféry. 2011. Data mining and statistics for
decision making. John Wiley & Sons.
Elliot Turner. 2020. Twitter post (@eturner303): Read-
ing the openai gpt-3 paper. https://twitter.com/
eturner303/status/1266264358771757057. Ac-
cessed: 2022-02-09.
Dennis Ulmer, Christian Hardmeier, and Jes Frellsen.
2022.
deep-signiﬁcance-easy and meaningful sta-
tistical signiﬁcance testing in the age of neural net-
works. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06815.
Alexandra N Uma, Tommaso Fornaciari, Dirk Hovy,
Silviu Paun, Barbara Plank, and Massimo Poesio.
2021.
Learning from disagreement:
A survey.
Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 72:1385–
1470.
Rob van der Goot. 2021. We need to talk about train-
dev-test splits. In Proceedings of the 2021 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, EMNLP 2021, Virtual Event / Punta
Cana, Dominican Republic, 7-11 November, 2021,
pages 4485–4494. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Rob van der Goot, Ahmet Üstün, Alan Ramponi,
Ibrahim Sharaf, and Barbara Plank. 2021.
Mas-
sive choice, ample tasks (MaChAmp): A toolkit
for multi-task learning in NLP. In Proceedings of
the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: System
Demonstrations, pages 176–197, Online. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Emiel van Miltenburg, Chris van der Lee, and Emiel
Krahmer. 2021.
Preregistering NLP research.
In
Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
NAACL-HLT 2021, Online, June 6-11, 2021, pages
613–623. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Daniel Varab and Natalie Schluter. 2020.
DaNews-
room: A large-scale Danish summarisation dataset.
In Proceedings of the 12th Language Resources
and Evaluation Conference, pages 6731–6739, Mar-
seille, France. European Language Resources Asso-
ciation.
Daniel Varab and Natalie Schluter. 2021.
Mas-
siveSumm: a very large-scale, very multilingual,
news summarisation dataset. In Proceedings of the
2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 10150–10161, Online
and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Tamás Váradi, Peter Wittenburg, Steven Krauwer, Mar-
tin Wynne, and Kimmo Koskenniemi. 2008. Clarin:
Common language resources and technology infras-
tructure.
In 6th International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2008).
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems, pages 5998–6008.
Zeerak Waseem, Smarika Lulz, Joachim Bingel, and
Isabelle Augenstein. 2021. Disembodied machine
learning: On the illusion of objectivity in nlp.
Ronald L Wasserstein, Allen L Schirm, and Nicole A
Lazar. 2019. Moving to a world beyond “p <0.05”.
Junyi Wei, Yicheng Zhang, Zhe Zhou, Zhou Li, and
Mohammad Abdullah Al Faruque. 2020.
Leaky
dnn: Stealing deep-learning model secret with gpu
context-switching side-channel.
In 2020 50th An-
nual IEEE/IFIP International Conference on De-
pendable Systems and Networks (DSN), pages 125–
137. IEEE.
Jennifer C. White and Ryan Cotterell. 2021.
Exam-
ining the inductive bias of neural language mod-
els with artiﬁcial languages. In Proceedings of the
59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics and the 11th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing,
ACL/IJCNLP 2021, (Volume 1: Long Papers), Vir-
tual Event, August 1-6, 2021, pages 454–463. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Martijn Wieling, Josine Rawee, and Gertjan van Noord.
2018. Reproducibility in computational linguistics:
are we willing to share? Computational Linguistics,
44(4):641–649.
Frank Wilcoxon. 1992.
Individual comparisons by
ranking methods.
In Breakthroughs in statistics,
pages 196–202. Springer.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien
Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pier-
ric Cistac, Tim Rault, Remi Louf, Morgan Funtow-
icz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen,
Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu,
Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame,
Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander Rush. 2020. Trans-
formers: State-of-the-art natural language process-
ing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing:
System Demonstrations, pages 38–45, Online. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Jie Yang, Shuailong Liang, and Yue Zhang. 2018. De-
sign challenges and misconceptions in neural se-
quence labeling. In Proceedings of the 27th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 3879–3889, Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Nanyang Ye, Kaican Li, Lanqing Hong, Haoyue
Bai, Yiting Chen, Fengwei Zhou, and Zhenguo Li.
2021. Ood-bench: Benchmarking and understand-
ing out-of-distribution generalization datasets and al-
gorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.03721.
Hongkun Yu, Chen Chen, Xianzhi Du, Yeqing Li, Ab-
dullah Rashwan, Le Hou, Pengchong Jin, Fan Yang,
Frederick Liu, Jaeyoun Kim, and Jing Li. 2020.
TensorFlow Model Garden. https://github.com/
tensorflow/models.
Ke-Hai Yuan and Kentaro Hayashi. 2003. Bootstrap
approach to inference and power analysis based on
three test statistics for covariance structure models.
British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psy-
chology, 56(1):93–110.
Mike Zhang and Barbara Plank. 2021.
Cartography
active learning. In Findings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2021, Virtual
Event / Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, 16-20
November, 2021, pages 395–406. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Bolei Zhou, Yuandong Tian, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar,
Arthur Szlam, and Rob Fergus. 2015. Simple base-
line for visual question answering. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1512.02167.
Steve Ziliak and Deirdre Nansen McCloskey. 2008.
The cult of statistical signiﬁcance: How the standard
error costs us jobs, justice, and lives. University of
Michigan Press.
Shi Zong, Ashutosh Baheti, Wei Xu, and Alan Ritter.
2020.
Extracting COVID-19 events from twitter.
CoRR, abs/2006.02567.
A
Case Studies & Further Reading
The implementation of the methods we advocate
for in our work can be challenging. This is why we
dedicate this appendix to listing further resources
and pointing to examples that illustrate their in-
tended use.
A.1
Data
Data Statement
Following Bender and Fried-
man (2018), the long form data statement should
outline CURATION RATIONALE, LANGUAGE VA-
RIETY, SPEAKER DEMOGRAPHIC, ANNOTA-
TOR DEMOGRAPHIC, SPEECH SITUATION, TEXT
CHARACTERISTICS and a PROVENANCE AP-
PENDIX. A good example of a long form data
statement can be found in Appendix B in Plank
et al. (2020), where each of the former mentioned
topics are outlined. For example, with respect to
ANNOTATOR DEMOGRAPHIC, they mention “three
students and one faculty (age range: 25-40), gen-
der: male and female. White European. Native
language: Danish, German. Socioeconomic status:
higher-education student and university faculty.”
This is a concise explanation of the annotators in-
volved in their project.
Data Quality
Text corpora today are building
blocks for many downstream NLP applications
like question answering and summarization. In
the work of Caswell et al. (2021), they audit the
quality of quality of 205 language-speciﬁc corpora
released within major public datasets. At least 15 of
these 205 corpora have no usable text, and a large
fraction contains less than 50% sentences of accept-
able quality. The tacit recommendation is looking
at samples of any dataset before using it or releas-
ing it to the public. A good example is Varab and
Schluter (2020, 2021), who ﬁlter out low-quality
news articles from their summarization dataset with
empty summaries or bodies, removing duplicates,
and removing summaries that are long than them
main body of text. More wide varieties of data
ﬁltering can be applied, like ﬁltering on length-
ratio, LangID, and TF-IDF wordlists (Caswell et al.,
2020). Note that there is no easy solution—data
cleaning is not a trivial task (Caswell et al., 2021).
Universal Dependencies
Nivre et al. (2020)
aims to annotate syntactic dependencies in addi-
tion to part-of-speech tags, morphological features
etc. for as many languages as possible within a
consistent set of guidelines. The dataset which con-
sists of treebanks contributed by various authors is
updated in a regular half-yearly cycle and is hosted
on the long-term storage LINDAT/CLARIN repos-
itory (Váradi et al., 2008). Each release is clearly
versioned such that fair comparisons can be made
even while guidelines are continuously adapted.
Maintenance of the project is conducted on a public
git repository, such that changes to both the data
and the guidelines can be followed transparently.
This allows for contributors to suggest changes via
pull requests.
A.2
Models
There are several libraries that allow for model
hosting or distribution of model weights for “ma-
ture” models. HuggingFace (Wolf et al., 2020)
is an example of hosting models for distribution.
It is an easy-to-use library for practitioners in
the ﬁeld. Other examples of model distribution
is Keras Applications10 or TensorFlow Model
Garden (Yu et al., 2020). Other ways of distribut-
ing models is setting hyperlinks in the repository
(e.g., Joshi et al., 2020), to load the models from the
checkpoints they have been saved to. A common
denominator of all the aforementioned libraries is
to list relevant model performances (designated
metrics per task), the model size (in bytes), model
parameters (e.g., in millions), and inference time
(e.g., any time variable).
A.3
Codebase
At the code-level, there are several examples of
codebases with strong documentation and clean
project structure. We deﬁne documentation and
10https://keras.io/api/applications/
project structure in Appendix B. Here, we give
examples going from smaller projects to larger
Python projects:
The codebase of CateNETS (Curth and van der
Schaar, 2021b,a; Curth et al., 2021)11 shows a clear
project structure. This includes unit tests, version-
ing of the library, and licensing. In addition, there
are speciﬁc ﬁles for each published work to repli-
cate the results.
Not all projects require a pip installation or
unit tests. For example—similar to the previous
project—MaChAmp (van der Goot et al., 2021)12
shows detailed documentation, including several
reproducible experiments shown in the paper (in-
cluding ﬁles with model scores) and a clear project
structure. Here, one possible complication lies
in possible dependency issues once the repository
grows, with unit tests as a mitigation strategy.
AdapterHub (Pfeiffer et al., 2020)13 demon-
strates the realization of a large-scale project.
This
includes
tutorials,
conﬁgurations,
and
hosting of technical documentation (https://
docs.adapterhub.ml/), as well as a dedicated
website for the library itself.
A.4
Experimental Analysis
Statistical Hypothesis Testing
A general intro-
duction to signiﬁcance testing in NLP is given
by Dror et al. (2018); Raschka (2018); Azer et al.
(2020). Furthermore, Dror et al. (2020) and Rie-
zler and Hagmann (2021) provide textbooks around
hypothesis testing in an NLP context. Japkowicz
and Shah (2011) describe the usage of statistical
test for general, classical ML classiﬁcation algo-
rithms. When it comes to usage, Zhang and Plank
(2021) describe the statistical test used with all pa-
rameter and results alongside performance metrics.
Shimorina et al. (2021) report p-values alongside
test statistics for the Spearman’s ρ test, using the
Bonferroni correction due to multiple comparisons.
Apidianaki et al. (2018) transparently report the p-
values of a approximate randomization test (Riezler
and Maxwell III, 2005) between all the competitors
in an argument reasoning comprehension shared
task and interpret them with the appropriate degree
of carefulness.
11https://github.com/AliciaCurth/CATENets
12https://github.com/machamp-nlp/machamp
13https://github.com/Adapter-Hub/adapter-
transformers
Bayesian analysis
Bayesian Data Analysis has a
long history of application across many scientiﬁc
disciplines. Popular textbooks about the topic are
given by Kruschke (2010); Gelman et al. (2013)
with a more gentle introduction by Kruschke and
Liddell (2018). Benavoli et al. (2017) supply an in-
depth tutorial for Bayesian Analysis for Machine
Learning, by using a Bayesian signed ranked test
(Benavoli et al., 2014), an extension of the fre-
quentist Wilcoxon signed rank test and a Bayesian
hierarchical correlated t-test (Corani and Benavoli,
2015). Applications can be found for instance by
Nilsson et al. (2018), who use the Bayesian corre-
lated t-test (Corani and Benavoli, 2015) to investi-
gate the posterior distribution over the performance
difference to compare different federated learning
algorithms. To evaluate deep neural networks on
road trafﬁc forecasting, Manibardo et al. (2021)
employ Bayesian analysis and plot Monte Carlo
samples from the posterior distribution between
pairs of models. The plots include ROPEs, i.e.,
regions of practical equivalence, where the judge-
ment about the superiority of a model is suspended.
A.5
Publication Considerations
Replicability
Gururangan et al. (2020) report in
detail all the computational requirements for their
adaptation techniques in a dedicated sub-section.
Additionally, following the suggestions by Dodge
et al. (2019), the authors report their results on the
development set in the appendix.
Environmental Impact
By introducing MultiB-
ERTs (Sellam et al., 2021), the authors include in
their paper an Environmental Statement. In the
paragraph they estimate the computational cost of
their experiments in terms of hours, and consequen-
tial tons of CO2e. They release the trained models
publicly with the aim to allow subsequent studies
by other researchers without the computational cost
of training MultiBERTs to be incurred.
Hershcovich et al. (2022), instead, propose a cli-
mate performance model card as a way to system-
atically report the climate impact of NLP research.
Social and Ethical Impact
Brown et al. (2020)
present GPT-3 and include a whole section on the
Broader Impacts language models like GPT-3 have.
Despite improving the quality of text generation,
they also have potentially harmful applications.
Speciﬁcally, the authors discuss the potential for
deliberate misuse of language models, and the po-
tential issues of bias, fairness and representation
(focusing on the gender, race and religion dimen-
sions).
The work of Hardmeier et al. (2021) assists the
researcher in writing a bias statement, by recom-
mending to provide explicit statements of why the
system’s behaviors described as “bias” are harm-
ful, in what ways, and to whom, then to reason on
them. In addition, they provide an example of a
bias statement from Basta et al. (2019).
B
Contents of Codebase
The README
First, the initial section of
the README would consist of the name of the
repository—to what paper or project is this code
base tied to? Including a hyperlink to the paper or
project itself. Second, developers also indicate the
structure of the repository—what and where are
the ﬁles, folders, code, et cetera in the project and
how would they be used.
Empirical work requires the installation of li-
braries or software. It is important to install the
right versions of the libraries to maintain replicabil-
ity, and indicate the correct version of the speciﬁc
package. In Python, a common practice is to make
use of virtual environments in combination with
a requirements.txt ﬁle. The main purpose of a
virtual environment is to create an isolated environ-
ment for code projects. Each project can have its
own dependencies (libraries) regardless of what de-
pendencies every other project has to avoid clashes
between libraries. For example, this ﬁle can be
created by piping the output of pip freeze to a
requirements.txt ﬁle. For further examples of
virtual environment tools, we refer to Table 1 (Ap-
pendix C).
To ensure replicability, the practitioner writes a
description on how to re-run all experiments that
are depicted in a paper to get the same results. For
example, these are evaluation scores or graphical
plots. This can come in the form of a bash script,
that indicates all the commands necessary.14 Sim-
ilarly, one can also indicate all commands in the
README. To give credit to each others work, the
last section of the README is usually reserved for
credits, acknowledgments, and the citation. The
citation is preferably provided in BibTeX format.
Project Structure
From the Python program-
ming language perspective, there are several refer-
ences for initializing an adequate Python project
14See
for
instance
https://robvanderg.github.io/
blog/repro.htm
structure.15 This includes a README, LICENSE,
setup.py, requirements.txt, and unit tests. To
quote The Hitchhiker’s Guide to Python (Reitz and
Schlusser, 2016) on the meaning of “structure”:
“By ‘structure’ we mean the decisions
you make concerning how your project
best meets its objective. We need to con-
sider how to best leverage Python’s fea-
tures to create clean, effective code. In
practical terms, ‘structure’ means mak-
ing clean code whose logic and depen-
dencies are clear as well as how the ﬁles
and folders are organized in the ﬁlesys-
tem.”
This includes decisions on where functions
should go into which modules. Also on how data
ﬂows through the project. What features and func-
tions can be grouped together or even isolated? In
a broader sense, to answer the question on how the
ﬁnished product should look like.
C
Resources
An overview over all mentioned resources in the
paper is given in Table 1.
15Some
examples:
https://docs.python-
guide.org/writing/structure/
and
https:
//coderefinery.github.io/reproducible-research/
02-organizing-projects/
Table 1: Overview over mentioned resources.
Name
Description
Link
ACL Anthology
Website hosting all the published proceedings of the ACL.
https://aclanthology.org
ACL pubcheck
Tool to check the format and the citations of papers written
with the ACL style ﬁles.
https://github.com/acl-org/aclpubcheck
Anonymous Github
Website to anonymize a Github repository.
https://anonymous.4open.science
baycomp (Benavoli et al., 2017)
Implementation of Bayesian tests for the comparison of clas-
siﬁers.
https://github.com/janezd/baycomp
BitBucket
A website and cloud-based service that helps developers store
and manage their code, as well as track and control changes
to their code.
https://bitbucket.org/
Conda
Open Source package management system and environment
management system.
https://docs.conda.io/
codecarbon (Schmidt et al., 2021)
Python package estimating and tracking carbon emission of
various kind of computer programs.
https://github.com/mlco2/codecarbon
dbpl
Computer science bibliography to ﬁnd correct versions of pa-
pers.
https://dblp.org/
deep-signiﬁcance (Ulmer et al.,
2022)
Python package implementing the ASO test by Dror et al.
(2019) and other utilities
https://github.com/Kaleidophon/deep-significance
European Language Resources As-
sociation (ELRA, 1995)
Public institution for language and evaluation resources
http://catalogue.elra.info/en-us/
GitHub
A website and cloud-based service that helps developers store
and manage their code, as well as track and control changes
to their de.
https://github.com/
Google Scholar
Scientiﬁc publication search engine. Note that the ACL An-
thology should be preferred, as Google Scholar often indexes
the ﬁrst occurence of a paper (which is frequently a pre-print)
https://scholar.google.com/
Hugging Face Datasets (Lhoest
et al., 2021)
Hub to store and share datasets
https://huggingface.co/datasets
HyBayes (Azer et al., 2020)
Python package implementing a variety of frequentist and
Bayesian signiﬁcance tests
https://github.com/allenai/HyBayes
LINDAT/CLARIN (Váradi et al.,
2008)
Open access to language resources and other data and ser-
vices for the support of research in digital humanities and
social sciences
https://lindat.cz/
ONNX
Open format built to represent Machine Learning models.
https://onnx.ai/
Pipenv
Virtual environment for managing Python packages
https://pipenv.pypa.io/
Protocal buffers
Data structure for model predictions
https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/
rebiber
Python tool to check and normalize the bib entries to the ofﬁ-
cial published versions of the cited papers.
https://github.com/yuchenlin/rebiber
Semantic Scholar
Scientiﬁc publication search engine.
https://www.semanticscholar.org/
Virtualenv
Tool to create isolated Python environments.
https://virtualenv.pypa.io/
Zenodo
General-purpose open-access repository for research papers,
datasets, research software, reports, and any other research
related digital artifacts
https://zenodo.org/
