Title: Causal Inference in Natural Language Processing: Estimation, Prediction, Interpretation and Beyond
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2109.00725v2
--------------------------------------------------

Causal Inference in Natural Language Processing:
Estimation, Prediction, Interpretation and Beyond
Amir Feder∗1,10, Katherine A. Keith2, Emaad Manzoor3, Reid Pryzant4, Dhanya Sridhar5,
Zach Wood-Doughty6, Jacob Eisenstein7, Justin Grimmer8, Roi Reichart1, Margaret E. Roberts9,
Brandon M. Stewart10, Victor Veitch7,11, and Diyi Yang12
1Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
2Williams College
3University of Wisconsin - Madison
4Microsoft
5Columbia University
6Northwestern University
7Google Research
8Stanford University
9University of California San Diego
10Princeton University
11University of Chicago
12Georgia Tech
Abstract
A fundamental goal of scientiﬁc research is
to learn about causal relationships. How-
ever, despite its critical role in the life
and social sciences, causality has not had
the same importance in Natural Language
Processing (NLP), which has traditionally
placed more emphasis on predictive tasks.
This distinction is beginning to fade, with
an emerging area of interdisciplinary re-
search at the convergence of causal infer-
ence and language processing.
Still, re-
search on causality in NLP remains scat-
tered across domains without uniﬁed def-
initions, benchmark datasets and clear ar-
ticulations of the challenges and opportuni-
ties in the application of causal inference to
the textual domain, with its unique proper-
ties. In this survey, we consolidate research
across academic areas and situate it in the
broader NLP landscape. We introduce the
statistical challenge of estimating causal ef-
fects with text, encompassing settings where
text is used as an outcome, treatment, or to
address confounding. In addition, we ex-
plore potential uses of causal inference to
improve the robustness, fairness, and inter-
pretability of NLP models. We thus provide
a uniﬁed overview of causal inference for
the NLP community. 1
∗All authors equally contributed to this paper.
Au-
thor names are organized alphabetically in two clusters:
First students and post-docs and then faculty members.
The email address of the corresponding (ﬁrst) author is:
feder@campus.technion.ac.il.
1An
online
repository
containing
existing
research
1
Introduction
The increasing effectiveness of NLP has created
exciting new opportunities for interdisciplinary
collaborations, bringing NLP techniques to a
wide range of external research disciplines (e.g.,
Roberts et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2020; Ophir
et al., 2020) and incorporating new data and tasks
into mainstream NLP (e.g., Thomas et al., 2006;
Pryzant et al., 2018). In such interdisciplinary col-
laborations, many of the most important research
questions relate to the inference of causal relation-
ships. For example, before recommending a new
drug therapy, clinicians want to know the causal
effect of the drug on disease progression. Causal
inference involves a question about a counterfac-
tual world created by taking an intervention: What
would a patient’s disease progression have been if
we had given them the drug? As we explain be-
low, with observational data, the causal effect is
not equivalent to the correlation between whether
the drug is taken and the observed disease progres-
sion. There is now a vast literature on techniques
for making valid inferences using traditional (non-
text) datasets (e.g., Morgan and Winship, 2015),
but the application of these techniques to natural
language data raises new fundamental challenges.
Conversely, in many classical NLP applications,
the main goal is to make accurate predictions:
Any statistical correlation is admissible, regard-
on causal inference and language processing is avail-
able
here:
https://github.com/causaltext/
causal-text-papers
arXiv:2109.00725v2  [cs.CL]  30 Jul 2022
less of the underlying causal relationship. How-
ever, as NLP systems are increasingly deployed in
challenging and high-stakes scenarios, we cannot
rely on the usual assumption that training and test
data are identically distributed, and we may not
be satisﬁed with uninterpretable black-box predic-
tors. For both of these problems, causality offers
a promising path forward: Domain knowledge of
the causal structure of the data generating process
can suggest inductive biases that lead to more ro-
bust predictors, and a causal view of the predictor
itself can offer new insights on its inner workings.
The core claim of this survey paper is that deep-
ening the connection between causality and NLP
has the potential to advance the goals of both so-
cial science and NLP researchers. We divide the
intersection of causality and NLP into two ar-
eas: Estimating causal effects from text, and using
causal formalisms to make NLP methods more re-
liable. We next illustrate this distinction.
Example 1. An online forum has allowed its users
to indicate their preferred gender in their proﬁles
with a female or male icon. They notice that users
who label themselves with the female icon tend
to receive fewer “likes” on their posts. To better
evaluate their policy of allowing gender informa-
tion in proﬁles, they ask: Does using the female
icon cause a decrease in popularity for a post?
Ex. 1 addresses the causal effect of signaling
female gender (treatment) on the likes a post re-
ceives (outcome) (see discussion on signaling at
(Keith et al., 2020)).
The counterfactual ques-
tion is: If we could manipulate the gender icon
of a post, how many likes would the post have re-
ceived?
The observed correlation between the gender
icons and the number of “likes” generally does not
coincide with the causal effect: it might instead be
a spurious correlation, induced by other variables,
known as confounders, which are correlated with
both the treatment and the outcome (see Gururan-
gan et al., 2018, for an early discussion of spurious
correlation in NLP). One possible confounder is
the topic of each post: Posts written by users who
have selected the female icon may be about cer-
tain topics (e.g., child birth or menstruation) more
often, and those topics may not receive as many
likes from the audience of the broader online plat-
form. As we will see in § 2, due to confounding,
estimating a causal effect requires assumptions.
Example 1 highlights the setting where the text
encodes the relevant confounders of a causal ef-
fect. The text as a confounder setting is one of
many causal inferences we can make with text
data. The text data can also encode outcomes or
treatments of interest. For example, we may won-
der about how gender signal affects the sentiment
of the reply that a post receives (text as outcome),
or about how a writing style affects the “likes” a
post receives (text as treatment).
NLP helps causal inference.
Causal infer-
ence with text data involves several challenges
that are distinct from typical causal inference set-
tings: Text is high-dimensional, needs sophisti-
cated modeling to measure semantically meaning-
ful factors like topic, and demands careful thought
to formalize the intervention that a causal question
corresponds to. The developments in NLP around
modeling language, from topic models (Blei et al.,
2003) to contextual embeddings (e.g.
(Devlin
et al., 2019)), offer promising ways to extract the
information we need from text to estimate causal
effects. However, we need new assumptions to en-
sure that the use of NLP methods leads to valid
causal inferences. We discuss existing research on
estimating causal effects from text and emphasize
these challenges and opportunities in § 3.
Example 2. A medical research center wants to
build a classiﬁer to detect clinical diagnoses from
the textual narratives of patient medical records.
The records are aggregated across multiple hospi-
tal sites, which vary both in the frequency of the
target clinical condition and the writing style of
the narratives. When the classiﬁer is applied to
records from sites that were not in the training
set, its accuracy decreases. Post-hoc analysis in-
dicates that it puts signiﬁcant weight on seemingly
irrelevant features, such as formatting markers.
Like Ex. 1, Ex. 2 also involves a counterfactual
question: Does the classiﬁer’s prediction change
if we intervene to change the hospital site, while
holding the true clinical status ﬁxed? We want
the classiﬁer to rely on phrases that express clin-
ical facts, and not writing style. However, in the
training data, the clinical condition and the writ-
ing style are spuriously correlated, due to the site
acting as a confounding variable. For example, a
site might be more likely to encounter the target
clinical condition due to its location or speciality,
and that site might also employ distinctive textual
features, such as boilerplate text at the beginning
of each narrative. In the training set, these features
will be predictive of the label, but they are unlikely
to be useful in deployment scenarios at new sites.
In this example, the hospital site acts like a con-
founder: It creates a spurious correlation between
some features of the text and the prediction target.
Example 2 shows how the lack of robustness
can make NLP methods less trustworthy. A re-
lated problem is that NLP systems are often black
boxes, making it hard to understand how human-
interpretable features of the text lead to the ob-
served predictions.
In this setting, we want to
know if some part of the text (e.g., some sequence
of tokens) causes the output of an NLP method
(e.g., classiﬁcation prediction).
Causal models can help NLP. To address the
robustness and interpretability challenges posed
by NLP methods, we need new criteria to learn
models that go beyond exploiting correlations.
For example, we want predictors that are invari-
ant to certain changes that we make to text, such
as changing the format while holding ﬁxed the
ground truth label. There is considerable promise
in using causality to develop new criteria in ser-
vice of building robust and interpretable NLP
methods. In contrast to the well-studied area of
causal inference with text, this area of causality
and NLP research is less well-understood, though
well-motivated by recent empirical successes. In
§4, we cover the existing research and review the
challenges and opportunities around using causal-
ity to improve NLP.
This position paper follows a small body of sur-
veys that review the role of text data within causal
inference (Egami et al., 2018; Keith et al., 2020).
We take a broader view, separating the intersec-
tion of causality and NLP into two distinct lines
of research on estimating causal effects in which
text is at least one causal variable (§3) and using
causal formalisms to improve robustness and in-
terpretability in NLP methods (§4). After reading
this paper, we envision that the reader will have a
broad understanding of: Different types of causal
queries and the challenges they present; the statis-
tical and causal challenges that are unique to work-
ing with text data and NLP methods; and open
problems in estimating effects from text and ap-
plying causality to improve NLP methods.
2
Background
Both focal problems of this survey (causal effect
estimation and causal formalisms for robust and
explainable prediction) involve causal inference.
The key ingredient to causal inference is deﬁning
counterfactuals based on an intervention of inter-
est. We will illustrate this idea with the motivating
examples from §1.
Example 1 involves online forum posts and the
number of likes Y that they receive. We use a bi-
nary variable T to indicate whether a post uses a
“female icon” (T = 1) or a “male icon” (T = 0).
We view the post icon T as the “treatment” in
this example, but do not assume that the treatment
is randomly assigned (it may be selected by the
posts’ authors). The counterfactual outcome Y (1)
represents the number of likes a post would have
received had it used a female icon. The counter-
factual outcome Y (0) is deﬁned analogously.
The fundamental problem of causal inference
(Holland, 1986) is that we can never observe Y (0)
and Y (1) simultaneously for any unit of analysis,
the smallest unit about which one wants to make
counterfactual inquiries (e.g. a post in Ex. 1). This
problem is what makes causal inference harder
than statistical inference and impossible without
identiﬁcation assumptions (see § 2.2).
Example 2 involves a trained classiﬁer f(X)
that takes a textual clinical narrative X as input
and outputs a diagnosis prediction. The text X is
written based on the physician’s diagnosis Y , and
is also inﬂuenced by the writing style used at the
hospital Z. We want to intervene upon the hospital
Z while holding the label Y ﬁxed. The counter-
factual narrative X(z) is the text we would have
observed had we set the hospital to the value z
while holding the diagnosis ﬁxed. The counterfac-
tual prediction f(X(z)) is the output the trained
classiﬁer would have produced had we given the
counterfactual review X(z) as input.
2.1
Causal Estimands
An analyst begins by specifying target causal
quantities of interest, called causal estimands,
which typically involve counterfactuals. In Exam-
ple 1, one possible causal estimand is the average
treatment effect (ATE) (Rubin, 1974),
ATE = E[Y (1) −Y (0)].
(1)
where the expectation is over the generative distri-
bution of posts. The ATE can be interpreted as the
change in the number of likes a post would have
received, on average, had the post used a female
icon instead of a male icon.
Another possible causal effect of interest is the
conditional average treatment effect (CATE) (Im-
bens and Rubin, 2015),
CATE = E[Y (1) −Y (0) | G].
(2)
where G is a predeﬁned subgroup of the popula-
tion. For example, G could be all posts on political
topics. In this case, the CATE can be interpreted
as the change in the number of likes a post on a po-
litical topic would have received, on average, had
the post used a male icon instead of a female icon.
CATEs are used to quantify the heterogeneity of
causal effects in different population subgroups.
2.2
Identiﬁcation Assumptions for Causal
Inference
We will focus on Example 1 and the ATE in Equa-
tion (1) to explain the assumptions needed for
causal inference. Although we focus on the ATE,
related assumptions are needed in some form for
all causal estimands. Variables are the same as
those deﬁned previously in this section.
Ignorability requires that the treatment assign-
ment be statistically independent of the counter-
factual outcomes,
T ⊥⊥Y (a)
∀a ∈{0, 1}.
(3)
Note that this assumption is not equivalent to in-
dependence between the treatment assignment and
the observed outcome Y . For example, if ignora-
bility holds, Y ⊥⊥T would additionally imply that
the treatment has no effect.
Randomized treatment assignment guarantees
ignorability by design. For example, we can guar-
antee ignorability in Example 1 by ﬂipping a coin
to select the icon for each post, and disallowing
post authors from changing it.
Without randomized treatment assignment, ig-
norability could be violated by confounders, vari-
ables that inﬂuence both the treatment status and
potential outcomes. In Example 1, suppose that:
(i) the default post icon is male, (ii) only experi-
enced users change the icon for their posts based
on their gender, (iii) experienced users write posts
that receive relatively more likes.
In this sce-
nario, the experience of post authors is a con-
founder: posts having female icons are more likely
to be written by experienced users and thus, re-
ceive more likes. In the presence of confounders,
causal inference is only possible if we assume con-
ditional ignorability,
T ⊥⊥Y (a) | X
∀a ∈{0, 1}
(4)
where X is a set of observed variables, condi-
tioning on which ensures independence between
the treatment assignment and the potential out-
comes. In other words, we can assume that all
confounders are observed.
Positivity requires that the probability of re-
ceiving treatment is bounded away from 0 and 1
for all values of the confounders X:
0 < Pr(T = 1 | X = x) < 1, ∀x
(5)
Intuitively, positivity requires that each unit under
study has the possibility of being treated and has
the possibility of being untreated.
Randomized
treatment assignment can also guarantee positiv-
ity by design.
Consistency
requires that the outcome ob-
served for each unit under study at treatment level
a ∈{0, 1} is identical to the outcome we would
have observed had that unit been assigned to treat-
ment level a,
T = a ⇔Y (a) = Y
∀a ∈{0, 1}
(6)
Consistency ensures that the potential outcomes
for each unit under study take on a single value
at each treatment level. Consistency will be vi-
olated if different unobservable “versions” of the
treatment lead to different potential outcomes. For
example, if red and blue female icons had differ-
ent effects on the number of likes received, but
icon color was not recorded. Consistency will also
be violated if the treatment assignment of one unit
affects the potential outcomes of another; a phe-
nomenon called interference (Rosenbaum, 2007).
Randomized treatment assignment does not guar-
antee consistency by design.
e.g.
if different
icon colors affect the number of likes but are not
considered by the model, then a randomized ex-
periment will not solve the problem. As Hernán
(2016) discusses, consistency assumptions are a
“matter of expert agreement” and, while subjec-
tive, these assumptions are at least made more
transparent by causal formalisms.
These three assumptions enable identifying the
ATE deﬁned in Equation (1), as formalized in the
following identiﬁcation proof:
E[Y (a)]
(i)
= EX[E[Y (a) | X]]
(ii)
= EX[E[Y (a) | X, T = a]]
(iii)
= EX[E[Y | X, T = a]], ∀a ∈{0, 1}
where equality (i) is due to iterated expectation,
equality (ii) follows from conditional ignorabil-
ity, and equality (iii) follows from consistency and
positivity, which ensures that the conditional ex-
pectation E[Y | X, T = a] is well deﬁned. The
ﬁnal expression can be computed from observable
quantities alone.
We refer to other background material to dis-
cuss how to identify and estimate causal effects
with these assumptions in hand (Rubin, 2005;
Pearl, 2009; Imbens and Rubin, 2015; Egami
et al., 2018; Keith et al., 2020).
2.3
Causal Graphical Models
Finding a set of variables X that ensure con-
ditional ignorability is challenging, and requires
making several carefully assessed assumptions
about the causal relationships in the domain un-
der study. Causal directed-acyclic graphs (DAGs)
(Pearl, 2009) enable formally encoding these as-
sumptions and deriving the set of variables X after
conditioning on which ignorability is satisﬁed.
In a causal DAG, an edge X →Y implies that
X may or may not cause Y . The absence of an
edge between X and Y implies that X does not
cause Y . Bi-directed dotted arrows between vari-
ables indicate that they are correlated potentially
through some unobserved variable.
Figure 1 illustrates the causal DAGs we assume
for Example 1 and Example 2.
Given a causal
DAG, causal dependencies between any pair of
variables can be derived using the d-separation al-
gorithm (Pearl, 1994).
These dependencies can
then be used to assess whether conditional ignor-
ability holds for a given treatment, outcome, and
set of conditioning variables X. For example, in
the left DAG in Figure 1, the post icon T is not
independent of the number of likes Y unless we
condition on X. In the right DAG, the prediction
f(X) is not independent of the hospital Z even
after conditioning on the narrative X.
3
Estimating Causal Effects with Text
In §2, we described assumptions for causal in-
ference when the treatment, outcome and con-
founders were directly measured. In this section,
we contribute a novel discussion about how causal
assumptions are complicated when variables nec-
essary for a causal analysis are extracted automati-
cally from text. Addressing these open challenges
will require collaborations between the NLP and
T
X
Y
Z
Y
X
f(X)
Example 1
Example 2
Figure 1: Causal graphs for the motivating exam-
ples. (Left) In Example 1, the post icon (T) is cor-
related with attributes of the post (X), and both
variables affect the number of likes a post receives
(Y ). (Right) In Example 2, the label (Y , i.e., di-
agnosis) and hospital site (Z) are correlated, and
both affect the clinical narrative (X). Predictions
f(X) from the trained classiﬁer depend on X.
causal estimation communities to understand what
are the requisite assumptions to draw valid causal
conclusions. We highlight prior approaches and
future challenges in settings where the text is a
confounder, the outcome, or the treatment – but
this discussion applies broadly to many text-based
causal problems.
To make these challenges clear, we will expand
upon Example 1 by supposing a hypothetical on-
line forum wants to understand and reduce harass-
ment on its platform. Many such questions are
causal: Do gendered icons inﬂuence the harass-
ment users receive? Do longer suspensions make
users less likely to harass others? How can a post
be rewritten to avoid offending others? In each
case, using NLP to measure aspects of language is
integral to any causal analysis.
3.1
Causal Effects with Textual Confounders
Returning to Example 1, suppose the platform
worries that users with female icons are more
likely to receive harassment from other users.
Such a ﬁnding might signiﬁcantly inﬂuence plans
for a new moderation strategy (Jhaver et al., 2018;
Rubin et al., 2020). We may be unable or unwill-
ing to randomize our treatment (the gender signal)
of the author’s icon), so the causal effect of gen-
der signal on harassment received might be con-
founded by other variables. The topic of the post
may be an important confounder: some subject
areas may be discussed by a larger proportion of
users with female icons, and more controversial
subjects may attract more harassment. The text of
the post provides evidence of the topic and thus
acts as a confounder (Roberts et al., 2020).
Previous approaches.
The main idea in this set-
ting is to use NLP methods to extract confounding
aspects from text and then adjust for those aspects
in an estimation approach such as propensity score
matching. However, how and when these methods
violate causal assumptions are still open questions.
Keith et al. (2020) provides a recent overview of
several such methods and many potential threats
to inference.
One set of methods apply unsupervised di-
mensionality reduction methods that reduce high-
dimensional text data to a low-dimensional set of
variables. Such methods include latent variable
models such as topic models, embedding methods,
and auto-encoders. Roberts et al. (2020) and Srid-
har and Getoor (2019) have applied topic models
to extract confounding patterns from text data, and
performed an adjustment for these inferred vari-
ables. Mozer et al. (2020) matches texts using dis-
tance metrics on the bag-of-words representation.
A second set of methods adjust for confounders
from text with supervised NLP methods. Recently,
Veitch et al. (2020) adapted pre-trained language
models and supervised topic models with multiple
classiﬁcation heads for binary treatment and coun-
terfactual outcomes.
By learning a “sufﬁcient”
embedding that obtained low classiﬁcation loss on
the treatment and counterfactual outcomes, they
show that confounding properties could be found
within text data. Roberts et al. (2020) combines
these strategies with the topic model approach in a
text matching framework.
Challenges for causal assumptions with text.
In settings without randomized treatments, NLP
methods that adjust for text confounding require
a particularly strong statement of conditional ig-
norability (Equation 4): all aspects of confounding
must be measured by the model. Because we can-
not test this assumption, we should seek domain
expertise to justify it or understand the theoretical
and empirical consequences if it is violated.
When the text is a confounder,
its high-
dimensionality makes positivity unlikely to hold
(D’Amour et al., 2020).
Even for approaches
that extract a low-dimensional representation of
the confounder from text, positivity is a concern.
For example, in Example 1, posts might con-
tain phrases that near-perfectly encode the chosen
gender-icon of the author. If the learned repre-
sentation captures this information alongside other
confounding aspects, it would be nearly impos-
sible to imagine changing the gender icon while
holding the gendered text ﬁxed.
3.2
Causal Effects on Textual Outcomes
Suppose platform moderators can choose to sus-
pend users who violate community guidelines for
either one day or one week, and we want to know
which option has the greatest effect at decreasing
the toxicity of the suspended user. If we could col-
lect them for each user’s post, ground-truth human
annotations of toxicity would be our ideal outcome
variable. We would then use those outcomes to
calculate the ATE, following the discussion in § 2.
Our analysis of suspensions is complicated if, in-
stead of ground-truth labels for our toxicity out-
come, we rely on NLP methods to extract the out-
come from the text. A core challenge is to distill
the high-dimensional text into a low-dimensional
measure of toxicity.
Challenges for causal assumptions with text.
We saw in § 2 that randomizing the treatment
assignment can ensure ignorability and positiv-
ity; but even with randomization, we require more
careful assessment to satisfy consistency.
Sup-
pose we randomly assign suspension lengths to
users and then once those users return and con-
tinue to post, we use a clustering method to dis-
cover toxic and non-toxic groupings among the
formerly-suspended users. To estimate the causal
effect of suspension length, we rely on the trained
clustering model to infer our outcome variable.
Assuming that the suspension policy does in truth
have a causal effect on posting behavior, then be-
cause our clustering model depends on all posts in
its training data, it also depends on the treatment
assignments that inﬂuenced each post. Thus, when
we use the model to infer outcomes, each user’s
outcome depends on all other users’ treatments.
This violates the assumption of consistency – that
potential outcomes do not depend on the treatment
status of other units. This undermines the theo-
retical basis for our causal estimate, and in prac-
tice, implies that different randomized treatment
assignments could lead to different treatment ef-
fect estimates.
These issues can be addressed by developing the
measure on only a sample of the data and then esti-
mating the effect on a separate, held-out data sam-
ple (Egami et al., 2018).
3.3
Causal Effects with Textual Treatments
As a third example, suppose we want to under-
stand what makes a post offensive. This might al-
low the platform to provide automated suggestions
that encourage users to rephrase their post. Here,
we are interested in the causal effect of the text
itself on whether a reader reports it as offensive.
Theoretically, the counterfactual Y (t) is deﬁned
for any t, but could be limited to an exploration
of speciﬁc aspects of the text. For example, do
second-person pronouns make a post more likely
to be reported?
Previous approaches.
One approach to study-
ing the effects of text involves treatment discovery:
producing interpretable features of the text—such
as latent topics or lexical features like n-grams
(Pryzant et al., 2018)—that can be causally linked
to outcomes.
For example, Fong and Grimmer
(2016) discovered features of candidate biogra-
phies that drove voter evaluations, Pryzant et al.
(2017) discovered writing styles in marketing ma-
terials that are inﬂuential in increasing sales ﬁg-
ures, and Zhang et al. (2020) discovered conver-
sational tendencies that lead to positive mental
health counseling sessions.
Another approach is to estimate the causal ef-
fects of speciﬁc latent properties that are inter-
vened on during an experiment or extracted from
text for observational studies (Pryzant et al., 2021;
Wood-Doughty et al., 2018). For example, Ger-
ber et al. (2008) studied the effect of appealing to
civic duty on voter turnout. In this setting, factors
are latent properties of the text for which we need
a measurement model.
Challenges for causal assumptions with text.
Ensuring positivity and consistency remains a
challenge in this setting, but assessing conditional
ignorability is particularly tricky.
Suppose the
treatment is the use of second-person pronouns,
but the relationship between this treatment and the
outcome is confounded by other properties of the
text (e.g., politeness). For conditional ignorabil-
ity to hold, we would need to extract from the text
and condition on all such confounders, which re-
quires assuming that we can disentangle the treat-
ment from many other aspects of the text (Pryzant
et al., 2021).
Such concerns could be avoided
by randomly assigning texts to readers (Fong and
Grimmer, 2016, 2021), but that may be impracti-
cal. Even if we could randomize the assignment
of texts, we still have to assume that there is no
confounding due to latent properties of the reader,
such as their political ideology or their tastes.
3.4
Future Work
We next highlight key challenges and opportuni-
ties for NLP researchers to facilitate causal infer-
ence from text.
Heterogeneous effects. Texts are read and in-
terpreted differently by different people; NLP re-
searchers have studied this problem in the context
of heterogeneous perceptions of annotators (Paun
et al., 2018; Pavlick and Kwiatkowski, 2019). In
the ﬁeld of causal inference, the idea that dif-
ferent subgroups experience different causal ef-
fects is formalized by a heterogeneous treatment
effect, and is studied using conditional average
treatment effects (Equation (2)) for different sub-
groups. It may also be of interest to discover sub-
groups where the treatment has a strong effect on
an outcome of interest. For example, we may want
to identify text features that characterize when a
treatment such as a content moderation policy is
effective.
Wager and Athey (2018) proposed a
ﬂexible approach to estimating heterogeneous ef-
fects based on random forests. However, such ap-
proaches, which are developed with tabular data in
mind, may be computationally infeasible for high-
dimensional text data. There is an opportunity to
extend NLP methods to discover text features that
capture subgroups where the causal effect varies.
Representation learning.
Causal inference
from text requires extracting low-dimensional fea-
tures from text.
Depending on the setting, the
low-dimensional features are tasked with extract-
ing confounding information, outcomes or treat-
ments. The need to measure latent aspects from
text connects to the ﬁeld of text representation
learning (Le and Mikolov, 2014; Liu et al., 2015;
Liu and Lapata, 2018). The usual objective of text
representation learning approaches is to model
language.
Adapting representation learning for
causal inference offers open challenges; for exam-
ple, we might augment the objective function to
ensure that (i) positivity is satisﬁed, (ii) confound-
ing information is not discarded, or (iii) noisily-
measured outcomes or treatments enable accurate
causal effect estimates.
Benchmarks.
Benchmark datasets have
propelled machine learning forward by creating
shared metrics by which predictive models can
be evaluated. There are currently no real-world
text-based causal estimation benchmarks due to
the fundamental problem of causal inference that
we can never obtain counterfactuals on an indi-
vidual and observe the true causal effects. How-
ever, as Keith et al. (2020) discuss, there has
been some progress in evaluating text-based es-
timation methods on semi-synthetic datasets in
which real covariates are used to generate treat-
ment and outcomes, e.g. Veitch et al. (2020);
Roberts et al. (2020); Pryzant et al. (2021); Feder
et al. (2021); Weld et al. (2022). Wood-Doughty
et al. (2021) employed large-scale language mod-
els for controlled synthetic generation of text on
which causal methods can be evaluated. An open
problem is the degree to which methods that per-
form well on synthetic data generalize to real-
world data.
Controllable Text generation. When running
a randomized experiment or generating synthetic
data, researchers make decisions using the em-
pirical distribution of the data. If we are study-
ing whether a drug prevents headaches, it would
make sense to randomly assign a ‘reasonable’ dose
– one that is large enough to plausibly be effec-
tive but not so large as to be toxic.
But when
the causal question involves natural language, do-
main knowledge might not provide a small set of
‘reasonable’ texts. Instead, we might turn to con-
trollable text generation to sample texts that ful-
ﬁll some requirements (Kiddon et al., 2016). Such
methods have a long history in NLP; for example,
a conversational agent should be able to answer
a user’s question while being perceived as polite
(Niu and Bansal, 2018). In our text as treatment
example where we want to understand which tex-
tual aspects make a text offensive, such methods
could enable an experiment allowing us to ran-
domly assign texts that differ on only a speciﬁc
latent aspect. For example, we could change the
style of a text while holding its content ﬁxed (Lo-
geswaran et al., 2018). Recent work has explored
text generation from a causal perspective (Hu and
Li, 2021), but future work could develop these
methods for causal estimation.
4
Robust and Explainable Predictions
from Causality
Thus far we have focused on using NLP tools for
estimating causal effects in the presence of text
data. In this section, we consider using causal rea-
soning to help solve traditional NLP tasks such as
understanding, manipulating, and generating nat-
ural language.
At a ﬁrst glance, NLP may appear to have lit-
tle need for causal ideas. The ﬁeld has achieved
remarkable progress from the use of increasingly
high-capacity neural architectures to extract cor-
relations from large-scale datasets (Peters et al.,
2018; Devlin et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019). These
architectures make no distinction between causes,
effects, and confounders, and they make no at-
tempt to identify causal relationships: A feature
may be a powerful predictor even if it has no di-
rect causal relationship with the desired output.
Yet correlational predictive models can be un-
trustworthy (Jacovi et al., 2021): They may latch
onto spurious correlations (“shortcuts”), leading to
errors in out-of-distribution (OOD) settings (e.g.,
McCoy et al., 2019); they may exhibit unac-
ceptable performance differences across groups of
users (e.g., Zhao et al., 2017); and their behavior
may be too inscrutable to incorporate into high-
stakes decisions (Guidotti et al., 2018). Each of
these shortcomings can potentially be addressed
by the causal perspective:
Knowledge of the
causal relationship between observations and la-
bels can be used to formalize spurious correlations
and mitigate their impact (§ 4.1); causality also
provides a language for specifying and reason-
ing about fairness conditions (§ 4.2); and the task
of explaining predictions may be naturally formu-
lated in terms of counterfactuals (§ 4.3). The ap-
plication of causality to these problems is still an
active area of research, which we attempt to facil-
itate by highlighting previously implicit connec-
tions among a diverse body of prior work.
4.1
Learning Robust Predictors
The NLP ﬁeld has grown increasingly concerned
with spurious correlations
(Gururangan et al.,
2018; McCoy et al., 2019, inter alia).
From
a causal perspective, spurious correlations arise
when two conditions are met. First, there must be
some factor(s) Z that are informative (in the train-
ing data) about both the features X and label Y .
Second, Y and Z must be dependent in the train-
ing data in a way that is not guaranteed to hold in
general. A predictor f : X →Y will learn to use
parts of X that carry information about Z (because
Z is informative about Y ), which can lead to errors
if the relationship between Y and Z changes when
the predictor is deployed.2
This issue is illustrated by Example 2, where
the task is to predict a medical condition from the
text of patient records. The training set is drawn
from multiple hospitals which vary both in the fre-
quency of the target clinical condition (Y ) and the
writing style of the narratives (represented in X).
A predictor trained on such data will use textual
features that carry information about the hospital
(Z), even when they are useless at predicting the
diagnosis within any individual hospital. Spurious
correlations also appear as artifacts in benchmarks
for tasks such as natural language inference, where
negation words are correlated with semantic con-
tradictions in crowdsourced training data but not
in text that is produced under more natural condi-
tions (Gururangan et al., 2018; Poliak et al., 2018).
Such observations have led to several proposals
for novel evaluation methodologies (Naik et al.,
2018; Ribeiro et al., 2020; Gardner et al., 2020)
to ensure that predictors are not “right for the
wrong reasons”. These evaluations generally take
two forms: Invariance tests, which assess whether
predictions are affected by perturbations that are
causally unrelated to the label, and sensitivity tests,
which apply perturbations that should in some
sense be the minimal change necessary to ﬂip the
true label. Both types of test can be motivated by
a causal perspective. The purpose of an invariance
test is to determine whether the predictor behaves
differently on counterfactual inputs X(Z = ˜z),
where Z indicates a property that an analyst be-
lieves should be causally irrelevant to Y . A model
whose predictions are invariant across such coun-
terfactuals can in some cases be expected to per-
form better on test distributions with a different re-
lationship between Y and Z (Veitch et al., 2021).
Similarly, sensitivity tests can be viewed as evalu-
ations of counterfactuals X(Y = ˜y), in which the
label Y is changed but all other causal inﬂuences
on X are held constant (Kaushik et al., 2020). Fea-
tures that are spuriously correlated with Y will be
2From the perspective of earlier work on domain adapta-
tion (Søgaard, 2013), spurious correlations can be viewed as a
special case of a more general phenomenon in which feature-
label relationships change across domains. For example, the
lexical feature boring might have a stronger negative weight
in reviews about books than about kitchen appliances, but this
is not a spurious correlation because there is a direct causal
relationship between this feature and the label. Spurious cor-
relations are a particularly important form of distributional
shift in practice because they can lead to inconsistent predic-
tions on pairs of examples that humans view as identical.
identical in the factual X and the counterfactual
X(Y = ˜y). A predictor that relies solely on such
spurious correlations will be unable to correctly la-
bel both factual and counterfactual instances.
A number of approaches have been proposed
for learning predictors that pass tests of sensitivity
and invariance. Many of these approaches are ei-
ther explicitly or implicitly motivated by a causal
perspective. They can be viewed as ways to in-
corporate knowledge of the causal structure of the
data into the learning objective.
4.1.1
Data augmentation
To learn predictors that pass tests of invariance
and sensitivity, a popular and straightforward ap-
proach is data augmentation: Elicit or construct
counterfactual instances, and incorporate them
into the training data.
When the counterfac-
tuals involve perturbations to confounding fac-
tors Z, it can help to add a term to the learn-
ing objective to explicitly penalize disagreements
in the predictions for counterfactual pairs, e.g.,
|f(X(Z = z)) −f(X(Z = ˜z))|, when f is the
prediction function (Garg et al., 2019).
When
perturbations are applied to the label Y , training
on label counterfactuals X(Y = ˜y) can improve
OOD generalization and reduce noise sensitivity
(Kaushik et al., 2019, 2020; Jha et al., 2020).3
Counterfactual examples can be generated in
several ways:
(1) manual post-editing (e.g.,
Kaushik et al., 2019; Gardner et al., 2020), (2)
heuristic replacement of keywords (e.g., Shekhar
et al., 2017; Garg et al., 2019; Feder et al., 2021),
and (3) automated text rewriting (e.g., Zmigrod
et al., 2019; Riley et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2021;
Calderon et al., 2022).
Manual editing is typ-
ically ﬂuent and accurate but relatively expen-
sive. Keyword-based approaches are appropriate
in some cases — for example, when counterfactu-
als can be obtained by making local substitutions
of closed-class words like pronouns — but they
cannot guarantee ﬂuency or coverage of all labels
and covariates of interest (Antoniak and Mimno,
2021), and are difﬁcult to generalize across lan-
guages. Fully generative approaches could poten-
3More broadly, there is a long history of methods that
elicit or construct new examples and labels with the goal of
improving generalization, e.g. self-training (McClosky et al.,
2006; Reichart and Rappoport, 2007), co-training (Steedman
et al., 2003), and adversarial perturbations (Ebrahimi et al.,
2018).
The connection of such methods to causal issues
such as spurious correlations has not been explored until re-
cently (Chen et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2021).
tially combine the ﬂuency and coverage of manual
editing with the ease of lexical heuristics.
Counterfactual examples are a powerful re-
source because they directly address the missing
data issues that are inherent to causal inference,
as described in § 2. However, in many cases it
is difﬁcult for even a ﬂuent human to produce
meaningful counterfactuals: Imagine the task of
converting a book review into a restaurant review
while somehow leaving “everything else” constant
(as in Calderon et al. (2022)).
A related con-
cern is lack of precision in specifying the desired
impact of the counterfactual.
To revise a text
from, say, U.S. to U.K. English, it is unambiguous
that “colors” should be replaced with “colours”,
but should terms like “congress” be replaced with
analogous concepts like “parliament”? This de-
pends on whether we view the semantics of the
text as a causal descendent of the locale. If such
decisions are left to the annotators’ intuitions, it
is difﬁcult to ascertain what robustness guarantees
we can get from counterfactual data augmentation.
Finally, there is the possibility that counterfactuals
will introduce new spurious correlations. For ex-
ample, when asked to rewrite NLI examples with-
out using negation, annotators (or automated text
rewriters) may simply ﬁnd another shortcut, intro-
ducing a new spurious correlation. Keyword sub-
stitution approaches may also introduce new spu-
rious correlations if the keyword lexicons are in-
complete (Joshi and He, 2021). Automated meth-
ods for conditional text rewriting are generally not
based on a formal counterfactual analysis of the
data generating process (cf. Pearl, 2009), which
would require modeling the relationships between
various causes and consequences of the text. The
resulting counterfactual instances may therefore
fail to fully account for spurious correlations and
may introduce new spurious correlations.
4.1.2
Distributional Criteria
An alternative to data augmentation is to design
new learning algorithms that operate directly on
the observed data. In the case of invariance tests,
one strategy is to derive distributional properties
of invariant predictors, and then ensure that these
properties are satisﬁed by the trained model.
Given observations of the potential confounder
at training time, the counterfactually-invariant pre-
dictor will satisfy an independence criterion that
can be derived from the causal structure of the
data generating process (Veitch et al., 2021). Re-
turning to Example 2, the desideratum is that the
predicted diagnosis f(X) should not be affected
by the aspects of the writing style that are asso-
ciated with the hospital Z. This can be formal-
ized as counterfactual invariance to Z: The pre-
dictor f should satisfy f(X(z)) = f(X(z′)) for
all z, z′. In this case, both Z and Y are causes
of the text features X.4 Using this observation,
it can be shown that any counterfactually invari-
ant predictor will satisfy f(X) ⊥⊥Z | Y , i.e., the
prediction f(X) is independent of the covariate Z
conditioned on the true label Y . In other cases,
such as content moderation, the label is an effect
of the text, rather than a cause — for a detailed dis-
cussion of this distinction, see Jin et al. (2021). In
such cases, it can be shown that a counterfactually-
invariant predictor will satisfy f(X) ⊥⊥Z (with-
out conditioning on Y ). In this fashion, knowl-
edge of the true causal structure of the problem can
be used to derive observed-data signatures of the
counterfactual invariance. Such signatures can be
incorporated as regularization terms in the train-
ing objective (e.g., using kernel-based measures
of statistical dependence). These criteria do not
guarantee counterfactual invariance—the implica-
tion works in the other direction—but in practice
they increase counterfactual invariance and im-
prove performance in out-of-distribution settings
without requiring counterfactual examples.
An alternative set of distributional criteria can
be derived by viewing the training data as aris-
ing from a ﬁnite set of environments, in which
each environment is endowed a unique distribu-
tion over causes, but the causal relationship be-
tween X and Y is invariant across environments.
This view motivates a set of environmental in-
variance criteria: The predictor should include a
representation function that is invariant across en-
vironments (Muandet et al., 2013; Peters et al.,
2016); we should induce a representation such
that the same predictor is optimal in every en-
vironment (Arjovsky et al., 2019); the predictor
should be equally well calibrated across environ-
ments (Wald et al., 2021).
Multi-environment
training is conceptually similar to domain adap-
tation (Ben-David et al., 2010), but here the goal
is not to learn a predictor for any speciﬁc target
domain, but rather to learn a predictor that works
4This is sometimes called the anticausal setting, because
the predictor f : X →ˆY must reverse the causal direction
of the data generating process (Schölkopf et al., 2012).
well across a set of causally-compatible domains,
known as domain generalization (Ghifary et al.,
2015; Gulrajani and Lopez-Paz, 2020). However,
it may be necessary to observe data from a very
large number of environments to disentangle the
true causal structure (Rosenfeld et al., 2021).
Both general approaches require richer training
data than in typical supervised learning: Either ex-
plicit labels Z for the factors to disentangle from
the predictions or access to data gathered from
multiple labeled environments.
Obtaining such
data may be rather challenging, even compared
to creating counterfactual instances. Furthermore,
the distributional approaches have thus far been
applied only to classiﬁcation problems, while data
augmentation can easily be applied to structured
outputs such as machine translation.
4.2
Fairness and bias
NLP systems inherit and sometimes amplify unde-
sirable biases encoded in text training data (Baro-
cas et al., 2019; Blodgett et al., 2020). Causality
can provide a language for specifying desired fair-
ness conditions across demographic attributes like
race and gender. Indeed, fairness and bias in pre-
dictive models have close connections to causal-
ity: Hardt et al. (2016) argue that a causal anal-
ysis is required to determine the fairness proper-
ties of an observed distribution of data and pre-
dictions; Kilbertus et al. (2017) show that fair-
ness metrics can be motivated by causal inter-
pretations of the data generating process; Kusner
et al. (2017) study “counterfactually fair” predic-
tors where, for each individual, predictions are the
same for that individual and for a counterfactual
version of them created by changing a protected
attribute. However, there are important questions
about the legitimacy of treating attributes like race
as variables subject to intervention (e.g., Kohler-
Hausmann, 2018; Hanna et al., 2020), and Kilber-
tus et al. (2017) propose to focus instead on invari-
ance to observable proxies such as names.
Fairness with text.
The fundamental connec-
tions between causality and unfair bias have been
explored mainly in the context of relatively low-
dimensional tabular data rather than text. How-
ever, there are several applications of the counter-
factual data augmentation strategies from § 4.1.1
in this setting: For example, Garg et al. (2019)
construct counterfactuals by swapping lists of
“identity terms”, with the goal of reducing bias
in text classiﬁcation, and Zhao et al. (2018) swap
gender markers such as pronouns and names for
coreference resolution. Counterfactual data aug-
mentation has also been applied to reduce bias
in pre-trained models (e.g., Huang et al., 2019;
Maudslay et al., 2019) but the extent to which
biases in pre-trained models propagate to down-
stream applications remains unclear (Goldfarb-
Tarrant et al., 2021). Fairness applications of the
distributional criteria discussed in § 4.1.2 are rel-
atively rare, but Adragna et al. (2020) show that
invariant risk minimization (Arjovsky et al., 2019)
can reduce the use of spurious correlations with
race for toxicity detection.
4.3
Causal Model Interpretations
Explanations of model predictions can be crucial
to help diagnose errors and establish trust with de-
cision makers (Guidotti et al., 2018; Jacovi and
Goldberg, 2020). One prominent approach to gen-
erate explanations is to exploit network artifacts,
such as attention weights (Bahdanau et al., 2014),
which are computed on the path to generating
a prediction (e.g., Xu et al., 2015; Wang et al.,
2016). Alternatively, there have been attempts to
estimate simpler and more interpretable models by
using perturbations of test examples or their hid-
den representations (Ribeiro et al., 2016; Lund-
berg and Lee, 2017; Kim et al., 2018).
How-
ever, both attention and perturbation-based meth-
ods have important limitations. Attention-based
explanations can be misleading (Jain and Wallace,
2019), and are generally possible only for indi-
vidual tokens; they cannot explain predictions in
terms of more abstract linguistic concepts. Exist-
ing perturbation-based methods often generate im-
plausible counterfactuals and also do not allow for
estimating the effect of sentence-level concepts.
Viewed as a causal inference problem, explana-
tion can be performed by comparing predictions
for each example and its generated counterfactual.
While it is usually not possible to observe coun-
terfactual predictions, here the causal system is the
predictor itself. In those cases it may be possible to
compute counterfactuals, e.g. by manipulating the
activations inside the network (Vig et al., 2020;
Geiger et al., 2021). Treatment effects can then
be computed by comparing the predictions under
the factual and counterfactual conditions. Such a
controlled setting is similar to the randomized ex-
periment described in § 2, where it is possible to
compute the difference between an actual text and
what the text would have been had a speciﬁc con-
cept not existed in it. Indeed, in cases where coun-
terfactual texts can be generated, we can often esti-
mate causal effects on text-based models (Ribeiro
et al., 2020; Gardner et al., 2020; Rosenberg et al.,
2021; Ross et al., 2021; Meng et al., 2022; Zhang
et al., 2022). However, generating such counter-
factuals is challenging (see § 4.1.1).
To overcome the counterfactual generation
problem, another class of approaches proposes to
manipulate the representation of the text and not
the text itself (Feder et al., 2021; Elazar et al.,
2021; Ravfogel et al., 2021). Feder et al. (2021)
compute the counterfactual representation by pre-
training an additional instance of the language
representation model employed by the classiﬁer,
with an adversarial component designed to "for-
get" the concept of choice, while controlling for
confounding concepts. Ravfogel et al. (2020) offer
a method for removing information from represen-
tations by iteratively training linear classiﬁers and
projecting the representations on their null-spaces,
but do not account for confounding concepts.
A complementary approach is to generate coun-
terfactuals with minimal changes that obtain a
different model prediction (Wachter et al., 2017;
Mothilal et al., 2020). Such examples allow us to
observe the changes required to change a model’s
prediction. Causal modeling can facilitate this by
making it possible to reason about the causal re-
lationships between observed features, thus iden-
tifying minimal actions which might have down-
stream effects on several features, ultimately re-
sulting in a new prediction (Karimi et al., 2021).
Finally, a causal perspective on attention-based
explanations is to view internal nodes as media-
tors of the causal effect from the input to the out-
put (Vig et al., 2020; Finlayson et al., 2021). By
querying models using manually-crafted counter-
factuals, we can observe how information ﬂows,
and identify where in the model it is encoded.
4.4
Future work
In general we cannot expect to have full causal
models of text, so a critical question for future
work is how to safely use partial causal models,
which omit some causal variables and do not com-
pletely specify the causal relationships within the
text itself. A particular concern is unobserved con-
founding between the variables that are explicitly
speciﬁed in the causal model. Unobserved con-
founding is challenging for causal inference in
general, but it is likely to be ubiquitous in lan-
guage applications, in which the text arises from
the author’s intention to express a structured ar-
rangement of semantic concepts, and the label cor-
responds to a query, either directly on the intended
semantics or on those understood by the reader.
Partial causal models of text can be “top down”,
in the sense of representing causal relationships
between the text and high-level document meta-
data such as authorship, or “bottom up”, in the
sense of representing local linguistic invariance
properties, such as the intuition that a multiword
expression like ‘San Francisco’ has a single cause.
The methods described here are almost exclu-
sively based on top-down models, but approaches
such as perturbing entity spans (e.g., Longpre
et al., 2021) can be justiﬁed by implicit bottom-
up causal models. Making these connections more
explicit may yield new insights. Future work may
also explore hybrid models that connect high-level
document metadata with medium-scale spans of
text such as sentences or paragraphs.
A related issue is when the true variable of in-
terest is unobserved but we do receive some noisy
or coarsened proxy variable. For example, we may
wish to enforce invariance to dialect but have ac-
cess only to geographical information, with which
dialect is only approximately correlated. This is an
emerging area within the statistical literature (Tch-
etgen et al., 2020), and despite the clear applicabil-
ity to NLP, we are aware of no relevant prior work.
Finally, applications of causality to NLP have
focused primarily on classiﬁcation, so it is natural
to ask how these approaches might be extended to
structured output prediction. This is particularly
challenging for distributional criteria like f(X) ⊥⊥
Z | Y , because f(X) and Y may now represent
sequences of vectors or tokens. In such cases it
may be preferable to focus on invariance criteria
that apply to the loss distribution or calibration.
5
Conclusion
Our main goal in this survey was to collect the var-
ious touchpoints of causality and NLP into one
space, which we then subdivided into the prob-
lems of estimating the magnitude of causal effects.
and more traditional NLP tasks. These branches of
scientiﬁc inquiry share common goals, intuitions,
and are beginning to show methodological syner-
gies. In § 3 we showed how recent advances in
NLP modeling can help researchers make causal
conclusions with text data and the challenges of
this process. In § 4, we showed how ideas from
causal inference can be used to make NLP mod-
els more robust, trustworthy and transparent. We
also gather approaches that are implicitly causal
and explicitly show their relationship to causal in-
ference. Both of these spaces, especially the use
of causal ideas for robust and explainable predic-
tions, remain nascent with a large number of open
challenges which we have detailed throughout this
paper.
A particular advantage of causal methodology
is that it forces practitioners to explicate their as-
sumptions.
To improve scientiﬁc standards, we
believe that the NLP community should be clearer
about these assumptions and analyze their data us-
ing causal reasoning. This could lead to a bet-
ter understanding of language and the models we
build to process it.
References
Robert Adragna, Elliot Creager, David Madras,
and Richard Zemel. 2020.
Fairness and ro-
bustness in invariant learning: A case study
in toxicity classiﬁcation.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2011.06485.
Maria Antoniak and David Mimno. 2021.
Bad
seeds: Evaluating lexical methods for bias mea-
surement. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the 11th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1889–1904,
Online. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Martin Arjovsky, Léon Bottou, Ishaan Gulrajani,
and David Lopez-Paz. 2019. Invariant risk min-
imization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02893.
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua
Bengio. 2014. Neural machine translation by
jointly learning to align and translate.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:1409.0473.
Solon
Barocas,
Moritz
Hardt,
and
Arvind
Narayanan. 2019.
Fairness and Machine
Learning.
fairmlbook.org.
http://www.
fairmlbook.org.
Shai Ben-David, John Blitzer, Koby Crammer,
Alex Kulesza, Fernando Pereira, and Jen-
nifer Wortman Vaughan. 2010.
A theory of
learning from different domains.
Machine
learning, 79(1):151–175.
David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jor-
dan. 2003.
Latent dirichlet allocation.
Jour-
nal of machine Learning research, 3(Jan):993–
1022.
Su Lin Blodgett, Solon Barocas, Hal Daumé III,
and Hanna Wallach. 2020. Language (technol-
ogy) is power: A critical survey of “bias” in nlp.
In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 5454–5476.
Nitay Calderon, Eyal Ben-David, Amir Feder, and
Roi Reichart. 2022. Docogen: Domain coun-
terfactual generation for low resource domain
adaptation. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual
Meeting of the Association of Computational
Linguistics (ACL).
Yining Chen, Colin Wei, Ananya Kumar, and
Tengyu Ma. 2020.
Self-training avoids us-
ing spurious features under domain shift. Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, 33:21061–21071.
Alexander D’Amour, Peng Ding, Avi Feller, Li-
hua Lei, and Jasjeet Sekhon. 2020. Overlap in
observational studies with high-dimensional co-
variates. Journal of Econometrics.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language
understanding.
In Proceedings of the 2019
Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT
2019, Minneapolis, MN, USA, June 2-7, 2019,
Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages 4171–
4186. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Javid Ebrahimi, Anyi Rao, Daniel Lowd, and De-
jing Dou. 2018. Hotﬂip: White-box adversarial
examples for text classiﬁcation. In Proceedings
of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short
Papers), pages 31–36.
Naoki Egami, Christian J Fong, Justin Grimmer,
Margaret E Roberts, and Brandon M Stewart.
2018.
How to make causal inferences using
texts. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.02163.
Yanai Elazar, Shauli Ravfogel, Alon Jacovi, and
Yoav Goldberg. 2021. Amnesic probing: Be-
havioral explanation with amnesic counterfac-
tuals. Transactions of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, 9:160–175.
Amir Feder, Nadav Oved, Uri Shalit, and Roi Re-
ichart. 2021.
Causalm: Causal model expla-
nation through counterfactual language models.
Computational Linguistics, 47(2):333–386.
Matthew Finlayson, Aaron Mueller, Sebastian
Gehrmann, Stuart Shieber, Tal Linzen, and
Yonatan Belinkov. 2021.
Causal analysis of
syntactic agreement mechanisms in neural lan-
guage models. In Proceedings of the 59th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics and the 11th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1828–
1843, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Christian Fong and Justin Grimmer. 2016. Dis-
covery of treatments from text corpora. In Pro-
ceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers), pages 1600–1609.
Christian Fong and Justin Grimmer. 2021. Causal
inference with latent treatments.
American
Journal of Political Science. Forthcoming.
Matt Gardner, Yoav Artzi, Victoria Basmov,
Jonathan Berant, Ben Bogin, Sihao Chen,
Pradeep Dasigi, Dheeru Dua, Yanai Elazar,
Ananth Gottumukkala, Nitish Gupta, Hannaneh
Hajishirzi, Gabriel Ilharco, Daniel Khashabi,
Kevin Lin, Jiangming Liu, Nelson F. Liu,
Phoebe Mulcaire, Qiang Ning, Sameer Singh,
Noah A. Smith, Sanjay Subramanian, Reut
Tsarfaty, Eric Wallace, Ally Zhang, and Ben
Zhou. 2020.
Evaluating models’ local deci-
sion boundaries via contrast sets. In Findings
of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: EMNLP 2020, pages 1307–1323, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Sahaj Garg, Vincent Perot, Nicole Limtiaco,
Ankur Taly, Ed H Chi, and Alex Beutel. 2019.
Counterfactual fairness in text classiﬁcation
through robustness. In Proceedings of the 2019
AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Soci-
ety, pages 219–226.
Atticus Geiger, Hanson Lu, Thomas Icard, and
Christopher Potts. 2021. Causal abstractions of
neural networks. Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, 34.
Alan S Gerber, Donald P Green, and Christo-
pher W Larimer. 2008.
Social pressure and
voter turnout: Evidence from a large-scale ﬁeld
experiment. American political Science review,
102(1):33–48.
Muhammad Ghifary, W Bastiaan Kleijn, Mengjie
Zhang, and David Balduzzi. 2015.
Domain
generalization for object recognition with multi-
task autoencoders. In Proceedings of the IEEE
international conference on computer vision,
pages 2551–2559.
Seraphina Goldfarb-Tarrant, Rebecca Marchant,
Ricardo Muñoz Sánchez, Mugdha Pandya, and
Adam Lopez. 2021. Intrinsic bias metrics do
not correlate with application bias. In Proceed-
ings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics and the
11th International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Pa-
pers), pages 1926–1940, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Riccardo Guidotti, Anna Monreale, Salvatore
Ruggieri, Franco Turini, Fosca Giannotti, and
Dino Pedreschi. 2018. A survey of methods for
explaining black box models. ACM computing
surveys (CSUR), 51(5):1–42.
Ishaan Gulrajani and David Lopez-Paz. 2020. In
search of lost domain generalization.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2007.01434.
Suchin Gururangan, Swabha Swayamdipta, Omer
Levy, Roy Schwartz, Samuel R Bowman, and
Noah A Smith. 2018.
Annotation artifacts in
natural language inference data.
Proceedings
of the North American Chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies (NAACL).
Alex Hanna, Emily Denton, Andrew Smart, and
Jamila Smith-Loud. 2020.
Towards a critical
race methodology in algorithmic fairness.
In
Proceedings of the 2020 conference on fairness,
accountability, and transparency, pages 501–
512.
Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nati Srebro. 2016.
Equality of opportunity in supervised learning.
Advances in neural information processing sys-
tems, 29:3315–3323.
Miguel A Hernán. 2016. Does water kill? a call
for less casual causal inferences. Annals of epi-
demiology, 26(10):674–680.
Paul W Holland. 1986. Statistics and causal infer-
ence. Journal of the American statistical Asso-
ciation, 81(396):945–960.
Zhiting Hu and Li Erran Li. 2021. A causal lens
for controllable text generation.
Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 34.
Po-Sen Huang, Huan Zhang, Ray Jiang, Robert
Stanforth, Johannes Welbl, Jack Rae, Vishal
Maini, Dani Yogatama, and Pushmeet Kohli.
2019.
Reducing sentiment bias in language
models via counterfactual evaluation.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:1911.03064.
Guido W Imbens and Donald B Rubin. 2015.
Causal inference in statistics,
social,
and
biomedical sciences.
Cambridge University
Press.
Alon Jacovi and Yoav Goldberg. 2020.
To-
wards faithfully interpretable nlp systems: How
should we deﬁne and evaluate faithfulness? In
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 4198–4205.
Alon Jacovi, Ana Marasovi´c, Tim Miller, and
Yoav Goldberg. 2021. Formalizing trust in ar-
tiﬁcial intelligence: Prerequisites, causes and
goals of human trust in ai. In Proceedings of the
2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Account-
ability, and Transparency, pages 624–635.
Sarthak Jain and Byron C Wallace. 2019.
At-
tention is not explanation.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1902.10186.
Rohan Jha, Charles Lovering, and Ellie Pavlick.
2020.
Does data augmentation improve
generalization in nlp?
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.15012.
Shagun Jhaver, Sucheta Ghoshal, Amy Bruck-
man, and Eric Gilbert. 2018. Online harassment
and content moderation: The case of blocklists.
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Inter-
action (TOCHI), 25(2):1–33.
Zhijing Jin, Julius von Kügelgen, Jingwei Ni, Te-
jas Vaidhya, Ayush Kaushal, Mrinmaya Sachan,
and Bernhard Schoelkopf. 2021. Causal direc-
tion of data collection matters: Implications of
causal and anticausal learning for nlp. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 9499–9513.
Nitish Joshi and He He. 2021. An investigation
of the (in) effectiveness of counterfactually aug-
mented data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.00753.
Amir-Hossein Karimi, Bernhard Schölkopf, and
Isabel Valera. 2021.
Algorithmic recourse:
from counterfactual explanations to interven-
tions. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Con-
ference on Fairness, Accountability, and Trans-
parency, pages 353–362.
Divyansh
Kaushik,
Eduard
Hovy,
and
Zachary C Lipton. 2019.
Learning the
difference
that
makes
a
difference
with
counterfactually-augmented
data.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:1909.12434.
Divyansh Kaushik, Amrith Setlur, Eduard Hovy,
and Zachary C Lipton. 2020.
Explaining the
efﬁcacy of counterfactually-augmented data.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02114.
Katherine Keith, David Jensen, and Brendan
O’Connor. 2020.
Text and causal inference:
A review of using text to remove confounding
from causal estimates. In ACL.
Chloé Kiddon, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Yejin Choi.
2016. Globally coherent text generation with
neural checklist models. In Proceedings of the
2016 conference on empirical methods in natu-
ral language processing, pages 329–339.
Niki Kilbertus, Mateo Rojas-Carulla, Giambattista
Parascandolo, Moritz Hardt, Dominik Janz-
ing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. 2017.
Avoid-
ing discrimination through causal reasoning. In
Proceedings of the 31st International Confer-
ence on Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, pages 656–666.
Been Kim, Martin Wattenberg, Justin Gilmer, Car-
rie Cai, James Wexler, Fernanda Viegas, et al.
2018.
Interpretability beyond feature attribu-
tion: Quantitative testing with concept activa-
tion vectors (tcav). In International Conference
on Machine Learning, pages 2668–2677.
Issa Kohler-Hausmann. 2018. Eddie murphy and
the dangers of counterfactual causal thinking
about detecting racial discrimination. Nw. UL
Rev., 113:1163.
Matt J Kusner, Joshua Loftus, Chris Russell, and
Ricardo Silva. 2017.
Counterfactual fairness.
In Advances in neural information processing
systems, pages 4066–4076.
Quoc Le and Tomas Mikolov. 2014. Distributed
representations of sentences and documents. In
International conference on machine learning,
pages 1188–1196. PMLR.
Xiaodong Liu,
Jianfeng Gao,
Xiaodong He,
Li Deng, Kevin Duh, and Ye-Yi Wang. 2015.
Representation learning using multi-task deep
neural networks for semantic classiﬁcation and
information retrieval.
In Proceedings of the
2015 Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, pages
912–921.
Yang Liu and Mirella Lapata. 2018.
Learning
structured text representations. Transactions of
the Association for Computational Linguistics,
6:63–75.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei
Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy,
Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin
Stoyanov. 2019.
Roberta:
A robustly opti-
mized bert pretraining approach. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.11692.
Lajanugen Logeswaran, Honglak Lee, and Samy
Bengio. 2018. Content preserving text genera-
tion with attribute controls. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 31.
Shayne Longpre, Kartik Perisetla, Anthony Chen,
Nikhil Ramesh, Chris DuBois, and Sameer
Singh. 2021. Entity-based knowledge conﬂicts
in question answering. In Proceedings of the
2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing, pages 7052–7063.
Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. 2017. A uniﬁed
approach to interpreting model predictions. In
Advances in neural information processing sys-
tems, pages 4765–4774.
Rowan Hall Maudslay, Hila Gonen, Ryan Cot-
terell, and Simone Teufel. 2019. It’s all in the
name: Mitigating gender bias with name-based
counterfactual data substitution. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.00871.
David McClosky, Eugene Charniak, and Mark
Johnson. 2006. Effective self-training for pars-
ing.
In Proceedings of the main conference
on human language technology conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association
of Computational Linguistics, pages 152–159.
Citeseer.
R Thomas McCoy, Ellie Pavlick, and Tal Linzen.
2019. Right for the wrong reasons: Diagnos-
ing syntactic heuristics in natural language in-
ference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.01007.
Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and
Yonatan Belinkov. 2022.
Locating and edit-
ing factual knowledge in gpt.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2202.05262.
Stephen L Morgan and Christopher Winship.
2015.
Counterfactuals and causal inference.
Cambridge University Press.
Ramaravind K Mothilal, Amit Sharma, and Chen-
hao Tan. 2020.
Explaining machine learning
classiﬁers through diverse counterfactual expla-
nations. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference
on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency,
pages 607–617.
Reagan Mozer, Luke Miratrix, Aaron Russell
Kaufman, and L Jason Anastasopoulos. 2020.
Matching with text data: An experimental eval-
uation of methods for matching documents and
of measuring match quality. Political Analysis,
28(4):445–468.
Krikamol Muandet, David Balduzzi, and Bernhard
Schölkopf. 2013. Domain generalization via in-
variant feature representation. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 10–18.
Aakanksha Naik, Abhilasha Ravichander, Nor-
man Sadeh, Carolyn Rose, and Graham Neu-
big. 2018. Stress test evaluation for natural lan-
guage inference. In Proceedings of the 27th In-
ternational Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 2340–2353, Santa Fe, New Mex-
ico, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Tong Niu and Mohit Bansal. 2018. Polite dialogue
generation without parallel data. Transactions
of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 6:373–389.
Yaakov Ophir, Refael Tikochinski, Christa SC
Asterhan, Itay Sisso, and Roi Reichart. 2020.
Deep neural networks detect suicide risk from
textual facebook posts.
Scientiﬁc reports,
10(1):1–10.
Silviu Paun, Bob Carpenter, Jon Chamberlain,
Dirk Hovy, Udo Kruschwitz, and Massimo Poe-
sio. 2018. Comparing bayesian models of an-
notation.
Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, 6:571–585.
Ellie Pavlick and Tom Kwiatkowski. 2019. Inher-
ent disagreements in human textual inferences.
Transactions of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, 7:677–694.
Judea Pearl. 1994. A probabilistic calculus of ac-
tions. In Uncertainty Proceedings 1994, pages
454–462. Elsevier.
Judea Pearl. 2009. Causality. Cambridge univer-
sity press.
J Peters, P Bühlmann, and N Meinshausen. 2016.
Causal inference using invariant prediction:
identiﬁcation and conﬁdence intervals.
Jour-
nal of the Royal Statistical Society-Statistical
Methodology-Series B, 78(5):947–1012.
Matthew E. Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer,
Matt Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee,
and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2018. Deep contextu-
alized word representations.
In Proceedings
of the 2018 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies,
NAACL-HLT 2018, New Orleans, Louisiana,
USA, June 1-6, 2018, Volume 1 (Long Papers),
pages 2227–2237. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Adam
Poliak,
Jason
Naradowsky,
Aparajita
Haldar,
Rachel
Rudinger,
and
Benjamin
Van Durme. 2018. Hypothesis only baselines
in natural language inference.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1805.01042.
Reid Pryzant, Dallas Card, Dan Jurafsky, Victor
Veitch, and Dhanya Sridhar. 2021. Causal ef-
fects of linguistic properties.
In Proceedings
of the 2021 Conference of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies, pages 4095–4109.
Reid Pryzant, Youngjoo Chung, and Dan Juraf-
sky. 2017. Predicting sales from the language
of product descriptions. In eCOM@ SIGIR.
Reid Pryzant, Kelly Shen, Dan Jurafsky, and Ste-
fan Wagner. 2018. Deconfounded lexicon in-
duction for interpretable social science. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pages 1615–
1625.
Shauli Ravfogel,
Yanai Elazar,
Hila Gonen,
Michael Twiton, and Yoav Goldberg. 2020.
Null it out: Guarding protected attributes by
iterative nullspace projection.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.07667.
Shauli Ravfogel, Grusha Prasad, Tal Linzen, and
Yoav Goldberg. 2021. Counterfactual interven-
tions reveal the causal effect of relative clause
representations on agreement prediction. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2105.06965.
Roi Reichart and Ari Rappoport. 2007.
Self-
training for enhancement and domain adap-
tation of statistical parsers trained on small
datasets.
In Proceedings of the 45th Annual
Meeting of the Association of Computational
Linguistics, pages 616–623.
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos
Guestrin. 2016. Why should i trust you?: Ex-
plaining the predictions of any classiﬁer.
In
Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD in-
ternational conference on knowledge discovery
and data mining, pages 1135–1144. ACM.
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Tongshuang Wu, Carlos
Guestrin, and Sameer Singh. 2020. Beyond ac-
curacy: Behavioral testing of NLP models with
CheckList. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 4902–4912, Online. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Parker Riley, Noah Constant, Mandy Guo, Girish
Kumar, David Uthus, and Zarana Parekh. 2020.
Textsettr: Label-free text style extraction and
tunable targeted restyling.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.03802.
Margaret E Roberts, Brandon M Stewart, and
Richard A Nielsen. 2020. Adjusting for con-
founding with text matching. American Journal
of Political Science, 64(4):887–903.
Margaret E Roberts, Brandon M Stewart, Dustin
Tingley, Christopher Lucas, Jetson Leder-Luis,
Shana Kushner Gadarian, Bethany Albertson,
and David G Rand. 2014. Structural topic mod-
els for open-ended survey responses. American
Journal of Political Science, 58(4):1064–1082.
Paul R Rosenbaum. 2007. Interference between
units in randomized experiments. Journal of the
american statistical association, 102(477):191–
200.
Daniel Rosenberg, Itai Gat, Amir Feder, and Roi
Reichart. 2021.
Are vqa systems rad? mea-
suring robustness to augmented data with fo-
cused interventions. In Proceedings of the 59th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics and the 11th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (Volume 2: Short Papers), pages 61–70.
Elan Rosenfeld, Pradeep Ravikumar, and Andrej
Risteski. 2021.
The risks of invariant risk
minimization. In International Conference on
Learning Representations, volume 9.
Alexis
Ross,
Tongshuang
Wu,
Hao
Peng,
Matthew E Peters, and Matt Gardner. 2021. Tai-
lor: Generating and perturbing text with seman-
tic controls. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.07150.
Donald B Rubin. 1974. Estimating causal effects
of treatments in randomized and nonrandom-
ized studies. Journal of educational Psychol-
ogy, 66(5):688.
Donald B Rubin. 2005. Causal inference using po-
tential outcomes: Design, modeling, decisions.
Journal of the American Statistical Association,
100(469):322–331.
Jennifer D Rubin, Lindsay Blackwell, and Terri D
Conley. 2020. Fragile masculinity: Men, gen-
der, and online harassment. In Proceedings of
the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, pages 1–14.
B Schölkopf, D Janzing, J Peters, E Sgouritsa,
K Zhang, and J Mooij. 2012.
On causal
and anticausal learning.
In 29th Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning (ICML
2012), pages 1255–1262. International Machine
Learning Society.
Ravi
Shekhar,
Sandro
Pezzelle,
Yauhen
Klimovich,
Aurélie Herbelot,
Moin Nabi,
Enver Sangineto, and Raffaella Bernardi. 2017.
FOIL it!
ﬁnd one mismatch between image
and language caption.
In Proceedings of the
55th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long
Papers), pages 255–265, Vancouver, Canada.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Anders Søgaard. 2013.
Semi-supervised learn-
ing and domain adaptation in natural language
processing. Synthesis Lectures on Human Lan-
guage Technologies, 6(2):1–103.
Dhanya Sridhar and Lise Getoor. 2019. Estimat-
ing causal effects of tone in online debates. In
International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial In-
telligence.
Mark Steedman, Miles Osborne, Anoop Sarkar,
Stephen Clark, Rebecca Hwa, Julia Hocken-
maier, Paul Ruhlen, Steven Baker, and Jeremiah
Crim. 2003.
Bootstrapping statistical parsers
from small datasets. In 10th conference of the
European chapter of the association for compu-
tational linguistics.
Eric J Tchetgen Tchetgen, Andrew Ying, Yifan
Cui, Xu Shi, and Wang Miao. 2020.
An in-
troduction to proximal causal learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2009.10982.
Matt Thomas, Bo Pang, and Lillian Lee. 2006.
Get out the vote: Determining support or op-
position from congressional ﬂoor-debate tran-
scripts. In Proceedings of the 2006 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 327–335, Sydney, Australia.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Victor Veitch, Alexander D’Amour, Steve Yad-
lowsky, and Jacob Eisenstein. 2021. Counter-
factual invariance to spurious correlations: Why
and how to pass stress tests.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2106.00545.
Victor Veitch, Dhanya Sridhar, and David M Blei.
2020. Adapting text embeddings for causal in-
ference. In UAI.
Jesse Vig, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yonatan Be-
linkov,
Sharon Qian,
Daniel Nevo,
Yaron
Singer, and Stuart M. Shieber. 2020.
Inves-
tigating gender bias in language models using
causal mediation analysis. In Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems 33: Annual
Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12,
2020, virtual.
Sandra Wachter, Brent Mittelstadt, and Chris Rus-
sell. 2017. Counterfactual explanations without
opening the black box: Automated decisions
and the gdpr. Harv. JL & Tech., 31:841.
Stefan Wager and Susan Athey. 2018.
Esti-
mation and inference of heterogeneous treat-
ment effects using random forests.
Jour-
nal of the American Statistical Association,
113(523):1228–1242.
Yoav Wald, Amir Feder, Daniel Greenfeld, and
Uri Shalit. 2021.
On calibration and out-
of-domain generalization.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2102.10395.
Yequan Wang, Minlie Huang, Xiaoyan Zhu, and
Li Zhao. 2016.
Attention-based LSTM for
aspect-level sentiment classiﬁcation.
In Pro-
ceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 606–615, Austin, Texas. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Galen Weld, Peter West, Maria Glenski, David
Arbour, Ryan Rossi, and Tim Althoff. 2022.
Adjusting for confounders with text:
Chal-
lenges and an empirical evaluation framework
for causal inference. ICWSM.
Zach Wood-Doughty, Ilya Shpitser, and Mark
Dredze. 2018.
Challenges of using text clas-
siﬁers for causal inference. In EMNLP.
Zach Wood-Doughty, Ilya Shpitser, and Mark
Dredze. 2021.
Generating synthetic text data
to evaluate causal inference methods.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2102.05638.
Tongshuang Wu, Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Jeffrey
Heer, and Daniel S Weld. 2021. Polyjuice: Au-
tomated, general-purpose counterfactual gener-
ation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00288.
Kelvin Xu, Jimmy Ba, Ryan Kiros, Kyunghyun
Cho, Aaron Courville, Ruslan Salakhudinov,
Rich Zemel, and Yoshua Bengio. 2015. Show,
attend and tell: Neural image caption genera-
tion with visual attention. In International con-
ference on machine learning, pages 2048–2057.
PMLR.
Justine Zhang, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Cristian
Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil. 2020.
Quantifying
the causal effects of conversational tendencies.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer
Interaction, 4(CSCW2):1–24.
Yi-Fan Zhang, Hanlin Zhang, Zachary C Lipton,
Li Erran Li, and Eric P Xing. 2022. Can trans-
formers be strong treatment effect estimators?
arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.01336.
Jieyu Zhao, Tianlu Wang, Mark Yatskar, Vicente
Ordonez, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2017. Men also
like shopping: Reducing gender bias ampliﬁ-
cation using corpus-level constraints. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 2979–2989, Copenhagen, Denmark. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Jieyu Zhao, Tianlu Wang, Mark Yatskar, Vicente
Ordonez, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2018.
Gender
bias in coreference resolution: Evaluation and
debiasing methods. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: Human Language Technologies, Volume
2 (Short Papers), pages 15–20, New Orleans,
Louisiana. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Ran Zmigrod, Sabrina J. Mielke, Hanna Wal-
lach, and Ryan Cotterell. 2019.
Counterfac-
tual data augmentation for mitigating gender
stereotypes in languages with rich morphology.
In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 1651–1661, Florence, Italy. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
