Title: Identifying botnet IP address clusters using natural language processing techniques on honeypot command logs
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2104.10232v1
--------------------------------------------------

Identifying botnet IP address clusters using natural language processing
techniques on honeypot command logs∗
Valentino Crespi
Wes Hardaker
Sami Abu-El-Haija
Aram Galstyan†
Abstract
Computer security has been plagued by increasing
formidable, dynamic, hard-to-detect, hard-to-predict,
and hard-to-characterize hacking techniques.
Such
techniques are very often deployed in self-propagating
worms capable of automatically infecting vulnerable
computer systems and then building large bot net-
works, which are then used to launch coordinated at-
tacks on designated targets. In this work, we investi-
gate novel applications of Natural Language Processing
(NLP) methods to detect and correlate botnet behaviors
through the analysis of honeypot data. In our approach
we take observed behaviors in shell commands issued
by intruders during captured internet sessions and re-
duce them to collections of stochastic processes that are,
in turn, processed with machine learning techniques to
build classiﬁers and predictors. Our technique results in
a new ability to cluster botnet source IP address even
in the face of their desire to obfuscate their penetration
attempts through rapid or random permutation tech-
niques.
1
Introduction
With the establishment of botnet technologies [5, 4,
12] the need for methods to understand the lethality
of certain behaviors and anticipate future moves of
attackers has become of paramount importance. The
challenge for cyberdefenders is further exacerbated by
the constant invention of new hard-to-detect and hard-
to-track rapidly mutating hacking techniques. In such
scenarios simple string-matching log searches to identify
common threat actors is no longer a suﬃcient technique.
In this work we study intruder behaviors within
data from a honeypot network to discover the latent
characteristics of hacking agent groups. We base our
work on the assumption that individual worms or au-
tomated hacking techniques that attack from diﬀerent
IP sources are likely to exhibit similar, but slightly var-
∗Work supported by the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency
(DARPA)
and
the
Army
Contracting
Command–
Aberdeen Proving Grounds (ACC-APG) under Contract Number
W911NF-18-C-0020.
†USC/ISI.
ied, modes of operation. Our intuition is that group-
ing behaviors by similarity of the attack sequence may
uncover botnets or coordinated agents, allowing secu-
rity analysts to track their activity, and the evolution
of their attack methodologies.
Honeypots [11] as a
service (HAAS) networks are large collections of Hon-
eypots that aggregate reports consisting of a set of
time-stamped, captured sessions of Borne-shell or sim-
ilar commands collected from intrusions of individual
hackers (human or automated bot).
We collect large
amounts of real and unlabeled data (see Appendix A)
and apply unsupervised NLP methods to learn statistics
and cluster reports. To the best of our knowledge the
application of such methods to the cyber domain is quite
novel. Supervised NLP methods have been successfully
applied to cluster tweets in social media [1], under the
assumption that tweets from the same account contain
stationary statistics and that diﬀerent accounts would
most probably correspond to diﬀerent users. Here we
make opposite assumptions insofar as large sets of bots
are controlled by the same infrastructure and their indi-
vidual behaviors can be periodic or evolve dynamically.
Given the impossibility of performing automated model
evaluation we chose to design two diﬀerent classes of so-
lutions (LDA and Deep Learning) with the idea of using
one as a reference for the other.
2
Levels of attacker behaviors
Suppose that at time t a hacker from source IP ip suc-
ceeded in establishing a Secure Shell (SSH) [7] connec-
tion with one of the honeypot servers and a ﬁnite se-
quence of session commands s is collected. The hon-
eypot system captures the record ip : (t, s), where
s is in turn a sequence of shell commands.
More-
over, we observed that individual hackers intrude into
multiple honeypots over time.
Thus, for each hacker
source IP ip, we observe a sequence of sessions: ip :
(t1, s1), (t2, s2), . . . , (tn, sn), with ti < ti+1 for all i. We
embed sessions into ﬁnite dimensional metric spaces in
order to learn the behavior of individual hackers or of
groups of “somewhat related” hackers (botnets) for clas-
siﬁcation and prediction purposes.
To be precise, we
are interested in two levels of analysis of hacking be-
arXiv:2104.10232v1  [cs.CR]  20 Apr 2021
haviors: L1) the statistics of lexical terms (commands
and identiﬁers) occurring in its sessions and L2) given
L1, the longitudinal statistical characteristics of session
time series. Learning L1 behaviors allows us to char-
acterize the fuzzy-signature shell techniques used by a
hacker (§2.1). Learning L2 behaviors allows us to char-
acterize the types of hacker activity over time, active
during speciﬁc, potentially recurring, time periods ob-
served in certain short subsequences of sessions (§2.2).
Given the success of these techniques, we consider fu-
ture directions and approaches in §3.
2.1
L1: learning statistics of lexical terms. We
break the L1 task into three separate stages.
First,
we train a probabilistic model to capture the statistics
of terms occurring in individual sessions (or in groups
of sessions generated by the same hacker1).
Second,
we exploit the model to embed sessions or groups of
sessions into a ﬁnite dimensional metric space. Third,
we cluster such embeddings with respect to the metric of
the embedding space. The intuition behind this method
is that two behaviors are syntactically similar if their
embeddings are close in metric, namely they fall into
the same cluster. Thus, this clustering identiﬁes botnets
on the basis of sharing similar technical sequences of
commands in their generated sessions.
For the ﬁrst
stage we consider two diﬀerent embedding methods. In
the ﬁrst, we train a Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA)
model (§2.1.1). In the second, we train a Deep Learning
autoencoder and exploit the encoding component to
map each session to a vector (§2.1.2). LDA and, more
generally, topic modeling, provides an “explainable”
interpretation of the embedding that is implicit in the
Bayesian description of the documents.
Par contre,
our Deep Learning autoencoder captures the order of
the commands and allows large scale processing of
millions of sessions. Finally, we employ k-means [9] and
vdgmm [2] to perform clustering.
2.1.1
LDA pipeline. LDA is a generative proba-
bilistic model for collections of discrete data such as
text corpora introduced in 2003 by Blei et al. [3] to
solve problems of text classiﬁcation. LDA models an
individual document as a mixture of a ﬁnite number of
topics where, in turn, each topic is a probability distri-
bution over a potentially inﬁnite vocabulary. An LDA
model consists of a collection of K multinomial distri-
butions p(w|j), for j = 1, 2, . . . , K, over V called topics
and a K-dimensional Dirichlet distribution q(θ). Given
an LDA model M = {p(w|j), q(θ)} a document of N
1We use terms “bot” and “hacker” interchangeably throughout
the text, as our technique applies to both.
Figure 1: LDA Pipeline: 248k documents, 200 topics.
words is generated in the following way. First, we sam-
ple a multinomial distribution θ ∼q(θ) over the K top-
ics2. Then for each i = 1, 2, . . . , N we sample a topic
ti ∼θ(ti) and the word wi ∼p(wi|ti). One way of using
LDA models is to apply Bayesian techniques [3] to learn
p and q from a given corpus C of documents and then,
for each document w ∈C, to infer θw ∈RK from the
posterior distribution PM(θ|w) induced by the learned
model M. The inferring of the multinomial distribution
θw from M and w deﬁnes an embedding of the docu-
ment w into a latent K-dimensional space. We process a
HAAS honeypot dataset through the following pipeline
(also shown in Figure 1) and cluster IP addresses ex-
hibiting similar statistics of lexical terms used in their
sessions.
1. Deﬁne documents:
we aggregate sessions by
source IP yielding a collection D1 of documents;
2. Build corpus: we tokenize documents in D1, build
a vocabulary V1, and encode each document as a
“bag of words” with respect to V1. This gives a
corpus C1 of encoded documents;
3. LDA compress: we train an LDA model (gensim)
with corpus C1 for a ﬁxed number of topics
3
(K = 200) and we exploit the model to embed each
document in C1 in the latent K-dimensional space;
4. Cluster: we employ k-means with k = 200 to clus-
ter all the embedded documents in the latent space
and group IPs by similarity of fuzzy signature.
2.1.2
Autoencoder pipeline. We also employ a
second NLP method for comparison using applications
of Deep Learning to unsupervised clustering (Deep
2Samples from a K-dimensional Dirichlet distribution are
probability vectors of K elements that can represent a multino-
mial distribution over K labels.
3A commonly chosen value in NLP.
Clustering), which proved eﬀective in clustering un-
labeled images [6, 13] and signals [10].
Our deep
learning pipeline, detailed below, consists of two deep
learning modules.
First, we tokenize all sessions as
before to build a vocabulary V and then train a
Word2Vec model [8].
This deﬁnes a map W : V →
Rh, h
=
128, that embeds each word into a h-
dimensional metric space, and, by extension, each se-
quence of tokens v1v2 · · · vN into the N × h matrix
W(vN
1 ) = [W(v1); W(v2); . . . ; W(vN)] ∈RN×h (here,
we have used the expression vj
i to denote the sequence
vivi+1 . . . vj, RN×h to denote the set of all N × h ma-
trices of real numbers, and employed matlab syntax to
describe matrices). Second, for a ﬁxed value of N (e.g.,
N = 500, sessions are either truncated or padded in
order to have a ﬁxed length in number of tokens) we
train an ad hoc autoencoder D ◦E : RN×h →RN×h,
with E : RN×h →RM, D : RM →RN×h, and
D(E(W(s))) ≈W(s) for each (tokenized) session s.
We implemented a standard Word2Vec Skip-gram
model 4 with Negative Sampling (with a window size of
2 and a number of negative samples of 4) using tensor-
ﬂow and experimentally established that h = 128 (with
4 epochs of training) was an optimal embedding dimen-
sion. We designed an autoencoder to capture the order
of tokens in sessions. The Encoder consists of an upper
LSTM layer built on top of a (maxpooled) convolutional
lower layer, and the decoder consists of an upper decon-
volution layer built on top of an upsampling layer. The
intuition behind this architecture is that, while convolu-
tional layers extract latent features, LSTMs capture the
order of the sequence of the tokens in their latent repre-
sentation. The output of the encoder E(W(s)) ∈RM,
M = 200, provides the embedding of session s into an
M-dimensional metric space. Unlike in [6] we did not
jointly train a clustering layer together with the autoen-
coder because we were interested in also learning the
number of session clusters. Thus, we clustered the em-
bedded sessions employing a Bayesian nonparametric
algorithm (VDGMM) that learns the parameters of a
Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) with an a priori un-
known number of Gaussian components [2]. As before,
we process the HAAS data with the following pipeline
(see Figure 2) to discover clusters of “similar” sessions:
1. Deﬁne documents: we treat each session as a
separate document and build collection D2 (with
192.0.2.1-4 we mean the 5th recorded session
from 192.0.2.1);
2. Build word embedding:
we tokenize all the
4We considered two models:
1) diﬀerent tokens map to
diﬀerent IDs; 2) tokens occurring only once map to the same ID.
Figure 2: Autoencoder Pipeline: 420k source addresses,
90M sessions over 3 years, N = 500 (length of sessions),
h = 128 (dimension of word embedding space), M =
200 (dimension of session embedding space).
Figure 3: First 4 documents in a random cluster from
the LDA pipeline (truncated for reading purposes).
documents in D2 and build a vocabulary V2. We
then train a Word2Vec model and exploit it to
encode each document as an N × h matrix. This
gives a corpus C2 of encoded sessions;
3. Build session embedding:
we use corpus C2
to train an autoencoder whose encoder component
encodes inputs into vectors of M reals, M = 200.
We exploit the encoder to map each session in C2
to a vector in RM;
4. Cluster: we employ VDGMM to cluster embedded
sessions recorded in a bounded period of time (a
month in our experiments) and learn the number
of diﬀerent types of sessions.
2.1.3
L1
clustering
results. The LDA pipeline
groups documents according to a predeﬁned number of
clusters (200). A direct inspection of the output shows
command list clusters that are visibly similar to a hu-
man eye. Despite the presence of outliers, the clusters
seem quite homogeneous as seen, for example, in Fig. 3
which contains a small excerpt of text from one of the
computed clusters.
These results indicate that NLP
text processing techniques can be successfully applied
to command sequences, provided that we deﬁne an ap-
propriate vocabulary (the tokenization method we de-
ploy dictates the observable vocabulary features). The
autoencoder pipeline identiﬁed 120 diﬀerent clusters of
sessions. Figure 4 shows one of the clusters whereas Fig-
Figure 4: One of the 120 autoencoder session clusters
containing three sessions with their ID, epoch time
stamp, and list of commands. To the human eye they
appear as variations of a same mode.
Figure 5: 8 representative sessions from as many session
clusters out of the 120 autoencoder session clusters.
ure 5 shows an arbitrary selection of eight diﬀerent types
of sessions by listing the representatives from eight arbi-
trarily selected clusters. Clustering at the session level
enables two types of analysis. First, as before, we can
recover botnets and fuzzy signatures. Second, we now
have a way to encode a time series of sessions and from
it extract the behavior of each individual botnet over
time, as discussed in §2.2.
2.2
L2: analyzing sessions time series. For level
L2, we embed each session into a ﬁnite dimensional
space where each source IP exhibits a vectored signal be-
havior deﬁned as the time series of its encoded sessions:
ip : yt1, yt2, . . . , ytn, with yti = E(W(si)) ∈RM. In this
short paper we present only preliminary observations
about such signals and defer a more thorough analysis
to an upcoming expanded version of this paper. Figure 6
shows the behavior of two signals, 20.133.96.132 and
5.99.213.53, that start from sessions that were clus-
tered together by the L1 analysis. For each signal, we
plot the distance between its ith session and its ﬁrst
one recorded. We observe that signal sessions are time
clustered and repetitive; moreover, related bots visibly
show synchronous activities. For example, they are ac-
tive during non-overlapping periods of time. These are
indications that we can train probabilistic models capa-
ble of capturing the temporal behaviors of signals (e.g.,
HSMMs and LSTMs) in order to predict bot’s future
actions.
Figure
6:
Signals
220.133.96.132
(left)
and
5.99.213.53 (right).
Each point (t, d) represents
an embedded session yt that occurred at time t with d
the distance from the ﬁrst signal session. Thus, similar
sessions map to points with similar ordinate.
While
the converse is not necessarily true it is reasonable
to hypothesize that the two signals share four fuzzy
signatures.
Moreover, they seem to exhibit a joint
temporal pattern.
This intuition is conﬁrmed by the
inspection of the corresponding raw sessions (bottom).
3
Conclusions and Future Work
We have demonstrated the potential of applying NLP
methods to parse honeypot logs of shell commands and
to characterize fuzzy signatures.
We also discussed
exploiting session embedding functions to study high-
level, longitudinal botnet behaviors.
We are expanding this work in three directions: 1)
developing fast algorithms to train and incrementally
update word2vec models as suggested in [8]; 2) modify-
ing the autoencoder to jointly train a classiﬁcation layer
as done in [13]; and 3) building probabilistic models
(HMMs, HSMMS, LSTMs) to study longitudinal botnet
behaviors (time series of encoded sessions) to predict fu-
ture session clusters and to group source IPs exhibiting
temporally coordinated behaviors.
References
[1] Nicholas Andrews and Marcus Bishop.
Learning in-
variant representations of social media users. CoRR,
abs/1910.04979, 2019.
[2] David M. Blei and Michael I. Jordan.
Variational
inference for Dirichlet process mixtures.
Bayesian
Analysis, 1:121–144, 2005.
[3] David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, Michael I. Jordan, and
John Laﬀerty. Latent Dirichlet allocation. Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 3:2003, 2003.
[4] Nikan Chavoshi,
Hossein Hamooni,
and Abdullah
Mueen. Temporal patterns in bot activities. In Pro-
ceedings of the 26th International Conference on World
Wide Web Companion, pages 1601—-1606, April 2017.
[5] D. Dagon, G. Gu, C. Lee, and W. Lee. A taxonomy
of botnet structures.
In Proceedings of the Annual
Computer Security Applications Conference (ACSAC),
2007.
[6] Xifeng Guo, Xinwang Liu, En Zhu, and Jianping Yin.
Deep clustering with convolutional autoencoders.
In
Liu D., Xie S., Li Y., Zhao D., El-Alfy ES. (eds)
Neural Information Processing (ICONIP), pages 373–
382, 10 2017.
[7] S. Lehtinen and C. Lonvick. The Secure Shell (SSH)
Protocol Assigned Numbers.
RFC 4250 (Proposed
Standard), January 2006.
[8] Omer Levy and Yoav Goldberg. Neural word embed-
ding as implicit matrix factorization. In Proceedings of
the 27th International Conference on Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems (NIPS’14), volume 2, pages
2177––2185, December 2014.
[9] James MacQueen. Some methods for classiﬁcation and
analysis of multivariate observations. In Proceedings of
the 5th Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics
and Probability, volume 5.1, pages 281–297, 1967.
[10] Naveen Sai Madiraju, Seid M. Sadat, Dimitry Fisher,
and Homa Karimabadi.
Deep temporal clustering:
Fully unsupervised learning of time-domain features.
arXiv:1802.01059 cs.LG, 2018.
[11] N. Provos and T. Holz. Virtual Honeypots: From Bot-
net Tracking to Intrusion Detection. Pearson Educa-
tion, 2007.
[12] Brett Stone-Gross, Marco Cova, Lorenzo Cavallaro,
Bob Gilbert, Martin Szydlowski, Richard Allen Kem-
merer, Christopher Kruegel, and Giovanni Vigna. Your
botnet is my botnet: analysis of a botnet takeover.
In Proceedings of the 16th ACM conference on Com-
puter and communications security, pages 635—-647,
November 2009.
[13] Junyuan Xie, Ross Girshick, and Ali Farhadi. Unsu-
pervised deep embedding for clustering analysis.
In
Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on
Machine Learning, New York, NY, USA, 2016.
A
Appendix
All
honeypot
data
were
downloaded
from
https://haas.nic.cz/.
Sessions are time-stamped.
However, individual bash commands in each session are
not. We tokenized bash commands with
def tokenize(line):
words = re.sub(
r"(2>&1)|(>&)|(&>)|(>\|)|(>>)|([012]>)",
" _r_ ", line)
words = words.replace(">", " > ")
words = words.replace("<", " < ")
words = words.replace("=", " = ")
words = words.replace("||", " _P_ ")
words = words.replace("|", " _p_ ")
words = words.replace("&&", " _A_ ")
words = words.replace("&", " _a_ ")
lwords = re.split("[;,\"() ]", words)
return lwords
A.1
LDA (LSI) pipeline: We parsed sessions col-
lected between 1/2018 and 2/2020 and aggregated them
by source IP:
Number of tokens:
331550
Source IPs (documents):
248795
Average document length:
5347.61
Figure 7 shows the distribution of the lengths of the
documents aggregated by IPs where we have removed
few but very long documents for ease of display.
Figure 7: Distribution of document lengths (after re-
moving 3566 documents longer than 50000 tokens).
A.2
Autoencoder pipeline: full vocabulary: We
parsed sessions collected between 1/2018 and 10/2020
and treated them as separate documents;
diﬀerent
tokens were mapped to diﬀerent indexes:
Source IPs:
420695
Vocabulary size:
569665
Number of sessions (documents):
90063468
Average session length:
15.7
Figure 8 shows the distribution of session lengths.
A.3
Autoencoder pipeline:
vocabulary with
tokens occurring only once mapped to single
word: We parsed sessions collected between 1/2018
and 10/2020 and treated them as separate documents;
tokens occurring only once were mapped to the same
index:
Source IPs:
420695
Vocabulary Size:
426439
Number of sessions (documents):
90063468
Average session length:
15.7
Figure 8 shows the distribution of session lengths.
Figure 8: Distribution of session lengths.
