Title: Natural Language Processing for EHR-Based Computational Phenotyping
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1806.04820v2
--------------------------------------------------

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY AND BIOINFORMATICS (ACCEPTED) 
1 
 
Natural Language Processing for 
EHR-Based Computational Phenotyping 
Zexian Zeng, Yu Deng, Xiaoyu Li, Tristan Naumann, Yuan Luo  
Abstract— This article reviews recent advances in applying natural language processing (NLP) to Electronic Health Records 
(EHRs) for computational phenotyping. NLP-based computational phenotyping has numerous applications including diagnosis 
categorization, novel phenotype discovery, clinical trial screening, pharmacogenomics, drug-drug interaction (DDI) and adverse 
drug event (ADE) detection, as well as genome-wide and phenome-wide association studies. Significant progress has been 
made in algorithm development and resource construction for computational phenotyping. Among the surveyed methods, well-
designed keyword search and rule-based systems often achieve good performance. However, the construction of keyword and 
rule lists requires significant manual effort, which is difficult to scale. Supervised machine learning models have been favored 
because they are capable of acquiring both classification patterns and structures from data. Recently, deep learning and 
unsupervised learning have received growing attention, with the former favored for its performance and the latter for its ability to 
find novel phenotypes. Integrating heterogeneous data sources have become increasingly important and have shown promise 
in improving model performance. Often better performance is achieved by combining multiple modalities of information. Despite 
these many advances, challenges and opportunities remain for NLP-based computational phenotyping, including better model 
interpretability and generalizability, and proper characterization of feature relations in clinical narratives.  
Index Terms—Electronic Health Records, Natural Language Processing, Computational Phenotyping, Machine Learning 
——————————   ◆   —————————— 
1 INTRODUCTION
phenotype is an expression of the characteristics that result 
from genotype variations and an organism’s interactions 
with its environment. A phenotype may consist of physical 
appearances (e.g., height, weight, BMI), biochemical processes, 
or behaviors [1]. In the medical domain, phenotypes are often 
summarized by experts on the basis of clinical observations. 
Nationwide adoption of Electronic Health Records (EHRs) has 
given rise to a large amount of digital health data, which can be 
used for secondary analysis [2]. Typical EHRs include structured 
data such as diagnosis codes, vitals and physiologic 
measurements, as well as unstructured clinical narratives such as 
progress notes and discharge summaries. Computational 
phenotyping aims to automatically mine or predict clinically 
significant, or scientifically meaningful, phenotypes from 
structured EHR data, unstructured clinical narratives, or their 
combination.  
As summarized in a 2013 review by Shivade et al. [3], early 
computational phenotyping studies were often formulated as 
supervised learning problems wherein a predefined phenotype is 
provided, and the task is to construct a patient cohort matching 
the definition’s criteria. Many of these studies relied heavily on 
structured and coded patient data; for example, using encodings 
such as International Classification of Disease, 9th Revision 
(ICD-9) [4], its successor the 10th Revision (ICD-10) [5], 
Systematized 
Nomenclature 
of 
Medicine-Clinical Terms 
(SNOMED CT) [6], RxNorm [7], and Logical Observation 
Identifiers Names and Codes (LOINC) [8]. On the other hand, 
the use of natural language processing (NLP) for EHR-based 
computational phenotyping has been limited to term and 
keyword extraction [3].  
Structured data typically capture patients’ demographic 
information, lab values, medications, diagnoses, and encounters 
[9]. Although readily available and easily accessible, studies 
have concluded that structured data alone are not sufficient to 
accurately infer phenotypes [10, 11]. For example, ICD-9 codes 
are mainly recorded for administrative purposes and are 
influenced by billing requirements and avoidance of liability [12, 
13]. Consequently, these codes do not always accurately reflect 
a patient’s underlying physiology. Furthermore, not all patient 
information is well documented in structured data, such as 
clinicians’ observations and insights [14]. As a result, using 
structured data alone for phenotype identification often results in 
low performance [11]. The limitations associated with structured 
data for computational phenotyping have encouraged the use of 
clinical narratives, which typically include clinicians’ notes, 
observations, referring letters, specialists’ reports, discharge 
summaries, and a record of communications between doctors and 
patients [15]. Unstructured clinical narratives may summarize 
patients’ medical history, diagnoses, medications, immunizations, 
allergies, radiology images, and laboratory test results, in the 
forms of progress notes, discharge reports etc. [16].  
Structured and unstructured EHR data are often stored in vendor 
applications or at a healthcare enterprise data warehouse. Typical 
xxxx-xxxx/0x/$xx.00 © 200x IEEE        Published by the IEEE Computer Society 
———————————————— 
• Zexian Zeng is with the Department of Preventive Medicine, Northwestern 
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611. E-mail: 
zexian.zeng@northwestern.edu. 
• Yu Deng is with the Department of Preventive Medicine, Northwestern 
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611. E-mail: 
yu.deng@northwestern.edu. 
• Xiaoyu Li is with the Department of Social and Behavioral Sciences, Harvard 
T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115. E-mail: 
xil288@mail.harvard.edu. 
• Tristan Naumann is with Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab, 
Massachusetts Institue of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139. E-mail: 
tjn@mit.edu. 
• Yuan Luo is with the Department of Preventive Medicine, Northwestern 
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611. E-mail: 
yuan.luo@northwestern.edu. 
A
2 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON JOURNAL NAME,  MANUSCRIPT ID 
 
EHR data are usually managed by a local institution’s 
technicians and are accessible to trained personnel or researchers. 
Institutional Review Boards at local institutions typically grant 
access to certain patient cohorts and certain parts of EHRs. 
Database queries can then be written and executed to retrieve 
desired structured and unstructured EHR data. In addition to 
hospital-collected data stored in EHRs, research data are 
increasingly available, including public databases such as 
PubMed [17], Textpresso [18], Human Protein Interaction 
Database (HPID) [19], and MeInfoText [20]. With growing 
amount of available data, efficient identification of relevant 
documents is essential to the research community. Information 
retrieval systems have been developed to identify text 
corresponding to certain topics or areas from EHR data across 
multiple fields. CoPub Mapper [21] ranks co-occurrence 
associations between genes and biological terms from PubMed. 
iHOP [22] links interacting proteins to their corresponding 
databases and uses co-occurrence information to build a 
graphical interaction network. We refer the reader to the 
following reviews for more details: [23] is a survey for 
biomedical text mining in cancer research, [24] is a survey for 
biomedical text mining, and [25] is a survey for web mining. 
While the prevalence of EHR data presents an opportunity for 
improved computational phenotyping, extracting information 
from clinical narratives for accurate phenotyping requires both 
semantic and syntactic structures in the narrative to be captured 
[26]. Scaling such tasks to large cohort studies is laborious, time-
consuming, and typically requires extensive data collection and 
annotation. 
Recently, 
NLP 
methods 
for 
EHR-based 
computational 
phenotyping have seen extensive development, extending 
beyond basic term and keyword extraction. One focus of recent 
studies is formulating computational phenotyping as an 
unsupervised learning problem to automatically discover 
unknown phenotypes. The construction of richer features such as 
relations between medical concepts enables greater expressive 
power when encoding patient status, compared to terms and 
keywords. More advanced machine learning methods, such as 
deep learning, have also been increasingly adopted to learn the 
underlying patient representation.  
This article reviews the literature on NLP methods for EHR-
based 
computational 
phenotyping, 
emphasizing 
recent 
developments. We first describe several applications of 
computational phenotyping. We then summarize the state-of-the-
art NLP methods for computational phenotyping and compare 
their advantages and disadvantages. We also describe the 
combinations of data modalities, feature learning, and relation 
extraction that have been used to aid computational phenotyping. 
Finally, we discuss challenges and opportunities to NLP methods 
for computational phenotyping and highlight a few promising 
future directions.  
2 APPLICATIONS OF EHR-BASED 
COMPUTATIONAL 
PHENOTYPING 
Computational phenotyping has facilitated biomedical and 
clinical research across many applications, including patient 
diagnosis categorization, novel phenotype discovery, clinical 
trial screening, pharmacogenomics, drug-drug interaction (DDI) 
and adverse drug event (ADE) detection, and downstream 
genomics studies.  
2.1 Diagnosis Categorization 
One of the most important applications of computational 
phenotyping is diagnosis categorization, which enables the 
automated and efficient identification of patient cohorts for 
secondary analysis [15, 27-31]. A wide range of diseases has 
been investigated in the past, including suspected tuberculosis 
(TB) [32, 33], colorectal cancer [34], rheumatoid arthritis [35], 
diabetes [36], heart failure [37, 38], neuropsychiatric disorders 
[39], etc. These applications have extended from disease 
identification to disease subtyping such as lung cancer stage 
evaluation [40], or subsequent event detection such as breast 
cancer recurrence detection [41] and cancer metastases detection 
[42]. 
2.2 Novel Phenotype Discovery 
Computational phenotyping has been applied to discover novel 
phenotypes and sub-phenotypes. Traditionally, a clinical 
phenotype is classified into a particular category if it meets a set 
of criteria developed by domain experts [43]. Instead, semi-
supervised or unsupervised methods can detect traits based on 
intrinsic data patterns with moderate or minimal expert guidance, 
which may promote the discovery of novel phenotypes or sub-
phenotypes. For example, in a study by Marlin et al. [44], a 
diagonal covariance Gaussian mixture model was applied on 
physiological time series data for patient clustering. They 
discovered distinct, recognizable physiological patterns and they 
concluded that interpretations of these patterns could offer 
prognostic significance. Doshi-Velez et al. [45] applied 
hierarchical clustering to define subgroups with distinct courses 
among autism spectrum disorders. They applied ICD-9 codes to 
construct time series features. In the study, they identified four 
subgroups among 4934 patients; one subgroup was characterized 
by seizures; one subgroup was characterized by multisystem 
disorders including gastrointestinal disorders, auditory disorders, 
and infections; one subgroup was characterized by psychiatric 
disorders; one subgroup could not be further resolved. In a study 
by Ho et al. [46], they applied tensor factorization [47, 48] on 
medication orders to generate phenotypes without supervision. 
In a case study searching for 50 phenotypes in heart failure, they 
achieved better performance than principal component analysis 
(PCA) with respect to area under curve (AUC) score and model 
stability. Further interpretations of these novel phenotypes have 
potential to offer us useful clinical information. Shah et al. [49] 
clustered patients with preserved ejection fraction into three 
novel subgroups, which offers meaningful insight into clinical 
characteristics, cardiac structures, and outcomes. 
2.3 Clinical Trial Screening 
Leveraging EHR data can benefit clinical trial recruitment [50]. 
In recent years, echoing the rising availability of EHR data and 
the increased volume of clinical trial recruitments, computational 
phenotyping for clinical trial screening has become an active area. 
Multiple systems have been designed for this purpose [51-54]. 
Electronic screening can improve efficiency in clinical trial 
recruitment, and automated querying over trials can support 
clinical knowledge curation [55]. A typical computational 
phenotyping system for clinical trial eligibility identifies patients 
ZENG ET AL.:  NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING FOR EHR-BASED COMPUTATIONAL PHENOTYPING 
3 
 
whose profiles—extracted from structured data and narratives—
matched the trial criteria in order to reduce the pool of candidates 
for further staff screening.  
2.4 Pharmacogenomics 
Pharmacogenomics aims to investigate the interaction between 
genes, gene products, and therapeutic substances. Much of this 
knowledge exists in scientific literature and curated databases. 
Computational phenotyping applications have been developed to 
mine 
pharmacogenomics 
knowledge 
[56-59]. 
These 
phenotyping tools automatically scan, retrieve, and summarize 
the literature for meaningful phenotypes. Recent studies have 
adopted semantic and syntactic analyses as well as statistical 
machine learning tools to mine targeted pharmacogenomics 
relations from scientific literature and clinical records [58]. 
2.5 DDIs and ADEs 
Drug-drug interactions (DDIs) happen when one drug affects the 
activity of another drug that has been simultaneously 
administered. Adverse drug events (ADEs) refer to unexpected 
injuries caused by administering medication. Detecting DDIs 
and ADEs can guide the process of drug development and drug 
administration. The impact of these negative outcomes has 
triggered huge efforts from industry and the scientific 
community to develop models exploring the relationships 
between drugs and biochemical pathways in order to enable the 
discovery of DDIs [60, 61] and ADEs [26, 62-64]. 
2.6 GWAS and PheWAS 
Cohorts obtained by computational phenotyping have benefited 
downstream genomic studies [65], using techniques such as 
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and phenome-wide 
association studies (PheWAS). In GWAS, researchers link 
genomic information from DNA biorepositories to EHR data to 
detect associations between phenotypes and genes. In such 
studies, case-control cohorts can be generated without labor 
intensive annotation, which is especially important for rare 
variant studies where a large number of patients need to be 
screened. Much research [66-69] has explored EHR phenotyping 
algorithms to facilitate GWAS. We refer the reader to reviews by 
Bush et al. [70] and Wei et al. [65] for more details. PheWAS 
studies analyze a wide range of phenotypes affected by a specific 
genetic variant. Denny et al. [71] applied computational 
phenotyping on EHR to automatically detect 776 different 
disease populations and their matched controls. Statistical tests 
were then carried out to determine associations between single 
nucleotide polymorphisms and multiple disease phenotypes. 
Additional studies have established the efficiency of EHR-based 
PheWAS to detect genetic association [72-74]. Compared to 
traditional genomic research, computational phenotyping has 
driven discovery of variant-disease associations and has 
facilitated the completion of genomic research in a timely and 
lower cost manner [66]. 
3 METHODS 
FOR 
NLP-BASED 
COMPUTATIONAL 
PHENOTYPING   
NLP methods for computational phenotyping algorithms exhibit 
a wide range of complexities. Early stage systems were often 
based on keyword search or customized rules. Later, supervised 
statistical machine learning algorithms were applied extensively 
to computational phenotyping. More recently, unsupervised 
learning has resulted in effective patient representation learning 
and discovery of novel phenotypes. This section reviews NLP 
methods for EHR-based computational phenotyping, starting 
with three major categories: 1) keyword search or rule-based 
systems, 2) supervised learning systems, and 3) unsupervised 
systems. We then identify current trends and active directions of 
development. For convenience, we summarize the characteristics 
of studies reviewed in this section in  
 
Table 1. The studies are characterized regarding the methods 
used to generate features, the methods or tools used for 
classifying the assertions (e.g., negations) of the features, the 
named entity recognition methods used to identify the concepts 
in the narratives, and the data sources used for modeling training. 
3.1 Keyword Search and Rule-based 
System 
Keyword search is one of the algorithms with the least model 
complexity for computational phenotyping. It looks for 
keywords, derivations of those keywords, or a combination of 
keywords to extract phenotypes [75]. For example, “pneumonia 
in the right lower lobe” is a derivation of the key phrase 
“consolidation in the left lower lobe” in Fiszman et al. [75]. 
These keywords correspond to medications, diseases, or 
symptoms; and, in practice, they are often identified using 
regular expressions. In early work, large tables of keywords were 
generated. Meystre et al. [76] manually built a keyword table 
using 80 selected concepts with related sub-concepts. They 
retrieved 6,928 phrases corresponding to the 80 concepts from 
the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) Metathesaurus 
MRCONSO table [77]. After filtering, they still had 4,570 
keywords remaining. Based on these keywords for classification, 
they achieved a precision of 75% and a recall of 89%. 
Wagholikar et al. [78] developed a keyword search system for 
limb abnormality identification using free-text radiology reports. 
Even though the reports have an average length of only 52 words, 
they achieved an F-measure of 80% and an accuracy of 80%. 
Despite their success, problems caused by the unstructured, noisy 
nature of the narrative text (e.g., grammatical ambiguity, 
synonyms, term abbreviation, misspelling, or negation of 
concepts) remain bottlenecks in keyword search. In general, 
keyword search is more susceptible to low accuracy due to 
simplicity of features. To improve model performance, 
supplementary rules (or other more sophisticated criteria) have 
been added to keyword search.  
Rule-based systems are among the most frequently used 
computational phenotyping methods. In a review by Shivade et 
al. [3], 24 out of 97 computational phenotyping related articles 
have described rule-based systems. In a typical rule-based 
system, criteria need to be pre-defined by domain experts. For 
example, Wiley et al. [79] developed a rule-based system for 
stain-induced myotoxicity detection. They manually annotated 
300 individuals’ allergy listings and pre-defined a set of 
keywords. Then they developed a set of rules to detect contextual 
mentions around the keywords. In this study, they achieved a 
positive predictive value (PPV) score of 86% and a negative 
predictive value (NPV) score of 91%. Ware et al. [80] developed 
4 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON JOURNAL NAME,  MANUSCRIPT ID 
 
a list of concepts together with a list of secondary concepts that 
appear in the same sentence. The secondary concepts were 
mainly medications. After defining the concepts, they developed 
a set of rules for phenotype identification. This framework 
achieved an overall kappa score of 92% with the original 
annotations. Nguyen et al. [40] implemented an NLP tool, called 
the General Architecture for Text Engineering (GATE), to extract 
UMLS concepts and mapped them to SNOMED CT concepts. 
These SNOMED CT concepts were utilized to predict the stage 
of lung cancer using defined rules based on staging guidance. 
They achieved accuracies of 72%, 78%, and 94% for T, N, and 
M staging, respectively.  
Xu et al. [34] implemented a heuristic rule-based approach for 
colorectal cancer assertion. The system used MedLEE [81] to 
detect colorectal cancer-related concepts. It then applied defined 
rules to search for concept contexts. The system achieved an F-
measure of 99.6% for document level concept identification. Li 
et al. [82] developed a rule-based system to detect adverse drug 
events and medical errors using patients’ clinical narratives, 
medications, and lab results. They compared the model’s 
performance to a trigger tool [83], and they achieved 100% 
agreement. The triggers in the trigger tool are a combination of 
keywords that signal an underlying event of interest. Haerian et 
al. [84] defined rules to extract concepts from discharge 
summaries on top of the ICD-9 code. The use of concepts 
increased the model’s PPV score from 55% to 97%. Sauer et al. 
[85] developed a set of rules to identify bronchodilator 
responsiveness from pulmonary function test reports, and they 
achieved an F-measure of 98%.  
Rule-based systems often need many complex attribute-specific 
rules, which may be too rigid to account for the diversity of the 
language expression. As a result, rule-based systems may exhibit 
have high precision, but low recall. In fact, as will be detailed in 
the next subsections, more recent systems opted to use statistical 
machine learning algorithms to replace or complement rules.  
Developing rules is laborious, time-consuming and requires 
expert knowledge. Despite these disadvantages, rule-based 
systems remain one of the most popular computational 
phenotyping methods in the field due to their straightforward 
construction, easy implementation, and high accuracy [30]. 
3.2 Supervised 
Statistical 
Machine 
Learning Algorithms 
To improve upon accuracy and scalability while decreasing 
domain expert involvement, statistical machine learning methods 
have been adopted for computational phenotyping. These 
methods usually have the advantage that in addition to 
classifying phenotypes, they often provide the probability or 
confidence of that classification. In general, statistical machine 
learning methods are categorized as supervised, semi-supervised, 
or unsupervised. Common to all methods, each subject is 
represented as a vector consisting of features. In supervised 
learning, each sample in a training dataset is labeled. Algorithms 
predict the labels for an unknown or test dataset after learning 
from the training dataset. In contrast, unsupervised learning 
identifies patterns without labeling. It automatically clusters 
samples with similar patterns into groups. Semi-supervised 
algorithms reflect a middle ground and are used when we have 
both labeled and unlabeled samples. Among the most widely 
used 
supervised learning 
algorithms 
for 
computational 
phenotyping are logistic regression, Bayesian networks, support 
vector machines (SVMs), decision trees, and random forests. 
More introductory and detailed description of supervised and 
unsupervised methods can be found in review papers such as 
Kotsiantis et al. [86] and Love et al. [87].  
Regression methods have a long history of application for 
computational phenotyping [15, 28, 29]. Regression models 
adjust their parameters to maximize the conditional likelihood of 
the data. Further, regression models do not require a lot of effort 
in building or tuning, and  the feature statistics derived from these 
regression models can be easily interpreted for meaningful 
insights. 
In a study of identification of methotrexate-induced liver toxicity 
in patients with rheumatoid arthritis, Lin et al. [29] collected 
Concept Unique Identifiers (CUIs), Methotrexate (MTX) 
signatures, nearby words, and part-of-speech (POS) tags as 
features for an L2-regularized logistic regression. They obtained 
an F-measure of 83% in a performance evaluation. Liao et al. [88] 
implemented adaptive least absolute shrinkage and selection 
operator (LASSO) penalized logistic regression as classification 
algorithm to predict patients’ probabilities of having Crohn’s 
disease and achieved a PPV score of 98%. Both Lin’s and Liao’s 
methods experimented with a combination of features from 
structured EHR and NLP-processed features from clinical 
narratives. Their studies showed that the inclusion of NLP 
methods resulted in significantly improved performance for 
regression models. Due to the high dimensionality of features 
extracted from narratives, both methods applied regularized 
regressions.  
Both Naive Bayes and Bayesian network classifiers are 
probabilistic classifiers [89] and work well with high-
dimensional features. Unlike Bayesian networks, Naive Bayes 
doesn’t require the inference of a dependency network and is 
more convenient in application when feature dimension is large. 
This is because Naive Bayes models assume that features are 
independent of one another whereas Bayesian networks allow for 
dependency among features. Besides their simplicity, Naive 
Bayes models are particularly useful for large datasets and are 
less prone to overfitting—sometimes outperforming highly 
sophisticated classification methods when sufficient data are 
available [90]. For example, Pakhomov et al. applied Naive 
Bayes to predict heart failure [91], using coded data (e.g., ICD-
9, SNOMED) and a “bag of words” representation from clinical 
narratives as features. They chose Naive Bayes for their 
predictive algorithm due to its ability to process high-
dimensional data. Their model achieved a sensitivity of 82% and 
a specificity of 98%. Similarly, Chase et al. [92] applied Naive 
Bayes for multiple sclerosis classifications and obtained an AUC 
score of 90%. Some studies have suggested that results obtained 
from logistic regression and Naive Bayes are comparable [93]. 
Copmared to logistic regression, the Naive Bayes classifier is 
capable of learning even in the presence of some missing values 
and relies less on missing data imputation [94, 95]. 
 
 
ZENG ET AL.:  NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING FOR EHR-BASED COMPUTATIONAL PHENOTYPING 
5 
 
Table 1 Summarization and characterization of computational phenotyping systems. Abbreviations: CPT Current Procedural 
Terminology; CUI Concept Unique Identifier; cTAKES clinical Text Analysis and Knowledge Extraction System; ICD-9 International 
Classification of Diseases, ninth revision; NLP Natural Language Processing; UMLS Unified Medical Language System; TF-IDF 
Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency; HITEx Health Information Text Extraction; MedLEE Medical Language Extraction 
and Encoding System; KMCI KnowledgeMap Concept Indexer; NILE Narrative Information Linear Extraction.  
Study 
Assertion 
Concept Extraction/ 
Concept Mapping 
Data Source 
Feature Generation 
Aramaki et al. [96]  
NA 
Self-defined 
keywords 
Narrative 
Similarity score between 
sentences 
Bejan, 
Vanderwende, et al. 
[97]  
Section headers, 
self-defined 
features, NegEx, 
and ConTex 
MetaMap 
Restricted set of time order 
physician daily note 
Uni-grams, bi-grams, UMLS 
concepts, assertion values 
associated with pneumonia 
expressions, statistical 
significance testing to rank 
features  
Carroll et al. [27]  
 Modified form of 
NegEx in KMCI, 
section header 
KMCI, MedEx for 
medication 
Clinical notes, ICD-9 
ICD-9, medication name, 
CUI, total note counts 
Carroll et al. [35]  
HITEx, Customized 
NegEx queries 
HITEx 
Diagnosis, billing, 
medication, procedural 
codes, physician text notes, 
discharge summaries, 
laboratory test results, 
radiology report 
21 defined attributes from 
patients' narrative 
Chapman et al. [98]  
NA 
SymText  
X-ray reports 
Pneumonia-related related 
concepts and its states from 
SymText 
Chase et al. [92]  
NA 
MedLEE 
Narrative 
50 buckets representing 
pools of synonymous UMLS 
terms 
Chen et al. [99]  
NA 
KMCI, SecTag, 
MedLEE, MedEx 
Narrative, ICD-9, CPT 
ICD-9, CPT, CUIs  
Castro et al. [100]  
Context dependent 
tokenizer in cTAKES 
cTAKES 
Radiology reports 
Concepts, context 
dependent concepts, and 
concepts from cTAKES 
Davis et al. [30]  
Negation, word-
sense 
disambiguation 
tool in KMCI 
KMCI 
ICD-9 codes, free text, and 
medications 
 ICD-9, CUIs, keywords 
DeLisle et al. [101]  
Customized rules, 
NegEx 
Examined UMLS-
supplied lexical 
variants/semantic 
types 
Narrative, ICD-9, vital signs 
and orders for tests, imaging, 
and medications 
186 UMLS associated with 
phenotype 
DeLisle et al. [102]  
NA 
cTAKES 
Chest imaging report ICD-9, 
encounter information, 
prescriptions 
ICD-9, antibiotics medicine, 
hospital re-admission, 
binary variable of non-
negative of chest imaging 
report 
Fiszman et al. [75]  
Self-defined rules 
SymText 
Chest x-ray reports 
Set of augmented transition 
network grammars and a 
lexicon derived from the 
specialist Lexicon 
Garla et al. [103]  
cTAKES, YTEX, 
defined rules  
Use cTAKES and 
YTEX to map 
concepts to UMLS 
and customized 
dictionary 
Narrative and customized 
dictionary 
Terms suggestive of 
benign/malignant lesions 
and UMLS concept in any 
liver-cancer related 
sentence 
Gehrmann et al. 
[104]  
cTAKES 
cTAKES 
Discharge summary 
Concepts from cTAKES were 
transformed to continuous 
features using the TF-IDF 
6 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON JOURNAL NAME,  MANUSCRIPT ID 
 
Haerian and 
Salmasian et al. [84]  
Manual, and 
MedLEE  
MedLEE map 
concepts to UMLS 
Discharge summaries, ICD-9  
MedLEE concepts were 
manually reviewed by a 
clinician. 31 codes were 
used 
Herskovic et al. 
[105] 
NA 
MetaMap, SemRep 
Narrative, biomedical 
literature 
UMLS concept and UMLS 
relationship, semantic 
predication from biomedical 
literature 
Lehman et al. [106] 
NegEx 
map to customized 
UMLS dictionary 
Narrative 
Manually selected UMLS 
concept 
Li et al. [82]  
NA 
NA 
Narrative, medication, lab 
results  
Neonatologists manually 
reviewed 11 patients' notes 
and defined keywords and 
rules 
Liao et al. [15]  
Occurrence of 
concepts to 
indicate positive or 
negative of a 
sentence 
HITEx 
Provider notes, radiology 
reports, pathology reports, 
discharge 
summaries, operative 
reports, ICD-9, prescriptions 
Concepts from HITEx, count 
of the concepts, binary 
variable to indicate 
occurrence of concepts.  
Liao et al. [107]  
NA 
HITEx 
ICD-9, CPT, lab results, 
narrative 
Binary variable was created 
to indicate whether a 
concept was mentioned or 
not 
Lin et al. [29]  
cTAKES 
cTAKES 
Narrative, medication code, 
customized CUI 
CUI, drug signatures 
(dosage, frequency), 
temporal features, nearby 
words, nearby POS tags 
Luo et al. [108]  
NA 
Stanford Parser, Link 
Parser, ClearParser 
Narrative 
 CUIs were used as nodes in 
the graph, syntactic 
dependencies among the 
concepts were used as 
edges in the graph 
McCowan et al. 
[109] 
NegEx 
UMLS mapper 
Pathology report 
Map UMLS concepts to 
specific factors from the 
staging guidelines 
Nguyen et al. [40]  
NegEx, section 
heading 
MEDTEX  
Narrative 
Concepts related to lung 
cancer resections (based on 
the AJCC 6th edition) were 
used 
Ni et al. [54]  
NegEx 
cTAKES map to 
UMLS, SNOMED CT 
Encounter data and clinical 
notes 
Use concepts and encounter 
data. Predefine concepts 
from selection criteria, 
search for the hyponyms of 
query word 
Nunes et al. [110]  
Manual 
NA 
Narrative, ICD-9, lab results, 
demographics  
Manual extract related 
terms and hyponyms and 
related words  
Peissig et al. [111]  
MedLEE 
MedLEE 
Narrative, ICD-9, CPT 
UMLS concepts, ICD-9, CPT 
Pineda et al. [112]  
ConText 
Topaz pipeline, map 
to UMLS 
Narrative, lab test 
Selected UMLS concepts 
and two lab test concepts 
Posada et al. [113]  
Section titles  
MedLEE, keyword 
extraction, Question-
Answer Feature 
Extraction 
Psychiatric evaluation 
records 
Count of keywords and 
concepts fall in nine defined 
categories as feature 
Roque et al. [114]  
NA 
Simple sentence 
splitter split the text 
into smaller units 
ICD-10, narrative  
ICD-10, small units of 
sentences  
Sauer et al. [85]  
NA 
Manual 
Narrative 
Experts reviewed notes and 
collected patterns to design 
ZENG ET AL.:  NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING FOR EHR-BASED COMPUTATIONAL PHENOTYPING 
7 
 
extraction rules using 
regular expression 
South et al. [115]  
Negex 
UMLS 
Metathesaurus 
Narrative 
NA 
Teixeira et al. [116]  
NegEx 
MetaMap 
Narrative, document count, 
medication, hypertension lab 
test related structured data 
UMLS concepts, SNOMED-
CT generated from 
narrative, ICD-9 code from 
structured data 
Wang et al. [117]  
NA 
Standford parser 
Clinical notes, comments, 
structured files  
Constituent and 
dependency parsed from 
sentence 
Ware et al. [80]  
Self-Dev 
NA 
Narrative 
Medication, treatment, word 
bigrams, numerical features, 
synonym list 
Wei et al. [118]  
cTAKES 
cTAKES, map to 
SNOMED-CT 
Narrative 
SNOMED-CT concept, 
semantic type, node 
collapse concept  
Wilke et al. [36]  
NA 
FreePharma  
Narrative, ICD-9, laboratory 
data 
NA 
Xu et al. [34]  
MedLEE 
MedLEE, map to 
UMLS CUI 
Narrative, ICD-9, CPT 
UMLS concept, words of 
distance and direction (left 
vs. right) 
Yu et al. [28]  
NA 
NILE, map to UMLS 
concept 
ICD-9, Narrative 
ICD-9, NLP features (counts 
of generic drug concept), 
number of notes for each 
patient  
Zeng et al. [89]  
HITEx (NexEx-2) 
HITEx, map to UMLS 
Narrative, ICD-9 
N-word text fragments 
along with frequency, UMLS 
concept, smoking related 
sentences 
Zhao et al. [119]  
Self-defined 
NA 
PubMed knowledge, ICD-9, 
narrative 
Selected concepts that are 
associated with pancreatic 
cancer 
A Bayesian network consists of a directed acyclic graph whose 
node set contains random variables and whose edges represent 
relationships among the variables, and a conditional probability 
distribution of each node given each combination of values of its 
parents [120]. Bayesian networks have been used for reasoning 
in the presence of uncertainty and machine learning in many 
domains including biomedical informatics [121]. Chapman et al. 
[98] applied a Bayesian network inference model to predict 
pancreatic cancer using X-ray reports. In their experiments, a 
Bayesian network demonstrated high sensitivity 90% and 
specificity of 78%. Zhao et al. [119] applied a similar approach 
to identify pancreatic cancer. They developed a weighted 
Bayesian network with weights assigned to each node (feature). 
They also incorporated external knowledge from PubMed for 
scaling weights. Associations between each risk factor and 
pancreatic cancer were established using the output of NLP tools 
run on PubMed. Finally, they selected 20 risk factors as variables 
and fit them into a weighted Bayesian network model for 
pancreatic cancer prediction. Their results showed that this 
weighted Bayesian network achieved an AUC score of 91%, 
which had better performance than a traditional Bayesian 
network (81%). Compared to logistic regression or Naive Bayes 
methods, as a probabilistic formalism, Bayesian networks offer 
a better capacity to integrate heterogeneous knowledge in a 
single representation, which is particularly important in 
computational phenotyping because it complements the 
increasing availability of heterogeneous data sources [119]. A 
priori estimations can be taken into account in Bayesian network; 
this advantage allows one to incorporate known domain 
knowledge to increase model performances.  
Clinical narratives are known to have high-dimensional feature 
spaces, few irrelevant features, and sparse instance vectors [122]. 
These problems were found to be well-addressed by SVMs [122]. 
In 
addition, 
SVMs 
have 
been 
recognized 
for 
their 
generalizability and are widely used for computational 
phenotyping [27, 89, 97, 103, 109, 123, 124]. In SVM models, a 
classifier is created by maximizing the margin between positive 
and negative examples [125]. Wei et al. [118] applied Mayo 
clinical Text Analysis and Knowledge Extraction System 
(cTAKES) to extract SNOMED CT concepts from clinical 
documents. The concepts were used to train a SVM for Type 2 
Diabetes identification. Their algorithm achieved an F-measure 
of 95%. They concluded that concepts from the semantic type of 
disease or syndrome contain most important information for 
accurate phenotyping. Carroll et al. [27] implemented a SVM 
model for rheumatoid arthritis identification using a set of 
features from clinical narratives using the Knowledge Map 
Concept Identifier (KMCI) [126]. They demonstrated that a 
8 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON JOURNAL NAME,  MANUSCRIPT ID 
 
SVM algorithm trained on these features outperformed a 
deterministic algorithm. Zeng et al. [89] trained a SVM model 
for principal diagnosis, co-morbidity, and smoking status 
identification. The features for the model were concepts 
extracted from discharge summaries and ICD-9 codes. The 
model achieved accuracies of 90% for smoking status, 87% for 
co-morbidity, and 82% for principal diagnoses. Chen et al. [99] 
applied active learning to a SVM classification algorithm to 
identify 
rheumatoid, 
colorectal 
cancer, 
and 
venous 
thromboembolism. Their results showed that active learning with 
a SVM could reduce annotated sample size while remaining 
relatively high performance. In the reviewed papers, SVMs 
constantly 
outperform 
other 
learning 
algorithms 
for 
computational phenotyping [27, 89, 99, 118, 127].  
Kernel methods provide a structured way to extend the use of a 
linear algorithm to data that are not linearly separable by 
transforming the underlying feature space. The nonlinear 
transformation enables it to operate on high-dimensional data 
without explicitly computing the coordinates of the data in that 
space. SVMs are the most well-known learning algorithm using 
kernel based methods. Kotfila et al. [128] evaluated different 
SVM kernels’ performances in identifying five diseases from 
unstructured medical notes. They found that SVMs with 
Gaussian radial basis function (RBF) kernels outperformed 
linear kernels. Zheng et al. [129] found that a SVM with RBF 
kernel exceeded non-kernel-based SVMs, decision trees, and 
perceptron for coreference resolution identification from the 
clinical narrative. In a study by Turner et al. [130], the authors 
tried to identify Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) from 
clinical notes. The authors concluded that a SVM with linear 
kernel outperformed radial basis function, polynomial, and 
sigmoid kernels. Good performance can be achieved in kernel 
methods with the appliance of statistical learning theory or 
Bayesian arguments. Linear methods are favored when there are 
many samples in a high dimensional input space. In contrast, for 
low-dimensional problems with many training instances, 
nonlinear kernel methods may be more favorable.Apart from the 
models mentioned above, researchers have explored other 
methods such as random forests [112], decision trees [100, 113, 
131, 132], and the Longitudinal Gamma Poisson Shrinker [133, 
134] for computational phenotyping. DeLisle et al. [102] 
implemented a conditional random field probabilistic classifier 
[135] to identify acute respiratory infections. They used 
structured 
data 
combined 
with 
narrative 
reports 
and 
demonstrated the inclusion of free text improved the PPV score 
by 20–70% while retaining sensitivities around 58-75%. 
Chapman et al. [98] applied decision trees, Bayesian networks, 
and an expert-crafted rule-based system to extract bacterial 
pneumonia from X-ray reports. The method using decision trees 
achieved an AUC score of 94%, and it is close to the other 
systems. Furthermore, semi-supervised methods have also been 
investigated for computational phenotyping [136, 137], which 
have the potential to significantly reduce the amount of labeling 
work and simultaneously retain high accuracy. Aramaki et al. [96] 
applied K-Nearest Neighbor classifier [138] based on the Okapi-
BM25 similarity measure to extract patient smoking statuses 
from free text, and they achieved 89% accuracy in a performance 
evaluation. Carrero et al. [139] applied AdaBoost with Naive 
Bayes for text classification, and they achieved an F-measure of 
72% using bigrams. Ni et al. [54] used TF-IDF similarity scores 
calculated from the feature vectors to identify a cohort of patients 
for clinical trial eligibility prescreening. Hybrid methods make 
use of more than one methods have also received increasing 
attention [138, 139], suggesting a promising direction for 
practical performance improvement. 
For many data resources and domains, various models have been 
investigated, and some of them have achieved impressive 
success. However, a comprehensive understanding of the 
superior performance of a particular method over another for a 
specific domain remains an open challenge.  
3.3 Unsupervised Learning 
The time-consuming and labor-intensive process of obtaining 
labels 
for 
supervised 
learning 
algorithms 
limits their 
applicability to computational phenotyping. Another limitation 
of supervised learning is that it only looks for known 
characteristic patterns by designating a task and its outcome [86]. 
Unsupervised learning, on the other hand, can automatically 
classify phenotypes without extra annotations by experts [105, 
140, 141]. Moreover, unsupervised learning searches for intrinsic 
patterns of data. Luo et al. [142] introduced subgraph augmented 
non-negative tensor factorization (SANTF) to cluster patients 
with lymphomas into three subtypes. After extracting atomic 
features (i.e., words) from narrative text, they implemented 
SANTF to mine relation features to cluster patients automatically. 
Their study demonstrated that NLP methods for unsupervised 
learning were able to achieve a decent accuracy (75%) and at the 
same time to discover latent subgroups. Roque et al. [114] 
extracted concepts from free text and mapped them to ICD-10 
code. The ICD-10 code vector was used to represent each 
patient’s profile and cosine similarity scores between each pair 
of ICD-10 vectors were obtained. Then, they applied hierarchical 
clustering to cluster those patients based on cosine similarity 
scores. As a result, they identified 26 clusters within 2,584 
patients. They further analyzed the clinical characteristics of 
each cluster and concluded that NLP-based unsupervised 
learning was able to uncover the latent pattern of patient cohorts. 
Ho et al. [143] applied sparse non-negative tensor factorization 
on counts of normal and abnormal measurements obtained from 
EHR data for phenotype discovery. They identified multiple 
interpretable and concise phenotypes from a diverse EHR 
population, concluding that their methods were capable of 
characterizing and predicting a large number of diseases without 
supervision. Quan et al. [144] applied kernel-based pattern 
clustering and sentence parsing for interaction identification 
from narratives. In their application of protein-protein interaction, 
the unsupervised system achieved close performance to 
supervised methods.  
Unsupervised learning has mitigated the laborious labeling work, 
thus making studies more scalable, and has the capability of 
finding novel phenotypes. However, interpretation of these new 
phenotypes requires domain expertise and remains challenging. 
Additionally, model performance in unsupervised learning is not 
yet as good as supervised learning. EHR-based unsupervised 
learning has frequently been applied on structured data [44, 45], 
but less frequently on narratives [142]. Further investigations on 
incorporating multiple data sources and at the same time 
maintaining or improving the performance are expected. 
ZENG ET AL.:  NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING FOR EHR-BASED COMPUTATIONAL PHENOTYPING 
9 
 
3.4 Deep Learning 
Deep learning algorithms are good at finding intricate structures 
in high-dimensional data and have demonstrated good 
performance in natural language [145]. They have been adapted 
to learn vector representations of words for NLP-based 
phenotyping [112, 136], laying a foundation for computational 
phenotyping. Deep learning has been applied on various NLP 
applications, including semantic representation [146], semantic 
analysis [147, 148], information retrieval [149, 150], entity 
recognition [151, 152], relation extraction [153-156], and event 
detection [157, 158].  
Beaulieu-Jones et al. [136] developed a neural network approach 
to construct phenotypes to classify patient disease status. The 
model obtained better performance than SVM, random forest, 
and decision tree models. They also claimed to successfully learn 
the structure of high-dimensional EHR data for phenotype 
stratification. Gehrmann et al. [104] compared convolutional 
neural networks (CNNs) to the traditional rule-based entity 
extraction systems using the cTAKES and logistic regression 
using n-gram features. They tested ten different phenotyping 
tasks using discharge summaries. The CNNs outperformed other 
phenotyping algorithms in the prediction of ten phenotypes, and 
they concluded that NLP-based deep learning methods improved 
the performance of patient phenotyping compared to other 
methods. Wu et al. [159] applied CNNs using a set of pre-trained 
embeddings on clinical text for named entity recognization. They 
found that their models outperformed the baseline of conditional 
random fields (CRF). Geraci et al. [160] applied deep neural 
networks to identify youth depression from unstructured text 
notes. The authors achieved a sensitivity of 93.5% and a 
specificity of 68%. Jagannatha et al. [161, 162] experimented 
with recurrent neural networks (RNNs), long short-term memory 
(LSTM), gated recurrent units (GRUs), bidirectional LSTMs, 
combinations of LSTMs with CRF, and CRF to extract clinical 
concepts from texts. They found that all variants of RNNs 
outperformed the CRF baseline. Lipton et al. [163] evaluated the 
performance of LSTM in phenotype prediction using 
multivariate time series clinical measurements. They concluded 
that their model outperformed logistic regression and multi-layer 
perceptron (MLP). They also concluded that the combination of 
LSTM and MLP had the best performance. Che et al. [164] also 
applied deep learning methods to study time series in ICU data. 
They introduced a prior-based Laplacian regularization process 
on the sigmoid layer that is based on medical ontologies and 
other structured knowledge. In addition, they developed an 
incremental training procedure to iteratively add neurons to the 
hidden layer. Then they applied causal inference techniques to 
analyze and interpret the hidden layer representations. They 
demonstrated that their proposed methods improved the 
performance of phenotype identification and that the model 
trains with faster convergence and better interpretation.  
It is commonly known that unsupervised pre-training can 
improve deep learning performances and generalizability [165]. 
A generative deep learning algorithm that uses unsupervised 
methods can be applied to large unlabeled datasets, which has the 
potential to increases model generalizability [166]. Miotto et al. 
[167] applied a deep learning model called an auto-encoder as an 
unsupervised model to learn the latent representations for 
patients in order to predict their outcome and achieved better 
performance than principal component analysis. Due to the 
excellent model performance and good generalizability [168], 
using deep learning methods in conjunction with unsupervised 
methods is a promising approach in NLP-based computational 
phenotyping. Miotto et al. [169] introduced the framework of 
“deep patient”. The method captures hierarchical regularities and 
dependencies in the data to create a vector for patient 
representation. This study showed that pre-processing data using 
a deep sequence of non-linear transformations can help better 
information embedding and information inference. Word2Vec 
[170] is an unsupervised artificial neural network (ANN) that has 
been developed to obtain vector representations of words when 
given large corpus and the representations are dependent on the 
context. For more details, we refer readers to a review [16] in 
recent advances on deep learning techniques for EHR analysis.  
Even though deep learning methods present an opportunity to 
build phenotyping systems with good generalizability [171], a 
drawback of deep learning methods is their lack of 
interpretability. It can be difficult to understand how the features 
of the model arrive at predictions even though they can train a 
classifier with good performance [172]. 
4 MAKING NLP MORE EFFECTIVE 
With numerous NLP methods available for computational 
phenotyping, it is practical to consider how to select more 
effective NLP methods or improve current NLP methods based 
on problem characteristics. This section reviews existing effort 
in these directions including model comparison, multi-modality 
data integration, entity recognition, and feature relation 
extractions.  
4.1 Comparison of Models 
Different computational phenotyping models vary in prediction 
accuracy and model generalizability. Comparison studies have 
been carried out to explore model performances. These 
comparison studies indicate algorithm performance differs based 
on specific conditions such as data sources, features, training 
data sizes, and target phenotypes.  
In 1999, Wilcox et al. [173] conducted a study to investigate 
different algorithms’ performances to extract clinical conditions 
from narratives. These algorithms were Naive Bayes, decision 
table, instance-based inducer, decision tree inducer MC4, 
decision tree inducer C5.0, and rule-discovery inducer CN2. 
Outputs of NLP algorithms were used as model features. They 
found MC4 and CN2 had the best performances while decision 
table performed the worst. Chapman et al. [98] tested rule-based 
method, Bayesian network, and decision tree for pneumonia 
detection using X-ray reports. The study showed that rule-based 
methods had slightly better performance (AUC score: 96%) than 
decision tree systems (AUC score: 94%) and Bayesian networks 
(AUC score: 95%).  
Teixeira et al. [116] found random forests were superior to rule-
based systems with a median AUC score of 98% when they were 
trying to identify hypertension using billing codes, medications, 
vitals, and concepts extracted from narratives. Pineda et al. [112] 
compared a Bayesian network classifier, Naive Bayes, a 
Bayesian network with the K2 algorithm, logistic regression, 
neural network, SVM, decision tree, and random forest for 
influenza detection. They concluded that all the machine learning 
classifiers had good performance with AUC score ranging from 
10 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON JOURNAL NAME,  MANUSCRIPT ID 
 
88% to 93% and outperformed curated Bayesian network 
classifier, which had an AUC score of 80%. 
Dumais et al. [132] compared the performances of SVM, Naive 
Bayes, Bayesian networks, decision trees, and rule-based 
systems in text classification. They concluded SVMs showed the 
best performance and noted that the training process is fast. Chen 
et al. [99] applied active learning to SVM classification, and their 
results showed that active learning with a SVM could reduce 
sample size needed. They concluded that semi-supervised 
learning, such as active learning, is efficient insofar as it reduces 
labeling cost.  
Gehrmann et al. [104] compared convolutional neural networks 
(CNNs) to logistic regression and random forest model. They 
found CNNs had an improved performance compared to others 
and it can automatically learn the phrases associated with each 
patient phenotype, which reduced annotation complexity for 
clinical domain experts.  
Among the compared methods, keyword search and rule-based 
systems often achieve good performance when such systems are 
well-designed and well-tuned. However, the construction of a 
keyword and rule list is laborious, making these systems difficult 
to scale. Supervised machine learning models have been favored 
for their capabilities of acquiring classification patterns and 
structures from data. The performance of supervised methods 
varies depending on the sample size, data resource type, number 
of data resources. Deep learning has also been favored for its 
better performance and generalizability. It has also been 
suggested that inclusion of more data resources can improve the 
model performances [174].  
4.2 Combining Multiple Data Modalities 
Computational 
phenotyping 
often 
involves 
multiple 
heterogeneous data sources in addition to structured data, such as 
clinical narratives, public databases, social media, biomedical 
literature [15, 88, 101, 111, 115, 175, 176]. Adding 
heterogeneous data has the benefit of providing complementary 
perspectives for computational phenotyping models [117]. 
Teixeira et al. [116] tested different combinations of ICD-9 codes, 
medications, vitals, and narrative documents as data resources 
for hypertension prediction. They found that model performance 
increases with the number of data resources regardless of the 
method used. They concluded that combination of multiple 
categories of information result in the best performances. The 
complete list of data sources utilized in the reviewed literature 
appears in  
 
Table 1.  
Liao et al. [15, 107] compared algorithms using ICD-9 codes 
alone to algorithms using a combination of structured data and 
NLP features. The results showed that the incorporation of NLP 
features improved algorithm performance significantly. Similarly, 
Nunes et al. [110] concluded that both structured data and clinical 
notes need to be considered to assess the occurrence of 
hypoglycemia among diabetes patients fully. Yu et al.  [28] 
collected concepts from publicly available knowledge sources 
(e.g., Medscape, Wikipedia) and combined them with concepts 
extracted from narratives to predict rheumatoid arthritis (RA) 
and coronary artery (CAD) disease status. Their results showed 
that the combination of available public databases like Wikipedia 
and features derived from narratives could achieve high accuracy 
in RA and CAD prediction. Xu et al. [34] used ICD-9 codes, 
Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) codes, and colorectal 
cancer concepts to identify colorectal cancer. Zhao et al. [119] 
applied additional PubMed knowledge to weight the existing 
features.  
The increasing trend of combining multiple data sources reflects 
the increased availability of EHR data and publicly available data 
[26]. Also, coupled with the increasing model complexities, there 
is a potential that more comprehensive data sources will be 
included for computational phenotyping. For example, one 
application developed by Gehrmann et al. [104] used CNNs to 
automatically learn the phrases associated with patients’ 
phenotypes without task-specific rules or pre-defined keywords, 
which reduced the annotation effort for domain experts. As such, 
various data sources can be adopted for model training without 
too 
much 
human 
labor. 
However, 
regarding 
model 
generalizability, models and features based on narratives do not 
appear to be as portable as the ones based on structured EHR 
fields [116].  
4.3 Entity Recognition and Relation 
Extraction 
It is important to accurately recognize entities in clinical 
narratives as the extracted concepts are often used as features for 
models. Methods for feature learning vary from early-on manual 
selection to, more recently, machine learning methods. State-of-
the-art named entity recognizers can automatically annotate text 
with high accuracy [177]. Bejan et al. [97, 123] implemented 
statistical feature selection, such as logistic regression with 
backward elimination to reduce feature dimensions. Wilcox et al. 
[173] tested machine learning algorithms with both expert-
selected variables and automatically-selected variables by 
identifying top ranking predictive accuracy variables to classify 
six different diseases. Several studies, including those of Lehman 
et al., Luo et al., and Ghassemi et al. [106, 142, 178, 179], applied 
topic models and extended tensor-based topic models to learn 
better coherent features. Chen et al. [180] have applied an 
unsupervised system that is based on phrase chunking and 
distortional semantics to find features that are important to 
individual patients. Zhang et al. [181] have applied an 
unsupervised approach to extract named entities from biomedical 
text. Their model is a stepwise method, detecting entity 
boundaries and also classifying entities without pre-defined rules 
or annotated data. To do this, they assume that entities of same 
class tend to have similar vocabulary and context, which is called 
distributional semantics. Their model achieves a stable and 
competitive performance.  
In addition to features, it is also critical to capture relations 
among features. Understanding these relations is important for 
knowledge representation and inference to augment structured 
knowledge bases [182, 183]. To date, a majority of the state-of-
the-art methods for relation extraction are graph-based. Xu et al. 
[184] developed medication information extraction system 
(MedEx) to extract medications and relations between them. 
They applied the Kay Chart Parser [185] to parse sentences 
according to a self-defined grammar. In this way, they converted 
narratives to conceptual graph representations of medication 
relations. Using this graph representation, they were able to 
extract the association strength, frequencies, and routes. 
Representing medical concepts with graph nodes, Luo et al. [108] 
ZENG ET AL.:  NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING FOR EHR-BASED COMPUTATIONAL PHENOTYPING 
11 
 
augmented the Stanford Parser with UMLS-based concept 
recognition to generate graph representations for sentences in 
pathology reports. They then applied frequent subgraph mining 
to collect important semantic relations between medical concepts.   
The integration of named entity detection with relation extraction 
will produce end-to-end systems that can further automate the 
discovery and curation of novel biomedical knowledge. In 
addition, there is a trend towards increasingly unsupervised 
relation extraction, which is more adaptable across biomedical 
subdomains. Unsupervised methods have been investigated for 
feature relations too. Ciaramita et al. [186] presented an 
unsupervised model to learn semantic relations from text, 
hypothesizing that semantically related words co-occur more 
frequently. The model represented relations as syntactic 
dependency paths between ordered pairs of named entities. 
Relations were selected using the similarity scores associated 
with each class pair and dependency paths. Most recently, 
Alicante et al. [187] proposed using unsupervised methods for 
both entity and relation extraction from clinical notes. Clustering 
was applied to all the entity pairs for possible relations discovery.  
5 FUTURE WORK 
While notable progress has been made in computational 
phenotyping, challenges remain in developing generalizable, 
efficient, and effective models for accurate phenotype 
identification. Below we discuss these challenges and directions 
for future work.  
5.1 Information heterogeneity in clinical 
narratives  
Boland et al. [188] highlighted the heterogeneity apparent in 
clinical narratives due to the variance in physicians’ expertise and 
behaviors. Different clinicians’ perspectives can be quite 
different, and in practice they often are. Also, clinical narratives 
are often ungrammatical, incomplete with limited context, and 
contain a large number of abbreviations and acronyms [189], all 
of which make computational phenotyping challenging. Studies 
have applied UMLS or other external controlled vocabularies to 
recognize the various expressions of the same medical concept.  
However, performances of those external modules remain 
controversial [190, 191]. How to resolve the heterogeneity in 
clinical narratives remains an interesting topic. 
5.2 Model generalizability 
There is an ongoing trend of expanding generalizable algorithms 
to mine multiple diseases from different narratives. But these 
methods are still lacking in computational phenotyping [192, 
193]. In addition, rule-based systems are one of the most 
prevalent methods for NLP-based computational phenotyping 
[3]. The intensive human labor required to adapt rules to a new 
system affects the model generalizability. Studies investigating 
algorithms that automatically mine rules are not yet available. 
Furthermore, even though statistical analysis and machine 
learning have provided alternative ways to automatically 
generate phenotypes, high dimensional feature spaces, data 
sparsity, and data imbalance remain impediments to the adoption 
of these methods [194]. Development of complete pipelines 
using various data sources for different phenotypes is one 
potential solution for generalizable computational phenotyping. 
5.3 Model interpretability 
More sophisticated models, such as convolutional neural 
networks, have the potential to automatically learn the phrases 
associated with each phenotype, which can reduce annotation 
complexity for clinical domain experts [104]. Using such models, 
one might be able to develop a system with good generalizability 
and have the availability to use multiple data sources.  However, 
these same models tend to lack interpretability, which presents a 
problem that remains to be solved. Furthermore, meaningful 
interpretations of the novel phenotypes discovered in 
unsupervised clustering models remain one of the next big 
challenges in the field. Another promising direction is improving 
interpretation while retaining, or even improving, performance. 
5.4 Characterizing 
the 
context 
of 
computational phenotyping 
Clinical narratives contain patients’ concerns, clinicians’ 
assumptions, and patients’ past medical histories. Clinicians also 
record diagnoses that are ruled out or symptoms that patients 
denied. Conditions, mentions, and feature relations can be 
extracted to better distinguish differential diagnoses. In 
computation phenotyping, generalized relation and event 
extraction, rather than binary relation classification, are expected 
to be a promising direction for future research; especially for the 
tasks of extracting clinical trial eligibility criteria [195], 
representing test results for automating diagnosis categorization 
[108], and building pharmacogenomic semantic networks [58], 
where the number of nodes is flexible, and the relation structure 
may not be entirely pre-specified due to the high complexity. To 
this end, graph methods are a promising class of algorithms and 
should be actively investigated [108, 142]. 
6 CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we review the applications of NLP methods for 
EHR-based computational phenotyping, including the state-of-
the-art NLP algorithms for this task. Our review shows that the 
keyword search, rule-based methods, and supervised machine 
learning-based NLP are the most widely used methods in the 
field. Well-designed keyword search and rule-based systems 
often show high accuracy. However, manually constructing 
keyword lists and rules results in problematically low 
generalizability and scalability for those methods.  
Supervised classification has higher accuracy and is easy to train 
and test. However, the supervised classification methods require 
the training samples to be labeled, which can be labor intensive. 
To date, there is not a dominating method in the field; rather, 
model performances for the same type of methods may even vary 
depending on the data sources, data types, and sample sizes.  
The combination of different data sources has the potential to 
improve model performance. Recently, unsupervised machine 
learning algorithms are gaining more attention because they 
require less human annotation and hold potential for finding 
novel phenotypes. Furthermore, new developments in machine 
learning methods, such as deep learning, have been increasingly 
adopted.  
Finally, there is an emerging trend to extract relations between 
medical concepts as more expressive and powerful features. The 
12 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON JOURNAL NAME,  MANUSCRIPT ID 
 
extracted relations have been shown to increase algorithm 
performance significantly.  
Despite these advances across multiple frontiers, there are many 
remaining challenges and opportunities for NLP-based 
computational phenotyping. These challenges include better 
model interpretability and generalizability, as well as proper 
characterization of feature relations in clinical narratives. These 
challenges will continuously shape the emerging landscape and 
provide research opportunities for NLP methods in EHR-based 
computational phenotyping. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported in part by NIH Grant 
1R21LM012618-01, NLM Biomedical Informatics Training 
Grant 2T15 LM007092-22, and the Intel Science and 
Technology Center for Big Data. Corresponding author: 
Yuan Luo (yuan.luo@northwestern.edu) 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
R. L. Richesson et al., "Electronic health records based phenotyping 
in next-generation clinical trials: a perspective from the NIH Health 
Care Systems Collaboratory," Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association, vol. 20, no. e2, pp. e226-e231, 2013. 
[2] 
D. Blumenthal and M. Tavenner, "The “meaningful use” regulation 
for electronic health records," N Engl J Med, vol. 2010, no. 363, pp. 
501-504, 2010. 
[3] 
C. Shivade et al., "A review of approaches to identifying patient 
phenotype cohorts using electronic health records," Journal of the 
American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 221-
230, 2013. 
[4] 
W. H. Organization, "International Classification of Disease, 9th 
revision (ICD-9)," Geneva: WHO Center for Classification of 
Disease, 1977. 
[5] 
W. H. Organization, "International statistical classification of diseases 
and health related problems, 10th revision," Geneva: WHO, 1992. 
[6] 
C. Snomed, "Systematized nomenclature of medicine-clinical terms," 
International Health Terminology Standards Development 
Organisation, 2011. 
[7] 
S. Liu, W. Ma, R. Moore, V. Ganesan, and S. Nelson, "RxNorm: 
prescription for electronic drug information exchange," IT 
professional, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 17-23, 2005. 
[8] 
A. W. Forrey et al., "Logical observation identifier names and codes 
(LOINC) database: a public use set of codes and names for electronic 
reporting of clinical laboratory test results," Clinical Chemistry, vol. 
42, no. 1, pp. 81-90, 1996. 
[9] 
P. Raghavan, J. L. Chen, E. Fosler-Lussier, and A. M. Lai, "How 
essential are unstructured clinical narratives and information fusion to 
clinical trial recruitment?," AMIA Summits on Translational Science 
Proceedings, vol. 2014, p. 218, 2014. 
[10] E. Birman-Deych, A. D. Waterman, Y. Yan, D. S. Nilasena, M. J. 
Radford, and B. F. Gage, "Accuracy of ICD-9-CM codes for 
identifying cardiovascular and stroke risk factors," Medical care, vol. 
43, no. 5, pp. 480-485, 2005. 
[11] J. A. Singh, A. R. Holmgren, and S. Noorbaloochi, "Accuracy of 
Veterans Administration databases for a diagnosis of rheumatoid 
arthritis," Arthritis Care & Research, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 952-957, 
2004. 
[12] K. J. O'malley, K. F. Cook, M. D. Price, K. R. Wildes, J. F. Hurdle, 
and C. M. Ashton, "Measuring diagnoses: ICD code accuracy," 
Health services research, vol. 40, no. 5p2, pp. 1620-1639, 2005. 
[13] G. Hripcsak and D. J. Albers, "Next-generation phenotyping of 
electronic health records," Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 117-121, 2012. 
[14] T. Greenhalgh, "Narrative based medicine: narrative based medicine 
in an evidence based world," BMJ: British Medical Journal, vol. 318, 
no. 7179, p. 323, 1999. 
[15] K. P. Liao et al., "Electronic medical records for discovery research in 
rheumatoid arthritis," Arthritis care & research, vol. 62, no. 8, pp. 
1120-1127, 2010. 
[16] B. Shickel, P. Tighe, A. Bihorac, and P. Rashidi, "Deep EHR: A 
Survey of Recent Advances on Deep Learning Techniques for 
Electronic Health Record (EHR) Analysis," arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1706.03446, 2017. 
[17] J. McEntyre and D. Lipman, "PubMed: bridging the information gap," 
Canadian Medical Association Journal, vol. 164, no. 9, pp. 1317-
1319, 2001. 
[18] H.-M. Müller, E. E. Kenny, and P. W. Sternberg, "Textpresso: an 
ontology-based information retrieval and extraction system for 
biological literature," PLoS biology, vol. 2, no. 11, p. e309, 2004. 
[19] K. Han, B. Park, H. Kim, J. Hong, and J. Park, "HPID: the human 
protein interaction database," Bioinformatics, vol. 20, no. 15, pp. 
2466-2470, 2004. 
[20] Y.-C. Fang, H.-C. Huang, and H.-F. Juan, "MeInfoText: associated 
gene methylation and cancer information from text mining," BMC 
bioinformatics, vol. 9, no. 1, p. 22, 2008. 
[21] B. T. Alako et al., "CoPub Mapper: mining MEDLINE based on 
search term co-publication," BMC bioinformatics, vol. 6, no. 1, p. 51, 
2005. 
[22] R. Hoffmann and A. Valencia, "Implementing the iHOP concept for 
navigation of biomedical literature," Bioinformatics, vol. 21, no. 
suppl_2, pp. ii252-ii258, 2005. 
[23] F. Zhu et al., "Biomedical text mining and its applications in cancer 
research," Journal of biomedical informatics, vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 200-
211, 2013. 
[24] A. M. Cohen and W. R. Hersh, "A survey of current work in 
biomedical text mining," Briefings in bioinformatics, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 
57-71, 2005. 
[25] R. Kosala and H. Blockeel, "Web mining research: A survey," ACM 
Sigkdd Explorations Newsletter, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1-15, 2000. 
[26] Y. Luo et al., "Natural Language Processing for EHR-Based 
Pharmacovigilance: A Structured Review," Drug Safety, pp. 1-15, 
2017. 
[27] R. J. Carroll, A. E. Eyler, and J. C. Denny, "Naïve electronic health 
record phenotype identification for rheumatoid arthritis," in AMIA 
annual symposium proceedings, 2011, vol. 2011, p. 189: American 
Medical Informatics Association. 
[28] S. Yu et al., "Toward high-throughput phenotyping: unbiased 
automated feature extraction and selection from knowledge sources," 
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 22, no. 
5, pp. 993-1000, 2015. 
[29] C. Lin et al., "Automatic identification of methotrexate-induced liver 
toxicity in patients with rheumatoid arthritis from the electronic 
medical record," Journal of the American Medical Informatics 
Association, vol. 22, no. e1, pp. e151-e161, 2014. 
ZENG ET AL.:  NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING FOR EHR-BASED COMPUTATIONAL PHENOTYPING 
13 
 
[30] M. F. Davis, S. Sriram, W. S. Bush, J. C. Denny, and J. L. Haines, 
"Automated extraction of clinical traits of multiple sclerosis in 
electronic medical records," Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association, vol. 20, no. e2, pp. e334-e340, 2013. 
[31] N. L. Jain and C. Friedman, "Identification of findings suspicious for 
breast cancer based on natural language processing of mammogram 
reports," in Proceedings of the AMIA Annual Fall Symposium, 1997, 
p. 829: American Medical Informatics Association. 
[32] N. L. Jain, C. A. Knirsch, C. Friedman, and G. Hripcsak, 
"Identification of suspected tuberculosis patients based on natural 
language processing of chest radiograph reports," in Proceedings of 
the AMIA Annual Fall Symposium, 1996, p. 542: American Medical 
Informatics Association. 
[33] G. Hripcsak, C. A. Knirsch, N. L. Jain, and A. Pablos-Mendez, 
"Automated tuberculosis detection," Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association, vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 376-381, 1997. 
[34] H. Xu et al., "Extracting and integrating data from entire electronic 
health records for detecting colorectal cancer cases," in AMIA Annual 
Symposium Proceedings, 2011, vol. 2011, p. 1564: American Medical 
Informatics Association. 
[35] R. J. Carroll et al., "Portability of an algorithm to identify rheumatoid 
arthritis in electronic health records," Journal of the American 
Medical Informatics Association, vol. 19, no. e1, pp. e162-e169, 2012. 
[36] R. A. Wilke et al., "Use of an electronic medical record for the 
identification of research subjects with diabetes mellitus," Clinical 
medicine & research, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1-7, 2007. 
[37] M. Panahiazar, V. Taslimitehrani, N. Pereira, and J. Pathak, "Using 
EHRs and machine learning for heart failure survival analysis," 
Studies in health technology and informatics, vol. 216, p. 40, 2015. 
[38] Y. Wang et al., "Early detection of heart failure with varying 
prediction windows by structured and unstructured data in electronic 
health records," in Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society 
(EMBC), 2015 37th Annual International Conference of the IEEE, 
2015, pp. 2530-2533: IEEE. 
[39] S. Lyalina, B. Percha, P. LePendu, S. V. Iyer, R. B. Altman, and N. H. 
Shah, "Identifying phenotypic signatures of neuropsychiatric disorders 
from electronic medical records," Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association, vol. 20, no. e2, pp. e297-e305, 2013. 
[40] A. N. Nguyen et al., "Symbolic rule-based classification of lung 
cancer stages from free-text pathology reports," Journal of the 
American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 440-
445, 2010. 
[41] R. Haque et al., "A hybrid approach to identify subsequent breast 
cancer using pathology and automated health information data," 
Medical care, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 380-385, 2015. 
[42] J. A. Strauss, C. R. Chao, M. L. Kwan, S. A. Ahmed, J. E. 
Schottinger, and V. P. Quinn, "Identifying primary and recurrent 
cancers using a SAS-based natural language processing algorithm," 
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 20, no. 
2, pp. 349-355, 2013. 
[43] A. American Psychiatric, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders. American Psychiatric Publishing, 2013. 
[44] B. M. Marlin, D. C. Kale, R. G. Khemani, and R. C. Wetzel, 
"Unsupervised pattern discovery in electronic health care data using 
probabilistic clustering models," in Proceedings of the 2nd ACM 
SIGHIT International Health Informatics Symposium, 2012, pp. 389-
398: ACM. 
[45] F. Doshi-Velez, Y. Ge, and I. Kohane, "Comorbidity clusters in 
autism spectrum disorders: an electronic health record time-series 
analysis," Pediatrics, vol. 133, no. 1, pp. e54-e63, 2014. 
[46] J. C. Ho et al., "Limestone: High-throughput candidate phenotype 
generation via tensor factorization," Journal of biomedical 
informatics, vol. 52, pp. 199-211, 2014. 
[47] Y. Luo, F. Wang, and P. Szolovits, "Tensor factorization toward 
precision medicine," Briefings in Bioinformatics, March 19, 2016 
2016. 
[48] T. G. Kolda and B. W. Bader, "Tensor decompositions and 
applications," SIAM review, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 455-500, 2009. 
[49] S. J. Shah et al., "Phenomapping for novel classification of heart 
failure with preserved ejection fraction," Circulation, p. 
CIRCULATIONAHA. 114.010637, 2014. 
[50] P. J. Embi, A. Jain, and C. M. Harris, "Physicians' perceptions of an 
electronic health record-based clinical trial alert approach to subject 
recruitment: a survey," BMC medical informatics and decision 
making, vol. 8, no. 1, p. 13, 2008. 
[51] A. J. Butte, D. A. Weinstein, and I. S. Kohane, "Enrolling patients 
into clinical trials faster using RealTime Recuiting," in Proceedings of 
the AMIA Symposium, 2000, p. 111: American Medical Informatics 
Association. 
[52] P. J. Embi, A. Jain, J. Clark, and C. M. Harris, "Development of an 
electronic health record-based Clinical Trial Alert system to enhance 
recruitment at the point of care," in AMIA Annual Symposium 
Proceedings, 2005, vol. 2005, p. 231: American Medical Informatics 
Association. 
[53] V. I. Petkov, L. T. Penberthy, B. A. Dahman, A. Poklepovic, C. W. 
Gillam, and J. H. McDermott, "Automated determination of 
metastases in unstructured radiology reports for eligibility screening 
in oncology clinical trials," Experimental Biology and Medicine, vol. 
238, no. 12, pp. 1370-1378, 2013. 
[54] Y. Ni et al., "Automated clinical trial eligibility prescreening: 
increasing the efficiency of patient identification for clinical trials in 
the emergency department," Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 166-178, 2014. 
[55] S. R. Thadani, C. Weng, J. T. Bigger, J. F. Ennever, and D. Wajngurt, 
"Electronic screening improves efficiency in clinical trial 
recruitment," Journal of the American Medical Informatics 
Association, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 869-873, 2009. 
[56] D. L. Rubin, C. F. Thorn, T. E. Klein, and R. B. Altman, "A statistical 
approach to scanning the biomedical literature for pharmacogenetics 
knowledge," Journal of the American Medical Informatics 
Association, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 121-129, 2005. 
[57] C. B. Ahlers, M. Fiszman, D. Demner-Fushman, F.-M. Lang, and T. 
C. Rindflesch, "Extracting semantic predications from Medline 
citations for pharmacogenomics," in Pacific Symposium on 
Biocomputing, 2007, vol. 12, pp. 209-220. 
[58] A. Coulet, N. H. Shah, Y. Garten, M. Musen, and R. B. Altman, 
"Using text to build semantic networks for pharmacogenomics," 
Journal of biomedical informatics, vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 1009-1019, 
2010. 
[59] Y. Garten and R. B. Altman, "Pharmspresso: a text mining tool for 
extraction of pharmacogenomic concepts and relationships from full 
text," BMC bioinformatics, vol. 10, no. 2, p. S6, 2009. 
[60] J. Delaney et al., "Predicting clopidogrel response using DNA 
samples linked to an electronic health record," Clinical Pharmacology 
& Therapeutics, vol. 91, no. 2, pp. 257-263, 2012. 
14 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON JOURNAL NAME,  MANUSCRIPT ID 
 
[61] B. Percha, Y. Garten, and R. B. Altman, "Discovery and explanation 
of drug-drug interactions via text mining," in Pacific symposium on 
biocomputing. Pacific symposium on biocomputing, 2012, p. 410: 
NIH Public Access. 
[62] K. Haerian, D. Varn, S. Vaidya, L. Ena, H. Chase, and C. Friedman, 
"Detection of Pharmacovigilance‐Related Adverse Events Using 
Electronic Health Records and Automated Methods," Clinical 
Pharmacology & Therapeutics, vol. 92, no. 2, pp. 228-234, 2012. 
[63] E. Iqbal et al., "Identification of adverse drug events from free text 
electronic patient records and information in a large mental health 
case register," PloS one, vol. 10, no. 8, p. e0134208, 2015. 
[64] H. Zheng, H. Wang, H. Xu, Y. Wu, Z. Zhao, and F. Azuaje, "Linking 
biochemical pathways and networks to adverse drug reactions," IEEE 
transactions on nanobioscience, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 131-137, 2014. 
[65] W.-Q. Wei and J. C. Denny, "Extracting research-quality phenotypes 
from electronic health records to support precision medicine," 
Genome medicine, vol. 7, no. 1, p. 41, 2015. 
[66] I. S. Kohane, "Using electronic health records to drive discovery in 
disease genomics," Nature Reviews Genetics, vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 417-
428, 2011. 
[67] K. P. Liao et al., "Associations of autoantibodies, autoimmune risk 
alleles, and clinical diagnoses from the electronic medical records in 
rheumatoid arthritis cases and non–rheumatoid arthritis controls," 
Arthritis & Rheumatology, vol. 65, no. 3, pp. 571-581, 2013. 
[68] I. J. Kullo, J. Fan, J. Pathak, G. K. Savova, Z. Ali, and C. G. Chute, 
"Leveraging informatics for genetic studies: use of the electronic 
medical record to enable a genome-wide association study of 
peripheral arterial disease," Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 568-574, 2010. 
[69] Y. Luo, F. S. Ahmad, and S. J. Shah, "Tensor factorization for 
precision medicine in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction," 
Journal of Cardiovascular Translational Research, pp. 1-8, 2017. 
[70] W. S. Bush and J. H. Moore, "Genome-wide association studies," 
PLoS computational biology, vol. 8, no. 12, p. e1002822, 2012. 
[71] J. C. Denny et al., "PheWAS: demonstrating the feasibility of a 
phenome-wide scan to discover gene–disease associations," 
Bioinformatics, vol. 26, no. 9, pp. 1205-1210, 2010. 
[72] J. C. Denny et al., "Systematic comparison of phenome-wide 
association study of electronic medical record data and genome-wide 
association study data," Nature biotechnology, vol. 31, no. 12, pp. 
1102-1111, 2013. 
[73] S. J. Hebbring, S. J. Schrodi, Z. Ye, Z. Zhou, D. Page, and M. H. 
Brilliant, "A PheWAS approach in studying HLA-DRB1* 1501," 
Genes and immunity, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 187-191, 2013. 
[74] M. D. Ritchie et al., "Genome-and phenome-wide analyses of cardiac 
conduction identifies markers of arrhythmia risk," Circulation, vol. 
127, no. 13, pp. 1377-1385, 2013. 
[75] M. Fiszman, W. W. Chapman, D. Aronsky, R. S. Evans, and P. J. 
Haug, "Automatic detection of acute bacterial pneumonia from chest 
X-ray reports," Journal of the American Medical Informatics 
Association, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 593-604, 2000. 
[76] S. M. Meystre and P. J. Haug, "Comparing natural language 
processing tools to extract medical problems from narrative text," in 
AMIA annual symposium proceedings, 2005, vol. 2005, p. 525: 
American Medical Informatics Association. 
[77] O. Bodenreider, "The unified medical language system (UMLS): 
integrating biomedical terminology," Nucleic acids research, vol. 32, 
no. suppl_1, pp. D267-D270, 2004. 
[78] A. Wagholikar et al., "Automated classification of limb fractures from 
free-text radiology reports using a clinician-informed gazetteer 
methodology," The Australasian medical journal, vol. 6, no. 5, p. 301, 
2013. 
[79] L. K. Wiley, J. D. Moretz, J. C. Denny, J. F. Peterson, and W. S. 
Bush, "Phenotyping adverse drug reactions: Statin-Related 
myotoxicity," AMIA Summits on Translational Science Proceedings, 
vol. 2015, p. 466, 2015. 
[80] H. Ware, C. J. Mullett, and V. Jagannathan, "Natural language 
processing framework to assess clinical conditions," Journal of the 
American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 585-
589, 2009. 
[81] C. Friedman, "Medlee-a medical language extraction and encoding 
system," Columbia University, and Queens College of CUNY, 1995. 
[82] Q. Li et al., "Phenotyping for patient safety: algorithm development 
for electronic health record based automated adverse event and 
medical error detection in neonatal intensive care," Journal of the 
American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 776-
784, 2014. 
[83] T. N. Raju, G. Suresh, and R. D. Higgins, "Patient safety in the 
context of neonatal intensive care: research and educational 
opportunities," Pediatric research, vol. 70, no. 1, p. 109, 2011. 
[84] K. Haerian, H. Salmasian, and C. Friedman, "Methods for identifying 
suicide or suicidal ideation in EHRs," in AMIA Annual Symposium 
Proceedings, 2012, vol. 2012, p. 1244: American Medical Informatics 
Association. 
[85] B. C. Sauer et al., "Performance of a Natural Language Processing 
(NLP) tool to extract pulmonary function test (PFT) reports from 
structured and semistructured Veteran Affairs (VA) data," eGEMs, 
vol. 4, no. 1, 2016. 
[86] S. B. Kotsiantis, I. Zaharakis, and P. Pintelas, "Supervised machine 
learning: A review of classification techniques," ed, 2007. 
[87] B. C. Love, "Comparing supervised and unsupervised category 
learning," Psychonomic bulletin & review, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 829-835, 
2002. 
[88] K. P. Liao et al., "Development of phenotype algorithms using 
electronic medical records and incorporating natural language 
processing," bmj, vol. 350, p. h1885, 2015. 
[89] Q. T. Zeng, S. Goryachev, S. Weiss, M. Sordo, S. N. Murphy, and R. 
Lazarus, "Extracting principal diagnosis, co-morbidity and smoking 
status for asthma research: evaluation of a natural language processing 
system," BMC medical informatics and decision making, vol. 6, no. 1, 
p. 30, 2006. 
[90] J. Huang, J. Lu, and C. X. Ling, "Comparing naive Bayes, decision 
trees, and SVM with AUC and accuracy," in Data Mining, 2003. 
ICDM 2003. Third IEEE International Conference on, 2003, pp. 553-
556: IEEE. 
[91] S. Pakhomov, S. A. Weston, S. J. Jacobsen, C. G. Chute, R. 
Meverden, and V. L. Roger, "Electronic medical records for clinical 
research: application to the identification of heart failure," Am J 
Manag Care, vol. 13, no. 6 Part 1, pp. 281-288, 2007. 
[92] H. S. Chase, L. R. Mitrani, G. G. Lu, and D. J. Fulgieri, "Early 
recognition of multiple sclerosis using natural language processing of 
the electronic health record," BMC medical informatics and decision 
making, vol. 17, no. 1, p. 24, 2017. 
[93] P. Sebastiani, N. Solovieff, and J. X. Sun, "Naïve Bayesian classifier 
and genetic risk score for genetic risk prediction of a categorical trait: 
not so different after all!," Frontiers in genetics, vol. 3, 2012. 
ZENG ET AL.:  NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING FOR EHR-BASED COMPUTATIONAL PHENOTYPING 
15 
 
[94] Y. Luo, P. Szolovits, A. S. Dighe, and J. M. Baron, "Using Machine 
Learning to Predict Laboratory Test Results," American Journal of 
Clinical Pathology, vol. 145, no. 6, pp. 778-788, 2016. 
[95] Y. Luo, P. Szolovits, A. S. Dighe, and J. M. Baron, "3D-MICE: 
integration of cross-sectional and longitudinal imputation for multi-
analyte longitudinal clinical data," (in eng), J Am Med Inform Assoc, 
Nov 30 2017. 
[96] E. Aramaki, T. Imai, K. Miyo, and K. Ohe, "Patient status 
classification by using rule based sentence extraction and BM25 kNN-
based classifier," in i2b2 Workshop on Challenges in Natural 
Language Processing for Clinical Data, 2006. 
[97] C. A. Bejan, F. Xia, L. Vanderwende, M. M. Wurfel, and M. 
Yetisgen-Yildiz, "Pneumonia identification using statistical feature 
selection," Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 
vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 817-823, 2012. 
[98] W. W. Chapman, M. Fizman, B. E. Chapman, and P. J. Haug, "A 
comparison of classification algorithms to automatically identify chest 
X-ray reports that support pneumonia," Journal of biomedical 
informatics, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 4-14, 2001. 
[99] Y. Chen et al., "Applying active learning to high-throughput 
phenotyping algorithms for electronic health records data," Journal of 
the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 20, no. e2, pp. 
e253-e259, 2013. 
[100] S. M. Castro et al., "Automated annotation and classification of BI-
RADS assessment from radiology reports," Journal of Biomedical 
Informatics, vol. 69, pp. 177-187, 2017. 
[101] S. DeLisle et al., "Combining free text and structured electronic 
medical record entries to detect acute respiratory infections," PloS 
one, vol. 5, no. 10, p. e13377, 2010. 
[102] S. DeLisle et al., "Using the electronic medical record to identify 
community-acquired pneumonia: toward a replicable automated 
strategy," PLoS One, vol. 8, no. 8, p. e70944, 2013. 
[103] V. Garla, C. Taylor, and C. Brandt, "Semi-supervised clinical text 
classification with Laplacian SVMs: an application to cancer case 
management," Journal of biomedical informatics, vol. 46, no. 5, pp. 
869-875, 2013. 
[104] S. Gehrmann et al., "Comparing Rule-Based and Deep Learning 
Models for Patient Phenotyping," arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.08705, 
2017. 
[105] J. R. Herskovic, D. Subramanian, T. Cohen, P. A. Bozzo-Silva, C. F. 
Bearden, and E. V. Bernstam, "Graph-based signal integration for 
high-throughput phenotyping," BMC bioinformatics, vol. 13, no. 13, 
p. S2, 2012. 
[106] L.-w. Lehman, M. Saeed, W. Long, J. Lee, and R. Mark, "Risk 
stratification of ICU patients using topic models inferred from 
unstructured progress notes," in AMIA annual symposium 
proceedings, 2012, vol. 2012, p. 505: American Medical Informatics 
Association. 
[107] K. P. Liao et al., "Methods to develop an electronic medical record 
phenotype algorithm to compare the risk of coronary artery disease 
across 3 chronic disease cohorts," PloS one, vol. 10, no. 8, p. 
e0136651, 2015. 
[108] Y. Luo, A. R. Sohani, E. P. Hochberg, and P. Szolovits, "Automatic 
lymphoma classification with sentence subgraph mining from 
pathology reports," Journal of the American Medical Informatics 
Association, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 824-832, 2014. 
[109] I. A. McCowan et al., "Collection of cancer stage data by classifying 
free-text medical reports," Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 736-745, 2007. 
[110] A. P. Nunes et al., "Assessing occurrence of hypoglycemia and its 
severity from electronic health records of patients with type 2 diabetes 
mellitus," Diabetes research and clinical practice, vol. 121, pp. 192-
203, 2016. 
[111] P. L. Peissig et al., "Importance of multi-modal approaches to 
effectively identify cataract cases from electronic health records," 
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 19, no. 
2, pp. 225-234, 2012. 
[112] A. L. Pineda, Y. Ye, S. Visweswaran, G. F. Cooper, M. M. Wagner, 
and F. R. Tsui, "Comparison of machine learning classifiers for 
influenza detection from emergency department free-text reports," 
Journal of biomedical informatics, vol. 58, pp. 60-69, 2015. 
[113] J. D. Posada et al., "Predictive Modeling for Classification of Positive 
Valence System Symptom Severity from Initial Psychiatric 
Evaluation Records," Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 2017. 
[114] F. S. Roque et al., "Using electronic patient records to discover 
disease correlations and stratify patient cohorts," PLoS computational 
biology, vol. 7, no. 8, p. e1002141, 2011. 
[115] B. R. South, S. Shen, W. W. Chapman, S. Delisle, M. H. Samore, and 
A. V. Gundlapalli, "Analysis of false positive errors of an acute 
respiratory infection text classifier due to contextual features," Summit 
on Translational Bioinformatics, vol. 2010, p. 56, 2010. 
[116] P. L. Teixeira et al., "Evaluating electronic health record data sources 
and algorithmic approaches to identify hypertensive individuals," 
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 24, no. 
1, pp. 162-171, 2016. 
[117] Y. Wang, E. S. Chen, S. Pakhomov, E. Lindemann, and G. B. Melton, 
"Investigating Longitudinal Tobacco Use Information from Social 
History and Clinical Notes in the Electronic Health Record," in AMIA 
Annual Symposium Proceedings, 2016, vol. 2016, p. 1209: American 
Medical Informatics Association. 
[118] W.-Q. Wei, C. Tao, G. Jiang, and C. G. Chute, "A high throughput 
semantic concept frequency based approach for patient identification: 
a case study using type 2 diabetes mellitus clinical notes," in AMIA 
annual symposium proceedings, 2010, vol. 2010, p. 857: American 
Medical Informatics Association. 
[119] D. Zhao and C. Weng, "Combining PubMed knowledge and EHR 
data to develop a weighted bayesian network for pancreatic cancer 
prediction," Journal of biomedical informatics, vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 859-
868, 2011. 
[120] N. Friedman, D. Geiger, and M. Goldszmidt, "Bayesian network 
classifiers," Machine learning, vol. 29, no. 2-3, pp. 131-163, 1997. 
[121] Z. Zeng, X. Jiang, and R. Neapolitan, "Discovering causal interactions 
using Bayesian network scoring and information gain," BMC 
bioinformatics, vol. 17, no. 1, p. 1, 2016. 
[122] T. Joachims, "Text categorization with support vector machines: 
Learning with many relevant features," Machine learning: ECML-98, 
pp. 137-142, 1998. 
[123] C. A. Bejan, L. Vanderwende, M. M. Wurfel, and M. Yetisgen-Yildiz, 
"Assessing pneumonia identification from time-ordered narrative 
reports," in AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings, 2012, vol. 2012, 
p. 1119: American Medical Informatics Association. 
[124] Z. Zeng et al., "Contralateral Breast Cancer Event Detection Using 
Nature Language Processing." 
16 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON JOURNAL NAME,  MANUSCRIPT ID 
 
[125] R. E. Schapire, Y. Freund, P. Bartlett, and W. S. Lee, "Boosting the 
margin: A new explanation for the effectiveness of voting methods," 
The annals of statistics, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 1651-1686, 1998. 
[126] J. C. Denny, J. D. Smithers, R. A. Miller, and A. Spickard III, 
"“Understanding” medical school curriculum content using 
KnowledgeMap," Journal of the American Medical Informatics 
Association, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 351-362, 2003. 
[127] Y. Goldberg and M. Elhadad, "splitSVM: fast, space-efficient, non-
heuristic, polynomial kernel computation for NLP applications," in 
Proceedings of the 46th Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics on Human Language Technologies: Short 
Papers, 2008, pp. 237-240: Association for Computational 
Linguistics. 
[128] C. Kotfila and Ö. Uzuner, "A systematic comparison of feature space 
effects on disease classifier performance for phenotype identification 
of five diseases," Journal of biomedical informatics, vol. 58, pp. S92-
S102, 2015. 
[129] J. Zheng, W. W. Chapman, T. A. Miller, C. Lin, R. S. Crowley, and 
G. K. Savova, "A system for coreference resolution for the clinical 
narrative," Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 
vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 660-667, 2012. 
[130] C. A. Turner et al., "Word2Vec inversion and traditional text 
classifiers for phenotyping lupus," BMC medical informatics and 
decision making, vol. 17, no. 1, p. 126, 2017. 
[131] P. Mukherjee et al., "NegAIT: A new parser for medical text 
simplification using morphological, sentential and double negation," 
Journal of Biomedical Informatics, vol. 69, pp. 55-62, 2017. 
[132] S. Dumais, J. Platt, D. Heckerman, and M. Sahami, "Inductive 
learning algorithms and representations for text categorization," in 
Proceedings of the seventh international conference on Information 
and knowledge management, 1998, pp. 148-155: ACM. 
[133] C. Ferrajolo et al., "Idiopathic acute liver injury in paediatric 
outpatients: incidence and signal detection in two European 
countries," Drug safety, vol. 36, no. 10, p. 1007, 2013. 
[134] C. Ferrajolo et al., "Signal detection of potentially drug-induced acute 
liver injury in children using a multi-country healthcare database 
network," Drug safety, vol. 37, no. 2, p. 99, 2014. 
[135] J. Lafferty, A. McCallum, and F. Pereira, "Conditional random fields: 
Probabilistic models for segmenting and labeling sequence data," 
2001. 
[136] B. K. Beaulieu-Jones and C. S. Greene, "Semi-supervised learning of 
the electronic health record for phenotype stratification," Journal of 
biomedical informatics, vol. 64, pp. 168-178, 2016. 
[137] Z. Wang, A. D. Shah, A. R. Tate, S. Denaxas, J. Shawe-Taylor, and 
H. Hemingway, "Extracting diagnoses and investigation results from 
unstructured text in electronic health records by semi-supervised 
machine learning," PLoS One, vol. 7, no. 1, p. e30412, 2012. 
[138] T. Cover and P. Hart, "Nearest neighbor pattern classification," IEEE 
transactions on information theory, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 21-27, 1967. 
[139] F. Carrero, J. G. Hidalgo, E. Puertas, M. Maña, and J. Mata, "Quick 
prototyping of high performance text classifiers," in i2b2 Workshop 
on Challenges in Natural Language Processing for Clinical Data, 
2006. 
[140] T. A. Lasko, J. C. Denny, and M. A. Levy, "Computational phenotype 
discovery using unsupervised feature learning over noisy, sparse, and 
irregular clinical data," PloS one, vol. 8, no. 6, p. e66341, 2013. 
[141] W.-J. Guan, M. Jiang, Y.-H. Gao, R.-C. Chen, and N.-S. Zhong, "In 
Reply: Towards precision medicine: phenotyping bronchiectasis with 
unsupervised learning technique," The International Journal of 
Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 710-710, 2016. 
[142] Y. Luo, Y. Xin, E. Hochberg, R. Joshi, O. Uzuner, and P. Szolovits, 
"Subgraph augmented non-negative tensor factorization (SANTF) for 
modeling clinical narrative text," Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association, p. ocv016, 2015. 
[143] J. C. Ho, J. Ghosh, and J. Sun, "Marble: high-throughput phenotyping 
from electronic health records via sparse nonnegative tensor 
factorization," in Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD international 
conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, 2014, pp. 115-
124: ACM. 
[144] C. Quan, M. Wang, and F. Ren, "An unsupervised text mining method 
for relation extraction from biomedical literature," PloS one, vol. 9, 
no. 7, p. e102039, 2014. 
[145] R. Collobert, J. Weston, L. Bottou, M. Karlen, K. Kavukcuoglu, and 
P. Kuksa, "Natural language processing (almost) from scratch," 
Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 12, no. Aug, pp. 2493-
2537, 2011. 
[146] S. W.-t. Yih, X. He, and C. Meek, "Semantic parsing for single-
relation question answering," 2014. 
[147] J. Zhou and W. Xu, "End-to-end learning of semantic role labeling 
using recurrent neural networks," in ACL (1), 2015, pp. 1127-1137. 
[148] A. Mazalov, B. Martins, and D. Matos, "Spatial role labeling with 
convolutional neural networks," in Proceedings of the 9th Workshop 
on Geographic Information Retrieval, 2015, p. 12: ACM. 
[149] Y. Shen, X. He, J. Gao, L. Deng, and G. Mesnil, "Learning semantic 
representations using convolutional neural networks for web search," 
in Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on World Wide 
Web, 2014, pp. 373-374: ACM. 
[150] A. Severyn and A. Moschitti, "Learning to rank short text pairs with 
convolutional deep neural networks," in Proceedings of the 38th 
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development 
in Information Retrieval, 2015, pp. 373-382: ACM. 
[151] H. Huang, L. Heck, and H. Ji, "Leveraging deep neural networks and 
knowledge graphs for entity disambiguation," arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1504.07678, 2015. 
[152] T. H. Nguyen, A. Sil, G. Dinu, and R. Florian, "Toward Mention 
Detection Robustness with Recurrent Neural Networks," arXiv 
preprint arXiv:1602.07749, 2016. 
[153] T. H. Nguyen and R. Grishman, "Combining neural networks and log-
linear models to improve relation extraction," arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1511.05926, 2015. 
[154] X. Yan, L. Mou, G. Li, Y. Chen, H. Peng, and Z. Jin, "Classifying 
relations via long short term memory networks along shortest 
dependency path," arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.03720, 2015. 
[155] Y. Luo, "Recurrent Neural Networks for Classifying Relations in 
Clinical Notes," Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 2017. 
[156] Y. Luo, Y. Cheng, O. Uzuner, P. Szolovits, and J. Starren, "Segment 
convolutional neural networks (Seg-CNNs) for classifying relations in 
clinical notes," Journal of the American Medical Informatics 
Association, no. ocx090, 2017. 
[157] P. Dasigi and E. H. Hovy, "Modeling Newswire Events using Neural 
Networks for Anomaly Detection," in COLING, 2014, pp. 1414-1422. 
[158] T. H. Nguyen and R. Grishman, "Event Detection and Domain 
Adaptation with Convolutional Neural Networks," in ACL (2), 2015, 
pp. 365-371. 
ZENG ET AL.:  NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING FOR EHR-BASED COMPUTATIONAL PHENOTYPING 
17 
 
[159] Y. Wu, M. Jiang, J. Lei, and H. Xu, "Named entity recognition in 
Chinese clinical text using deep neural network," Studies in health 
technology and informatics, vol. 216, p. 624, 2015. 
[160] J. Geraci, P. Wilansky, V. de Luca, A. Roy, J. L. Kennedy, and J. 
Strauss, "Applying deep neural networks to unstructured text notes in 
electronic medical records for phenotyping youth depression," 
Evidence-based mental health, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 83-87, 2017. 
[161] A. N. Jagannatha and H. Yu, "Structured prediction models for RNN 
based sequence labeling in clinical text," in Proceedings of the 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 
2016, vol. 2016, p. 856: NIH Public Access. 
[162] A. N. Jagannatha and H. Yu, "Bidirectional RNN for medical event 
detection in electronic health records," in Proceedings of the 
conference. Association for Computational Linguistics. North 
American Chapter. Meeting, 2016, vol. 2016, p. 473: NIH Public 
Access. 
[163] Z. C. Lipton, D. C. Kale, C. Elkan, and R. Wetzell, "Learning to 
diagnose with LSTM recurrent neural networks," arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1511.03677, 2015. 
[164] Z. Che, D. Kale, W. Li, M. T. Bahadori, and Y. Liu, "Deep 
computational phenotyping," in Proceedings of the 21th ACM 
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and 
Data Mining, 2015, pp. 507-516: ACM. 
[165] D. Erhan, Y. Bengio, A. Courville, P.-A. Manzagol, P. Vincent, and 
S. Bengio, "Why does unsupervised pre-training help deep learning?," 
Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 11, no. Feb, pp. 625-660, 
2010. 
[166] G. E. Hinton, S. Osindero, and Y.-W. Teh, "A fast learning algorithm 
for deep belief nets," Neural computation, vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 1527-
1554, 2006. 
[167] R. Miotto, L. Li, B. A. Kidd, and J. T. Dudley, "Deep patient: An 
unsupervised representation to predict the future of patients from the 
electronic health records," Scientific reports, vol. 6, 2016. 
[168] M. Yousefi-Azar and L. Hamey, "Text summarization using 
unsupervised deep learning," Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 
68, pp. 93-105, 2017. 
[169] R. Miotto, L. Li, B. A. Kidd, and J. T. Dudley, "Deep patient: An 
unsupervised representation to predict the future of patients from the 
electronic health records," Scientific reports, vol. 6, p. 26094, 2016. 
[170] T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean, "Efficient estimation 
of word representations in vector space," arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1301.3781, 2013. 
[171] Y. Kim, "Convolutional neural networks for sentence classification," 
arXiv preprint arXiv:1408.5882, 2014. 
[172] R. Miotto, F. Wang, S. Wang, X. Jiang, and J. T. Dudley, "Deep 
learning for healthcare: review, opportunities and challenges," (in 
eng), Brief Bioinform, May 06 2017. 
[173] A. Wilcox and G. Hripcsak, "Classification algorithms applied to 
narrative reports," in Proceedings of the AMIA Symposium, 1999, p. 
455: American Medical Informatics Association. 
[174] A. Halevy, P. Norvig, and F. Pereira, "The unreasonable effectiveness 
of data," IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 8-12, 2009. 
[175] Y. Luo, G. Riedlinger, and P. Szolovits, "Text mining in cancer gene 
and pathway prioritization," Cancer informatics, no. Suppl. 1, p. 69, 
2014. 
[176] Y. Luo, Y. Xin, R. Joshi, L. Celi, and P. Szolovits, "Predicting ICU 
Mortality Risk by Grouping Temporal Trends from a Multivariate 
Panel of Physiologic Measurements," in Proceedings of the 30th AAAI 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2016. 
[177] Ö. Uzuner, B. R. South, S. Shen, and S. L. DuVall, "2010 i2b2/VA 
challenge on concepts, assertions, and relations in clinical text," 
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 18, no. 
5, pp. 552-556, 2011. 
[178] M. Ghassemi et al., "Unfolding physiological state: mortality 
modelling in intensive care units," in Proceedings of the 20th ACM 
SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data 
mining, 2014, pp. 75-84: ACM. 
[179] M. Ghassemi et al., "A Multivariate Timeseries Modeling Approach 
to Severity of Illness Assessment and Forecasting in ICU with Sparse, 
Heterogeneous Clinical Data," in AAAI, 2015, pp. 446-453. 
[180] J. Chen and H. Yu, "Unsupervised ensemble ranking of terms in 
electronic health record notes based on their importance to patients," 
Journal of Biomedical Informatics, vol. 68, pp. 121-131, 2017. 
[181] S. Zhang and N. Elhadad, "Unsupervised biomedical named entity 
recognition: Experiments with clinical and biological texts," Journal 
of biomedical informatics, vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 1088-1098, 2013. 
[182] Y. Luo, Ö. Uzuner, and P. Szolovits, "Bridging semantics and syntax 
with graph algorithms—state-of-the-art of extracting biomedical 
relations," Briefings in bioinformatics, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 160-178, 
2016. 
[183] Y. Luo and O. Uzuner, "Semi-Supervised Learning to Identify UMLS 
Semantic Relations," in AMIA Joint Summits on Translational 
Science, 2014: American Medical Informatics Association. 
[184] H. Xu, S. P. Stenner, S. Doan, K. B. Johnson, L. R. Waitman, and J. 
C. Denny, "MedEx: a medication information extraction system for 
clinical narratives," Journal of the American Medical Informatics 
Association, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 19-24, 2010. 
[185] M. Kay, "Algorithm schemata and data structures in syntactic 
processing," Technical Report CSL80-12, 1980. 
[186] M. Ciaramita, A. Gangemi, E. Ratsch, J. Saric, and I. Rojas, 
"Unsupervised learning of semantic relations between concepts of a 
molecular biology ontology," in IJCAI, 2005, pp. 659-664. 
[187] A. Alicante, A. Corazza, F. Isgrò, and S. Silvestri, "Unsupervised 
entity and relation extraction from clinical records in Italian," 
Computers in biology and medicine, vol. 72, pp. 263-275, 2016. 
[188] M. R. Boland, G. Hripcsak, Y. Shen, W. K. Chung, and C. Weng, 
"Defining a comprehensive verotype using electronic health records 
for personalized medicine," Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association, pp. e232-e238, 2013. 
[189] P. M. Nadkarni, L. Ohno-Machado, and W. W. Chapman, "Natural 
language processing: an introduction," Journal of the American 
Medical Informatics Association, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 544-551, 2011. 
[190] W. Hersh, S. Price, and L. Donohoe, "Assessing thesaurus-based 
query expansion using the UMLS Metathesaurus," in Proceedings of 
the AMIA Symposium, 2000, p. 344: American Medical Informatics 
Association. 
[191] A. Passos and J. Wainer, "Wordnet-based metrics do not seem to help 
document clustering," in International Workshop on Web and Text 
Intelligence (WTI-2009), 2009. 
[192] L. Cui, S. D. Lhatoo, G.-Q. Zhang, S. S. Sahoo, and A. Bozorgi, 
"EpiDEA: extracting structured epilepsy and seizure information from 
patient discharge summaries for cohort identification," in AMIA, 2012. 
[193] D. B. Aronow, F. Fangfang, and W. B. Croft, "Ad hoc classification 
of radiology reports," Journal of the American Medical Informatics 
Association, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 393-411, 1999. 
18 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON JOURNAL NAME,  MANUSCRIPT ID 
 
[194] N. V. Chawla, K. W. Bowyer, L. O. Hall, and W. P. Kegelmeyer, 
"SMOTE: synthetic minority over-sampling technique," Journal of 
artificial intelligence research, vol. 16, pp. 321-357, 2002. 
[195] C. Weng, X. Wu, Z. Luo, M. R. Boland, D. Theodoratos, and S. B. 
Johnson, "EliXR: an approach to eligibility criteria extraction and 
representation," Journal of the American Medical Informatics 
Association, vol. 18, no. Supplement_1, pp. i116-i124, 2011. 
 
 
Zexian Zeng received both his master degrees in Industrial and Systems 
Engineering and Computer Science from University of Wisconsin-Madison 
in 2014. Currently, he is working towards the Ph.D. degree at the 
Department of Preventive Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg 
School of Medicine. His research interests are in natural language 
processing and cancer genomics. 
 
Yu Deng earned her bachelor degree in Biotechnology from Northeast 
Normal University in 2014, China. Currently, she is working towards her 
PhD degree in Biomedical Informatics, Northwestern University. She 
works on the development of mathematics and computer methods for 
dynamic risk prediction. She is also interested in disease sub-phenotype 
discovery using clustering methods. She is a member of American Medical 
Informatics Association since 2016. 
 
Xiaoyu Li received a BA in Sociology from Tsinghua University in 2011, 
an MS in sociology from University of Wisconsin-Madison in 2013, and an 
MS in Biostatistics and a ScD in Social and Behavioral Sciences from 
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health in 2017. She is currently a 
postdoctoral research fellow at Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health 
and Brigham and Women's Hospital. She is interested in data science 
methods and contextual determinants of population health. She is a 
reviewer for the journal of Social Science and Medicine and a member of 
the Society for Epidemiologic Research. 
 
Tristan Naumann is a Ph.D. candidate in Electrical Engineering and 
Computer Science at MIT working with Professor Peter Szolovits in 
CSAIL’s Clinical Decision-Making group. His research includes exploring 
relationships in complex, unstructured healthcare data using natural 
language processing and unsupervised learning techniques. He has been an 
organizer for workshops and datathon events, which bring together 
participants with diverse backgrounds in order to address biomedical and 
clinical questions in a manner that is reliable and reproducible. 
 
Yuan Luo is an assistant professor in the Department of Preventive 
Medicine at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine. He 
received his PhD in Computer Science from Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. He served on the student editorial board of Journal of 
American Medical Informatics Association. His research interests include 
machine learning, natural language processing, time series analysis, 
computational genomics, with a focus on biomedical applications. Dr. Luo 
is the recipient of the inaugural Doctoral Dissertation Award Honorable 
Mention by American Medical Informatics Association (AMIA) in 2017. 
 
