Title: Report on the 3rd Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and Natural Language Processing for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL 2018)
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1812.00427v1
--------------------------------------------------

arXiv:1812.00427v1  [cs.IR]  2 Dec 2018
SIGIR WORKSHOP REPORT
Report on the 3rd Joint Workshop on
Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval
and Natural Language Processing for
Digital Libraries (BIRNDL 2018)
Philipp Mayr
GESIS – Leibniz Institute for the Social Sciences, Germany
philipp.mayr@gesis.org
Muthu Kumar Chandrasekaran
NUS School of Computing, Singapore
cmkumar087@gmail.com
Kokil Jaidka
University of Pennsylvania, USA
jaidka@sas.upenn.edu
Abstract
The 3rd joint BIRNDL workshop was held at the 41st ACM SIGIR Conference on Re-
search and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR 2018) in Ann Arbor, USA. BIRNDL
2018 intended to stimulate IR researchers and digital library professionals to elaborate on
new approaches in natural language processing, information retrieval, scientometrics, and
recommendation techniques that can advance the state-of-the-art in scholarly document un-
derstanding, analysis, and retrieval at scale. The workshop incorporated three paper sessions
and the 4th edition of the CL-SciSumm Shared Task.
1
Introduction
The goal of the BIRNDL workshop at SIGIR is to engage the information retrieval (IR),
natural language processing (NLP), digital libraries, bibliometrics and scientometrics com-
munities to advance the state-of-the-art in scholarly document understanding, analysis and
search and retrieval at scale [10]. Scholarly documents are indexed by large, cross-domain
digital repositories such as the ACL Anthology, ArXiv, ACM Digital Library, IEEE database,
Web of Science, Google Scholar and Semantic Scholar. Currently, digital libraries collect and
allow access to papers and their metadata — including citations — but mostly do not ana-
lyze the items they index. The scale of scholarly publications poses a challenge for scholars
in their search for relevant literature. Information seeking and sensemaking from the large
body of scholarly literature is the key theme of BIRNDL and sets the agenda for tools and
approaches to be discussed and evaluated at the workshop.
Papers at the 3rd BIRNDL workshop incorporate insights from IR, bibliometrics and NLP
to develop new techniques to address the open problems such as evidence-based searching,
measurement of research quality, relevance and impact, the emergence and decline of research
problems, identiﬁcation of scholarly relationships and inﬂuences and applied problems such
as language translation, question-answering and summarization. We also address the need
for established, standardized baselines, evaluation metrics and test collections. Towards the
purpose of evaluating tools and technologies developed for digital libraries, we are organizing
the 4th CL-SciSumm Shared Task based on the CL-SciSumm corpus, which comprises over
500 computational linguistics (CL) research papers, interlinked through a citation network.
2
Overview of the papers
This year six full papers were submitted to the workshop, three of which were ﬁnally accepted
as full papers for presentation and inclusion in the proceedings. In addition three poster
papers were accepted for inclusion in the proceedings. The workshop featured one keynote
talk, one full paper session, one session with presentations of systems participating in the
CL-SciSumm Shared Task (see the CL-SciSumm overview paper [6]) and a poster session.
The following section brieﬂy describes the keynote and sessions.
2.1
Keynote
Byron Wallace gave an inspiring keynote on “Automating Biomedical Evidence Synthesis:
Recent Work and Directions Forward” [15]. He talked about recent progress in biomedical
evidence synthesis and called on the NLP, IR and machine learning communities to take up
the challenges that remain unaddressed in this critical ﬁeld. He said that the ﬁeld puts forth
technically challenging problems of interest such as, building models with low-supervision,
joint inference and extraction over long documents and hybrid crowd-expert annotations, to
the aforementioned technical communities.
2.2
Research papers
Alzogbi [2] presented a time-aware recommender system (Time-aware Collaborative Topic
Regression - T-CTR) that accounts for the concept-drift in user interest by computing user-
speciﬁc concept drift scores. The paper considered the use case of scientiﬁc papers recom-
mendation and conducted experiments on data from citeulike. Results showed the superiority
of the time-aware recommendation system T-CTR over the state-of-the-art systems.
Shinoda and Aizawa [14] proposed an unsupervised query-based summarization of scien-
tiﬁc papers. Importance scores for words calculated from word embeddings trained on an
auxiliary corpus are used to compute sentence vectors. Finally, a random walk is performed
on sentences which leverages distributional similarities between query terms and words in
the sentence, as well as the similarities between pairs of sentences.
Brochier et al. [4] applied a new document-query methodology to evaluate experts re-
trieval from a set of queries sampled directly from the experts documents. They provided a
formal deﬁnition of the expert ﬁnding task and worked on a topic-query and a document-
query evaluation protocol. They performed a detailed evaluation with three baseline expert
recommender algorithms on two AMiner expert data sets.
2.3
Poster papers
Scharpf et al. [13] proposed a Wikidata markup to link semantic elements of a mathematical
formula in MathML to Wikidata items. They suggested Formula Concept Discovery as a
concept to develop automatic retrieval functions (e.g. formula clustering) on labeled full text
corpora. They argued in favor of a larger MathML benchmark for evaluation purposes.
Jia and Saule [7] proposed “Keyphraser” to alleviate the “over-generation error” when
extracting key phrases from scientiﬁc documents. KeyPhraser is an unsupervised method for
identifying document phrases using features such as concordance, popularity, informativeness
and position of the ﬁrst occurrence of the phrase.
Luan et al. [9] presented their SemEval-2018 Task 7 system Semantic Relation Extraction
and Classiﬁcation in Scientiﬁc Papers as an invited poster. They were invited due to the
work’s close relevance to the workshop and the authors’ interest.1
2.4
CL-SciSumm
We hosted the 4th Computational Linguistics Scientiﬁc Summarization Shared Task, spon-
sored by Microsoft Research Asia as part of the BIRNDL workshop. The Shared Task is
aimed at creation of an open corpus for citation based faceted summarization of scientiﬁc
documents and evaluation of systems over three sub-tasks to output a summary. This is the
ﬁrst medium-scale shared task on scientiﬁc document summarization in the computational
linguistics (CL) domain. The task and its corpus have the potential to spur further interest
in related problems in scientiﬁc discourse mining, such as citation analysis, query-focused
question answering and text reuse.
We have been incrementally building our annotated corpora over the four editions of
CL-SciSumm. CL-SciSumm’18 systems were provided with 50 document sets for training
and evaluation was run over 10 test document sets. Eleven teams registered and ten teams
participated in this year’s shared task, on a corpus that was 33% larger than the 2017
corpus. A total of 60 runs were evaluated for Task 1, and 33 runs were evaluated for Task
2. For Task 1A, on using sentence overlap (F1 score) as the metric, the best performance
was achieved by using voting methods on the results of a random forest classiﬁer trained on
lexical features and word embeddings, by NUDT [16]. When ROUGE-based F1 is used as
a metric, the best performance was also based on a BM25 voting mechanism by Klick Labs
[3]. The best performance in Task 1B was using kernel-based methods by CIST [8].
For Task 2, the team from LaSTUS/TALN+INCO had the best performance using CNN
to learn the relation between a sentence and a scoring value indicating its relevance, and
choosing the most relevant sentences for the summary [1].
Table 1 summarizes the best results, together with information about the corpus size in
the diﬀerent years. It also mentions the best performing approaches for Task 1. We observe
that although the corpus size has doubled over the years, there is no perceptible change in
the best scores. It should be noted that because of the diﬀerence in corpus sizes, the numbers
are perhaps not comparable – model overﬁtting has surely decreased since the eﬀorts in 2016.
We believe that to observe a real spurt in progress, there is a need to try to automatically
scale dataset development and achieve O(N) = 1000 for any signiﬁcant nudge in results, and
we invite other researchers to collaborate with us on this long term goal.
1BIRNDL organising committee and [9] thank the BIRNDL reviewers for reviewing this accepted SemEval paper
without prejudice.
Year
2016
2017
2018
Corpus size
30
40
60
Task 1A results
F1-score
0.13
0.12
0.14
Best performing
approach
Tf-idf
Weighted
ensemble
CNN
Task 1B results
F-1 score
0.65
0.40
0.38
Task 2 (Rouge-2 scores)
vs. Abstracts
0.68
0.35
0.33
vs. Humans
0.22
0.27
0.25
vs. Community
0.25
0.20
0.21
Table 1: Task 1A, 1B and Task 2 scores and best performing approaches over the years.
Based on the trends in system performance, we anticipate that lexical methods comple-
mented with domain-speciﬁc word embeddings in a deep learning framework would be an
ideal approach for a scientiﬁc summarization task such as ours. For a detailed breakdown of
the results, please see the CL-SciSumm’18 overview paper [6]. It is inspiring is that each year,
we have had new research teams participating, including participants from the industry in
2018. Many other teams have consistently participated over the years and patiently worked
with us to improve the quality of our corpus, and we are glad to have their support as well
as to support their research with our eﬀorts.
3
Outlook and further reading
With this continuing workshop series we have built up a sequence of explorations, visions,
results documented in scholarly discourse, and created a sustainable bridge between biblio-
metrics, IR and NLP. We see the community still growing.
We will continue to organize similar workshops at IR, DL, Scientometric, NLP and CL
premier venues. The combination of research paper presentations, and a shared task like
CL-SciSumm with system evaluation has proven to be a successful agile format. We propose
to continue with this format. CL-SciSumm ’19 will see a major expansion in the training
data size.
In 2015 we published a ﬁrst special issue on “Combining Bibliometrics and Information
Retrieval” in the Scientometrics journal [12]. Recently, a special issue on “Bibliometrics,
Information Retrieval and Natural Language Processing in Digital Libraries” appeared in
September 2018 in the International Journal on Digital Libraries, see an overview in [11].
Another special issue on “Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and Scientometrics”
appeared in Scientometrics, see editorial [5].
Since 2016 we maintain the “Bibliometric-
enhanced-IR Bibliography”2 that collects scientiﬁc papers which appear in collaboration
with the BIR/BIRNDL organizers. We invite interested researchers to join this project and
contribute related publications.
Acknowledgments
We thank Microsoft Research Asia for their generous support in funding the development,
dissemination and organization of the CL-SciSumm dataset and the Shared Task3. We are
also grateful to the co-organizers of the 1st BIRNDL workshop - Guillaume Cabanac, Ingo
Frommholz, Min-Yen Kan and Dietmar Wolfram, for their continued support and involve-
ment. Finally we thank our programme committee members who did an excellent reviewing
job. All PC members are documented on the BIRNDL website4.
References
[1] A. Abura’ed, A. Bravo, L. Chiruzzo, and H. Saggion1.
LaSTUS/TALN+INCO @
CL-SciSumm 2018 - Using Regression and Convolutions for Cross-document Semantic
Linking and Summarization of Scholarly Literature. In Proceedings of the 3nd Joint
Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and Natural Language
Processing for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL2018), Ann Arbor, Michigan, July 2018.
[2] A. Alzogbi.
Time-aware collaborative topic regression: Towards higher relevance in
textual item recommendation.
In Proc. of the 3rd Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-
enhanced Information Retrieval and Natural Language Processing for Digital Libraries
(BIRNDL), 2018.
[3] G. Baruah and M. Kolla. Klick Labs at CL-SciSumm 2018. In Proceedings of the 3nd
Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and Natural Language
Processing for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL2018), Ann Arbor, Michigan, July 2018.
[4] R. Brochier, A. Guille, B. Rothan, and J. Velcin.
Impact of the query set on
the evaluation of expert ﬁnding systems.
In Proc. of the 3rd Joint Workshop on
Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and Natural Language Processing for
Digital Libraries (BIRNDL), 2018.
[5] G. Cabanac, I. Frommholz, and P. Mayr. Bibliometric-enhanced information retrieval:
preface. Scientometrics, 116(2):1225–1227, 2018.
[6] K. Jaidka, M. Yasunaga, M. K. Chandrasekaran, D. Radev, and M.-Y. Kan.
The
cl-scisumm shared task 2018:
Results and key insights.
In Proc. of the 3rd Joint
Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and Natural Language
Processing for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL), 2018.
[7] H. Jia and E. Saule.
Addressing overgeneration error:
An eﬀective and eﬃcient
approach to keyphrase extraction from scientiﬁc papers.
In Proc. of the 3rd Joint
Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and Natural Language
Processing for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL), 2018.
2https://github.com/PhilippMayr/Bibliometric-enhanced-IR_Bibliography/
3http://wing.comp.nus.edu.sg/cl-scisumm2018/
4http://wing.comp.nus.edu.sg/birndl-sigir2018/
[8] L. Li, J. Chi, M. Chen, Z. Huang, Y. Zhu, and X. Fu.
CIST@CLSciSumm-18:
Methods for Computational Linguistics Scientiﬁc Citation Linkage, Facet Classiﬁcation
and Summarization.
In Proceedings of the 3nd Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-
enhanced Information Retrieval and Natural Language Processing for Digital Libraries
(BIRNDL2018), Ann Arbor, Michigan, July 2018.
[9] Y. Luan, M. Ostendorf, and H. Hajishirzi. The UWNLP system at SemEval-2018 Task
7: Neural Relation Extraction Model with Selectively Incorporated Concept Embed-
dings.
In Proceedings of The 12th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation,
pages 788–792. ACL, 2018.
[10] P. Mayr, M. K. Chandrasekaran, and K. Jaidka. Report on the 2nd Joint Workshop
on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and Natural Language Processing for
Digital Libraries (BIRNDL 2017). SIGIR Forum, 51(3):107–113, 2017.
[11] P. Mayr, I. Frommholz, G. Cabanac, M. K. Chandrasekaran, K. Jaidka, M.-Y. Kan,
and D. Wolfram.
Introduction to the Special Issue on Bibliometric-Enhanced Infor-
mation Retrieval and Natural Language Processing for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL).
International Journal on Digital Libraries, 19(2-3):107–111, 2018.
[12] P. Mayr and A. Scharnhorst.
Scientometrics and information retrieval:
weak-links
revitalized. Scientometrics, 102(3):2193–2199, 2015.
[13] P. Scharpf, M. Schubotz, and B. Gipp.
Representing mathematical formulae in
content mathml using wikidata. In Proc. of the 3rd Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-
enhanced Information Retrieval and Natural Language Processing for Digital Libraries
(BIRNDL), 2018.
[14] K. Shinoda and A. Aizawa.
Query-focused scientiﬁc paper summarization with
localized sentence representation. In Proc. of the 3rd Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-
enhanced Information Retrieval and Natural Language Processing for Digital Libraries
(BIRNDL), 2018.
[15] B. Wallace.
Automating biomedical evidence synthesis: Recent work and directions
forward.
In Proc. of the 3rd Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information
Retrieval and Natural Language Processing for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL), 2018.
[16] P. Wang, S. Li, T. Wang, H. Zhou, and J. Tang.
NUDT @ CLSciSumm-18.
In
Proceedings of the 3nd Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval
and Natural Language Processing for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL2018), Ann Arbor,
Michigan, July 2018.
