Title: Natural Language Processing of Aviation Occurrence Reports for Safety Management
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2301.05663v1
--------------------------------------------------

arXiv:2301.05663v1  [cs.CL]  13 Jan 2023
January 16, 2023
1:42
RPS ESREL Proceedings/Edited Book: Trim Size: 221mm x 173mm
S05-06-449-cd
Natural Language Processing of Aviation Occurrence Reports for Safety Management
Patrick Jonk, Vincent de Vries, Rombout Wever
Aerospace Operations Safety and Human Performance, Royal Netherlands Aerospace Centre, The
Netherlands. E-mail: patrick.jonk@nlr.nl, vincent.de.vries@nlr.nl, rombout.wever@nlr.nl
Georgios Sidiropoulos, Evangelos Kanoulas
Amsterdam Business School, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands. E-mail: g.sidiropoulos@uva.nl,
e.kanoulas@uva.nl
Occurrence reporting is a commonly used method in safety management systems to obtain insight in the prevalence
of hazards and accident scenarios. In support of safety data analysis, reports are often categorized according to a
taxonomy. However, the processing of the reports can require signiﬁcant effort from safety analysts and a common
problem is interrater variability in labeling processes. Also, in some cases, reports are not processed according to a
taxonomy, or the taxonomy does not fully cover the contents of the documents. This paper explores various Natural
Language Processing (NLP) methods to support the analysis of aviation safety occurrence reports. In particular, the
problems studied are the automatic labeling of reports using a classiﬁcation model, extracting the latent topics in a
collection of texts using a topic model and the automatic generation of probable cause texts. Experimental results
showed that (i) under the right conditions the labeling of occurrence reports can be effectively automated with a
transformer-based classiﬁer, (ii) topic modeling can be useful for ﬁnding the topics present in a collection of reports,
and (iii) using a summarization model can be a promising direction for generating probable cause texts.
Keywords: Machine Learning, Natural Language Processing, Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Occurrence Reporting, Aviation,
Safety Management.
1. Introduction
Occurrence reporting is a common method in
safety management systems to obtain insight in
the prevalence of hazards and accident scenarios,
which enables safety analysts to identify hazards
and to assess and mitigate risks. The International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) prescribes
that service providers such as airlines, air trafﬁc
control organizations, ground handlers and air-
ports report several categories of incidents and ac-
cidents when they occur. Reports are collected and
investigated by independent organizations such as
the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB)
of the United States and the Transportation Safety
Board (TSB) of Canada. In addition, many orga-
nizations collect and process reports outside the
mandatory system. Examples of voluntarily re-
ported occurrences are some of the Airline Safety
Reports (ASR) that are collected by airlines as
part of their safety management system and the
NASA Aviation Safety Reporting System (ASRS)
system.
As such, a great number of reports are collected
each year. For example, the total intake of ASRS
for the year 2020 was 65,656 reports (NASA,
2022) and the Dutch Inspectie Leefomgeving en
Transport (ILT) collected 13,802 reports in the
year 2019 (ILT, 2022). In order to enable effective
monitoring of risks and the extraction of useful
insights from these reports, considerable effort is
required to categorize and study the occurrences.
Techniques from Natural Language Processing
(NLP) may reduce the workload of processing the
reports and may offer additional insights to safety
analysts. This paper gives an overview of three
research projects on NLP methods to support the
analysis of safety occurrence reports.
The ﬁrst project discussed is the automatic la-
beling of reports using a classiﬁcation model. In
support of safety data analysis, reports are of-
ten categorized according to a taxonomy. How-
ever, the processing of the reports can require
signiﬁcant effort from safety analysts. In addi-
Proceedings of the 32nd European Safety and Reliability Conference.
Edited by Maria Chiara Leva, Edoardo Patelli, Luca Podoﬁllini and Simon Wilson
Copyright © 2022 by ESREL2022 Organizers. Published by Research Publishing, Singapore.
doi: 10.3850/978-981-18-5183-4 S05-06-449-cd
1
January 16, 2023
1:42
RPS ESREL Proceedings/Edited Book: Trim Size: 221mm x 173mm
S05-06-449-cd
2
Jonk et al.
tion, inter-rater variability is a common problem
in the labeling process. The automatic labeling
of occurrence reports using a machine learning
model may greatly reduce the effort of processing
occurrence reports, improve the uniformity of the
labels applied, and may offer additional insights
in repositories where a labeling process is not yet
part of the occurrence reporting system.
Traditional machine learning approaches such
as support vector machines (Tanguy et al., 2015)
and random forests (de Vries, 2020) were used
in the past for the automatic labeling of occur-
rence reports. The current study uses a Bidirec-
tional Encoder Representations from Transform-
ers (BERT)-based classiﬁer (Devlin et al., 2018).
BERT is a contextualized language model that
holds state-of-the-art performance in various NLP
tasks (e.g. question answering, sentiment analysis,
etc.). Training and evaluation of the models was
done using data from NASA’s ASRS system and
Canada’s Civil Aviation Daily Occurrence Report-
ing System (CADORS).
NLP methods may enable the extraction of in-
formation and insights from occurrence reporting
databases beyond the taxonomies that were ap-
plied by analysts to the reports in the repository.
In particular, the goal of the second study is to
ﬁnd relations between different cause and effects
present in the reports of the aviation accident
database of the NTSB by their co-occurrence. In
order to do this the latent topics in a collection of
texts are extracted using a topic model.
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) is a method
from unsupervised machine learning that can be
used for topic modeling, in which the topics from
a collection of texts are extracted without the
need for annotated data (Blei et al., 2003). Pre-
vious studies such as (Tanguy et al., 2015) used
LDA on occurrence reporting data from ASRS,
where the applicability of the used methods was
inconclusive. LDA allows the assignment of sin-
gle documents to multiple topics, in contrast to un-
supervised methods such as clustering. Assigning
single documents to multiple topics is necessary
for studying the co-occurrenceof different factors.
The ﬁnal project focuses on automatic sum-
mary generation using a language model. Like the
labels discussed in the ﬁrst project, reports can
have many sections or attributes. Some of these
attributes are free text sections. Again, because
of the large number of reports that are annually
collected, assisting in or automating some of the
processing by a text generation model can reduce
the effort required by safety analysts. One such
free text attribute that can be automatically gen-
erated is the ‘probable cause and ﬁndings’ section
that is present in the NTSB reports, which is the
topic of this study.
Automatic summarization of aviation occur-
rence reports is a topic that has not been studied
extensively
in the past. A similar sequence-to-sequence task
in the aviation occurrence reporting domain that
was studied before was question answering on
ASRS reports (Kierszbaum and Lapasset, 2020).
This study used a variant of the previously dis-
cussed BERT model. However, the model archi-
tecture that was used in the current study was
that of a Bidirectional and Auto-Regressive Trans-
formers (BART)-large model (Lewis et al., 2019).
Section 2 describes the models used in the
study. In section 3 the data are discussed, as well
as the cleaning and processing steps required. The
metrics used to quantify the model performance
are discussed in 4, after which the metrics calcu-
lated on the model predictions and some examples
of predictions are shown in section 5. Additional
details regarding the data sets, hyperparameters,
baseline models and example results are available
at github.com/AviationNLP/nlp aviation safety.
2. Methods
2.1. BERT
A BERT-based approach was used for the classiﬁ-
cation modelsa (Devlin et al., 2018). BERT makes
use of the encoder part of the transformers archi-
tecture. One of the reasons that transformer mod-
els are successful is that they produce contextual
representations where the meaning to the model
of the input words is dependent on the context in
aSeveral neural and non-neural approaches were tested, but the
BERT-based model held the best performance in preliminary
experiments.
January 16, 2023
1:42
RPS ESREL Proceedings/Edited Book: Trim Size: 221mm x 173mm
S05-06-449-cd
Natural Language Processing of Aviation Occurrence Reports for Safety Management
3
which they appear (word-sense disambiguation).
Transformers make use of self-attention, which
is a mechanism that allows the models to under-
stand relations between words that are spaced an
arbitrary distance apart in a text. In addition, the
model uses transfer learning. Transfer learning is
a paradigm where a model is ﬁrst trained on a task
for which a large amount of data is available. Sub-
sequently, the model is ﬁne-tuned on the task of
interest. The pre-training task is similar enough to
the task of interest for the model to learn valuable
information during the pre-training phase.
In text classiﬁcation problems a model is
trained to assign one or more categories where the
input is a sequence of words. One of the prepro-
cessing steps when using a BERT-based model is
prepending the input sequence with a CLS token.
For classiﬁcation tasks a fully connected layer
is added to the model output of the CLS token.
The dimension of the output vector of the last
layer is equal to the number of possible output
categories (e.g., if we have 7 human factors as
categories, the last layer would have been of size
7). This study focuses on multi-label classiﬁcation
problems, meaning that one or more labels are as-
signed to each document. The sigmoid activation
function is applied to the outputs, casting them to
independent probability scores between zero and
one, as opposed to the softmax activation function
in single-label classiﬁcation where the sum of the
output scores is normalized. Typically a thresh-
old is applied to the probability scores to decide
whether the corresponding label is applicable.
2.2. LDA
LDA topic models are mainly used to discover
hidden topics in a corpus, but they can also be used
to classify documents. The output of the model is
a list of topics of length ntopics, where each topic
in the corpus consists of a probability distribution
over all possible words. In addition, for each doc-
ument a list of length ntopics is given, containing
probability scores indicating to what degree each
topic belongs to the given document. Intuitively,
words that often co-occur in documents represent
underlying topics in the corpus.
LDA is a generative probabilistic topic model.
A number of assumptions are made about how
documents are generated. For each document:
(i) The number of words N is chosen from a
Poisson distribution.
(ii) The topic distribution θ of a document is
drawn from a Dirichlet distribution.
(iii) For each of the N words in the document:
(a) a topic z is drawn from θ
(b) each topic has a probability distribution
over the words in the corpus. A word is
drawn from the probability distribution
belonging to z.
During the training or inference phase the dis-
tribution of the topics over the corpus and the
word distributions over the corpus are learned.
LDA models do not offer control over the contents
of the topics that will result from the model. More-
over, the number of topics is a hyperparameter of
the model and there is no deﬁnitive method for
determining the optimal number of topics. Based
on a causal safety model of (Ale et al., 2009), a
total number of 40 topics was estimated to be a
reasonable number.
2.3. BART
Finally, the BART-large model (Lewis et al.,
2019) was used for the summarization task. Like
the BERT model, the BART model makes use of
a transformers architecture and transfer learning.
However, this model makes use of an encoder-
decoder architecture. When used for question an-
swering, BERT is an ‘extractive’ model, meaning
the output text of the model can only consist of a
subset of the words present in the input text (span
prediction). In constrast, BART is an ‘abstractive’
model, which can generate arbitrary sequences
regardless of the model input.
3. Data
3.1. ASRS
The occurrence classiﬁer algorithm was trained
and tested against two datasets en taxonomies.
In both models the narrative of the occurrence
reports served as the input of the model. The
ﬁrst model was trained to produce one or more
January 16, 2023
1:42
RPS ESREL Proceedings/Edited Book: Trim Size: 221mm x 173mm
S05-06-449-cd
4
Jonk et al.
human factors labels using data from NASA’s
ASRS system. ASRS is a database developed and
maintained by NASA to collect and store volun-
tary occurrence reports from pilots, air trafﬁc con-
trollers, maintenance personnel and cabin crew.
The ﬁled reports are each processed by two of
NASA’s analysts, after which the documents are
anonymized. In total there were 12 distinct human
factors categories. Examples of human factors la-
bels are ‘Confusion’ and ‘Fatigue’. A copy of the
ASRS database can be requested at NASA b.
For the experiment the data was divided into a
training, validation and test set of 85%, 5% and
10%, or 50,755, 2,672, and 5,937 samples respec-
tively. The training set was used to train the model
and learn the model parameters. The validation
set was used to select the optimal model, and
the test set was used to give an estimate of the
performance of the model on data not previously
seen by the model.
3.2. CADORS
The second model was trained to output one
or more ICAO Accident/Incident Data Reporting
(ADREP) occurrence categories using data from
CADORS. CADORS is the Canadian national
safety data reporting system. The purpose of the
system is to collect information about operational
occurrences within the Canadian National Civil
Air Transportation System. It is used to for early
identiﬁcation of potential aviation hazards and
system deﬁciencies. The reports in the CADORS
system are labeled according to the ICAO ADREP
taxonomy. One of the attributes of the reports
that is labeled is the occurrence category. To each
document one or more of 27 distinct occurrence
categories are assigned. The CADORS database
can be openly queried on their website c.
Again, the dataset was split into a training,
validation and test set of respectively 72%, 8%
and 20% or 152,562, 16,952, and 42,446 samples.
Examples of some of the possible categories are
‘Bird strike’ and ‘Runway incursion’.
bhttps://asrs.arc.nasa.gov/search/requesting.html
chttps://wwwapps.tc.gc.ca/saf-sec-sur/2/cadors-screaq/
3.3. NTSB Aviation Accident Database
The NTSB is the agency of the United States gov-
ernment that investigates and reports on aviation
accidents and incidents. Accident and incident
reports are stored in the NTSB aviation accident
database. The time frame of most of the accident
and incident reports in the database available for
this study spans from 1989 until 2019. The re-
ports in the NTSB aviation accident database are
typically one or two pages long and contain a
number of free text sections and some additional
properties, some of which categorical. In general,
the free text ﬁelds consist of three sections. These
sections are ‘analysis’, ‘factual information’ and
‘probable cause and ﬁndings’. The contents of the
NTSB database are openly available d.
The ‘factual information’ section contains gen-
eral information about the ﬂight. The ‘analysis’
section provides an analysis of the facts and events
that are directly relevant for the occurrence. In the
‘probable cause and ﬁndings’ section the NTSB
summarises the probable cause and contributing
factors of the occurrence in the form of a one- or
two sentence description. An example of a prob-
able cause and ﬁndings section is: “The pilot’s
loss of control while on approach to the runway.
Contributing factors were the downdraft and the
lack of suitable terrain for the off-airport landing.”
After a number of preprocessing steps, the size
of the data set to which the topic model was
applied was 54,410 documents. During prepro-
cessing duplicate reports were removed. Reports
where the ‘probable cause and ﬁndings’ section
was missing, as well as reports where both the
‘analysis’ and ‘factual information’ were missing
were discarded. In addition, all characters were
cast to lower case. The probable cause and ﬁnd-
ings sections were relatively short, since the av-
erage number of words is 25.3. In addition, the
used vocabulary was found to be relatively homo-
geneous and domain speciﬁc.
In the case of the probable cause summarizer,
texts that consisted of only uppercase characters
were cast to lowercase since the model is case-
dhttps://data.ntsb.gov/avdata
January 16, 2023
1:42
RPS ESREL Proceedings/Edited Book: Trim Size: 221mm x 173mm
S05-06-449-cd
Natural Language Processing of Aviation Occurrence Reports for Safety Management
5
sensitive. The fact that the report structure con-
sists of an ‘analysis’, ‘factual information’ and
‘probable cause and ﬁndings’ section, and that the
information in the ‘probable cause and ﬁndings’ is
based on information in the ﬁrst two sections, was
used to deﬁne a summarization task. The ‘analy-
sis’ and ‘factual information’ sections were con-
catenated and used as the input text. The model
was then trained to generate the ‘probable cause
and ﬁndings’ section as the target text.
Because the time and memory available for
computation was limited the maximal length of
the input text was set to 1024 tokens. All reports
with an input text larger than 1024 tokens, in
total 11,945 reports, were discarded, after which
42,466 reports were left. The cleaned data set was
split up into a training, validation and test set of
70%, 15% and 15%, or 29,726, 6,370 and 6,370
reports respectively.
4. Metrics
In order to quantify the performance of the mod-
els a number of metrics were calculated. For the
occurrence classiﬁer, these metrics were the pre-
cision P, recall R, success S and exact match
EM. Using the true positives T P, false positives
FP, and false negatives FN, precision and recall
are deﬁned as P = T P/(T P + FP) and R =
T P/(T P + FN). The success score is calculated
by dividing the number of documents to which at
least one of the ground-truth labels is assigned by
the total number of documents.
The output of the model is a list of categories
with associated probabilities. A higher probability
score indicates a higher conﬁdence the category is
applicable to the document. When the labels per
topic are ordered by probability score, P@n, R@n
and S@n can be found by only taking into account
the top n most probable assigned categories when
calculating these metrics.
The EM score is calculated by dividing the
number of documents to which all the labels are
correctly assigned by the total number of doc-
uments. In the classiﬁcation task, the predicted
labels are the labels with a probability higher than
the threshold of 0.5. For the topic modeling study,
only P and R have been calculated.
ROUGE (Recall-Oriented Understudy for Gist-
ing Evaluation) is a set of metrics that is of-
ten used to quantify the quality of automatically
generated summaries or translations (Lin, 2004).
The R1, R2 and RL precision and recall scores
were calculated for the texts generated in the test
set. R1 and R2 scores are the fractions of uni-
and bigrams that overlap respectively between the
generated text and the existing reference ‘proba-
ble cause and ﬁndings’ section from the report.
In case of the precision, the denominator is the
number of N-grams in the generated text. In case
of recall, the denominator is the number of N-
grams in the existing reference text. For exam-
ple the R1 recall would be calculated as R1 =
(unigrams in both)/(unigrams in reference).
N-grams are sequences of N consecutive words
in a text. For example, for ‘excessive breaking
caused the accident’, the unigrams are ‘exces-
sive’, ‘breaking’, ‘caused’, ‘the’ and ‘accident’.
The bigrams are ‘excessive breaking’, ‘breaking
caused’, ‘caused the’ and ‘the accident’, etc.
The RL score refers to the fraction of the length
of the longest common sub-sequence between the
generated and existing reference text, divided by
the total number of unigrams in the generated or
reference text.
5. Results and Discussion
5.1. Occurrence Classiﬁer
The performance metrics of both the human fac-
tors and the occurrence category classiﬁer are
shown in table 1. The S@1, S@2 and S@3 scores
are 67%, 80%, and 92% respectively, thereby
illustrating that for most cases at least one of
the ground truth categories was found within the
ﬁrst two retrieved ones. The R@1 and R@2 are
relatively low. This was expected, because many
records had more than two ground truth labels.
The EM score of 20% was relatively low. Since
the data set was imbalanced across the different
categories a relatively low performance was ex-
pected. However, when only categories are con-
sidered for which more than 1000 samples exist,
the EM only improves to around 30%. A likely
cause for the low performance is a low inter-rater
agreement in the annotated data. This can nega-
January 16, 2023
1:42
RPS ESREL Proceedings/Edited Book: Trim Size: 221mm x 173mm
S05-06-449-cd
6
Jonk et al.
Table 1.
Performance metrics of the
BERT-based report categorization model.
Metric
ASRS
(human
factors)
CADORS
(occurrence
category)
P@1
0.67
0.88
P@2
0.56
0.56
P@5
0.37
0.24
R@1
0.34
0.77
R@2
0.53
0.92
R@5
0.81
0.98
S@1
0.67
0.88
S@2
0.80
0.95
S@5
0.92
0.99
EM
0.20
0.70
tively inﬂuence the training process and adds a
degree of randomness to the ground truth labels in
the test set, thereby lowering performancemetrics.
The performance of the occurrence classiﬁer
trained on the CADORS data was signiﬁcantly
higher. The EM score that was achieved was
70%. The difference in performance between the
human factors classiﬁer and the occurrence cate-
gory classiﬁer can be due to a number of reasons.
First, it is interesting to note that there were more
distinct occurrence category labels, 27 in total, as
compared to 12 human factors labels. One could
think that fewer distinct labels make the problem
easier to solve. However, to each of the documents
of the ASRS data set on average a larger number
of labels was assigned, therefore making it harder
to predict all correct labels.
Other reasons for the difference in performance
could be quality of the annotations. The reports
from ASRS are gathered through self-reporting,
whereas 80% of the reports from CADORS come
from ANSP NAV CANADA. The remaining of
the reports is provided by TSB Canada, airports,
etc. In addition, a less clear distinction between
the labels deﬁned in the taxonomy may cause the
human factors classiﬁcation task to be more com-
plex than the occurrence category classiﬁcation.
5.2. Topic Model
Interpreting what concept is represented by a cer-
tain topic can be done by examining the top n
most probable words in the probability distribu-
tion of a given topic. In this study a topic was
deﬁned to be of ‘good’ quality if a single coherent
concept could be deduced by a subject matter
expert or safety analyst from the top 10 topic
words, and ‘bad’ quality if it could not. Analysis
of the top 10 topic words of all topics showed
that 32 out of 40 topics were of ‘good’ quality. A
selection of the ‘good’ quality topics and the top
topic words are shown in table 2. Note however
that the interpretation of topics is quite subjective.
Table 2.
Selection of 9 of the good quality topics with
description and top 10 words found by the LDA model.
Description
Top 10 topic words
landing
incident
go, around, runway, tailwind,
touchdown, anomaly, landing,
proper, point, attempted
landing
gear
damage
landing, gear, hard, nose,
main, right, left,
collapse, damage, resulting
instructor-
student
ﬂight, instructor, action, delayed,
remedial, student, inadequate,
non, input, hover
planning
decision
making
decision, improper, his,
attempt, planning, off,
ﬂight, land, take, tailwind
collision
which, resulted, an, with,
subsequent, airplane, ﬂight,
collision, loss, impact
ﬂare
bounced
landing
landing, improper, ﬂare,
student, bounced, recovery, from,
inadequate, supervision, misjudged
loss
of
control
during, control, maintain,
landing, directional, airplane,
roll, loss, takeoff, aircraft
propellor /
crankshaft
failure
fatigue, due, propeller, blade,
engine, separation, from,
fracture, bearing, crankshaft
loss
engine
power
engine, for, reason, loss,
power, undetermined, carburetor,
total, partial, due
After training the model, 65 documents were
randomly sampled, after which the topics of each
January 16, 2023
1:42
RPS ESREL Proceedings/Edited Book: Trim Size: 221mm x 173mm
S05-06-449-cd
Natural Language Processing of Aviation Occurrence Reports for Safety Management
7
document were sorted by probability. The validity
of the top 3 most probable topics when compared
to the content of the document was evaluated by
the NLR team. Subsequently, the precision and
success were calculated for the top 3 topics. The
precision and success scores are shown in table 3.
Table 3.
Precision and success scores of the
LDA model that was ﬁt on NTSB data, calculated
from 65 randomly sampled reports.
Topics evaluated
Precision
Success
top 1
70.8
70.8
top 2
56.2
83.1
top 3
46.2
87.7
As seen in table 3 P@1, P@2, and P@3 were
found to be 70.8%, 56.2%, and 46.2% respec-
tively. Arguably, the precision @ 1 might be ac-
ceptable for some applications, but for the pre-
cision @ 2 and 3 the performance is poor for
practical applications. Therefore this model might
not be suitable for inferring relations between dif-
ferent causes and between causes and effects.
S@1, S@2 and S@3 were found to be 70.8%,
83.1% and 87.7%. When the top 3 topics are
taken into account, a considerable fraction of the
documents has at least one correct topic assigned.
For applications in which false positives are of low
importance this model might be suitable.
It should be noted that the sample size of the
evaluated documents was rather small and may
not provide a statistically robust score. In addition,
the precision and success scores were calculated
across all topics. It is possible that signiﬁcant
variance exists in the performance of the model
for the different topics. In short, the lack of test
data makes it challenging to quantify the quality
of the predictions at this time.
5.3. Probable Cause Summarizer
Below are some examples of reference ‘probable
cause and ﬁndings’ sections from the reports in
the test set, and the text generated by the model.
(1 - reference) The pilots failure to maintain
directional control during landing roll that resulted
in a collision with an airport sign. Factors were
wet runway surface and wind gust.
(1 - generated) The pilot’s failure to maintain
directional control during landing. A factor was
the wind gust.
(2 - reference) Failure of the ﬂight control lower
mixing unit due to fatigue, which resulted in the
loss of control.
(2 - generated) A fatigue failure of the lower
mixing unit. contributing to the accident was un-
suitable terrain.
(3- reference) A loss of left braking action
for reasons that could not be determined because
postaccident examination did not reveal any ev-
idence of preimpact mechanical failures or mal-
functions that would have precluded normal op-
eration, which resulted in a loss of directional
control.
(3 - generated) The pilot’s inability to maintain
directional control during the landing roll due to a
lack of left brake action for reasons that could not
be determined.
(4 - reference) failure of the number three ex-
haust valve on the left engine. a major factor was
the high density altitude where the airplane would
not operate on single engine.
(4 - generated) The failure of the number three
exhaust valve. a factor in the accident was the high
density altitude.
The examples above show that the model gen-
erates grammatically correct language that is often
indiscernible from human written text. The gener-
ated texts were not always correct however with
regards to the content. For example, in example 1
‘wet runway surface’ is stated as one of the fac-
tors in the reference text but not in the generated
text. The ROUGE scores give an estimate of the
agreement between the generated and reference
texts. The R1, R2 and RL precision and recall
calculated on the test set are shown in table 4.
As compared to
the performance of the
BART model on the CNN/DailyMail dataset
(Hermann et al., 2015), which is a standard
dataset on which summarization models are often
tested, the performance of the model in the cur-
rent study is relatively high (Lewis et al., 2019).
On the CNN/DailyMail dataset the BART model
January 16, 2023
1:42
RPS ESREL Proceedings/Edited Book: Trim Size: 221mm x 173mm
S05-06-449-cd
8
Jonk et al.
Table 4.
ROUGE scores of the
BART-based model trained on NTSB
reports, on texts from the test set.
Score
Precision
Recall
R1
59.7
49.4
R2
39.0
32.1
RL
52.8
43.8
achieves R1, R2 en RL recall scores of 44.2%,
21.3% and 40.9% respectively, as compared to
49.4%, 32.1% and 43.8% for the NTSB dataset.
The reason the model achieves a higher score
in this study is probably related to the fact that
the NTSB’s reports are relatively homogeneous in
language, sentence construction, phraseology, and
that many reports contain similar contents with
regards to scenario’s and causes.
6. Conclusion
The labeling of occurrence reports can be effec-
tively automated under certain conditions. The
occurrence category model predicted the labels of
the documents in the test set with a high degree
of correctness, whereas the performance of the
human factors model was signiﬁcantly lower. As
the number of applicable labels for each document
increases the classiﬁcation task becomes harder.
High quality, uniform annotations in the training
data are necessary for high quality predictions. In
addition, clear distinctly deﬁned categories may
improve the performance.
Topic modeling is a technique that is suitable
for an exploratory analysis of a set of documents
to infer the main topics underlying the data set. In
the context of aviation safety the application may
be useful for occurrence reports or for the open-
ended questions in a survey. However, because
of the relatively low performance in assigning
the correct topics to the different documents this
model is not suitable for inferring relations be-
tween different causes and between causes and
effects in the NTSB reports.
Summarization models are promising as an aid
in processing documents for a safety analyst. The
generated texts were grammatically correct and
most of the time not discernible from human gen-
erated texts. In addition, the model achieves rela-
tively high ROUGE scores. However, these scores
only gives a measure of the similarity between
the generated and the reference text. Conclusively
judging the performanceof the model with regards
to correctness and completeness of the probable
cause summaries would require additional inspec-
tion of the results by domain experts.
When considering the three research projects in
this paper on a whole, parallels can be drawn be-
tween the automatic labeling of reports and the au-
tomatic summary generation. Both methods could
be used in conjunction to reduce the workload
of analysts processing reports. After the analyst
provides a narrative of the incident or accident, the
models could be used to automatically determine
the applicable labels and provide a summary stat-
ing the probable cause of the accident. Thereby
it could also improve homogeneity over reports
processed by different analysts.
Overall, NLP is promising for the processing of
reports and the extraction of insights in aviation
safety management. Factors that make the ap-
plication of machine learning challenging in this
domain are the the lack of quality and uniformity
of the data, limited depth of information present in
the documents, the complexity of the taxonomies
applied, lack of uniformity and correctness in the
processing and labeling of existing documents, or
the presence of low quality annotated data that
may corrupt possible training data.
Acknowledgement
Part of this research was done
as part of the
SAFEMODE project. This project has received fund-
ing from European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research
and Innovation Programme under Grant Agreement No
814961 but this document does not necessarily reﬂect
the views of the European Commission.
NLR has conducted part of this research into the
application of machine learning in support of safety
analyses within the framework of the NLR research
program for the Dutch government.
References
Ale, B., L. J. Bellamy, R. Cooke, M. Duyvis, D. Kurow-
icka, P. H. Lin, O. Morales, A. Roelen, and J. Spouge
(2009). Causal model for air transportation safety.
January 16, 2023
1:42
RPS ESREL Proceedings/Edited Book: Trim Size: 221mm x 173mm
S05-06-449-cd
Natural Language Processing of Aviation Occurrence Reports for Safety Management
9
Blei, D. M., A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan (2003, mar). La-
tent dirichlet allocation. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 3(null),
993–1022.
de Vries, V. (2020).
Classiﬁcation of aviation safety
reports using machine learning.
In 2020 Interna-
tional Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Data
Analytics for Air Transportation (AIDA-AT), pp. 1–6.
Devlin, J., M. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova
(2018).
BERT: pre-training of deep bidirec-
tional transformers for language understanding.
CoRR abs/1810.04805.
Hermann, K. M., T. Kocisk´y, E. Grefenstette, L. Espe-
holt, W. Kay, M. Suleyman, and P. Blunsom (2015).
Teaching machines to read and comprehend.
In
NIPS, pp. 1693–1701.
ILT (2022).
Inspectie Leefomgeving en Transport,
Dashboard
Luchtvaartvoorvallen.
https://dashboards.ilt.rijkscloud.nl/luchtvaartvoorvallen/.
Accessed: 2022-03-11.
Kierszbaum, S. and L. Lapasset (2020).
Applying
distilled bert for question answering on asrs reports.
In 2020 New Trends in Civil Aviation (NTCA), pp.
33–38.
Lewis, M., Y. Liu, N. Goyal, M. Ghazvininejad, A. Mo-
hamed, O. Levy, V. Stoyanov, and L. Zettlemoyer
(2019). BART: denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-
training for natural language generation, translation,
and comprehension. CoRR abs/1910.13461.
Lin, C.-Y. (2004, July). ROUGE: A package for au-
tomatic evaluation of summaries.
In Text Summa-
rization Branches Out, Barcelona, Spain, pp. 74–81.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
NASA
(2022).
ASRS
program
brieﬁng.
https://asrs.arc.nasa.gov/docs/ASRS_ProgramBriefing.pdf.
Accessed: 2022-03-11.
Tanguy, L., N. Tulechki, A. Urieli, E. Hermann, and
C. Raynal (2015, 10). Natural language processing
for aviation safety reports: from classiﬁcation to in-
teractive analysis. Computers in Industry 78.
