Title: Discovering key topics from short, real-world medical inquiries via natural language processing and unsupervised learning
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2012.04545v1
--------------------------------------------------

Discovering key topics from short, real-world medical inquiries via natural language processing and
unsupervised learning
A. Ziletti,1, ∗C. Berns,2 O. Treichel,3 T. Weber,3 J. Liang,4 S. Kammerath,5
M. Schwaerzler,1 J. Virayah,6 D. Ruau,1 X. Ma,7 and A. Mattern4
1Department of Decision Science & Advanced Analytics, Bayer AG, 13353, Berlin, Germany
2Department of Data Science & Data Engineering, areto consulting gmbh, 51063, Cologne, Germany
3Department of Product Platforms, Bayer AG, 13353, Berlin, Germany
4Department of Medical Information, Bayer AG, 13353, Berlin, Germany
5Department of Medical Affairs & Pharmacovigilance, Bayer AG, 13353, Berlin, Germany
6Department of Medical Affairs & Pharmacovigilance Digital Transformation, Bayer AG, 13353, Berlin, Germany
7Department of Integrated Evidence Generation & Business Excellence, Bayer AG, 13353, Berlin, Germany
Millions of unsolicited medical inquiries are received by pharmaceutical companies every year. It has been
hypothesized that these inquiries represent a treasure trove of information, potentially giving insight into matters
regarding medicinal products and the associated medical treatments. However, due to the large volume and
specialized nature of the inquiries, it is difﬁcult to perform timely, recurrent, and comprehensive analyses. Here,
we propose a machine learning approach based on natural language processing and unsupervised learning to
automatically discover key topics in real-world medical inquiries from customers. This approach does not
require ontologies nor annotations. The discovered topics are meaningful and medically relevant, as judged by
medical information specialists, thus demonstrating that unsolicited medical inquiries are a source of valuable
customer insights. Our work paves the way for the machine-learning-driven analysis of medical inquiries in the
pharmaceutical industry, which ultimately aims at improving patient care.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Every day pharmaceutical companies receive numerous
medical inquiries related to their products from patients,
healthcare professionals, research institutes, or public author-
ities from a variety of sources (e.g. websites, e-mail, phone,
social media channels, company personnel, telefax). These
medical inquiries may relate to drug-drug-interactions, avail-
ability of products, side effects of pharmaceuticals, clinical
trial information, product quality issues, comparison with
competitor products, storage conditions, dosing regimen, and
the like. On the one hand, a single medical inquiry is simply a
question of a given person searching for a speciﬁc information
related to a medicinal product. On the other hand, a plurality
of medical inquiries from different persons may provide use-
ful insight into matters related to medicinal products and asso-
ciated medical treatments. Examples of these insights could
be early detection of product quality or supply chain issues,
anticipation of treatment trends and market events, improve-
ment of educational material and standard answers/frequently
asked question coverage, potential changes in treatment pat-
tern, or even suggestions on new possible indications to in-
vestigate. From a strategic perspective, this information could
enable organizations to make better decisions, drive organiza-
tion results, and more broadly create beneﬁts for the health-
care community.
However, obtaining high-level general insights is a com-
plicated task since pharmaceutical companies receive copius
amounts of medical inquiries every year. Machine learning
and natural language processing represent a promising route
to automatically extract insights from these large amounts of
unstructured (and noisy) medical text. Natural language pro-
cessing and text mining techniques have been widely used in
the medical domain1,2, with particular emphasis on electronic
health records3–6. In particular, deep learning has been suc-
cessfully applied to medical text, with the overwhelming ma-
jority of works in supervised learning, or representation learn-
ing (in a supervised or self-supervised setting) to learn special-
ized word vector representations (i.e. word embeddings)7–11.
Conversely, the literature on unsupervised learning for med-
ical text is scarce despite the bulk of real-world medical text
being unstructured, without any labels or annotations. Un-
supervised learning from unstructured medical text is mainly
limited to the development of topic models based on latent
Dirichlet allocation (LDA)12.
Examples of applications in
the medical domain are clinical event identiﬁcation in brain
cancer patients from clinical reports13, modeling diseases14
and predicting clinical order patterns15 from electronic health
records, or detecting cases of noncompliance to drug treat-
ment from patient forums16. Only recently, word embeddings
and unsupervised learning techniques have been combined
to analyze unstructured medical text to study the concept of
diseases17, medical product reviews18, or to extract informa-
tive sentences for text summarization.19
In this work, we combine biomedical word embeddings
and unsupervised learning to discover topics from real-world
medical inquiries received by Bayer™. A real-world corpus
of medical inquiries presents numerous challenges. From an
inquirer (e.g. healthcare professional or patient) perspective,
often the goal is to convey the information requested in as few
words as possible to save time. This leads to an extensive
use of acronyms, sentences with atypical syntactic structure,
occasionally missing verb or subject, or inquiries comprising
exclusively a single noun phrase. Moreover, since medical in-
quiries come from different sources, it is common to ﬁnd ad-
ditional (not relevant) information related to the text source;
examples are references to internal computer systems, form
frames (i.e.
textual instructions) alongside with the actual
form content, lot numbers, email headers and signatures, city
arXiv:2012.04545v1  [cs.LG]  8 Dec 2020
2
FIG. 1. From medical inquiries to medical topics via natural language processing and machine learning.
names. The corpus contains a mixture of layman and medi-
cal language depending (mostly) on the inquirer being either
a patient or a healthcare professional. Style and content of
medical inquiries vary quite substantially according to which
therapeutic areas (e.g. cardiovascular vs oncology) a given
medicinal product belongs to.
As already mentioned, medical inquiries are short. More
speciﬁcally, they comprise less than ﬁfteen words in the vast
majority of cases. Standard techniques for topic modelling
based on LDA12 do not apply, since the main assumption -
each document/text is a distribution over topics - clearly does
not hold given that the text is short20.
Approaches based
on pseudo-documents21 or using auxiliary information22,23
are also not suitable since no meaningful pseudo-document
nor auxiliary information are available for medical inquiries.
Moreoever, these models aim to learn semantics (e.g. meaning
of words) directly from the corpus of interest. However, the
recent success of pretrained embeddings24,25 shows that it is
beneﬁcial to include semantics learned on a general (and thus
orders of magnitude larger) corpus, thus providing semantic
information difﬁcult to obtain from smaller corpora. This is
particularly important for limited data and short text settings.
To this end, there has been recently some work aimed at in-
corporating word embeddings into probabilistic models simi-
lar to LDA (Dirichlet multinomial mixture model26) and that
- contrary to LDA - satisﬁes the single topic assumption (i.e.
one document/text belong to only one topic)27,28. Even though
these models include (some) semantic information in the topic
model, it is not evident how to choose the required hyper-
parameters, for example determining an appropriate thresh-
old when ﬁltering semantically related word pairs.28 Concur-
rently to our work, document-level embeddings and hierar-
chical clustering have been combined to obtain topic vectors
from news articles and a question-answer corpus.29
Here, we propose an approach based on specialized
biomedical word embeddings and unsupervised learning to
discover topics from short, unstructured, real-world medical
inquiries. This approach - schematically depicted in Fig.1 - is
then used to discovery topics in medical inquiries received by
Bayer™Medical Information regarding the oncology medic-
inal product Stivarga™.
II.
RESULTS
A.
Machine learning approach to discover topics in medical
inquiries
1.
Text representation
One of the main challenges of topic discovery in short text
is sparseness: it is not possible to extract semantic information
from word co-occurrences because words rarely appear to-
gether since the text is short. In our case, the sparseness prob-
lem is exacerbated by two following aspects. First, the amount
of data available is limited: most medicinal products receive
less than 4,000 medical inquiries yearly. Second, medical in-
quiries are sent by patients as well as healthcare professionals
(e.g. physicians, pharmacists, nurses): this leads to inquiries
with widely different writing styles, containing a mixture of
common and specialized medical text. The sparsity problem
can be tackled by leveraging word embedding models trained
on large corpora; these embeddings have been shown to learn
semantic similarities directly from data, even for specialized
biomedical text7–9,30. Speciﬁcally, we use the scispaCy word
embedding model7, which was trained on a large corpus con-
taining scientiﬁc abstracts from medical literature (PubMed)
as well as web pages (OntoNotes 5.0 corpus31). This assorted
training corpus enables the model to treat specialized medical
terminology and layman terms on the same footing, so that
medical topics are discovered regardless of the writing style.
One of the main disadvantages of word vector (word2vec)
models - like the (scispaCy) model used in this work - is their
inability to handle out-of-vocabulary (oov) words: if a word
appearing in the text is not included in the model vocabulary, it
is effectively skipped from the analysis (i.e. a vector of all ze-
ros is assigned to it). To tackle this issue, several models have
been proposed, initially based on chargram level embeddings
(FastText32), and more recently contextual embeddings based
on character (ELMO24), or byte pair encoding33 representa-
tions (BERT25). Even though other advancements - namely
word polysemy handling and the use of attention34 - were ar-
guably the decisive factors, improvements in oov word han-
dling also contributed in making ELMO and BERT the de-
facto gold standard for natural language processing, at least
for supervised learning tasks.
Even though the use of contextual word embeddings is gen-
3
Probe word Most similar words (standard embedding)
Most similar words (biomedical embedding)
leukemia
cancer (0.68), cancers (0.65), tumor (0.65),
leukaemia (0.97), leukemias (0.88), lymphoblastic (0.80),
tumors (0.64), chemotherapy (0.63), marrow (0.63), myelomonocytic (0.80), myelogenous (0.80), myeloid (0.80),
prognosis (0.61), malignant (0.61), anemia (0.60),
promyelocytic (0.73), leukaemic (0.73), leukemic (0.72),
diagnosed (0.60), pancreatic (0.59), ovarian (0.59)
blastic (0.67), blasts (0.67), therapy-related (0.66)
blood
urine (0.63), bleeding (0.62), liver (0.61),
hematocrit (0.60), haematocrit (0.59), whole-blood (0.58),
bloodstream (0.59), glucose (0.59), kidney (0.58),
arterial (0.57), pressure (0.55), heparinized (0.54),
heart (0.58), kidneys (0.57), cholesterol (0.57),
oncotic (0.53), hemoglobin (0.53), haemoglobin (0.52),
stomach (0.56), saliva (0.56), disease (0.56)
venous (0.52), peripheral (0.52), venipuncture (0.51)
carcinoma
tumors (0.78), tumor (0.76), malignant (0.75),
carcinomas (0.90), adenocarcinoma (0.88), adenocarcinomas (0.79),
cancers (0.74), ovarian (0.71), pancreatic (0.69),
squamous (0.76), well-differentiated (0.70), metastasizing (0.68),
lesions (0.67), cancer (0.66), prognosis (0.66),
urothelial (0.68), tumours (0.68), cancers (0.68),
lung (0.65), prostate (0.64), leukemia (0.60)
cancer (0.68), non-metastatic (0.67), tumors (0.66)
TABLE I. Illustrative comparison between standard and biomedical word embeddings. The most similar words to the probe words blood,
carcinoma, and leukemia are shown for a standard and a biomedical word embedding. Values in parenthesis indicate the similarity with the
corresponding probe word (maximum similarity is 1). The biomedical embedding model returns more speciﬁc and more medically relevant
terms. The standard and biomedical embedding models are spaCy en core web lg and scispaCy en core sci lg, respectively.
erally beneﬁcial and can be readily incorporated in our ap-
proach (simply substituting the word representation), we no-
tice that - given the large amount of noise present and the
purely unsupervised setting - a word2vec model is actually
advantageous for the task of extracting medical topics from
real-word medical inquiries. Indeed, using a model with a lim-
ited yet comprehensive vocabulary (the scispaCy model used
in this work includes 600k word vectors) constitutes a princi-
pled, data-driven, efﬁcient, and effective way to ﬁlter relevant
information from the noise present in the corpus. This ﬁl-
tering is principled and data driven because the words (and
vectors) included in the model vocabulary are automatically
determined in the scispaCy training procedure by optimiz-
ing the performance on biomedical text benchmarks7. This
also leads to harmonization of the medical inquiry corpus by
eliminating both non-relevant region-speciﬁc terms, and noise
introduced by machine translation (words or expressions are
sometimes not translated but simply copied still in the original
language35). Clearly, in this context it is of paramount impor-
tance to use specialized biomedical embeddings so that the
word2vec model has a comprehensive knowledge of medical
terms despite its relatively limited vocabulary.
Table II A 1 presents a qualitative comparison of a stan-
dard embedding (en core web lg, trained on the Common
Crawl) and a specialized biomedical embedding (scispaCy
en core sci lg, trained also on PubMed).
Speciﬁcally, for
a given probe word (i.e. leukemia, carcinoma, blood), the
words most semantically similar to it - measured by the co-
sine similarity between word vectors - are retrieved, together
with their similarity with the probe word (shown in parenthe-
sis, 1.0 being the highest possible similarity). It is evident
that the biomedical embedding returns much more relevant
and medically speciﬁc terms. For instance, given the probe
word leukemia, the standard embedding returns generic terms
like cancer, tumor, chemotherapy which are broadly related
to oncology, but not necessarily to leukemia. In contrast, the
biomedical embedding returns more specialized (and med-
ically relevant) terms like lymphoblastic, myelomonocytic,
myelogenous, myeloid, promyelocytic: acute lymphoblastic,
chronic myelomonocytic, chronic myelogenous, adult acute
myeloid, and acute promyelocytic are all types of leukemia.
2.
Clustering similar medical inquiries via hierarchical clustering
We have shown in the previous section that word embed-
dings provide a natural way to include semantic information
(i.e. meaning of individual words) in the modeling. Medical
inquiries comprise multiple words, and therefore a semantic
representation for each inquiry needs to be computed from the
word-level embeddings. We accomplish this by simply aver-
aging the embeddings of the words belonging to the inquiry,
thus obtaining one vector for each inquiry. Since these vec-
tors capture semantic information, medical inquiries bearing
similar meaning are mapped to nearby vectors in the high-
dimensional embedding space.
To group similar inquiries,
clustering is performed in this embedding space, and for each
medicinal product separately.
Usually, it is not conducive to deﬁne an appropriate num-
ber of clusters a priori. A reasonable number of clusters de-
pends on various interdependent factors: number of incoming
inquiries, therapeutic area of the medicine, time frame of the
analysis, and intrinsic amount of information (i.e. variety of
the medical inquiries). For a given medicinal product, typi-
cally a handful of frequently asked questions covers a large
volume of inquiries, accompanied by numerous low-volume
and less cohesive inquiry clusters. These low-volume clusters
often contain valuable information, which might not even be
known to medical experts: their low volume makes it difﬁcult
to detect them via manual inspection. To perform clustering in
the embedding space, we use the hierarchical, density based
clustering algorithm HDBSCAN36–38. As customary in unsu-
pervised learning tasks, one needs to provide some informa-
tion on the desired granularity, i.e. how ﬁne or coarse the clus-
4
tering should be. In HDSBCAN, this is accomplished by spec-
ifying a single, intuitive hyper-parameter (min cluster size).
In our case, the objective is to obtain approximately 100 clus-
ters so that the results can be easily analyzed by medical ex-
perts. Thus, the main factor in deﬁning min cluster size is
the number of inquiries for a given medicinal product: the
larger the medical inquiry volume, the larger the parameter
min cluster size. Note that min cluster size is not a strict con-
troller of cluster size (and thus how many clusters should be
formed), but rather a guidance provided to the algorithm re-
garding the desired clustering granularity. It is also possible
to combine different min cluster size for the same dataset, i.e.
using a ﬁner granularity for more recent inquiries, thus en-
abling the discovery of new topics when only few inquiries are
received, at a price however of an increase in noise given the
low data volume. Moreover, min cluster size is very slowly
varying with data (medical inquiry) volume, which facilitate
its determination (see Methods).
In practice, a non-linear dimensionality reduction is applied
to lower the dimensionality of the text representation before
clustering is performed. We utilize the UMAP algorithm39,40
because of its ﬁrm mathematical foundations from manifold
learning and fuzzy topology, ability to meaningfully project
to any number of dimensions (not only two or three like t-
SNE41), and computational efﬁciency. Reducing the dimen-
sionality considerably improves the clustering computational
performance, greatly easing model deployment to production,
especially for products with more than 5,000 inquiries. The
dimensionality reduction can in principle be omitted, espe-
cially for smaller datasets. At the end of this step, for each
medicinal product a set of clusters is returned, each contain-
ing a collection of medical inquiries. A given medical inquiry
is associated to one topic only, in accordance with the single
topic assumption.
In order to convey the cluster content to users, a name (or
headline) needs to be determined for each cluster. To this end,
the top-ﬁve most recurring words for each cluster are con-
catenated, provided that they appear in at least 20% of the
inquiries belonging to that cluster; this frequency threshold is
set to avoid to include in the topic name words that appear
very infrequently but are still in the top-ﬁve words. Thus, if
a word does not fulﬁll the frequency requirement, it is not
included in the topic name (resulting in topic names with less
than ﬁve words). By such naming (topic creation), the clusters
are represented by a set of words, which summarize their se-
mantic content. Finally, topics with similar names are merged
in order to limit the number of topics to be presented to med-
ical experts (see Methods). After the topics are merged, new
topic names are generated according to the procedure outlined
above. The ﬁnal result is a list of topics deﬁned by a given
name, each containing a set of similar medical inquiries. The
list of discovered topics is then outputted, and presented to
medical experts.
Since the goal is to extract as much knowledge as possible
from incoming medical inquiries, a relatively large number of
topics (typically around 100) is returned to medical experts
for each medicinal product. To facilitate topic exploration and
analysis, topics are visualized on a map that reﬂects the sim-
ilarity between topics (Fig. 3a): topics close to each other
in this map are semantically similar. To obtain this seman-
tic map, ﬁrst topic vectors are computed by averaging the text
representation of all inquiries belonging to a given topic; then,
a dimensionality reduction to two dimensions via UMAP is
performed.
3.
Topic evaluation: topic semantic compactness and name
saliency
Once topics are discovered, it is desirable to provide med-
ical experts with information regarding the quality of a given
topic. To this end, a score is calculated for each topic. Since
no available metric applies to the case of medical topic discov-
ery (see Methods), we introduce two new quantities to evalu-
ate topics discovered in an unsupervised setting. These quan-
tities - which we term topic semantic compactness and name
saliency - fully leverage semantic similarity at the sentence
(medical inquiry) level; they are also intuitive, computation-
ally efﬁcient, and intrinsic, i.e. do not require any gold labels.
One way of quantifying the quality of a discovered topic
is to determine how similar the inquiries grouped in a topic
are: intuitively, the more similar the inquiries in a topic are,
the higher the quality of this topic.
As described in Sec.
II A 1-II A 2, we maps inquiries (via word2vec and averaging
of word vectors) in a semantic space where clustering is per-
formed. From a geometrical point of view, topic quality can
be estimated by calculating the similarity among medical in-
quiries within a given topic in this semantic space; those simi-
larities are then summed to evaluate the semantic compactness
of a topic. The topic semantic compactness is between zero
and one, one indicating the highest possible compactness.
The topic name is one of the main information shown to
the users to summarize the semantic content of a discovered
medical topic. It is therefore of interest to quantify how repre-
sentative the name is for a given medical topic. This is tackled
by answering the following question: how similar is the name
with the inquiries grouped in the topic it represents? This is
quantiﬁed by the name salience, a score between zero and one,
the higher the value, the more salient the name w.r.t. the topic
its represents. Topic quality is then obtained by averaging se-
mantic compactness and title saliency for each topic. Addi-
tional information on topic evaluation can be found in Meth-
ods.
B.
A real-world example of topic discovery: the oncology
product Stivarga™
As a real-world example of topic discovery, we present
the results for medical inquiries on the oncology product Sti-
varga™. Stivarga™is an oral multikinase inhibitor which in-
hibits various signal pathways responsible for tumor growth.
In this work, all unsolicited medical inquiries received by
Bayer™worldwide in the time frame July 2019-June 2020
are considered. All non-English inquiries are translated to En-
glish using machine translation. These inquiries are then pre-
5
FIG. 2. Length distribution of medical inquiries on Stivarga™. The
large majority of the inquiries (∼90 %) contains less than ﬁfteen
words after preprocessing.
processed: acronyms are resolved; non-informative phrases,
words or patterns are removed; text is tokenized and lemma-
tized. Additional details are provided in Methods. Then, the
topic discovery algorithm introduced in Sec. II A is applied.
The semantic map with the discovered topics is shown in
Fig. 3a. These topics span a relatively large variety of themes,
ranging from interactions with food and adverse drug reac-
tions to purchase costs and literature requests. The topics are
judged as meaningful and medically relevant by medical in-
formation specialists, on the basis of their expert knowledge
of the medicinal product.
Topics are also speciﬁc: the unsupervised learning ap-
proach allows information to emerge directly from the data,
without recurring to predeﬁned lists of keywords or classes, as
required when using ontologies or supervised learning. An ex-
ample of a very specialized topic for inquiries on scientiﬁc lit-
erature is treatment role bruix grothey evolve: 12 requests re-
lated to the review article on the treatment of advanced cancer
with Regorafenib (active ingredient of Stivarga™) published
on February 202042. Other examples are the ﬁve topics fat
diet high meal low, eat breakfast day drink, precaution diet,
eat time, contraindication diet. Even though all these topics
relate to nutrition, they are addressing different aspects. It is
quite advantageous that they are identiﬁed as distinct since
medical recommendations will likely differ across these ﬁve
topics.
Thanks to the inclusion of semantics via word embed-
ding, the algorithm is able to group together inquiries hav-
ing similar meaning, even though the actual words in them
are distinct. For instance, the topic pain side effect foot fa-
tigue comprises 21 inquiries on medical issues (which may
or may not be related with the medicine), in which the fol-
lowing words appear: pain (seven times), side effect (six
times) nausea (three times), fatigue (ﬁve times), dysphonia
(two times). The algorithm is able to cluster these inquiries
together because similar inquiries are mapped close to each
other in the high dimensional semantic space where cluster-
ing is performed. This is corroborated by the relatively high
similarity score between the terms appearing in these inquiries
(pain-nausea:
0.66, nausea-fatigue:0.61, pain-fatigue:0.71,
dysphonia-pain:0.55, dysphonia-fatigue:0.49), scores much
higher than zero, zero being the score expected for unrelated
terms.(cf.
pain-day:0.05, nausea-sun:0.08).
Conversely, if
there is a moderate number of inquiries on a speciﬁc medical
matter, the algorithm is generally able to detect that signal, as
in the case of mucositis and hoarse in the two topics daily care
method rash mucositis, and daily care method rash hoarse.
As shown in Fig.
3a, the automatically generated topic
names (see Sec.II A 2) provide a reasonably good insight into
the semantic content of their respective topics. However, one
needs to be mindful that the topic might - and usually will -
contain additional information of relevance. To convey this
information in a simple yet effective way to the users, word-
clouds are generated for each topic; examples of wordcloud
are shown in Fig. 3b. For example, in the wordcloud of topic
compassionate program (Fig. 3b, 1st column-2nd row), con-
cepts not included in the topic name (e.g. assistance, inter-
ested, access, status) appear, thus giving further insight into
the topic content. In some cases, even the wordcloud might
not convey the topic meaning: users will then resort to manu-
ally inspect the inquiries belonging to the topic. For instance,
the content of topic chinese is not clear, neither from the topic
name nor from the wordcloud; however, inspection of the ac-
tual inquiries quickly reveals that they refer to the interaction
between Chinese medicine and Stivarga™(the word medicine
does not appear since it is a stopword). Another examples are
al et clin and long, which group together requests for scientiﬁc
articles and product durability, respectively.
Topic quality provides a useful guidance when exploring
topics. If topic quality is close to one, medical inquiries in
that topic are all very similar, and the topic name is expected
to summarize the topic content well. Conversely, topics with
low quality will contain inquiries that might differ quite sub-
stantially, yet are similar enough to be clustered together by
the algorithm. In these cases, manual inspection of the under-
lying medical inquiries may be a good strategy. From Fig. 3a,
it appears that smaller topics tend to have higher topic scores,
although no clear trend emerges.
Finally, in addition of having similar inquiries within top-
ics, the model captures semantic similarities between topics.
This is apparent from Fig. 3a: similar topics tend to be close
to each other in the semantic map. Even though this feature
does not inﬂuence the topic discovered, from a user perspec-
tive it provides a clear advantage when exploring topics (e.g.
compared to reading them from as a simple list).
III.
DISCUSSION
This study introduces an unsupervised machine learning
approach to automatically discover topics from medical in-
quiries. After the initial (one-time) effort for preprocessing
(e.g. abbreviation deﬁnition, stopword reﬁnement) and hyper-
parameters determination, the algorithm runs without requir-
ing any human intervention, discovering key topics as medical
inquiries are received. Topics can be discovered even if only
6
FIG. 3. Topic discovery for medical inquiries on Stivarga™˙(a) Topic semantic map. Axis are the non-linear dimensionality components and
thus are not shown. (b) Wordclouds for selected topics.
a small number of inquiries is present, and are generally spe-
ciﬁc, thus enabling targeted, informed decisions by medical
experts. Being completely unsupervised, the algorithm can
discover topics that were neither known nor expected in ad-
vance, topics which often are the most valuable. This is in
stark contrast with ontology or supervised based approaches,
where topics need to be deﬁned a priori (as collections of key-
words or classes), and incoming text can be associated only
to these predeﬁned lists of topics, thus hindering the discov-
ery of a priori unknown topics. The machine learning ap-
proach introduced here does not use ontologies (which are
costly and hard to build, validate, maintain, and difﬁcult to
apply when layman and specialized medical terms are com-
bined), and instead it incorporates domain knowledge via spe-
cialized biomedical word embeddings. This allows to read-
ily apply the topic discovery algorithm to different medicinal
products, without the burden of having to develop specialized
ontologies for each product or therapeutic area. Indeed, the al-
gorithm is periodically analyzing medical inquiries for a total
of sixteen Bayer™medicinal products, encompassing cardiol-
7
ogy, oncology, gynecology, hematology, and ophthalmology.
Our approach has several limitations. First, it can happen
that a small fraction of inquiries associated to a given topic
are actually extraneous to it, especially for semantically broad
topics. This is because - due to the noise present in this real-
world dataset - the soft clustering HDBSCAN algorithm must
be applied with a low probability threshold for cluster assign-
ment to avoid the majority of inquiries being considered as
outliers (see Methods). Second, even though the topic names
are generally quite informative, a medical expert needs to read
the actual inquiries to fully grasp the topic meaning, especially
if a decision will be made on the grounds of the discovered
topics. This is however not burdensome because inspection is
limited to the inquiries associated to a given topic (and not all
inquiries). Last, some discovered topics are judged by medi-
cal experts - based on their expert knowledge - so similar that
they could have been merged in a single topic, but are consid-
ered distinct by the algorithm. In these cases, manual topic
grouping might be required to determine the top topics by in-
quiry volumes. Still, these similar topics very often appear
close to each other in the topic map.
Despite these limitations, this study demonstrates that med-
ical inquiries contain useful information, and that machine
learning can extract this information in an automatic way, dis-
covering topics that are judged by medical information spe-
cialists as meaningful and valuable. The hope is that this will
stimulate mining of medical inquiries, and more generally the
use of natural language processing and unsupervised learn-
ing in the medical industry. Interesting future directions are
the inclusion of a priori expert knowledge (e.g. a list of ex-
pected topics) while at the same time maintaining the ability
to discover new and previously unknown topics, and grouping
topics in meta-topics though a clustering hierarchy.
IV.
METHODS
A.
Preprocessing
Since our dataset comprises real-word medical inquiries,
preprocessing is a crucial step to limit the amount of noise
in the corpus. The corpus contains numerous acronyms: a
ﬁrst step is thus acronym resolution, i.e. substitute a given
acronym with its extended form. A dictionary for the most re-
curring acronyms (∼40 per product) is compiled with the help
of medical experts. Acronym resolution is performed via a cu-
rated dictionary for two reasons. First, the data is too scarce
and noisy to train a reliable, custom-made word embedding
to learn the acronym meanings from the corpus. Second, in
pretrained word embeddings typically there is no suitable rep-
resentation for the acronym, or the acronym in our corpus is
used to indicate something different than in natural language
(it can even be company-speciﬁc). For example, in our cor-
pus lode does not refer to a vein of a metal, but stands for
lack of product effect. Regular expressions are then used to
remove non-informative strings (e.g. lot numbers, references
to internal systems). Next. text is split into sentences, tok-
enized and lemmatized using the scispaCy library7 (which is
built on top of spaCy). We disable the scispaCy parser; this
gives a signiﬁcant speed-up without affecting the topic discov-
ery outcome. Finally stopwords (i.e. non informative words)
are removed. In addition to standard English stopwords, there
are non-standard stopwords which arise from the dataset be-
ing composed of medical inquiries e.g. ask, request, email, in-
quiry, patient, doctor, and product-dependent stopwords, typ-
ically the brand and chemical name of the medicinal prod-
uct to which the inquiries refer to. It is also the case that in
the medical inquiry corpus single words bear value, but when
combined they are no longer relevant for medical topic dis-
covery. For example, the word years and old are generally of
relevance, but if contiguous (years old) they are no longer sig-
niﬁcant since this expression simply originates from a medical
information specialists logging the age of the patient to which
the inquiry refers to. Another example is the word morning:
when appearing alone it is of relevance, but when it is pre-
ceded by the word good it loses its relevance since the expres-
sion good morning does not bear any signiﬁcance for medical
topic discovery. We compile a short list of stop n-grams (∼20)
and remove them from the corpus.
B.
Text representation
To represent medical inquiries, the scispaCy7 word embed-
ding model en core sci lg-0.2.5 is used. No model re-training
or ﬁne-tuning is performed because of the small amount of
data and the sparsity problem; since no labels are available,
one would need to train a language model on noisy and short
text instances which would likely lead the model to forget
the semantics learned by the scispaCy model. For each to-
ken, the (200-dimensional) scispaCy embedding vector is re-
trieved; the sentence representation is then obtained simply by
calculating the arithmetic average of the vectors representing
each token over all tokens belonging to a given sentence.
C.
Out-of-vocabulary words
Even
though
the
overwhelming
majority
of
out-of-
vocabulary (oov) words are not of interest for medical topic
discovery, a very small (but relevant) subset of important
oov words would be missed if one were to simply use the
word2vec model. We thus devise a strategy to overcome this,
as described below. For each product, the most recurring oov
words are automatically detected; these words need to be in-
cluded in the word2vec model so that they can be represented
by a vector which accurately captures their meaning. Train-
ing a new embedding to include these new terms is not a good
approach given the sparseness problem described above. To
overcome this, we combine a deﬁnition mapping and embed-
ding strategy. Speciﬁcally, ﬁrst each of the relevant oov terms
is manually mapped to a short deﬁnition; for example, the oov
ReDOS is mapped to dose optimization study since ReDOS
refers to a dose-optimisation phase 2 study on regorafenib43.
Then, using the text from these deﬁnitions, a meaningful vec-
tor representation for the oov words is obtained with the em-
8
bedding strategy described above (scispaCy word embedding
model and arithmetic average of word vectors, the word vec-
tors averaged now being the words of the oov word deﬁni-
tion). This procedure has two main beneﬁts. First, it does not
require any training data nor any training effort. Second, it en-
sures by construction that the added word vectors are compat-
ible with the word representation model in use. Pharmaceu-
tical product trade names are oov words of particular interest
for medical topic discovery. However, they are are generally
not included in the scispaCy model. Thus, a slightly differ-
ent procedure is used to ensure that all trade names appear-
ing in medical inquiries are added to the model, regardless
of them belonging to the most recurring oov words or not.
Luckily, international non-proprietary names (INNs) of drugs
are included. For instance, the oncology product trade name
Stivarga™is not present, while its corresponding INN (rego-
rafenib) is. Thus, to automatically detect drug trade names
we utilize the scispaCy named entity recognizer (NER) and
the scispaCy UmlsEntityLinker as follows. First, the NER is
used to extract entities from the text; then, for each entity, the
UmlsEntityLinker performs a linking with the Uniﬁed Medi-
cal Language System (UMLS)44 by searching within a knowl-
edge base of approximately 2.7 million concepts via string
overlap as described in Ref. 7. To limit the number of false
positive matches we increase the UmlsEntityLinker threshold
to 0.85 from the default of 0.7. For each entities that has been
successfully linked to UMLS, several information regarding
the identiﬁed concepts are returned by the UmlsEntityLinker:
concept unique identiﬁer (CUI), concept preferred name, con-
cept deﬁnition, concept aliases, and concept type unique iden-
tiﬁer (TUI). In particular, the latter deﬁnes to which seman-
tic group the linked concept belongs to45,46; an up-to-date list
of semantic type mappings can be found at47. A TUI value
of T121 indicates that the concept found is a Pharmacologic
Substance. Extracting the entities with TUI equal to T121 al-
lows to automatically identify drug trade names. Each drug
trade name is then mapped to the concept preferred name; if
that is not present, the concept deﬁnition is used; if that is
also not present, drug trade name is replaced by to the phrase
pharmaceutical medication drug. Once this mapping is per-
formed, the same embedding strategy used for the other oov
words is followed in order to obtain semantically meaningful
word vector representations.
D.
Hierarchical clustering
The HDBSCAN algorithm36–38 starts by deﬁning a mutual
reachability distance based on a density estimation; the data is
then represented as a weighted graph where vertices are data
points and edges have weight equal to the mutual reachabil-
ity distance between points. The minimum spanning tree is
built, and converted to a hierarchy of connected components
via a union-ﬁnd data structure: starting from an initial clus-
ter containing all points, the data is subsequently split at each
level of the hierarchy according to the distance, ultimately re-
turning as many clusters as data points when the threshold
distance approaches zero. This cluster hierarchy is commonly
depicted as dendogram. To obtain a meaningful set of clusters,
this hierarchy needs to be condensed. The crucial point is to
discern - at any given split - if two new meaningful clusters
are formed by splitting their parent cluster, or instead the par-
ent cluster is simply loosing points (and in the latter case one
wishes to keep the parent cluster undivided). In HDBSCAN,
this decision is governed by the minimum cluster size hyper-
parameter (min cluster size): a cluster split is accepted only
if both newly formed clusters have at least min cluster size
points. The ﬁnal clusters are then chosen from this set of con-
densed clusters by means of a measure of stability as deﬁned
by Ref. 36. The main factor in deﬁning min cluster size is
the number of inquiries for a given product: we want to ob-
tain (approximately) 100 clusters so that results can be easily
analyzed by medical experts. It is important to point out that
min cluster size does not strictly specify the number of clus-
ters that will be formed, but rather provides to the algorithm an
indication regarding the desired granularity, as outlined above.
In our case, min cluster size ranges only between 5 and 10 de-
pending on the number of inquiries. This small range of varia-
tion substantially facilitate the hyper-parameter search. More-
over, we noticed that - for approximately the same amount of
inquiries and same min cluster size - the number of returned
clusters increases with data variety, where data variety is qual-
itatively evaluated by manual inspection: for products with
more diverse inquiries HDBSCAN tends to return a higher
number of clusters, ceteris paribus. We utilize the leaf clus-
ter selection method instead of the excess of mass algorithm
because the former is known to return more homogeneous
clusters37.
Due to the noise in the dataset, using the standard (hard)
HDBSCAN clustering results in a large portion of the
dataset (30-60%) considered as outliers consistently across
all products. To overcome this, we use the soft HDBSCAN
clustering37, which returns - instead of a (hard) cluster as-
signment - the probability that an inquiry belongs to a given
cluster. We then deﬁne a probability threshold under which a
point is considered to be an outlier; for all other points above
this threshold, we associate them to the cluster with the high-
est probability through an argmax operation. This probabil-
ity threshold ranges between 10−3 and 10−2 and it is chosen
such that approximately 10% of the inquiries are classiﬁed as
outliers. As mentioned in the main text, for computational
reasons, we project via UMAP to a lower dimensional space
before clustering is performed.
Speciﬁcally, we project to
100 dimensions for products with less than 15,000 inquiries,
and to 20 dimensions for products with more than 15,000 in-
quiries. Moreover, inquiries longer than 800 characters are
also considered as outliers: this is because the text represen-
tation (average of word vectors) degrades for long sentences.
These inquiries are gathered in the outlier cluster and made
available to medical experts for manual inspection.
E.
Topic merging
Given a topic, the vector representation for each word in
the topic name is calculated; the topic name vector is then ob-
9
tained by averaging the word vectors of the words present in
the topic name. Topics are merged if their similarity - evalu-
ated as cosine similarity between their topic name vectors - is
larger than a threshold. Threshold values range between 0.8
and 0.95 depending on the medicinal product considered.
F.
Topic evaluation: topic semantic compactness and name
saliency
The most popular topic evaluation metrics for topic mod-
elling on long text are UCI48 and UMass49. However, both
UCI and UMass metrics are not good indicators for quality
of topics in short text topic modelling due to the sparseness
problem50. In Ref. 50, a purity measure is introduced to eval-
uate short text topic modelling; however, it requires pairs of
short and long documents (e.g. abstract and corresponding full
text article), and thus it is not applicable here because there
is no long document associated to a given medical inquiry.
Indeed, evaluation of short text topic modelling is an open
research problem20. An additional challenge is the absence
of labels. Performing annotations would require substantial
manual effort by specialized medical professionals, and would
be of limited use because one of the main goals is to discover
previously unknown topics as new inquiries are received. The
absence of labels precludes the use of the metrics based on pu-
rity and normalized mutual information proposed in Ref. 51,
52, 26.
Ref. 53 bring forward the valuable idea of using distribu-
tional semantic to evaluate topic coherence, exploiting the se-
mantic similarity learned by word2vec models. Topic coher-
ence is assessed by calculating the similarity among the top
n-words of a given topic: semantically similar top n-words
lead to higher topic coherence. If this might be in general
desirable, in the case of discovering medical topics it is ac-
tually detrimental: interesting (and potentially previously un-
known) topics are often characterized by top n-words which
are not semantically similar. For example, a medical topic
having as top 2-words rivaroxaban (an anticoagulant medica-
tion) and glutine is clearly relevant from a medical topic dis-
covery standpoint. However, rivaroxaban and glutine are not
semantically similar, and thus the metric proposed in Ref. 53
would consider this as a low coherence (and thus low quality)
topic, in stark contrast with human expert judgment. Anal-
ogous considerations apply to the indirect conﬁrmation mea-
sures in Ref. 54: words emerging in novel topics would have
rarely appeared before in a shared context. For this reason, we
introduce a new measure of topic compactness which takes
into account the semantics of the inquiries, and does not re-
quire any labeled data. Speciﬁcally, we compute the similar-
ity of all inquiries belonging to a given topic with each other
(excluding self-similarity), sum the elements of the resulting
similarity matrix, and divide by the total number of elements
in this matrix. The topic semantic compactness γα of topic α
reads
γα =
|Cα|
X
i=1
|Cα|
X
j=1
i̸=j
S(qi, qj)
|Cα|(|Cα| −1)
(1)
where |Cα| is the cardinality of topic α (how many inquiries
are in topic α), qi (and qj) is the word vector representing in-
quiry i (j), and S is a function quantifying the semantic simi-
larity between inquiry qi and qj, taking values between 0 and
1 (S = 1 when qi and qj are indentical, and S = 0 being the
lowest possible similarity). Given the chosen normalization
factor (i.e. the denominator in Eq.1), 0 ≤γα ≤1 and thus
γα can be directly used as (a proxy for) topic quality score.
The topic compactness maximum (γα = 1) is attained if and
only if every sentence (after preprocessing) contains exactly
the same words. It is important to point out that γα auto-
matically takes semantics into account: different but semanti-
cally similar medical inquiries would still have high similarity
score, and thus would lead (as desired) to a high topic seman-
tic compactness, despite these inquiries using different words
to express similar content.
Contrary to Ref. 53, the topic semantic compactness γα
introduced in Eq.1 does not artiﬁcially penalize novel topics
just because they associate semantically different words ap-
pearing in the same inquiry. To come back to the previous
example, if numerous inquiries in a discovered topic contain
the words rivaroxaban and glutine, the topic semantic com-
pactness would be high (as desired), regardless from the fact
that the top 2-words are not semantically similar since the sim-
ilarity is evaluated at the inquiry level (by S(qi, qj) in Eq. 1).
It is also beneﬁcial to evaluate how representative the topic
name is for the topic it represents. To this end, we calculate
the name saliency τ α for medical topic α by calculating the
similarity of the word vector representing the topic name with
the word vectors representing the inquiries in the topic, sum
these similarity values, and divide by the total number of in-
quiries in the topic. This reads
τ α =
|Cα|
X
i=1
S(tα, qi)
|Cα|
(2)
where |Cα| is the cardinality of topic α (how many inquiries
are in topic α), tα is the word vector representing the name
of topic α, and qi is the vector representing inquiry i. This
returns a score (0 ≤τ α ≤1) which quantiﬁes how represen-
tative (salient) the name is for the topic it represents. As in
the case of the topic semantic compactness, the name saliency
τ α takes natively semantics (e.g. synonyms) into account via
S(tα, qi) in Eq. 2. In both Eq. 1 and Eq. 2, the cosine simi-
larity is used as similarity measure.
V.
COMPETING INTERESTS
Financial support for the research was provided by Bayer
AG. The authors reports a patent application on Topic Mod-
elling of Short Medical Inquiries submitted on April 21st,
2020 (application number EP20170513.4).
10
∗angelo.ziletti@bayer.com
1 M. Allahyari, S. A. Pouriyeh, M. Asseﬁ, S. Safaei, E. D. Trippe,
J. B. Gutierrez, and K. Kochut, “A brief survey of text min-
ing: Classiﬁcation, clustering and extraction techniques.,” CoRR,
2017.
2 C. Luque, J. M. Luna, M. Luque, and S. Ventura, “An advanced
review on text mining in medicine,” WIREs Data Mining and
Knowledge Discovery, vol. 9, no. 3, p. e1302, 2019.
3 W. Sun, Z. Cai, F. Liu, S. Fang, and G. Wang, “A survey of data
mining technology on electronic medical records,” in 2017 IEEE
19th International Conference on e-Health Networking, Applica-
tions and Services (Healthcom), pp. 1–6, 2017.
4 A. Kormilitzin, N. Vaci, Q. Liu, and A. J. Nevado-Holgado,
“Med7: a transferable clinical natural language processing model
for electronic health records.,” CoRR, vol. abs/2003.01271, 2020.
5 A. Mascio, Z. Kraljevic, D. Bean, R. J. B. Dobson, R. Stewart,
R. Bendayan, and A. Roberts, “Comparative analysis of text clas-
siﬁcation approaches in electronic health records.,” in BioNLP
(D. Demner-Fushman, K. B. Cohen, S. Ananiadou, and J. Tsu-
jii, eds.), pp. 86–94, Association for Computational Linguistics,
2020.
6 I. Landi, B. S. Glicksberg, H.-C. Lee, S. T. Cherng, G. Landi,
M. Danieletto, J. T. Dudley, C. Furlanello, and R. Miotto, “Deep
representation learning of electronic health records to unlock pa-
tient stratiﬁcation at scale.,” CoRR, vol. abs/2003.06516, 2020.
7 M. Neumann, D. King, I. Beltagy, and W. Ammar, “Scispacy: Fast
and robust models for biomedical natural language processing.,”
in BioNLP@ACL (D. Demner-Fushman, K. B. Cohen, S. Anani-
adou, and J. Tsujii, eds.), pp. 319–327, Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, 2019.
8 I. Beltagy, K. Lo, and A. Cohan, “Scibert: A pretrained lan-
guage model for scientiﬁc text,” in EMNLP/IJCNLP (1) (K. Inui,
J. Jiang, V. Ng, and X. Wan, eds.), pp. 3613–3618, Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2019.
9 E. Alsentzer, J. Murphy, W. Boag, W.-H. Weng, D. Jindi, T. Nau-
mann, and M. McDermott, “Publicly available clinical BERT em-
beddings,” in Proceedings of the 2nd Clinical Natural Language
Processing Workshop, (Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA), pp. 72–
78, Association for Computational Linguistics, June 2019.
10 W.-H. Weng and P. Szolovits, “Representation learning for elec-
tronic health records.,” CoRR, vol. abs/1909.09248, 2019.
11 S. Wu, K. Roberts, S. Datta, J. Du, Z. Ji, Y. Si, S. Soni, Q. Wang,
Q. Wei, Y. Xiang, B. Zhao, and H. Xu, “Deep learning in clinical
natural language processing: a methodical review,” Journal of the
American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 27, pp. 457–470,
12 2019.
12 D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan, “Latent dirichlet allo-
cation,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 3, pp. 993–
1022, Mar. 2003.
13 C. Arnold and W. Speier, “A topic model of clinical reports,” in
Proceedings of the 35th International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval, SIGIR ’12,
(New York, NY, USA), pp. 1031–1032, Association for Comput-
ing Machinery, 2012.
14 R. Pivovarov, A. J. Perotte, E. Grave, J. Angiolillo, C. H. Wiggins,
and N. Elhadad, “Learning probabilistic phenotypes from hetero-
geneous ehr data,” Journal of Biomedical Informatics, vol. 58,
pp. 156 – 165, 2015.
15 J. H. Chen, M. K. Goldstein, S. M. Asch, L. W. Mackey, and
R. B. Altman, “Predicting inpatient clinical order patterns with
probabilistic topic models vs conventional order sets.,” JAMIA,
vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 472–480, 2017.
16 R. Abdellaoui, P. Foulqui´e, N. Texier, C. Faviez, A. Burgun, and
S. Sch¨uck, “Detection of cases of noncompliance to drug treat-
ment in patient forum posts: Topic model approach,” J Med Inter-
net Res, vol. 20, p. e85, Mar 2018.
17 S. Shah and X. Luo, “Biomedical document clustering and
visualization based on the concepts of diseases.,”
CoRR,
vol. abs/1810.09597, 2018.
18 M. R. Karim, O. Beyan, A. Zappa, I. G. Costa, D. Rebholz-
Schuhmann, M. Cochez, and S. Decker, “Deep learning-based
clustering approaches for bioinformatics,” Brieﬁngs in Bioinfor-
matics, 02 2020. bbz170.
19 M. Moradi and M. Samwald, “Clustering of deep contextualized
representations for summarization of biomedical texts.,” CoRR,
vol. abs/1908.02286, 2019.
20 J. Qiang, Z. Qian, Y. Li, Y. Yuan, and X. Wu, “Short text topic
modeling techniques, applications, and performance: A survey.,”
CoRR, vol. abs/1904.07695, 2019.
21 R. Mehrotra, S. Sanner, W. Buntine, and L. Xie, “Improving lda
topic models for microblogs via tweet pooling and automatic la-
beling,” in Proceedings of the 36th International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Information Re-
trieval, SIGIR ’13, (New York, NY, USA), pp. 889–892, Asso-
ciation for Computing Machinery, 2013.
22 X.-H. Phan, L.-M. Nguyen, and S. Horiguchi, “Learning to clas-
sify short and sparse text and web with hidden topics from large-
scale data collections,” in Proceedings of the 17th International
Conference on World Wide Web, WWW ’08, (New York, NY,
USA), pp. 91–100, Association for Computing Machinery, 2008.
23 O. Jin, N. N. Liu, K. Zhao, Y. Yu, and Q. Yang, “Transferring top-
ical knowledge from auxiliary long texts for short text clustering,”
in Proceedings of the 20th ACM International Conference on In-
formation and Knowledge Management, CIKM ’11, (New York,
NY, USA), pp. 775–784, Association for Computing Machinery,
2011.
24 M. E. Peters, M. Neumann, M. Iyyer, M. Gardner, C. Clark,
K. Lee, and L. Zettlemoyer, “Deep contextualized word repre-
sentations.,” in NAACL-HLT (M. A. Walker, H. Ji, and A. Stent,
eds.), pp. 2227–2237, Association for Computational Linguistics,
2018.
25 J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “Bert: Pre-
training of deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
26 J. Yin and J. Wang, “A dirichlet multinomial mixture model-based
approach for short text clustering.,” in KDD (S. A. Macskassy,
C. Perlich, J. Leskovec, W. Wang, and R. Ghani, eds.), pp. 233–
242, ACM, 2014.
27 D. Q. Nguyen, R. Billingsley, L. Du, and M. Johnson, “Improv-
ing topic models with latent feature word representations,” Trans-
actions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 3,
pp. 299–313, 2015.
28 C. Li, H. Wang, Z. Zhang, A. Sun, and Z. Ma, “Topic modeling
for short texts with auxiliary word embeddings,” in Proceedings of
the 39th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval, SIGIR ’16, (New York,
NY, USA), pp. 165–174, Association for Computing Machinery,
2016.
29 D. Angelov, “Top2vec: Distributed representations of topics,”
2020.
30 J. Lee, W. Yoon, S. Kim, D. Kim, S. Kim, C. H. So, and
J. Kang, “BioBERT: a pre-trained biomedical language represen-
11
tation model for biomedical text mining,” Bioinformatics, vol. 36,
pp. 1234–1240, 09 2019.
31 S. Pradhan, A. Moschitti, N. Xue, H. T. Ng, A. Bj¨orkelund,
O. Uryupina, Y. Zhang, and Z. Zhong, “Towards robust lin-
guistic analysis using OntoNotes,” in Proceedings of the Seven-
teenth Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning,
(Soﬁa, Bulgaria), pp. 143–152, Association for Computational
Linguistics, Aug. 2013.
32 P. Bojanowski, E. Grave, A. Joulin, and T. Mikolov, “Enrich-
ing word vectors with subword information,” Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 5, pp. 135–146,
2017.
33 R. Sennrich, B. Haddow, and A. Birch, “Neural machine transla-
tion of rare words with subword units.,” in ACL (1), The Associa-
tion for Computer Linguistics, 2016.
34 A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones,
A. N. Gomez, L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you
need,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30
(I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus,
S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, eds.), pp. 5998–6008, Curran
Associates, Inc., 2017.
35 R. Knowles and P. Koehn, “Context and copying in neural ma-
chine translation.,” in EMNLP (E. Riloff, D. Chiang, J. Hocken-
maier, and J. Tsujii, eds.), pp. 3034–3041, Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, 2018.
36 R. J. G. B. Campello, D. Moulavi, and J. Sander, “Density-based
clustering based on hierarchical density estimates.,” in PAKDD
(2) (J. Pei, V. S. Tseng, L. Cao, H. Motoda, and G. Xu, eds.),
vol. 7819 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 160–172,
Springer, 2013.
37 D. Melo, S. Toledo, F. Mourao, R. S. Oliveira, G. Andrade, R. Fer-
reira, S. Parthasarathy, and L. C. da Rocha, “Hierarchical density-
based clustering based on gpu accelerated data indexing strategy.,”
in ICCS (M. Connolly, ed.), vol. 80 of Procedia Computer Sci-
ence, pp. 951–961, Elsevier, 2016.
38 L. McInnes, J. Healy, and S. Astels, “hdbscan: Hierarchical den-
sity based clustering.,” J. Open Source Softw., vol. 2, no. 11,
p. 205, 2017.
39 L. McInnes, J. Healy, and J. Melville, “Umap: Uniform manifold
approximation and projection for dimension reduction,” 2018. cite
arxiv:1802.03426Comment: Reference implementation available
at http://github.com/lmcinnes/umap.
40 L. McInnes, J. Healy, N. Saul, and L. Grossberger, “Umap: Uni-
form manifold approximation and projection.,” J. Open Source
Softw., vol. 3, no. 29, p. 861, 2018.
41 L. van der Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,”
Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 9, pp. 2579–2605,
2008.
42 A. Grothey, J.-Y. Blay, N. Pavlakis, T. Yoshino, and J. Bruix,
“Evolving role of regorafenib for the treatment of advanced can-
cers,” Cancer Treatment Reviews, vol. 86, p. 101993, Jun 2020.
43 T. Bekaii-Saab, F. Ou, D. Ahn, P. Boland, K. Ciombor, E. Hey-
ing, T. Dockter, N. Jacobs, B. Pasche, J. Cleary, J. Meyers,
R. Desnoyers, J. McCune, K. Pedersen, A. Barzi, E. Chiorean,
J. Sloan, M. Lacouture, H. Lenz, and A. Grothey, “Regorafenib
dose-optimisation in patients with refractory metastatic colorec-
tal cancer (redos): a randomised, multicentre, open-label, phase 2
study,” The Lancet Oncology, vol. 20, pp. 1070–1082, Aug. 2019.
44 O. Bodenreider,
“The Uniﬁed Medical Language System
(UMLS): integrating biomedical terminology,” Nucleic Acids Re-
search, vol. 32, pp. D267–D270, 01 2004.
45 A. McCray, A. Burgun, and O. Bodenreider, “Aggregating umls
semantic types for reducing conceptual complexity.,” Proceedings
of Medinfo, vol. 10, no. pt 1, pp. 216–20, 2001.
46 O. Bodenreider and A. T. McCray, “Exploring semantic groups
through visual approaches.,” J. Biomed. Informatics, vol. 36,
no. 6, pp. 414–432, 2003.
47 Bodenreider, Olivier, “The UMLS Semantic Network.” https:
//semanticnetwork.nlm.nih.gov/, 2020. Online; ac-
cessed 20 July 2020.
48 D. Newman, J. H. Lau, K. Grieser, and T. Baldwin, “Automatic
evaluation of topic coherence,” in Human Language Technolo-
gies: The 2010 Annual Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, HLT ’10,
(Stroudsburg, PA, USA), pp. 100–108, Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, 2010.
49 D. M. Mimno, H. M. Wallach, E. M. Talley, M. Leenders, and
A. McCallum, “Optimizing semantic coherence in topic models.,”
in EMNLP, pp. 262–272, ACL, 2011.
50 X. Quan, C. Kit, Y. Ge, and S. J. Pan, “Short and sparse text
topic modeling via self-aggregation.,” in IJCAI (Q. Yang and M. J.
Wooldridge, eds.), pp. 2270–2276, AAAI Press, 2015.
51 A. Rosenberg and J. Hirschberg, “V-measure:
A conditional
entropy-based external cluster evaluation measure,” in Proceed-
ings of the 2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing and Computational Natural Language
Learning(EMNLP-CoNLL), pp. 410–420, 2007.
52 R. zhang Huang, G. Yu, Z. Wang, J. Zhang, and L. Shi, “Dirichlet
process mixture model for document clustering with feature par-
tition.,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 25, no. 8, pp. 1748–
1759, 2013.
53 N. Aletras and M. Stevenson, “Evaluating topic coherence using
distributional semantics.,” in IWCS (K. Erk and A. Koller, eds.),
pp. 13–22, The Association for Computer Linguistics, 2013.
54 M. Roeder, A. Both, and A. Hinneburg, “Exploring the space
of topic coherence measures.,” in WSDM (X. Cheng, H. Li,
E. Gabrilovich, and J. Tang, eds.), pp. 399–408, ACM, 2015.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
A.Z. led and thereby ideated and implemented the topic
discovery algorithm, and is the main author the manuscript.
M.S., C.B., D.R. provided valuable suggestions on the topic
discovery algorithm.
C.B., O.T., and T.W. designed and
implemented the software architecture and data engineering
pipeline for the algorithm deployment. T.W., J.V., J.L., S.K.,
X.M., A.M., D.R., and M.S. provided the in-house resources
for the study, supervised the overall project, and provided
domain knowledge expertise. All authors revised and com-
mented on the manuscript.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The data used in the study are the proprietary of Bayer AG,
and not publicly available.
VI.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
A.Z. thanks Robin Williams and Nikki Hayward from
Bayer™Medical Information for providing expert insightful
and in-depth feedback on the results of topic discovery.
