Title: A Survey of Paraphrasing and Textual Entailment Methods
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/0912.3747v3
--------------------------------------------------

Last update: May 30, 2010
A Survey of Paraphrasing and Textual Entailment Methods
Ion Androutsopoulos
ION@AUEB.GR
Prodromos Malakasiotis
RULLLER@AUEB.GR
Department of Informatics
Athens University of Economics and Business
Patission 76, GR-104 34 Athens, Greece
Abstract
Paraphrasing methods recognize, generate, or extract phrases, sentences, or longer natural lan-
guage expressions that convey almost the same information. Textual entailment methods, on the
other hand, recognize, generate, or extract pairs of natural language expressions, such that a human
who reads (and trusts) the ﬁrst element of a pair would most likely infer that the other element is
also true. Paraphrasing can be seen as bidirectional textual entailment and methods from the two
areas are often similar. Both kinds of methods are useful, at least in principle, in a wide range of
natural language processing applications, including question answering, summarization, text gener-
ation, and machine translation. We summarize key ideas from the two areas by considering in turn
recognition, generation, and extraction methods, also pointing to prominent articles and resources.
1. Introduction
This article is a survey of computational methods for paraphrasing and textual entailment. Para-
phrasing methods recognize, generate, or extract (e.g., from corpora) paraphrases, meaning phrases,
sentences, or longer texts that convey the same, or almost the same information. For example, (1)
and (2) are paraphrases. Most people would also accept (3) as a paraphrase of (1) and (2), though
it could be argued that in (3) the construction of the bridge has not necessarily been completed,
unlike (1) and (2).1 Such ﬁne distinctions, however, are usually ignored in paraphrasing and textual
entailment work, which is why we say that paraphrases may convey almost the same information.
(1)
Wonderworks Ltd. constructed the new bridge.
(2)
The new bridge was constructed by Wonderworks Ltd.
(3)
Wonderworks Ltd. is the constructor of the new bridge.
Paraphrasing methods may also operate on templates of natural language expressions, like (4)–
(6); here the slots X and Y can be ﬁlled in with arbitrary noun phrases. Templates speciﬁed at
the syntactic or semantic level may also be used, where the slot ﬁllers may be required to have
particular syntactic relations (e.g., verb-object) to other words or constituents, or to satisfy semantic
constraints (e.g., requiring Y to denote a book).
(4)
X wrote Y.
(5)
Y was written by X.
(6)
X is the writer of Y.
1Readers familiar with tense and aspect theories will have recognized that (1)–(3) involve an “accomplishment” of
Vendler’s (1967) taxonomy. The accomplishment’s completion point is not necessarily reached in (3), unlike (1)–(2).
arXiv:0912.3747v3  [cs.CL]  30 May 2010
ANDROUTSOPOULOS & MALAKASIOTIS
Textual entailment methods, on the other hand, recognize, generate, or extract pairs ⟨T,H⟩of
natural language expressions, such that a human who reads (and trusts) T would infer that H is most
likely also true (Dagan, Glickman, & Magnini, 2006). For example, (7) textually entails (8), but (9)
does not textually entail (10).2
(7)
The drugs that slow down Alzheimer’s disease work best the earlier you administer them.
(8)
Alzheimer’s disease can be slowed down using drugs.
(9)
Drew Walker, Tayside’s public health director, said: “It is important to stress that this is not a conﬁrmed
case of rabies.”
(10)
A case of rabies was conﬁrmed.
As in paraphrasing, textual entailment methods may operate on templates. For example, in a
discourse about painters, composers, and their work, (11) textually entails (12), for any noun phrases
X and Y. However, (12) does not textually entail (11), when Y denotes a symphony composed by
X. If we require textual entailment between templates to hold for all possible slot ﬁllers, then (11)
textually entails (12) in our example’s discourse, but the reverse does not hold.
(11)
X painted Y.
(12)
Y is the work of X.
In general, we cannot judge if two natural language expressions are paraphrases or a correct
textual entailment pair without selecting particular readings of the expressions, among those that
may be possible due to multiple word senses, syntactic ambiguities etc. For example, (13) textually
entails (14) with the ﬁnancial sense of “bank”, but not when (13) refers to the bank of a river.
(13)
A bomb exploded near the French bank.
(14)
A bomb exploded near a building.
One possibility, then, is to examine the language expressions (or templates) only in particular
contexts that make their intended readings clear. Alternatively, we may want to treat as correct any
textual entailment pair ⟨T,H⟩for which there are possible readings of T and H, such that a human
who reads T would infer that H is most likely also true; then, if a system reports that (13) textually
entails (14), its response is to be counted as correct, regardless of the intended sense of “bank”.
Similarly, paraphrases would have possible readings conveying almost the same information.
The lexical substitution task of SEMEVAL (McCarthy & Navigli, 2009), where systems are re-
quired to ﬁnd an appropriate substitute for a particular word in the context of a given sentence,
can be seen as a special case of paraphrasing or textual entailment, restricted to pairs of words.
SEMEVAL’s task, however, includes the requirement that it must be possible to use the two words
(original and replacement) in exactly the same context. In a similar manner, one could adopt a
stricter deﬁnition of paraphrases, which would require them not only to have the same (or almost
the same) meaning, but also to be expressions that can be used interchangeably in grammatical sen-
tences. In that case, although (15) and (16) are paraphrases, their underlined parts are not, because
they cannot be swapped in the two sentences; the resulting sentences would be ungrammatical.
(15)
Edison invented the light bulb in 1879, providing a long lasting source of light.
(16)
Edison’s invention of the light bulb in 1879 provided a long lasting source of light.
A similar stricter deﬁnition of textual entailment would impose the additional requirement that H
and T can replace each other in grammatical sentences.
2Simpliﬁed examples from RTE-2 (Bar-Haim, Dagan, Dolan, Ferro, Giampiccolo, Magnini, & Szpektor, 2006).
2
A SURVEY OF PARAPHRASING AND TEXTUAL ENTAILMENT METHODS
1.1 Possible Applications of Paraphrasing and Textual Entailment Methods
The natural language expressions that paraphrasing and textual entailment methods consider are
not always statements. In fact, many of these methods were developed having question answering
(QA) systems in mind. In QA systems for document collections (Voorhees, 2001; Pasca, 2003;
Harabagiu & Moldovan, 2003; Moll´a & Vicedo, 2007), a question may be phrased differently than
in a document that contains the answer, and taking such variations into account can improve system
performance signiﬁcantly (Harabagiu, Maiorano, & Pasca, 2003; Duboue & Chu-Carroll, 2006;
Harabagiu & Hickl, 2006; Riezler, Vasserman, Tsochantaridis, Mittal, & Liu, 2007). For example,
a QA system may retrieve relevant documents or passages, using the input question as a query to an
information retrieval or Web search engine (Baeza-Yates & Ribeiro-Neto, 1999; Manning, 2008),
and then check if any of the retrieved texts textually entails a candidate answer (Moldovan & Rus,
2001; Duclaye, Yvon, & Collin, 2003).3 If the input question is (17) and the search engine returns
passage (18), the system may check if (18) textually entails any of the candidate answers of (19),
where we have replaced the interrogative “who” of (17) with all the expressions of (18) that a named
entity recognizer (Bikel, Schwartz, & Weischedel, 1999; Sekine & Ranchhod, 2009) would ideally
have recognized as person names.4
(17)
Who sculpted the Doryphoros?
(18)
The Doryphoros is one of the best known Greek sculptures of the classical era in Western Art. The
Greek sculptor Polykleitos designed this work as an example of the “canon” or “rule”, showing the
perfectly harmonious and balanced proportions of the human body in the sculpted form. The sculpture
was known through the Roman marble replica found in Herculaneum and conserved in the Naples
National Archaeological Museum, but, according to Francis Haskell and Nicholas Penny, early con-
noisseurs passed it by in the royal Bourbon collection at Naples without notable comment.
(19)
Polykleitos/Francis Haskell/Nicholas Penny sculpted the Doryphoros.
The input question may also be paraphrased, to allow more, potentially relevant passages to be
obtained. Question paraphrasing is also useful when mapping user questions to lists of frequently
asked questions (FAQs) that are accompanied by their answers (Tomuro, 2003); and natural language
interfaces to databases often generate question paraphrases to allow users to understand if their
queries have been understood (McKeown, 1983; Androutsopoulos, Ritchie, & Thanisch, 1995).
Paraphrasing and textual entailment methods are also useful in several other natural language
processing applications. In text summarization (Mani, 2001; Hovy, 2003), for example, an impor-
tant processing stage is typically sentence extraction, which identiﬁes the most important sentences
of the texts to be summarized. During that stage, especially when generating a single summary from
several documents (Barzilay & McKeown, 2005), it is important to avoid selecting sentences (e.g.,
from different news articles about the same event) that convey the same information (paraphrases)
as other sentences that have already been selected, or sentences whose information follows from
other already selected sentences (textual entailment).
Sentence compression (Knight & Marcu, 2002; McDonald, 2006; Cohn & Lapata, 2008; Clarke
& Lapata, 2008; Cohn & Lapata, 2009; Galanis & Androutsopoulos, 2010), often also a processing
stage of text summarization, can be seen as a special case of sentence paraphrasing, as suggested by
3Culicover (1968) discussed different types of paraphrasing and entailment, and proposed the earliest computational
treatment of paraphrasing and textual entailment that we are aware of, with the goal of retrieving passages of texts that
answer natural language queries. We thank one of the anonymous reviewers for pointing us to Culicover’s work.
4Passage (18) is based on Wikipedia’s page for Doryphoros.
3
ANDROUTSOPOULOS & MALAKASIOTIS
Zhao et al. (2009), with the additional constraint that the resulting sentence must be shorter than the
original one and still grammatical; for example, a sentence matching (5) or (6) could be shortened by
converting it to a paraphrase of the form of (4). Most sentence compression work, however, allows
less important information of the original sentence to be discarded. Hence, the resulting sentence is
entailed by, it is not necessarily a paraphrase of the original one. In the following example, (21) is
a compressed form of (20) produced by a human.5
(20)
Mother Catherine, 82, the mother superior, will attend the hearing on Friday, he said.
(21)
Mother Catherine, 82, the mother superior, will attend.
When the compressed sentence is not necessarily a paraphrase of the original one, we may ﬁrst
produce (grammatical) candidate compressions that are textually entailed by the original sentence;
hence, a mechanism to generate textually entailed sentences is useful. Additional mechanisms are
needed, however, to rank the candidates depending on the space they save and the degree to which
they maintain important information; we do not discuss additional mechanisms of this kind.
Information extraction systems (Grishman, 2003; Moens, 2006) often rely on manually or au-
tomatically crafted patterns (Muslea, 1999) to locate text snippets that report particular types of
events and to identify the entities involved; for example, patterns like (22)–(24), or similar patterns
operating on syntax trees, possibly with additional semantic constraints, might be used to locate
snippets referring to bombing incidents and identify their targets. Paraphrasing or textual entail-
ment methods can be used to generate additional semantically equivalent extraction patterns (in the
case of paraphrasing) or patterns that textually entail the original ones (Shinyama & Sekine, 2003).
(22)
X was bombed
(23)
bomb exploded near X
(24)
explosion destroyed X
In machine translation (Koehn, 2009), ideas from paraphrasing and textual entailment research
have been embedded in measures and processes that automatically evaluate machine-generated
translations against human-authored ones that may use different phrasings (Lepage & Denoual,
2005; Zhou, Lin, & Hovy, 2006a; Kauchak & Barzilay, 2006; Pad´o, Galley, Jurafsky, & Manning,
2009); we return to this issue in following sections. Paraphrasing methods have also been used
to automatically generate additional reference translations from human-authored ones when train-
ing machine translation systems (Madnani, Ayan, Resnik, & Dorr, 2007). Finally, paraphrasing
and textual entailment methods have been employed to allow machine translation systems to cope
with source language words and longer phrases that have not been encountered in training corpora
(Zhang & Yamamoto, 2005; Callison-Burch, Koehn, & Osborne, 2006a; Marton, Callison-Burch, &
Resnik, 2009; Mirkin, Specia, Cancedda, Dagan, Dymetman, & Szpektor, 2009b). To use an exam-
ple of Mirkin et al. (2009b), a phrase-based machine translation system that has never encountered
the expression “ﬁle a lawsuit” during its training, but which knows that pattern (25) textually entails
(26), may be able to produce a more acceptable translation by converting (27) to (28), and then
translating (28). Some information would be lost in the translation, because (28) is not a paraphrase
of (27), but the translation may still be preferable to the outcome of translating directly (27).
(25)
X ﬁled a lawsuit against Y for Z.
5Example from Clarke et al.s paper, “Written News Compression Corpus (Clarke & Lapata, 2008); see Appendix A.
4
A SURVEY OF PARAPHRASING AND TEXTUAL ENTAILMENT METHODS
(26)
X accused Y of Z.
(27)
Cisco ﬁled a lawsuit against Apple for patent violation.
(28)
Cisco accused Apple of patent violation.
In natural language generation (Reiter & Dale, 2000; Bateman & Zock, 2003), for example
when producing texts describing the entities of a formal ontology (O’Donnell, Mellish, Oberlan-
der, & Knott, 2001; Androutsopoulos, Oberlander, & Karkaletsis, 2007), paraphrasing can be used
to avoid repeating the same phrasings (e.g., when expressing properties of similar entities), or to
produce alternative expressions that improve text coherence, adhere to writing style (e.g., avoid
passives), or satisfy other constraints (Power & Scott, 2005). Among other possible applications,
paraphrasing and textual entailment methods can be employed to simplify texts, for example by re-
placing specialized (e.g., medical) terms with expressions non-experts can understand (Elhadad &
Sutaria, 2007; Del´eger & Zweigenbaum, 2009), and to automatically score student answers against
reference answers (Nielsen, Ward, & Martin, 2009).
1.2 The Relation of Paraphrasing and Textual Entailment to Logical Entailment
If we represent the meanings of natural language expressions by logical formulae, for example in
ﬁrst-order predicate logic, we may think of textual entailment and paraphrasing in terms of logical
entailment (|=). If the logical meaning representations of T and H are φT and φH, then ⟨T,H⟩is a
correct textual entailment pair if and only if (φT ∧B) |= φH; B is a knowledge base, for simplicity
assumed here to have the form of a single conjunctive formula, which contains meaning postulates
(Carnap, 1952) and other knowledge assumed to be shared by all language users.6 Let us consider
the example below, where logical terms starting with capital letters are constants; we assume that
different word senses would give rise to different predicate symbols. Let us also assume that B
contains only ψ. Then (φT ∧ψ) |= φH holds, i.e., φH is true for any interpretation (e.g., model-
theoretic) of constants, predicate names and other domain-dependent atomic symbols, for which φT
and ψ both hold. A sound and complete automated reasoner (e.g., based on resolution, in the case
of ﬁrst-order predicate logic) could be used to conﬁrm that the logical entailment holds. Hence, T
textually entails H, assuming again that the meaning postulate ψ is available. The reverse, however,
does not hold, i.e., (φH ∧ψ) ̸|= φT; the implication (⇒) of ψ would have to be made bidirectional
(⇔) for the reverse to hold.
T
:
Leonardo da Vinci painted the Mona Lisa.
φT
:
isPainterOf(DaVinci,MonaLisa)
H
:
Mona Lisa is the work of Leonardo da Vinci.
φH
:
isWorkOf(MonaLisa,DaVinci)
ψ
:
∀x∀y isPainterOf(x,y) ⇒isWorkOf(y,x)
Similarly, if the logical meaning representations of T1 and T2 are φ1 and φ2, then T1 is a para-
phrase of T2 iff (φ1 ∧B) |= φ2 and (φ2 ∧B) |= φ1, where again B contains meaning postulates and
common sense knowledge. Ideally, sentences like (1)–(3) would be represented by the same for-
mula, making it clear that they are paraphrases, regardless of the contents of B. Otherwise, it may
6Zaenen et al. (2005) provide examples showing that linguistic and world knowledge cannot often be separated.
5
ANDROUTSOPOULOS & MALAKASIOTIS
sometimes be unclear if T1 and T2 should be considered paraphrases, because it may be unclear if
some knowledge should be considered part of B.
Since natural language expressions are often ambiguous, especially out of context, we may again
want to adopt looser deﬁnitions, so that T textually entails H iff there are possible readings of T and
H, represented by φH and φT, such that (φT ∧B) |= φH, and similarly for paraphrases. Thinking of
textual entailment and paraphrasing in terms of logical entailment allows us to borrow notions and
methods from logic. Indeed, some paraphrasing and textual entailment recognition methods map
natural language expressions to logical formulae, and then examine if logical entailments hold. This
is not, however, the only possible approach. Many other, if not most, methods currently operate on
surface strings or syntactic representations, without mapping natural language expressions to formal
meaning representations. Note, also, that in methods that map natural language to logical formulae,
it is important to work with a form of logic that provides adequate support for logical entailment
checks; full ﬁrst-order predicate logic may be inappropriate, as it is semi-decidable.
To apply our logic-based deﬁnition of textual entailment, which was formulated for statements,
to questions, let us use identical fresh constants (in effect, Skolem constants) across questions to
represent the unknown entities the questions ask for; we mark such constants with question marks
as subscripts, but in logical entailment checks they can be treated as ordinary constants. In the fol-
lowing example, the user asks H, and the system generates T. Assuming that the meaning postulate
ψ is available in B, (φT ∧B) |= φH, i.e., for any interpretation of the predicate symbols and constants,
if (φT ∧B) is true, then φH is necessarily also true. Hence, T textually entails H. In practice, this
means that if the system manages to ﬁnd an answer to T, perhaps because T’s phrasing is closer to
a sentence in a document collection, the same answer can be used to respond to H.
T(generated)
:
Who painted the Mona Lisa?
φT
:
isAgent(W?)∧isPainterOf(W?,MonaLisa)
H(asked)
:
Whose work is the Mona Lisa?
φH
:
isAgent(W?)∧isWorkOf(MonaLisa,W?)
ψ
:
∀x∀y isPainterOf(x,y) ⇒isWorkOf(y,x)
A logic-based deﬁnition of question paraphrases can be formulated in a similar manner, as
bidirectional logical entailment. Note also that logic-based paraphrasing and textual entailment
methods may actually represent interrogatives as free variables, instead of fresh constants, and they
may rely on uniﬁcation to obtain their values (Moldovan & Rus, 2001; Rinaldi, Dowdall, Kaljurand,
Hess, & Molla, 2003).
1.3 A Classiﬁcation of Paraphrasing and Textual Entailment Methods
There have been six workshops on paraphrasing and/or textual entailment (Sato & Nakagawa, 2001;
Inui & Hermjakob, 2003; Dolan & Dagan, 2005; Drass & Yamamoto, 2005; Sekine, Inui, Dagan,
Dolan, Giampiccolo, & Magnini, 2007; Callison-Burch, Dagan, Manning, Pennacchiotti, & Zan-
zotto, 2009) in recent years.7 The Recognizing Textual Entailment (RTE) challenges (Dagan et al.,
2006; Bar-Haim et al., 2006; Giampiccolo, Magnini, Dagan, & Dolan, 2007; Giampiccolo, Dang,
7The proceedings of the ﬁve more recent workshops are available in the ACL Anthology.
6
A SURVEY OF PARAPHRASING AND TEXTUAL ENTAILMENT METHODS
Magnini, Dagan, & Dolan, 2008), currently in their ﬁfth year, provide additional signiﬁcant thrust.8
Consequently, there is a large number of published articles, proposed methods, and resources re-
lated to paraphrasing and textual entailment.9 A special issue on textual entailment was also recently
published, and its editorial provides a brief overview of textual entailment methods (Dagan, Dolan,
Magnini, & Roth, 2009).10 To the best of our knowledge, however, the present article is the ﬁrst
extensive survey of paraphrasing and textual entailment.
To provide a clearer view of the different goals and assumptions of the methods that have been
proposed, we classify them along two dimensions: whether they are paraphrasing or textual en-
tailment methods; and whether they perform recognition, generation, or extraction of paraphrases
or textual entailment pairs. These distinctions are not always clear in the literature, especially the
distinctions along the second dimension, which we explain below. It is also possible to classify
methods along other dimensions, for example depending on whether they operate on language ex-
pressions or templates; or whether they operate on phrases, sentences or longer texts.
The main input to a paraphrase or textual entailment recognizer is a pair of language expressions
(or templates), possibly in particular contexts. The output is a judgement, possibly probabilistic, in-
dicating whether or not the members of the input pair are paraphrases or a correct textual entailment
pair; the judgements must agree as much as possible with those of humans. On the other hand, the
main input to a paraphrase or textual entailment generator is a single language expression (or tem-
plate) at a time, possibly in a particular context. The output is a set of paraphrases of the input, or
a set of language expressions that entail or are entailed by the input; the output set must be as large
as possible, but including as few errors as possible. In contrast, no particular language expressions
or templates are provided to a paraphrase or textual entailment extractor. The main input in this
case is a corpus, for example a monolingual corpus of parallel or comparable texts, such as different
English translations of the same French novel, or clusters of multiple monolingual news articles,
with the articles in each cluster reporting the same event. The system outputs pairs of paraphrases
(possibly templates), or pairs of language expressions (or templates) that constitute correct textual
entailment pairs, based on the evidence of the corpus; the goal is again to produce as many output
pairs as possible, with as few errors as possible. Note that the boundaries between recognizers, gen-
erators, and extractors may not always be clear. For example, a paraphrase generator may invoke a
paraphrase recognizer to ﬁlter out erroneous candidate paraphrases; and a recognizer or a generator
may consult a collection of template pairs produced by an extractor.
We note that articles reporting actual applications of paraphrasing and textual entailment meth-
ods to larger systems (e.g., for QA, information extraction, machine translation, as discussed in
Section 1.1) are currently relatively few, compared to the number of articles that propose new para-
phrasing and textual entailment methods or that test them in vitro, despite the fact that articles of the
second kind very often point to possible applications of the methods they propose. The relatively
small number of application articles may be an indicator that paraphrasing and textual entailment
methods are not used extensively in larger systems yet. We believe that this may be due to at least
two reasons. First, the efﬁciency of the methods needs to be improved, which may require com-
bining recognition, generation, and extraction methods, for example to iteratively produce more
training data; we return to this point in following sections. Second, the literature on paraphrasing
8The RTE challenges were initially organized by the European PASCAL Network of Excellence, and subsequently as
part of NIST’s Text Analysis Conference.
9A textual entailment portal has been established, as part of ACL’s wiki, to help organize all relevant material.
10The slides of Dagan, Roth, and Zazotto’s ACL 2007 tutorial on textual entailment are also publicly available.
7
ANDROUTSOPOULOS & MALAKASIOTIS
and textual entailment is vast, which makes it difﬁcult for researchers working on larger systems to
assimilate its key concepts and identify suitable methods. We hope that this article will help address
the second problem, while also acting as an introduction that may help new researchers improve
paraphrasing and textual entailment methods further.
In Sections 2, 3, and 4 below we consider in turn recognition, generation, and extraction methods
for both paraphrasing and textual entailment. In each of the three sections, we attempt to identify
and explain prominent ideas, pointing also to relevant articles and resources. In Section 5, we
conclude and discuss some possible directions for future research. The URLs of all publicly available
resources that we mention are listed in appendix A.
2. Paraphrase and Textual Entailment Recognition
Paraphrase and textual entailment recognizers judge whether or not two given language expressions
(or templates) constitute paraphrases or a correct textual entailment pair. Different methods may
operate at different levels of representation of the input expressions; for example, they may treat the
input expressions simply as surface strings, they may operate on syntactic or semantic representa-
tions of the input expressions, or on representations combining information from different levels.
2.1 Logic-based Approaches to Recognition
One possibility is to map the language expressions to logical meaning representations, and then
rely on logical entailment checks, possibly by invoking theorem provers (Rinaldi et al., 2003; Bos
& Markert, 2005; Tatu & Moldovan, 2005, 2007). In the case of textual entailment, this involves
generating pairs of formulae ⟨φT,φH⟩for T and H (or their possible readings), and then checking
if (φT ∧B) |= φH, where B contains meaning postulates and common sense knowledge, as already
discussed. In practice, however, it may be very difﬁcult to formulate a reasonably complete B. A
partial solution to this problem is to obtain common sense knowledge from resources like WordNet
(Fellbaum, 1998) or Extended WordNet (Moldovan & Rus, 2001). The latter also includes logical
meaning representations extracted from WordNet’s glosses. For example, since “assassinate” is a
hyponym (more speciﬁc sense) of “kill” in WordNet, an axiom like the following can be added to B
(Moldovan & Rus, 2001; Bos & Markert, 2005; Tatu & Moldovan, 2007).
∀x∀y assassinate(x,y) ⇒kill(x,y)
Additional axioms can be obtained from FrameNet’s frames (Baker, Fillmore, & Lowe, 1998;
Lonneker-Rodman & Baker, 2009), as discussed for example by Tatu et al. (2005), or similar re-
sources. Roughly speaking, a frame is the representation of a prototypical situation (e.g., a pur-
chase), which also identiﬁes the situation’s main roles (e.g., the buyer, the entity bought), the types
of entities (e.g., person) that can play these roles, and possibly relations (e.g., causation, inheritance)
to other prototypical situations (other frames). VerbNet (Schuler, 2005) also speciﬁes, among other
information, semantic frames for English verbs. On-line encyclopedias have also been used to ob-
tain background knowledge by extracting particular types of information (e.g., is-a relationships)
from their articles (Iftene & Balahur-Dobrescu, 2007).
Another approach is to use no particular B (meaning postulates and common sense knowledge),
and measure how difﬁcult it is to satisfy both φT and φH, in the case of textual entailment recog-
nition, compared to satisfying φT on its own. A possible measure is the difference of the size of
8
A SURVEY OF PARAPHRASING AND TEXTUAL ENTAILMENT METHODS
the minimum model that satisﬁes both φT and φH, compared to the size of the minimum model that
satisﬁes φT on its own (Bos & Markert, 2005); intuitively, a model is an assignment of entities,
relations etc. to terms, predicate names, and other domain-dependent atomic symbols. The greater
this difference the more knowledge is required in B for (φT ∧B) |= φH to hold, and the more difﬁcult
it becomes for speakers to accept that T textually entails H. Similar bidirectional logical entailment
checks can be used to recognize paraphrases (Rinaldi et al., 2003).
2.2 Recognition Approaches that Use Vector Space Models of Semantics
An alternative to using logical meaning representations is to start by mapping each word of the
input language expressions to a vector that shows how strongly the word cooccurs with particular
other words in corpora (Lin, 1998b), possibly also taking into account syntactic information, for
example requiring that the cooccurring words participate in particular syntactic dependencies (Pad´o
& Lapata, 2007). A compositional vector-based meaning representation theory can then be used to
combine the vectors of single words, eventually mapping each one of the two input expressions to a
single vector that attempts to capture its meaning; in the simplest case, the vector of each expression
could be the sum or product of the vectors of its words, but more elaborate approaches have also
been proposed (Mitchell & Lapata, 2008; Erk & Pad´o, 2009; Clarke, 2009). Paraphrases can then
be detected by measuring the distance of the vectors of the two input expressions, for example by
computing their cosine similarity. See also the work of Turney and Pantel (2010) for a survey of
vector space models of semantics.
Recognition approaches based on vector space models of semantics appear to have been ex-
plored much less than other approaches discussed in this article, and mostly in paraphrase recogni-
tion (Erk & Pad´o, 2009). They could also be used in textual entailment recognition, however, by
checking if the vector of H is particularly close to that of a part (e.g., phrase or sentence) of T. Intu-
itively, this would check if what H says is included in what T says, though we must be careful with
negations and other expressions that do not preserve truth values (Zaenen et al., 2005; MacCartney
& Manning, 2009), as in (29)–(30). We return to the idea of matching H to a part of T below.
(29)
T: He denied that BigCo bought SmallCo.
(30)
H: BigCo bought SmallCo.
2.3 Recognition Approaches Based on Surface String Similarity
Several paraphrase recognition methods operate directly on the input surface strings, possibly after
applying some pre-processing, such as part-of-speech (POS) tagging or named-entity recognition,
but without computing more elaborate syntactic or semantic representations. For example, they
may compute the string edit distance (Levenshtein, 1966) of the two input strings, the number of
their common words, or combinations of several string similarity measures (Malakasiotis & An-
droutsopoulos, 2007), including measures originating from machine translation evaluation (Finch,
Hwang, & Sumita, 2005; Perez & Alfonseca, 2005; Zhang & Patrick, 2005; Wan, Dras, Dale, &
Paris, 2006). The latter have been developed to automatically compare machine-generated trans-
lations against human-authored reference translations. A well known measure is BLEU (Papineni,
Roukos, Ward, & Zhu, 2002; Zhou et al., 2006a), which roughly speaking examines the percentage
of word n-grams (sequences of consecutive words) of the machine-generated translations that also
occur in the reference translations, and takes the geometric average of the percentages obtained for
different values of n. Although such n-gram based measures have been criticised in machine transla-
9
ANDROUTSOPOULOS & MALAKASIOTIS
tion evaluation (Callison-Burch, Osborne, & Koehn, 2006b), for example because they are unaware
of synonyms and longer paraphrases, they can be combined with other measures to build para-
phrase (and textual entailment) recognizers (Zhou et al., 2006a; Kauchak & Barzilay, 2006; Pad´o
et al., 2009), which may help address the problems of automated machine translation evaluation.
In textual entailment recognition, one of the input language expressions (T) is often much longer
than the other one (H). If a part of T’s surface string is very similar to H’s, this is an indication
that H may be entailed by T. This is illustrated in (31)–(32), where H is included verbatim in T.11
Note, however, that the surface string similarity (e.g., measured by string edit distance) between H
and the entire T of this example is low, because of the different lengths of T and H.
(31)
T: Charles de Gaulle died in 1970 at the age of eighty. He was thus ﬁfty years old when, as an un-
known ofﬁcer recently promoted to the rank of brigadier general, he made his famous broadcast from
London rejecting the capitulation of France to the Nazis after the debacle of May-June 1940.
(32)
H: Charles de Gaulle died in 1970.
Comparing H to a sliding window of T’s surface string of the same size as H (in our example, six
consecutive words of T) and keeping the largest similarity score between the sliding window and
H may provide a better indication of whether T entails H or not (Malakasiotis, 2009). In many
correct textual entailment pairs, however, using a single sliding window of a ﬁxed length may still
be inadequate, because H may correspond to several non-continuous parts of T; in (33)–(34), for
example, H corresponds to the three underlined parts of T.12
(33)
T: The Gaspe, also known as la Gaspesie in French, is a North American peninsula on the south shore
of the Saint Lawrence River, in Quebec.
(34)
H: The Gaspe is a peninsula in Quebec.
One possible solution is to attempt to align the words (or phrases) of H to those of T, and
consider T–H a correct textual entailment pair if a sufﬁciently good alignment is found, in the
simplest case if a large percentage of T’s words are aligned to words of H. Another approach would
be to use a window of variable length; the window could be, for example, the shortest span of T
that contains all of T’s words that are aligned to words of H (Burchardt, Pennacchiotti, Thater, &
Pinkal, 2009). In any case, we need to be careful with negations and other expressions that do
not preserve truth values, as already mentioned. Note, also, that although effective word alignment
methods have been developed in statistical machine translation (Brown, Della Pietra, Della Pietra,
& Mercer, 1993; Vogel, Ney, & Tillmann, 1996; Och & Ney, 2003), they often perform poorly on
textual entailment pairs, because T and H are often of very different lengths, they do not necessarily
convey the same information, and textual entailment training datasets are much smaller than those
used in machine translation; see MacCartney et al.’s (2008) work for further related discussion and
a word alignment method developed especially for textual entailment pairs.13
2.4 Recognition Approaches Based on Syntactic Similarity
Another common approach is to work at the syntax level. Dependency grammar parsers (Melcuk,
1987; Kubler, McDonald, & Nivre, 2009) are popular in paraphrasing and textual entailment re-
11Example from the dataset of RTE-3 (Giampiccolo et al., 2007).
12Modiﬁed example from the dataset of the RTE-3 (Giampiccolo et al., 2007).
13Cohn et al. (2008) discuss how a publicly available corpus with manually word-aligned paraphrases was constructed.
Other word-aligned paraphrasing or textual entailment datasets can be found at the ACL Textual Entailment Portal.
10
A SURVEY OF PARAPHRASING AND TEXTUAL ENTAILMENT METHODS
solved 
mathematician 
A 
problem 
the 
subj 
obj 
det 
det 
solved 
The 
was 
a 
young 
problem 
mathematician 
aux 
obj 
by 
det 
det mod 
A mathematician solved the problem The problem was solved by a young mathematician 
Figure 1: Two sentences that are very similar when viewed at the level of dependency trees.
search, as in other natural language processing areas recently. Instead of showing hierarchically the
syntactic constituents (e.g., noun phrases, verb phrases) of a sentence, the output of a dependency
grammar parser is a graph (usually a tree) whose nodes are the words of the sentence and whose
(labeled) edges correspond to syntactic dependencies between words, for example the dependency
between a verb and the head noun of its subject noun phrase, or the dependency between a noun
and an adjective that modiﬁes it. Figure 1 shows the dependency trees of two sentences. The exact
form of the trees and the edge labels would differ, depending on the parser; for simplicity, we show
prepositions as edges. If we ignore word order and the auxiliary “was” of the passive (right) sen-
tence, and if we take into account that the by edge of the passive sentence corresponds to the subj
edge of the active (left) one, the only difference is the extra adjective of the passive sentence. Hence,
it is easy to ﬁgure out from the dependency trees that the two sentences have very similar meanings,
despite their differences in word order. Strictly speaking, the right sentence textually entails the left
one, not the reverse, because of the word “young” in the right sentence.
Some paraphrase recognizers simply count the common edges of the dependency trees of the
input expressions (Wan et al., 2006; Malakasiotis, 2009) or use other tree similarity measures. A
large similarity score (e.g., above a threshold) indicates that the input expressions may be para-
phrases. Tree edit distance (Selkow, 1977; Tai, 1979; Zhang & Shasha, 1989) is another example
of a similarity measure that can be applied to dependency or other parse trees; it computes the se-
quence of operator applications (e.g., add, replace, or remove a node or edge) with the minimum
cost that turns one tree into the other.14 To obtain more accurate predictions, it is important to devise
an appropriate inventory of operators and assign appropriate costs to the operators during a training
stage (Kouylekov & Magnini, 2005; Mehdad, 2009; Harmeling, 2009). For example, replacing a
noun with one of its synonyms should be less costly than replacing it with an unrelated word; and
removing a dependency between a verb and an adverb should perhaps be less costly than removing
a dependency between a verb and the head noun of its subject or object.
In textual entailment recognition, one may compare H’s parse tree against subtrees of T’s parse
tree (Iftene & Balahur-Dobrescu, 2007; Zanzotto, Pennacchiotti, & Moschitti, 2009). It may be
possible to match H’s tree against a single subtree of T, in effect a single syntactic window on T,
as illustrated in Figure 2, which shows the dependency trees of (33)–(34); recall that (34) does not
match a single window of (33) at the surface string level.15 This is also a further example of how
operating at a higher level than surface strings may reveal similarities that may be less clear at lower
14EDITS, a suite to recognize textual entailment by computing edit distances, is publicly available.
15Figure 2 is based on the output of Stanford’s parser. One might argue that “North” should modify “American”.
11
ANDROUTSOPOULOS & MALAKASIOTIS
peninsula 
The 
is 
a 
Quebec 
Gaspe 
in 
aux 
subj 
mod 
det 
det 
obj 
known 
mod 
also 
as 
mod 
mod 
Gaspesie 
obj 
la 
in 
mod 
mod 
French 
obj 
North 
American 
on 
mod mod 
mod 
North 
south 
of 
the 
det mod mod 
River 
Saint 
Lawrence 
the 
det mod mod 
obj 
obj 
Figure 2: An example of how dependency trees may make it easier to match a short sentence (sub-
tree inside the dashed line) to a part of a longer one.
levels. Another example is (35)–(36); although (35) includes verbatim (36), it does not textually
entail (36).16 This is clear when one compares the syntactic representations of the two sentences:
Israel is the subject of “was established” in (36), but not in (35). The difference, however, is not
evident at the surface string level, and a sliding window of (35) would match exactly (36), wrongly
suggesting a textual entailment.
(35)
T: The National Institute for Psychobiology in Israel was established in 1979.
(36)
H: Israel was established in 1979.
Similar arguments can be made in favour of computing similarities at the semantic level (Qiu,
Kan, & Chua, 2006); for example, both the active and passive forms of a sentence may be mapped
to the same logical formula, making their similarity clearer than at the surface or syntax level. The
syntactic or semantic representations of the input expressions, however, cannot always be computed
accurately (e.g., due to parser errors), which may introduce noise; and, possibly because of the
noise, methods that operate at the syntactic or semantic level do not necessarily outperform in
practice methods that operate on surface strings (Wan et al., 2006; Burchardt, Reiter, Thater, &
Frank, 2007; Burchardt et al., 2009).
2.5 Recognition via Similarity Measures Operating on Symbolic Meaning Representations
Paraphrases may also be recognized by computing similarity measures on graphs whose edges do
not correspond to syntactic dependencies, but reﬂect semantic relations mentioned in the input ex-
pressions (Haghighi, 2005), for example the relation between a buyer and the entity bought. Rela-
tions of this kind may be identiﬁed by applying semantic role labeling methods (M`arquez, Carreras,
16Modiﬁed example from Haghighi et al.’s (2005) work.
12
A SURVEY OF PARAPHRASING AND TEXTUAL ENTAILMENT METHODS
Litkowski, & Stevenson, 2008) to the input language expressions. It is also possible to compute
similarities between meaning representations that are based on FrameNet’s frames (Burchardt et al.,
2007). The latter approach has the advantage that semantically related expressions may invoke the
same frame (as with “announcement”, “announce”, “acknowledge”) or interconnected frames (e.g.,
FrameNet links the frame invoked by “arrest” to the frame invoked by “trial” via a path of tempo-
ral precedence relations), making similarities and implications easier to capture (Burchardt et al.,
2009).17 The prototypical semantic roles that PropBank (Palmer, Gildea, & Kingsbury, 2005) asso-
ciates with each verb may also be used in a similar manner, instead of FrameNet’s frames. Similarly,
in the case of textual entailment recognition, one may compare H’s semantic representation (e.g.,
semantic graph or frame) to parts of T’s representation.
WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998), automatically constructed collections of near synonyms (Lin, 1998a;
Moore, 2001; Brockett & Dolan, 2005), or resources like NOMLEX (Meyers, Macleod, Yangarber,
Grishman, Barrett, & Reeves, 1998) and CATVAR (Habash & Dorr, 2003) that provide nominaliza-
tions of verbs and other derivationally related words across different POS categories (e.g., “to invent”
and “invention”), can be used to match synonyms, hypernyms–hyponyms, or, more generally, se-
mantically related words across the two input expressions. According to WordNet, in (37)–(38)
“shares” is a direct hyponym (more speciﬁc meaning) of “stock”, “slumped” is a direct hyponym
of “dropped”, and “company” is an indirect hyponym (two levels down) of “organization”.18 By
treating semantically similar words (e.g., synonyms, or hypernyms-hyponyms up to a small hierar-
chical distance) as identical (Rinaldi et al., 2003; Finch et al., 2005; Tatu, Iles, Slavick, Novischi, &
Moldovan, 2006; Iftene & Balahur-Dobrescu, 2007; Malakasiotis, 2009; Harmeling, 2009), or by
considering (e.g., counting) semantically similar words across the two input language expressions
(Brockett & Dolan, 2005; Bos & Markert, 2005), paraphrase recognizers may be able to cope with
paraphrases that have very similar meanings, but very few or no common words.
(37)
The shares of the company dropped.
(38)
The organization’s stock slumped.
In textual entailment recognition, it may be desirable to allow the words of T to be more distant
hyponyms of the words of H, compared to paraphrase recognition. For example, “X is a computer”
textually entails “X is an artifact”, and “computer” is a hyponym of “artifact” four levels down.
Measures that exploit WordNet (or similar resources) and compute the semantic similarity
between two words or, more generally, two texts have also been proposed (Leacock, Miller, &
Chodorow, 1998; Lin, 1998c; Resnik, 1999; Budanitsky & Hirst, 2006; Tsatsaronis, Varlamis, &
Vazirgiannis, 2010).19 Some of them are directional, making them more suitable to textual entail-
ment recognition (Corley & Mihalcea, 2005). Roughly speaking, measures of this kind consider
(e.g., sum the lengths of) the paths in WordNet’s hierarchies (or similar resources) that connect the
senses of corresponding (e.g., most similar) words across the two texts. They may also take into
account information such as the frequencies of the words in the two texts and how rarely they are
encountered in documents of a large collection (inverse document frequency). The rationale is that
frequent words of the input texts that are rarely used in a general corpus are more important, as in
17Consult, for example, the work of Erk and Pad´o (2006) for a description of a system that can annotate texts with
FrameNet frames. The FATE corpus (Burchardt & Pennacchiotti, 2008), a version of the RTE 2 test set (Bar-Haim et al.,
2006) with FrameNet annotations, is publicly available.
18Modiﬁed example from the work of Tsatsaronis (2009)
19Pedersen’s WordNet::Similarity package implements many of these measures.
13
ANDROUTSOPOULOS & MALAKASIOTIS
(P1,1, P2,1) X 
(P1,2, P2,2)  
(P1,n, P2,n)  
… 
Vector creation 
Preprocessing 
<f1,1, …, fm,1> X 
… 
<f1,2, …, fm,2>  
<f1,n, …, fm,n>  
Learning 
Algorithm 
Training stage 
(P1, P2) ? 
Vector creation 
Preprocessing 
<f1, …, fm> ? 
Trained 
Classifier 
Classification stage 
Decision:  
Trained 
Classifier 
Figure 3: Paraphrase and textual entailment recognition via supervised machine learning.
information retrieval; hence, the paths that connect them should be assigned greater weights. Since
they often consider paths between word senses, many of these measures would ideally be combined
with word sense disambiguation (Yarowski, 2000; Stevenson & Wilks, 2003; Kohomban & Lee,
2005; Navigli, 2008), which is not, however, always accurate enough for practical purposes.
2.6 Recognition Approaches that Employ Machine Learning
Multiple similarity measures, possibly computed at different levels (surface strings, syntactic or
semantic representations) may be combined by using machine learning (Mitchell, 1997; Alpay-
din, 2004), as illustrated in Figure 3.20 Each pair of input language expressions ⟨P1,P2⟩, i.e., each
pair of expressions we wish to check if they are paraphrases or a correct textual entailment pair,
is represented by a feature vector ⟨f1,..., fm⟩. The vector contains the scores of multiple simi-
larity measures applied to the pair, and possibly other features. For example, many systems also
include features that check for polarity differences across the two input expressions, as in “this is
not a conﬁrmed case of rabies” vs. “a case of rabies was conﬁrmed”, or modality differences, as
in “a case may have been conﬁrmed” vs. “a case has been conﬁrmed” (Haghighi, 2005; Iftene &
Balahur-Dobrescu, 2007; Tatu & Moldovan, 2007). Bos and Markert (2005) also include features
indicating if a theorem prover has managed to prove that the logical representation of one of the
input expressions entails the other or contradicts it. A supervised machine learning algorithm trains
a classiﬁer on manually classiﬁed (as correct or incorrect) vectors corresponding to training input
pairs. Once trained, the classiﬁer can classify unseen pairs as correct or incorrect paraphrases or
textual entailment pairs by examining their features (Bos & Markert, 2005; Brockett & Dolan, 2005;
Zhang & Patrick, 2005; Finch et al., 2005; Wan et al., 2006; Burchardt et al., 2007; Hickl, 2008;
Malakasiotis, 2009; Nielsen et al., 2009).
A preprocessing stage is commonly applied to each input pair of language expressions, before
converting it to a feature vector (Zhang & Patrick, 2005). Part of the preprocessing may provide
20WEKA (Witten & Frank, 2005) provides implementations of several well known machine learning algorithms, in-
cluding C4.5 (Quinlan, 1993), Naive Bayes (Mitchell, 1997), SVMs (Vapnik, 1998; Cristianini & Shawe-Taylor, 2000;
Joachims, 2002), and AdaBoost (Freund & Schapire, 1995; Friedman, Hastie, & Tibshirani, 2000). More efﬁcient im-
plementations of SVMs, such as LIBSVM and SVM-LIGHT, are also available. Maximum Entropy classiﬁers are also very
effective; see chapter 6 of the book “Speech and Language Processing” (Jurafsky & Martin, 2008) for an introduction;
Stanford’s implementation is frequently used.
14
A SURVEY OF PARAPHRASING AND TEXTUAL ENTAILMENT METHODS
information that is required to compute the features; for example, this is when a POS tagger or a
parser would be applied.21 The preprocessing may also normalize the input pairs; for example, a
stemmer may be applied; dates may be converted to a consistent format; names of persons, organi-
zations, locations etc. may be tagged by their semantic categories using a named entity recognizer;
pronouns or, more generally, referring expressions, may be replaced by the expressions they refer to
(Hobbs, 1986; Lappin & Leass, 1994; Mitkov, 2003; Moll´a, Schwitter, Rinaldi, Dowdall, & Hess,
2003; Yang, Su, & Tan, 2008); and morphosyntactic variations may be normalized (e.g., passive
sentences may be converted to active ones).22
Instead of mapping each ⟨P1,P2⟩pair to a feature vector that contains mostly scores measur-
ing the similarity between P1 and P2, it is possible to use vectors that encode directly parts of P1
and P2, or parts of their syntactic or semantic representations. Zanzotto et al. (2009) project each
⟨P1,P2⟩pair to a vector that, roughly speaking, contains as features all the fragments of P1 and P2’s
parse trees. Leaf nodes corresponding to identical or very similar words (according to a WordNet-
based similarity measure) across P1 and P2 are replaced by co-indexed slots, to allow the features
to be more general. Zanzotto et al. deﬁne a measure (actually, different versions of it) that, in ef-
fect, computes the similarity of two pairs ⟨P1,P2⟩and ⟨P′
1,P′
2⟩by counting the parse tree fragments
(features) that are shared by P1 and P′
1, and those shared by P2 and P′
2. The measure is used as a
kernel in an Support Vector Machine (SVM) that learns to separate positive textual entailment pairs
⟨P1,P2⟩= ⟨T,H⟩from negative ones. A (valid) kernel can be thought of as a similarity measure that
projects two objects to a highly dimensional vector space, where it computes the inner product of
the projected objects; efﬁcient kernels compute the inner product directly from the original objects,
without computing their projections to the highly dimensional vector space (Vapnik, 1998; Cris-
tianini & Shawe-Taylor, 2000; Joachims, 2002). In Zanzotto et al.’s work, each object is a ⟨T,H⟩
pair, and its projection is the vector that contains all the parse tree fragments of T and H as features.
Consult, for example, the work of Zanzotto and Dell’ Arciprete (2009) and Moschitti (2009) for
further discussion of kernels that can be used in paraphrase and textual entailment recognition.
2.7 Recognition Approaches Based on Decoding
Pairs of paraphrasing or textual entailment expressions (or templates) like (39), often called rules,
that may have been produced by extraction mechanisms (to be discussed in Section 4) can be used
by recognizers much as, and often in addition to synonyms and hypernyms-hyponyms.
(39)
“X is fond of Y” ≈“X likes Y”
Given the paraphrasing rule of (39) and the information that “child” is a synonym of “kid” and
“candy” a hyponym of “sweet”, a recognizer could ﬁgure out that (40) textually entails (43) by
gradually transforming (40) to (43) as shown below.23
(40)
Children are fond of sweets.
21Brill’s (1992) POS tagger is well-known and publicly available. Stanford’s tagger (Toutanova, Klein, Manning, &
Singer, 2003) is another example of a publicly available POS tagger. Commonly used parsers include Charniak’s (2000),
Collin’s (2003), the Link Grammar Parser (Sleator & Temperley, 1993), MINIPAR, a principle-based parser (Berwick,
1991) very similar to PRINCIPAR (Lin, 1994), MaltParser (Nivre, Hall, Nilsson, Chanev, Eryigit, Kuebler, Marinov, &
Marsi, 2007), and Stanford’s parser (Klein & Manning, 2003).
22Porter’s stemmer (1997) is well-known. An example of a publicly available named-entity recognizer is Stanford’s.
23Modiﬁed example from Bar-Haim et al.’s (2009) work.
15
ANDROUTSOPOULOS & MALAKASIOTIS
(41)
Kids are fond of sweets.
(42)
Kids like sweets.
(43)
Kids like candies.
Another recognition approach, then, is to search for a sequence of rule applications or other
transformations (e.g., replacing synonyms, or hypernyms-hyponyms) that turns one of the input
expressions (or its syntactic or semantic representation) to the other. We call this search decoding,
because it is similar to the decoding stage of machine translation (to be discussed in Section 3),
where a sequence of transformations that turns a source-language expression into a target-language
expression is sought. In our case, if a sequence is found, the two input expressions constitute a
positive paraphrasing or textual entailment pair, depending on the rules used; otherwise, the pair is
negative. If each rule is associated with a conﬁdence score (possibly learnt from a training dataset)
that reﬂects the degree to which the rule preserves the original meaning in paraphrase recognition,
or the degree to which we are conﬁdent that it produces an entailed expression, we may search for
the sequence of transformations with the maximum score (or minimum cost), much as in approaches
that compute the minimum (string or tree) edit distance between the two input expressions. The pair
of input expressions can then be classiﬁed as positive if the maximum-score sequence exceeds a
conﬁdence threshold (Harmeling, 2009). One would also have to consider the contexts where rules
are applied, because a rule may not be valid in all contexts, for instance because of the different
possible senses of the words it involves. A possible solution is to associate each rule with a vector
that represents the contexts where it can be used (e.g., a vector of frequently occurring words in
training contexts where the rule applies), and use a rule only in contexts that are similar to its
associated context vector; with slotted rules, one can also model the types of slot values (e.g., types
of named entities) the rule can be used with the work of Pantel, Bhagat, Coppola, Chklovski, and
Hovy (2007), and Szpektor, Dagan, Bar-Haim, and Goldberger (2008).
Resouces like WordNet and extraction methods, however, provide thousands or millions of rules,
giving rise to an exponentially large number of transformation sequences to consider.24
When
operating at the level of semantic representations, the sequence sought is in effect a proof that the
two input expressions are paraphrases or a valid textual entailment pair, and it may be obtained
by exploiting theorem provers, as discussed earlier. Bar-Haim et al. (2007) discuss how to search
for sequences of transformations, seen as proofs at the syntactic level, when the input language
expressions and their reformulations are represented by dependency trees. In subsequent work (Bar-
Haim et al., 2009), they introduce compact forests, a data structure that allows the dependency trees
of multiple intermediate reformulations to be represented by a single graph, to make the search
more efﬁcient. They also combine their approach with an SVM-based recognizer; sequences of
transformations are used to bring T closer to H, and the SVM recognizer is then employed to judge
if the transformed T and H consitute a positive textual entailment pair or not.
2.8 Evaluating Recognition Methods
Experimenting with paraphase and textual entailment recognizers requires datasets containing both
positive and negative input pairs. When using discriminative classiﬁers (e.g., SVMs), the negative
training pairs must ideally be near misses, otherwise they may be of little use (Schohn & Cohn,
2000; Tong & Koller, 2002). Near misses can also make the test data more challenging.
24Collections of transformation rules and resources that can be used to obtain such rules are listed at the ACL Textual
Entailment Portal. Mirkin et al. (2009a) discuss how to evaluate collections of textual entailment rules.
16
A SURVEY OF PARAPHRASING AND TEXTUAL ENTAILMENT METHODS
method
accuracy (%)
precision (%)
recall (%)
F-measure (%)
Corley & Mihalcea (2005)
71.5
72.3
92.5
81.2
Das & Smith (2009)
76.1
79.6
86.1
82.9
Finch et al. (2005)
75.0
76.6
89.8
82.7
Malakasiotis (2009)
76.2
79.4
86.8
82.9
Qiu et al. (2006)
72.0
72.5
93.4
81.6
Wan et al. (2006)
75.6
77.0
90.0
83.0
Zhang & Patrick (2005)
71.9
74.3
88.2
80.7
BASE1
66.5
66.5
100.0
79.9
BASE2
69.0
72.4
86.3
78.8
Table 1: Paraphrase recognition results on the MSR corpus.
The most widely used benchmark dataset for paraphrase recognition is the Microsoft Research
(MSR) Paraphrase Corpus. It contains 5,801 pairs of sentences obtained from clusters of online news
articles referring to the same events (Dolan, Quirk, & Brockett, 2004; Dolan & Brockett, 2005).
The pairs were initially ﬁltered by heuristics, which require, for example, the word edit distance
of the two sentences in each pair to be neither too small (to avoid nearly identical sentences) nor
too large (to avoid too many negative pairs); and both sentences to be among the ﬁrst three of
articles from the same cluster (articles referring to the same event), the rationale being that initial
sentences often summarize the events. The candidate paraphrase pairs were then ﬁltered by an
SVM-based paraphrase recognizer (Brockett & Dolan, 2005), trained on separate manually classiﬁed
pairs obtained in a similar manner, which was biased to overidentify paraphrases. Finally, human
judges annotated the remaining sentence pairs as paraphrases or not. After resolving disagreements,
approximately 67% of the 5,801 pairs were judged to be paraphrases. The dataset is divided in
two non-overlapping parts, for training (30% of all pairs) and testing (70%). Zhang and Patrick
(2005) and others have pointed out that the heuristics that were used to construct the corpus may
have biased it towards particular types of paraphrases, excluding for example paraphrases that do
not share any common words.
Table 1 lists all the published results of paraphrase recognition experiments on the MSR corpus
we are aware of. We include two baselines we used: BASE1 classiﬁes all pairs as paraphrases;
BASE2 classiﬁes two sentences as paraphrases when their surface word edit distance is below a
threshold, tuned on the training part of the corpus. Four commonly used evaluation measures are
used: accuracy, precision, recall, and F-measure with equal weight on precision and recall. These
measures are deﬁned below. TP (true positives) and FP (false positives) are the numbers of pairs
that have been correctly or incorrectly, respectively, classiﬁed as positive (paraphrases). TN (true
negatives) and FN (false negatives) are the numbers of pairs that have been correctly or incorrectly,
respectively, classiﬁed as negative (not paraphrases).
precision =
TP
TP+FP,
recall =
TP
TP+FN,
accuracy =
TP+TN
TP+TN+FP+FN ,
F-measure = 2·precision·recall
precision+recall
All the systems of Table 1 have better recall than precision, which implies they tend to over-classify
pairs as paraphrases, possibly because the sentences of each pair have at least some common words
and refer to the same event. Systems with higher recall tend to have lower precision, and vice versa,
as one would expect. The high F-measure of BASE1 is largely due to its perfect recall; its precision
17
ANDROUTSOPOULOS & MALAKASIOTIS
method
accuracy (%)
precision (%)
recall (%)
F-measure (%)
Bensley & Hickl (2008)
74.6
–
–
–
Iftene (2008)
72.1
65.5
93.2
76.9
Siblini & Kosseim (2008)
68.8
–
–
–
Wang & Neumann (2008)
70.6
–
–
–
BASE1
50.0
50.0
100.0
66.7
BASE2
54.9
53.6
73.6
62.0
Table 2: Textual entailment recognition results (for two classes) on the RTE-4 corpus.
is signiﬁcantly lower, compared to the other systems. BASE2, which uses only string edit distance,
is a competitive baseline for this corpus. Space does not permit listing published evaluation results
of all the paraphrase recognition methods that we have discussed. Furthermore, comparing results
obtained on different datasets is not always meaningful.
For textual entailment recognition, the most widely used benchmarks are those of the RTE chal-
lenges. As an example, the RTE-3 corpus contains 1,600 ⟨T,H⟩pairs (positive or negative). Four
application scenarios where textual entailment recognition might be useful were considered: infor-
mation extraction, information retrieval, question answering, and summarization. There are 200
training and 200 testing pairs for each scenario; Dagan et al. (2009) explain how they were con-
structed. The RTE-4 corpus was constructed in a similar way, but it contains only test pairs, 250 for
each of the four scenarios. A further difference is that in RTE-4 the judges classiﬁed the pairs in
three classes: true entailment pairs, false entailment pairs where H contradicts T (Harabagiu, Hickl,
& Lacatusu, 2006; de Marneffe, Rafferty, & Manning, 2008), and false pairs where reading T does
not lead to any conclusion about H; a similar pilot task was included in RTE-3 (Voorhees, 2008).
The pairs of the latter two classes can be merged, if only two classes (true and false) are desirable.
We also note that RTE-3 included a pilot task requiring systems to justify their answers. Many of
the participants, however, used technical or mathematical terminology in their explanations, which
was not always appreciated by the human judges; also, the entailments were often obvious to the
judges, to the extent that no justiﬁcation was considered necessary (Voorhees, 2008). Table 2 lists
the best accuracy results of RTE-4 participants (for two classes only), along with results of the two
baselines described previously; precision, recall, and F-measure scores are also shown, when avail-
able. All four measures are deﬁned as in paraphrase recognition, but positives and negatives are now
textual entailment pairs.25 Again, space does not permit listing published evaluation results of all
the textual entailment recognition methods that we have discussed, and comparing results obtained
on different datasets is not always meaningful.
It is also possible to evaluate recognition methods indirectly, by measuring their impact on the
performance of larger natural language processing systems (Section 1.1). For instance, one could
measure the difference in the performance of a QA system, or the degree to which the redundancy
of a generated summary is reduced when using paraphrase and/or textual entailment recognizers.
25Average precision, borrowed from information retrieval evaluation, has also been used in the RTE challenges.
Bergmair (2009), however, argues against using it in RTE challenges and proposes alternative measures.
18
A SURVEY OF PARAPHRASING AND TEXTUAL ENTAILMENT METHODS
3. Paraphrase and Textual Entailment Generation
Unlike recognizers, paraphrase or textual entailment generators are given a single language expres-
sion (or template) as input, and they are required to produce as many output language expressions
(or templates) as possible, such that the output expressions are paraphrases or they constitute, along
with the input, correct textual entailment pairs. Most generators assume that the input is a single
sentence (or sentence template), and we adopt this assumption in the remainder of this section.
3.1 Generation Methods Inspired by Statistical Machine Translation
Many generation methods borrow ideas from statistical machine translation (SMT).26 Let us ﬁrst in-
troduce some central ideas from SMT, for the beneﬁt of readers unfamiliar with them. SMT methods
rely on very large bilingual or multilingual parallel corpora, for example the proceedings of the Eu-
ropean parliament, without constructing meaning representations and often, at least until recently,
without even constructing syntactic representations.27 Let us assume that we wish to translate a
sentence F, whose words are f1, f2,..., f|F| in that order, from a foreign language to our native lan-
guage. Let us also denote by N any candidate translation, whose words are a1,a2,...,a|N|. The best
translation, denoted N∗, is the N with the maximum probability of being a translation of F, i.e:
N∗= argmax
N P(N|F) = argmax
N
P(N)P(F|N)
P(F)
= argmax
N P(N)P(F|N)
(44)
Since F is ﬁxed, the denominator P(F) above is constant and can be ignored when searching for
N∗. P(N) is called the language model and P(F|N) the translation model.
For modeling purposes, it is common to assume that F was in fact originally written in our native
language and it was transmitted to us via a noisy channel, which introduced various deformations.
The possible deformations may include, for example, replacing a native word with one or more
foreign ones, removing or inserting words, moving words to the left or right etc. The commonly
used IBM models 1 to 5 (Brown et al., 1993) provide an increasingly richer inventory of word
deformations; more recent phrase-based SMT systems (Koehn, Och, & Marcu, 2003) also allow
directly replacing entire phrases with other phrases. The foreign sentence F can thus be seen as the
result of applying a sequence of transformations D =

d1,d2,...,d|D|

to N, and it is common to
search for the N∗that maximizes (45); this search is called decoding.
N∗= argmax
N P(N)max
D P(F,D|N)
(45)
An exhaustive search is usually intractable. Hence, heuristic search algorithms (e.g., based on beam
search) are usually employed (Germann, Jahr, Knight, Marcu, & Yamada, 2001; Koehn, 2004).28
Assuming for simplicity that the individual deformations di(·) of D are mutually independent,
P(F,D|N) can be computed as the product of the probabilities of D’s individual deformations. Given
a bilingual parallel corpus with words aligned across languages, we can estimate the probabilities
26For an introduction to SMT, see chapter 25 of the book “Speech and Language Processing” (Jurafsky & Martin,
2008), and chapter 13 of the book “Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Processing” (Manning & Schuetze,
1999). For a more extensive discussion, consult the work of Koehn (2009).
27See Koehn’s Statistical Machine Translation site for commonly used SMT corpora and tools.
28A frequently used SMT system that includes decoding facilities is Moses.
19
ANDROUTSOPOULOS & MALAKASIOTIS
of all possible deformations di(·). In practice, however, parallel corpora do not indicate word align-
ment. Hence, it is common to ﬁnd the most probable word alignment of the corpus given initial
estimates of individual deformation probabilities, then re-estimate the deformation probabilities
given the resulting alignment, and iterate (Brown et al., 1993; Och & Ney, 2003).29
The translation model P(F,D|N) estimates the probability of obtaining F from N via D; we are
interested in Ns with high probabilities of leading to F. We also want, however, N to be gram-
matical, and we use the language model P(N) to check for grammaticality. P(N) is the probability
of encountering N in our native language; it is estimated from a large monolingual corpus of our
language, typically assuming that the probability of encountering word ai depends only on the pre-
ceding n−1 words. For n = 3, P(N) becomes:
P(N) = P(a1)·P(a2|a1)·P(a3|a1,a2)·P(a4|a2,a3)···P(a|N||a|N|−2,a|N|−1)
(46)
A language model typically also includes smoothening mechanisms, to cope with n-grams that are
very rare or not present in the monolingual corpus, which would lead to P(N) = 0.30
In principle, an SMT system could be used to generate paraphrases, if it could be trained on a
sufﬁciently large monolingual corpus of parallel texts. Both N and F are now sentences of the same
language, but N has to be different from the given F, and it has to convey the same (or almost the
same) information. The main problem is that there are no readily available monolingual parallel
corpora of the sizes that are used in SMT, to train the language model on them. One possibility
is to use multiple translations of the same source texts; for example, different English translations
of novels originally written in other languages (Barzilay & McKeown, 2001), or multiple English
translations of Chinese news articles, as in the Multiple-Translation Chinese Corpus. Corpora of
this kind, however, are still orders of magnitude smaller than those used in SMT.
To bypass the lack of large monolingual parallel corpora, Quirk et al. (2004) use clusters of
news articles referring to the same event. The articles of each cluster do not always report the same
information and, hence, they are not parallel texts. Since they talk about the same event, however,
they often contain phrases, sentences, or even longer fragments with very similar meanings; corpora
of this kind are often called comparable. From each cluster, Quirk et al. select pairs of similar
sentences (e.g., with small word edit distance, but not identical sentences) using methods like those
employed to create the MSR corpus (Section 2.8).31 The sentence pairs are then word aligned as
in machine translation, and the resulting alignments are used to create a table of phrase pairs as
in phrase-based SMT systems (Koehn et al., 2003). A phrase pair ⟨P1,P2⟩consists of contiguous
words (taken to be a phrase, though not necessarily a syntactic constituent) P1 of one sentence that
are aligned to different contiguous words P2 of another sentence. Quirk et al. provide the following
examples of discovered pairs.
29GIZA++ is often used to train IBM models and align words.
30See chapter 4 of the book “Speech and Language Processing” (Jurafsky & Martin, 2008) and chapter 6 of the book
“Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Processing” (Manning & Schuetze, 1999) for an introduction to language
models. SRILM (Stolcke, 2002) is a commonly used tool to create language models.
31Wubben et al. (2009) discuss similar methods to pair news titles. Barzilay & Elhadad (2003) and Nelken & Shieber
(2006) discuss more general methods to align sentences of monolingual comparable corpora. Sentence alignment methods
for bilingual parallel or comparable corpora are discussed, for example, by Gale and Church (1993), Melamed (1999),
Fung and Cheung (2004), Munteanu and Marcu (2006); see also the work of Wu (2000). Sentence alignment methods
for parallel corpora may perform poorly on comparable corpora (Nelken & Shieber, 2006).
20
A SURVEY OF PARAPHRASING AND TEXTUAL ENTAILMENT METHODS
P1
P2
injured
wounded
Bush administration
White House
margin of error
error margin
...
. . .
Phrase pairs that occur frequently in the aligned sentences may be assigned higher probabili-
ties; Quirk et al. use probabilities returned by IBM model 1. Their decoder ﬁrst constructs a lattice
that represents all the possible paraphrases of the input sentence that can be produced by replacing
phrases by their counterparts in the phrase table; i.e., the possible deformations di(·) are the phrase
replacements licensed by the phrase table.32 Unlike machine translation, not all of the words or
phrases need to be replaced, which is why Quirk et al. also allow a degenerate identity deforma-
tion did(ξ) = ξ; assigning a high probability to the identity deformation leads to more conservative
paraphrases, with fewer phrase replacements. The decoder uses the probabilities of di(·) to com-
pute P(F,D|N) in equation (45), and the language model to compute P(N). The best scored N∗is
returned as a paraphrase of F; the n most highly scored Ns could also be returned. More generally,
the table of phrase pairs may also include synonyms obtained from WordNet or similar resources,
or pairs of paraphrases (or templates) discovered by paraphrase extraction methods; in effect, Quirk
et al.’s construction of a monolingual phrase table is a paraphrase extraction method. A language
model may also be applied locally to the replacement words of a deformation and their context to
assess whether or not the new words ﬁt the original context (Mirkin et al., 2009b).
Zhao et al. (2008, 2009) demonstrated that combining phrase tables derived from multiple re-
sources improves paraphrase generation. They also proposed scoring the candidate paraphrases
by using an additional, application-dependent model, called the usability model; for example, in
sentence compression (Section 1.1) the usability model rewards Ns that have fewer words than F.
Equation (45) then becomes (47), where U(F,N) is the usability model and λi are weights assigned
to the three models; similar weights can be used in (45).
N∗= argmax
N U(F,N)λ1P(N)λ2 max
D P(F,D|N)λ3
(47)
Zhao et al. actually use a log-linear formulation of (47); and they select the weights λi that maxi-
mize an objective function that rewards many and correct (as judged by human evaluators) phrasal
replacements.33 One may replace the translation model by a paraphrase recognizer (Section 2) that
returns a conﬁdence score; in its log-linear formulation, (47) then becomes (48), where R(F,N) is
the conﬁdence score of the recognizer.
N∗= argmax
N [λ1 logU(F,N)+λ2 logP(N)+λ3logR(F,N)]
(48)
Including hyponyms-hypernyms or textual entailment rules (Section 2.7) in the phrase table
would generate sentences N that textually entail or are entailed (depending on the direction of the
32Chevelu et al. (2009) discuss how other decoders could be developed especially for paraphrase generation.
33In a “reluctant paraphrasing” setting (Dras, 1998), for example when revising a document to satisfy length require-
ments, readability measures, or other externally imposed constraints, it may be desirable to use an objective function that
rewards making as few changes as possible, provided that the constraints are satisﬁed. Dras (1998) discusses a formulation
of this problem in terms of integer programming.
21
ANDROUTSOPOULOS & MALAKASIOTIS
rules and whether we replace hyponyms by hypernyms or the reverse) by F. SMT-inspired methods,
however, have been used mostly in paraphrase generation, not in textual entailment generation.
Paraphrases can also be generated by using pairs of machine translation systems to translate the
input expression to a new language, often called a pivot language, and then back to the original
language. The resulting expression is often different from the input one, especially when the two
translation systems employ different methods. By using different pairs of machine translation sys-
tems or different pivot languages, multiple paraphrases may be obtained. Duboue and Chu-Carroll
(2006) demonstrated the beneﬁt of using this approach to paraphrase questions, with an additional
machine learning classiﬁer to ﬁlter the generated paraphrases; their classiﬁer uses features such as
the cosine similarity between a candidate generated paraphrase and the original question, the lengths
of the candidate paraphrase and the original question, features showing whether or not both ques-
tions are of the same type (e.g., both asking for a person name), etc. An advantage of this approach
is that the machine translation systems can be treated as black boxes, and they can be trained on
readily available parallel corpora of different languages. A disadvantage is that translation errors
from both directions may lead to poor paraphrases. We return to pivot languages in Section 4.
In principle, the output of a generator may be produced by mapping the input to a representation
of its meaning, a process that usually presupposes parsing, and by passing on the meaning represen-
tation, or new meaning representations that are logically entailed by the original one, to a natural
language generation system (Reiter & Dale, 2000; Bateman & Zock, 2003) to produce paraphrases
or entailed language expressions. This approach would be similar to using language-independent
meaning representations (an “interlingua”) in machine translation, but here the meaning representa-
tions would not need to be language-independent, since only one language is involved. An approach
similar to syntactic transfer in machine translation may also be adopted (McKeown, 1983). In that
case, the input language expression (assumed to be a sentence) is ﬁrst parsed. The resulting syntac-
tic representation is then modiﬁed in ways that preserve, or affect only slightly, the original meaning
(e.g., turning a sentence from active to passive), or in ways that produce syntactic representations
of entailed language expressions (e.g., pruning certain modiﬁers or subordinate clauses). New lan-
guage expressions are then generated from the new syntactic representations, possibly by invoking
the surface realization components of a natural language generation system. Parsing, however, the
input expression may introduce errors, and producing a correct meaning representation of the input,
when this is required, may be far from trivial. Furthermore, the natural language generator may be
capable of producing language expressions of only a limited variety, missing possible paraphrases
or entailed language expressions. This is perhaps why meaning representation and syntactic transfer
do not seem to be currently popular in paraphrase and textual entailment generation.
3.2 Generation Methods that Use Bootstrapping
When the input and output expressions are slotted templates, it is possible to apply bootstrapping
to a large monolingual corpus (e.g., the entire Web), instead of using machine translation methods.
Let us assume, for example, that we wish to generate paraphrases of (49), and that we are given a
few pairs of seed values of X and Y, as in (50) and (51).
(49)
X is the author of Y.
(50)
⟨X = “Jack Kerouac”,Y = “On the Road”⟩
(51)
⟨X = “Jules Verne”,Y = “The Mysterious Island”⟩
We can retrieve from the corpus sentences that contain any of the seed pairs:
22
A SURVEY OF PARAPHRASING AND TEXTUAL ENTAILMENT METHODS
(52)
Jack Kerouac wrote “On the Road”.
(53)
“The Mysterious Island” was written by Jules Verne.
(54)
Jack Kerouac is most known for his novel “On the Road”.
By replacing the known seeds with the corresponding slot names, we obtain new templates:
(55)
X wrote Y.
(56)
Y was written by X.
(57)
X is most known for his novel Y.
In our example, (55) and (56) are paraphrases of (49); however, (57) textually entails (49), but is
not a paraphrase of (49). If we want to generate paraphrases, we must keep (55) and (56) only; if we
want to generate templates that entail (49), we must keep (57) too. Some of the generated candidate
templates may neither be paraphrases of, nor entail (or be entailed by) the original template. A good
paraphrase or textual entailment recognizer (Section 2) or a human in the loop would be able to ﬁlter
out bad candidate templates; see also Duclaye et al.’s (2003) work, where Expectation Maximization
(Mitchell, 1997) is used to ﬁlter the candidate templates. Simpler ﬁltering techniques may also be
used. For example, Ravichandran et al. (2002, 2003) assign to each candidate template a pseudo-
precision score; roughly speaking, the score is computed as the number of retrieved sentences that
match the candidate template with X and Y having the values of any seed pair, divided by the
number of retrieved sentences that match the template when X has a seed value and Y any value,
not necessarily the corresponding seed value.
Having obtained new templates, we can search the corpus for new sentences that match them;
for example, sentence (58) matches the generated template (56). From the new sentences, more seed
values can be obtained, if the slot values correspond to types of expressions (e.g., person names) that
can be recognized reasonably well, for example by using a named entity recognizer or a gazetteer
(e.g., a large list of book titles); from (58) we would obtain the new seed pair (59). More iterations
may be used to generate more templates and more seeds, until no more templates and seeds can be
discovered or a maximum number of iterations is reached.
(58)
Frankenstein was written by Mary Shelley.
(59)
⟨X = “Mary Shelley”,Y = “Frankenstein”⟩
Figure 4 illustrates how a bootstrapping paraphrase generator works. Templates that textually entail
or that are textually entailed by an initial template, for which seed slot values are provided, can be
generated similarly, if the paraphrase recognizer is replaced by a textual entailment recognizer.
If slot values can be recognized reliably, we can also obtain the initial seed slot values auto-
matically by retrieving directly sentences that match the original templates and by identifying the
slot values in the retrieved sentences.34 If we are also given a mechanism to identify sentences of
interest in the corpus (e.g., sentences involving particular terms, such as names of known diseases
and medicines), we can also obtain the initial templates automatically, by identifying sentences of
interest, identifying slot values (e.g., named entities of particular categories) in the sentences, and
using the contexts of the slot values as initial templates. In effect, the generation task then becomes
an extraction one, since we are given a corpus, but neither initial templates nor seed slot values.
TEASE (Szpektor, Tanev, Dagan, & Coppola, 2004) is a well-known bootstrapping method of this
34Seed slot values per semantic relation can also be obtained from databases (Mintz, Bills, Snow, & Jurafsky, 2009).
23
ANDROUTSOPOULOS & MALAKASIOTIS
kind, which produces textual entailment pairs, for example pairs like (60)–(61), given only a mono-
lingual (non-parallel) corpus and a dictionary of terms. (60) textually implies (61), for example in
contexts like those of (62)–(63), but not the reverse.35
(60)
X prevents Y
(61)
X reduces Y risk
(62)
Aspirin prevents heart attack.
(63)
Aspirin reduces heart attack risk.
TEASE does not specify the directionality of the produced template pairs, for example whether (60)
textually entails (61) or vice versa, but additional mechanisms have been proposed that attempt to
guess the directionality; we discuss one such mechanism, LEDIR (Bhagat, Pantel, & Hovy, 2007), in
Section 4.1 below. Although TEASE can also be used as a generator, if particular input templates are
provided, we discuss it further in Section 4.2, along with other bootstrapping extraction methods,
since in its full form it requires no initial templates (nor seed slot values). The reader is reminded
that the boundaries between recognizers, generators, and extractors are not always clear.
Similar bootstrapping methods have been used to generate information extraction patterns (Riloff
& Jones, 1999; Xu, Uszkoreit, & Li, 2007). Some of these methods, however, require corpora an-
notated with instances of particular types of events to be extracted (Huffman, 1995; Riloff, 1996b;
Soderland, Fisher, Aseltine, & Lehnert, 1995; Soderland, 1999; Muslea, 1999; Califf & Mooney,
2003), or texts that mention the target events and near-miss texts that do not (Riloff, 1996a).
Marton et al. (2009) used a similar approach, but without iterations, to generate paraphrases of
unknown source language phrases in a phrase-based SMT system (Section 1.1). For each unknown
phrase, they collected contexts where the phrase occurred in a monolingual corpus of the source
language, and they searched for other phrases (candidate paraphrases) in the corpus that occurred
in the same contexts. They subsequently produced feature vectors for both the unknown phrase and
its candidate paraphrases, with each vector showing how often the corresponding phrase cooccurred
with other words. The candidate paraphrases were then ranked by the similarity of their vectors
to the vector of the unknown phrase. The unknown phrases were in effect replaced by their best
paraphrases that the SMT system knew how to map to target language phrases, and this improved
the SMT system’s performance.
3.3 Evaluating Generation Methods
In most generation applications, for example when rephrasing queries to a QA system (Section 1.1),
it is desirable not only to produce correct outputs (correct paraphrases, or expressions that constitute
correct textual entailment pairs along with the input), but also to produce as many correct outputs as
possible. The two goals correspond to high precision and recall, respectively. For a particular input
si, the precision pi and recall ri of a generator can now be deﬁned as follows (cf. Section 2.8). TPi
is the number of correct outputs for input si, FPi is the number of wrong outputs for si, and FNi is
the number of outputs for si that have incorrectly not been generated (missed).
pi =
TPi
TPi+FPi ,
ri =
TPi
TPi+FNi
The precision and recall scores of a method over a set of inputs {si} can then be deﬁned using
micro-averaging or macro-averaging:
35Example from the work of Szpektor et al. (2004).
24
A SURVEY OF PARAPHRASING AND TEXTUAL ENTAILMENT METHODS
Search engine 
Search engine 
<X=Virginia Wolf, Y=Mrs. Dalloway> 
<X=Mary Shelley, Y=Frankestein> 
Paraphrase Recognizer 
<X=Jack Kerouac, Y=On the road>  
<X=Jules Verne, Y=The Mysterious Island>  
The Mysterious Island was written by Jules Verne  
Jack Kerouac wrote On the road  
Jack Kerouac is most known for his novel On the road 
Y was written by X 
X wrote Y  
X is most known for his novel Y 
Known seeds to slots 
Y was written by X 
X wrote Y  
Identify new seeds 
Frankestein was written by Mary Shelley 
Virginia Wolf wrote Mrs. Dalloway 
Figure 4: Generating paraphrases of “X wrote Y” by bootstrapping.
macro-precision = ∑i pi,
macro-recall = ∑i ri
micro-precision =
∑i TPi
∑i(TPi+FPi),
micro-recall =
∑i TPi
∑i(TPi+FNi)
In any case, however, recall cannot be computed in generation, because FNi is unknown; there are
numerous correct paraphrases of an input si that may have been missed, and there are even more (if
not inﬁnite) language expressions that entail or are entailed by si.36
Instead of reporting recall, it is common to report (along with precision) the average number
of outputs, sometimes called yield, deﬁned below, where we assume that there are n test inputs.
A better option is to report the yield at different precision levels, since there is usually a tradeoff
between the two ﬁgures, which is controlled by parameter tuning (e.g., selecting different values of
thresholds involved in the methods).
yield = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
(TPi +FPi)
Note that if we use a ﬁxed set of test inputs {si}, if we store the sets Oref
i
of all the correct
outputs that a reference generation method produces for each si, and if we treat each Oref
i
as the set
of all possible correct outputs that may be generated for si, then both precision and recall can be
computed, and without further human effort when a new generation method, say M, is evaluated.
FNi is then the number of outputs in Oref
i
that have not been produced for si by M; FPi is the number
of M’s outputs for si that are not in Oref
i ; and TPi is the number of M’s outputs for si that are included
in Oref
i . Callison-Burch et al. (2008) propose an evaluation approach of this kind for what we call
paraphrase generation. They use phrase alignment heuristics (Och & Ney, 2003; Cohn et al., 2008)
36Accuracy (Section 2.8) is also impossible to compute in this case; apart from not knowing FNi, the number of
outputs that have correctly not been generated (TNi) is inﬁnite.
25
ANDROUTSOPOULOS & MALAKASIOTIS
to obtain aligned phrases (e.g., “resign”, “tender his resignation”, “leave ofﬁce voluntarily”) from
manually word-aligned sentences with the same meanings (from the Multiple-Translation Chinese
Corpus). Roughly speaking, they use as {si} phrases for which alignments have been found; and
for each si, Oref
i
contains the phrases si was aligned to. Since Oref
i , however, contains much fewer
phrases than the possible correct paraphrases of si, the resulting precision score is a (possibly very
pessimistic) lower bound, and the resulting recall scores only measure to what extent M managed
to discover the (relatively few) paraphrases in Oref
i , as pointed out by Callison-Burch et al.
To the best of our knowledge, there are no widely adopted benchmark datasets for paraphrase
and textual entailment generation, unlike recognition, and comparing results obtained on different
datasets is not always meaningful. The lack of generation benchmarks is probably due to the fact
that although it is possible to assemble a large collection of input language expressions, it is practi-
cally impossible to specify in advance all the numerous (if not inﬁnite) correct outputs a generator
may produce, as already discussed. In principle, one could use a paraphrase or textual entailment
recognizer to automatically judge if the output of a generator is a paraphrase of, or forms a correct
entailment pair with the corresponding input expression. Current recognizers, however, are not yet
accurate enough, and automatic evaluation measures from machine translation (e.g., BLEU, Section
2.3) cannot be employed, exactly because their weakness is that they cannot detect paraphrases and
textual entailment. An alternative, more costly solution is to use human judges, which also allows
evaluating other aspects of the outputs, such as their ﬂuency (Zhao et al., 2009), as in machine trans-
lation. One can also evaluate the performance of a generator indirectly, by measuring its impact on
the performance of larger natural language processing systems (Section 1.1).
4. Paraphrase and Textual Entailment Extraction
Unlike recognition and generation methods, extraction methods are not given particular input lan-
guage expressions. They typically process large corpora to extract pairs of language expressions
(or templates) that constitute paraphrases or textual entailment pairs. The generated pairs are stored
to be used subsequently by recognizers and generators or other applications (e.g., as additional en-
tries of phrase tables in SMT systems). Most extraction methods produce pairs of sentences (or
sentence templates) or pairs of shorter expressions. Methods to discover synonyms, hypernym-
hyponym pairs or, more generally, entailment relations between words (Lin, 1998a; Hearst, 1998;
Moore, 2001; Glickman & Dagan, 2004; Brockett & Dolan, 2005; Hashimoto, Torisawa, Kuroda,
De Saeger, Murata, & Kazama, 2009; Herbelot, 2009) can be seen as performing paraphrase or
textual entailment extraction restricted to pairs of single words.
4.1 Extraction Methods Based on the Distributional Hypothesis
A possible paraphrase extraction approach is to store all the word n-grams that occur in a large
monolingual corpus (e.g., for n ≤5), along with their left and right contexts, and consider as para-
phrases n-grams that occur frequently in similar contexts. For example, each n-gram can be repre-
sented by a vector showing the words that typically precede or follow the n-gram, with the values
in the vector indicating how strongly each word co-occurs with the n-gram; for example, pointwise
mutual information values (Manning & Schuetze, 1999) may be used. Vector similarity measures,
for example cosine similarity or Lin’s measure (1998a), can then be employed to identify n-grams
26
A SURVEY OF PARAPHRASING AND TEXTUAL ENTAILMENT METHODS
that occur in similar contexts by comparing their vectors.37 This approach has been shown to be
viable with very large monolingual corpora; Pasca and Dienes (2005) used a Web snapshot of ap-
proximately a billion Web pages; Bhagat and Ravichandran (2008) used 150 GB of news articles
and reported that results deteriorate rapidly with smaller corpora. Even if only lightweight linguistic
processing (e.g., POS tagging, without parsing) is performed, processing such large datasets requires
very signiﬁcant processing power, although linear computational complexity is possible with appro-
priate hashing of the context vectors (Bhagat & Ravichandran, 2008). Paraphrasing approaches of
this kind are based on Harris’s Distributional Hypothesis (1964), which states that words in similar
contexts tend to have similar meanings. The bootstrapping methods of Section 3.2 are based on
a similar hypothesis that phrases (or templates) occurring in similar contexts (or with similar slot
values) tend to have similar meanings, a hypothesis that can be seen as an extension of Harris’s.
Lin and Pantel’s (2001) well-known extraction method, called DIRT, is also based on the ex-
tended Distributional Hypothesis, but it operates at the syntax level. DIRT ﬁrst applies a dependency
grammar parser to a monolingual corpus. Parsing the corpus is generally time-consuming and,
hence, smaller corpora have to be used, compared to methods that do not require parsing; Lin and
Panel used 1 GB of news texts in their experiments. Dependency paths are then extracted from the
dependency trees of the corpus. Let us consider, for example, sentences (64) and (67). Their de-
pendency trees are shown in Figure 5; the similarity between the two sentences is less obvious than
in Figure 1, because of the different verbs that are now involved. Two of the dependency paths that
can be extracted from the trees of Figure 5 are shown in (65) and (68). The labels of the edges are
augmented by the POS-tags of the words they connect (e.g., N:subj:V instead of simply subj).38
The ﬁrst and last words of the extracted paths are replaced by slots, shown as boxed and numbered
POS-tags. Roughly speaking, the paths of (65) and (68) correspond to the surface templates of (66)
and (69), respectively, but the paths are actually templates speciﬁed at the syntactic level.
(64)
A mathematician found a solution to the problem.
(65)
N1 :subj:V ←found →V:obj:N →solution →N:to: N2
(66)
N1 found [a] solution to N2
(67)
The problem was solved by a young mathematician.
(68)
N3 :obj:V ←solved →V:by: N4
(69)
N3 was solved by N4.
DIRT imposes restrictions on the paths that can be extracted from the dependency trees; for
example, they have to start and end with noun slots. Once the paths have been extracted, it looks for
pairs of paths that occur frequently with the same slot ﬁllers. If (65) and (68) occur frequently with
the same ﬁllers (e.g., N1 = N4 = “mathematician”, N2 = N3 = “problem”), they will be included
as a pair in DIRT’s output (with N1 = N4 and N2 = N3). A measure based on mutual information
(Manning & Schuetze, 1999; Lin & Pantel, 2001) is used to detect paths with common ﬁllers.
Lin and Pantel call the pairs of templates that DIRT produces “inference rules”, but there is
no directionality between the templates of each pair; the intention seems to be to produce pairs of
near paraphrases. The resulting pairs are actually often textual entailment pairs, not paraphrases,
37Zhitomirsky-Geffet and Dagan (2009) discuss a bootstrapping approach, whereby the vector similarity scores (ini-
tially computed using pointwise mutual information values in the vectors) are used to improve the values in the vectors;
the vector similarity scores are then re-computed.
38For consistency with previous examples, we show slightly different labels than those used by Lin and Pantel.
27
ANDROUTSOPOULOS & MALAKASIOTIS
found 
mathematician 
A 
solution 
a 
problem 
the 
subj 
obj 
det 
det 
to 
det 
solved 
The 
was 
a 
young 
problem 
mathematician 
aux 
obj 
by 
det 
det mod 
Figure 5: Dependency trees of sentences (64) and (67).
and the directionality of the entailment is unspeciﬁed.39 Bhagat et al. (2007) developed a method,
called LEDIR, to classify the template pairs ⟨P1,P2⟩that DIRT and similar methods produce into three
classes: (i) paraphrases, (ii) P1 textually entails P2 and not the reverse, or (iii) P2 textually entails
P1 and not the reverse; with the addition of LEDIR, DIRT becomes a method that extracts separately
pairs of paraphrase templates and pairs of directional textual entailment templates. Roughly speak-
ing, LEDIR examines the semantic categories (e.g., person, location etc.) of the words that ﬁll P1 and
P2’s slots in the corpus; the categories can be obtained by following WordNet’s hypernym-hyponym
hierarchies from the ﬁller words up to a certain level, or by applying clustering to the words of
the corpus and using the clusters of the ﬁller words as their categories.40 If P1 occurs with ﬁllers
from a substantially larger number of categories than P2, then LEDIR assumes P1 has a more general
meaning than P2 and, hence, P2 textually entails P1; similarly for the reverse direction. If there is no
substantial difference in the number of categories, P1 and P2 are taken to be paraphrases. Szpektor
and Dagan (2008) describe a method similar to DIRT that produces textual entailment pairs of unary
(single slot) templates (e.g., “X takes a nap” ⇒“X sleeps”) using a directional similarity measure
for unary templates.
Extraction methods based on the (extended) Distributional Hypothesis often produce pairs of
templates that are not correct paraphrasing or textual entailment pairs, although they share many
common ﬁllers. In fact, pairs involving antonyms are frequent; according to Lin and Pantel (2001),
DIRT ﬁnds “X solves Y” to be very similar to “X worsens Y”; and the same problem has been
reported in experiments with LEDIR (Bhagat et al., 2007) and distributional approaches that operate
at the surface level (Bhagat & Ravichandran, 2008).
Ibrahim et al.’s (2003) method is similar to DIRT, but it assumes that a monolingual parallel
corpus is available (e.g., multiple English translations of novels), whereas DIRT does not require
parallel corpora. Ibrahim et al.’s method extracts pairs of dependency paths only from aligned
sentences that share matching anchors. Anchors are allowed to be only nouns or pronouns, and they
match if they are identical, if they are a noun and a compatible pronoun, if they are of the same
semantic category etc. In (70)–(71), square brackets and subscripts indicate matching anchors.41
The pair of templates of (72)–(73) would be extracted from (70)–(71); for simplicity, we show
sentences and templates as surface strings, although the method operates on dependency trees and
39Template pairs produced by DIRT are available on-line.
40For an introduction to clustering methods, consult chapter 14 of “Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Pro-
cessing” (Manning & Schuetze, 1999).
41Simpliﬁed example from Ibrahim et al.’s work (2003).
28
A SURVEY OF PARAPHRASING AND TEXTUAL ENTAILMENT METHODS
paths. Matching anchors become matched slots. Heuristic functions are used to score the anchor
matches (e.g., identical anchors are preferred to matching nouns and pronouns) and the resulting
template pairs; roughly speaking frequently rediscovered template pairs are rewarded, especially
when they occur with many different anchors.
(70)
The [clerk]1 liked [Bovary]2.
(71)
[He]1 was fond of [Bovary]2.
(72)
X liked Y.
(73)
X was fond of Y.
By operating on aligned sentences of monolingual parallel corpora, Ibrahim et al.’s method may
avoid, to some extent, producing pairs of unrelated templates that simply happen to share common
slot ﬁllers; the resulting pairs of templates are also more likely to be paraphrases, rather than simply
textual entailment pairs, since they are obtained from aligned sentences of a monolingual parallel
corpus. Large monolingual parallel corpora, however, are more difﬁcult to obtain than non-parallel
corpora, as already discussed. An alternative is to identify anchors in related sentences from com-
parable corpora (Section 3.1), which are easier to obtain. Shinyama and Sekine (2003) ﬁnd pairs
of sentences that share the same anchors within clusters of news articles reporting the same event.
In their method, anchors are named entities (e.g., person names) identiﬁed using a named entity
recognizer, or pronouns and noun phrases that refer to named entities; heuristics are employed to
identify likely referents. Dependency trees are then constructed from each pair of sentences, and
pairs of dependency paths are extracted from the trees by treating anchors as slots.
4.2 Extraction Methods that Use Bootstrapping
Bootstrapping approaches can also be used in extraction, as in generation (Section 3.2), but with the
additional complication that there is no particular input template nor seed values of its slots to start
from. To address this complication, TEASE (Szpektor et al., 2004) starts with a lexicon of terms of a
knowledge domain, for example names of diseases, symptoms etc. in the case of a medical domain;
to some extent, such lexicons can be constructed automatically from a domain-speciﬁc corpus (e.g.,
medical articles) via term acquisition techniques (Jacquemin & Bourigault, 2003).
TEASE then
extracts from a (non-parallel) monolingual corpus pairs of textual entailment templates that can be
used with the lexicon’s terms as slot ﬁllers. We have already shown a resulting pair of templates,
(60)–(61), in Section 3.2; we repeat it as (74)–(75) below. Recall that TEASE does not indicate the
directionality of the resulting template pairs, for example whether (74) textually entails (75) or vice
versa, but mechanisms like LEDIR (Section 4.1) could be used to guess the directionality.
(74)
X prevents Y
(75)
X reduces Y risk
Roughly speaking, TEASE ﬁrst identiﬁes noun phrases that cooccur frequently with each term of
the lexicon, excluding very common noun phrases. It then uses the terms and their cooccurring
noun phrases as seed slot values to obtain templates, and then the new templates to obtain more
slot values, much as in Figure 4. In TEASE, however, the templates are actually slotted dependency
paths, and the method includes a stage that merges compatible templates to form more general
ones.42 If particular input templates are provided, TEASE can be used as a generator (Section 3.2).
42Template pairs produced by TEASE are available on-line.
29
ANDROUTSOPOULOS & MALAKASIOTIS
Barzilay and McKeown (2001) also used a bootstrapping method, but to extract paraphrases
from a parallel monolingual corpus; they used multiple English translations of novels. Unlike
previously discussed bootstrapping approaches, their method involves two classiﬁers (in effect, two
sets of rules). One classiﬁer examines the words the candidate paraphrases consist of, and a second
one examines their contexts. The two classiﬁers use different feature sets (different views of the
data), and the output of each classiﬁer is used to improve the performance of the other one in
an iterative manner; this is a case of co-training (Blum & Mitchell, 1998). More speciﬁcally, a
POS tagger, a shallow parser, and a stemmer are ﬁrst applied to the corpus, and the sentences are
aligned across the different translations. Words that occur in both sentences of an aligned pair
are treated as seed positive lexical examples; all the other pairs of words from the two sentences
become seed negative lexical examples. From the aligned sentences (76)–(77), we obtain three seed
positive lexical examples, shown in (78)–(80), and many more seed negative lexical examples, two
of which are shown in (81)–(82).43 Although seed positive lexical examples are pairs of identical
words, as the algorithm iterates new positive lexical examples are produced, and some of them may
be synonyms (e.g., “comfort” and “console”) or pairs of longer paraphrases, as will be explained
below.
(76)
He tried to comfort her.
(77)
He tried to console Mary.
(78)
⟨expression1 = “he”,expression2 = “he”,+⟩
(79)
⟨expression1 = “tried”,expression2 = “tried”,+⟩
(80)
⟨expression1 = “to”,expression2 = “to”,+⟩
(81)
⟨expression1 = “he”,expression2 = “tried”,−⟩
(82)
⟨expression1 = “he”,expression2 = “to”,−⟩
The contexts of the positive (similarly, negative) lexical examples in the corresponding sen-
tences are then used to construct positive (or negative) context rules, i.e., rules that can be used to
obtain new pairs of positive (or negative) lexical examples. Barzilay and McKeown (2001) use the
POS tags of the l words before and after the lexical examples as contexts, and in their experiments
set l = 3. For simplicity, however, let us assume that l = 2; then, for instance, from (76)–(77) and
the positive lexical example of (79), we obtain the positive context rule of (83). The rule says that
if two aligned sentences contain two sequences of words, say λ1 and λ2, one from each sentence,
and both λ1 and λ2 are preceded by the same pronoun, and both are followed by “to” and a (pos-
sibly different) verb, then λ1 and λ2 are positive lexical examples. Identical subscripts in the POS
tags denote identical words; for example, (83) requires both λ1 and λ2 to be preceded by the same
pronoun, but the verbs that follow them may be different.
(83)
⟨left1 = (pronoun1),right1 = (to1,verb),left2 = (pronoun1),right1 = (to1,verb),+⟩
In each iteration, only the k strongest positive and negative context rules are retained. The
strength of each context rule is its precision, i.e., for positive context rules, the number of positive
lexical examples whose contexts are matched by the rule divided by the number of both positive and
negative lexical examples matched, and similarly for negative context rules. Barzilay and McKeown
(2001) used k = 10, and they also discarded context rules whose strength was below 95%. The
resulting (positive and negative) context rules are then used to identify new (positive and negative)
43Simpliﬁed example from the work of Barzilay and McKeown (2001).
30
A SURVEY OF PARAPHRASING AND TEXTUAL ENTAILMENT METHODS
Slot 1 
Slot 2 
Slot 4 
planes 
army 
bombed 
forces
was
by
planes
bombers
bombed 
Baghdad 
forces
Iraqi
capital
start
start
Slot 3 
end
end
Baghdad
Iraqi
capital 
Iraqi
military
base
Figure 6: Word lattices obtained from sentence clusters in Barzilay and Lee’s method.
lexical examples. From the aligned (84)–(85), the rule of (83) would ﬁgure out that “tried” is a
synonym of “attempted”; the two words would be treated as a new positive lexical example, shown
in (86).
(84)
She tried to run away.
(85)
She attempted to escape.
(86)
⟨expression1 = “tried”,expression2 = “attempted”,+⟩
The context rules may also produce multi-word lexical examples, like the one shown in (87).
The obtained lexical examples are generalized by replacing their words by their POS tags, giving
rise to paraphrasing rules. From (87) we obtain the positive paraphrasing rule of (88); again, POS
subscripts denote identical words, whereas superscripts denote identical stems. The rule of (88)
says that any sequence of words consisting of a verb, “to”, and another verb is a paraphrase of any
other sequence consisting of the same initial verb, “to”, and another verb of the same stem as the
second verb of the ﬁrst sequence, provided that the two sequences occur in aligned sentences.
(87)
⟨expression1 = “start to talk”,expression2 = “start talking”,+⟩
(88)

generalized expression1 = (verb0,to,verb1),generalized expression2 = (verb0,verb1),+

The paraphrasing rules are also ﬁltered by their strength, which is the precision with which they
predict paraphrasing contexts. The remaining paraphrasing rules are used to obtain more lexical
examples, which are also ﬁltered by the precision with which they predict paraphrasing contexts.
The new positive and negative lexical examples are then added to the existing ones, and they are
used to obtain, score, and ﬁlter new positive and negative context rules, as well as to rescore and
ﬁlter the existing ones. The resulting context rules are then employed to obtain more lexical exam-
ples, more paraphrasing rules, and so on, until no new positive lexical examples can be obtained
from the corpus, or a maximum number of iterations is exceeded. Wang et al. (2009) added more
scoring measures to Barzilay and McKeown’s (2001) method to ﬁlter and rank the paraphrase pairs
it produces, and used the extended method to extract paraphrases of technical terms from clusters
of bug reports.
4.3 Extraction Methods Based on Alignment
Barzilay and Lee (2003) used two corpora of the same genre, but from different sources (news
articles from two press agencies). They call the two corpora comparable, but they use the term with
31
ANDROUTSOPOULOS & MALAKASIOTIS
a slightly different meaning than in previously discussed methods; the sentences of each corpus
were clustered separately, and each cluster was intended to contain sentences (from a single corpus)
referring to events of the same type (e.g., bomb attacks), not sentences (or documents) referring to
the same events (e.g., the same particular bombing). From each cluster, a word lattice was produced
by aligning the cluster’s sentences with Multiple Sequence Alignment (Durbin, Eddy, Krogh, &
Mitchison, 1998; Barzilay & Lee, 2002). The solid lines of Figure 6 illustrate two possible resulting
lattices, from two different clusters; we omit stop-words. Each sentence of a cluster corresponds to
a path in the cluster’s lattice. In each lattice, nodes that are shared by a high percentage (50% in
Barzilay and Lee’s experiments) of the cluster’s sentences are considered backbone nodes. Parts of
the lattice that connect otherwise consecutive backbone nodes are replaced by slots, as illustrated in
Figure 6. The two lattices of our example correspond to the surface templates (89)–(90).
(89)
X bombed Y.
(90)
Y was bombed by X.
The encountered ﬁllers of each slot are also recorded. If two slotted lattices (templates) from dif-
ferent corpora share many ﬁllers, they are taken to be a pair of paraphrases (Figure 6). Hence, this
method also uses the extended Distributional Hypothesis (Section 4.1).
Pang et al.’s method (2003) produces ﬁnite state automata very similar to Barzilay and Lee’s
(2003) lattices, but it requires a parallel monolingual corpus; Pang et al. used the Multiple-Translation
Chinese Corpus (Section 3.1) in their experiments. The parse trees of aligned sentences are con-
structed and then merged as illustrated in Figure 7; vertical lines inside the nodes indicate sequences
of necessary constituents, whereas horizontal lines correspond to disjunctions.44 In the example of
Figure 7, both sentences consist of a noun phrase (NP) followed by a verb phrase (VP); this is re-
ﬂected to the root node of the merged tree. In both sentences, the noun phrase is a cardinal number
(CD) followed by a noun (NN); however, the particular cardinal numbers and nouns are different
across the two sentences, leading to leaf nodes with disjunctions. The rest of the merged tree is
constructed similarly; consult Pang at al. for further details. Presumably one could also generalize
over cardinal numbers, types of named entities etc.
Each merged tree is then converted to a ﬁnite state automaton by traversing the tree in a depth-
ﬁrst manner and introducing a ramiﬁcation when a node with a disjunction is encountered. Figure 8
shows the automaton that corresponds to the merged tree of Figure 7. All the language expressions
that can be produced by the automaton (all the paths from the start to the end node) are paraphrases.
Hence, unlike other extraction methods, Pang et al.’s (2003) method produces automata, rather than
pairs of templates, but the automata can be used in a similar manner. In recognition, for example, if
two strings are accepted by the same automaton, they are paraphrases; and in generation, we could
look for an automaton that accepts the input expression, and then output other expressions that can
be generated by the same automaton. As with Barzilay and Lee’s (2003) method, however, Pang et
al.’s (2003) method is intended to extract mostly paraphrase, not simply textual entailment pairs.
Bannard and Callison-Burch (2005) point out that bilingual parallel corpora are much easier to
obtain, and in much larger sizes, than the monolingual parallel or comparable corpora that some
extraction methods employ. Hence, they set out to extract paraphrases from bilingual parallel cor-
pora commonly used in statistical machine translation (SMT). As already discussed in Section 3.1,
phrase-based SMT systems employ tables whose entries show how phrases of one language may be
44Example from Pang et al.’s work (2003).
32
A SURVEY OF PARAPHRASING AND TEXTUAL ENTAILMENT METHODS
S 
NP 
VP 
CD 
12 
NN 
persons 
AUX 
were 
VB 
killed 
S 
NP 
VP 
CD 
twelve 
NN 
people 
VB 
died 
NP VP 
CD NN 
AUX 
VB 
12 
twelve 
persons 
people 
died 
were 
killed 
merge 
trees
Parse trees of 
aligned sentences 
VB 
Figure 7: Merging parse trees of aligned sentences in Pang et al.’s method.
start 
end
were 
twelve 
people 
killed 
died 
persons 
12 
Figure 8: Finite state automaton produced by Pang et al.’s method.
replaced by phrases of another language; phrase tables of this kind may be produced by applying
phrase alignment heuristics (Och & Ney, 2003; Cohn et al., 2008) to word alignments produced
by the commonly used IBM models. In the case of an English-German parallel corpus, a phrase
table may contain entries like the following, which show that “under control” has been aligned with
“unter kontrolle” in the corpus, but “unter kontrolle” has also been aligned with “in check”; hence,
“under control” and “in check” are a candidate paraphrase pair.45
English phrase
German phrase
...
. . .
under control
unter kontrolle
...
. . .
in check
unter kontrolle
...
. . .
More precisely, to paraphrase English phrases, Bannard and Callison-Burch (2005) employ a
pivot language (German, in the example above) and a bilingual parallel corpus for English and the
pivot language. They construct a phrase table from the parallel corpus, and from the table they
estimate the probabilities P(e|f) and P(f|e), where e and f range over all of the English and pivot
language phrases of the table. For example, P(e|f) may be estimated as the number of entries (rows)
that contain both e and f, divided by the number of entries that contain f, if there are multiple rows
for multiple alignments of e and f in the corpus, and similarly for P(f|e). The best paraphrase e∗
2 of
each English phrase e1 in the table is then computed by equation (91), where f ranges over all the
pivot language phrases of the phrase table T.
e∗
2 = arg max
e2̸=e1
P(e2|e1) = arg max
e2̸=e1 ∑
f∈T
P(f|e1)P(e2|f,e1) ≈arg max
e2̸=e1 ∑
f∈T
P(f|e1)P(e2|f)
(91)
45Example from the work of Bannard and Callison-Burch (2005).
33
ANDROUTSOPOULOS & MALAKASIOTIS
Multiple bilingual corpora, for different pivot languages, can be used; (91) becomes (92), where C
ranges over the corpora, and f now ranges over the pivot language phrases of C’s phrase table.
e∗
2 = arg max
e2̸=e1∑
C ∑
f∈T(C)
P(f|e1)P(e2|f)
(92)
Bannard and Callison-Burch (2005) also considered adding a language model (Section 3.1) to
their method to favour paraphrase pairs that can be used interchangeably in sentences; roughly
speaking, the language model assesses how well one element of a pair can replace the other in sen-
tences where the latter occurs, by scoring the grammaticality of the sentences after the replacement.
In subsequent work, Callison-Burch (2008) extended their method to require paraphrases to have the
same syntactic types, since replacing a phrase with one of a different syntactic type generally leads
to an ungrammatical sentence.46 Zhou et al. (2006b) employed a method very similar to Bannard
and Callison-Burch’s to extract paraphrase pairs from a corpus, and used the resulting pairs in SMT
evaluation, when comparing machine-generated translations against human-authored ones. Riezler
et al. (2007) adopted a similar pivot approach to obtain paraphrase pairs from bilingual phrase ta-
bles, and used the resulting pairs as paraphrasing rules to obtain paraphrases of (longer) questions
submitted to a QA system; they also used a log-linear model (Section 3.1) to rank the resulting
question paraphrases by combining the probabilities of the invoked paraphrasing rules, a language
model score of the resulting question paraphrase, and other features.47
The pivot language approaches discussed above have been shown to produce millions of para-
phrase pairs from large bilingual parallel corpora. The paraphrases, however, are typically short
(e.g., up to four or ﬁve words), since longer phrases are rare in phrase tables. The methods can also
be signiﬁcantly affected by errors in automatic word and phrase alignment (Bannard & Callison-
Burch, 2005). To take into consideration word alignment errors, Zhao et al. (2008) use a log-linear
classiﬁer to score candidate paraphrase pairs that share a common pivot phrase, instead of using
equations (91) and (92). In effect, the classiﬁer uses the probabilities P(f|e1) and P(e2|f) of (91)–
(92) as features, but it also uses additional features that assess the quality of the word alignment
between e1 and f, as well as between f and e2. In subsequent work, Zhao et al. (2009) also consider
the English phrases e1 and e2 to be paraphrases, when they are aligned to different pivot phrases
f1 and f2, provided that f1 and f2 are themselves a paraphrase pair in the pivot language. Figure 9
illustrates the original and extended pivot approaches of Zhao et al. The paraphrase pairs ⟨f1, f2⟩
of the pivot language are extracted and scored from a bilingual parallel corpus as in the original ap-
proach, by reversing the roles of the two languages. The scores of the ⟨f1, f2⟩pairs, which roughly
speaking correspond to P(f2|f1), are included as additional features in the classiﬁer that scores the
resulting English paraphrases, along with scores corresponding to P(f1|e1), P(e2|f2), and features
that assess the word alignments of the phrases involved.
Zhao et al.’s (2008, 2009) method also extends Bannard and Callison-Burch’s (2005) by pro-
ducing pairs of slotted templates, whose slots can be ﬁlled in by words of particular parts of speech
(e.g., “Noun1 is considered by Noun2” ≈“Noun2 considers Noun1”).48 Hence, Zhao et al.’s patterns
are more general, but a reliable parser of the language we paraphrase in is required; let us assume
again that we paraphrase in English. Roughly speaking, the slots are formed by removing subtrees
46An implementation of Callison-Burch’s (2008) method and paraphrase rules it produced are available on-line.
47Riezler et al. (2007) also employ a paraphrasing method based on an SMT system trained on question-answer pairs.
48A collection of template pairs produced by Zhao et al.’s method is available on-line.
34
A SURVEY OF PARAPHRASING AND TEXTUAL ENTAILMENT METHODS
e1
f1
f2
e2
paraphrase
paraphrase
align
align
e1
f
e2
paraphrase
Figure 9: Illustration of Zhao et al.’s pivot approaches to paraphrase extraction.
from the dependency trees of the English sentences and replacing the removed subtrees by the POS
tags of their roots; words of the pivot language sentences that are aligned to removed words of the
corresponding English sentences are also replaced by slots. A language model is also used, when
paraphrases are replaced in longer sentences. Zhao et al.’s experiments show that their method out-
performs DIRT, and that it is able to output as many paraphrase pairs as the method of Bannard and
Callison-Burch, but with better precision, i.e., fewer wrongly produced pairs. Most of the generated
paraphrases (93%), however, contain only one slot, and the method is still very sensitive to word
alignment errors (Zhao et al., 2009), although the features that check the word alignment quality
alleviate the problem.
Madnani et al. (2007) used a pivot approach similar to Bannard and Callison-Burch’s (2005)
to obtain synchronous (normally bilingual) English-to-English context-free grammar rules from
bilingual parallel corpora. Parsing an English text with the English-to-English synchronous rules
automatically paraphrases it; hence the resulting synchronous rules can be used in paraphrase gen-
eration (Section 3). The rules have associated probabilities, which are estimated from the bilingual
corpora. A log-linear combination of the probabilities and other features of the invoked rules is
used to guide parsing. Madnani et al. employed the English-to-English rules to parse and, thus,
paraphrase human-authored English reference translations of Chinese texts. They showed that us-
ing the additional automatically generated reference translations when tuning a Chinese-to-English
SMT system improves its performance, compared to using only the human-authored references.
We note that the alignment-based methods of this section appear to have been used to extract
only paraphrase pairs, not (unidirectional) textual entailment pairs.
4.4 Evaluating Extraction Methods
When evaluating extraction methods, we would ideally measure both their precision (what percent-
age of the extracted pairs are correct paraphrase or textual entailment pairs) and their recall (what
percentage of all the correct pairs that could have been extracted have actually been extracted). As
in generation, however, recall cannot be computed, because the number of all correct pairs that
could have been extracted from a large corpus (by an ideal method) is unknown. Instead, one may
again count the number of extracted pairs (the total yield of the method), possibly at different pre-
cision levels. Different extraction methods, however, produce pairs of different kinds (e.g., surface
strings, slotted surface templates, or slotted dependency paths) from different kinds of corpora (e.g.,
monolingual or multilingual parallel or comparable corpora); hence, direct comparisons of extrac-
tion methods may be impossible. Furthermore, different scores are obtained, depending on whether
the extracted pairs are considered in particular contexts or not, and whether they are required to be
interchangeable in grammatical sentences (Bannard & Callison-Burch, 2005; Barzilay & Lee, 2003;
35
ANDROUTSOPOULOS & MALAKASIOTIS
Callison-Burch, 2008; Zhao et al., 2008). The output of an extraction method may also include pairs
with relatively minor variations (e.g., active vs. passive, verbs vs. nominalizations, or variants such
as “the X company bought Y vs. “X bought Y”), which may cause methods that produce large num-
bers of minor variants to appear better than they really are; these points also apply to the evaluation
of generation methods (Section 3.3), though they have been discussed mostly in the extraction liter-
ature. Detecting and grouping such variants (e.g., turning all passives and nominalizations to active
forms) may help avoid this bias and may also improve the quality of the extracted pairs by making
the occurrences of the (grouped) expressions less sparse (Szpektor & Dagan, 2007).
As in generation, in principle one could use a paraphrase or textual entailment recognizer to
automatically score the extracted pairs. However, recognizers are not yet accurate enough; hence,
human judges are usually employed. When extracting slotted textual entailment rules (e.g., “X
painted Y” textually entails “Y is the work of X”), Szpektor et al. (2007) report that human judges
ﬁnd it easier to agree whether or not particular instantiations of the rules (in particular contexts)
are correct or incorrect, as opposed to asking them to assess directly the correctness of the rules.
A better evaluation strategy, then, is to show the judges multiple sentences that match the left-
hand side of each rule, along with the corresponding transformed sentences that are produced by
applying the rule, and measure the percentage of these sentence pairs the judges consider correct
textual entailment pairs; this measure can be thought of as the precision of each individual rule.
Rules whose precision exceeds a (high) threshold can be considered correct (Szpektor et al., 2007).
Again, one may also evaluate extraction methods indirectly, for example by measuring how
much the extracted pairs help in information extraction (Bhagat & Ravichandran, 2008; Szpektor
& Dagan, 2007, 2008) or when expanding queries (Pasca & Dienes, 2005), by measuring how
well the extracted pairs, seen as paraphrasing rules, perform in phrase alignment in monolingual
parallel corpora (Callison-Burch et al., 2008), or by measuring to what extent SMT or summarization
evaluation measures can be improved by taking into consideration the extracted pairs (Callison-
Burch et al., 2006a; Kauchak & Barzilay, 2006; Zhou et al., 2006b).
5. Conclusions
Paraphrasing and textual entailment is currently a popular research topic. Paraphrasing can be seen
as bidirectional textual entailment and, hence, similar methods are often used for both. Although
both kinds of methods can be described in terms of logical entailment, they are usually intended to
capture human intuitions that may not be as strict as logical entailment; and although logic-based
methods have been developed, most methods operate at the surface, syntactic, or shallow semantic
level, with dependency trees being a particularly popular representation.
Recognition methods, which classify input pairs of natural language expressions (or templates)
as correct or incorrect paraphrases or textual entailment pairs, often rely on supervised machine
learning to combine similarity measures possibly operating at different representation levels (sur-
face, syntactic, semantic). More recently, approaches that search for sequences of transformations
that connect the two input expressions are also gaining popularity, and they exploit paraphrasing
or textual entailment rules extracted from large corpora. The RTE challenges provide a signiﬁcant
thrust to recognition work, and they have helped establish benchmarks and attract more researchers.
Generation methods, meaning methods that generate paraphrases of an input natural language
expression (or template), or expressions that entail or are entailed by the input expression, are cur-
rently based mostly on bootstrapping or ideas from statistical machine translation. There are fewer
36
A SURVEY OF PARAPHRASING AND TEXTUAL ENTAILMENT METHODS
Main ideas discussed
R-TE
R-P
G-TE
G-P
E-TE
E-P
Logic-based inferencing
X
X
Vector space semantic models
X
Surface string similarity measures
X
X
Syntactic similarity measures
X
X
Similarity measures on symbolic meaning representations
X
X
Machine learning algorithms
X
X
X
X
Decoding (transformation sequences)
X
X
X
Word/sentence alignment
X
X
X
Pivot language(s)
X
X
Bootstrapping
X
X
X
X
Distributional hypothesis
X
X
X
X
Synchronous grammar rules
X
X
Table 3: Main ideas discussed and tasks they have mostly been used in. R: recognition; G: genera-
tion, E: extraction; TE: textual entailment, P: paraphrasing.
publications on generation, compared to recognition (and extraction), and most of them focus on
paraphrasing; furthermore, there are no established challenges or benchmarks, unlike recognition.
Nevertheless, generation may provide opportunities for novel research, especially to researchers
with experience in statistical machine translation, who may for example wish to develop alignment
or decoding techniques especially for paraphrasing or textual entailment generation.
Extraction methods extract paraphrases or textual entailment pairs (also called “rules”) from
corpora, usually off-line. They can be used to construct resources (e.g., phrase tables or collec-
tions of rules) that can be exploited by recognition or generation methods, or in other tasks (e.g.,
statistical machine translation, information extraction). Many extraction methods are based on the
Distributional Hypothesis, though they often operate at different representation levels. Alignment
techniques originating from statistical machine translation are recently also popular and they allow
existing large bilingual parallel corpora to be exploited. Extraction methods also differ depending
on whether they require parallel, comparable, or simply large corpora, monolingual or bilingual. As
in generation, most extraction research has focused on paraphrasing, and there are no established
challenges or benchmarks.
Table 3 summarizes the main ideas we have discussed per task, and Table 4 lists the correspond-
ing main resources that are typically required. The underlying ideas of generation and extraction
methods are in effect the same, as shown in Table 3, even if the methods perform different tasks;
recognition work has relied on rather different ideas. Generation and extraction have mostly focused
on paraphrasing, as already noted, which is why fewer ideas have been explored in generation and
extraction for (unidirectional) textual entailment.
We expect to see more interplay among recognition, generation, and extraction methods in the
near future. For example, recognizers and generators may use extracted rules to a larger extent;
recognizers may be used to ﬁlter candidate paraphrases or textual entailment pairs in extraction
or generation approaches; and generators may help produce more monolingual parallel corpora
or recognition benchmarks. We also expect to see paraphrasing and textual entailment methods
being used more often in larger natural language processing tasks, including question answering,
information extraction, text summarization, natural language generation, and machine translation.
37
ANDROUTSOPOULOS & MALAKASIOTIS
Main ideas discussed
Main typically required resources
Logical-based inferencing
Parser producing logical meaning representations, inferencing engine,
resources to extract meaning postulates and common sense knowledge from.
Vector space semantic models
Large monolingual corpus, possibly parser.
Surface string similarity measures
Only preprocessing tools, e.g., POS tagger, named-entity recognizer, which
are also required by most other methods.
Syntactic similarity measures
Parser.
Similarity measures operating on
Lexical semantic resources, possibly parser and/or semantic role labeling
symbolic meaning representations
to produce semantic representations.
Machine learning algorithms
Training/testing datasets, components/resources needed to compute features.
Decoding (transformation sequences)
Synonyms, hypernyms-hyponyms, paraphrasing/TE rules.
Word/sentence alignment
Large parallel or comparable corpora (monolingual or multilingual), possibly
parser.
Pivot language(s)
Multilingual parallel corpora.
Bootstrapping
Large monolingual corpus, recognizer.
Distributional hypothesis
Monolingual corpus (possibly parallel or comparable).
Synchronous grammar rules
Monolingual parallel corpus.
Table 4: Main ideas discussed and main resources they typically require.
Acknowledgments
We thank the three anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments. This work was funded by
the Greek PENED project “Combined research in the areas of information retrieval, natural language
processing, and user modeling aiming at the development of advanced search engines for document
collections”, which was co-funded by the European Union (80%) and the Greek General Secretariat
for Research and Technology (20%).
Appendix A. On-line Resources Mentioned
A.1 Bibliographic Resources, Portals, Tutorials
ACL 2007 tutorial on textual entailment: http://www.cs.biu.ac.il/∼dagan
/TE-Tutorial-ACL07.ppt.
ACL Anthology: http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/.
Textual Entailment Portal: http://www.aclweb.org/aclwiki/index.php?
title=Textual Entailment Portal.
A.2 Corpora, Challenges, and their Datasets
Cohn et al.’s paraphrase corpus: Word-aligned paraphrases;
http://www.dcs.shef.ac.uk/∼tcohn/paraphrase corpus.html.
FATE: The RTE-2 dataset with FrameNet annotations;
http://www.coli.uni-saarland.de/projects/salsa/fate/.
MSR Paraphrase Corpus: Paraphrase recognition benchmark dataset;
http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/downloads/607d14d9-20cd-47e3-85bc-a2f65cd28042/.
38
A SURVEY OF PARAPHRASING AND TEXTUAL ENTAILMENT METHODS
Multiple-Translation Chinese Corpus: Multiple English translations of Chinese news articles;
http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/Catalog/CatalogEntry.jsp?catalogId=LDC2002T01.
RTE challenges, PASCAL Network of Excellence: Textual entailment recognition challenges and
their datasets; http://pascallin.ecs.soton.ac.uk/Challenges/.
RTE track of NIST’s Text Analysis Conference: Continuation of PASCAL’s RTE;
http://www.nist.gov/tac/tracks/.
Written News Compression Corpus: Sentence compression corpus;
http://jamesclarke.net/research/.
A.3 Implementations of Machine Learning Algorithms
LIBSVM: SVM implementation; http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/∼cjlin/libsvm/.
Stanford’s Maximum Entropy classiﬁer: http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/index.shtml.
SVM-Light: SVM implementation; http://svmlight.joachims.org/.
Weka: Includes implementations of many machine learning algorithms;
http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/.
A.4 Implementations of Similarity Measures
EDITS: Suite to recognize textual entailment by computing edit distances; http://edits.fbk.eu/.
WordNet::Similarity: Implementations of WordNet-based similarity measures;
http://wn-similarity.sourceforge.net/.
A.5 Parsers, POS Taggers, Named Entity Recognizers, Stemmers
Brill’s POS tagger: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brill tagger.
Charniak’s parser: http://ﬂake.cs.uiuc.edu/∼cogcomp/srl/CharniakServer.tgz.
Collin’s parser: http://people.csail.mit.edu/mcollins/code.html.
Link Grammar Parser: http://www.abisource.com/projects/link-grammar/.
MaltParser: http://w3.msi.vxu. se/∼nivre/research/MaltParser.html.
MINIPAR: http://www.cs.ualberta.ca/∼lindek/minipar.htm.
Porter’s stemmer: http://tartarus.org/∼martin/PorterStemmer/.
Stanford’s named-entity recognizer, parser, tagger: http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/index.shtml.
39
ANDROUTSOPOULOS & MALAKASIOTIS
A.6 Statistical Machine Translation Tools and Resources
Giza++: Often used to train IBM models and align words; http://www.fjoch.com/GIZA++.html.
Koehn’s Statistical Machine Translation site: Pointers to commonly used SMT tools, resources;
http://www.statmt.org/.
Moses: Frequently used SMT system that includes decoding facilities;
http://www.statmt.org/moses/.
SRILM: Commonly used to create language models;
http://www.speech.sri.com/projects/srilm/.
A.7 Lexical Resources, Paraphrasing and Textual Entailment Rules
Callison-Burch’s paraphrase rules: Paraphrase rules extracted from multilingual parallel corpora
via pivot language(s); the implementation of the method used is also available;
http://cs.jhu.edu/∼ccb/.
DIRT rules: Template pairs produced by DIRT; http://demo.patrickpantel.com/.
Extended WordNet: Includes meaning representations extracted from WordNet’s glosses;
http://wordnet.princeton.edu/.
FrameNet: http://framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu/.
Nomlex: English nominalizations of verbs; http://nlp.cs.nyu.edu/nomlex/
TEASE rules: Textual entailment rules produced by TEASE;
http://www.cs.biu.ac.il/∼szpekti/TEASE collection.zip.
VerbNet: http://verbs.colorado.edu/∼mpalmer/projects/verbnet.html.
WordNet: http://xwn.hlt.utdallas.edu/.
Zhao et al.’s paraphrase rules: Paraphrase rules with slots corresponding to POS tags, extracted
from multilingual parallel corpora via pivot language(s);
http://ir.hit.edu.cn/phpwebsite/index.php?
module=documents&JAS DocumentManager op=viewDocument&JAS Document id=268.
References
Alpaydin, E. (2004). Introduction to Machine Learning. MIT Press.
Androutsopoulos, I., Oberlander, J., & Karkaletsis, V. (2007). Source authoring for multilingual
generation of personalised object descriptions. Nat. Lang. Engineering, 13(3), 191–233.
Androutsopoulos, I., Ritchie, G. D., & Thanisch, P. (1995). Natural language interfaces to databases
– an introduction. Nat. Lang. Engineering, 1(1), 29–81.
Baeza-Yates, R., & Ribeiro-Neto, B. (1999). Modern Information Retrieval. Addison Wesley.
40
A SURVEY OF PARAPHRASING AND TEXTUAL ENTAILMENT METHODS
Baker, C. F., Fillmore, C. J., & Lowe, J. B. (1998). The Berkeley FrameNet project. In Proc. of the
17th Int. Conf. on Comp. Linguistics, pp. 86–90, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
Bannard, C., & Callison-Burch, C. (2005). Paraphrasing with bilingual parallel corpora. In Proc. of
the 43rd Annual Meeting of ACL, pp. 597–604, Ann Arbor, MI.
Bar-Haim, R., Berant, J., & Dagan, I. (2009). A compact forest for scalable inference over entail-
ment and paraphrase rules. In Proc. of the Conf. on EMNLP, pp. 1056–1065, Singapore.
Bar-Haim, R., Dagan, I., Dolan, B., Ferro, L., Giampiccolo, D., Magnini, B., & Szpektor, I. (2006).
The 2nd PASCAL recognising textual entailment challenge. In Proc. of the 2nd PASCAL Chal-
lenges Workshop on Recognising Textual Entailment, Venice, Italy.
Bar-Haim, R., Dagan, I., Greental, I., & Shnarch, E. (2007). Semantic inference at the lexical-
syntactic level. In Proc. of the 22nd Conf. on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pp. 871–876, Vancouver,
BC, Canada.
Barzilay, R., & Elhadad, N. (2003). Sentence alignment for monolingual comparable corpora. In
Proc. of the Conf. on EMNLP, pp. 25–32, Sapporo, Japan.
Barzilay, R., & Lee, L. (2002). Bootstrapping lexical choice via multiple-sequence alignment. In
Proc. of the Conf. on EMNLP, pp. 164–171, Philadelphia, PA.
Barzilay, R., & Lee, L. (2003). Learning to paraphrase: an unsupervised approach using multiple-
sequence alignment. In Proc. of the HLT Conf. of NAACL, pp. 16–23, Edmonton, Canada.
Barzilay, R., & McKeown, K. (2001). Extracting paraphrases from a parallel corpus. In Proc. of the
39th Annual Meeting of ACL, pp. 50–57, Toulouse, France.
Barzilay, R., & McKeown, K. R. (2005). Sentence fusion for multidocument news summarization.
Comp. Linguistics, 31(3), 297–327.
Bateman, J., & Zock, M. (2003). Natural language generation. In Mitkov, R. (Ed.), The Oxford
Handbook of Comp. Linguistics, chap. 15, pp. 284–304. Oxford University Press.
Bensley, J., & Hickl, A. (2008). Workshop: Application of LCC’s GROUNGHOG system for RTE-4.
In Proc. of the Text Analysis Conference, Gaithersburg, MD.
Bergmair, R. (2009). A proposal on evaluation measures for RTE. In Proc. of the ACL Workshop on
Applied Textual Inference, pp. 10–17, Singapore.
Berwick, R. C. (1991). Principles of principle-based parsing. In Berwick, R. C., Abney, S. P.,
& Tenny, C. (Eds.), Principle-Based Parsing: Computation and Psycholinguistics, pp. 1–37.
Kluwer, Dordrecht, Netherlands.
Bhagat, R., Pantel, P., & Hovy, E. (2007). LEDIR: An unsupervised algorithm for learning direc-
tionality of inference rules. In Proc. of the Conf. on EMNLP and the Conf. on Computational
Nat. Lang. Learning, pp. 161–170, Prague, Czech Republic.
Bhagat, R., & Ravichandran, D. (2008). Large scale acquisition of paraphrases for learning surface
patterns. In Proc. of the 46th Annual Meeting of ACL: HLT, pp. 674–682, Columbus, OH.
Bikel, D. M., Schwartz, R. L., & Weischedel, R. M. (1999). An algorithm that learns what’s in a
name. Machine Learning, 34(1-3), 211–231.
Blum, A., & Mitchell, T. (1998). Combining labeled and unlabeled data with co-training. In Proc.
of the 11th Annual Conf. on Computational Learning Theory, pp. 92–100, Madison, WI.
41
ANDROUTSOPOULOS & MALAKASIOTIS
Bos, J., & Markert, K. (2005). Recognising textual entailment with logical inference. In Proc. of
the Conf. on HLT and EMNLP, pp. 628–635, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Brill, E. (1992). A simple rule-based part of speech tagger. In Proc. of the 3rd Conf. on Applied
Nat. Lang. Processing, pp. 152–155, Trento, Italy.
Brockett, C., & Dolan, W. (2005). Support Vector Machines for paraphrase identiﬁcation and corpus
construction. In Proc. of the 3rd Int. Workshop on Paraphrasing, pp. 1–8, Jeju island, Korea.
Brown, P. F., Della Pietra, S. A., Della Pietra, V. J., & Mercer, R. L. (1993). The mathematics of
statistical machine translation: Parameter estimation. Comp. Linguistics, 19(2), 263–311.
Budanitsky, A., & Hirst, G. (2006). Evaluating WordNet-based measures of lexical semantic relat-
edness. Comp. Linguistics, 32(1), 13–47.
Burchardt, A., & Pennacchiotti, M. (2008).
FATE: A FrameNet-annotated corpus for textual en-
tailment. In Proc. of the 6th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference, Marrakech,
Marocco.
Burchardt, A., Pennacchiotti, M., Thater, S., & Pinkal, M. (2009). Assessing the impact of frame
semantics on textual entailment. Nat. Lang. Engineering, 15(4).
Burchardt, A., Reiter, N., Thater, S., & Frank, A. (2007). A semantic approach to textual entail-
ment: System evaluation and task analysis. In Proc. of the ACL-PASCAL Workshop on Textual
Entailment and Paraphrasing, pp. 10–15, Prague, Czech Republic. ACL.
Califf, M., & Mooney, R. (2003). Bottom-up relational learning of pattern matching rules for infor-
mation extraction. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 4, 177–210.
Callison-Burch, C. (2008). Syntactic constraints on paraphrases extracted from parallel corpora. In
Proc. of the Conf. on EMNLP, pp. 196–205, Honolulu, HI.
Callison-Burch, C., Cohn, T., & Lapata, M. (2008). ParaMetric: An automatic evaluation metric for
paraphrasing. In Proc. of the 22nd Int. Conf. on Comp. Linguistics, pp. 97–104, Manchester,
UK.
Callison-Burch, C., Dagan, I., Manning, C., Pennacchiotti, M., & Zanzotto, F. M. (Eds.). (2009).
Proc. of the ACL-IJCNLP Workshop on Applied Textual Inference. Singapore.
Callison-Burch, C., Koehn, P., & Osborne, M. (2006a). Improved statistical machine translation
using paraphrases. In Proc. of the HLT Conf. of the NAACL, pp. 17–24, New York, NY.
Callison-Burch, C., Osborne, M., & Koehn, P. (2006b). Re-evaluating the role of BLEU in machine
translation research. In Proc. of the 11th Conf. of EACL, pp. 249–256, Trento, Italy.
Carnap, R. (1952). Meaning postulates. Philosophical Studies, 3(5).
Charniak, E. (2000). A maximum-entropy-inspired parser. In Proc. of the 1st Conf. of NAACL, pp.
132–139, Seattle, WA.
Chevelu, J., Lavergne, T., Lepage, Y., & Moudenc, T. (2009). Introduction of a new paraphrase
generation tool based on Monte-Carlo sampling. In Proc. of the 47th Annual Meeting of ACL
and the 4th Int. Joint Conf. on Nat. Lang. Processing of AFNLP, pp. 249–252, Singapore.
Clarke, D. (2009).
Context-theoretic semantics for natural language: an overview.
In Proc. of
the EACL workshop on Geometrical Models of Nat. Lang. Semantics, pp. 112–119, Athens,
Greece.
42
A SURVEY OF PARAPHRASING AND TEXTUAL ENTAILMENT METHODS
Clarke, J., & Lapata, M. (2008). Global inference for sentence compression: An integer linear
programming approach. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research,, 31(1), 399–429.
Cohn, T., Callison-Burch, C., & Lapata, M. (2008). Constructing corpora for the development and
evaluation of paraphrase systems. Comp. Linguistics, 34(4), 597–614.
Cohn, T., & Lapata, M. (2008). Sentence compression beyond word deletion. In Proc. of the 22nd
Int. Conf. on Comp. Linguistics, Manchester, UK.
Cohn, T., & Lapata, M. (2009). Sentence compression as tree transduction. Journal of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Research, 34(1), 637–674.
Collins, M. (2003). Head-driven statistical models for natural language parsing. Comput. Linguis-
tics, 29(4), 589–637.
Corley, C., & Mihalcea, R. (2005). Measuring the semantic similarity of texts. In Proc. of the ACL
Workshop on Empirical Modeling of Semantic Equivalence and Entailment, pp. 13–18, Ann
Arbor, MI.
Cristianini, N., & Shawe-Taylor, J. (2000). An Introduction to Support Vector Machines and Other
Kernel-based Learning Methods. Cambridge University Press.
Culicover, P. (1968). Paraphrase generation and information retrieval from stored text. Mechanical
Translation and Computational Linguistics, 11(1–2), 78–88.
Dagan, I., Dolan, B., Magnini, B., & Roth, D. (2009). Recognizing textual entailment: Rational,
evaluation and approaches. Nat. Lang. Engineering, 15(4), i–xvii. Editorial of the special
issue on Textual Entailment.
Dagan, I., Glickman, O., & Magnini, B. (2006). The PASCAL recognising textual entailment chal-
lenge. In Qui˜nonero-Candela, J., Dagan, I., Magnini, B., & d’Alche’ Buc, F. (Eds.), Machine
Learning Challenges. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 3944, pp. 177–190. Springer-
Verlag.
Das, D., & Smith, N. A. (2009). Paraphrase identiﬁcation as probabilistic quasi-synchronous recog-
nition. In Proc. of the 47th Annual Meeting of ACL and the 4th Int. Joint Conf. on Nat. Lang.
Processing of AFNLP, pp. 468–476, Singapore.
de Marneffe, M., Rafferty, A., & Manning, C. (2008). Finding contradictions in text. In Proc. of the
46th Annual Meeting of ACL: HLT, pp. 1039–1047, Columbus, OH.
Del´eger, L., & Zweigenbaum, P. (2009). Extracting lay paraphrases of specialized expressions from
monolingual comparable medical corpora. In Proc. of the 2nd Workshop on Building and
Using Comparable Corpora: from Parallel to Non-parallel Corpora, pp. 2–10, Singapore.
Dolan, B., & Dagan, I. (Eds.). (2005). Proc. of the ACL workshop on Empirical Modeling of Se-
mantic Equivalence and Entailment. Ann Arbor, MI.
Dolan, B., Quirk, C., & Brockett, C. (2004). Unsupervised construction of large paraphrase cor-
pora: Eploiting massively parallel news sources. In Proc. of the 20th Int. Conf. on Comp.
Linguistics, pp. 350–356, Geneva, Switzerland.
Dolan, W. B., & Brockett, C. (2005). Automatically constructing a corpus of sentential paraphrases.
In Proc. of the 3rd Int. Workshop on Paraphrasing, pp. 9–16, Jeju island, Korea.
43
ANDROUTSOPOULOS & MALAKASIOTIS
Dras, M. (1998). Search in constraint-based paraphrasing. In Proc. of the 2nd Int. Conf. on Natural
Lang. Processing and Industrial Applications, pp. 213–219, Moncton, Canada.
Drass, M., & Yamamoto, K. (Eds.). (2005). Proc. of the 3rd Int. Workshop on Paraphrasing. Jeju
island, Korea.
Duboue, P. A., & Chu-Carroll, J. (2006). Answering the question you wish they had asked: The
impact of paraphrasing for question answering. In Proc. of the HLT Conf. of NAACL, pp.
33–36, New York, NY.
Duclaye, F., Yvon, F., & Collin, O. (2003). Learning paraphrases to improve a question-answering
system. In Proc. of the EACL Workshop on Nat. Lang. Processing for Question Answering,
pp. 35–41, Budapest, Hungary.
Durbin, R., Eddy, S., Krogh, A., & Mitchison, G. (1998). Biological Sequence Analysis. Cambridge
University Press.
Elhadad, N., & Sutaria, K. (2007). Mining a lexicon of technical terms and lay equivalents. In Proc.
of the Workshop on BioNLP, pp. 49–56, Prague, Czech Republic.
Erk, K., & Pad´o, S. (2006). Shalmaneser – a toolchain for shallow semantic parsing. In Proc. of the
5th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference, Genoa, Italy.
Erk, K., & Pad´o, S. (2009). Paraphrase assessment in structured vector space: Exploring parameters
and datasets. In Proc. of the EACL Workshop on Geometrical Models of Nat. Lang. Semantics,
pp. 57–65, Athens, Greece.
Fellbaum, C. (1998). WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database. MIT Press.
Finch, A., Hwang, Y. S., & Sumita, E. (2005). Using machine translation evaluation techniques to
determine sentence-level semantic equivalence. In Proc. of the 3rd Int. Workshop on Para-
phrasing, pp. 17–24, Jeju Island, Korea.
Freund, Y., & Schapire, R. E. (1995). A decision-theoretic generalization of on-line learning and
an application to boosting. In Proc. of the 2nd European Conf. on Computational Learning
Theory, pp. 23–37, Barcelona, Spain.
Friedman, J., Hastie, T., & Tibshirani, R. (2000). Additive logistic regression: a statistical view of
boosting. Annals of Statistics, 28(2), 337–374.
Fung, P., & Cheung, P. (2004). Multi-level bootstrapping for extracting parallel sentences from a
quasi-comparable corpus. In Proc. of the 20th Int. Conf. on Comp. Linguistics, pp. 1051–
1057, Geneva, Switzerland.
Galanis, D., & Androutsopoulos, I. (2010). An extractive supervised two-stage method for sentence
compression. In Proc. of the HLT Conf. of NAACL, Los Angeles, CA.
Gale, W., & Church, K. (1993). A program for aligning sentences in bilingual corpora. Comp.
Linguistics, 19(1), 75–102.
Germann, U., Jahr, M., Knight, K., Marcu, D., & Yamada, K. (2001). Fast decoding and optimal
decoding for machine translation. In Proc. of the 39th Annual Meeting on ACL, pp. 228–235,
Toulouse, France.
Giampiccolo, D., Dang, H., Magnini, B., Dagan, I., & Dolan, B. (2008). The fourth PASCAL rec-
ognizing textual entailment challenge. In Proc. of the Text Analysis Conference, pp. 1–9,
Gaithersburg, MD.
44
A SURVEY OF PARAPHRASING AND TEXTUAL ENTAILMENT METHODS
Giampiccolo, D., Magnini, B., Dagan, I., & Dolan, B. (2007). The third PASCAL recognizing tex-
tual entailment challenge. In Proc. of the ACL-Pascal Workshop on Textual Entailment and
Paraphrasing, pp. 1–9, Prague, Czech Republic.
Glickman, O., & Dagan, I. (2004). Acquiring lexical paraphrases from a single corpus. In Ni-
colov, N., Bontcheva, K., Angelova, G., & Mitkov, R. (Eds.), Recent Advances in Nat. Lang.
Processing III, pp. 81–90. John Benjamins.
Grishman, R. (2003). Information extraction. In Mitkov, R. (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Comp.
Linguistics, chap. 30, pp. 545–559. Oxford University Press.
Habash, N., & Dorr, B. (2003). A categorial variation database for english. In Proc. of the HLT
Conf. of NAACL, pp. 17–23, Edmonton, Canada.
Haghighi, A. D. (2005). Robust textual inference via graph matching. In Proc. of the Conf. on
EMNLP, pp. 387–394, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Harabagiu, S., & Hickl, A. (2006). Methods for using textual entailment in open-domain question
answering. In Proc. of the 21st Int. Conf. on Comp. Linguistics and the 44th Annual Meeting
of ACL, pp. 905–912, Sydney, Australia.
Harabagiu, S., Hickl, A., & Lacatusu, F. (2006). Negation, contrast and contradiction in text pro-
cessing. In Proc. of the 21st National Conf. on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pp. 755–762, Boston,
MA.
Harabagiu, S., & Moldovan, D. (2003). Question answering. In Mitkov, R. (Ed.), The Oxford
Handbook of Comp. Linguistics, chap. 31, pp. 560–582. Oxford University Press.
Harabagiu, S. M., Maiorano, S. J., & Pasca, M. A. (2003). Open-domain textual question answering
techniques. Nat. Lang. Engineering, 9(3), 231–267.
Harmeling, S. (2009). Inferring textual entailment with a probabilistically sound calculus. Nat.
Lang. Engineering, 15(4), 459–477.
Harris, Z. (1964). Distributional Structure. In Katz, J., & Fodor, J. (Eds.), The Philosphy of Lin-
guistics, pp. 33–49. Oxford University Press.
Hashimoto, C., Torisawa, K., Kuroda, K., De Saeger, S., Murata, M., & Kazama, J. (2009). Large-
scale verb entailment acquisition from the Web. In Proc. of the Conf. on EMNLP, pp. 1172–
1181, Singapore.
Hearst, M. (1998). Automated discovery of Wordnet relations. In Fellbaum, C. (Ed.), WordNet: An
Electronic Lexical Database. MIT Press.
Herbelot, A. (2009). Finding word substitutions using a distributional similarity baseline and imme-
diate context overlap. In Proc. of the Student Research Workshop of the 12th Conf. of EACL,
pp. 28–36, Athens, Greece.
Hickl, A. (2008). Using discourse commitments to recognize textual entailment. In Proc. of the
22nd Int. Conf. on Comp. Linguistics, pp. 337–344, Manchester, UK.
Hobbs, J. (1986). Resolving pronoun references. In Readings in Nat. Lang. Processing, pp. 339–
352. Morgan Kaufmann.
Hovy, E. (2003). Text summarization. In Mitkov, R. (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Comp. Lin-
guistics, chap. 32, pp. 583–598. Oxford University Press.
45
ANDROUTSOPOULOS & MALAKASIOTIS
Huffman, S. (1995). Learning information extraction patterns from examples. In Proc. of the IJCAI
Workshop on New Approaches to Learning for Nat. Lang. Processing, pp. 127–142, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada.
Ibrahim, A., Katz, B., & Lin, J. (2003). Extracting structural paraphrases from aligned monolingual
corpora. In Proc. of the ACL Workshop on Paraphrasing, pp. 57–64, Sapporo, Japan.
Iftene, A. (2008). UAIC participation at RTE4. In Proc. of the Text Analysis Conference, Gaithers-
burg, MD.
Iftene, A., & Balahur-Dobrescu, A. (2007). Hypothesis transformation and semantic variability rules
used in recognizing textual entailment. In Proc. of the ACL-PASCAL Workshop on Textual
Entailment and Paraphrasing, pp. 125–130, Prague, Czech Republic.
Inui, K., & Hermjakob, U. (Eds.). (2003). Proc. of the 2nd Int. Workshop on Paraphrasing: Para-
phrase Acquisition and Applications. Sapporo, Japan.
Jacquemin, C., & Bourigault, D. (2003). Term extraction and automatic indexing. In Mitkov, R.
(Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Comp. Linguistics, chap. 33, pp. 599–615. Oxford University
Press.
Joachims, T. (2002). Learning to Classify Text Using Support Vector Machines: Methods, Theory,
Algorithms. Kluwer.
Jurafsky, D., & Martin, J. H. (2008). Speech and Language Processing (2nd edition). Prentice Hall.
Kauchak, D., & Barzilay, R. (2006). Paraphrasing for automatic evaluation. In Proc. of the HLT
Conf. of NAACL, pp. 455–462, New York, NY.
Klein, D., & Manning, C. D. (2003). Accurate unlexicalized parsing. In Proc. of the 41st Annual
Meeting of ACL, pp. 423–430, Sapporo, Japan.
Knight, K., & Marcu, D. (2002). Summarization beyond sentence extraction: A probalistic approach
to sentence compression. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 139(1), 91–107.
Koehn, P. (2004). Pharaoh: a beam search decoder for phrase-based statistical machine translation
models. In Proc. of the 6th Conf. of the Association for Machine Translation in the Americas,
pp. 115–124, Washington, DC.
Koehn, P. (2009). Statistical Machine Translation. Cambridge University Press.
Koehn, P., Och, F. J., & Marcu, D. (2003). Statistical phrase-based translation. In Proc. of the HLT
Conf. of NAACL, pp. 48–54, Edmonton, Canada. ACL.
Kohomban, U., & Lee, W. (2005). Learning semantic classes for word sense disambiguation. In
Proc. of the 43rd Annual Meeting of ACL, pp. 34–41, Ann Arbor, MI.
Kouylekov, M., & Magnini, B. (2005). Recognizing textual entailment with tree edit distance algo-
rithms. In Proc. of the PASCAL Recognising Textual Entailment Challenge.
Kubler, S., McDonald, R., & Nivre, J. (2009). Dependency Parsing. Synthesis Lectures on HLT.
Morgan and Claypool Publishers.
Lappin, S., & Leass, H. (1994). An algorithm for pronominal anaphora resolution. Comp. Linguis-
tics, 20(4), 535–561.
Leacock, C., Miller, G., & Chodorow, M. (1998). Using corpus statistics and WordNet relations for
sense identiﬁcation. Comp. Linguistics, 24(1), 147–165.
46
A SURVEY OF PARAPHRASING AND TEXTUAL ENTAILMENT METHODS
Lepage, Y., & Denoual, E. (2005). Automatic generation of paraphrases to be used as translation
references in objective evaluation measures of machine translation. In Proc. of the 3rd Int.
Workshop on Paraphrasing, pp. 57–64, Jesu Island, Korea.
Levenshtein, V. (1966). Binary codes capable of correcting deletions, insertions, and reversals.
Soviet Physice-Doklady, 10, 707–710.
Lin, D. (1994).
PRINCIPAR: an efﬁcient, broad-coverage, principle-based parser. In Proc. of the
15th Conf. on Comp. Linguistics, pp. 482–488, Kyoto, Japan. ACL.
Lin, D. (1998a). Automatic retrieval and clustering of similar words. In Proc. of the the 36th Annual
Meeting of ACL and 17th Int. Conf. on Comp. Linguistics, pp. 768–774, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada.
Lin, D. (1998b). An information-theoretic deﬁnition of similarity. In Proc. of the 15th Int. Conf. on
Machine Learning, pp. 296–304, Madison, WI. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA.
Lin, D. (1998c). An information-theoretic deﬁnition of similarity. In Proc. of the 15th Int. Conf. on
Machine Learning, pp. 296–304, Madison, WI.
Lin, D., & Pantel, P. (2001). Discovery of inference rules for question answering. Nat. Lang.
Engineering, 7, 343–360.
Lonneker-Rodman, B., & Baker, C. (2009). The FrameNet model and its applications. Nat. Lang.
Engineering, 15(3), 414–453.
MacCartney, B., Galley, M., & Manning, C. (2008). A phrase-based alignment model for natural
language inference. In Proc. of the Conf. on EMNLP, pp. 802–811, Honolulu, Hawaii.
MacCartney, B., & Manning, C. (2009). An extended model of natural logic. In Proc. of the 8th Int.
Conf. on Computational Semantics, pp. 140–156, Tilburg, The Netherlands.
Madnani, N., Ayan, F., Resnik, P., & Dorr, B. J. (2007). Using paraphrases for parameter tuning in
statistical machine translation. In Proc. of 2nd Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation,
pp. 120–127, Prague, Czech Republic.
Malakasiotis, P. (2009). Paraphrase recognition using machine learning to combine similarity mea-
sures. In Proc. of the 47th Annual Meeting of ACL and the 4th Int. Joint Conf. on Nat. Lang.
Processing of AFNLP, Singapore.
Malakasiotis, P., & Androutsopoulos, I. (2007). Learning textual entailment using SVMs and string
similarity measures. In Proc. of the ACL-PASCAL Workshop on Textual Entailment and Para-
phrasing, pp. 42–47, Prague. ACL.
Mani, I. (2001). Automatic Summarization. John Benjamins.
Manning, C. D. (2008). Introduction to Information Retrieval. Cambridge University Press.
Manning, C. D., & Schuetze, H. (1999). Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Processing.
MIT press.
M`arquez, L., Carreras, X., Litkowski, K. C., & Stevenson, S. (2008). Semantic role labeling: an
introduction to the special issue. Comp. Linguistics, 34(2), 145–159.
Marton, Y., Callison-Burch, C., & Resnik, P. (2009). Improved statistical machine translation using
monolingually-derived paraphrases. In Proc. of Conf. on EMNLP, pp. 381–390, Singapore.
47
ANDROUTSOPOULOS & MALAKASIOTIS
McCarthy, D., & Navigli, R. (2009). The English lexical substitution task. Lang. Resources &
Evaluation, 43, 139–159.
McDonald, R. (2006). Discriminative sentence compression with soft syntactic constraints. In Proc.
of the 11th Conf. of EACL, pp. 297–304, Trento, Italy.
McKeown, K. (1983). Paraphrasing questions using given and new information. Comp. Linguistics,
9(1).
Mehdad, Y. (2009). Automatic cost estimation for tree edit distance using particle swarm optimiza-
tion. In Proc. of the 47th Annual Meeting of ACL and the 4th Int. Joint Conf. on Nat. Lang.
Processing of AFNLP, pp. 289–292, Singapore.
Melamed, D. (1999). Bitext maps and alignment via pattern recognition. Comp. Linguistics, 25(1),
107–130.
Melcuk, I. (1987). Dependency Syntax: Theory and Practice. State University of New York Press.
Meyers, A., Macleod, C., Yangarber, R., Grishman, R., Barrett, L., & Reeves, R. (1998). Using
NOMLEX to produce nominalization patterns for information extraction.
In Proc. of the
COLING-ACL workshop on the Computational Treatment of Nominals, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada.
Mintz, M., Bills, S., Snow, R., & Jurafsky, D. (2009). Distant supervision for relation extraction
without labeled data. In Proc. of the 47th Annual Meeting of ACL and the 4th Int. Joint Conf.
on Nat. Lang. Processing of AFNLP, pp. 1003–1011, Singapore.
Mirkin, S., Dagan, I., & Shnarch, E. (2009a). Evaluating the inferential utility of lexical-semantic
resources. In Proc. of the 12th Conf. of EACL, pp. 558–566, Athens, Greece.
Mirkin, S., Specia, L., Cancedda, N., Dagan, I., Dymetman, M., & Szpektor, I. (2009b). Source-
language entailment modeling for translating unknown terms. In Proc. of the 47th Annual
Meeting of ACL and the 4th Int. Joint Conf. on Nat. Lang. Processing of AFNLP, pp. 791–
799, Singapore.
Mitchell, J., & Lapata, M. (2008). Vector-based models of semantic composition. In Proc. of the
46th Annual Meeting of ACL: HLT, pp. 236–244, Columbus, OH.
Mitchell, T. (1997). Machine Learning. Mc-Graw Hill.
Mitkov, R. (2003). Anaphora resolution. In Mitkov, R. (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Comp.
Linguistics, chap. 14, pp. 266–283. Oxford University Press.
Moens, M. (2006).
Information Extraction: Algorithms and Prospects in a Retrieval Context.
Springer.
Moldovan, D., & Rus, V. (2001). Logic form transformation of WordNet and its applicability to
question answering. In Proc. of the 39th Annual Meeting of ACL, pp. 402–409, Toulouse,
France.
Moll´a, D., Schwitter, R., Rinaldi, F., Dowdall, J., & Hess, M. (2003). Anaphora resolution in EX-
TRANS. In Proc. of the Int. Symposium on Reference Resolution and Its Applications to
Question Answering and Summarization, pp. 23–25, Venice, Italy.
Moll´a, D., & Vicedo, J. (2007). Question answering in restricted domains: An overview. Comp.
Linguistics, 33(1), 41–61.
48
A SURVEY OF PARAPHRASING AND TEXTUAL ENTAILMENT METHODS
Moore, R. C. (2001). Towards a simple and accurate statistical approach to learning translation rela-
tionships among words. In Proc. of the ACL Workshop on Data-Driven Machine Translation,
Toulouse, France.
Moschitti, A. (2009). Syntactic and semantic kernels for short text pair categorization. In Proc. of
the 12th Conf. of EACL, pp. 576–584, Athens, Greece.
Munteanu, D. S., & Marcu, D. (2006). Improving machine translation performance by exploiting
non-parallel corpora. Comp. Linguistics, 31(4), 477–504.
Muslea, I. (1999). Extraction patterns for information extraction tasks: a survey. In Proc. of the
AAAI Workshop on Machine Learning for Information Extraction, Orlando, FL.
Navigli, R. (2008). A structural approach to the automatic adjudication of word sense disagree-
ments. Nat. Lang. Engineering, 14(4), 547–573.
Nelken, R., & Shieber, S. M. (2006).
Towards robust context-sensitive sentence alignment for
monolingual corpora. In Proc. of the 11th Conf. of EACL, pp. 161–168, Trento, Italy.
Nielsen, R., Ward, W., & Martin, J. (2009). Recognizing entailment in intelligent tutoring systems.
Nat. Lang. Engineering, 15(4), 479–501.
Nivre, J., Hall, J., Nilsson, J., Chanev, A., Eryigit, G., Kuebler, S., Marinov, S., & Marsi, E. (2007).
MALTPARSER: a language-independent system for data-driven dependency parsing.
Nat.
Lang. Engineering, 13(2), 95–135.
Och, F. J., & Ney, H. (2003). A systematic comparison of various stat. alignment models. Comp.
Ling., 29(1), 19–21.
O’Donnell, M., Mellish, C., Oberlander, J., & Knott, A. (2001). ILEX: An architecture for a dynamic
hypertext generation system. Nat. Lang. Engineering, 7(3), 225–250.
Pad´o, S., Galley, M., Jurafsky, D., & Manning, C. D. (2009). Robust machine translation evaluation
with entailment features. In Proc. of the 47th Annual Meeting of ACL and the 4th Int. Joint
Conf. on Nat. Lang. Processing of AFNLP, pp. 297–305, Singapore.
Pad´o, S., & Lapata, M. (2007). Dependency-based construction of semantic space models. Comp.
Ling., 33(2), 161–199.
Palmer, M., Gildea, D., & Kingsbury, P. (2005). The Propositional Bank: an annotated corpus of
semantic roles. Comp. Linguistics, 31(1), 71–105.
Pang, B., Knight, K., & Marcu, D. (2003). Syntax-based alignment of multiple translations: extract-
ing paraphrases and generating new sentences. In Proc. of the Human Lang. Techn. Conf. of
NAACL, pp. 102–109, Edmonton, Canada.
Pantel, P., Bhagat, R., Coppola, B., Chklovski, T., & Hovy, E. H. (2007). ISP: Learning inferential
selectional preferences. In Proc. of the HLT Conf. of NAACL, pp. 564–571, Rochester, NY.
Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., & Zhu, W. J. (2002). BLEU: a method for automatic evaluation of
machine translation. In Proc. of the 40th Annual Meeting on ACL, pp. 311–318, Philadelphia,
PA.
Pasca, M. (2003). Open-domain question answering from large text collections (2nd edition). Center
for the Study of Language and Information.
49
ANDROUTSOPOULOS & MALAKASIOTIS
Pasca, M., & Dienes, P. (2005). Aligning needles in a haystack: Paraphrase acquisition across the
Web. In Proc. of the 2nd Int. Joint Conf. on Nat. Lang. Processing, pp. 119–130, Jeju Island,
Korea.
Perez, D., & Alfonseca, E. (2005).
Application of the BLEU algorithm for recognizing textual
entailments. In Proc. of the PASCAL Challenges Worshop on Recognising Textual Entailment,
Southampton, UK.
Porter, M. F. (1997). An algorithm for sufﬁx stripping. In Jones, K. S., & Willet, P. (Eds.), Readings
in Information Retrieval, pp. 313–316. Morgan Kaufmann.
Power, R., & Scott, D. (2005). Automatic generation of large-scale paraphrases. In Proc. of the 3rd
Int. Workshop on Paraphrasing, pp. 73–79, Jesu Island, Korea.
Qiu, L., Kan, M. Y., & Chua, T. (2006). Paraphrase recognition via dissimilarity signiﬁcance clas-
siﬁcation. In Proc. of the Conf. on EMNLP, pp. 18–26, Sydney, Australia.
Quinlan, J. R. (1993). C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning. Morgan Kaufmann.
Quirk, C., Brockett, C., & Dolan, W. B. (2004). Monolingual machine translation for paraphrase
generation. In Proc. of the Conf. on EMNLP, pp. 142–149, Barcelona, Spain.
Ravichandran, D., & Hovy, E. (2002). Learning surface text patterns for a question answering
system. In Proc. of the 40th Annual Meeting on ACL, pp. 41–47, Philadelphia, PA.
Ravichandran, D., Ittycheriah, A., & Roukos, S. (2003). Automatic derivation of surface text pat-
terns for a maximum entropy based question answering system. In Proc. of the HLT Conf. of
NAACL, pp. 85–87, Edmonton, Canada.
Reiter, E., & Dale, R. (2000). Building Natural Language Generation Systems. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Resnik, P. (1999). Semantic similarity in a taxonomy: An information-based measure and its ap-
plication to problems of ambiguity in natural language. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Research, 11, 95–130.
Riezler, S., Vasserman, A., Tsochantaridis, I., Mittal, V., & Liu, Y. (2007). Statistical machine
translation for query expansion in answer retrieval. In Proc. of the 45th Annual Meeting of
ACL, pp. 464–471, Prague, Czech Republic.
Riloff, E. (1996a). Automatically generating extraction patterns from untagged text. In Proc. of the
13th National Conf. on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pp. 1044–1049, Portland, OR.
Riloff, E. (1996b). An empirical study of automated dictionary construction for information extrac-
tion in three domains. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 85(1–2), 101–134.
Riloff, E., & Jones, R. (1999). Learning dictionaries for information extraction by multi-level boot-
strapping. In Proc. of the 16th National Conf. on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pp. 474–479, Orlando,
FL.
Rinaldi, F., Dowdall, J., Kaljurand, K., Hess, M., & Molla, D. (2003). Exploiting paraphrases in a
question answering system. In Proc. of the 2nd Int. Workshop in Paraphrasing, pp. 25–32,
Saporo, Japan.
Sato, S., & Nakagawa, H. (Eds.). (2001). Proc. of the Workshop on Automatic Paraphrasing. Tokyo,
Japan.
50
A SURVEY OF PARAPHRASING AND TEXTUAL ENTAILMENT METHODS
Schohn, G., & Cohn, D. (2000). Less is more: active learning with Support Vector Machines. In
Proc. of the 17th Int. Conf. on Machine Learning, pp. 839–846, Stanford, CA.
Schuler, K. K. (2005). VerbNet: A Broad-Coverage, Comprehensive Verb Lexicon. Ph.D. thesis,
Univ. of Pennsylvania.
Sekine, S., Inui, K., Dagan, I., Dolan, B., Giampiccolo, D., & Magnini, B. (Eds.). (2007). Proc. of
the ACL-PASCAL Workshop on Textual Entailment and Paraphrasing. Prague, Czech Repub-
lic.
Sekine, S., & Ranchhod, E. (Eds.). (2009). Named Entities – Recognition, Classiﬁcation and Use.
John Benjamins.
Selkow, S. (1977). The tree-to-tree editing problem. Information Processing Letters, 6(6), 184–186.
Shinyama, Y., & Sekine, S. (2003). Paraphrase acquisition for information extraction. In Proc. of
the ACL Workshop on Paraphrasing, Sapporo, Japan.
Siblini, R., & Kosseim, L. (2008). Using ontology alignment for the TAC RTE challenge. In Proc.
of the Text Analysis Conference, Gaithersburg, MD.
Sleator, D. D., & Temperley, D. (1993). Parsing English with a link grammar. In Proc. of the 3rd Int.
Workshop on Parsing Technologies, pp. 277–292, Tilburg, Netherlands and Durbuy, Belgium.
Soderland, S. (1999). Learning inf. extraction rules for semi-structured and free text. Mach. Learn-
ing, 34(1–3), 233–272.
Soderland, S., Fisher, D., Aseltine, J., & Lehnert, W. G. (1995). CRYSTAL: Inducing a conceptual
dictionary. In Proc. of the 14th Int. Joint Conf. on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pp. 1314–1319,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
Stevenson, M., & Wilks, Y. (2003). Word sense disambiguation. In Mitkov, R. (Ed.), The Oxford
Handbook of Comp. Linguistics, chap. 13, pp. 249–265. Oxford University Press.
Stolcke, A. (2002). SRILM – an extensible language modeling toolkit. In Proc. of the 7th Int. Conf.
on Spoken Language Processing, pp. 901–904, Denver, CO.
Szpektor, I., & Dagan, I. (2007). Learning canonical forms of entailment rules. In Proc. of Recent
Advances in Natural Lang. Processing, Borovets, Bulgaria.
Szpektor, I., & Dagan, I. (2008). Learning entailment rules for unary templates. In Proc. of the
22nd Int. Conf. on Comp. Linguistics, pp. 849–856, Manchester, UK.
Szpektor, I., Dagan, I., Bar-Haim, R., & Goldberger, J. (2008). Contextual preferences. In Proc. of
the 46th Annual Meeting of ACL: HLT, pp. 683–691, Columbus, OH.
Szpektor, I., Shnarch, E., & Dagan, I. (2007). Instance-based evaluation of entailment rule acquisi-
tion. In Proc. of the 45th Annual Meeting of ACL, pp. 456–463, Prague, Czech Republic.
Szpektor, I., Tanev, H., Dagan, I., & Coppola, B. (2004). Scaling Web-based acquisition of entail-
ment relations. In Proc. of the Conf. on EMNLP, Barcelona, Spain.
Tai, K.-C. (1979). The tree-to-tree correction problem. Journal of ACM, 26(3), 422–433.
Tatu, M., Iles, B., Slavick, J., Novischi, A., & Moldovan, D. (2006). COGEX at the second recog-
nizing textual entailment challenge. In Proc. of the 2nd PASCAL Challenges Workshop on
Recognising Textual Entailment, Venice, Italy.
51
ANDROUTSOPOULOS & MALAKASIOTIS
Tatu, M., & Moldovan, D. (2005). A semantic approach to recognizing textual entailment. In Proc.
of the Conf. on HLT and EMNLP, pp. 371–378, Vancouver, Canada.
Tatu, M., & Moldovan, D. (2007). COGEX at RTE 3. In Proc. of the ACL-PASCAL Workshop on
Textual Entailment and Paraphrasing, pp. 22–27, Prague, Czech Republic.
Tomuro, N. (2003). Interrogative reformulation patterns and acquisition of question paraphrases. In
Proc. of the 2nd Int. Workshop on Paraphrasing, pp. 33–40, Sapporo, Japan.
Tong, S., & Koller, D. (2002). Support Vector Machine active learning with applications to text
classiﬁcation. Machine Learning Research, 2, 45–66.
Toutanova, K., Klein, D., Manning, C. D., & Singer, Y. (2003). Feature-rich part-of-speech tag-
ging with a cyclic dependency network. In Proc. of the HLT Conf. of NAACL, pp. 173–180,
Edmonton, Canada.
Tsatsaronis, G. (2009). Word Sense Disambiguation and Text Relatedness Based on Word Thesauri.
Ph.D. thesis, Department of Informatics, Athens University of Economics and Business.
Tsatsaronis, G., Varlamis, I., & Vazirgiannis, M. (2010). Text relatedness based on a word thesaurus.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 37, 1–39.
Turney, P., & Pantel, P. (2010). From frequency to meaning: Vector space models of semantics.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 37, 141–188.
Vapnik, V. (1998). Statistical learning theory. John Wiley.
Vendler, Z. (1967). Verbs and Times. In Linguistics in Philosophy, chap. 4, pp. 97–121. Cornell
University Press.
Vogel, S., Ney, H., & Tillmann, C. (1996). HMM-based word alignment in statistical translation. In
Proc. of the 16th Conf. on Comp. Linguistics, pp. 836–841, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Voorhees, E. (2001). The TREC QA track. Nat. Lang. Engineering, 7(4), 361–378.
Voorhees, E. (2008). Contradictions and justiﬁcations: Extensions to the textual entailment task. In
Proc. of the 46th Annual Meeting of ACL: HLT, pp. 63–71, Columbus, OH.
Wan, S., Dras, M., Dale, R., & Paris, C. (2006). Using dependency-based features to take the “para-
farce” out of paraphrase. In Proc. of the Australasian Language Technology Workshop, pp.
131–138, Sydney, Australia.
Wang, R., & Neumann, G. (2008). An divide-and-conquer strategy for recognizing textual entail-
ment. In Proc. of the Text Analysis Conference, Gaithersburg, MD.
Wang, X., Lo, D., Jiang, J., Zhang, L., & Mei, H. (2009). Extracting paraphrases of technical terms
from noisy parallel software corpora. In Proc. of the 47th Annual Meeting of ACL and the 4th
Int. Joint Conf. on Nat. Lang. Processing of AFNLP, pp. 197–200, Singapore.
Witten, I. H., & Frank, E. (2005). Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques.
Morgan Kaufmann.
Wu, D. (2000). Alignment. In Dale, R., Moisl, H., & Somers, H. (Eds.), Handbook of Nat. Lang.
Processing, pp. 415–458. Marcel Dekker.
Wubben, S., van den Bosch, A., Krahmer, E., & Marsi, E. (2009). Clustering and matching headlines
for automatic paraphrase acquisition. In Proc. of the 12th European Workshop on Nat. Lang.
Generation, pp. 122–125, Athens, Greece.
52
A SURVEY OF PARAPHRASING AND TEXTUAL ENTAILMENT METHODS
Xu, F., Uszkoreit, H., & Li, H. (2007).
A seed-driven bottom-up machine learning framework
for extracting relations of various complexity. In Proc. of the 45th Annual Meeting of the
Association of Comp. Linguistics, pp. 584–591, Prague, Czech Republic.
Yang, X., Su, J., & Tan, C. L. (2008). A twin-candidate model for learning-based anaphora resolu-
tion. Comp. Linguistics, 34(3), 327–356.
Yarowski, D. (2000). Word-sense disambiguation. In Dale, R., Moisl, H., & Somers, H. (Eds.),
Handbook of Nat. Lang. Processing, pp. 629–654. Marcel Dekker.
Zaenen, A., Karttunen, L., & Crouch, R. (2005). Local textual inference: Can it be deﬁned or cir-
cumscribed?. In Proc. of the ACL workshop on Empirical Modeling of Semantic Equivalence
and Entailment, pp. 31–36, Ann Arbor, MI.
Zanzotto, F. M., & Dell’ Arciprete, L. (2009). Efﬁcient kernels for sentence pair classiﬁcation. In
Proc. of the Conf. on EMNLP, pp. 91–100, Singapore.
Zanzotto, F. M., Pennacchiotti, M., & Moschitti, A. (2009). A machine-learning approach to textual
entailment recognition. Nat. Lang. Engineering, 15(4), 551–582.
Zhang, K., & Shasha, D. (1989). Simple fast algorithms for the editing distance between trees and
related problems. SIAM Journal of Computing, 18(6), 1245–1262.
Zhang, Y., & Patrick, J. (2005). Paraphrase identiﬁcation by text canonicalization. In Proc. of the
Australasian Language Technology Workshop, pp. 160–166, Sydney, Australia.
Zhang, Y., & Yamamoto, K. (2005). Paraphrasing spoken Chinese using a paraphrase corpus. Nat.
Lang. Engineering, 11(4), 417–434.
Zhao, S., Lan, X., Liu, T., & Li, S. (2009). Application-driven statistical paraphrase generation. In
Proc. of the 47th Annual Meeting of ACL and the 4th Int. Joint Conf. on Nat. Lang. Processing
of AFNLP, pp. 834–842, Singapore.
Zhao, S., Wang, H., Liu, T., & Li, S. (2008). Pivot approach for extracting paraphrase patterns from
bilingual corpora. In Proc. of the 46th Annual Meeting of ACL: HLT, pp. 780–788, Columbus,
OH.
Zhitomirsky-Geffet, M., & Dagan, I. (2009). Bootstrapping distributional feature vector quality.
Computational Linguistics, 35, 435–461.
Zhou, L., Lin, C.-Y., & Hovy, E. (2006a). Re-evaluating machine translation results with paraphrase
support. In Proc. of the Conf. on EMNLP, pp. 77–84.
Zhou, L., Lin, C.-Y., Munteanu, D. S., & Hovy, E. (2006b). PARAEVAL: Using paraphrases to
evaluate summaries automatically. In Proc. of the HLT Conf. of NAACL, pp. 447–454, New
York, NY.
53
