Title: Using Natural Language Processing to Develop an Automated Orthodontic Diagnostic System
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1905.13601v1
--------------------------------------------------

USING NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING TO DEVELOP AN
AUTOMATED ORTHODONTIC DIAGNOSTIC SYSTEM
Tomoyuki Kajiwara
Institute for Datability Science
Osaka University
Osaka, Japan
kajiwara@ids.osaka-u.ac.jp
Chihiro Tanikawa
Graduate School of Dentistry
Osaka University
Osaka, Japan
ctanika@dent.osaka-u.ac.jp
Yuujin Shimizu
Graduate School of Dentistry
Osaka University
Osaka, Japan
yjnshimizu@dent.osaka-u.ac.jp
Chenhui Chu
Institute for Datability Science
Osaka University
Osaka, Japan
chu@ids.osaka-u.ac.jp
Takashi Yamashiro
Graduate School of Dentistry
Osaka University
Osaka, Japan
yamashiro@dent.osaka-u.ac.jp
Hajime Nagahara
Institute for Datability Science
Osaka University
Osaka, Japan
nagahara@ids.osaka-u.ac.jp
ABSTRACT
We work on the task of automatically designing a treatment plan from the ﬁndings included in the
medical certiﬁcate written by the dentist. To develop an artiﬁcial intelligence system that deals
with free-form certiﬁcates written by dentists, we annotate the ﬁndings and utilized the natural
language processing approach. As a result of the experiment using 990 certiﬁcates, 0.585 F1-score
was achieved for the task of extracting orthodontic problems from ﬁndings, and 0.584 correlation
coefﬁcient with the human ranking was achieved for the treatment prioritization task.
1
Introduction
An orthodontic diagnosis and treatment plan involves predicting the entire course of action that a dentist should take to
obtain the optimal treatment results at low risk [1]. Making such an assessment – one that leads to the optimal diagnosis
and treatment plan – requires years of knowledge and experience. As such, there are cases in which inexperienced
dentists make judgment errors or otherwise misunderstand a case’s parameters. An artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) system
that can implement the years of experience of a specialist would be of great signiﬁcance in providing patients with
evidence-based medical care. In addition, the automatic summarization of orthodontic diagnoses or presentation of
necessary examinations in an orthodontic clinic would reduce the heavy workload of dentists, as well as help less
experienced dentists in avoiding oversights and judgment errors.
Treatment operates on the logic of “doing the opposite of the problem," and the process of modern orthodontic diagnosis
and treatment consists mainly of the following three steps: (1) Collection and itemization of patient information
regarding the problem(s); (2) Contemplating solutions for each problem; (3) Determining the course of action and its
implementation. A certain regularity is apparent in the logical structure involved in medical diagnosis and treatment
planning (as described above). Hence, attempts have been made to automate orthodontic diagnosis and treatment
planning, such as the use of expert systems. An orthodontic diagnosis support system using fuzzy logic [2], as well as a
support system for the selection of orthodontic appliances [3], have previously been developed. However, orthodontic
diagnosis and treatment planning support systems for use in dental practice are yet to be established.
To put the diagnosis process of a specialist in mathematical terms, if patient information regarding the problem is
thought of as a set of feature values, the above step (1) is analogous to representing medical conditions based on the
individual weight of each feature value and detecting the degree of similarity between each medical condition. Step
(2) can be considered equivalent to learning more about the approach to handle each of the medical conditions, at
which point a natural language processing (NLP) AI system could be expected to ﬁnd a solution. The aim of this study
is to develop an AI system that uses NLP on various imaging and model resources from the Graduate School and
arXiv:1905.13601v1  [cs.CL]  31 May 2019
Natural language processing
＋
Correct
＋
Automatic recogntion
・Skeletal 3 due mandibular retrusion
・Small maxillary length
・Mandibular protrusion
・Longer face height
・Labial inclination of upper incisors
Bone age: 12 years
・Concave type profile
・Midface retrusion
・Thin upper lip
・Maxillary severe crowding
・V-shaped arch
・High palate
・Reverser OJ (OJ = -10mm)
IOTN : 5
X-rays
Facial photos
Model data
Diagnostic materials 
Input
Evaluation
（Description）
Output１
Treatment 
planning
Output2
Translated to 
patient words
Output３
Patient attribution（Age, sex）
Priority order
1. Skeletal 3 due to 
maxillary retrusion
2. Severe crowding in 
the upper arch
3. Long facial height
4. Labial inclination of 
the upper incisor
Treatment plan
1. Oral hygiene 
control
2. Extraction of 14 and 
24
3. Pre-orthodontic 
treatment
4. Surgery
5. Post-orthodontic 
treatment
５. Retention
Problems
1. Opposite occlusion due to 
small upper jaw
2.  Teeth are crowded
3.  Long face
4 Upper front teeth are 
inclined facially
Treatment plan
1. Practice a toothbrush
2. Pull out the upper two 
premolars
3. Align the upper and lower 
arches
4. Surgery
5. Align both arches again 
6. Use the retainers for two 
years
●Name of tooth
Murata, 2017
Automatic
recognition
AI system
Innovative clinical support 
by utilizing big data
Creation of promising 
growth markets
Industry-University 
co-creation
Patent
Tanikawa,  2019
Tanikawa, 2017
Input
Output
Figure 1: Automated diagnosis system in orthodontic treatment planning.
their accompanying treatment protocols. Then, the ﬁndings are considered to not only create an automated process
of diagnosis and treatment planning, but also put the results of the process in layman’s terms for patient’s ease of
understanding.
2
System Overview
An overview of our system is shown in Figure 1. Based on the treatment protocol information (text data) kept by
the Graduate School, the system uses NLP to extract imaging and model ﬁndings that represent a patient’s medical
condition. This becomes the learning data. Machine learning is then performed by extracting diagnoses (listed by
priority) and treatment plans relevant to the ﬁndings and using them as answer data.
2.1
Automated Summarization of Findings
The system organizes each medical condition mentioned in the treatment protocol and formulates the automated
treatment protocol summarization problem as a multi-label classiﬁcation problem comprising of around 400 types of
medical condition labels. Feature values are extracted from the text ﬁndings with NLP using vector space models, and
the multi-label classiﬁcation problem is solved using machine learning models, such as support vector machines (SVM)
and deep learning models. Furthermore, in the case of usable image ﬁndings, multi-modal feature extraction is jointly
performed on the images to solve the multi-label classiﬁcation problem with high accuracy.
2.2
Automated Planning of Treatment Protocol
Using the prioritized list of diagnoses results included in the treatment protocol, the system performs machine-learned
ranking of each medical condition extracted at the automated summarization step. Automated diagnosis is carried out
by combining the medical condition extraction of Section 2.1 and the ranking of Section 2.2.
2
(1) Congenital missing of the upper right lateral  
(2) Premature contact on #13-43  
(3) Occlusal cant
︙
(b) Orthodontic problems
(1)   33
(2)     1
(3)   70
︙
(c) Orthodontic problem classes
1.
Facial findings
Frontal view: His nose is deviated to the right side and he has a scar on the right nostril.
Lateral view: Straight type profile. The upper lip is thin. The nasolabial angle is normal.
2. Radiographic findings
(ⅰ) Frontal view: Skeletal: The midline of the mandible is deviated to the right by 3.5mm.
    
Dental: The upper and lower dental midline is deviated to the right by 2mm.
︙
(a) Medical findings
Figure 2: Annotation of orthodontic problem classes to the medical certiﬁcate.
2.3
Automated Simpliﬁcation of Results for Reporting to a Patient
The system trains a series transformation model using pairs of relevant treatment protocol summaries and consent
form documents. First, relevant sentence pairs are automatically extracted from the relevant documents using an NLP
method of sentence alignment. Next, statistical machine translation or neural machine translation techniques are used to
automatically translate difﬁcult text and generate text with simpler language that can be understood by patients easily.
This paper does not address text simpliﬁcation. This is our future work.
3
Dataset and Problem Setting
In this study, we work on the task of automatically designing a treatment plan from the ﬁndings included in the medical
certiﬁcate written by the dentist. We used 990 certiﬁcates written by dentists for our experiments. We develop an
artiﬁcial intelligence system that is input a document that describes the ﬁndings of the patient (Figure 2 (a)) and
outputs a list of problems that the patient has in the order of treatment priority (Figure 2 (b)). As ﬁndings are free-form
descriptions in natural language, the method of feature extraction for machine learning is not obvious. Therefore, we
employ a natural language processing approach for feature extraction from text.
We divide into the following two subtasks to efﬁciently address the task of planning a treatment plan from ﬁndings:
• Step 1: List the problems
• Step 2: Prioritize treatment
Step 1 summarizes the ﬁndings and lists the orthodontic problems each patient has. This task can be regarded as a
text generation task that generates a summary of ﬁndings. However, compared to the millions to tens of millions of
datasets commonly used in text generation tasks such as machine translation and automatic summarization in natural
language processing, our dataset of 990 documents is signiﬁcantly smaller. Therefore, we add an annotation as shown
in Figure 2 (c) and tackle Step 1 as a multi-label classiﬁcation problem. In this additional annotation, one dentist of the
author classiﬁed orthodontic problems into 423 classes. Each problem that the patient has corresponds to one class.
Step 2 ranks each problem listed in Step 1 in terms of treatment priority. Treatment priorities are indicated in brackets
in Figures 2 (b) and (c). Solving the above two subtasks, our system automatically creates a treatment plan from the
ﬁndings contained in the medical certiﬁcate.
According to the dataset, each patient has an average of 15.4 orthodontic problems. In the following experiments, these
990 documents are randomly divided into 810 for training, 90 for validation, and 90 for evaluation.
3
Precision
Recall
F1-score
BoW
0.653
0.546
0.585
USE
0.634
0.486
0.536
Table 1: Automatic evaluation of multi-label classiﬁcation models.
4
Multi-label Classiﬁcation Model for Orthodontic Problems
4.1
Proposed Methods
We develop classiﬁcation models of orthodontic problems on the datasets shown in (a) and (c) of Figure 2. These models
take the text of the ﬁndings as input and output a list of class labels in Figure 2 (c). By working as a classiﬁcation
problem rather than a generation problem, it can be expected that even small datasets will be less susceptible to linguistic
variation.
We convert each text of ﬁndings into vector representation using a natural language processing approach and perform
supervised learning of multi-label classiﬁcation with them as features. The following methods are used to vectorize
each document.
• BoW (Bag-of-Words): The BoW representations have dimensions corresponding to the number of vocabulary
in the training dataset, and each dimension has a value of 1 if the corresponding word appears in the input text
or 0 it does not. These are high-dimensional sparse vectors.
• USE (Universal Sentence Encoder): We construct feature vectors from the text using the cross-lingual version
of universal sentence encoder [4]. These are 512-dimensional dense vectors.
A multi-layer perceptron was implemented on Chainer [5] for a multi-label classiﬁer. In the output layer, a sigmoid
function was used instead of the softmax function in the single-label classiﬁcation.
4.2
Experimental Settings
Each sentence was divided into words using MeCab [6] for the BoW model. In this experiment, the vocabulary size
is 2, 075 because only words appearing ﬁve or more times in the training dataset are used. In addition, semantically
equivalent classes are grouped, and 151 class labels are used. We used a three-layer perceptron for this experiment and
examined the hidden layer size as a hyper-parameter from {256, 512, 1024, 2048, 4096} on the validation dataset.
4.3
Experimental Results
The performance of each model was automatically evaluated using the F1-score which is the harmonic average of
the precision and the recall. The experimental results are shown in Table 1. The simple BoW model achieved higher
performance. Unique structures such as bullets and incomplete sentences may have a negative impact on the sentence
encoder. On the other hand, BoW models treat documents as a set of words, so they are not affected by the structure of
the sentence.
5
Treatment Prioritization Model
5.1
Proposed Methods
We develop a prioritization model of treatment on the datasets shown in (b) and (c) of Figure 2. This model takes as
input a list of text representing the orthodontic problems or a list of classes and outputs a list of treatment priority for
each problem shown in parentheses in the lower part of Figure 1.
We convert each problem into vector representation using a natural language processing approach and perform learning-
to-rank with them as features. The following three methods are used to vectorize each problem.
• BoW (Bag-of-Words): We construct feature vectors from the text of the problem. These vector representations
have dimensions corresponding to the number of vocabulary in the training dataset, and each dimension has a
value of 1 if the corresponding word appears in the input text or 0 it does not.
4
ρ
BoW
0.513
OoK
0.566
USE
0.584
Table 2: Automatic evaluation of treatment ranking models by Spearman’s rho.
• OoK (One-of-K): We construct feature vectors from the labels that represent the problem. These vector
representations have dimensions corresponding to numbers of labels appearing in the training dataset, and
only one of the dimensions corresponding to the input class has a value of 1 and the other dimensions have a
value of 0.
• USE (Universal Sentence Encoder): We construct feature vectors from the text of the problem using the
cross-lingual version of universal sentence encoder [4]. These are 512-dimensional dense vectors.
For learning-to-rank, we used SVM-rank [7] with a linear kernel, a standard toolkit.
5.2
Experimental Settings
Each sentence was divided into words using MeCab [6] for the BoW model. In this experiment, as the training
dataset has 146 vocabulary and 320 classes, the feature vectors of each model are 146 dimensions for BoW, 320
dimensions for OoK, and 512 dimensions for USE. For a given set of features, we examined a hyper-parameter among
C ∈{1, 5, 10, 50, 100, 500, 1000, 5000} on the validation dataset for SVM-rank.
Spearman’s rank correlation coefﬁcient is used to automatically evaluate the performance of each model. When the
correlation coefﬁcient between the human ranking and the estimated ranking exceeds 0.4, the estimation result of the
model can be interpreted as having a positive correlation with human evaluation.
5.3
Experimental Results
The experimental results are shown in Table 2. As each method has Spearman’s rank correlation coefﬁcient exceeding
0.4, it can be interpreted that these estimation results have a positive correlation with human evaluation. Compared to
the BoW model, the OoK model is expected to be able to obtain feature vectors that reﬂect an annotator’s expertise, so it
is considered that high performance has been achieved. Furthermore, the USE model achieves the highest performance
because the dense vectors obtained by deep learning can represent rich information.
6
Conclusion
We work on the task of automatically designing a treatment plan from the ﬁndings included in the medical certiﬁcate
written by the dentist. To develop an artiﬁcial intelligence system that deals with free-form certiﬁcates written by
dentists, we annotate the ﬁndings and utilized the natural language processing approach. As a result of the experiment
using 990 certiﬁcates, 0.585 F1-score was achieved for the task of extracting orthodontic problems from ﬁndings, and
0.584 correlation coefﬁcient with the human ranking was achieved for the treatment prioritization task.
Our future work includes:
• Fine-tuning on in-domain data of sentence encoder [8].
• Robust sentence encoding for incomplete sentences for multi-label classiﬁcation model.
• Consideration of the ﬁndings for treatment prioritization.
• Text simpliﬁcation from treatment protocol summaries to consent form documents.
5
References
[1] Kenji Takada. Elements of Orthodontics. 2017.
[2] J. H. Sims-Williams, I. D. Brown, A. Matthewman and C. D. Stephens. A Computer-Controlled Expert System for
Orthodontic Advice. British Dental Journal, vol.163, no.5, pp.161–166, 1987.
[3] C. D. Stephens, N. Mackin, J. H. Sims-Williams. The Development and Validation of an Orthodontic Expert System.
British Journal of Orthodontics, vol.23, no.1, pp.1–9, 1996.
[4] Muthuraman Chidambaram, Yinfei Yang, Daniel Cer, Steve Yuan, Yun-Hsuan Sung, Brian Strope and Ray Kurzweil.
Learning Cross-Lingual Sentence Representations via a Multi-task Dual-Encoder Model. arXiv:1810.12836, 2018.
[5] Seiya Tokui, Kenta Oono, Shohei Hido and Justin Clayton. Chainer: a Next-Generation Open Source Framework
for Deep Learning. In Proceedings of Workshop on Machine Learning Systems in The Twenty-ninth Annual
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2004.
[6] Taku Kudo, Kaoru Yamamoto and Yuji Matsumoto. Applying Conditional Random Fields to Japanese Morpho-
logical Analysis. In Proceedings of the 2004 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pp.230–237, 2004.
[7] Thorsten Joachims. Training Linear SVMs in Linear Time. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining, 2006.
[8] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional
Transformers for Language Understanding. arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
6
