Title: Natural Language Processing for Music Knowledge Discovery
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1807.02200v1
--------------------------------------------------

Natural Language Processing for Music
Knowledge Discovery
Sergio Oramas1, Luis Espinosa-Anke2, Francisco Gómez3, and
Xavier Serra1
1Music Technology Group, Universitat Pompeu Fabra
2School of Computer Science and Informatics, CardiﬀUniversity
3Technical University of Madrid
{sergio.oramas,xavier.serra}@upf.edu,
espinosa-ankel@cardiﬀ.ac.uk, fmartin@etsisi.upm.es
Abstract
Today, a massive amount of musical knowledge is stored in written
form, with testimonies dated as far back as several centuries ago.
In
this work, we present diﬀerent Natural Language Processing (NLP) ap-
proaches to harness the potential of these text collections for automatic
music knowledge discovery, covering diﬀerent phases in a prototypical
NLP pipeline, namely corpus compilation, text-mining, information ex-
traction, knowledge graph generation and sentiment analysis.
Each of
these approaches is presented alongside diﬀerent use cases (i.e., ﬂamenco,
Renaissance and popular music) where large collections of documents are
processed, and conclusions stemming from data-driven analyses are pre-
sented and discussed.
Keywords Musicology, Natural Language Processing, Information Extrac-
tion, Entity Linking, Sentiment Analysis
1
Introduction
One of the main tasks carried out in musicology is the development and valida-
tion of musical hypotheses. The seed that usually leads to most research involves
looking for relevant information in written documents, which in general are or-
ganized as compilations, collections or anthologies. Today, it is unsurprising
to ﬁnd many of these collections stored in digitized machine-readable format,
a scenario which has signiﬁed a great improvement on the way information is
accessed. These digitized collections are mostly stored in digital libraries and
managed by information systems where documents can be searched by textual
keywords.
This improvement has increased signiﬁcantly the possibilities for
1
arXiv:1807.02200v1  [cs.CL]  6 Jul 2018
S. Oramas et al.
NLP for Music Knowledge Discovery
musicologists to access information. However, in these infrastructures the un-
derlying semantics in the textual content of each document are not captured by
search engines, which usually operate at an exact text string matching level, and
therefore in the majority of cases do not take full advantage of the sophisticated
processing tools that semantic search puts at our disposal. In this context, and
in order to capture the subtle nuances in musical meaning and thus improving
musicological research, we argue that it is not enough to put text corpora on-
line and make them searchable. Indeed, there still remains the important and
diﬃcult task to transform text collections, from searchable repositories, into
knowledge environments, in what can be seen as the next step in the evolution
of digital libraries (Fast & Sedig, 2011).
This limitation coexists with an opportunity derived from the quick growth
rate at which online content is generated. Today, speciﬁcally in the music do-
main, we have at our disposal vast amounts of knowledge, gathered for centuries
by musicologists and music enthusiasts and made accessible by various agents.
Most of this knowledge is encoded in artist biographies, reviews, facsimile edi-
tions, and other written media. The constant production of this music-related
textual information results in large repositories of knowledge, which have great
potential for musicological and philological studies. However, since most of it is
recorded in natural language, processing and analyzing them eﬀectively is a dif-
ﬁcult task. We claim, however, that by leveraging Natural Language Processing
(NLP) techniques, it is possible to unveil relevant information hidden in large
domain-speciﬁc document collections, which would otherwise remain hidden.
Fortunately, targeting NLP techniques to text corpora in the music domain
has been the main focus of several works so far (Oramas, Espinosa-Anke, Sordo,
et al., 2016b; Tata & Di Eugenio, 2010; Oramas, Ostuni, et al., 2016; Sutcliﬀe
et al., 2015; Knees & Schedl, 2011; Sordo et al., 2012; Fujinaga & Weiss, 2016).
These and other contributions report experimental results of the application
of intelligent text processing techniques to music-speciﬁc document collections.
In addition, many of the upshots of these methods consist in large structured
databases containing musical and musicological information, which can provide
search engines with much richer and ﬁne-grained information about musicians,
their life and work, and even their relation with other musical entities (mu-
sicians, record labels, venues, and so forth). Conversely, information already
structured in online knowledge repositories has also been exploited in the context
of Computational Musicology. For example, a noteworthy example is provided
in Crawford et al. (2014), where musicologists are provided with a means to cre-
ate a linked and extensible knowledge structure over a collection of Early Music
metadata and facsimile images. In Rose & Tuppen (2014), seven big datasets
of musical and biographical metadata are aligned, showing how analysis and vi-
sualization of such data might transform musicological understanding. Despite
these valuable contributions, scant musicological research has been carried out
regarding the speciﬁc challenge of processing text collections.
We propose to speciﬁcally address the above challenge by presenting con-
crete methodologies aimed at exploring large musicological text corpora. With
these methodologies we reconcile, on one the hand, intelligent text processing
2
S. Oramas et al.
NLP for Music Knowledge Discovery
techniques, and on the other, musical knowledge acquired both from structured
and unstructured resources. First, we distill methods for gathering and com-
bining information coming from diﬀerent sources. The textual data used in our
experiments comes in diﬀerent ﬂavors, namely (1) A knowledge base of ﬂamenco
music; (2) A corpus of biographies from artists of the Renaissance period; and
(3) A dataset of music album reviews of diverse genres.
The underlying knowledge expressed in these corpora is thus extracted ap-
plying diﬀerent NLP pipelines. First, shallow text-mining processing techniques
are applied to understand main trends in the diﬀerent schools of the Renaissance
period. Second, Information Extraction (IE) techniques constitute the method-
ological basis for populating a novel fully automatic ﬂamenco knowledge base,
and to analogously study migratory tendencies and the role of diﬀerent Eu-
ropean capitals along the Renaissance period. Third, a methodology for the
creation of a knowledge graph from a set of unstructured text documents is
proposed and evaluated from diﬀerent standpoints. We further show a direct
application of this knowledge graph in automatically computing the ranked rel-
evance of a given artist in the ﬂamenco and Renaissance corpora. Finally, we
present an approach for capturing the sentiment expressed in text. Using senti-
mental information as a starting point, we provide a diachronic study of music
criticism via a quantitative analysis of the polarity associated to music album
reviews gathered from Amazon1. Our analysis hints at a potential correlation
between key cultural and geopolitical events and the language and evolving
sentiment found in music reviews and, ultimately, opens exciting avenues for
diachronic studies of music genres.
This paper is an extended version of two previous publications (Oramas,
Gómez, et al., 2015; Oramas, Espinosa-Anke, Lawlor, & Others, 2016) , with
the main novel contributions being the uniﬁcation of approaches, the addition
of more detailed results, and the introduction of an additional use case based
on the study of the Renaissance Music period. The remainder of this paper is
organized as follows. First, in Section 2, we describe the processes of gather-
ing and combining information from diﬀerent data sources, and apply it to the
gathering of the three text corpora used throughout the paper: ﬂamenco music,
Renaissance artists, and albums reviews. Then, in Section 3, a text-mining ap-
proach based on word frequencies is described and applied to study the diﬀerent
music schools of the Renaissance period. Next, in Section 4, an information ex-
traction pipeline for the extraction of biographical information is exposed and
applied to populate a ﬂamenco knowledge base and to study the Renaissance
period. Later, in Section 5, an approach for the creation of knowledge graphs is
presented and used to compute a relevance ranking of ﬂamenco and Renaissance
artists. In Section 6, an aspect-based sentiment analysis method is deﬁned and
applied to describe how sentiment associated with music reviews changes over
time. Following this method, two experiments are performed, one aggregating
sentiment scores by review publication year, and other by album publication
year. Finally, we conclude with a discussion about our ﬁndings (Section 7).
1http://www.amazon.com
3
S. Oramas et al.
NLP for Music Knowledge Discovery
2
Collecting text corpora
Gathering, structuring, and connecting data from diﬀerent sources is a research
problem in itself, where diﬀerent and major challenges may arise. Although
some existing repositories with music information, such as Wikipedia2, Oxford
Music Online3, or MusicBrainz4 are quite complete and accurate, there is still
a vast amount of music information out there that is generally scattered across
diﬀerent sources on the Web. Selecting the sources and harvesting and combin-
ing data is a crucial step towards the creation of practical and meaningful music
research corpora (Oramas, 2014)
In this work, three diﬀerent datasets are built as testbeds of our knowledge
extraction methodologies. First, we illustrate in detail a methodology for select-
ing and mixing data coming from diﬀerent sources in the creation of a ﬂamenco
music knowledge base. Then, we apply some of the described approaches to col-
lect a corpus of artist’s biographies about Renaissance artists and a collection of
music album reviews and metadata. In what follows we describe the gathered
corpora and the processes carried on for their compilation.
2.1
The ﬂamenco corpus
In this section, we describe the methodology used for the creation of a knowledge
base of ﬂamenco music. To this end, a large amount of information is gathered
from diﬀerent data sources, and further combined by applying a process of pair-
wise entity resolution.
2.1.1
Flamenco music overview
Several musical traditions contributed to the genesis of ﬂamenco music as we
know it today. Among them, the inﬂuences of the Jews, Arabs, and Spanish
folk music are recognizable, but indubitably the imprint of Andalusian Gypsies’
culture is deeply ingrained in ﬂamenco music. The main components of ﬂa-
menco music are: cante or singing, toque or guitar playing, and baile or dance.
According to Gamboa (2005), ﬂamenco music grew out of the singing tradition,
as a melting process of all the traditions mentioned above, and therefore the
role of the singer soon became dominant and fundamental. Toque is subordi-
nated to cante, especially in more traditional settings, whereas baile enjoys more
independence from voice.
In the ﬂamenco jargon, styles are called palos. Criteria adopted to deﬁne
ﬂamenco palos are rhythmic patterns, chord progressions, lyrics, poetic struc-
ture, and geographical origin. In ﬂamenco, geographical variation is important
to classify cantes as often they are associated to a particular region where they
were originated or where they are performed with gusto. Rhythm or compás is
a unique feature of ﬂamenco. Rhythmic patterns based on 12-beat cycles are
2http://wikipedia.org
3http://www.oxfordmusiconline.com/
4http://musicbrainz.org
4
S. Oramas et al.
NLP for Music Knowledge Discovery
Figure 1: Selected data sources
mainly used. Those patterns can be classed as follows: binary patterns, such as
tangos or tientos; ternary patterns, which are the most common ones, such as
fandangos or bulerías; mixed patterns, where ternary and binary patterns al-
ternate, such as guajira; free-form, where there is no a clear underlying rhythm,
such as tonás. For further information on fundamental aspects of ﬂamenco mu-
sic, see the book Fernández (2004). For a comprehensive study of styles, musical
forms and history of ﬂamenco the reader is referred to the books of Blas Vega
& Ríos Ruiz (1988), Navarro & Ropero (1995), and Gamboa (2005), and the
references therein.
2.1.2
Data acquisition
Our aim is to gather an important amount of information about musical entities
(e.g. artists, recordings), including textual descriptions and available metadata.
A schema of the selected data sources is shown in Figure 1. We started by
looking at Wikipedia. Each Wikipedia article may have a set of associated cat-
egories. Categories are intended to group together pages on similar subjects
and are structured in a taxonomical way. To ﬁnd Wikipedia articles related to
ﬂamenco music, we ﬁrst looked for ﬂamenco categories. The taxonomy of cate-
gories can be explored by querying DBpedia, a knowledge base with structured
content extracted from Wikipedia. We queried the Spanish version of DBpe-
dia5 for categories related to ﬂamenco. We obtained 17 diﬀerent categories (e.g.,
cantaores de ﬂamenco, guitarristas de ﬂamenco).
We gathered all DBpedia resources related to at least one of these categories.
We obtained a total number of 438 resources in Spanish, of which 281 were also
in English. Each DBpedia resource is associated with a Wikipedia article. Text
and HTML code were then extracted from Wikipedia articles in English and
Spanish. Next, we classiﬁed the extracted articles according to the role of the
biography subject (i.e., cantaor, guitarist, and bailaor). For this purpose, we
5http://es.dbpedia.org
5
S. Oramas et al.
NLP for Music Knowledge Discovery
exploited classiﬁcation information provided by DBpedia (DBpedia types and
Wikipedia categories). At the end, from all gathered resources, we only kept
those related to artists and palos, totaling 291 artists and 56 palos.
As the amount of information present in Wikipedia related to ﬂamenco music
is somewhat scarce, we decided to expand our knowledge base with information
from two diﬀerent websites. First, Andalucia.org, the touristic web from the An-
dalusia Government6. It contains 422 artist biographies in English and Spanish,
and the description of 76 palos also in both languages. Second, a website called
El arte de vivir el ﬂamenco7, which includes 749 artist biographies among can-
taores, bailaores and guitarists.
We used MusicBrainz to ﬁll our knowledge base with information about ﬂa-
menco album releases and recordings. For every artist mapped to MusicBrainz,
all content related to releases and recordings was gathered. Thus, 814 releases
and 9,942 recordings were collected.
The information gathered from MusicBrainz is a small part of the actual ﬂa-
menco discography. Therefore, to complement it we used a ﬂamenco recordings
database gathered by Rafael Infante and available at CICA website8 (Comput-
ing and Scientiﬁc Center of Andalusia). This database has information about
releases from the early time of recordings until present time, counting 2,099
releases and 4,136 songs. For every song entry, a cantaor name is provided,
and most of the times also guitarist and palo, which is an important piece of
information to deﬁne ﬂamenco recordings.
Finally, we supplied our knowledge base with information related to An-
dalusian towns and provinces. We gathered this information from the oﬃcial
database SIMA9 (Multi-territorial System of Information of Andalusia).
2.1.3
Entity resolution
Entity resolution is the problem of extracting, matching and resolving entity
mentions in structured and unstructured data (Getoor, 2012). There are sev-
eral approaches to tackle the entity resolution problem. For the scope of this
research, we selected a pair-wise classiﬁcation approach based on string similar-
ity between entity labels.
The ﬁrst issue after gathering the data is to decide whether two entities
from diﬀerent sources are referring to the same one. Therefore, given two sets
of entities A and B, the objective is to deﬁne an injective and non-surjective
mapping function f between A and B that decides whether an entity a ∈A is
the same as an entity b ∈B. To do that, a string similarity metric sim(a, b)
based on the Ratcliﬀ-Obershelp algorithm (Ratcliﬀ& Metzener, 1988) has been
applied. It measures the similarity between two entity labels and outputs a
value between 0 and 1. We consider that a and b are the same entity if their
similarity is bigger than a parameter θ. If there are two entities b, c ∈B that
6http://andalucia.org
7http://www.elartedevivirelflamenco.com/
8http://flun.cica.es/index.php/grabaciones
9http://www.juntadeandalucia.es/institutodeestadisticaycartografia/sima
6
S. Oramas et al.
NLP for Music Knowledge Discovery
Figure 2: F-measure for diﬀerent values of θ
satisfy that sim(a, b) ≥θ and sim(a, c) ≥θ, we consider only the mapping
with the highest score.
To determine the value of θ, we tested the method
with several θ values over an annotated dataset of entity pairs. To create this
dataset, the 291 artists gathered from Wikipedia were manually mapped to the
422 artists gathered from Andalucia.org, obtaining a total amount of 120 pair
matches. As it is shown in Figure 2 the best F-measure (0,97) was obtained
with θ = 0.9. Finally, we applied the described method with θ = 0.9 to all
gathered entities from the three data sources. Thanks to the entity resolution
process, we reduced the initial set of 1,462 artists and 132 palos to a set of 1,174
artists and 76 palos.
Once we had our artist entities resolved, we began to gather their related
discography. First, we tried to ﬁnd out the MusicBrainz ID of the gathered
artists. Depending on the information about the entity, two diﬀerent processes
were applied. First, we leveraged mapping information between Wikipedia and
MusicBrainz present in Wikidata10 (Vrandečić & Krötzsch, 2014). Wikidata is
a free linked database, which acts as a structured data storage of Wikipedia.
For those artists without this mapping information, we queried the MusicBrainz
API, and then applied our entity resolution method to the obtained results.
Finally, to integrate the discography database of CICA into our knowledge
base, we applied the entity resolution method to the ﬁelds cantaor, guitarist
and palo of each recording entry in the database. From the set of 202 cantaores
and 157 guitarist names present in the recording entries of the database, a total
number of 78 cantaores and 44 guitarists were mapped to our knowledge base.
The number of mapped artists was low due to diﬀerences between the way of
labeling an artist. An artist name may be written by using one or two of her
surnames, or by using her nickname. In the case of palos, there were 162 diﬀerent
palos in the database, 54 of which were mapped with the 76 of our knowledge
base. These 54 palos correspond to an 80% of palo assignments present in the
recording entries.
2.1.4
FlaBase
FlaBase (Flamenco Knowledge Base) is the acronym of the resulting knowledge
base of ﬂamenco music. It contains online editorial, biographical and musicolog-
10https://www.wikidata.org
7
S. Oramas et al.
NLP for Music Knowledge Discovery
Figure 3: Songs by palo
ical information related to ﬂamenco music. FlaBase is stored in JSON format,
and it is freely available for download11. FlaBase contains information about
1,174 artists, 76 palos (ﬂamenco genres), 2,913 albums, 14,078 tracks, and 771
Andalusian locations. In Figure 3 it is shown that the most representative pa-
los in ﬂamenco music are represented in our knowledge base, with a higher
predominance of fandangos.
2.2
The Renaissance corpus
Renaissance is a period in history that starts around 1400 with the end of the
medieval era, and closes around 1600, with the beginning of the Baroque period.
Renaissance music refers to music written in Europe during this period.
In this work we experimented with two datasets of biographies about Re-
naissance composers, one gathered from Wikipedia, and another from The New
Grove(Sadie, 2001), available through Oxford Music Online.
2.2.1
The Wikipedia corpus
In Wikipedia there is an important number of articles related to Renaissance
music, most of them biographies of composers. For this research, we compiled
the biographies of all composers that are linked in the Wikipedia page: List of
Renaissance composers 12. In this page, composers are classiﬁed by school. We
collected biographies of composers from the ﬁve most representative schools:
Spanish, German, English, Franco-Flemish, and Italian. A total number of 543
biographies were gathered. In addition to the biography texts, HTML links to
other Wikipedia pages present in texts were also stored.
11http://mtg.upf.edu/download/datasets/flabase
12https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Renaissance_composers
8
S. Oramas et al.
NLP for Music Knowledge Discovery
2.2.2
The Grove corpus
The Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians (Grove, 1878) is an encyclopedic
dictionary, and one of the largest reference works in Western music. It was ﬁrst
published in four volumes in the last quarter of the XIX century by George
Grove. In 1980 a new version called The New Grove (Sadie, 2001) was released
with 20 volumes, where there are 22,500 articles and 16,500 biographies. The
complete text of the second edition of The New Grove is available in machine-
readable format on the online service Oxford Music Online as Grove Music
Online. From this set of biographies, we gathered all of them classiﬁed as Early
Renaissance and Late Renaissance. A total number of 1710 biographies were
collected.
2.3
The albums reviews corpus
In this section, we put forward an integration procedure for enriching with
music-related information a large dataset of Amazon customer reviews McAuley
et al. (2015), with semantic metadata obtained from MusicBrainz. The initial
dataset of Amazon customer reviews provides millions of review texts together
with additional information such as overall rating (between 0 to 5), date of
publication, or creator id. Each review is associated to a product and, for each
product, additional metadata is also provided, namely, Amazon product id, list
of similar products, price, sell rank, and genre categories.
From this initial
dataset, we selected the subset of products categorized as CDs & Vinyls, which
also fulﬁll the following criteria. First, considering that the Amazon taxonomy
of music genres contains 27 labels in the ﬁrst hierarchy level, and about 500 in
total, we obtain a music-relevant subset and select 16 of the 27 which really de-
ﬁne a music style and discard for instance region categories (e.g., World Music)
and other categories speciﬁcally non-related to a music style (e.g., Soundtrack,
Miscellaneous, Special Interest), function-oriented categories (Karaoke, Holiday
& Wedding), or categories whose albums might also be found under other cat-
egories (e.g., Opera & Classical Vocal, Broadway & Vocalists). We compiled
albums belonging only to one of the 16 selected categories, i.e., no multi-label.
Note that the original dataset contains not only reviews about CDs and Vinyls,
but also about music DVDs and VHSs. Since these are not strictly speaking
music audio products, we ﬁlter out those products also classiﬁed as "Movies &
TV". Finally, since products classiﬁed as Classical and Pop are substantially
more frequent in the original dataset, we compensate this unbalance by limiting
the number of albums of any genre to 10,000.
After this preprocessing, the
dataset amounts to a total of 65,566 albums and 263,525 customer reviews. A
breakdown of the number of albums per genre is provided in Table 1. The ﬁnal
dataset is called the Multimodal Album Reviews Dataset (MARD) and is freely
available for download13.
Having performed genre ﬁltering, we enrich the dataset by extracting artist
names and record labels from the Amazon product page. We pivot over this
13https://www.upf.edu/web/mtg/mard
9
S. Oramas et al.
NLP for Music Knowledge Discovery
Genre
Amazon
MusicBrainz
Alternative Rock
2,674
1,696
Reggae
509
260
Classical
10,000
2,197
R&B
2,114
2,950
Country
2,771
1,032
Jazz
6,890
2,990
Metal
1,785
1,294
Pop
10,000
4,422
New Age
2,656
638
Dance & Electronic
5,106
899
Rap & Hip-Hop
1,679
768
Latin Music
7,924
3,237
Rock
7,315
4,100
Gospel
900
274
Blues
1,158
448
Folk
2,085
848
Total
66,566
28,053
Table 1: Number of albums by genre with information from the diﬀerent sources
in the albums reviews dataset.
information to query the MusicBrainz search API to gather additional metadata
such as release id, ﬁrst release date, song titles and song ids. Mapping with Mu-
sicBrainz is performed using the same methodology described in Section 2.1.3,
following a pair-wise entity resolution approach based on string similarity with
a threshold value of θ = 0.85. We successfully mapped 28,053 albums to Mu-
sicBrainz.
3
Text-mining
Text-mining is the process of deriving high-quality information from text. This
high-quality information is typically derived through the devising of patterns
and trends using statistical analysis over text. Many text-mining techniques
are based on the analysis of frequencies of the words present in the set of stud-
ied documents. In what follows, we illustrate the potential of this technique
with a simple application to the analysis of word frequencies in our corpus of
Renaissance artist’s biographies.
3.1
Renaissance music schools
The computational analysis of artist biographies may reveal interesting insights
from the data that can be useful to musicologists. Using the Renaissance artist’s
biographies gathered from Wikipedia (see Section 2.2.1), we applied a shallow
analysis of the words used in the articles. We computed the frequencies of all
10
S. Oramas et al.
NLP for Music Knowledge Discovery
words present in the articles of every school. From the obtained frequencies we
plot a word cloud for each school, where more frequent words are represented
with bigger fonts.
In Figure 4, the word clouds of the diﬀerent schools are
shown. We observe very clear insights from the images at ﬁrst sight. We see,
for instance, how madrigal is very important in the Italian, chanson in the
French, and motet in the Franco-Flemish school. We also see the importance of
the Church in the Spanish school, or the relevance of organ music in the German
school. Although these observations may seem obvious to a musicologist, they
are extracted directly from the data without human intervention. This approach
can be applied to text corpora the researcher might not be familiar with, helping
her in easily discovering some trends directly from the data.
(a) Spanish
(b) Italian
(c) English
(d) Franco-Flemish
(e) French
(f) German
Figure 4: Word clouds by school from Wikipedia biographies.
11
S. Oramas et al.
NLP for Music Knowledge Discovery
4
Information Extraction
Information extraction is the task of automatically extracting structured infor-
mation from unstructured or semi-structured text sources. It is a widely studied
topic within the NLP research community (Cowie & Lehnert, 1996). A major
step towards understanding language is the extraction of meaningful terms (en-
tities) from text as well as relationships between those entities. This statement
involves two diﬀerent tasks. First, the identiﬁcation and categorization of entity
mentions. This task is called named entity recognition (NER). However, when
this task involves a latter step of disambiguation of entities against a knowledge
base it is called named entity disambiguation or entity linking (EL). The second
task consists of the identiﬁcation of relevant semantic relations or attributes
associated to these entities.
4.1
Entity linking
The advent of large knowledge repositories and collaborative resources has con-
tributed to the emergence of entity linking, i.e., the task of discovering mentions
of entities in text and link them to a suitable knowledge repository (Moro et al.,
2014). It encompasses similar subtasks such as named entity disambiguation
(Bunescu & Pasca, 2006), which is precisely linking mentions of entities to a
knowledge base, or wikiﬁcation (Mihalcea & Csomai, 2007), speciﬁcally using
Wikipedia as knowledge base.
Entity linking is typically divided in two steps, namely, the identiﬁcation
of a text span from the text as an entity candidate, and the disambiguation
of this entity with respect to a knowledge base. This disambiguation step can
be directly applied to the surface form of the identiﬁed text span, or to the
output of a NER system previously applied. The biggest diﬀerence here is that
the NER system not only identiﬁes the text span, but also provides a category
that classify the identiﬁed candidate. We propose a method that employs a
combination of both approaches, depending on the category of the entity. For
NER, we used the Stanford NER system (Finkel et al., 2005), implemented in
the library Stanford Core NLP14 and trained on English and Spanish texts. For
disambiguation we simply looked for exact string matches between entity labels
in the knowledge base and identiﬁed text spans.
4.2
Studying the ﬂamenco corpus
4.2.1
Linking entities in the ﬂamenco corpus
As the gathered ﬂamenco texts are mostly written in Spanish, we needed an
entity linking system that deals with Spanish texts. Although there are many
entity linking tools available, state-of-the-art systems are well-tuned for English
texts, but may not perform as well in languages other than English, and even
less with music related texts (Oramas, Espinosa-Anke, Sordo, et al., 2016a). In
14http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/corenlp.shtml
12
S. Oramas et al.
NLP for Music Knowledge Discovery
Approach
Precision
Recall
F-measure
1) no NER
0.829
0.694
0.756
2) NER to PERS & LOC
0.739
0.347
0.472
3) NER to LOC
0.892
0.674
0.767
Table 2: Precision, Recall and F-measure of entity linking approaches.
addition, we wanted to have a system that uses our own knowledge base for dis-
ambiguation. Therefore, we developed our own system, which is able to detect
and disambiguate three categories of entities: Person, Palo and Location. Three
diﬀerent approaches for the selection of annotation candidates were deﬁned by
applying NER only on a subset of the categories of entities: only using text
spans (no NER) for disambiguation; disambiguating Location and Person enti-
ties from the NER output, and Palo from text spans; and only disambiguating
Location entities from the NER output, and Person and Palo directly from text
spans.
To determine which approach performs better, three artist biographies were
manually annotated, having a total number of 49 annotated entities. Results
on the diﬀerent approaches are shown in Table 2. We observe that applying
NER to entities of the Person category worsens performance signiﬁcantly, as
recall suddenly decreases by half. After manually analyzing false negatives, we
observed that this is caused because many artist names have deﬁnite articles
between name and surname (e.g., de, del), and this is not recognized correctly
by the NER system. In addition, many artists have a nickname that is not
interpreted as a Person entity by the NER system. The best approach is the
third one (NER to LOC), where NER output is used only for Locations, which
is slightly better than the ﬁrst one (no NER) in terms of precision. This is due
to the fact that many artists have a town name as a surname or as part of his
or her nickname. Therefore, applying entity linking directly to text spans is
misclassifying Person entities as Location entities. Thus, by adding a previous
step of NER to Location entities we have increased the overall performance, as
it can be seen on the F-measure values.
4.2.2
Extracting biographical data
While the created knowledge base of ﬂamenco does already encode relevant
culture and music-speciﬁc information, a notable portion of the data collected
currently remains unexploited due to its unstructured nature. Consequently,
to enhance the amount of structured data, a process of information extraction
is carried out. We focus on extracting two speciﬁc pieces of information from
the artist biographies: birth year and birth place, as they can be relevant for
anthropological studies. We observed that this information is often in the ﬁrst
sentences of the biographies, and always near the word nació (Spanish trans-
lation of "was born"). Therefore, to extract this information, we look for this
word in the ﬁrst 250 characters of every biographical text. If it is found, we
13
S. Oramas et al.
NLP for Music Knowledge Discovery
(a) Artists by province of birth
(b) Artists by decade of birth
Figure 5: FlaBase distributions.
apply our entity linking method to this piece of text. If a Location entity is
found near the word "nació", we assume that this entity is the place of birth
of the biography subject. In addition, by using regular expressions, we look for
the presence of a year expression in the context of the Location entity. If it is
found, we assume it as the year of birth. If more than one year is found, we
select the one with the smaller value.
To evaluate our approach, we tested the extraction of birth places in all
texts coming from the web Andalucia.org (442 artists). We manually annotated
the province of provenance of these 442 artists for building ground truth data.
After the application of the extraction process on the annotated test set, we
obtained a precision value of 0.922 and a recall of 0.648. Therefore, we may
argue that our method is extracting biographic information with high precision
and quite reasonable recall.
We ﬁnally applied the extraction process to all
artist entities with biographical texts. Thus, 743 birth places and 879 birth
years were extracted.
Using the information extracted, we computed the distribution of diﬀerent
items present in FlaBase. Data shown in Figures 5a and 5b was obtained thanks
to the information extraction process applied. We can observe in Figure 5a that
most ﬂamenco artists are from the Andalusian provinces of Seville and Cadiz.
Finally, in Figure 5b we observe a higher number of artists in the data were
born from the 30’s to the 80’s of the 20th century.
4.3
Studying the Renaissance period
To study the Renaissance period, we applied a process of information extraction
similar to the one described above for the ﬂamenco corpus. Thus, we extracted
biographical data from the artist biographies in the Grove corpus. We observed
in this corpus that at the beginning of every biography there is a sentence be-
tween parentheses with information about the place and date of birth and death.
Therefore, we automatically extracted this information using the same ad-hoc
entity linking system and regular expressions used to extract information from
the ﬂamenco corpus. Using the extracted data, we ﬁrst plotted the histograms
of the distributions of birth and death dates (Figures 6a and 6b. As observed
14
S. Oramas et al.
NLP for Music Knowledge Discovery
City
Births
Deaths
Diﬀerence
Florence
25
26
+4%
Brescia
18
5
-72%
Parma
15
10
-33%
Nuremberg
15
17
+13%
Bologna
15
13
-13%
Table 3: Top cities by number of births, extracted from the Grove dataset.
City
Births
Deaths
Diﬀerence
Rome
9
59
+555%
London
7
39
+457%
Paris
6
32
+433%
Venice
11
29
+164%
Florence
25
26
+4%
Table 4: Top cities by number of deaths, extracted from the Grove dataset.
in Figures 6a and 6b, most Renaissance composers were born in the ﬁrst half
of the XVI century, and died at the beginning of the XVII century. This image
gives as a simple overview of the activity in the period.
(a) Births
(b) Deaths
Figure 6: Distribution of birth and death dates.
Using the extracted places of birth and death, we also computed the dif-
ference between cities in number of births and deaths. We observe in Table 3
that Brescia and Parma are cities where many relevant composers were born,
but few died. This perhaps implies a good educational environment in music,
but less career opportunities for those composers. By contrast, we observe in
Table 4 how big cities like Rome, London, Paris, or Venice are attractors of
talent, with much larger number of deaths than births. Florence in contrast,
typically considered as the cradle of the Renaissance, has a similar number of
births and deaths.
15
S. Oramas et al.
NLP for Music Knowledge Discovery
City
Median year
Nuremberg
1563
Paris
1569
Venice
1576
Rome
1594
Florence
1597
London
1610
Table 5: Median of the distribution of deaths by city.
Finally, we computed the median of the distribution of death years by city
of those with larger number of deaths. This data may be useful to observe when
a city was in the middle of his success as an attractor of musical talent. In
Table 5, we observe how the gravity center of Renaissance music moves from
Nuremberg and Paris to Venice, Florence, and Rome, and ﬁnally to London.
Again, this result may be very illustrative as a ﬁrst impression of this musical
period.
5
Knowledge graph construction
We assume that an entity mention inside an artist biography signals a semantic
relation between the entity that constitutes the main theme of the biography
(subject entity) and the mentioned entity. Based on this assumption, we build a
semantic graph by applying the following steps. First, each artist in the corpus
is added to the graph as a node. Second, entity linking is applied to artist’s
biographical texts. For every linked entity identiﬁed in the biography, a new
node is created in the graph (only if it was not previously created). Next, an
edge is added, connecting the subject entity with the linked entity found in its
biography. This way, a directed graph connecting the entities of the text corpus
is obtained.
This graph may have multiple applications. It may be exploited to compute
similarity measures between artists, as explored in Oramas, Sordo, et al. (2015),
or it may provide a data structure well suited to the implementation of graphical
navigational systems throughout the collection of documents, as explored in
Oramas et al. (2014).
In this work, we explore a diﬀerent application: the
measurement artist relevance.
5.1
Artists relevance
Entities identiﬁed in a text by an entity linking system may be seen as hy-
perlinks that connects one text to another. Thus, algorithms to measure the
relevance of nodes in a network of hyperlinks can be applied to our semantic
graph (Bellomi & Bonato, 2005). Hence, a knowledge graph constructed with
the proposed methodology represents a network of hyperlinks that connect the
diﬀerent documents in the corpus. In order to measure artist relevance in our
16
S. Oramas et al.
NLP for Music Knowledge Discovery
constructed graph, we applied the PageRank (Brin & Page, 1998) and HITS
(Kleinberg, 1999) algorithms.
PageRank outputs a measure of relevance for
each node, and HITS gives two diﬀerent results: authority and hubness. We
only take into consideration authority from HITS algorithm because it has been
proven to be the most eﬀective of both values as a metric of relevancy (Bellomi
& Bonato, 2005).
5.1.1
Flamenco artists
Following the proposed methodology for the creation of a knowledge graph, we
created a graph of ﬂamenco artists after its application to the corpus of artist
biographies gathered in FlaBase. We applied the entity linking system described
in Section 4.1 and then constructed the graph. In this case, we also added other
attributes present in FlaBase to the graph, such as the extracted attributes and
the recordings associated to each artist. Once the graph was built, we applied
the PageRank and HITS algorithms and built an ordered list with the top-10
entities of the diﬀerent artist categories (cantaor, guitarist and bailaor) for each
of the algorithms.
For evaluation purposes, we asked a reputed ﬂamenco expert to build a list
of top-10 artists for each category according to his knowledge and the available
bibliography. The concept of artist relevance is somehow subjective and there
is no uniﬁed or consensual criterion for ﬂamenco experts about who the most
relevant artists of all time are. Despite that, there is a high level of agreement
among them on certain artists that should be on such a hypothetical list, based
on their inﬂuence in the evolution of the genre. Thus, after consulting several
documented sources and other ﬂamenco experts, our expert provided us with
this list of consensual top-10 artists by category and we considered it as ground
truth.
We deﬁne precision as the number of identiﬁed artists in the resulting list
that are also present in the ground truth list divided by the length of the list.
We evaluated the output of the two algorithms by calculating precision over the
entire list (top-10), and over the ﬁrst ﬁve elements (top-5) (see Table 6). We can
observe that PageRank results show the greatest agreement with the ﬂamenco
experts list. High values of precision, especially for the top-5 list, indicates that
the information in the knowledge graph is highly complete and accurate, and
the proposed methodology adequate to compute relevance of artists. In Table 7
the top-5 artists in each category obtained with the PageRank algorithm are
shown. It is clear that this approach tend to favor ancient artists that have
more probabilities of have been mentioned in other biographies. Therefore, we
understand in this case artist relevance as a measure directly tied to the inﬂuence
of the artist in the evolution of the genre.
5.1.2
Renaissance artists
We followed two diﬀerent strategies for knowledge graph construction for the
two datasets of Renaissance artist biographies. For the Wikipedia corpus, we
17
S. Oramas et al.
NLP for Music Knowledge Discovery
Top-5
Top-10
PageRank
0.933
0.633
HITS Authority
0.6
0.4
Table 6: Precision values of artist relevance ranking.
Cantaor
Guitarist
Bailaor
Antonio Mairena
Paco de Lucía
Antonio Ruiz Soler
Manolo Caracol
Ramón Montoya
Rosario
La Niña de los Peines
Niño Ricardo
Antonio Gades
Antonio Chacón
Manolo Sanlúcar
Mario Maya
Camarón de la Isla
Sabicas
Carmen Amaya
Manuel Torre
Tomatito
Pilar López
José Mercé
Vicente Amigo
La Argentinita
Enrique Morente
Gerardo Núñez
Lola Flores
Pepe Marchena
Paco Cepero
Pastora Imperio
Manuel Vallejo
Pepe Habichuela
José Antonio
Table 7: PageRank Top-10 artists by category.
took advantage of the links already present in the Wikipedia pages instead of
applying entity linking. We connected the biography main theme entity with all
the entities linked in the biography text. There are many entities linked in the
biographies that do not correspond to Renaissance composers (e.g., countries,
events, kings). Therefore, we created a graph composed only of Renaissance
composers and another with all the entities found in the biographies. Figure 7
shows the diﬀerence between the two graphs.
Following the same methodology described in Section 5.1, we computed the
relevance ranking of the composers in the 2 graphs created from the Wikipedia
corpus using the PageRank algorithm. We observe in Table 8 the most relevant
composer of each school obtained from the 2 Wikipedia graphs, the one using
only links between Renaissance composers (internal connections) and the
one using links to any entity (all connections). From a musicological per-
spective, we observe that the results using only internal connections have
School
Internal connections
All connections
Spanish
Francisco Guerrero
Juan de la Encina
German
Hans Leo Hessler
Martin Luther
English
Thomas Morley
Henry VIII
Franco-Flemish
Josquin des Prez
Josquin des Prez
Italian
Palestrina
Monteverdi
Table 8: Relevance ranking of composers by school and graph creation approach
using the Wikipedia dataset.
18
S. Oramas et al.
NLP for Music Knowledge Discovery
Figure 7: Knowledge graph construction approaches
Ranking
Internal connections
All connections
#1
Josquin des Prez
Henry VIII
#2
Palestrina
Martin Luther
#3
Orlande de Lassus
Henry V
#4
Adrian Willaert
Monteverdi
Table 9: Relevance ranking of all composers by graph creation approach using
the Wikipedia dataset.
more sense than those obtained using all connections. For example, Henry
VIII appears as the most prominent entity of the English school when using all
connections. Henry VIII, in addition to the king of England, was a composer
of the Renaissance era. However, his popularity is mainly due to his role as a
king rather than as a composer. Using internal connections only we obtain
Thomas Morley as the most prominent composer of the English school, who is
really a cornerstone of this school. The same happens in the German school
with Martin Luther, who is popular for other aspects diﬀerent from music. In
the Italian school we observe a slightly diﬀerent situation. Claudio Monteverdi
appears as the most prominent composer using all connections. He is ac-
tually one of the most prominent composers of the history of music, however,
although he started his career in the Renaissance era, he is mostly considered as
a Baroque composer. Palestrina, who was obtained using only internal con-
nections, is also a very prominent composer in the history of music, but he is a
prototypical composer of the Renaissance. We can infer from these results that
the use of only inner connections helps the approach to obtain results that are
19
S. Oramas et al.
NLP for Music Knowledge Discovery
Ranking
Internal connections
#1
Palestrina
#2
Alessandro Damasceni Peretti di Montalto
#3
Petrarch
#4
Claudin de Sermisy
#5
Luca Marenzio
#6
Pierre Sandrin
#7
Jaques Arcadelt
#8
Jacob Obrecht
Table 10: Relevance ranking of all composers using the Grove dataset.
more musicologically meaningful. In Table 9 we observe the top-4 composers
from both graphs independently of the music school. We notice here the same
tendency in the results.
For the Grove corpus, we followed the same strategy described for the con-
struction of the ﬂamenco knowledge graph. We applied entity linking to the
biographies, and then connected each biography subject with the entities men-
tioned in its biography.
We employed a similar ad-hoc approach for entity
linking as the one described in Section 4.1.
We computed the ranking list of the most relevant composers applying the
PageRank algorithm over this graph. As shown in Table 10, composers obtained
in this list are all very relevant musicians of the Renaissance period. However,
there are other types of artists and relevant people in the list, similarly to the
results obtained with the Wikipedia graph with all connections. This implies
the need of a ﬁltering process of the selected entities. This result conﬁrms the
ﬁndings shown in Section 5.1.1, which demonstrate the utility of the proposed
approach to compute artist relevance ranking from unstructured texts by using
entity linking.
6
Sentiment analysis
Sentiment analysis is the task to systematically identify, extract, quantify, and
study aﬀective states and subjective information in text. Among the diﬀerent
subtasks of sentiment analysis, we focus in this work on aspect-based sentiment
analysis. This technique provides speciﬁc sentiment scores for diﬀerent aspects
present in the text, e.g.
album cover, guitar, voice or lyrics.
These scores
represent how much the user likes or dislikes speciﬁc attributes expressed in
text.
6.1
Aspect-based sentiment analysis
Following the work of Dong et al. (2013, 2014) we use a combination of shallow
NLP, opinion mining, and sentiment analysis to extract opinionated features
20
S. Oramas et al.
NLP for Music Knowledge Discovery
Music Reviews
Aspect Extraction
Sentiment Analysis
bi-
grams
nouns
thresholding / filtering
Shallow NLP (POS 
tagging)
sentiment 
terms
Opinion Pattern 
Mining
Sentiment 
Matching
Sentiment 
Assignment
ь, э, . . .
opinion 
patterns
JJ_FEATURE
$, %, $%, (+, −, =), . . .
M1
Mn
Mi →{R1, . . . , Rn}
Ri
Figure 8: Overview of the opinion mining and sentiment analysis framework.
from reviews. For all reviews Ri of each album, we mine bi-grams and single-
noun aspects (also called review features; see Hu & Liu (2004)). We consider
bi-grams that conform to a noun followed by a noun (e.g., chorus arrangement)
or an adjective followed by a noun (e.g., original sound), and excluded bi-grams
whose adjective is a sentiment word (e.g., excellent, terrible). Separately, single-
noun aspects are validated by eliminating nouns that are rarely associated with
sentiment words in reviews, since such nouns are unlikely to refer to item aspects.
We refer to each of these extracted aspects Aj as review aspects.
For a review aspect Aj we determine if there are any sentiment words in
the sentence containing Aj. If not, Aj is marked neutral; otherwise, we iden-
tify the sentiment word wmin with the minimum word-distance to Aj. Next,
we determine the part-of-speech tags for wmin, Ai and any words that occur
between wmin and Ai. We assign a sentiment score between -1 and 1 to Aj
based on the sentiment of wmin, subject to whether the corresponding sentence
contains any negation terms within 4 words of wmin. If there are no negation
terms, then the sentiment assigned to Aj is that of the sentiment word in the
sentiment lexicon; otherwise, this sentiment is reversed. Our sentiment lexicon
is derived from SentiWordNet (Esuli & Sebastiani, 2006) and is not speciﬁcally
tuned for music reviews. An overview of the process is shown in Figure 8. The
end result of sentiment analysis is that we determine a sentiment score Sij for
each aspect Aj in review Ri. A sample annotated review is shown in Figure 9.
Finally, the sentiment score of a review Ri is calculated as the average of the
sentiment score Sij of every aspect Aj in Ri.
6.2
Diachronic study of music criticism
We applied the proposed aspect-based sentiment analysis framework to the cor-
pus of album customer reviews gathered from Amazon (see Section 2.3), obtain-
ing speciﬁc sentiment scores for diﬀerent aspects present in the text, e.g., album
cover, guitar, voice or lyrics. In Figure 10 we observe that the sentiment scores
follow a Gaussian distribution, with a median of 0.21, and remarkable picks at
21
S. Oramas et al.
NLP for Music Knowledge Discovery
“Very
melodic
great
guitar
riffs
but
the
vocals
are
shrill”
S
A
A
A
S
+ve
+ve
-ve
Figure 9: A sentence from a sample review annotated with opinion and aspect
pairs.
Figure 10: Distribution of sentiment scores
0 and 0.5.
In addition to the sentiment computed, this corpus includes music metadata
such as genre, review rating, review publication date and album release date.
We beneﬁt from this substantial amount of information at our disposal for per-
forming a diachronic analysis of music criticism. Speciﬁcally, we combine the
metadata retrieved for each review with their associated sentiment information,
and generate visualizations to help us investigate any potential trends in di-
achronic music appreciation and criticism. Based on this evidence, and since
music evokes emotions through mechanisms that are not unique to music (Juslin
& Västfjäll, 2008), we may go as far as using musical information as means for
a better understanding of global aﬀairs. Previous studies argue that national
conﬁdence may be expressed in any form of art, including music (Moïsi, 2010),
and in fact, there is strong evidence suggesting that our emotional reactions to
music have important and far-reaching implications for our beliefs, goals and
actions, as members of social and cultural groups (Alcorta et al., 2008).
To investigate this matter, we carried out a study of the evolution of mu-
sic criticism from two diﬀerent temporal standpoints. Speciﬁcally, we consider
when the review was written and, in addition, when the album was ﬁrst pub-
lished. We deﬁne the sentiment score of a review as the average score of all
aspects in the review. Since we have sentiment information available for each
review, we ﬁrst computed an average sentiment score for each year of review
22
S. Oramas et al.
NLP for Music Knowledge Discovery
publication (between 2000 and 2014). In this way, we may detect any signiﬁcant
ﬂuctuation in the evolution of aﬀective language during the 21st century. Then,
we also calculated an average sentiment score by year of album publication. The
aﬀective information is complemented with the averages of the Amazon rating
scores.
In what follows, we show visualizations for sentiment scores and correlation
with ratings given by Amazon users, according to these two diﬀerent temporal
dimensions. Although arriving to musicological conclusions is out of the scope of
this paper, we provide food for thought and present the readers with hypotheses
that may explain some of the facts revealed by these data-driven trends.
6.2.1
Evolution by review publication year
We applied sentiment and rating average calculations to the whole dataset,
grouping album reviews by year of publication of the review. Figure 11a shows
the average of the sentiment scores of all the reviews published in a speciﬁc
year, whilst Figure 11b shows average review ratings per year. At ﬁrst sight,
we do not observe any correlation between the trends illustrated in the ﬁgures.
However, the sentiment curve (Figure 11a ) shows a remarkable peak in 2008,
a slightly lower one in 2013, and a low between 2003 and 2007, and also be-
tween 2009 and 2012. Figure 11e shows the kernel density estimation of the
distribution of reviews by year of the 16 genres. The shapes of these curves
suggest that the 2008 peak in the sentiment score is not related to the number
of reviews published that year. The peak persists if we construct the graphs
with the average sentiment associated with the most repeated aspects in text
(Figure 11d). It is not trivial to give a proper explanation of this variations on
the average sentiment. We speculate that these curve ﬂuctuations may suggest
some inﬂuence of economical or geopolitical circumstances in the language used
in the reviews, such as the 2008 election of Barack Obama as president of the
US. As stated by the political scientist Dominique Moïsi in Moïsi (2010):
In November 2008, at least for a time, hope prevailed over fear.
The
wall of racial prejudice fell as surely as the wall of oppression had fallen
in Berlin twenty years earlier [...] Yet the emotional dimension of this
election and the sense of pride it created in many Americans must not be
underestimated.
If we calculate the sentiment evolution curve for the diﬀerent genres (see Fig-
ure 11c), we observe that 2008 constitutes an all-time-high for almost all genres.
It is remarkable that genres traditionally related to more diverse communities
such as Jazz and Latin Music experience such an increase, whilst other genres
such as Country do not.
Another factor that might be related to the positiveness in use of language is
the economical situation. After several years of continuous economic growth, in
2007 a global economic crisis started15, whose consequences were visible in the
15https://research.stlouisfed.org
23
S. Oramas et al.
NLP for Music Knowledge Discovery
(a) Sentiment
(b) Rating
(c) Sentiment by genre
(d) Sentiment by aspect
(e) Kernel density est.
(f) USA GDP trend
Figure 11: Sentiment (a, c, and d) and rating (b) averages by review publication
year; Kernel density estimation of the distribution of reviews by year (e); GDP
trend in USA from 2000 to 2014 (f)
society after 2008 (see Figure 11f). In any case, further study of the diﬀerent
implied variables is necessary to reinforce any of these hypotheses.
6.2.2
Evolution by album publication year
In this case, we study the evolution of the polarity of language by grouping
reviews according to the album publication date. This date was gathered from
MusicBrainz, meaning that this study is conducted on the 42,1% of the dataset
that was successfully mapped. We compared again the evolution of the average
sentiment polarity (Figure 12a) with the evolution of the average rating (Fig-
24
S. Oramas et al.
NLP for Music Knowledge Discovery
(a) Sentiment
(b) Rating
(c) Sentiment by genre
Figure 12: Sentiment (a), rating (b), and sentiment by genres (c) averages by
album publication year.
ure 12b). Contrary to the results observed by review publication year, here we
observe a strong correlation between ratings and sentiment polarity. To cor-
roborate that, we computed ﬁrst a smoothed version of the average graphs, by
applying 1-D convolution (see line in red in Figures 12a and 12b). Then we
computed Pearson’s correlation between smoothed curves, obtaining a correla-
tion r = 0.75, and a p-value p ≪0.001. This means that in fact there is a strong
correlation between the polarity identiﬁed by the sentiment analysis framework
in the review texts, and the rating scores provided by the users. This correlation
reinforces the conclusions that may be drawn from the sentiment analysis data.
To further dig into the utility of this polarity measure for studying genre
evolution, we also computed the smoothed curve of the average sentiment by
genre, and illustrate it with two idiosyncratic genres, namely Pop and Reggae
(see Figure 12c. We observe in the case of Reggae that there is a time period
where reviews have a substantial use of a more positive language between the
second half of the 70s and the ﬁrst half of the 80s, an epoch which is often called
the golden age of Reggae (Alleyne & Dunbar, 2012). This might be related to
the publication of Bob Marley albums, one of the most inﬂuential artists in this
genre, and the worldwide spread popularity of reggae music. In the case of Pop,
we observe a more constant sentiment average. However, in the 60s and the
beginning of 70s there are higher values, probably consequence by the release of
albums by The Beatles and other iconic pop bands. These results show that the
25
S. Oramas et al.
NLP for Music Knowledge Discovery
use of sentiment analysis on music reviews over certain timelines may be useful
to study genre evolution and identify inﬂuential events.
Finally, we observe a growing tendency for sentiment and rating average
over albums published in the last years of the study. Are we experiencing a
new golden age of music or is this due to an increase of the number of reviewers
incentivized by 3rd party services (Gibbs, 2016)? Again, data-driven analysis
has provided us with meaningful insights as well as novel hypotheses that open
up vibrating avenues for further studies.
7
Conclusions
We have presented diﬀerent methodologies to process large corpora of music-
related documents from a musicological perspective, enabling data-driven anal-
ysis, which can be further used for complementing expert knowledge. These
methodologies have been evaluated on three diﬀerent use cases: Flamenco mu-
sic (with the creation, population, and analysis of a ﬂamenco knowledge base);
the Renaissance period (by processing and studying a corpus of composers bi-
ographies); and the evolution of music criticism (with a cross-genre diachronic
study using as target data online music reviews).
First, diﬀerent challenges and techniques for gathering and combining large
text corpora are presented and applied to compile the diﬀerent datasets used
throughout the paper. Then, a methodology for the analysis and visualization
of word frequencies has been presented, showing some of the most important as-
pects of the diﬀerent music schools in Renaissance Music. Next, an information
extraction pipeline is presented where entities identiﬁed in text are connected to
a knowledge base throughout an ad-hoc entity linking system. Then, a method
for extracting biographical information from artist biographies is described, and
applied to enrich a ﬂamenco knowledge base and to study the Renaissance pe-
riod. The analysis of extracted biographical data revealed migratory tendencies
of composers and the oscillation of the gravitational center of the music activity
among diﬀerent European cities within the Renaissance period. A methodol-
ogy to build knowledge graphs is described next and evaluated in the task of
computing artist relevance rankings. Experimental results show high correla-
tion between the automatically obtained ranking of artists and the opinion of
ﬂamenco experts. The application on the Renaissance corpus revealed also that
the use of only inner connections helps the approach to obtain results that are
more musicologically meaningful. Finally, an aspect-based sentiment analysis
method is described. This methodology is then used to perform a diachronic
study of the sentiment polarity expressed in customer reviews from two diﬀer-
ent standpoints. First, an analysis by year of review publication suggests that
geopolitical events or macro-economical circumstances may inﬂuence the way
people speak about music. Second, an analysis by year of album publication
shows how sentiment analysis can be useful to study the evolution of music.
The main contribution of this work is a demonstration of the usefulness for
musicological research of applying systematic linguistic processing techniques on
26
S. Oramas et al.
NLP for Music Knowledge Discovery
text collections about music. Although further work is necessary to elaborate
on the hypotheses or claims that may be derived from purely data-driven analy-
ses, these methodologies have shown their suitability in the quest of knowledge
discovery from large amounts of documents, which may be highly useful for mu-
sicologists and humanities researchers in general. In fact, one of the strongest
claims used in the Information Age is that Big Data can be used to reveal hid-
den patterns and meaningful variables hidden among unstructured information,
and indeed in this work we provide a myriad of conclusions drawn from intel-
ligent text processing, in the hopes that these may constitute the cornerstone
of further musicological studies. Moreover, we envision that the combination
of knowledge extracted from text with knowledge extracted from other data
modalities (e.g., audio signals or music scores) would be a further step in the
construction of real-world music understanding systems.
8
Acknowledgments
This work was partially funded by the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Com-
petitiveness under the Maria de Maeztu Units of Excellence Programme (MDM-
2015-0502) and by the COFLA2 research project (Proyectos de Excelencia de
la Junta de Andalucía, FEDER P12-TIC-1362).
References
Alcorta, C. S., Sosis, R., & Finkel, D. (2008). Ritual harmony: Toward an
evolutionary theory of music.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 31(5), 576.
doi: Doi10.1017/S0140525x08005311
Alleyne, M. R., & Dunbar, S. (2012). The Encyclopedia of Reggae: The Golden
Age of Roots Reggae. Sterling.
Bellomi, F., & Bonato, R. (2005). Network analysis for wikipedia. In Proceedings
of wikimania 2005, the ﬁrst international wikimedia conference.
Blas Vega, J., & Ríos Ruiz, M. (1988). Diccionario enciclopédico ilustrado del
ﬂamenco. Madrid: Cinterco.
Brin, S., & Page, L. (1998). The Anatomy of a Large-Scale Hypertextual Web
Search Engine. Computer Networks, 30, 107–117. Retrieved from http://
infolab.stanford.edu/~backrub/google.html
Bunescu, R., & Pasca, M. (2006). Using Encyclopedic Knowledge for Named
Entity Disambiguation. In Proceesings of the 11th conference of the euro-
pean chapter of the association for computational linguistics (eacl-06) (pp. 9–
16). Retrieved from http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/ai-lab/?bunescu:
eacl06
27
S. Oramas et al.
NLP for Music Knowledge Discovery
Cowie, J., & Lehnert, W. (1996). Information extraction. Communications of
the ACM , 39(1), 80–91.
Crawford, T., Fields, B., Lewis, D., & Page, K. (2014). Explorations in linked
data practice for early music corpora. Digital Libraries 2014.
Dong, R., O’Mahony, M. P., & Smyth, B.
(2014).
Further Experiments in
Opinionated Product Recommendation. In Iccbr’14 (pp. 110–124). Retrieved
from http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-11209-1{_}9 doi: 10.1007/
978-3-319-11209-1_9
Dong, R., Schaal, M., O’Mahony, M. P., & Smyth, B. (2013). Topic Extraction
from Online Reviews for Classiﬁcation and Recommendation. In (pp. 1310–
1316).
Esuli, A., & Sebastiani, F. (2006). Sentiwordnet: A publicly available lexical
resource for opinion mining. In Proceedings of lrec (Vol. 6, pp. 417–422).
Fast, K. V., & Sedig, K.
(2011, November).
Interaction and the epistemic
potential of digital libraries. International Journal on Digital Libraries, 11(3),
169–207. Retrieved from http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s00799-011
-0066-8 doi: 10.1007/s00799-011-0066-8
Fernández, L. (2004). Teoría musical del ﬂamenco. Madrid: Acordes Concert.
Finkel, J. R., Grenager, T., & Manning, C. (2005). Incorporating Non-local
Information into Information Extraction Systems by Gibbs Sampling.
In
Proceedings of the 43nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (pp. 363–370).
Fujinaga, I., & Weiss, S. F.
(2016).
Digital prosopography for renaissance
musicians: Discovery of social and professional networks. NEH White Paper.
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.17613/M6FW85
Gamboa, J. M. (2005). Una historia del ﬂamenco. Madrid: Espasa-Calpe.
Getoor, L. (2012). Entity Resolution : Theory , Practice & Open Challenges.
Tutorial at AAAI-12, pages 2018–2019.
Gibbs,
S.
(2016,
Sep).
Incentivised
reviews
are
warping
ama-
zon’s
product
star
ratings,
report
says.
The
Guardian.
Re-
trieved
from
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/20/
incentivised-reviews-amazon-product-star-ratings
Grove, G. (1878). A Dictionary of Music and Musicians.
Hu, M., & Liu, B. (2004). Mining Opinion Features in Customer Reviews. In
AAAI’04 (pp. 755–760). Retrieved from http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm
?id=1597148.1597269
28
S. Oramas et al.
NLP for Music Knowledge Discovery
Juslin, P. N., & Västfjäll, D. (2008). Emotional responses to music: the need to
consider underlying mechanisms. The Behavioral and brain sciences, 31(5),
559–621. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18826699
doi: 10.1017/S0140525X08005293
Kleinberg, J. M. (1999). Authoritative sources in a hyperlinked environment.
Journal of the ACM (JACM), 46, 604–632. doi: 10.1145/324133.324140
Knees, P., & Schedl, M.
(2011).
Towards Semantic Music Information Ex-
traction from the Web Using Rule Patterns and Supervised Learning. Work-
shop on Music Recommendation and Discovery, colocated with ACM Rec-
Sys 2011, 18.
Retrieved from http://ftp.informatik.rwth-aachen.de/
Publications/CEUR-WS/Vol-793/womrad2011_complete.pdf#page=24
McAuley, J., Pandey, R., & Leskovec, J. (2015). Inferring Networks of Sub-
stitutable and Complementary Products.
In Proceedings of the 21st acm
sigkdd conference on knowledge discovery and data mining (kdd’15) (p. 12).
Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1506.08839
doi: 10.1145/2783258
.2783381
Mihalcea, R., & Csomai, A. (2007). Wikify!: linking documents to encyclopedic
knowledge. In Proceedings of the sixteenth acm conference on conference on
information and knowledge management (pp. 233–242).
Moïsi, D. (2010). The Geopolitics of Emotion: How Cultures of Fear, Humil-
iation, and Hope are Reshaping the World. Anchor Books. Retrieved from
http://lccn.loc.gov/2008044798
Moro, A., Raganato, A., & Navigli, R. (2014). Entity Linking meets Word
Sense Disambiguation: a Uniﬁed Approach. Transactions of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (TACL), 2, 231–244.
Navarro, J. L., & Ropero, M.
(1995).
Historia del ﬂamenco.
Sevilla: Ed.
Tartessos.
Oramas, S. (2014). Harvesting and Structuring Social Data in Music Informa-
tion Retrieval. Extended Semantic Web Conference (ESWC). Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, 8465, 817–826.
Oramas, S., Espinosa-Anke, L., Lawlor, A., & Others. (2016). Exploring Cus-
tomer Reviews for Music Genre Classiﬁcation and Evolutionary Studies. In
Proceedings of the 17th international society for music information retrieval
conference (ismir 2016).
Oramas, S., Espinosa-Anke, L., Sordo, M., Saggion, H., & Serra, X. (2016a).
ELMD: An Automatically Generated Entity Linking Gold Standard Dataset
in the Music Domain. In In proceedings of the 10th international conference
on language resources and evaluation, lrec 2016.
29
S. Oramas et al.
NLP for Music Knowledge Discovery
Oramas, S., Espinosa-Anke, L., Sordo, M., Saggion, H., & Serra, X. (2016b).
Information extraction for knowledge base construction in the music do-
main.
Data and Knowledge Engineering, 106, 70–83.
Retrieved from
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.datak.2016.06.001
doi: 10.1016/j.datak
.2016.06.001
Oramas, S., Gómez, F., Gómez, E., & Mora, J. (2015). FlaBase: Towards the
Creation of a Flamenco Music Knowledge Base. In Proceedings of the 16th
international society for music information retrieval conference.
Oramas, S., Ostuni, V. C., Di Noia, T., Serra, X., & Di Sciascio, E. (2016).
Sound and Music Recommendation with Knowledge Graphs. ACM Transac-
tions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST), 8(2), 21.
Oramas, S., Sordo, M., Espinosa-Anke, L., & Serra, X. (2015). A Semantic-
based Approach for Artist Similarity. In Proceedings of 16th the international
society for music information retrieval conference (ismir).
Oramas, S., Sordo, M., & Serra, X. (2014). Automatic Creation of Knowledge
Graphs from Digital Musical Document Libraries. In Conference in interdis-
ciplinary musicology. Berlin.
Ratcliﬀ, J. W., & Metzener, D. (1988). Pattern matching: The Gestalt ap-
proach. Dr. Dobb’s Journal, 13, 46–72.
Rose, S., & Tuppen, S. (2014). Prospects for a Big Data History of Music. In
International workshop on digital libraries for musicology.
Sadie, S. (2001). The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, 2d ed.
(Vol. 58). doi: 10.1353/not.2001.0195
Sordo, M., Serrà, J., & Serra, X. (2012). A Method for Extracting Semantic
Information from on-line Art Music Discussion Forums. In 2nd compmusic
workshop (pp. 55–60).
Sutcliﬀe, R., Crawford, T., Fox, C., Root, D. L., & Hovy, E. (2015). Relat-
ing natural language text to musical passages.
In Proceedings of the 16th
international society for music information retrieval conference.
Tata, S., & Di Eugenio, B. (2010). Generating Fine-Grained Reviews of Songs
from Album Reviews.
In Proceedings of the 48th annual meeting of the
association for computational linguistics (pp. 1376–1385).
Retrieved from
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P10-1140
Vrandečić, D., & Krötzsch, M.
(2014).
Wikidata:
A Free Collaborative
Knowledgebase. Commun. ACM , 57(10), 78–85. Retrieved from http://
doi.acm.org/10.1145/2629489 doi: 10.1145/2629489
30
