Title: TweeNLP: A Twitter Exploration Portal for Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2106.10512v1
--------------------------------------------------

TweeNLP: A Twitter Exploration Portal for Natural Language Processing
Viraj Shah, Shruti Singh and Mayank Singh
Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India
{shah.viraj, singh shruti, singh.mayank}@iitgn.ac.in
Abstract
We present TWEENLP, a one-stop portal that
organizes Twitter’s natural language process-
ing (NLP) data and builds a visualization and
exploration platform. It curates 19,395 tweets
(as of April 2021) from various NLP confer-
ences and general NLP discussions.
It sup-
ports multiple features such as TweetExplorer
to explore tweets by topics, visualize insights
from Twitter activity throughout the organiza-
tion cycle of conferences, discover popular re-
search papers and researchers. It also builds
a timeline of conference and workshop sub-
mission deadlines.
We envision TWEENLP
to function as a collective memory unit for
the NLP community by integrating the tweets
pertaining to research papers with the NLPEx-
plorer scientiﬁc literature search engine. The
current system is hosted at URL.
1
Introduction
Online communication channels have become pop-
ular in the Internet era, and several online commu-
nities of like-minded people have evolved around
these channels. For example, communities such
as Stack Overﬂow and AskUbuntu are question-
answering forums; Twitter and Reddit are content-
sharing forums. These forums over the years have
provided a platform for novice users to learn from
the experts, facilitated discussions among the com-
munity members, and have over the years accumu-
lated a rich database of questions, answers, and
discussions.
According to the theory of diffusion of inno-
vation proposed by Rogers (2003), the communi-
cation channel is one of the four main elements
inﬂuencing the spread of a new idea. Notably, the
communication channel serves as a collective long-
term memory or a knowledge archive of the com-
munity, which any member can access to study the
community’s stance on diverse topics at any point
in time.
Although several mailing lists, slack channels,
and subreddits exist for communication, most natu-
ral language processing (henceforth NLP) commu-
nity discussions are primarily carried out on Twit-
ter due to its open accessibility and wider reach.
Announcements of calls for papers and submis-
sion deadlines, recently accepted papers, interest-
ing talks and seminars, lecture videos, and tutori-
als on various topics are often posted on Twitter.
These are a great medium to stay updated on the
recent developments in the NLP ﬁeld. It is also
a medium for researchers to engage in informal
research discussions which might be unreported
in ofﬁcial publications. We present a sample of
diverse NLP tweets in Figure 1 to emphasise the
utility of the platform.
However, unlike subreddits or communities like
Stack Overﬂow and AskUbuntu, Twitter is not an
exclusive channel for NLP discussions. Exclusive
channels provide users a one-stop destination for
their interests and allow extremely topic-speciﬁc
exploration. While Twitter allows search by hash-
tags to narrow down to speciﬁc topics, the usage
of hashtags is highly irregular. Furthermore, Twit-
ter is more suited to live discussions and less suit-
able for maintaining a snapshot of the discussions
taking place in the online community. Relevant
Twitter discussions about speciﬁc research papers
are often forgotten in the long run because there
is no infrastructure to link these discussions with
the papers on the proceedings archives or research
paper search engines. In an attempt to address
these issues, we extend the functionality of NLP-
Explorer (Parmar et al., 2020) platform by integrat-
ing TWEENLP with it. NLPExplorer is a portal for
searching, and visualizing NLP research volume
based on the ACL Anthology (ACL Anthology). In
our current work, we build an automatic pipeline
for curating NLP tweets and build a one-stop por-
tal - TWEENLP, for the search and browsing of
arXiv:2106.10512v1  [cs.CL]  19 Jun 2021
Figure 1: A sample of diverse natural language processing tweets.
NLP discussion on Twitter. The system has curated
19,395 NLP tweets as of April 2021.
TWEENLP organizes NLP tweets into topics:
(i) New paper announcements, (ii) Call for Pa-
per announcements, (iii) Reading Materials & Tu-
torials, (iv) Career Opportunities, (v) Talks &
Seminars, and (vi) Others.
Topic-wise tweets
are presented via dashboards for easy exploration.
TWEENLP supports dashboards to browse through
popular NLP tweets in the previous week and the
month. We construct a CFP Timeline from ‘Call
for Papers’ announcements on Twitter and arrange
it according to the upcoming submission deadlines
of various workshops and conferences. We link the
research paper tweets to the research paper’s meta-
data, accessible via the NLPExplorer paper discov-
ery feature. We also build live Conference Visu-
alization dashboards, which curate tweets about
the conference schedule, ongoing talks, poster ses-
sions, and interesting papers at the conference, and
present statistics such as popular hashtags, users,
tweet languages, etc.
We integrate TWEENLP with NLPExplorer
(Section 2) to build a joint-portal that aims to bridge
the gap between published research and its infor-
mal communication on the social media platform
Twitter. Our automatic data curation pipeline and
the architecture of the system is described in Sec-
tion 3 and Section 4 respectively. We describe the
features of TWEENLP in detail in Section 5. In
Section 6, we discuss previous works in organiz-
ing the NLP literature and visualization of research
papers.
2
NLPExplorer
NLPExplorer1 (Parmar et al., 2020) is an auto-
matic portal for indexing, searching, and visualiz-
ing Natural Language Processing research volume.
It presents multiple paper, venue, and author statis-
tics, including paper citation distribution, paper
topic distribution, authors, their ﬁeld of study, their
citation distributions, etc. It also presents category
information of research papers into various topics
broadly arranged in ﬁve categories: (i) Linguistic
Target (Syntax, Discourse, etc.), (ii) Tasks (Tag-
ging, Summarization, etc.), (iii) Approaches (un-
supervised, supervised, etc.), (iv) Languages (En-
glish, Chinese, etc.) and (v) Dataset types (news,
clinical notes, etc.). The current snapshot consists
of 75k research papers and 50k authors. Since its
inception, it has been accessed by more than 7.3k
users having a close to 9.7k sessions.
3
Dataset
We curate the dataset from two primary sources:
3.1
Twitter
We curate the Twitter data using the open-source
library Twint2 by retrieving tweets with the hashtag
NLProc. We also curate tweets with NLP confer-
ence hashtags such as #acl2020, #emnlp2020, etc.
The list of NLP conferences is compiled via ACL
1http://nlpexplorer.org/
2https://github.com/twintproject/twint
Figure 2: The architecture of TWEENLP. Arrow direc-
tions denote the ﬂow of data. AAD represents the ACL
Anthology Dataset which is the other data source apart
from Twitter.
Anthology. Our system is scheduled to download
the Twitter data for each day automatically. For on-
going conferences, our system curates new tweets
every hour to continually update the Conference
Visualizer page. The current snapshot (as of April
2021) contains data since October 2017 (around
1300 days) and consists of 19,395 tweets.
3.2
ACL Anthology
We curate the conference and journal names and
URLs from the ACL Anthology github reposi-
tory3. We also curate the paper titles and their links.
Tweets are collected periodically every day, and the
system checks for paper mentions in the tweets by
substring matching the paper URLs collected from
the ACL Anthology github repository.
4
Architecture
We present the pipeline of our system in Figure 2.
The Data Curator module curates tweets daily. The
curated tweets are processed before we perform fur-
ther steps. The following modules process tweets:
(i) Tweet Classiﬁer, (ii) Conference Page Builder,
(iii) CFP Timeline Builder, and (iv) Paper Tweet
Linker. We describe the tweet processing modules
in detail below:
1. Tweet Classiﬁer: The Tweet Classiﬁer module
classiﬁes a tweet into one of the six topics: (i)
New Paper Announcements, (ii) Call for Pa-
per announcements, (iii) Reading Materials &
Tutorials, (iv) Career Opportunities, (v) Talks
& Seminars, and (vi) Others. The Tweet Ex-
plorer feature utilizes these tweet categories.
The detailed description of each topic is pre-
3https://github.com/acl-org/
acl-anthology
sented in Section 5.1. We experiment by ﬁne-
tuning a BERT-base(Devlin et al., 2019) clas-
siﬁer and twitter-roberta-base(Barbieri et al.,
2020) to predict the tweet topics. The BERT-
base model4 obtains the best test accuracy of
75% on a small manually annotated dataset5.
2. Conference Page Builder: The Conference
Page Builder classiﬁes a tweet either as dis-
cussing an ongoing conference or other topics.
The module builds speciﬁc conference pages
using such tweets.
3. CFP Timeline Builder: The module processes
‘Call for Papers’ tweets identiﬁed by the Tweet
Classiﬁer module. It extracts the conference
(and workshop) name by regex-based key-
word matching against a pre-compiled list of
venues. The submission date are extracted
from the tweets by labeling dates using the
Spacy6 library. The tweets are arranged in a
timeline sorted by the submission deadline.
4. Paper Tweet Linker: The Paper Tweet Linker
module maps speciﬁc tweets to research pa-
pers using regex matching of the paper title
and paper URL. The Paper Tweet Visualizer
uses these mappings to embed the tweets on
the research paper page on NLPExplorer.
The pipeline then stores the tweets in the database
after processing by the above modules. We sched-
ule our system to automatically curate the Twitter
data daily and increase it to an hourly frequency
during ongoing conferences.
5
TWEENLP Features
5.1
Tweet Explorer
We present a Tweet Explorer dashboard that allows
a user to browse tweets from speciﬁc topics such
as:
1. New paper announcements: This topic orga-
nizes tweets about recent papers, which often
involve the summary or a short introduction
of the research paper. These twitter threads
facilitate other researchers to communicate in-
formally with the paper authors. These also
contain interesting discussions by the commu-
nity on the insights, merits, and critiques of
the research paper, and post questions about
4We also experimented with a zero-shot classiﬁer but it
underperformed the BERT-base classiﬁer.
5each tweet was annotated by two ML/NLP students and
inter annotator agreement computed using Cohen’s κ=0.68
6https://spacy.io/
the work. The authors’ short introductions of-
fer an informal account of the paper compared
to the paper alert services that usually present
the title and the abstract of the research paper.
2. Call for Papers (CFPs) by various confer-
ences and workshops: Users can view the
announcements for call for papers and sub-
mission deadlines by various workshops and
conferences.
3. Reading Materials & Tutorials: It lists var-
ious study material, such as lecture slides
and videos, tutorials, online courses, and blog
posts.
4. NLP Career Opportunities: Individuals fre-
quently advertise opportunities for various po-
sitions such as interns, full-time, Ph.D., post-
doctoral fellows, and research fellows on Twit-
ter.
5. NLP Talks & Seminars: Various online NLP
talks and seminars can be accessed using the
NLP Talks & Seminars ﬁlter on the Tweet
Explorer dashboard.
6. Others:
This category contains the NLP
tweets which do not belong to any of the above
topics.
The Tweet Explorer feature allows users to specif-
ically browse through tweets by topics and ﬁlter
them based on their immediate interests. A snap-
shot of the same is presented in Figure 3. We
present the distribution of tweets in the six cate-
gories from tweets curated by the system in the last
1,300 days in Table 1.
Figure 3: Tweet Explorer feature of TWEENLP which
facilitates browsing tweets by six different topics.
5.2
Conference Visualizer – Near real-time
view for conferences
TWEENLP supports real-time statistics for mul-
tiple top conferences and the popular #NLProc
hashtag. The information is updated hourly for
live events and weekly for past events. Some of
the statistics presented are top mentions, top hash-
Topic
Tweet Count
New Paper Announcements
6,337
Call for Papers
972
Reading Materials & Tutorials
1,400
NLP Career Opportunities
681
NLP Talks & Seminars
2,382
Others
7,623
Total Tweets
19,395
Table 1: Distribution of tweets (curated since October
2017) into various topics.
tags, top linked URLs, and top discussed papers
in tweets. We present the most popular hashtags,
mentions, URLs, and highly discussed papers for
ACL2020 in Table 2. A summary of Twitter activ-
ity from the Conference Visualizer page for ACL
2020 is presented in Table 3. Apart from Twitter
discussions about a conference in a speciﬁc month,
we also show insights from the conferences across
the year. The insights from ACL conference over
time is presented in Figure 4. We also present other
conference-speciﬁc statistics such as the number
of tweets per month, daily distribution of tweets
in the conference month, most active users tweet-
ing about the conference, and a distribution of the
tweet languages other than English.
5.3
Popular Paper Visualizer
We showcase widely discussed papers on Twitter in
the Popular Paper Visualizer dashboard. It presents
the titles and provides direct links to the full-text
of the top discussed papers for quick reference.
The system extracts tweets mentioning research pa-
pers and assigns a popularity score to each paper
based on the count of tweets that mention it, and
the likes, retweets, and replies on the paper tweets.
We present a snapshot of few popular papers iden-
tiﬁed by our platform in Figure 5. It also presents
the most active users tweeting about #NLProc on
Twitter. Popular Paper Visualizer dashboard also
supports exploration of most liked and retweeted
#NLProc tweets of all times and in the last month.
5.4
CFP Timeline
TWEENLP presents a timeline of the upcoming
submission deadlines. The timeline is created by
identifying ‘Call for Papers’ tweets using keyword
based ﬁltering of tweets and also lists the confer-
ence/workshop website. The details are described
in the CFP Timeline Builder module 3. We present
a snapshot of the timeline in Figure 6.
Top Hashtags
Top Mentions
Top URLs
Top Papers Discussed
#acl2020nlp
@aclmeeting
virtual.acl2020.org/socials.html
Beyond Accuracy: Behavioral Testing
of NLP models with CheckList
#acl2020en
@emilymbender
virtual.acl2020.org/plenary
session keynote kathy mckeown.html
Photon: A Robust Cross-Domain Text-
to-SQL System
#nlproc
@akoller
virtual.acl2020.org/paper main.701.html
Climbing towards NLU: On Meaning,
Form, and Understanding in the Age of
Data
#acl2020zht
@winlpworkshop
virtual.acl2020.org/workshop W1.html
Language Models as an Alternative Eval-
uator of Word Order Hypotheses: A
Case Study in Japanese
#acl2020hi
@xandaschoﬁeld
www.aclweb.org/anthology/
2020.acl-main.442/
Don’t Stop Pretraining: Adapt Language
Models to Domains and Tasks
#mt
@gneubig
virtual.acl2020.org/workshop W10.html
The State and Fate of Linguistic Diver-
sity and Inclusion in the NLP World
Table 2: ACL 2020 Twitter Coverage: Top discussed papers, mentions and URLs and popular hashtags.
Tweet Counter
Likes Counter
Retweet Counter
Unique Mentions
Unique Paper Mentions
5,343
58,160
11,440
907
251
Table 3: ACL 2020 Twitter Statistics of various activities.
Figure 4: Conference Visualizer: ACL2020 Statistics. (a) Distribution of tweets across different months. (b) Daily
distribution of ACL2020 tweets in July 2020. (c) Distribution of tweet languages except English. (d) Twitter users
with highest ACL2020 tweets.
5.5
Paper Tweet Visualizer
NLPExplorer supports a research paper search
interface and builds research paper pages which
showcase standard paper related statistics such as
the publication year and venue, author information,
citations, citation distribution over the years and
the link to the corresponding PDF article. Addition-
ally, it also provides interesting insights like similar
papers, topical distribution and mentioned URLs.
We map research paper discussion tweets on Twit-
ter to the NLPExplorer paper page. This feature
allows users to browse through discussions about
the paper along with the metadata of the paper. We
present a snapshot of the feature in Figure 7.
Figure 5: Popular papers identiﬁed TWEENLP based on twitter activity.
Figure 6: CFP Timeline built from tweets. ‘W’ on top-
right denotes Workshop.
Figure 7: Paper Tweet Visualizer curates tweets and
metadata of a research paper on a joint portal. The
image background is a ‘Paper’ page from NLPEx-
plorer which lists paper metadata, citing papers, ﬁeld-
of-study tags, and similar papers alongwith the associ-
ated tweets.
5.6
Popular Last Week
Lastly, we present popular tweets in the NLP com-
munity on Twitter (also referred as NLP Twitter).
This feature allows researchers to catch up with the
recent NLP-related Twitter discussions in a single
dashboard without searching for them speciﬁcally
in the Twitter feed.
6
Related Works
Bird et al. (2008) curated the ACL Anthology Ref-
erence Corpus (ACL ARC) of research papers in
NLP and CL. Radev et al. (2009, 2013) constructed
the ACL Anthology Network (AAN) by manual
annotation of the references to complete the cita-
tion network and analysed the network to present
central papers, authors and other network statis-
tics (Radev et al., 2016). Works by Sch¨afer et al.
(2011) and Parmar et al. (2020) provide a compre-
hensive search interface to browse through the NLP
based on parameters such as author, full text, year
of publication, title, and the ﬁeld of study. Moham-
mad (2020) built the NLPScholar platform which
consists of interactive dashboards that present vari-
ous aspects of NLP research papers. The platform
uses ACL Anthology and Google Scholar as the
information source.
Few works have analysed Twitter data to predict
scholarly impact. Shuai et al. (2012) report a sta-
tistical correlation between high volume of Twitter
mentions and arXiv downloads and early citations
(i.e., citations occurring less than seven months af-
ter the publication of a preprint). However, they
also point out that Twitter mentions cannot be di-
rectly concluded to be causative of higher levels of
download and early citations. Several other works
such as Eysenbach (2011), Thelwall et al. (2013),
and Haustein et al. (2014) have tried to analyze
whether tweets correlate with citations.
However, to the best of our knowledge, no prior
work has tried to curate NLP discussions data from
Twitter in an attempt to organize it and link it to re-
search papers via a search engine or a visualization
portal.
7
Future Scope and Extensions
Currently, the system is implemented only for NLP
papers present in the ACL Anthology. The system
could be extended to papers from NeurIPS, ICLR,
and CVPR as the data for these conferences is avail-
able publicly. The system is versatile and can be
easily extended to other domains. TWEENLP pro-
vides basic visualization graphs over Twitter activ-
ity. Over time, these discussions could be used to
build a timeline of evolution of research in various
domains of NLP based on the Twitter activity of
researchers. Tweets by popular users attain likes
and retweets at a higher rate in comparison to new
users (or users with less followers) of the commu-
nity. TWEENLP currently only presents popular
tweets based on retweets and likes count which
can bias the conversations, understanding and pre-
sentation of ideas by emphasising the tweets of a
small set of popular users. Future work includes
identifying novel alternative ideas and perspectives
by adjusting user popularity to create an inclusive
space for the community.
References
ACL Anthology.
ACL Anthology.
https://www.
aclweb.org/anthology/.
Accessed: 2021-03-
01.
Francesco Barbieri, Jose Camacho-Collados, Luis
Espinosa-Anke, and Leonardo Neves. 2020. Tweet-
Eval:Uniﬁed Benchmark and Comparative Evalua-
tion for Tweet Classiﬁcation.
In Proceedings of
Findings of EMNLP.
Steven Bird, Robert Dale, Bonnie J Dorr, Bryan Gib-
son, Mark Thomas Joseph, Min-Yen Kan, Dongwon
Lee, Brett Powley, Dragomir R Radev, and Yee Fan
Tan. 2008. The ACL Anthology Reference Corpus:
A Reference Dataset for Bibliographic Research in
Computational Linguistics.
Language Resources
and Evaluation Conference.
J. Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina
Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of deep bidi-
rectional transformers for language understanding.
In NAACL-HLT.
Gunther Eysenbach. 2011.
Can tweets predict cita-
tions?
Metrics of social impact based on Twit-
ter and correlation with traditional metrics of scien-
tiﬁc impact. Journal of medical Internet research,
13(4):e123.
Stefanie Haustein, Isabella Peters, Cassidy R Sugimoto,
Mike Thelwall, and Vincent Larivi`ere. 2014. Tweet-
ing biomedicine: An analysis of tweets and cita-
tions in the biomedical literature. Journal of the As-
sociation for Information Science and Technology,
65(4):656–669.
Saif M. Mohammad. 2020. NLP scholar: An interac-
tive visual explorer for natural language processing
literature. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
System Demonstrations, pages 232–255, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Monarch Parmar, Naman Jain, Pranjali Jain, P Jayakr-
ishna Sahit, Soham Pachpande, Shruti Singh, and
Mayank Singh. 2020. NLPExplorer: exploring the
universe of nlp papers. In European Conference on
Information Retrieval, pages 476–480. Springer.
Dragomir R Radev, Mark Thomas Joseph, Bryan Gib-
son, and Pradeep Muthukrishnan. 2016. A biblio-
metric and network analysis of the ﬁeld of computa-
tional linguistics. Journal of the Association for In-
formation Science and Technology, 67(3):683–706.
Dragomir R Radev, Pradeep Muthukrishnan, and Va-
hed Qazvinian. 2009. The ACL Anthology Network
Corpus. ACL-IJCNLP, page 54.
Dragomir R Radev, Pradeep Muthukrishnan, Vahed
Qazvinian, and Amjad Abu-Jbara. 2013. The ACL
anthology network corpus.
Language Resources
and Evaluation, 47(4):919–944.
Everett M. Rogers. 2003. Diffusion of innovations, 5th
edition. Free Press, New York, NY [u.a.].
Ulrich Sch¨afer, Bernd Kiefer, Christian Spurk, J¨org
Steffen, and Rui Wang. 2011. The ACL Anthology
searchbench. In Proceedings of the ACL-HLT 2011
System Demonstrations, pages 7–13, Portland, Ore-
gon. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Xin Shuai, Alberto Pepe, and Johan Bollen. 2012. How
the scientiﬁc community reacts to newly submitted
preprints: Article downloads, twitter mentions, and
citations. PloS one, 7(11):e47523.
Mike Thelwall, Stefanie Haustein, Vincent Larivi`ere,
and Cassidy R Sugimoto. 2013. Do altmetrics work?
twitter and ten other social web services. PloS one,
8(5):e64841.
