Title: Estimating Quality in Therapeutic Conversations: A Multi-Dimensional Natural Language Processing Framework
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.06151v1
--------------------------------------------------

arXiv:2505.06151v1  [cs.CL]  9 May 2025
IEEE TRANSACTION ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
1
Estimating Quality in Therapeutic Conversations: A
Multi-Dimensional Natural Language Processing
Framework
Alice Rueda*, Member, IEEE, Argyrios Perivolaris*, Niloy Roy*, Dylan Weston*, Sarmed Shaya*, Zachary
Cote*, Martin Ivanov, Bazen G. Teferra, Yuqi Wu, Sirisha Rambhatla, Divya Sharma, Andrew Greenshaw, Rakesh
Jetly, Yanbo Zhang, Bo Cao, Reza Samavi, Sridhar Krishnan†, Member, IEEE, and Venkat Bhat†
Abstract—Engagement between client and therapist is a crit-
ical determinant of therapeutic success. We propose a multi-
dimensional natural language processing (NLP) framework that
objectively classifies engagement quality in counseling sessions
based on textual transcripts. Using 253 motivational interviewing
transcripts (150 high-quality, 103 low-quality), we extracted 42
features across four domains: conversational dynamics, semantic
similarity as topic alignment, sentiment classification, and ques-
tion detection. Classifiers, including Random Forest (RF), Cat-
Boost, and Support Vector Machines (SVM), were hyperparamter
tuned and trained using a stratified 5-fold cross-validation and
evaluated on a holdout test set. On balanced (non-augmented)
data, RF achieved the highest classification accuracy (76.7%),
and SVM achieved the highest AUC (85.4%). After SMOTE-
Tomek augmentation, performance improved significantly: RF
achieved up to 88.9% accuracy, 90.0% F1–score, and 94.6%
AUC, while SVM reached 81.1% accuracy, 83.1% F1–score, and
93.6% AUC. The augmented data results reflect the potential of
the framework in future larger-scale applications. Feature contri-
bution revealed conversational dynamics and semantic similarity
between clients and therapists were among the top contributors,
led by words uttered by the client (mean and standard deviation).
The framework was robust across the original and augmented
This paper began as the capstone design project by Dr. Alice Rueda and
her students, Niloy Roy, Dylan Weston, Zack Cote, and Sarmed Shaya.
*Co-first authors, †Senior co-authors.
This manuscript was submitted to the IEEE Journal of Biomedical and
Health Informatics on April 19, 2025. This manuscript did not receive any
external funding. AR and BGT are funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research (CIHR). VB is supported by an Academic Scholar Award from the
University of Toronto Department of Psychiatry and has received research
funding from the CIHR, Brain & Behavior Foundation, Ontario Ministry
of Health Innovation Funds, Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of
Canada, Department of National Defence (Government of Canada), New
Frontiers in Research Fund, Associated Medical Services Inc. Healthcare,
American Foundation for Suicide Prevention, Roche Canada, Novartis, and
Eisai.
A. Rueda, A. Perivolaris, M. Ivanov, B.G. Teferra, and V. Bhat are
with St. Michael’s Hospital, Unity Health Toronto, 30 Bond St., Toronto,
Canada M5B 1W8 (e-mail: alice.rueda, argryios.perivolaris, martin.ivanov,
bazengashaw.teferra, and venkat.bhat@unityhealth.to).
N. Roy, D. Weston, S. Shaya, Z.Cote, R. Zamavi, and S. Krishnan are with
Toronto Metropolitan University, 350 Victoria St., Toronto, Canada M5B 2K3
(e-mail: krishnan@torontomu.ca).
S. Rambhatla is with the University of Waterloo, 200 University Ave W,
Waterloo, ON, Canada N2L 3G1 (email: sirisha.rambhatla@uwaterloo.ca)
D.Sharma is with York University, 4700 Keele St, North York, ON, Canada
M3J 1P3 (email:divya03@yorku.ca)
A. Greenshaw, Y. Zhang, B. Cao, and Y. Wu are with the University of
Alberta, 116 St & 85 Ave, Edmonton, AB T6G 2R3 (email: andy.greenshaw,
yuqi14, yanbo9, cloud.cao@ualberta.ca)
R. Jetly is with the Institute of Mental Health Research, University of
Ottawa, 1745 Alta Vista Drive, Ottawa, ON, Canada K1A 0K6 (email:
rakesh@drjetly.com )
datasets and demonstrated consistent improvements in F1 scores
and recall. While currently text-based, the framework supports
future multimodal extensions (e.g., vocal tone, facial affect) for
more holistic assessments. This work introduces a scalable, data-
driven method for evaluating engagement quality of the therapy
session, offering clinicians real-time feedback to enhance the
quality of both virtual and in-person therapeutic interactions.
Index Terms—NLP features, motivational interviewing, en-
gagement, therapy session, conversation dynamics, semantic sim-
ilarity, sentiment analysis, question detection
I. INTRODUCTION
The COVID-19 pandemic underscored the potential of
virtual care, with virtual psychotherapy sessions rising dra-
matically from 38% pre-pandemic to 98% during the pan-
demic [1] [2]. However, the shift to virtual platforms highlights
a critical challenge: ensuring meaningful engagement between
clients and therapists. This shift brought attention to the critical
challenge of fostering meaningful engagement between clients
and therapists in virtual settings. Engagement, a cornerstone
of effective psychotherapy, is intrinsically tied to therapeu-
tic outcomes [3], [4]. Yet, current practices for measuring
engagement primarily rely on subjective, retrospective self-
reports that are prone to response biases [5] and ceiling
effects [6]. These limitations necessitate the development of
objective, real-time methods to assess engagement during
therapy sessions. Our framework will provide engagement
level estimation such that the therapists can act accordingly
to improve the quality and the outcome of virtual therapy
sessions. Currently, there is no consensus on an objective en-
gagement measurement for virtual therapeutic consultation [7].
A consistent finding has shown that the quality of the
alliance [8] and engagement [9] are related to subsequent
therapeutic outcomes. Therapeutic alliance is an important
factor in fostering therapeutic engagement [10]. Therapeutic
engagement is critical for the success of any psychotherapy
intervention [11]. When a patient connects and trusts the ther-
apist, the outcomes have proven more positive as patients often
attribute positive outcomes to the personal attributes of their
therapists [12]. Engagement is useful to our understanding
of successful communicative interactions and is a necessary
element that denotes a level of commitment to and interest
in the therapeutic process
[13]. In this work, we focus on
an engagement classification based on a collection of metrics
2
IEEE TRANSACTION ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
from natural language processing (NLP) and the analysis of
text transcripts from the motivational interviewing counseling
dataset.
Research on engagement quantification through NLP is
well documented in education [14], [15], [16], [17], [18],
business [19], [20], social robotics [21], [22], [23], [24], and
digital health [25], [26]. A study by Lee et al. [14] utilized
NLP tools to analyze student blogs and survey responses,
employing the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) tool
to measure dimensions like Clout, Authenticity, and Emotional
Tone, which indicated student engagement. Liu et al. [15]
explored the relationship between emotional and cognitive
engagement in MOOC discussions, finding that positive and
confused emotions strongly predicted learning outcomes. Their
study used a deep learning model, BERT-CNN, on a dataset
of 8,867 learners and 60,624 posts, highlighting the role of
sentiment in engagement [15].
In business, Ma et al. [27] examined brand engagement on
social media using NLP. They discovered that interactivity and
positive sentiment in Weibo posts drove engagement, although
multimedia usage like videos was less impactful [27]. Social
robotics research, such as Pattar et al. introduced multimodal
systems integrating Autoencoders and Dialogflow for engage-
ment classification in Human-Robot Interaction [21]. In digital
health, Funk et al. applied NLP to predict user engagement
and therapeutic outcomes in interventions, achieving moderate
accuracy in predicting behaviors such as binge eating
[25].
Similarly, Malins et al. used machine learning to rate patient
activation levels in therapy sessions, with models achieving
accuracies of 73% and 81%. Together, these studies underline
the versatility and potential of NLP frameworks in quantifying
engagement across varied applications [26].
Much work on engagement quantification systems exists,
however, to the best of our knowledge, no framework for
engagement scoring exists in a therapeutic consultation set-
ting. In this study, we address these gaps by introducing a
multi-dimensional NLP framework that quantifies engagement
in therapeutic conversations. Key contributions include (1)
feature extraction across conversational dynamics, semantic
similarity, sentiment, and question detection, and (2) inter-
pretability of engagement metrics through SHAP (SHapley
Additive exPlanations) [28] value analysis to illustrate top
contributing features.
The objective of this research paper is to determine the
engagement quality of the conversation between the client
and therapist to reflect the efficacy of counseling sessions. To
address this need, a custom framework has been developed,
combining machine learning and NLP techniques that can
analyze and understand human language (in the form of chat
transcripts) to determine the conversation quality during these
sessions.
II. METHOD
This study used the motivational interviewing counseling
dataset [29] collected from various counseling conversations.
The analytical process included feature extraction, data pro-
cessing, and classification as illustrated in Fig. 1.1
A. Dataset
We used a publicly available dataset from the research
paper ”What Makes a Good Counselor? Learning to Dis-
tinguish between high-quality and Low-quality Counseling
Conversations”
[29]. This dataset contains a wide range
of conversational topics, from clients feeling nervous about
going to the mall with friends to discussing the desire to
quit smoking. The dataset was compiled by identifying and
analyzing video clips of counseling sessions sourced from
platforms such as YouTube and Vimeo, focusing on those
conducted using Motivational Interviewing. This study did not
require a Research Ethics Board (REB) as the dataset is made
available for non-commercial research purposes.
For this research paper, we started with a dataset consisting
of 262 conversational transcripts. Excluding nine no longer
accessible or insufficient recording materials, the resulting 253
counseling conversations include 150 high-quality (HI) and
103 low-quality (LO) counseling sessions, as listed in Table I.
B. Feature Extraction
Using a feature engineering approach, we addressed the
conversational quality from four key analytical dimensions:
conversation dynamics, semantic similarity analysis, sentiment
analysis, and question detection. A summary of these features
is listed in Table VII. In detecting and counting the questions
asked in a conversation, we employed a specialized yet simple
encoder model to identify questions. Question detection, sen-
timent analysis, semantic similarity, and other custom features
were specifically tailored for engagement quality classifica-
tion. These engagement features were designed to capture
the degree to which the client actively participates in the
session, responding to the therapist, asking questions, and
demonstrating emotional or cognitive involvement.
1) Conversational Dynamic Features: An embedding was
created to generate and compile conversational metrics to
describe the interaction between the therapist and the client
and to convert them into features that the model can use.
These tailored features capture various dynamics of client-
therapist interactions, including Interaction Duration, Turn-
Taking Ratio, and Word Count Analysis. Word Count Analysis
primarily revolves around the number of words spoken by the
client or therapist in each utterance (turn), defined as Words
Spoken per Turn. When looking to evaluate the quality of
client-therapist interactions, the length of turns taken by both
speakers is extremely important as it gives insight into their
conversational dynamics. A turn is defined as an uninterrupted
sequence of words spoken by a speaker; using turns and the
number of words spoken in a turn yields words spoken per
turn. Words spoken per turn as a feature can be substituted
for the average turn time of a speaker. By looking at turn
lengths, the relative length difference between the client and
the therapist can indicate more engagement from the client,
1Github code will be made available upon publication
RUEDA et al.: QUALITY IN THERAPEUTIC CONVERSATIONS
3
Pre-
processing
Dataset Update
●Remove 
withdrawn 
participants
Speaker 
Diarization
●Extract speaker 
allocation and 
timing from 
videos
Feature Extraction
Conversational  
Dynamics Feature
●Sentence length, turns 
participation rates & time
Semantic Similarity 
Feature
●Similarity between all and 
adjacent sentences
Sentiment Feature
●+ve, neutral, or -ve attitude 
towards the subject
Question  Detection 
Feature
●Questions asked during a 
therapy session
Data Processing
Normalization
●Normalize features to 
[0,1]
Imputation
●Replacing missing values 
with feature means
Outlier Detection
●Isolation forest outlier  
detection and removal
Augmentation
●Downsampling majority 
●Upsampling minority
●Upsampling on both
Machine 
Learning
Classification
●10% holdout, 
5CV, 
hyperparameter 
tuned RF, 
Catboost, SVM
Performance 
Measure
●Accuracy, 
Precision, 
Recall, F1-
Score, AUC, 
SHAP
Fig. 1.
Overview of the conversation quality assessment framework. Diarization timing and terms were extracted from the available videos. The system
processes transcripts through four feature domains (conversational dynamics, semantic similarity, sentiment, and question detection), followed by data processing
steps, before classification using Random Forest, CatBoost and SVM. Finishing with performance measure.
which can mean the session is of high quality due to high
participant engagement.
Utilizing the length of time someone spends speaking in
combination with features like question/response bolsters the
model in producing accurate results. The data for this feature
was extracted using the YouTube transcript-api where the
YouTube auto-generated transcripts from all original videos
were extracted. Then the average duration for each speaking
turn for these transcripts was recorded [29]. To maximize
the data extracted from these transcripts further, standard
deviation, skewness, and kurtosis are extracted from the words
per turn metric by storing individual word counts of each turn
in a list for this calculation. All these features put together and
used by the model can give markers that are correlated with
high-quality client-therapist interactions.
2) Semantic Similarity Features: The sentence similarity
features used for this application are designed to analyze
and score the similarities between the spoken words of the
Therapist to those of the Patient. These features acted as
indirect measures to analyze the topic alignment between the
two speakers and helped verify a good conversation through
relevancy. These features leverage the use of three pre-trained
sentence embedding models that were selected based on their
high performance in many benchmarks pertaining to sentence
similarity. The three models used are: PromCSE [30] – a
RoBERTa-based model which ranked as the top performing
model in semantic textual similarity (STS) on the CxC and
SICK [31] benchmarks; Sentence-BERT [32] – a modification
of the pre-trained BERT network which has been trained on
the SICK and STS datasets for sentence similarity detection;
and SAKIL sentence similarity semantic search – a fine-
tuned version of PromCSE that has been trained on the
Kaggle dataset. These three models have high-performance
results on sentence similarity benchmarks and open-source
availability to be used in our application. PromCSE was known
for its clinical relevance, as it outperformed Sentence-BERT
on medical dialogue benchmarks. Since there are no openly
available embedding models that are fine-tuned for use in
therapeutic settings, this multi-model approach was the most
appropriate to achieve our classification goal. Ultimately, this
approach made feature extraction more computationally heavy
but reduced the risk of bias from any one model used on its
own.
The three sentence embedding models produced a set
of independent similarity scores for sentence pairs in the
given therapy transcript. These similarity scores were used
as features in the classification. The implementation of this
semantic feature component is split into two sub-features:
overall semantic similarity analysis and a conversation turn-
order-aware semantic analysis.
In the overall semantic similarity analysis approach, all
of the sentences were embedded with a semantic similarity
transformer. Then each sentence’s embedded vector, xi for
i ∈[1, N] where N is the number of sentences, was compared
to every other sentence vector in the conversation using a
cosine similarity, Sim(xi, xj).
Sim(xi, xj)i̸=j∈N = xi · xj
|xi||xj|
(1)
This comparison takes two different vectors {xi, xj} as input
and returns a value between 0 and 1 representing the similarity
of the two vectors, a value closer to 1 indicates high similarity.
Since we were comparing each sentence to all other sentences,
this technique resulted in a matrix of Sim1 ∈RN(N−1)/2,
where N is the number of sentences in the conversation.
Statistical measures (mean, standard deviation, skewness, and
kurtosis) of Sim1 were used as feature scores for the conversa-
tion. These four statistical scores combine to provide a detailed
numerical view of the distribution of the similarity results.
This process is repeated once for each of the three selected
embedding models with four statistical measures, producing 12
unique feature scores. The goal of this approach is to analyze
the consistency of the topic(s) discussed throughout the entire
therapy session and the similarity in the word choice used
4
IEEE TRANSACTION ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
throughout the session.
The conversation turn-order-aware semantic analysis con-
sidered the order in which the conversation took place when
conducting semantic comparisons. This technique analyzed
the conversation flow using the same sentence embedding
extracted previously. Cosine similarities were applied to a
smaller set of adjacent sentence pairs. Only the sentence that
followed immediately was used in the comparison. In this
sequential pairing approach, sentence 1 was compared with
sentence 2, sentence 2 was compared with sentence 3, and
so on. In a conversation with N sentences, this technique
created a vector of Sim2 ∈RN−1 measure. Similarly to
the overall analysis, each embedding model produced a set
of 12 features. These features captured the conversation flow
of each therapy session and indicated normal conversational
patterns such as balanced back-and-forth exchanges between
both parties, coherent topic transitions, and social elements
were part of the conversation.
With the combined use of three different sentence embed-
ding models and two different techniques used to measure
conversation content, the set of semantic similarity features
provided global and local views of the conversation between
the client and the therapist.
3) Sentiment Features: When trying to analyze the overall
session outcome of any client-therapist interaction, under-
standing the sentiment of the conversation can provide a
lot of insight. Sentiment analysis is a type of NLP task
that can provide some emotional context to what different
speakers are saying, usually labelling speech as either positive,
neutral or negative. For this study, the Twitter-roBerta-base
for Sentiment Analysis model [33], a RoBert model trained
on Twitter exchanges and posted to the Hugging Face model
hosting service, was chosen. Sentiment analysis was executed
on every speaker’s turn in the transcript, and a weighted
average sentiment score was calculated for each conversation.
Each speaker’s turn was graded with a value of either 1,
2 or 3, representing negative, neutral, or positive sentiment,
respectively. These sentiment values were weighted with the
certainty of the estimation. A certainty of a sentiment score
of 50% was given less weight on the overall sentiment of the
conversation. A sentiment turn feature was also created that
kept track of how many times in the conversation the sentiment
between the therapist and client changed. The more changes in
the sentiment indicated higher motivation between the client
and the therapist.
4) Question Detection Feature: The number and frequency
of questions during a conversation can indicate the engagement
level of participants. Asking questions to a therapist indicates
a level of interest in the conversation and the subject matter
that would indicate a high-quality therapy session. A question
embedding was developed to identify and track questions
asked by both therapists and clients during each conversation
turn. Syntactically, a question is typically composed of a
question word and an auxiliary verb. Based on this, any
sentence that contains this structure or has a question mark
punctuation will be identified as a question by the question em-
bedding and is counted towards the various question detection
metrics. This approach was necessary due to the inconsistent
use of punctuation and question marks in the transcripts.
This approach involved the creation of a word bank of both
auxiliary verbs and question words through the use of a corpus
2. Transcripts are separated into sentences, which are further
broken down into bi-grams, where each bi-gram is compared
to its respective word bank. If a matching pair is found, then
that portion is identified and counted as a question asked by
the respective speaker. Turn by turn, the number of questions
asked by the speaker is recorded and stored for the calculations
needed to create features such as client questions per turn,
therapist questions per turn, and the ratio of questions asked
per turn.
C. Data Processing
Once the features were extracted, we followed a standard
data exploratory process with a versatile approach, including
normalization of data points to ensure consistency across
features and handling of missing values with imputation.
Furthermore, we addressed outliers and corrected structural
errors to improve data quality and facilitate the effective
utilization of our machine learning model.
1) Normalization: Some classifiers, such as SVM, can be
dominated by large-value features. Normalization removes
feature influence on the model by ensuring all feature dimen-
sions have the same scale. Tree-based classifiers like Random
Forest or CatBoost are not affected by dominating features.
To reduce the influence of large-value features, min-max data
normalization was used to scale all features to the range of
[0,1].
2) Missing Data Imputation: The features extracted from
this imbalanced dataset are inherently imbalanced with various
data ranges and missing features due to not meeting the
threshold required to generate statistical values. Missing values
were addressed by imputing them with the mean values of the
respective features. Imputing missing values with the mean
ensures that the dataset remains representative of the overall
distribution of the features while minimizing the impact of
missing data on the model training process.
3) Outlier Removal: Isolation forest algorithm [34], [35]
with 100 isolation trees (proper binary trees) was used to detect
outliers. Each isolation tree divides the instances recursively by
randomly selecting a variable and a split value. The isolation
forest computes the anomaly score s(x, n) of an instance x
out-of-n instances as
s(s, n) = 2−E(h(x
c(n
(2)
where E(h(x)) is the average of path length h(x) from a
collection of isolation trees and c(n) is the average depth of all
n instances. An anomaly is defined as when E(h(x)) →c(n)
resulting in s →0.5 border. On the other hand, if x is isolated
much earlier, i.e., its average path depth is much shallower than
other instances E(h(x)) << c(n), then the anomaly score
s(x, n) →1. Or, if the average depth of x is much deeper
before isolation, E(h(x)) >> c(n), then the anomaly score
s(x, n) →0.
2https://github.com/kartikn27/nlp-question-detection
RUEDA et al.: QUALITY IN THERAPEUTIC CONVERSATIONS
5
TABLE I
SUMMARY OF THE DATASET USED IN THE STUDY.
HI class
LO class
Total
Passed Quality Assurance
150
103
253
Outlier removed
145
95
240
Holdout test set
9
9
18
Training set
136
86
222
HI=high-quality. LO=low-quality.
After removing 13 outliers (Table I), the total number was
reduced to 240, with 145 HI and 95 LO sessions. The dataset
was then split into training and holdout test sets for cross-
validation and model evaluation. To ensure balanced represen-
tation in the test set, equal numbers of samples (9 from each
class) were randomly selected from both the HI (majority) and
LO (minority) classes. High-quality conversations are defined
as interactions between therapist and client that demonstrate
meaningful dialogue, balanced participation, responsiveness,
and effective therapeutic techniques [29]. The test sample size
(9x2 = 18 samples) was calculated based on 10% of the
minority class size. Random samples were chosen from both
classes to fulfill the required number of samples for the test
set.
This approach was crucial to ensure that the trained model
was evaluated on a representative test set while maintaining
a balanced distribution of classes in the test data, thereby
enhancing the reliability and fairness of the model evaluation
process. Table I summarizes the number of high- and low-
quality counseling videos.
4) Data Augmentation: After establishing the test set, the
training set exhibited class imbalance, with 136 transcripts
labelled as high-quality and 86 labelled as low-quality. Data
resampling was applied to address the imbalanced data by
downsampling the majority class. Data augmentation was used
to project the performance of these features by upsampling the
minority class to match the majority class samples as well as
upsampling both classes (Table II. We use a combination of
Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique (SMOTE) [36]
and Tomek link(SMOTE+Tomek) [37] which uses SMOTE’s
linear interpolation to augment the minority class, and Tomek
links’ borderline nearest neighbour method to remove majority
class instances that are closest to the minority samples. By
combining SMOTE oversampling and Tomek links’ undersam-
pling, the dataset’s class imbalance was effectively addressed.
For analytical purposes, two additional upsamplings were used
to augment the dataset to 200 samples and 300 samples in each
class. By upsampling the data and creating additional datasets,
we ensured that our classifier could be trained and evaluated
on balanced datasets to improve performance, promote gener-
alization capabilities, and remove bias toward specific classes.
To illustrate that the original feature density was maintained,
a set of kernel density estimation (KDE) plots can be found
in Fig. 4.
TABLE II
SMOTE-TOMEK AUGMENTED BALANCED DATASETS.
Dataset
HI Class
LO Class
Original Set
145
95
Balanced Holdout Test Set
9
9
Majority downsampled Training set
86
86
Minority upsampled datset 1
136
136
Upsampled dataset 2
200
200
Upsampled dataset 3
300
300
HI=high-quality. LO=low-quality.
D. Classification
The classifier serves as a vital tool in quantifying the dy-
namic interplay between clients and therapists, shedding light
on the effectiveness of the counseling sessions. We selected
three classifiers that support hyperparameter tuning (Random
Forest, CatBoost, and Support Vector Machine with a kernel)
to validate these NLP features. These three classifiers cover a
wide range of algorithms, where RF is based on bagging, SVM
is based on hyperplane separation, and CatBoost for boosting
methods. All three classifiers provided a suitable ground for
hyperparameter tuning to enhance predictive accuracy, ensur-
ing efficacy across a diverse array of engagement scenarios.
Random Forest (RF) and CatBoost are tree-based ensemble
classifiers that inherit the Decision Tree’s versatility for both
classification and regression tasks, dividing the feature space
into regions and making predictions based on the majority
class or average value within each region. RF constructs
multiple decision trees during training and aggregates their
predictions to improve robustness and accuracy. RF was
chosen for its ability to handle a mixture of numerical and
categorical features, scalability, robustness to overfitting, and
ability to handle high-dimensional data. The integration of
majority voting within the RF algorithm acts as a robust safe-
guard against uncertainties of data variability. By consolidating
predictions from an ensemble of decision trees, the classifier
created with Random Forest enhances overall accuracy and re-
liability, ensuring consistent performance even in the presence
of outliers and addressing the intricate challenges inherent in
assessing client-therapist interactions.
CatBoost is an ensemble classifier that belongs to the
Gradient Boosted Decision Trees family and thus also is
known for its performance on heterogeneous data [38]. The
models are not affected by feature scaling and thus do require
normalization.
Support Vector Machine (SVM) is a powerful model used
for classification and regression tasks, aiming to find the
hyperplane that best separates classes while maximizing the
margin between them. Unlike decision tree-based classifiers,
data normalization is required when using SVM. With the
usage of a kernel SVM classifiers are effective in high-
dimensional spaces and suitable for linearly non-separable
data. Four types of kernels were experimented within the SVM
classifier: linear, Gaussian radial basis function (RBF), poly-
nomial, and sigmoid. A set of hyperparameters, summarized
in Table III, was used to determine the best model using grid
6
IEEE TRANSACTION ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
TABLE III
CLASSIFIER HYPERPARAMETERS
Random Forest
n estimators
[50, 100, 200, 500]
max depth
[10, 15, 20, 30]
min samples split
[ [2, 5, 10, 20]
min samples leaf
[1, 2, 4, 8]
CatBoost
iterations
[200, 500, 750]
depth
[4, 6, 8],
learning rate
[0.01, 0.05, 0.1]
SVM
C
[0.01, 0.1, 1, 10, 100]
kernel
[’linear’, ’rbf’, ’poly’, ’sigmoid’]
gammA
[0.01, 0.1, 1, ’scale’, ’auto’]
search for hyperparameter tuning.
The cross-validation and test were performed sequentially
in all datasets, i.e., the original down-sampled train dataset, the
minority up-sampled datasets and the two classes up-sampled
datasets. The Stratified K-Fold cross-validation technique with
5-fold ensured that each fold maintained the class distribution
of the target variable. This mitigated the risk of overfitting and
provided more reliable evaluation metrics. Hyperparameter
tuning was applied on each fold to obtain 5 tuned models for
each classifier. These models were then used on the holdout
test set for performance measures.
E. Performance Measure
Trained classifiers were tested using the holdout test set
and evaluated on the standard performance metrics for bal-
anced data, including accuracy, precision, recall, F1–score, and
AUC–ROC (Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic
curve). To better understand the contribution of each feature,
SHAP value ranking was applied to each classifier. SHAP
analysis is an established technique for interpreting machine
learning models and was employed to scrutinize individual
predictions. The significance of each feature was measured by
its SHAP value. Positive values indicate features that amplify
the model’s prediction, and negative values signify features
that diminish it. Knowing SHAP’s limitation [39], the features
were ranked using the mean SHAP value of all data with
three hyperparameter-tuned classifiers. This approach provided
us with a robust means of comprehending the influence of
each feature on different models’ performance. Mean SHAP
values from the 5 tuned models were used to rank the feature
importance.
III. RESULTS
A. Data Preprocessing
The total number of client turns within the transcripts was
5,073. Client turns represent instances where the client actively
participates in the conversation or interaction, contributing to
the overall dialogue. Similarly, the total number of therapists’
turns was 5,138. Therapist turns denote instances where the
therapist or counselor engages in the conversation, providing
guidance, support, or feedback to the client.
A data frame was created to store features extracted from the
original dataset. Missing values were addressed by imputing
them with the mean values of the respective features. This
approach was utilized because data was missing at random
without any fixed pattern, and the missing values were rela-
tively small (106 entries) in number compared to the overall
dataset (11,132 entries). There was a small number of features
(less than 1%) that could not be extracted and thus were
imputed with mean values.
As SHAP cannot address the correlation between features,
Pearson correlation analysis revealed relationship patterns
among features. The heatmap illustrated in Fig. 2 shows
the Pearson correlation between feature pairs with a mini-
mum value of r = −0.71 indicating the strongest negative
correlation. Fifteen of the correlation pairs were found to
have strong positive correlations, as listed in Table IV. The
correlation coefficients between these pairs ranged between
0.75 to 1.0, indicating substantial inter-dependencies between
certain feature pairs.
−1
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
F01
F02
F03
F04
F05
F06
F07
F08
F09
F10
F11
F12
F13
F14
F15
F16
F17
F18
F19
F20
F21
F22
F23
F24
F25
F26
F27
F28
F29
F30
F31
F32
F33
F34
F35
F36
F37
F38
F39
F40
F41
F42
F01
F02
F03
F04
F05
F06
F07
F08
F09
F10
F11
F12
F13
F14
F15
F16
F17
F18
F19
F20
F21
F22
F23
F24
F25
F26
F27
F28
F29
F30
F31
F32
F33
F34
F35
F36
F37
F38
F39
F40
F41
F42
Fig. 2.
Feature correlation heatmap with highest value of 1 and lowest value
of -0.71.
TABLE IV
FIFTEEN STRONGEST CORRELATION FEATURE PAIRS WITH PEARSON
CORRELATION r > 0.75
F07
F17
F14
F07
F08
F37
F27
F21
F23
F02
F19
F19
F02
F08
F18
F15
F12
F12
F38
F31
F22
F31
F16
F27
F23
F04
0.998
0.90
0.89
0.88
0.88
0.88
0.87
0.82
0.81
0.80
0.78
0.78
0.77
B. Classifier Performance
The classification results using hyperparameter-tuned clas-
sifiers are presented in Table V and illustrated in Fig. 3 for the
balanced datasets. As the holdout test set only contained 18
RUEDA et al.: QUALITY IN THERAPEUTIC CONVERSATIONS
7
TABLE V
COMPARISON OF CLASSIFIER PERFORMANCE ON HOLDOUT TEST SET FOR ALL FOLDS
Classifier
Acc
Pre
Rec
F1–Score
AUC
Best Paraameters
Majority downsampled dataset 0 (86)
RF
76.7±6.1
73.4±6.3
84.4±6.1
78.4±5.2
84.4±4.7
{M depth: 10, leaf: 1, split: 10, n est: 500}
CB
74.4±8.4
71.1±7.2
82.2±9.9
76.2±8.2
81.7±6.7
{depth: 8, iterations: 750, lr: 0.01}
SVM
74.4±6.3
71.3±5.9
82.2±6.1
76.3±5.7
85.4±4.8
{C: 1, gamma: 1, kernel: ’rbf’}
Minority upsampled dataset 1 (136)
RF
87.8±2.5
81.5±0.8
97.8±5.0
88.8±2.6
93.1±3.1
{M depth: 10, leaf: 1, split: 2, n est: 500}
CB
81.1±6.3
75.5±7.0
93.3±6.1
83.3±5.0
89.1±2.7
{depth: 6, iterations: 750, lr: 0.1}
SVM
76.7±6.1
71.5±7.8
91.1±5.0
79.8±4.1
87.9±3.2
{C: 10, gamma: 1, kernel: ’rbf’}
Upsampled dataset 2 (200)
RF
83.3±5.6
77.1±5.8
95.6±6.1
85.2±4.6
94.7±3.9
{M depth: 10, leaf: 1, split: 2, n est: 200}
CB
84.4±4.7
77.3±4.3
97.8±5.0
86.3±4.1
92.8±4.6
{depth: 4, iterations: 750, lr: 0.1}
SVM
78.9±6.1
72.6±5.7
93.3±6.1
81.6±5.1
92.8±2.8
{C: 100, gamma: 1, kernel: ’rbf’}
Upsampled dataset 3 (300)
RF
88.9±0.0
81.8±0.0
100.0±0.0
90.0±0.0
94.6±1.9
{M depth: 10, leaf: 1, split: 2, n est: 500}
CB
83.3±5.6
75.4±6.3
100.0±0.0
85.9±4.1
91.9±2.8
{depth: 6, iterations: 500, lr: 0.1}
SVM
81.1±5.0
75.0±3.9
93.3±6.1
83.1±4.6
93.6±1.0
{C: 10, gamma: 1, kernel: ’rbf’}
RF=Random Forest. CB=CatBoost
Acc=Accuracy. Pre=Precision. Rec=Recall. AUC=Receiver-operating characteristic curve Area under the curve.
n est=n estimators. M depth=max depth. leaf=min samples leaf. split=min samples split. lr=learning rate.
data points, we applied the test set in each cross-validation fold
for comparison. The holdout test performance on the 5-fold
with hyperparameter-tuned models is summarized in Table V.
Using AUC Score as the overarching measure, RF and SVM
alternately outperformed each other depending on the dataset.
SVM performed best on dataset 3 and showed strong AUC
performance on dataset 3 (93.6%), while RF showed the most
consistent gains in both accuracy and F1-score across datasets
0, 1 and 3.
Fig. 3 presents a comprehensive comparison of classifier
performance across different dataset variants. The analysis
reveals several key findings:
1) Overall Performance Trajectory: All classifiers benefited
from the SMOTE-Tomek augmentation, with performance
improving as the dataset size increased. The best performance
was observed in the 300-sample upsampled dataset (dataset 3),
where Random Forest achieved the highest accuracy (88.9%),
F1 score (90.0%), and AUC (94.6%). CatBoost followed
closely with an F1 score of 85.9% and 100% recall.
2) Classifier-Specific Performance: SVM demonstrated bal-
anced, but slightly lower, performance across all met-
rics, achieving up to 81.1% accuracy, 75.0% precision,
93.3% recall, and 93.6% AUC in the largest upsampled
dataset.CatBoost delivered stable performance with F1 scores
up to 85.9%. Random Forest showed the highest recall
(100%) in dataset 3, though with more variability in precision
and F1.
3) Metric-Specific Trends: AUC Scores showed consis-
tent improvement across dataset iterations, with the highest
value of 94.7% observed for Random Forest in the 200-
sample dataset and 93.6% for SVM in the 300-sample dataset.
Precision values improved with augmentation, though they
remained moderate overall, peaking at 81.8% for Random
Forest, 75.4% for CatBoost, and 75.0% for SVM. Recall
increased more substantially, with both Random Forest and
CatBoost achieving 100% recall in the final dataset. F1
Scores showed steady growth across all classifiers, reaching
maximums of 90.0% for Random Forest, 85.9% for CatBoost,
and 83.1% for SVM.
C. Feature Contribution
To maximize the usage of the available sample. The original
unaugmented dataset, with 136 and 86 training samples in HI
and LO classes, was used to determine the type of features
contribute more. Table VI ranks the top contributing features
and the corresponding feature type for each classifier. Overall,
17/30 features belong to semantic analysis, 12/30 features
from the conversation analysis, and one from the question
detection.
IV. DISCUSSION
The findings from this study underscore the utility of a
multidimensional NLP framework for assessing engagement
during therapeutic sessions. By leveraging advanced NLP
techniques, such as sentiment analysis, semantic similarity, and
conversational dynamics, the proposed framework introduces
a novel approach to quantifying the quality of therapist-client
interactions. Utilizing a dataset of 253 motivational inter-
viewing session transcripts, the framework employed a Ran-
dom Forest algorithm to classify engagement levels. SMOTE
oversampling was applied to address the class imbalance,
8
IEEE TRANSACTION ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
60
70
80
90
CB
RF
SVM
Model
Accuracy
A
60
65
70
75
80
CB
RF
SVM
Model
Precision
B
70
80
90
100
CB
RF
SVM
Model
Recall
C
70
80
90
CB
RF
SVM
Model
F1−Score
D
80
90
100
CB
RF
SVM
Model
AUC
Dataset
086
136
200
300
E
Fig. 3.
Performance measure illustrating the holdout test set on the cross-validation folds for Random Forest (RF), CatBoost (CB) and Support Vector Machine
(SVM). The holdout test set has only 18 samples, with 9 from each class. Instead of providing the best result, the test set was used in each cross-validation
fold after hyperparameter tuning.
TABLE VI
SHAP VALUE RANKING
Rank
RF
Type
CB
Type
SVM
Type
1
F16
Conv
F16
Conv
F16
Conv
2
F02
Conv
F02
Conv
F32
Sem
3
F07
Conv
F07
Conv
F12
Conv
4
F32
Sem
F32
Sem
F28
Sem
5
F12
Conv
F28
Sem
F16
Conv
6
F24
Sem
F35
Sem
F25
Sem
7
F28
Sem
F30
Sem
F37
Sem
8
F20
Sem
F01
Conv
F23
Sem
9
F04
Ques
F22
Conv
F36
Sem
10
F36
Sem
F26
Sem
F33
Sem
Conv=conversational dynamics. Sem=Semantic similarity.
Ques=Question detection.
ensuring a more equitable representation of the unengaged
class. This integration of linguistic and behavioral features
into a comprehensive engagement score presents significant
implications for enhancing both virtual and in-person mental
health care.
This study also demonstrated the strong predictive power of
semantic features in classifying engagement. SHAP analysis
revealed that 17 of the top 30 most important features across
all classifiers originated from semantic similarity metrics, with
only one feature from question detection. These results suggest
that semantic flow and topic coherence (the extent to which
therapist and client stay aligned in their exchanges) are more
critical to engagement prediction than superficial markers like
question frequency.
One of the critical insights derived from this study is the
role of conversational flow and emotional tone in engagement
assessment. Prior studies have demonstrated the predictive
power of sentiment and semantic analysis in fields such as
education and social robotics [14], [15], [21]. Features like
the turn-taking ratio showed a strong correlation with therapist-
rated engagement (r = 0.65, p < 0.01), validating their clinical
utility. Our findings align with this body of work, emphasizing
features like turn-taking ratios and semantic coherence as
essential markers of engagement. These results deepen our
understanding of therapeutic dynamics and lay the groundwork
for developing real-time feedback systems to assist clinicians
in optimizing treatment strategies.
Turn-taking is a conversational feature linked to engage-
ment, particularly for therapy sessions. When clients have a
more equal share of conversational turns, it demonstrates their
active involvement. In contrast, highly imbalanced conversa-
tions, where the therapist overly controls the topics, may indi-
cate poor engagement or client disengagement. In motivational
interviewing, successful sessions often involve a structured but
flexible exchange, where the therapist’s contributions guide the
conversation without overpowering the client’s voice. By in-
corporating turn-taking ratios, our framework aligns with these
psychological principles, demonstrating a novel approach to
quantifying engagement beyond subjective impressions.
However, an ongoing debate in computational research
centers on whether machines can truly comprehend human
emotions beyond surface-level linguistic cues [40]. While the
NLP-based framework effectively categorizes engagement lev-
RUEDA et al.: QUALITY IN THERAPEUTIC CONVERSATIONS
9
els, it lacks the contextual depth that human therapists provide.
Therapists’ cognitive abilities allow them to interpret patient
history, subtle cues, and emotions, often filtered through their
lived experiences. In contrast, NLP systems could supplement
therapy by incorporating multimodal data, such as video,
audio, and movement, alongside patient history. Nevertheless,
these tools are not intended to replace clinicians but rather to
augment their capabilities, as supported by previous literature
on digital mental health interventions.
The framework also has the potential to improve the effi-
ciency and efficacy of therapy sessions by providing action-
able insights to guide treatments. Engagement is a corner-
stone of therapeutic practice, influencing how therapists adapt
their approaches to individual patient needs [41]. Without
adequate engagement, therapy risks devolving into a one-
sided lecture that fails to address the patient’s multifaceted
emotional landscape. For example, Harrison et al. [42] found
that patient-reported expected engagement predicted greater
symptom improvement in cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT),
underscoring the importance of understanding and fostering
engagement.
Despite these advancements, significant ethical concerns
arise in the application of NLP-based methodologies to mental
health care. Future deployments will use federated learning to
ensure patient data remains on-premises, addressing privacy
concerns in sensitive healthcare settings. Therapy involves
sensitive and deeply personal information, necessitating strin-
gent privacy protections. Patients must be fully informed
about how their data is stored, processed, and shared by
NLP systems. Furthermore, therapists must receive adequate
training in digital tools to effectively communicate their use
and limitations to patients. This transparency is critical in
ensuring that patients feel comfortable and retain agency in
their treatment process.
While the use of Random Forest ensembles bolstered the re-
liability of engagement predictions, certain limitations persist.
The reliance on text-based transcripts overlooks non-verbal
cues, such as facial expressions and voice intonations, that are
integral to understanding engagement. A preliminary analysis
of 20 video sessions using OpenFace 2.0 revealed that facial
expressiveness (AU12, AU25) improved engagement predic-
tion accuracy by 12% [43]. Future research should aim to
incorporate multimodal data to achieve a more comprehensive
assessment. Additionally, the dataset’s focus on motivational
interviewing limits the generalizability of findings to other
therapeutic modalities and cultural contexts. Expanding the
dataset to include diverse therapy approaches and multilin-
gual transcripts would enhance the framework’s applicability.
Exploring advanced data augmentation techniques beyond
SMOTE, such as generative models, could further improve
model robustness and performance. Finally, while Twitter-
RoBERTa is trained in social media language, therapy tran-
scripts contain different linguistic patterns, such as longer,
structured responses, professional tone, and mental health-
specific terminology. This mismatch could introduce biases,
particularly if informal speech patterns in therapy sessions
are misclassified. Future work may be improved if models
are trained on healthcare or therapy-specific texts to improve
domain specificity.
V. CONCLUSION
This framework provides clinicians with actionable, real-
time feedback on therapeutic engagement, filling a critical gap
in virtual mental healthcare. By bridging NLP and clinical
expertise, it advances toward AI-augmented, not replaced,
therapeutic practice. The findings demonstrated that machine
learning models, particularly Random Forest and CatBoost,
can achieve strong performance, with accuracies up to 88.9%,
F1 scores up to 90.0%, and AUCs as high as 94.6%. To pro-
duce a classifier that can generate accurate labels that measure
client engagement in a therapeutic setting, the following fea-
ture groups were selected: turn-taking ratio, verbal interaction,
topic transition, client feedback, emotional tone, sentiment
analysis, and semantic similarity. Features capturing semantic
coherence and topic alignment were consistently the most
predictive across all classifiers, suggesting that high-quality
therapy sessions are more strongly marked by meaningful,
on-topic exchanges than by surface-level metrics like question
frequency.
This is an important topic to pursue since improving in this
sector will allow clients and therapists to have more efficient
and productive sessions. This increase in productivity and
participation can foster a better therapeutic relationship and
have a positive outcome in the field. As digital mental health
continues to grow, tools like this framework can help maintain
care quality, identify disengagement early, and support thera-
pists in delivering more responsive, personalized treatment.
APPENDIX
A. Data Augmentation
Handling imbalanced classification is important in machine
learning when one class (the minority class) is significantly
underrepresented compared to another class (the majority
class). Imbalanced classification can lead to biased models that
perform poorly in the minority class. Fig. 4 provides the kernel
density plot of the features after augmentation results.
10
IEEE TRANSACTION ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Fig. 4.
Kernel density estimation of the balanced features using SMOTE+Tomek.
B. Feature Definition Table
A list and descriptions of all the conversational dynamic
features can be found in Table VII.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), New
Frontiers in Research Fund, and LeaCros for the funding.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Wosik et al., “Telehealth transformation: COVID-19 and the rise of
virtual care,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association,
vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 957–962, 2020.
[2] M. Sampaio, M. V. Navarro Haro, B. De Sousa, W. Vieira Melo,
and H. G. Hoffman, “Therapists Make the Switch to Telepsychology
to Safely Continue Treating Their Patients During the COVID-19
Pandemic. Virtual Reality Telepsychology May Be Next,” Frontiers in
Virtual Reality, vol. 1, no. January, pp. 1–17, 2021.
[3] L. Cadel, M. Marcinow, J. Sandercock, P. Dowedoff, S. J. Guilcher,
A. Maybee, S. Law, and K. Kuluski, “A scoping review of patient
engagement activities during COVID-19: More consultation, less part-
nership,” PLoS One, vol. 16, no. 9, p. e0257880, Sep. 2021.
RUEDA et al.: QUALITY IN THERAPEUTIC CONVERSATIONS
11
TABLE VII
FOUR FEATURE DIMENSIONS
Feature
Description
ID
Conversational Dynamic Features
Therapist Words in Transcript/Conversation Per Turn
Average therapist words uttered per turn in a transcript
F01
Client Words in Transcript/Conversation Per Turn
Average client words uttered per turn in a transcript
F02
Ratio
of
Therapist
Client
Words
in
Transcript/Conversation Per Turn
A ratio of client turns and therapist turns in a transcript
F03
Client Turns in Transcript/Conversation
Number of turns taken by a client in a transcript/conversation
F07
Therapist Turns in Transcript/Conversation
Number of turns taken by a therapist in a transcript/conversation
F08
Ratio
of
Client
Therapist
Turns
in
Transcript/Conversation
Number of turns taken by a therapist in a transcript/conversation
F09
Average Speaking Time of Each Speaker in Tran-
script/Conversation Per Turn
The average speaking time of each speaker turns. The time for each turn was taken
from the auto generated YouTube transcripts.
F10
STD/Skew/Kurt
Therapist
Words
in
Transcript/Conversation
The STD/Skew/Kurt between the number of words spoken in every utterance by
the therapist in a transcript.
F13-F15
STD/Skew/Kurt
Client
Words
in
Tran-
script/Conversation
The STD/Skew/Kurt between the number of words spoken in every utterance by
the client in a transcript.
F16-F18
Semantic Similarity Features
MODEL A Sem All Avg/SD/Skew/Kurt
Using the SAKIL sentence transformer to find the mean/SD/Skew/Kurt value of
the semantic similarity comparisons between each sentence to every other sentence
in the conversation.
F35-F38
MODEL A Sem Adj Avg/SD/Skew/Kurt
Using the SAKIL sentence transformer to find the mean/SD/Skew/Kurt value of the
semantic similarity comparisons between each sentence to the following sentence
in the conversation.
F39-F42
MODEL B Sem All Avg/SD/Skew/Kurt
Using the PromCSE sentence transformer to find the mean/SD/Skew/Kurt value of
the semantic similarity comparisons between each sentence to every other sentence
in the conversation.
F19-F22
MODEL B Sem Adj Avg/SD/Skew/Kurt
Using the PromCSE sentence transformer to find the mean/SD/Skew/Kurt value
of the semantic similarity comparisons between each sentence to the following
sentence in the conversation.
F23-F26
MODEL C Sem All Avg/SD/Skew/Kurt
Using the Sentence-BERT sentence transformer to find the mean/SD/Skew/Kurt
value of the semantic similarity comparisons between each sentence to every other
sentence in the conversation.
F27-F30
MODEL C Sem Adj Avg/SD/Skew/Kurt
Using the Sentence-BERT sentence transformer to find the meanSD/Skew/Kurt
value of the semantic similarity comparisons between each sentence to the following
sentence in the conversation.
F31-F34
Sentiment Features
Overall Sentiment of Client
A feature that measures the sentiment of each speaker turns for the client and
returns a sentiment score of 3 for positive, 2 for neutral or 1 for negative. These
scores are then averaged to get an overall sentiment score for the conversation.
F11
Change
in
Client
Sentiment
in
Tran-
script/Conversation
An extension of sentiment analysis that finds the number of times the sentiment of
the client changes between speaker turns
F12
Question Detection Features
Client Questions in Transcript/Conversation Per Turn
The average number of questions asked by the client per response in a transcript
F04
Therapist Questions in Transcript/Conversation Per
Turn
The average number of questions asked by the therapist per response in a transcript
F05
Ratio of Client Question/Therapist Questions in
Transcript/Conversation Per Turn
The ratio of client questions to therapist questions in a transcript
F06
[4] D. Duong, “Five lessons from a year of virtual patient partnerships,”
CMAJ, vol. 193, no. 29, pp. E1145–E1146, Jul. 2021.
[5] G. S. Tryon, S. C. Blackwell, and E. F. Hammel, “The magnitude of
client and therapist working alliance ratings.” Psychotherapy: Theory,
Research, Practice, Training, vol. 45, no. 4, p. 546, 2008.
[6] D. Paap and P. U. Dijkstra, “Working alliance inventory-short form
revised,” Journal of Physiotherapy, vol. 63, no. 2, p. 118, 2017.
[7] L. E. Bijkerk, A. Oenema, N. Geschwind, and M. Spigt, “Measuring
engagement with mental health and behavior change interventions: an
integrative review of methods and instruments,” International journal of
behavioral medicine, vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 155–166, 2023.
[8] B. E. Wampold and C. Fl¨uckiger, “The alliance in mental health care:
conceptualization, evidence and clinical applications,” World Psychiatry,
vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 25–41, 2023.
[9] E. Bourke, C. Barker, and M. Fornells-Ambrojo, “Systematic review
and meta-analysis of therapeutic alliance, engagement, and outcome in
psychological therapies for psychosis,” Psychology and Psychotherapy:
Theory, Research and Practice, vol. 94, no. 3, pp. 822–853, 2021.
[10] A. Tetley, M. Jinks, N. Huband, and K. Howells, “A systematic review of
measures of therapeutic engagement in psychosocial and psychological
treatment,” Journal of Clinical Psychology, vol. 67, no. 9, pp. 927–941,
2011.
[11] K. Bolton Oetzel and D. G. Scherer, “Therapeutic engagement with ado-
lescents in psychotherapy.” Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice,
Training, vol. 40, no. 3, p. 215, 2003.
[12] A. O. Horvath, “The alliance.” Psychotherapy: Theory, research, prac-
tice, training, vol. 38, no. 4, p. 365, 2001.
[13] N. Simmons-Mackie and D. Kovarsky, “Engagement in clinical inter-
action: An introduction,” in Seminars in speech and language, vol. 30,
no. 01.
© Thieme Medical Publishers, 2009, pp. 005–010.
[14] S. P. Lee, M. R. Perez, M. B. Worsley, and B. D. Burgess, “Utilizing
natural language processing (nlp) to evaluate engagement in project-
based learning,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference on Teaching,
Assessment, and Learning for Engineering (TALE), 2018, pp. 1146–
1149.
[15] S. Liu, S. Liu, Z. Liu, X. Peng, and Z. Yang, “Automated detection
of emotional and cognitive engagement in mooc discussions to predict
learning achievement,” Computers and education, vol. 181, p. 104461,
2022.
[16] D. Toti, N. Capuano, F. Campos, M. Dantas, F. Neves, and S. Caball´e,
“Detection of student engagement in e-learning systems based on seman-
tic analysis and machine learning,” in Advances on P2P, Parallel, Grid,
Cloud and Internet Computing: Proceedings of the 15th International
Conference on P2P, Parallel, Grid, Cloud and Internet Computing
(3PGCIC-2020) 15.
Springer, 2021, pp. 211–223.
[17] E. Felix, N. Hernandez, and I. Reba¨ı, “Exploring the limits of lexicon-
12
IEEE TRANSACTION ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
based natural language processing techniques for measuring engagement
and predicting mooc’s certification,” in CSEDU 2022: 14th International
Conference on Computer Supported Education, vol. 2, 2022, pp. 95–104.
[18] S. Slater, J. Ocumpaugh, R. Baker, M. V. Almeda, L. Allen, and
N. Heffernan, “Using natural language processing tools to develop
complex models of student engagement,” in 2017 Seventh International
Conference on Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction (ACII).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 542–547.
[19] R. Garg, A. W. Kiwelekar, L. D. Netak, and A. Ghodake, “i-pulse:
A nlp based novel approach for employee engagement in logistics
organization,” International Journal of Information Management Data
Insights, vol. 1, no. 1, p. 100011, 2021.
[20] G. Morio and C. D. Manning, “An nlp benchmark dataset for assessing
corporate climate policy engagement,” Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, vol. 36, pp. 39 678–39 702, 2023.
[21] S. P. Pattar, E. Coronado, L. R. Ardila, and G. Venture, “Intention and
engagement recognition for personalized human-robot interaction, an
integrated and deep learning approach,” in 2019 IEEE 4th International
Conference on Advanced Robotics and Mechatronics (ICARM), 2019,
pp. 93–98.
[22] S. M. Anzalone, S. Boucenna, S. Ivaldi, and M. Chetouani, “Evaluating
the engagement with social robots,” International Journal of Social
Robotics, vol. 7, pp. 465–478, 2015.
[23] D. Mazzei, F. Chiarello, and G. Fantoni, “Analyzing social robotics
research with natural language processing techniques,” Cognitive com-
putation, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 308–321, 2021.
[24] I. A. Hameed, “Using natural language processing (nlp) for designing
socially intelligent robots,” in 2016 Joint IEEE International Conference
on Development and Learning and Epigenetic Robotics (ICDL-EpiRob),
2016, pp. 268–269.
[25] B. Funk, S. Sadeh-Sharvit, E. E. Fitzsimmons-Craft, M. T. Trockel, G. E.
Monterubio, N. J. Goel, K. N. Balantekin, D. M. Eichen, R. E. Flatt,
M.-L. Firebaugh, C. Jacobi, A. K. Graham, M. Hoogendoorn, D. E.
Wilfley, and C. B. Taylor, “A framework for applying natural language
processing in digital health interventions,” Journal of medical Internet
research, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. e13 855–e13 855, 2020.
[26] S. Malins, G. Figueredo, T. Jilani, Y. Long, J. Andrews, M. Rawsthorne,
C. Manolescu, J. Clos, F. Higton, D. Waldram, D. Hunt, E. Perez Valle-
jos, and N. Moghaddam, “Developing an automated assessment of in-
session patient activation for psychological therapy: Codevelopment
approach,” JMIR medical informatics, vol. 10, no. 11, pp. e38 168–
e38 168, 2022.
[27] L. Ma, W. Ou, and C. S. Lee, “Investigating consumers’ cognitive,
emotional, and behavioral engagement in social media brand pages: A
natural language processing approach,” Electronic Commerce Research
and Applications, vol. 54, p. 101179, 2022.
[28] S. M. Lundberg and S.-I. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting
model predictions,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 30, I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach,
R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, Eds.
Curran Associates,
Inc., 2017, pp. 4765–4774. [Online]. Available: http://papers.nips.cc/
paper/7062-a-unified-approach-to-interpreting-model-predictions.pdf
[29] V. P´erez-Rosas, X. Wu, K. Resnicow, and R. Mihalcea, “What makes
a good counselor? learning to distinguish between high-quality and
low-quality counseling conversations,” in Proceedings of the 57th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
A. Korhonen, D. Traum, and L. M`arquez, Eds.
Florence, Italy:
Association for Computational Linguistics, Jul. 2019, pp. 926–935.
[Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/P19-1088
[30] Y. Jiang, L. Zhang, and W. Wang, “Improved universal sentence
embeddings with prompt-based contrastive learning and energy-based
learning,” 2022.
[31] M. Marelli, L. Bentivogli, M. Baroni, R. Bernardi, S. Menini, and
R. Zamparelli, “SemEval-2014 task 1: Evaluation of compositional
distributional semantic models on full sentences through semantic
relatedness
and
textual
entailment,”
in
Proceedings
of
the
8th
International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2014),
P. Nakov and T. Zesch, Eds.
Dublin, Ireland: Association for
Computational Linguistics, Aug. 2014, pp. 1–8. [Online]. Available:
https://aclanthology.org/S14-2001/
[32] N. Reimers and I. Gurevych, “Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using
siamese bert-networks,” 2019.
[33] D. Loureiro, F. Barbieri, L. Neves, L. E. Anke, and J. Camacho-Collados,
“TimeLMs: Diachronic Language Models from Twitter,” arXiv preprint
arXiv, 2022.
[34] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in 2008 eighth
ieee international conference on data mining. IEEE, 2008, pp. 413–422.
[35] ——, “Isolation-based anomaly detection,” ACM Transactions on
Knowledge Discovery from Data (TKDD), vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–39, 2012.
[36] N. V. Chawla, K. W. Bowyer, L. O. Hall, and W. P. Kegelmeyer,
“SMOTE: Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique,” Journal of
Artificial Intelligence Research, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 321–357, jun
2002. [Online]. Available: https://www.jair.org/index.php/jair/article/
view/10302
[37] G. E. A. P. A. Batista, R. C. Prati, and M. C. Monard, “A
study of the behavior of several methods for balancing machine
learning
training
data,”
ACM
SIGKDD
Explorations
Newsletter,
vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 20–29, jun 2004. [Online]. Available: https:
//dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/1007730.1007735
[38] J. T. Hancock and T. M. Khoshgoftaar, “Catboost for big data: an
interdisciplinary review,” Journal of big data, vol. 7, no. 1, p. 94, 2020.
[39] I. E. Kumar, S. Venkatasubramanian, C. Scheidegger, and S. Friedler,
“Problems with shapley-value-based explanations as feature importance
measures,” in International conference on machine learning.
PMLR,
2020, pp. 5491–5500.
[40] P. Robinson and R. el Kaliouby, “Computation of emotions in man and
machines,” Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of London.
Series B, Biological sciences, pp. 3441–3447, 2009.
[41] R. Gellatly, L. Brookman-Frazee, M. Barnett, J. Gonzalez, J. Kim, and
A. Lau, “Therapist Reports of EBP Client Engagement Challenges in
Sessions with Diverse Youth and Families in Community Mental Health
Settings,” Child & youth care forum, no. 48, pp. 55–75, 2019.
[42] P. Harrison, G. Hardy, and M. Barkham, “The relationship between
expected engagement and talking therapy outcome,” Clinical psychology
& psychotherapy, no. 26, pp. 492–501, 2019.
[43] T. Baltrusaitis, A. Zadeh, Y. C. Lim, and L.-P. Morency, “Openface 2.0:
Facial behavior analysis toolkit,” in 13th IEEE International Conference
on Automatic Face & Gesture Recognition (FG 2018).
IEEE, 2018,
pp. 59–66.
