Title: Near-Term Advances in Quantum Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2206.02171v3
--------------------------------------------------

Preprint of https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10472-024-09940-y
Near-Term Advances in Quantum Natural
Language Processing
Dominic Widdows, Aaranya Alexander, Daiwei Zhu, Chase
Zimmerman and Arunava Majumder
IonQ Inc., College Park, Maryland, USA
Preprint from 2023.
See https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10472-024-09940-y for
updated official version.
*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): widdows@ionq.com;
Abstract
This paper describes experiments showing that some tasks in nat-
ural
language
processing
(NLP)
can
already
be
performed
us-
ing quantum computers, though so far only with small datasets.
We demonstrate various approaches to topic classification. The first uses
an explicit word-based approach, in which word-topic weights are imple-
mented as fractional rotations of individual qubits, and a phrase is classi-
fied based on the accumulation of these weights onto a scoring qubit using
entangling quantum gates. This is compared with more scalable quantum
encodings of word embedding vectors, which are used to compute ker-
nel values in a quantum support vector machine: this approach achieved
an average of 62% accuracy on classification tasks involving over 10000
words, which is the largest such quantum computing experiment to date.
We describe a quantum probability approach to bigram modeling that
can be applied to understand sequences of words and formal con-
cepts, investigate a generative approximation to these distributions
using a quantum circuit Born machine, and introduce an approach
to ambiguity resolution in verb-noun composition using single-qubit
rotations for simple nouns and 2-qubit entangling gates for simple verbs.
The smaller systems presented have been run successfully on phys-
ical quantum computers, and the larger ones have been simulated.
We show that statistically meaningful results can be obtained, but
are much more difficult to predict using real datasets than using
artificial language examples from previous quantum NLP research.
Related NLP research is compared, partly with respect to contempo-
rary challenges including informal language, fluency, and truthfulness.
1
arXiv:2206.02171v3  [cs.CL]  15 Apr 2024
Preprint of https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10472-024-09940-y
2
Near-Term Advances in Quantum Natural Language Processing
Keywords: Quantum Natural Language Processing, Quantum NLP, QNLP,
Quantum Computing
1 Introduction
Natural Language Processing (NLP) is a promising area of application using
quantum computers. This paper reports on progress in developing and run-
ning NLP experiments on trapped-ion quantum computers mainly during the
year 2022. The experimental applications include topic classification, bigram
modeling, and ambiguity resolution.
More generally, building real artificial general intelligence is a core goal of
computer science. Reasons for believing that quantum models and quantum
computing may contribute to building more fully intelligent systems are varied,
and are discussed in Section 2. Our approach to building early-stage language
processing systems on quantum computers is motivated by these goals. Ques-
tions this entails include: what properties are lacking in artificial intelligence
(AI) today; whether these gaps can be addressed with quantum approaches;
what core mathematical / language operations can be identified; and for each
operation, what are the simplest effective implementations? These questions
help to motivate medium-term challenges and immediate progress.
The examples presented in this paper include word-based topic classifi-
cation in Section 3, bigram sequence modelling in Section 4, and ambiguity
resolution in verb-noun composition in Section 5. Progress in related systems
and fields is surveyed in Section 6, focusing partly on the question of whether
natural language grammar and syntax needs to be modeled explicitly in quan-
tum NLP. Thanks partly to progress with more mainstream NLP language
models, we argue that factual accuracy is more central and challenging than
aligning semantics with syntax explicitly. The conclusion in Section 7 revis-
its core questions in scale and accuracy: our experiments have processed large
enough real datasets to produce statistically meaningful results, though con-
siderably smaller than would be needed to compete with standard classical
methods on natural language data.
2 The Promise of Quantum NLP
Overlaps between quantum theory and NLP are many and varied, ranging
from structural and qualitative similarities to directly sharing mathematical
techniques.
2.1 Structural Similarities
Language and quantum mechanics have notable qualitative similarities [1].
Most words have several possible meanings or could refer to several different
Preprint of https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10472-024-09940-y
Near-Term Advances in Quantum Natural Language Processing
3
things. Even if we can predict the range of options in advance, we do not typ-
ically know which interpretation of a word or phrase is appropriate until we
encounter it in context. However, once a word is observed in context, one of the
available meanings is typically selected, and this selection tends to remain fixed
until the context changes. Similarly, quantum mechanics predicts the proba-
bilities of different outcomes, not which outcome is actually found, unless the
system is already in a fixed state that is aligned with the measurement being
performed. When measured, the system is observed to be in a fixed state, and
if measured again, the same result will be given — the outcome remains fixed
until something changes it [2, Ch 2]. Even if we prefer precise deterministic
theories in physics and linguistics, nature and language are unpredictable in
practice.
Features found in quantum theory have been explored in other human sci-
ences, noting similar patterns. The nature of money in economics and finance
is one example: David Orrell’s textbook Quantum Economics and Finance
argues that credits and debts show similarities to the concept of quantum en-
tanglement, and that money, price, and value are uncertain properties that
only become fixed when they are agreed and recorded in transactions, likening
the former to quantum and the latter to classical information [3]. Cognitive
scientists have measured relationships between available information, context,
and decision-making, that violate classical probabilistic laws but can be repre-
sented concisely and accurately as phase interference terms in quantum models
[4].
Such similarities do not show us how to perform particular language pro-
cessing tasks, but they do suggest that there is a rich space to explore, which
is especially inviting for problems involving large amounts of context and un-
certainty which frustrate classical or more reductionist approaches. For some
human problems, if we look to mathematics and physics for helpful techniques,
quantum mechanics and logic can be just as intuitive a place to start as classical
mechanics and logic.
2.2 Compositional Behaviors
Language is compositional, in the sense that the meanings of new phrases
and sentences can be derived from their parts, even when the phrase itself
has not been seen before or describes something quite unrealistic. For exam-
ple, one may have never heard the phrase “purple polar bear” before, but it
immediately conjures up a mental picture of a polar bear whose color is purple.
Language composition sometimes produces similar structures from dissim-
ilar ingredients — for example, in the context of hotels, “book a room” and
“make a reservation” have overlapping and sometimes identical meanings, even
though neither of the pairs (book, make) or (room, reservation) are usually syn-
onyms. The phrases nonetheless make immediate sense to familiar listeners, at
which point it becomes harder to decompose the phrase into its constituents.
Perhaps the word “book” is there because there used to be physical books
that such plans was written down in, and at that point the reservation was
Preprint of https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10472-024-09940-y
4
Near-Term Advances in Quantum Natural Language Processing
“booked”. The claim here is not that this is the true etymology, but that the
exercise of looking for such a piecewise explanation is itself unusual for us.
Schr¨odinger [5] famously noted a similar phenomenon in quantum mechan-
ics:
When two systems, of which we know the states by their respective representatives,
enter into temporary physical interaction due to known forces between them, and
when after a time of mutual influence the systems separate again, then they can no
longer be described in the same way as before, viz. by endowing each of them with
a representative of its own. I would not call that one but rather the characteristic
trait of quantum mechanics, the one that enforces its entire departure from classical
lines of thought.
Similar patterns have been noted for centuries — for example, Aristotle (De
Interpretatione, Ch 2) argues that in the common phrase “a fair steed”, the
word “steed” has an independent meaning, but in the proper name “Fairsteed”,
it does not. 1 Given the prevalence of composition as a general topic, one
might ask whether any overlap between language and quantum mechanics here
is just accidental. One mathematical approach to answering this question has
been to explore common compositional structures using category theory. This
has become a fertile direction for research, because common structures have
been identified (in particular, compact closed categories), and moreover, this
has shown ways in which various grammatical and lexical structures can be
represented and even combined into tensor networks that can be implemented
as quantum circuits [7, 8].
2.3 Vectors Everywhere
Vectors and linear algebra have become ubiquitous throughout artificial intel-
ligence, including NLP. Important cases include the use of feature vectors in
statistical machine learning, and the representation of states and operators in
neural networks [9]. Linear algebra is also central to quantum mechanics and
quantum computing [2, 10, Ch 2].
Again one may ask whether these overlaps are significant — the use of vec-
tors alone might be a shallow commonality. But many more pieces of quantum
mathematics have been found to useful in language-related tasks, including
subspaces and projections for representing conditionals [11] and logical nega-
tion and disjunction [12], quantum probability and the analysis of off-diagonal
correlations for information retrieval [13], entanglement for representing the
combined representation of many pairwise relationships [14].
While vector spaces have become ubiquitous in AI, some of the oppor-
tunities they present have remained comparatively unused. For example, the
lattice of subspaces (lines, planes, and higher-dimensional versions of these)
provides a geometric model for a kind of logic, just as set theory gives a
model for Boolean logic (Figure 1). This was discovered by Garrett Birkhoff
1The words Aristotle uses are Κάλιππσς contrasted with καλός ἵππος, καλός as in ‘calligraphy’
and ἵππος as in ‘hippodrome’ or ‘hippopotamus’, so the correspondence with English ‘fair steed’
is quite direct [6, p. 116].
Preprint of https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10472-024-09940-y
Near-Term Advances in Quantum Natural Language Processing
5
Figure 1 Comparing Quantum (left) with Boolean Logic (right). In quantum logic concepts
are modelled by subspaces such as lines and planes, and a point can be projected onto any
subspace. In classical logic concepts can be represented by any set of points, and a point
either belongs to this set or it does not.
and John von Neumann in the 1930’s and given the name “quantum logic”
[15]. In terms of operator algebras, the subspaces are in one-to-one correspon-
dence with the lattice of projectors onto those subspaces, and projections move
points around the space. This gives quantum logic a non-local character, which
can be exploited for semantic modelling. The negation operator in quantum
logic is projection onto the orthogonal subspace — for example, in Figure 1,
“p NOT (A OR B)” would be represented as the orthogonal projection of the
point p onto the line C, since C is orthogonal to the plane spanned by A and
B. This form of vector negation can be used to navigate between different ar-
eas of meaning, rather than just removing unwanted items piecemeal [12, Ch
7]. Several techniques that have been adapted from earlier quantum litera-
ture and applied to problems in AI today. Many of the successes of quantum
mathematics in artificial intelligence are surveyed by Widdows et al [16].
2.4 The Availability of Quantum Computers
Far from being considered popular or fashionable, research using quantum
mathematical models outside of conventional platforms of quantum physi-
cal systems such as isolated atoms have often been met with skepticism and
resistance — perhaps because quantum theory is too-often overhyped and
speculative in general science writing, and in some cases because clinging to
classical determinism is considered to be much more scientifically respectable
[3, Ch 1].
These hurdles may be becoming easier to surmount — for example, ma-
jor journals have recently published papers on quantum approaches in areas
including at least economics [17], psychology [18], and AI [16]. Reasons for
this acceptance include the reality of quantum hardware. Working quantum
computers have been built and are running programs every day — in a devel-
opment process spanning decades, concepts like “entangled pairs” have gone
from scientific imagination through experimental demonstration to engineering
implementation. We may be uncomfortable with such quantum concepts, but
unlike pioneers in the 1930’s, we have evidence that resolves any reasonable
dispute about their reality.
Preprint of https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10472-024-09940-y
6
Near-Term Advances in Quantum Natural Language Processing
Figure 2 Basic quantum logic gate diagrams used throughout these examples. A single
qubit rotation gate (left) manipulates superposition of |0⟩and |1⟩states for the qubit. The
two-qubit CNOT gate (right) entangles two qubits
The question for quantum approaches is no longer “Are they real?” but
“Are they useful?”. In NLP the work is still in its early days, and success
must be demonstrated by building useful systems. Rather than predicting a
singular quantum advantage for a particular quantum NLP system, this paper
explores several examples, with an eye to general capabilities. The next few
sections give examples of how standard language processing tasks have been
successfully performed on quantum computers. Experiments below used the
11-qubit trapped ion quantum computer described by Johri et al. [19], and
where necessary, the larger IonQ Aria machine with a capacity of 32 physical
and 20 algorithmic qubits [20]. A crucial point to bear in mind with quantum
computing is that the memory capacity of a system doubles every time a
qubit is added, because the number of basis vectors that can be combined in
superposition doubles. While this memory is difficult to access in practice and
comes with caveats and restrictions, just the notion of exponential memory
growth is a compelling attraction for researchers in data-hungry fields like NLP
[16].
Some familiarity with Dirac’s bra-ket notation, quantum bits (qubits),
gates, and circuits is necessary to fully understand the experiments presented
in this paper. For a thorough review of this area, see Nielsen and Chuang
[10, Ch 4]. Alternatively, the more introductory presentation found in Or-
rell’s textbook [3, Ch 5] is enough to understand the new circuits presented
below. A qubit is a two-level quantum system, whose basis states are nor-
mally written as |0⟩and |1⟩, and whose pure states are superpositions of the
form λ|0⟩+ µ|1⟩, where λ and µ are complex numbers with |λ|2 + |µ|2 = 1.
Thus the state of a qubit is represented by a vector in C2. When n qubits
are assembled, their combined state is represented by the tensor product
C2 ⊗C2 ⊗. . . ⊗C2 ≡(C2)⊗n ∼= C(2n). The key gate operations are single-
qubit gates which manipulate the coefficients λ and µ for a single qubit, and
two-qubit gates, in particular the ‘controlled-X’ or ‘controlled-NOT’ (CNOT)
gate that perfoms an X-rotation on the second qubit of the first qubit is in the
|1⟩state. Example circuit diagram components for these are shown in Figure
2. Readers for whom these are at least somewhat familiar should be able to
understand most of the subsequent examples in this paper. Readers for whom
these are new are encouraged to consult one of the textbooks cited or online
resources.2
2See e.g., https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum logic gate and https://qiskit.org/learn/ c.f.
[21].
Preprint of https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10472-024-09940-y
Near-Term Advances in Quantum Natural Language Processing
7
3 Word-Based Topic Classification and State
Addition
Text classification or topic classification is the task of assigning topic labels to
texts such as sports or music, or in the case of “Which bands performed at
the Super Bowl this year?”, perhaps both. It has many uses including intent
classification in dialog systems, assigning topic keywords to documents, routing
incoming messages for customer service, and spam filtering. There are many
successful methods, often involving vector representations and various forms
of neural networks and dimensionality reduction [22].
3.1 One Qubit Per Word and Topic
The quantum implementation developed here was deliberately simple: a bag-of-
words classifier on a quantum computer. In this context, ‘bag-of-words’ means
that only individual words are used as features for the classifier: the order of
words is not taken into account, or even which combinations of words appear.
So for example, a bag-of-words classifier may predict that a document contain-
ing the word horse is about farming or sports, which will often be correct,
but is a mistake if it occurs in the phrase “A horse chestnut is a deciduous
tree with palmate leaves.”
The training process for such a classifier is usually some form of supervised
machine learning. A collection of texts or documents is sampled, labels are
applied to these texts by human annotators, and these examples are used
to train the classifier to deal with new unseen examples. For a bag-of-words
classifier, a simple version of this process is:
1. For each (document, topic) pair in the training set, split the document text
into a list of words.
2. For each word in that list, increment a score recording how often this word
was seen with this topic.
This process gradually builds up a term-topic matrix (if each document is
considered to be a distinct topic, this is exactly the same as a term-document
matrix). The classification stage then proceeds as follows:
1. A new document is passed to the classifier. It is split into a list of words.
2. For each word, look up the scores that word acquired for each topic during
training.
3. Given each topic an overall score accumulated from the sum of the scores
for each word.
4. Choose the topic with the highest score as the overall winner.
This example was chosen because it raises some basic mathematical imple-
mentation questions — in particular, item 2 in training, “How do we keep a
score for each (word, topic) pair?” and item 3 in classification, “How do we
accumulate an overall score from these individual contributions?” The first of
these problems can be addressed using repeated single-qubit rotations, and
Preprint of https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10472-024-09940-y
8
Near-Term Advances in Quantum Natural Language Processing
Figure 3 Example Adder Circuit that Combines the Angles θ and φ
the second by connecting the rotated qubits to a common ‘sum qubit’, as
shown in Figure 3. A detailed analysis of the gate matrices in Figure 3 shows
that the probability of measuring a state |1⟩in the sum qubit q2 is given by
sin2(θ) cos2(φ) + cos2(θ) sin2(φ). This is the case when the input rotations
are X-rotations [10, S1.3.1]. Using other fractional rotations as generators
gives combinations with different algebraic properties, investigated more thor-
oughly in a mathematical paper by Widdows [23]. Most generally, if the two
single-qubit rotations in Figure 3 are represented by the matrices
A =
 α β
−β α

and
B =
 γ
δ
−δ γ

,
then
P(q2 = |1⟩) = |αδ|2 + |βγ|2.
The bag-of-words classifier is built by assembling several such qubits and
gates. During training, each (word, topic) pair is assigned to a particular qubit,
and the (word, topic) weights are accumulated by scanning over the training
set and incrementing the rotation for the corresponding qubit every time a
given word occurs with a given topic. For each topic, an extra qubit is de-
clared to keep the sum for each topic, so the number of qubits required is
(num words + 1)×num topics. (Hence this design only works as a demonstra-
tion for very small vocabularies.) During classification of a new phrase, each
recognized word in the phrase has each of its topic weights connected to the
sum qubit for that topic.
As a worked example, consider the toy training corpus:
I play football
→
sports
I play guitar
→
music
The training process records that the content word football gives a score to
sports and guitar gives a score to music (assuming a preprocessing step that
notes that the other words are common to all topics.) When classifying the
phrase “Do you want to play football?”, the word football is recognized and
each of the football, topic weights are connected to the sum qubit for the
corresponding topic. Each of the topic qubits is measured, and the winner is
the topic that measures the most |1⟩states over a number of shots. A circuit
implementing this process is shown in Figure 4.
Preprint of https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10472-024-09940-y
Near-Term Advances in Quantum Natural Language Processing
9
Figure 4 Example Classification Circuit for Two Words and Two Topics
3.2 One Qubit Per Embedding Dimension
The design above is clear but wasteful — a system that requires distinct bits for
each word in the vocabulary would be fine in classical but not yet in quantum
computing. In machine learning terms, using a qubit for each word is an exam-
ple of a ‘one-hot encoding’, and to avoid redundancy and get more information
out of each dimension, more compact distributional vector embeddings are of-
ten preferred. The work by Alexander and Widdows [24] details the method
used to classify words from their vector embeddings using a quantum support
vector machine (QSVM), and demonstrates subsequent experiments for differ-
ent QSVM implementations. The steps used in the paper are summarized as
follows, and results are explored in further sections.
First, the Word2Vec technique was used [25] to reduce the representation
of each word to 8 dimensions. This part of the process was run classically as a
preprocessing step. The generated vectors were then used as input parameters
for a feature map quantum circuit. Measurement of the feature map yields a
value representing the relationship between two word vectors, which is stored
in a kernel matrix [26]. This kernel was then used as input for a quantum
support vector machine. For this experiment, the ZZFeatureMap and QSVM
implementations from the Qiskit package were used [21], as shown in Figure
5. The ZZFeatureMap applies Hadamard gates on each qubit (denoted by H)
and a parameterized unitary gate (Uϕ) in a repetitive cycle; details regarding
meaning behind this structure can be found in a preliminary QSVM paper by
Havlicek et al [26]. The first half of the feature map circuit will use parameters
from one word vector, and the second half will take parameters from another
word vector.
3.3 N Qubits for 2N Embedding Dimensions
Building off of an n-qubit feature map for n-dimensional word vectors, the
same QSVM classification process was followed for densely encoded feature
maps [24]. In this case, vector representations were encoded into fewer qubits
in the feature map circuit, using log2(n)-qubits for n-dimensional word vectors.
Using such a mapping reduces qubit use without necessarily compromising the
Preprint of https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10472-024-09940-y
10
Near-Term Advances in Quantum Natural Language Processing
Figure 5 SVM Kernel Circuit Example with 8-Dimensional Inputs ⃗x and ⃗z
Figure 6 Densely-encoded Kernel Circuit with 8-Dimensional Inputs
complexity of information represented in the word embeddings, as shown in
Figure 6.
As observed in the results below, the classical embeddings preprocess-
ing step from Section 3.2 enabled the quantum circuit to achieve relatively
high accuracy with fewer qubits. Further improvements to space using densely
encoded feature maps achieved similar results.
3.4 Data and Experimental Results
For our initial small-scale experiments, the test and training datasets from the
lambeq package were used [27], which was previously used for the evaluation
of the compositional quantum NLP system of Lorenz et al [28]. This dataset
consists of 70 training sentences and 30 development and test sentences, ar-
tificially generated to use a small fixed vocabulary and to follow predictable
syntactic patterns. Lorenz et al.[28] report an accuracy of 83.3% on the test
dataset using a 6-qubit quantum computer, and a similar work by Kartsak-
lis and Sadrzadeh [27] report achieving 100% accuracy after several rounds of
training on a noisy simulation of a quantum computer. These are the near-
est comparable experiments to those reported here, so the same dataset was
deliberately reused.
Both the “one qubit per word and topic classifier” of Section 3.1 was able
to reach 100% accuracy, and the word embeddings classifiers of Section 3.2
and Section 3.3 were able to reach 90-100% accuracy, with comparatively little
training and tuning.
Preprint of https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10472-024-09940-y
Near-Term Advances in Quantum Natural Language Processing
11
For the bag-of-words classifier of Section 3.1, the key parameters to tune
were the number of words to use and the incremental rotation angle. The
tradeoff here is that too small an incremental rotation can be insignificant
compared to statistical noise, and too large an incremental rotation can lead to
cumulative rotations that go too far and ‘turn the corner’ — a naive version of
classical ‘buffer overflow’ in a single qubit. The incremental rotation angle was
chosen to be π/24 (as in Figure 4) because this gave accurate results on the
development set. Larger datasets would obviously warrant smaller angles to
avoid the overflow issues, and this parameter tuning could easily be automated
for a larger variational learning approach. The number of words used is partly
a tradeoff between space and accuracy. The largest system available to us had
20 algorithm qubits [20], and offline simulations showed that perfectly accurate
results could be expected with at least 9 words. To build a circuit like that
of Figure 4 with 9 words and 2 topics requires 20 qubits, so by a convenient
accident, this was just able to run comfortably on available quantum hardware,
yielding 100% accuracy.
For the word embeddings classifier of Section 3.2, only one qubit per dimen-
sion was needed, and results were experimentally found to be 90% accurate
with just 8 embedding dimensions, thus requiring only 8 qubits to run. When
running the densely encoded version of the word embeddings classifier from
Section 3.3, 100% accuracy was achieved using 16 embedding dimensions and
only 4 qubits [24]. This model achieves perfect accuracy for the lambeq set
and in the fewest qubits of all the methods covered.
To draw deeper conclusions on scalability, Alexander and Widdows [24]
tested the QSVM classifiers on a more complex dataset of IMDb movie reviews
[29]. Actual reviews taken from the database incorporated varied word com-
binations and colloquial language, similar to a realistic use case for quantum
NLP. The average number of words in each review is between 228 and 229,
and classification experiments were performed in batches of 50 documents:
the the number of word tokens involved in each experiment was around 11000
(whereas the total size of the lambeq training and test set is 465 words). The
percentage of samples correctly classified peaked when using 4 qubits, where
average accuracy was 57% with the ZZFeatureMap and 62% using the densely
encoded feature map. The QSVM experiments were on par with classical SVM
on average, and classified some sample batches with perfect accuracy. This, in
contrast with the lambeq results, suggests that good classification merits com-
patibility of the specific text sample with the feature map or overall method.
Such compatibility is not yet predictable and requires further investigation to
draw conclusions on the potential of quantum NLP classification on a large
scale.
3.5 Language Caveats and Dependencies
As well as the simple data size and scaling questions, there are many other
language details to be considered, including “What does splitting into words
mean precisely?” (tokenization) and “How do we declare that two words are
Preprint of https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10472-024-09940-y
12
Near-Term Advances in Quantum Natural Language Processing
the same?” (canonicalization). These questions were sidestepped for now by us-
ing particularly simple English phrases as the training and test data. However,
it is still important to bear in mind that all the approaches require classical
preprocessing of various sorts, including basic whitespace-splitting and assign-
ing tokens to qubit indices in the word-based classifier, word vector embedding
training for the inputs to the SVM classifier, to the need for a full natural
language parse tree in the lambeq package.
Rather than claiming that the bags-of-words classifier is ‘the best’ because
it reaches the highest accuracy completely on a quantum hardware, we believe
these comparisons highlight important tradeoffs to consider. With a much
more sophisticated linguistic model and related requirements for preprocessing,
Lorenz et al. [28] were able to reach 87% accuracy with only 6 qubits —
whereas with the same restriction (implemented by reducing the number of
words considered), the bag-of-words classifier accuracy was reduced to 83%
in simulations. Having a range of available approaches puts us in a position
where tradeoffs between space requirements, system complexity, and results
accuracy can be considered in the light of what problems users are trying
to solve. For example, the work by Alexander and Widdows [24] investigates
solely the effects of decreasing space in the QSVM using a densely encoded
feature map. Improved accuracy from 90% to 100% in fewer qubits on the
lambeq dataset, albeit promising, translated to an unrealistic tradeoff between
space and accuracy on the IMDb set.
For the problem of correctly classifying general text data samples using
quantum computation, properly reflecting the complexity of language in quan-
tum representations is challenging. The accuracies from quantum circuits are
dependent on the compatibility between the language dataset, type of classes
(sentiment, topic etc.), extent of preprocessing and structure of the resulting
quantum state. It should be noted that constructing quantum representations
for language for any feature-based computation should be purposeful and case-
specific, for more effective handling of language dependencies. In this way, the
bag-of-words classifier is a more universal approach to handling arbitrary lan-
guage and classes; it relies only on tokenization compared to abstract feature
mappings and word embeddings used by the QSVM.
4 Bigram Modelling and Quantum Probability
While the ability to combine classifier weights and get good results is im-
portant, it is obvious and well-known that bag-of-words models are a poor
approximation for language. Historically, one of the next steps in statistical
language modelling was the modelling language based on short sequences of
characters and words, used by mathematician Claude Shannon [30, S3] to illus-
trate key behaviors including entropy in the foundation of information theory.
Shannon used the terms ‘first-order approximation’ for a model that samples
and generates words based purely on their frequencies, and ‘second-order ap-
proximation’ for a model that conditions this probability on the preceding
Preprint of https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10472-024-09940-y
Near-Term Advances in Quantum Natural Language Processing
13
word. (For example, yellow is likely to come before but not after submarine.)
Today these are often called unigram and bigram models, and in principle such
a model extends to sequences of any length, leading to the long-established
field of n-gram language modelling [31, Ch 6]. Having built a quantum unigram
model, extending this to bigram modelling is a natural next step.
Though still relatively simple, semantic modelling for two-word bigram
combinations has real-world applications. For example, in the hospitality do-
main, book room, arrange accommodation, reserve hotel, make reservation all
imply the same intent or goal, even though they do not share the same words
and these words are often not synonyms in other contexts — for example,
book and make are not normally synonyms in English. Recognizing that these
phrases mean similar things when combined in this way is this important for
intent recognition in customer service dialog systems.
In probabilistic terms, a unigram model can be used for language generation
by sampling terms from the distribution of words, in which case a bigram
model works by sampling from the joint distribution of (ordered) word pairs.
This has an established parallel in quantum probability theory, described in
detail by Bradley [32]. A joint distribution over the vector spaces V and W
is represented in the tensor product space V ⊗W, in which case the marginal
distributions are represented by partial traces defined by trW (v ⊗w) = v tr(w)
and trV (v ⊗w) = w tr(v). Bradley [32] uses this approach to represent formal
concept lattices in vector spaces. Formal concept analysis is a theory developed
by Georg Cantor [33] in which objects are represented by which attributes
they possess, and concepts arise as closures of sets of objects and attributes
that go together.
4.1 Modelling Steps
The distributional modelling process outlined by Bradley [32] uses the
following steps, which are written out fully in the example in Table 1.
1. Write down the joint distribution matrix (‘Initial Distribution’). In the ex-
ample in Table 1, this joint distribution is a subset of the Cartesian product
Colors × Fruit.
2. Express this distribution as an element of the tensor product space Colors⊗
Fruit by flattening the distribution matrix into a long vector.
3. Normalize this element to get a distribution state vector |ψ⟩.
4. Take the outer product |ψ⟩⟨ψ| which gives the density matrix of the joint
distribution.
5. Take partial traces of this density matrix. Each partial trace reveals infor-
mation about the distribution of the respective ingredients — in particular,
the diagonal elements represent the individual marginal probabilities, and
the off-diagonal elements represent information about correlations between
items.
In the worked example of Table 1, the key thing to note is the off-diagonal
1
3 terms that link the red and green concepts in the partial trace showing colors.
Preprint of https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10472-024-09940-y
14
Near-Term Advances in Quantum Natural Language Processing
Table 1 Steps for modelling the concepts “red apple”, “green apple”, “yellow banana”
This reflects the fact that back in the original distribution, these are both
colors of apple. Note that classical marginalization leaves such information
behind — the classical marginal distribution would just tell us that red, green,
and yellow are equally likely. This property has been noted by various authors,
and was put to work in the work of Sordoni et al. [13] for term-weighting in
information retrieval. Those authors recognized that the weight given for a
combination of words should sometimes be different from the additive weights
of the individual words — taking an example from earlier, the weight of the
term horse in the phrase “I love the flowers on horse chestnut trees” should be
suppressed because it is unlikely to be relevant for users whose search terms
include horse on its own.
4.2 Quantum Circuit Approximation for Small
Distribution
The initial quantum implementation goal was to build a joint bigram distri-
bution in a way that can potentially be used for language understanding and
generation from a probabilistic model. One of the general challenges here is
that preparing a quantum state representing an arbitrary large state vector
is difficult — as discussed in Section 3.3, explicitly preparing and comparing
vectors dimensions requires procedures like the divide-and-conquer method
developed by Araujo et al [34]. This worked reasonably well for embedding 8
feature-dimensions in 3 qubits, but even with a small collection of words, the
corresponding model dimension is much larger, so instead of trying to create
the state ⟨ψ|ψ⟩from Table 1 explicitly, we try to learn effective approximations.
For this demonstration, a slightly larger distribution of items and colors
was used including green apple, red apple, yellow banana, ripe banana, red
pepper, yellow pepper, black shoes, red dress, blue suit, white shirt. This has
7 distinct prefixes and 7 distinct suffixes, so to model the joint distribution
in the manner of Table 1 would require 49 dimensions and 492 for the outer
product density matrix.
Preprint of https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10472-024-09940-y
Near-Term Advances in Quantum Natural Language Processing
15
Figure 7 Attempts to fit the target distribution, with and without introducing noise.
The goodness-of-fit is measured by Kullback-Liebler (KL) divergence, DKL(P ∥Q) =
P
x∈X P(x) log
 P (x)
Q(x)

, where P is the learned distribution and Q is the target distribution.
Instead, in order to fit the distribution into quantum memory and to in-
duce some interference between terms, a dense encoding scheme was used. We
use a Quantum Circuit Born Machine (QCBM) model to learn the joint proba-
bility distribution. The QCBM encodes the probability of (prefix, suffix) pairs
directly as the amplitudes of different states in the superposition. This way,
the normalization is satisfied by default. For a joint distribution with n pre-
fixes and m suffixes, we would need nm classical bits just to model ‘present
or absent’. For the QCBM model, we use ⌈log2(n)⌉+ ⌈log2(m)⌉qubits, and
an encoding convention where each prefix and suffix is given a binary index,
and the cooccurrence weight is stored as the amplitude of the state given by
concatenating these two indices. Each of the adjectives and nouns was as-
signed a binary index corresponding to a tensor product state, for example
blue = |101⟩and shoes = |100⟩. These are concatenated to form the bigram
index, blue shoes = |101100⟩.
The QCBM uses parametric quantum circuits to generate different super-
positions. The training challenge is then to find the proper set of parameters
that lead to the generation of the specific superposition that represents the
target joint probability distribution. For this, a Simultaneous Perturbation
Stochastic Approximation (SPSA) optimizer [35] was implemented which op-
timizes the parametric quantum circuit, minimizing the difference between the
generated distribution and the target distribution using the Kullback–Leibler
(KL) divergence as the cost function. Sample results are shown in Figure 7. The
initial results were disappointing (middle column) — while finding some peaks
in the distribution, the optimizer entirely missed others, leading to a poor KL-
divergence score of 1.131. Our hypothesis was that the target distribution was
too discrete or ‘spiky’ to be fitted effectively in this way. Further experiments
were carried out that added noise to the distribution and tried to fit the noisy
version. Perhaps surprisingly, this worked considerably better — the optimizer
was able to fit most of the spikes in the distribution, at the cost of giving some
weight to other elements, achieving a much better KL-divergence of 0.211.
This result is analogous to the use of smoothing in n-gram models. It is
often observed that language produces new words and phrases that have not
been seen before: this is what is meant when language is said to be ‘gener-
ative’. To accommodate this, language models are adapted to give non-zero
Preprint of https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10472-024-09940-y
16
Near-Term Advances in Quantum Natural Language Processing
probabilities even to phrases that have never been encountered in training, and
there are several traditional ways of doing this [31, Ch 6]. In a simple demon-
stration, after training, the model was used to generate a few new phrases by
random sampling. Results included some plausible example like black suit, and
occasionally misfits such as ripe shirt.
4.3 Quantum Circuit Approximation for Larger
Cue-Target Distributions
This section investigates how these quantum circuits and results behaved at
a larger scale with more realistic data. For this, a larger collection of pairs
was needed, for which the University of South Florida Free Association Norms
dataset was used [36]. This dataset collects many results of experiments where
subjects were given a prompt-word, such as add, and responded with a word
they consider associated, such as subtract or calculate. This dataset has been
used to compare different models for analyzing word-meaning and retrieval
[37], and to propose word-pairs for subsequent word-similarity ranking ex-
periments [38]. After combining the input files, the word-graph used in our
experiments had 1703 distinct cue words, 6359 distinct target words, and 24526
links from a cue to a target. Each link was weighted by the forward-strength
of the link as computed by Nelson et al [36].
Given n = 1703 and m = 6359, it would need ⌈log2(n)⌉+ ⌈log2(m)⌉= 24
qubits to attempt to model the whole graph distribution, which even with
advances in recent months is beyond the current size of reliable quantum com-
puters [39]. This introduces the requirement of sampling from the larger graph
to get representative subgraphs. A natural problem here is that taking a ran-
dom sample of nodes and retaining the edges between them does not preserve
representative graph properties — for example, if p nodes are randomly sam-
pled from a graph with N nodes, the chance of a node n being selected is
p
N ,
whereas the chance of an edge (n1, n2) being selected is roughly
p
N2 because
both n1 and n2 need to be selected. Graph sampling challenges and exam-
ple solutions are surveyed by Leskovec and Faloutsos [40]: in these terms, the
graph sampling challenge would be described as a kind of scale-down sampling,
and the method used is related to the random walk family. More precisely, a
subgraph is grown by starting with a small set of seed nodes, scoring their
neighbors according to the sum of edge-weights connecting them with the seed
nodes, and adding batches of the k neighbors with the best scores until the
desired number of nodes is reached. In our bipartite graph this process alter-
nates between cues and targets, so the same number of each is sampled. An
example subgraph with 10 cues and 10 targets starting with the seed word
acorn is shown in Figure 8.
This technique was used to create a 100 sample subgraphs containing each
of 16, 32, 64, 128 modes, by choosing a random cue-word (sampling uniformly
from all cues) and growing a subgraph around that word. The pattern of being
able to approximate target distributions more effectively with some smoothing
was confirmed — for example, the average KL-divergence between the learned
Preprint of https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10472-024-09940-y
Near-Term Advances in Quantum Natural Language Processing
17
Figure 8 Bipartite cue-target graph grown around the seed-word acorn
Nodes in Graph
16
32
Prec.
Rec.
F1
Prec.
Rec.
F1
SPSA
0.062
0.047
0.053
0.042
0.029
0.034
SPSA Smoothed
0.041
0.033
0.036
0.025
0.019
0.022
Shared Links
0.054
0.045
0.049
0.032
0.025
0.028
Random
0.046
0.034
0.039
0.040
0.029
0.033
Nodes in Graph
64
128
Prec.
Rec.
F1
Prec.
Rec.
F1
SPSA
0.022
0.016
0.019
0.011
0.008
0.009
SPSA Smoothed
0.015
0.011
0.013
0.008
0.006
0.006
Shared Links
0.051
0.039
0.044
0.056
0.041
0.048
Random
0.020
0.015
0.017
0.011
0.008
0.009
Table 2 Precision, recall, and F1-score of link recovery experiments for graphs up to 128
nodes. Each figure is the average of 100 experiments with graph grown around a randomly
chosen seed word.
and the target distributions with 16 nodes was 1.504 without smoothing and
0.454 with smoothing.
A further experiment was performed to see how these learned distributions
perform at generating new links. This was simulated by removing 20% of the
links in the sampled subgraphs in a random train-test split, training the models
on the 80% of training links, taking the pairs with the highest probabilities
in the learned distribution that were not links in the training graph, and
comparing these with the 20% of held-out test links. The results were evaluated
Preprint of https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10472-024-09940-y
18
Near-Term Advances in Quantum Natural Language Processing
using the standard scores of precision (number of correct links divided by
number of proposed links), recall (number of correct links divided by number of
test links that could be found), and F1-score (the geometric mean of precision
and recall) [9, Ch 3]. The results of this experiment are shown in Table 2. In
spite of the the better KL-divergence scores, the SPSA results with smoothing
are consistently less good than those without, and are sometimes worse than
the random baseline scores. For small graphs (16 and 32 nodes), the SPSA
method performs better than randomly, and better than an alternative Shared
Links approach, which uses a similar link-scoring technique to that used for
selecting the sample subgraphs to rank the most promising available new links.
However, for the larger graphs (64 and 128 nodes), the Shared Links method
pulls ahead.
These results are somewhat disappointing, though representative of some of
the challenges quantum NLP is likely to face. Mathematically exciting models
may lead to promising implementations, from which we can learn a lot about
distributional patterns and propose improvements. However, classical comput-
ers can still process much more data quickly so in many cases a relatively
simple classical baseline algorithm can still produce better results.
5 Ambiguity Resolution in Composition
The ability to choose appropriate interpretations for ambiguous words is a
hallmark of human language capability. Much of the time, we guess meanings
quickly and correctly, but various experiments have also shown that in some
situations, several meanings are not only available but cognitively activated,
causing and confusion and delay in human language responses [41, Ch 19]. 3
Word-sense discrimination and disambiguation were among the early suc-
cesses of word vector models during the 1990’s, built using dimension-reduction
of term-document or term-term cooccurrence matrices [44]. This was followed
by the use of orthogonal projection as a logical operator for isolating particular
senses of ambiguous words, confirming that a semantic vector for an ambigu-
ous word can be analyzed as a sum of vectors for difference senses, which can
sometimes be recovered from the geometry of the vector space [12, Ch 7].
The ambition of combining distributional word vectors with compositional
operations that model grammatical structures led to successful experiments
with matrices as operators — for example, where nouns are modelled as vec-
tors, adjectives can be modelled more effectively as matrices acting upon the
noun vectors [45]. Putting such insights together enabled comprehensive sys-
tems for distributional compositional semantics to be devised [43, 46], leading
to many successful experiments (for a more thorough summary see Widdows
et al. [16]).
3Sometimes ambiguity resolution is so effortless that we underestimate the prevalence of ambi-
guity itself, which takes many forms. For example, English has considerable syntactic ambiguity
— one large sample found that 57% of the 400 most common English verbs are also nouns [42],
but we rarely notice this. As noted by [43], “Nearly all papers in formal semantics start from the
assumption that all the words in the examples under study have been neatly disambiguated before
being combined. But this is not an innocent or easy assumption.”
Preprint of https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10472-024-09940-y
Near-Term Advances in Quantum Natural Language Processing
19
Table 3 A toy domain model with column vectors for nouns and matrices for transitive
verbs
Borneo
Java
C++
Trip
Juggling
Place
1
1
0
0
0
Event
0
0
0
1
0
Tech
0
1
1
0
0
Skill
0
0
0
0
1
visit =


0 0 0 0
1 0 0 0
0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0


learn =


0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0
0 0 1 0


Circuit for Java
Circuit for visit
Circuit for visit Java
Figure 9 Toy circuit examples showing how the phrase visit Java selects the place meaning
As noted by authors including Baroni and Zamparelli [45], the use of ma-
trices to operate on vectors supports disambiguation as different components
of meaning are selected in the compositional process. For example, we might
learn that red means something closer to orange in ‘red hair’, something closer
to purple in ‘red wine’, and something closer to urgent in ‘red alert’.
To demonstrate such a process on quantum computer, we designed the ex-
ample domain shown in Table 3. There are only four dimensions, representing
the broad areas place, event, technology, skill, and 5 nouns — one belonging
to each dimension, and the noun Java which could refer to a place or a tech-
nology. Consider now the transitive verbs visit and learn. When we say “I
visited Borneo”, this indicates that an event happened — so the verb visit
takes places as input and creates events as output. When we say “I learned
C++”, this indicates that a skill was acquired — so the verb learned in this
case takes technologies as input and creates skills as output. It is easy to write
down matrices that perform these operations (Table 3, right hand side).
Consider now the action of these matrices on the ambiguous word Java.
Both the place and the tech dimensions are activated with this input, but
the verb visit simply ignores the tech part of the input, whereas the verb
learn ignores the place part. In the process of composition, the meanings that
naturally combine with one another are preserved, and those that do not are
discarded.
Preprint of https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10472-024-09940-y
20
Near-Term Advances in Quantum Natural Language Processing
This process was then modelled using the quantum circuits in Figure 9.
Qubits corresponding to the dimensions for Java are activated by applying
the X gate, and the verb visit is implemented by connecting the input place
qubit to the output event qubit. The quantum circuit is actually more compli-
cated mathematically than the small matrices of Table 3 — for example, the
state of the four input qubits would be represented in (C2)⊗4 ∼= C16. These
interactions would have to be considered when modelling a larger domain, if
only because the approach in Figure 9 would soon run out of qubits. Nonethe-
less, an experiment with these circuits on the 11-qubit IonQ machine gave the
expected results — measuring the output bits for the visit Java or the corre-
sponding learn Java circuits shows that the former activates the event output
and the latter activates the skill output. Ambiguity is an example of a problem
that is crucial to language understanding, to which the mathematical tools of
vectors and matrices have been successfully applied, and the circuits of Figure
9 provide an example of how such processes can be implemented on quantum
computers.
6 Related Work
These experiments and results come in the midst of much progress in quantum
machine learning and AI. Until recently, most work in quantum algorithms
was theoretical in how these algorithms could not be run on quantum hard-
ware. This has changed rapidly, and in the 2020’s, new results from quantum
computers in artificial intelligence are being published almost every month,
with applications including probabilistic reasoning [47] financial modeling [19],
and image classification [48, 49]. Similar questions arise across these areas,
partly because the availability of some of the key quantum properties like in-
determinacy, interference, and entanglement pose the question “How can these
mathematical properties help to model a given situation?”
The most directly comparable research to that presented here is the com-
positional quantum approach released in the lambeq package [27, 50]. This
is the ongoing culmination of a research program outlined by Coecke et al.
[46], which is often referred to as the DisCoCat (‘distributional compositional
categorical’) model. This combines the use of distributional semantic vectors
with syntactic parsing, and partly follows the tradition of logical semantics
in the sense that the semantic representation is derived from first finding the
syntactic or grammatical structure of a sentence.
Such an approach to meaning is common in theoretical linguistics, which
often considers sentences as fundamental units of language and require gram-
maticality. The relationship between categorial grammar and compositional
semantics especially is a key part of Montague grammar [51]. Such direct pre-
decessors in NLP today are sometimes obscured by the tremendous success
of machine learning methods since the early 2000’s: as the field has coalesced
around a few particularly successful techniques, other topics that would once
have been included in a standard introduction to language and meaning have
Preprint of https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10472-024-09940-y
Near-Term Advances in Quantum Natural Language Processing
21
become less well-known. A renewed interest in logical semantics encouraged
by its use in DisCoCat could bring insights independently of its potential
applications in quantum NLP.
At the same time, precedents in logical semantics also bring reservations
— starkly, for example, in 1976 philosopher David Lewis wrote, “It is apparent
that categorial grammars of this sort are not reasonable grammars for natural
language” [52]. Lewis’ concerns were partly about the inability of phrase-
structure grammars to account for freer word-orders, which motivates the
addition of a transformational component. This helps to adapt the machinery
to grammatical structures in more languages, but maintains the assumption
that systems are working with grammatical sentences to begin with. While
this is still appropriate in many formal domains, the pervasive availability this
century of mobile electronic devices has led to a deluge of informal text which
also (and frequently!) demands our attention.
The challenge of inferring grammatical structure from informal text could
itself become an opportunity for QNLP, since early studies suggest that lan-
guage parsing can be done efficiently on quantum computers [53]. This raises
the possibility that grammatical structure could interact with the semantic
compositional structure in a model such as DisCoCat as quantum information,
rather than as a fixed piece of classical information from a preprocessing step,
which could make the system more efficient and effective when working with
incomplete or indeterminate parses.
An approach based more on information retrieval [11, 12] starts bottom-
up with individual words instead of grammatical sentences, and moves from
there to pairs of words [13]. The examples in this paper have more obviously
drawn on this research, partly because we believe it will be applicable to more
language situations in general. Another family of techniques that combines
syntax and semantics has been to train deep neural networks and distill both
semantic and grammatical information together from these [54]. The use of
tensor product decomposition networks has particularly interesting overlaps
with models used in quantum chemistry [55].
However, the most advanced language systems in widespread use currently
are neural networks such as GPT-3 that do not use explicit grammatical pre-
processing at all, and these models are so fluent that critiques of them focus
on semantic and ethical failures instead of anything related to grammar and
syntax [56]. Human grammatical fluency is still scientifically interesting, but
the lack of it is no longer a weak-link in language processing systems: language
generation systems can easily produce “massive amounts of very plausible but
often untrue texts” [57]. For this reason we expect aligning semantics and
factual accuracy to be a more pressing engineering challenge than aligning
semantics and syntax.
Given the huge range of language challenges in computing, and pace of
development in both language processing and quantum computing, we ex-
pect that the next few years will witness many more contributions and
combinations.
Preprint of https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10472-024-09940-y
22
Near-Term Advances in Quantum Natural Language Processing
7 Conclusions and Next Steps
The experiments and demonstrations presented in this paper show that NLP
tasks can be performed on quantum computers, which is important in itself —
quantum information processing is being demonstrated on quantum hardware,
not just in theory. The practical applications are so far small-scale, and it is
still challenging to find consumer-facing NLP requirement that would be better
served today by quantum than classical hardware. And as demonstrated in
some of our experiments, a more elegant mathematical method may produce
worse results than a simple baseline model that can train on more realistic
data.
The main dependency here is hardware: because quantum memory capacity
grows exponentially with the number of qubits, 10 qubits can represent a
kilobyte, whereas 30 qubits can represent a gigabyte (roughly speaking — this
compares the number of variables, not their expressivity or access patterns,
and classical memory is still much more reliable). This threshold is likely to be
crossed in the next two years, which will enable us to explore larger datasets,
and to look for useful intermediate-scale applications.
The scaling challenge is particularly important in NLP, because one of
the consistent findings in this paper is that promising results with very small
curated datasets do not always translate into good performance on larger, more
varied and realistic datasets. This challenge is analyzed in detail by Alexander
and Widdows [24], where it shown that the that enough data can be processed
to get results that are reliably above baseline in a statistical sense, but still
much less than is regularly used in classical NLP systems.
Though much of the focus in NLP research in recent years has been on
larger and larger models, many commercial systems involve much smaller
curated datasets, such as the intents used by dialog systems or ticket classifi-
cations used by customer service tracking systems. With a dedicated focus on
building useful products, it should become possible for quantum NLP to help
with practical medium-term goals, and this can help show the way to more
general intelligent systems.
Data Avaliability
The datasets that were analyzed in the current study may be found at the
following public domain resources:
• Lambeq: CQCL Github repository at https://github.com/CQCL/lambeq
• IMDb: https://ai.stanford.edu/∼amaas/data/sentiment/
• University of South Florida Free Association Norms: Available through the
supplementary material at https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03195588
Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
Preprint of https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10472-024-09940-y
Near-Term Advances in Quantum Natural Language Processing
23
References
[1] Widdows, D.: A mathematical model for context and word-meaning. In:
International and Interdisciplinary Conference on Modeling and Using
Context, pp. 369–382 (2003). Springer
[2] Dirac, P.: The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, 4th edition, 1958,
reprinted 1982 edn. Clarendon Press, Oxford (1930)
[3] Orrell, D.: Quantum Economics and Finance: An Applied Mathematics
Introduction. Panda Ohana Publishing, New York (2020)
[4] Busemeyer, J.R., Bruza, P.D.: Quantum Models of Cognition and Deci-
sion. Cambridge University Press, (2012)
[5] Schr¨odinger, E.: Discussion of probability relations between separated
systems. In: Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical
Society, vol. 31, pp. 555–563 (1935). Cambridge University Press
[6] Cooke, H.P., Treddenick, H. (eds.): Aristotle: Categories, On Interpreta-
tion, Prior Analytics. Loeb Classical Library. Harvard University Press,
(1938)
[7] Piedeleu, R., Kartsaklis, D., Coecke, B., Sadrzadeh, M.: Open system cat-
egorical quantum semantics in natural language processing. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1502.00831 (2015)
[8] Coecke, B., de Felice, G., Meichanetzidis, K., Toumi, A.: Foundations
for near-term quantum natural language processing. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2012.03755 (2020)
[9] G´eron, A.: Hands-On Machine Learning with Scikit-Learn, Keras, and
TensorFlow: Concepts, Tools, and Techniques to Build Intelligent Sys-
tems. O’Reilly Media, (2019)
[10] Nielsen, M.A., Chuang, I.: Quantum Computation and Quantum Infor-
mation. American Association of Physics Teachers, Cambridge University
Press Edition, 2016 (2002)
[11] Van Rijsbergen, C.J.: The Geometry of Information Retrieval. Cambridge
University Press, (2004)
[12] Widdows, D.: Geometry and Meaning. CSLI Publications, Stanford
(2004)
[13] Sordoni, A., Nie, J.-Y., Bengio, Y.: Modeling Term Dependencies with
Quantum Language Models for IR. In: Proceedings of the 36th In-
ternational ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Preprint of https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10472-024-09940-y
24
Near-Term Advances in Quantum Natural Language Processing
Information Retrieval. SIGIR ’13, pp. 653–662 (2013)
[14] Cohen, T., Widdows, D., Vine, L.D., Schvaneveldt, R., Rindflesch, T.C.:
Many paths lead to discovery: Analogical retrieval of cancer therapies. In:
Sixth International Symposium on Quantum Interaction (2012)
[15] Birkhoff, G., von Neumann, J.: The logic of quantum mechanics. Annals
of Mathematics 37, 823–843 (1936)
[16] Widdows, D., Kitto, K., Cohen, T.: Quantum mathematics in artifi-
cial intelligence. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 72, 1307–1341
(2021)
[17] Orrell, D., Houshmand, M.: Quantum propensity in economics. Fron-
tiers in Artificial Intelligence 4 (2022). https://doi.org/10.3389/frai.2021.
772294
[18] Pothos, E.M., Busemeyer, J.R.: Quantum cognition. Annual review of
psychology 73, 749–778 (2022)
[19] Johri, S., Debnath, S., Mocherla, A., Singk, A., Prakash, A., Kim, J.,
Kerenidis, I.: Nearest centroid classification on a trapped ion quantum
computer. npj Quantum Information 7(1), 1–11 (2021)
[20] IonQ Aria: IonQ Aria Furthers Lead As World’s Most Powerful Quan-
tum Computer. accessed 2022-05-28 (2022). https://ionq.com/news/
february-23-2022-ionq-aria-furthers-lead
[21] ANIS, M.S., Abby-Mitchell, Abraham, H., AduOffei, Agarwal, R.,
Agliardi, G., other authors: Qiskit: An Open-source Framework for
Quantum Computing (2021). https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2573505
[22] Kowsari, K., Jafari Meimandi, K., Heidarysafa, M., Mendu, S., Barnes, L.,
Brown, D.: Text classification algorithms: A survey. Information 10(4),
150 (2019)
[23] Widdows, D.: Nonlinear addition of qubit states using entangled quater-
nionic powers of single-qubit gates. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.13787
(2022)
[24] Alexander, A., Widdows, D.: Quantum text encoding for classification
tasks. In: 2022 IEEE/ACM 7th Symposium on Edge Computing, pp. 355–
361 (2022)
[25] Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., Dean, J.: Efficient estimation of word
representations in vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781 (2013)
Preprint of https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10472-024-09940-y
Near-Term Advances in Quantum Natural Language Processing
25
[26] Havlicek, V., Corcoles, A., Temme, K., other authors.: Supervised learn-
ing with quantum-enhanced feature spaces. Nature 567(7747), 212–567
(2019)
[27] Kartsaklis, D., Fan, I., Yeung, R., Pearson, A., Lorenz, R., Toumi, A.,
de Felice, G., Meichanetzidis, K., Clark, S., Coecke, B.: lambeq: An Ef-
ficient High-Level Python Library for Quantum NLP. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2110.04236 (2021)
[28] Lorenz, R., Pearson, A., Meichanetzidis, K., Kartsaklis, D., Coecke,
B.: QNLP in practice: Running compositional models of meaning on a
quantum computer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.12846 (2021)
[29] Maas, A.L., Daly, R.E., Pham, P.T., Huang, D., Ng, A.Y., Potts, C.:
Learning word vectors for sentiment analysis. In: Proceedings of the 49th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp.
142–150. ACL, Portland, Oregon, USA (2011)
[30] Shannon, C.: A mathematical theory of communication. Bell system
technical journal 27, 379–423623656 (1948)
[31] Manning, C.D., Sch¨utze, H.: Foundations of Statistical Natural Language
Processing. The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts (1999)
[32] Bradley, T.-D.: At the interface of algebra and statistics. PhD thesis, City
University of New York (2020)
[33] Ganter, B., Wille, R.: Formal Concept Analysis: Mathematical Founda-
tions. Springer, ??? (1999)
[34] Araujo, I.F., Park, D.K., Petruccione, F., da Silva, A.J.: A divide-
and-conquer algorithm for quantum state preparation. Nature Scientific
Reports 11(1), 6329 (2021)
[35] Spall, J.C.: An overview of the simultaneous perturbation method for
efficient optimization. Johns Hopkins apl technical digest 19(4), 482–492
(1998)
[36] Nelson, D.L., McEvoy, C.L., Schreiber, T.A.: The University of South
Florida free association, rhyme, and word fragment norms. Behavior
Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers 36(3), 402–407 (2004)
[37] Bruza, P., Kitto, K., Nelson, D., McEvoy, C.: Is there something quantum-
like about the human mental lexicon? Journal of mathematical psychology
53(5), 362–377 (2009)
[38] Chandrasekaran, D., Mago, V.: Evolution of semantic similarity — a
Preprint of https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10472-024-09940-y
26
Near-Term Advances in Quantum Natural Language Processing
survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 54(2), 1–37 (2021)
[39] IonQ Benchmarking: Algorithmic Qubits: A Better Single-Number
Metric. https://ionq.com/posts/february-23-2022-algorithmic-qubits, ac-
cessed 2022-09-19 (2022)
[40] Leskovec, J., Faloutsos, C.: Sampling from large graphs. In: Proceed-
ings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 631–636 (2006)
[41] Aitchison, J.: Words in the Mind: An Introduction to the Mental Lexicon,
3rd edn. Blackwell, (2002)
[42] Widdows, D.: Unsupervised methods for developing taxonomies by com-
bining syntactic and statistical information. In: Proceedings of North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
Edmonton, Canada (2003)
[43] Baroni, M., Bernardi, R., Zamparelli, R., et al.: Frege in space: A program
for compositional distributional semantics. Linguistic Issues in language
technology 9(6), 5–110 (2014)
[44] Sch¨utze, H.: Automatic word sense discrimination. Computational Lin-
guistics 24(1), 97–124 (1998)
[45] Baroni, M., Zamparelli, R.: Nouns are vectors, adjectives are matrices:
Representing adjective-noun constructions in semantic space. In: Proceed-
ings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP) (2010)
[46] Coecke, B., Sadrzadeh, M., Clark, S.: Mathematical foundations for a
compositional distributional model of meaning. CoRR, arXiv preprint
arXiV:1003.4394 (2010)
[47] Borujeni, S.E., Nannapaneni, S., Nguyen, N.H., Behrman, E.C., Steck,
J.E.: Quantum circuit representation of Bayesian networks. Expert Sys-
tems with Applications 176, 114768 (2021)
[48] Wang, K., Xiao, L., Yi, W., Ran, S.-J., Xue, P.: Experimental realization
of a quantum image classifier via tensor-network-based machine learning.
Photonics Research 9(12), 2332–2340 (2021)
[49] Johri, S., Zhu, E., Bacon, D., Esencan, M., Kim, J., Muir, M., Murgai, N.,
Nguyen, J., Pisenti, N., Schouela, A., et al.: Generative quantum learn-
ing of joint probability distribution functions. Bulletin of the American
Physical Society (2022)
Preprint of https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10472-024-09940-y
Near-Term Advances in Quantum Natural Language Processing
27
[50] Coecke, B., de Felice, G., Meichanetzidis, K., Toumi, A.: Quantum
Natural Language Processing: “We did it! On an actual quantum com-
puter!”. https://medium.com/cambridge-quantum-computing/quantum-
natural-language-processing-748d6f27b31d (2020)
[51] Partee, B.H.: Montague Grammar. Academic Press, Inc., Cambridge
(1976)
[52] Lewis, D.: General semantics. In: Montague Grammar, pp. 1–50. Aca-
demic Press, Inc., Cambridge (1976)
[53] Wiebe, N., Bocharov, A., Smolensky, P., Troyer, M., Svore, K.M.:
Quantum language processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.05162 (2019)
[54] Palangi, H., Huang, Q., Smolensky, P., He, X., Deng, L.: Grammatically-
interpretable learned representations in deep NLP models. In: Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems Workshop (2017)
[55] McCoy, R.T., Linzen, T., Dunbar, E., Smolensky, P.: Tensor product de-
composition networks: Uncovering representations of structure learned
by neural networks. Proceedings of the Society for Computation in
Linguistics 3(1), 474–475 (2020)
[56] Floridi, L., Chiriatti, M.: Gpt-3: Its nature, scope, limits, and conse-
quences. Minds and Machines 30(4), 681–694 (2020)
[57] Sobieszek, A., Price, T.: Playing games with ais: The limits of gpt-3 and
similar large language models. Minds and Machines 32(2), 341–364 (2022)
