Title: Integrating Natural Language Processing Techniques of Text Mining Into Financial System: Applications and Limitations
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2412.20438v1
--------------------------------------------------

 
 
International Journal on 
 
“Technical and Physical Problems of Engineering” 
 
(IJTPE) 
 
Published by International Organization of IOTPE 
ISSN 2077-3528 
 
IJTPE Journal 
 
www.iotpe.com 
 
ijtpe@iotpe.com 
December 2024 
Issue 61                           Volume 16                        Number 4 
Pages 1-6 
 
Registered: 240529 
Article Info: 1891 
Accepted: 241118 
Reserved: 240907 
 
Available: 241231 
1 
INTEGRATING NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING TECHNIQUES OF 
TEXT MINING INTO FINANCIAL SYSTEM: APPLICATIONS AND 
LIMITATIONS 
 
D. Millo     B. Vika     N. Baci 
 
Statistics and Applied Informatics Department, Faculty of Economy, University of Tirana, Tirana, Albania 
denisa.millo@unitir.edu.al, blerina.vika@unitir.edu.al, nevila.baci@unitir.edu.al 
 
 
Abstract- The financial sector, a pivotal force in economic 
development, 
increasingly 
uses 
the 
intelligent 
technologies such as natural language processing to 
enhance data processing and insight extraction. This 
research paper through a review process of the time span 
of 2018-2023 explores the use of text mining as natural 
language processing techniques in various components of 
the financial system including asset pricing, corporate 
finance, derivatives, risk management, and public finance 
and highlights the need to address the specific problems in 
the discussion section.  We notice that most of the research 
materials combined probabilistic with vector-space 
models, and text-data with numerical ones. The most used 
technique regarding information processing is the 
information classification technique and the most used 
algorithms include the long-short term memory and 
bidirectional encoder models. The research noticed that 
new specific algorithms are developed and the focus of the 
financial system is mainly on asset pricing component. The 
research also proposes a path from engineering perspective 
for researchers who need to analyze financial text. The 
challenges regarding text mining perspective such as data 
quality, context-adaption and model interpretability need 
to be solved so to integrate advanced natural language 
processing models and techniques in enhancing financial 
analysis and prediction. 
 
Keywords: Financial System (FS), Natural Language 
Processing (NLP), Software and Text Engineering, 
Probabilistic, Vector-Space, Models, Techniques, Text-
Data, Financial Analysis. 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The financial sector is an important and a driving force 
of the worldwide economic development and it is having a 
rapid development due to the use of the latest intelligent 
technologies such as Natural Language Processing (NLP). 
The period of 2018-2023 covered in this research paper 
implies an important one, where NLPs have seen an 
exponential growth with the Large Language Models 
(LLMs) projects like ChatGPTs, Gemini, Bard and Bing 
exploration and models deeper specifications.  
For the scope of this research paper, we refer to the Finance 
field as the Financial System (FS) as it encompasses 
various components such as; public finance, international 
finance, corporate finance, derivatives, risk management, 
portfolio theory, asset pricing (AP), and financial 
economics [1].  
A detailed view of the search methods and machine 
learning tools in language processing, including classifiers 
and sequence models, techniques like decision trees (DT), 
support vector machines (SVM), and cross-validation is 
essential for evaluating NLP systems [2]. We will give 
examples of the use of NLP techniques in the next sections 
in this research, enhancing their understanding by 
delivering the research questions as following:  
Q1: What are the NLP models and techniques used for 
analyzing FS components in the time span of 2018-2023? 
Q2: What are the challenges and limitations in the 
applications of NLP to the FS regarding text-mining 
applications on the engineering perspective of data 
processing? 
 
2. THE APPLICATIONS OF NLP MODELS AND 
TECHNIQUES IN FINANCIAL SYSTEM 
Going deeper into example cases, we discover an 
ongoing trend that is growing fast. To analyze the subject-
matter we go through a time span of 2018-2023. 
 
2.1. Materials and Methods  
The path used to answer to Q1 is built on the 
methodology of filtering in the Google Scholar search 
engine.  There are included citations and patents with the 
query as follows: (NLP OR “Natural Language 
Processing”) AND “*FS element mentioned in chapter 
1”AND text mining AND forecasting AND prediction 
AND models. To give answer to our research questions we 
explored around 250 scientific materials, from which 35 of 
them books and the rest papers and articles. After selecting 
the scientific materials filtered, we reached to a total of 
around one hundred and nine (109) papers, articles, books 
and similar. For the scope of this research paper, we 
classified and analyzed around sixty (60) study materials. 
 
International Journal on “Technical and Physical Problems of Engineering” (IJTPE), Iss. 61, Vol. 16, No. 4, Dec. 2024 
2 
2.2. Results 
Figure 1 shows that the focus of most studies relies on 
AP, (especially on stock prediction), while having the 
corporate finances as the second most studied component 
of FS. 
 
 
Figure 1. Histogram of scientific materials extracted and classified 
according to Financial System Components for the years 2018-2023 
 
From the actual database of scientific materials, we 
also noticed that most of NLP models were a combination 
of probabilistic and vector-based ones. Whereas, regarding 
the classification on NLP techniques evidenced, we can 
refer to Figure 2. As we can see, the information 
classification techniques and the combination of the all 
three ones, has most of the works used during the time span 
study. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Histogram of scientific materials extracted and classified 
according to information processing NLP techniques, years 2018-2023, 
 
We noticed a growing number of articles which 
combined both probabilistic with VSM, and also combined 
text-data with numerical ones. A systematic and critical 
review of deep learning in financial economics is provided 
by using hybrid variants of methods [3]. The work [4] 
forecasted economic trends using sentiment analysis, 
AutoRegressive with eXogenous inputs (ARX) and Lasso 
on data from articles from six newspapers showing varying 
levels of accuracy. The Numeric Hierarchical Transformer 
Model (NumHTML) for financial forecasting using 
earning conference calls data was introduced in the year of 
2022 [5]. As these studies remain near the financial 
economics area, they also might have infusions of other 
topics, showing at least, a low interest on the matter.  
A textual analysis of China's financial markets is 
conducted with sentiment analysis [6]. The work of [30] 
used 
transformers 
for 
sentiment 
analysis 
on 
Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG) news. 
Datasets on the international finance FS component are of 
various data sources, as they help to create an international 
point of view on the topic. 
As for the portfolio theory application of NLPs, we can 
elaborate works that underpin the interconnection of the 
fields of FS and NLP. An important work [7] applies 
financial Bidirectional Encoder Representations from 
Transformers (FinBERT), Monte Carlo, and Black and 
Litterman model for portfolio optimization on Milano 
Finanza data. Whereas, [28] investigated the importance of 
financial sentiment in portfolio management using RF, 
Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP), and LSTM on data from 
Quandl and StockFluence APIs. Here we have to mention 
even the use of datasets from other sectors for training 
models, which can be sub-optimal, highlighting the need 
for more sector-specific annotated datasets [8,9,10]. The 
diverse number of techniques used, show of a versatile 
sub-field, where data and information are not absent, but 
needs more attention in the future, for taking proper 
financial decisions and predictions to the investors. 
The public finance component is elaborated in some 
works below though, there is a need to be further 
investigated. Work of [11] applied machine learning to 
budget speech statements. The article of [12] examined tax 
compliance 
behavior 
using 
Bidirectional 
Encoder 
Representations from Transformers (BERT) on survey 
responses. A bank financial risk prediction model is 
developed using big data from commercial banks, 
employing Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection 
Operator (Lasso) and SVM [29]. The SVM techniques [13] 
and hybrid deep learning models [14] show their global use 
in different fields, we can mention the healthcare one. 
Whereas the finance field is evolving, the need for 
intelligent methods is rising, as it is a crucial point when 
taking financial decisions, and is applied thoroughly in 
every other component presented above. 
Through our work we saw that the stock predictions 
remain the most studied topic, in the AP component of the 
FS, and that the AP component of the FS is the most 
studied topic compared to other components. There might 
be different reasons, but what we can deduce is that there 
are more open databases that allow the latter topic to be 
studied and also, it is a very fast needed information. An 
investor has to have an accurate and timely information on 
stocks or in AP, in order to take proper decision. There is 
evidenced a variety of datasets utilized, including financial 
news databases. stock returns data, corporate financial 
reports (e.g., 10-K filings), and social media data (e.g., 
StockTwits, Weibo).  
The most used common specific techniques, as 
presented in Figure 3. include BERT types, Long Short-
Term Memory (LSTM) and Logistic Regression (LR), 
whereas Lasso, Bag of Words (Bow), NEUS, K-Nearest 
Neighbors (KNN), Deep Neural Network (DNN), Deep 
Learning (DL), Generalized Autoregressive Conditional 
Heteroskedasticity 
(GARCH) 
and 
Autoregressive 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
No.of NLP scientific materials
Information
Retreaval
Information
Classification
Information
Extraction
Combination
0
10
20
30
40
No.of scientific materials according to information proccessing NLP
techniques
International Journal on “Technical and Physical Problems of Engineering” (IJTPE), Iss. 61, Vol. 16, No. 4, Dec. 2024 
3 
Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) are to be 
mentioned. Other types of techniques, which are a 
combination of above and new techniques proposed e.g. 
NumHTML, AdaBoost, compose a share of 47 % in 
overall scientific material of 60 papers used for the purpose 
of this section. The frequently used evaluation parameters 
were Accuracy, F1-score, Precision, Recall, and R2. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Histogram of scientific materials extracted and classified 
according to specific NLP techniques, years 2018-2023, Source: 
Authors 
 
3. DISCUSSION 
This research highlighted several limitations on the text 
engineering perspective in the application of NLP to FSs 
in order to answer to Q2. It leverages the past works’ [15] 
limitations and challenges (restriction to confidential data, 
absence of well-defined financial lexicon lists, lack of 
dynamic texts analysis models, need of club inter-domain 
results, highly un-structured and redundant data, sarcasm 
and vernacular language) are not fully appointed yet. Let 
us point out the evolution of the challenges from the time 
of the study’s [15] analysis to the end of the year 2023. A 
significant issue is the data shift between training corpora 
and real estate headlines, leading to poor performance in 
event extraction [16]. Traditional models like the Fama-
French 5-factor model (FF5) face overfitting problems, 
highlighting superiority of newer models like Generalized 
News-based Sentiment Analysis (GNUS) [17].   
Whereas even the latter like deep learning models 
encounter 
challenges 
with 
Non-Independent 
and 
Identically Distributed (non-IID) samples, time-varying 
distributions, and low signal-to-noise ratios, complicating 
stock return predictions such as in [18]. Refs. [17, 18] 
indicate a partially addressed issue of Gupta, et al. [15] 
challenges to the lack of dynamic text analysis models. 
There is a limited interpretability of advanced models like 
BERT and Word2Vec that restricts their application, 
particularly when not trained on domain-specific texts [19, 
20]. The sentiment analysis models often fail to capture 
financial context adequately due to reliance on general 
lexicons [21], a challenge not yet solved since the research 
paper [15] reference on absence of well-defined financial 
lexicon lists.  
Further, data quality and causality issues persist, 
making it difficult to establish reliable links between 
sentiment indicators and outcomes [22]. The overreliance 
on numerical data in models overlooks qualitative factors 
like managerial experience, which could enhance 
predictions [23]. The matter of scalability and adaptability 
of models to real-time data remain challenging, 
particularly in evolving financial markets [24]. Even the 
expert annotations based on prior beliefs can be incorrect, 
emphasizing need for context-based annotations [25]. The 
infancy of text analysis in finance requires comprehensive 
research to fully understand its potential [4].  
Additionally, the use of datasets from other sectors for 
training models can be sub-optimal, highlighting the need 
for more sector-specific annotated datasets [10]. Future 
research should take into consideration market frictions 
and transaction costs in trading strategies [26]. While some 
[15] challenges are mentioned above, the other ones such 
restriction to confidential data, need of club inter-domain 
results, highly un-structured and redundant data, sarcasm 
and vernacular language and the new ones we presented 
above resonate a need to address them as quickly as 
possible. Lastly, we can state that advanced NLP models 
show promise but require further investigation to address 
their current limitations and optimize their use in financial 
predictions [27].  
 
Table 1. Challenges and Limitations in the application of NLP to FS, the 
x symbol means that the problem persists and needs to be addressed 
 
Challenges and Limitations in the application of 
NLP to FSs regarding text mining engineering 
perspective 
Gupta, et al. 
[15] 
This 
research 
restriction to confidential data 
x 
solved 
absence of well-defined financial 
lexicon lists 
x 
x 
lack of dynamic texts analysis models 
x 
partially 
resolved 
need of club inter-domain results 
x 
x 
highly un-structured and redundant data 
x 
x 
sarcasm and vernacular language 
x 
x 
data shift between training corpora 
and real-world corpora 
 
x 
overfitting problems of traditional model 
 
x 
limited interpretability of advanced models 
 
x 
time-varying distributions 
 
x 
low signal-to-noise ratios 
 
x 
fail to capture the financial context adequately 
due to reliance on general lexicons 
 
x 
data quality and causality issues 
 
x 
matter of scalability and adaptability of models 
to real-time data 
 
x 
incorrect expert annotations based on prior 
beliefs 
 
x 
 
As per conclusion of this chapter, we propose a path to 
be followed when having to do research on the finance 
field combined with NLP models and techniques of text 
mining. Figures 4 and 5 explain visually the steps as per 
follows. 
After determining the where we will delve in while 
following the Figure 4, we follow the text analyzing steps 
mentioned in Jurafsky and Martin 2020 [2]. Figure 5 
explains in detail the broader panorama of analyzing 
financial text in the language context and the specific 
limitations encountered from our work in the research 
papers analyzed. In the right side of each step, there are 
mentioned the most encountered limitations. These 
limitations should be taken into account when dealing with 
problems of the same field as this research paper handles. 
2%
10%
3%
2%
2%
2%
2%
5%
2%
10%
12%
3%
47%
International Journal on “Technical and Physical Problems of Engineering” (IJTPE), Iss. 61, Vol. 16, No. 4, Dec. 2024 
4 
Financial texts remain difficult to understand as they 
have a specific domain language. The models and 
limitations discussed in this research paper tend to make 
easier the first stage of a research, the state of the art. After 
choosing the FS component field, NLP model and 
techniques, the language analysis and having into account 
the proper limitations as expressed in Figure 5, the data 
preparation should begin.  
 
 
Figure 4. The first step is to determine the FS component to work on 
with and the NLP technique regarding information processing and 
model algorithms. In the left side FS components, in the right side the 
most used NLP techniques for each component. In the bottom the most 
probable data source. “Other” and “Combination” have the same 
meaning as mentioned in Figures 1 and 2. In this Figure there are 
mentioned the most used NLP techniques and models 
 
4. CONCLUSIONS 
Despite the limitations, NLP holds substantial promise for 
enhancing the FS. Their mixed applications can 
significantly improve the accuracy of predictions, such as 
stock prices and asset returns, by taking large amounts of 
textual data from news articles, social media, and financial 
reports. Advanced models like BERT and LSTM, and their 
modified 
models, 
have 
demonstrated 
superior 
performance in capturing the nuances of financial 
language and predicting market movements. Integrating 
deep learning techniques into financial models not only 
enhances prediction accuracy but also helps uncover 
underlying economic mechanisms, offering deeper 
empirical insights into AP. Furthermore, NLP can 
facilitate better sentiment analysis, crucial for gauging 
market sentiment and making informed investment 
decisions. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Second step is to determine the problem on language terms 
and in which phase of language analysis it will go on to. For each 
double headed sub diagram, there is the step analysis on top and 
limitations in the bottom. Source: Martin and Jura sky (2020) with the 
limitations from the authors 
 
Advancements in transfer learning and domain 
adaptation are promising for addressing data shift issues, 
thereby improving model robustness and generalization. 
As the field progresses, developing more interpretable AI 
models will enhance transparency and trust, making NLP 
an indispensable tool for financial analysts and 
researchers.  
The FS components of AP and corporate finance 
remain amongst most elaborated with NLP techniques, 
while the other components have a small number of 
studies. Amongst NLP models, the most used remain the 
probabilistic and VSM models, whereas the most used 
techniques remain the information classification and 
hybrid techniques. Overall, while advanced NLP and deep 
learning models show great promise for financial 
Information Classification, LSTM
Asset Pricing
• S&P, Bloomberg, Dow Jones etc.
Combination, Other
Corporate 
finance
• 10-K and 10-Q reports, etc.
Combination, Other
Derivatives
• Thomson Reuters etc.
Combination, Other
Risk 
Managment
• Industries annual reports etc.
Information Classification, Other
International 
Finance
• News articles, International Banks data etc.
Information Classification, Other
Portfolio Theory
• Wall Street, Dow Jones etc.
Information Classification, Other
Financial 
Economics
• World Bank, Yahoo Finance etc.
Information Retrieval, BERTs
Public Finance
• Budget speeches etc.
Semantic Analysis, Meaning of words and sentences
limited interpretability of advanced models, time-varying 
distributions, low signal-to-noise ratios
Syntactic Analysis,Ogranization of the words into sentences 
lack of dynamic texts analysis models
Lexical Analysis, Structure and Meaning of the words
absence of well-defined financial lexicon lists, fail to capture the 
financial context adequately due to reliance on general lexicons 
Return to the any previous stage, if the following is not 
accomplished, otherwise go to the model results.
Pragmatic Analysis, Understanding/interpreting language in 
context
sarcasm and vernacular language, incorrect expert annotations
based on prior beliefs, matter of scalability and adaptability of
models to real-time data, data quality and causality issues,
overfitting
problems
of
traditional
model,
restriction
to
confidential data
Discourse Analysis, Meaning of Sentences in Documents
data shift between training corpora and real-world corpora, need of 
club inter-domain results, highly un-structured and redundant data
International Journal on “Technical and Physical Problems of Engineering” (IJTPE), Iss. 61, Vol. 16, No. 4, Dec. 2024 
5 
applications, ongoing research must address these 
limitations to enhance their accuracy, interpretability, and 
applicability. Future research should focus on refining 
models to account for local market dynamics, improving 
data quality and annotation methods, and developing more 
sophisticated algorithms capable of handling the complex 
and dynamic nature of financial data.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The author(s) appreciate the assistance of the finance 
student Savina Shtaka for supporting in material search. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Hens, M.O. Rieger, “Financial Economics”, 
Springer Texts in Business and Economics, Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 5-6, Heidelberg, Berlin, Germany, 
2016. 
[2] J. Martin, D. Jurafsky, “Speech and Language 
Processing 
an 
Introduction 
to 
Natural 
Language 
Processing”, Computational Linguistics, and Speech 
Recognition, 3rd ed., pp. 3-263, 2020.  
[3] Y. Zheng, Z. Xu, A. Xiao, “Deep Learning in 
Economics: A Systematic and Critical Review”, Arif. 
Intell. Rev., Vol. 56, pp. 9497-9539, September 2023. 
[4] L. Barbaglia, S. Consoli, S. Manzan, “Forecasting with 
Economic News”, Journal of Business and Economic 
Statistics, Vol. 41, pp. 708-719, July 2023. 
[5] L. Yang, J. Li, R. Dong, Y. Zhang, B. Smyth, 
“NumHTML: NumericOriented Hierarchical Transformer 
Model for Multi-Task Financial Forecasting”, AAAI, Vol. 
36, pp. 11604-11612, June 2022. 
[6] A. Huang, W. Wu, T. Yu, “Textual Analysis for 
China’s 
Financial 
Markets: 
a 
Review 
and 
Discussion”, China Finance Review International, Vol. 10, 
No. 1, pp. 1-15, 2020.  
[7] F. Colasanto, L. Grilli, D. Santoro, G. Villani, “BERT’s 
Sentiment Score for Portfolio Optimization: A Fine-Tuned 
View in Black and Litterman Model”, Neural Comput. and 
Applic., Vol. 34, pp. 17507-17521, October 2022. 
[8] M. Wujec, “Analysis of the Financial Information 
Contained in the Texts of Current Reports: A Deep 
Learning Approach”, JRFM, Vol. 14, p. 582, December 
2021. 
[9] C. Chen, S. Xiao, B. Zhao, “Machine Learning Meets 
the Journal of Public Budgeting and Finance: Topics and 
Trends Over 40 Years”, Public Budgeting and Finance, 
Vol. 43, pp. 3-23, December 2023. 
[10] T.I. Theodorou, A. Zamichos, M. Skoumperdis, A. 
Kougioumtzidou, K. Tsolaki, D. Papadopoulos, T. Patsios, 
G. Papanikolaou, A. Konstantinidis, A. Drosou, D. 
Tzovaras, “An AI-Enabled Stock Prediction Platform 
Combining News and Social Sensing with Financial 
Statements”, Future Internet, Vol. 13, p. 138, May 2021. 
[11] C. Vuppalapati, A. Ilapakurti, S. Vissapragada, V. 
Mamaidi, S. Kedari, R. Vuppalapati, S. Kedari, J. 
Vuppalapati, “Application of Machine Learning and 
Government Finance Statistics for Macroeconomic Signal 
Mining to Analyze Recessionary Trends and Score Policy 
Effectiveness”, IEEE International Conference on Big 
Data (Big Data), pp. 3274-3283, Orlando, FL, USA, 
December 2021. 
[12] I. Florina, C. Stefana, C. Codruta, “Is Trust a Valid 
Indicator of Tax Compliance Behavior? A Study on 
Taxpayers’ Public Perception Using Sentiment Analysis 
Tools”, A.M. Dima, M. Kelemen, (Eds.), “Digitalization 
and Big Data for Resilience and Economic Intelligence”, 
Springer Proceedings in Business and Economics. 
Springer, Cham, Switzerland, 2022. 
[13] V. Jain, B. Jha, S. Joshi, S. Miglani, A. Singal, S. 
Babbar, M. Demirci, M.C. Taplamacioglu, “Human 
Disease 
Detection 
Using 
Artificial 
Intelligence”, 
International Journal on Technical and Physical Problems 
of Engineering (IJTPE), Issue 55, Vol. 15, No. 2, pp. 125-
133, June 2023. 
[14] H.S. Rahli, N. Benamrane, “Intelligent Breast Cancer 
Screening Based on Deep Neural Networks”, International 
Journal on Technical and Physical Problems of 
Engineering (IJTPE), Issue 57, Vol. 15, No. 4, pp. 404-
409, December 2023. 
[15] A. Gupta, V. Dengre, H.A. Kheruwala, M. Shah, 
“Comprehensive Review of Text-Mining Applications in 
Finance”, Financ Innov, Vol. 6, p. 39, December 2020. 
[16] J. Huang, R. Xing, Q. Li, “Asset Pricing Via Deep 
Graph Learning to Incorporate Heterogeneous Predictors”, 
Int J. of Intelligent Sys., Vol. 37, pp. 8462-8489, 
November 2022. 
[17] L. Zhu, H. Wu, M.T. Wells, “A News-Based Machine 
Learning Model for Adaptive Asset Pricing”, Arxiv 
Preprint Arxiv:2106.07103, 2021. 
[18] C. Zhang, “Asset Pricing and Deep Learning”, 
arXiv:2209.12014, Vol. 24, [q-fin.ST], September 2022. 
[19] R. Liu, F. Mai, Z. Shan, Y. Wu, “Predicting 
Shareholder Litigation on Insider Trading from Financial 
Text: An Interpretable Deep Learning Approach”, 
Information and Management, Vol. 57, p. 103387, 
December 2020. 
[20] S. Gholizadeh, N. Zhou, “Model Explainability in 
Deep Learning Based Natural Language Processing”, 
arXiv:2106.07410 [cs], June 2021. 
[21] L. Malandri, F.Z. Xing, C. Orsenigo, C. Vercellis, E. 
Cambria, “Public Mood-Driven Asset Allocation: The 
Importance 
of 
Financial 
Sentiment 
in 
Portfolio 
Management”, Cong Compute, Vol. 10, pp. 1167-1176, 
December 2018. 
[22] C.K. Soo, “Quantifying Sentiment with News Media 
Across Local Housing Markets”, The Review of Financial 
Studies, Vol. 31, pp. 3689-3719, October 2018. 
[23] S.B. Jabeur, C. Gharib, S. Mefteh Wali, W.B. Arfi, 
“CatBoost Model and Artificial Intelligence Techniques 
for 
Corporate 
Failure 
Prediction”, 
Technological 
Forecasting and Social Change, Vol. 166, pp. 120-658, 
May 2021. 
[24] J.Z.G. Hiew, X. Huang, H. Mou, D. Li, Q. Wu, Y. Xu, 
“BERT-Based Financial Sentiment Index and LSTM-
Based Stock Return Predictability”, Arxiv:1906.09024 [q-
fin.ST], July 2022. 
[25] M. Sedinkina, N. Breitkopf, H. Schutze, “Automatic 
Domain Adaptation Outperforms Manual Domain 
Adaptation for Predicting Financial Outcomes”, The 57th 
International Journal on “Technical and Physical Problems of Engineering” (IJTPE), Iss. 61, Vol. 16, No. 4, Dec. 2024 
6 
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, pp. 346-359, 2019. 
[26] B. Fazlija, P. Harder, “Using Financial News 
Sentiment for Stock Price Direction Prediction”, 
Mathematics, Vol. 10, pp. 21-56, June 2022. 
[27] A. Zaremba, E. Demir, “ChatGPT: Unlocking the 
Future of NLP in Finance”, SSRN Journal, Modern 
Finance, 2023, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 93-98, 2023.  
[28] L. Malandri, F.Z. Xing, C. Orsenigo, C. Vercellis, E. 
Cambria, “Public Mood–Driven Asset Allocation: The 
Importance 
of 
Financial 
Sentiment 
in 
Portfolio 
Management”, Cong Compute, Vol. 10, pp. 1167-1176, 
December 2018. 
[29] H. Peng, Y. Lin, M. Wu, “Bank Financial Risk 
Prediction Model Based on Big Data”, Scientific 
Programming, Vol. 20, No. 22, pp. 1-9, February 2022. 
[30] B. Sandwidi, S. Pallitharammal Mukkolakal, 
“Transformers-Based Approach for a Sustainability Term-
Based Sentiment Analysis (STBSA)”, The Second 
Workshop on NLP for Positive Impact (NLP4PI), (Abu 
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates (Hybrid)), pp. 157-170, 
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2022. 
 
BIOGRAPHIES 
 
Name: Denisa 
Surname: Millo 
Birthday: 19.11.1990 
Birthplace: Elbasan, Albania 
Bachelor: 
Business 
Informatics, 
Department of Statistics and Applied
Informatics, 
Faculty 
of 
Economy, 
University of Tirana, Tirana, Albania, 2012 
Master: 
Operational 
Research 
in 
Management, 
Department of Statistics and Applied Informatics, Faculty 
of Economy, University of Tirana, Tirana, Albania, 2014 
Doctorate: Student, Information Systems in Economy,
Department of Statistics and Applied Informatics, Faculty 
of Economy, University of Tirana, Tirana, Albania, Since
2022 
The Last Scientific Position: Lecturer, Department of
Statistics and Applied Informatics, Faculty of Economy, 
University of Tirana, Tirana, Albania, Since 2016 
Research Interests: Natural Language Processing in 
Finance and Media 
Scientific Publications: 8 Papers, 2 Projects 
Scientific Memberships: UNINOVIS Alumni 
 
Name: Blerina 
Surname: Vika 
Birthday: 27.06.1984 
Birthplace: Tirana, Albania 
Education: Informatics, Department of 
Informatics, Faculty of Natural Sciences, 
University of Tirana, Tirana, Albania, 
2007 
Master: 
Advanced 
Informatics, 
Department 
of 
Informatics, Faculty of Natural Sciences, University of 
Tirana, Tirana, Albania, 2011 
Doctorate: Information Systems, Department of Statistics 
and Applied Informatics, Faculty of Natural Sciences, 
University of Tirana, Tirana, Albania, 2010 
The Last Scientific Position: Assoc. Prof., Department of 
Statistics and Applied Informatics, Faculty of Economy, 
University of Tirana, Tirana, Albania, 2024  
Research Interests: Artificial Intelligences Machine 
Learning, Forecasting Models 
Scientific Publications: 20 Papers, 2 Books, 4 Projects 
 
Name: Nevila 
Surname: Baci 
Birthday: 15.05.1965  
Birthplace: Tirana, Albania 
Bachelor: Economics, Department of 
Economics, 
Faculty 
of 
Economy, 
University of Tirana, Tirana, Albania,
1987 
Doctorate: 
E-government, 
Faculty 
of 
Economy, 
University of Tirana, Tirana, Albania, 2005 
The Last Scientific Position: Prof., Department of 
Statistics and Applied Informatics, Faculty of Economy, 
University of Tirana, Tirana, Albania, 2022 
Research Interests: Informatics, Information Systems, E- 
Commerce 
Scientific Publications: 25 Papers, 1 Books, 5 Projects 
Scientific Memberships: Academy of Science, Albania 
 
