Title: Utilizing Natural Language Processing for Automated Assessment of Classroom Discussion
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2306.14918v1
--------------------------------------------------

Utilizing Natural Language Processing for
Automated Assessment of Classroom Discussion⋆
Nhat Tran, Benjamin Pierce, Diane Litman, Richard Correnti, and Lindsay
Clare Matsumura
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA
{nlt26,bep51,dlitman,rcorrent,lclare}@pitt.edu
Abstract. Rigorous and interactive class discussions that support stu-
dents to engage in high-level thinking and reasoning are essential to learn-
ing and are a central component of most teaching interventions. However,
formally assessing discussion quality ‘at scale’ is expensive and infeasible
for most researchers. In this work, we experimented with various modern
natural language processing (NLP) techniques to automatically gener-
ate rubric scores for individual dimensions of classroom text discussion
quality. Specifically, we worked on a dataset of 90 classroom discussion
transcripts consisting of over 18000 turns annotated with fine-grained
Analyzing Teaching Moves (ATM) codes and focused on four Instruc-
tional Quality Assessment (IQA) rubrics. Despite the limited amount of
data, our work shows encouraging results in some of the rubrics while
suggesting that there is room for improvement in the others. We also
found that certain NLP approaches work better for certain rubrics.
Keywords: Classroom discussion · Quality assessment · NLP
1
Introduction and Background
Instructional quality has been of great interest to educational researchers for
several decades. Due to their cost, measures of instructional quality that can
be obtained at-scale remain elusive. Previous work [5] has shown that provid-
ing automated feedback on teachers’ talk moves can lead to positive instruc-
tional changes. We report here on initial attempts to apply Natural Language
Processing (NLP) methods such as pre-trained language models or sequence la-
beling with BiLSTM [4] to automatically produce rubric scores for individual
dimensions of classroom discussion quality from transcripts, building upon two
established measures that have shown high levels of reliability and validity in
prior learning research – the Instructional Quality Assessment (IQA) and the
Analyzing Teaching Moves (ATM) rubrics [2,6].
Our corpus consists of 170 videos from 31 English Language Arts classrooms
in a Texas district. 18 teachers taught fourth grade, 13 taught fifth grade, and on
average had 13 years of teaching experience. The student population was consid-
ered low income (61%), with students identifying as: Latinx (73%), Caucasian
⋆Supported by a grant from the Learning Engineering Tools Competition.
arXiv:2306.14918v1  [cs.CL]  21 Jun 2023
2
Tran et al.
Table 1. Data distribution and mean (Avg) of 4 focused IQA rubrics for Teacher
(T) and Student (S) with their relevant ATM codes. An IQA rubric’s distribution is
represented as the counts of each score (1 to 4 from left to right) (n=90 discussions).
Rubric
Relevant ATM code
Short Description
Distribution Avg
Code Label
Count
S1: T connects Ss
[51, 19, 9, 11]
1.8 Recap or Synthesize S Ideas
75
S2: T presses S
[7, 7, 9, 67]
3.6
Press
927
S3: S builds on other’s idea [65, 6, 8, 11]
1.6
Strong Link
101
S4: S support their claims
[28, 12, 8, 42]
2.7 Strong Text-based Evidence
403
Strong Explanation
286
-
Others
52687
(15%), African American (7%), multiracial (4%), and Asian or Pacific Islander
(1%). The videos were manually scored holistically, on a scale from 1 to 4, using
the IQA on 11 dimensions for both teacher and student contributions. They were
also scored using more fine-grained talk moves at the sentence level using the
ATM discourse measure. The current work focuses on only the 90 discussion
transcripts that have already been converted to text-based codes.
As summarized in column 1 of Table 1, our classifiers are trained to predict
4 of the 11 IQA rubrics containing aspirational teacher (T) and student (S) ‘talk
moves’ – T Links Student Contributions (score S1), T Presses for Information
(S2), S Link Contributions (S3), S Support Claims with Evidence (S4). Besides
the 5 ATM codes (column 4 in Table 1) related to these 4 IQA rubrics the
rest are labeled as Others. The distributions of IQA scores for each rubric and of
relevant ATM codes are summarized in columns 2 and 5 of Table 1, respectively.
We notice that the frequencies of ATM codes related to S1 and S3 are very low
(less than or approximately 1 per transcript). Below is an example excerpt with
annotated ATM codes from our data:
Teacher: [The girls get the water and the boys do the herds, right?]Others
[Where did you get that from the text?]Press
Student: [Other people, mostly women and girls who had to come fill
their own containers, many kinds of birds, all flap, twittering and cawing.
Herds of cattle had been brought to good grazing by the young boys who
looked after them.]Strong Text-Based Evidence
In this paper we present several IQA classifiers, and show that using predicted
ATM codes as features outperforms an end-to-end model. The long-term goal
of our work is to use such classifiers in a tool for automated IQA assessment so
that teachers and coaches can evaluate classroom discussion quality in real-time.
2
Methods
We train different models for IQA assessment to explore tradeoffs between scor-
ing performance, explainability, and training set. Our baseline is a neural end-
to-end model, as neural models often have high performance and do not require
Automated Assessment of Classroom Discussion
3
feature engineering. However, since the IQA score of a specific rubric can be in-
ferred from the number of times the relevant ATM codes are used (Section 1), we
also develop IQA prediction models using ATM codes as predictive fea-
tures. This in turn requires ATM models to predict the relevant 6 ATM codes.
Specifically, for each sentence, these models will predict 1 of 6 ATM code labels
in column 4 of Table 1. This is a 6-way classification task.
Hierarchical ATM Classification. We hypothesize that it would be easier
to separate Others from the 5 focal ATM codes as they have specific usages. We
perform a 2-step hierarchical classification at sentence level as follows. Step 1,
binary classification, is to classify Other versus 5 focal ATM Codes. If the code
is not Others, step 2 is to perform another 5-way classification to identify the
final label. We train separate BERT-based classifiers for each step. The input
for the classifiers is the current sentence concatenated with previous sentences
in the same turn and sentences from one previous turn. Because each ATM code
except Others can be only from one speaker, either Teacher or Student, we train
two classifiers for the 5-way classification of Step 2, one classifier used to predict
teacher codes (Recap or Synthesize S Ideas and Press) and one classifier spe-
cialized in student codes (Strong Link, Strong Text-Based Evidence and Strong
Explanation). Depending on the speaker, only one of them is called for Step 2.
ATM Sequence Labeling. A classroom discussion can be considered as
a sequence of sentences. This approach assigns a label (1 out of the 6 ATM
codes) to each sentence in a conversation. Unlike the Hierarchical Classification
approach that predicts the label of each sentence independently, in this approach,
the label of a given sentence is more dependent on the labels of nearby sentences.
We use BERT-BiLSTM-CRF as our sequence labeling model. BiLSTM-CRF has
been widely used for sequence labeling tasks [4] and BERT [3] provides a powerful
tool for sentence representation that can work well with that architecture.
Additional Techniques. During ATM classification, since Others consti-
tutes more than 90% of the total labels, we downsample the training data to
reduce the imbalance. For IQA classification, annotators tend to group consecu-
tive sentences sharing the same functionality in one turn as one ATM code (e.g.,
one Strong Texted-Based Evidence code is used for two sentences in the excerpt
in Section 1), but our prediction is done on sentence level. Merging adjacent
ATM predictions that are the same into one code in the inference phase
helps preserve this nature. Also, since the range of the IQA scores is very small
(1 to 4), translating the absolute counting of ATM codes to IQA scores (see
Section 1) can drastically shift the IQA scores due to misclassification of the
ATM codes. To alleviate this sensitivity, we build separate linear regression
models to estimate each IQA score from the counting of relevant ATM
codes, then use the nearest integers as the IQA scores.
3
Results
ATM Code Prediction results (macro average F1 scores) are shown in Ta-
ble 2. The Non-hierarchical baseline is a BERT-based 6-way classifier given the
4
Tran et al.
Table 2. ATM Codes 6-way Classification Results (F1 scores over 5-fold cross-
validation with standard deviations in parentheses).
Method
Step 1
6-way
Non-hierarchical Classification (All Data)
-
0.29 (0.04)
/w 60% downsampling
-
0.49 (0.03)
Hierarchical Classification (All Data)
0.56
0.41 (0.04)
/w 60% downsampling
0.72
0.65 (0.02)
Sequence Labeling (All Data)
-
0.45 (0.03)
/w 60% downsampling
-
0.62 (0.01)
Hierarchical with Oracle for Step 1 (All Data)
1
0.57 (0.02)
/w 60% downsampling
1
0.68 (0.04)
same input as our hierarchical approach. Both Hierarchical Classification and
Sequence Labeling outperform the Non-hierarchical baseline, whether using all
data or downsampled data for training. The numbers also show that downsam-
pling the proportion of the most popular class (Others) to 60% increases the
performance of all models1. For the 2-step Hierarchical Classification approach,
it improves the performances of both step 1 and the final 6-way classification.
Additionally, the Sequence Labeling and Hierarchical approaches perform simi-
larly. Although Sequence Labeling has a slightly higher score when all training
data is used (0.45 vs. 0.41, ρ = 0.039), it is inferior to Hierarchical Classification
with 60% downsampling (0.62 vs. 0.65, ρ = 0.046). Using a perfect Oracle model
with 100% accuracy for Step 1 (Others versus 5 ATM codes) does not lead to
a large gain in the 6-way classification results compared to our fully automated
Hierarchical approach in the downsampled version (0.68 vs 0.65). We thus use
the non-oracle models built with 60% downsampling rate for the inference of the
classroom discussion quality (IQA scores) below.
IQA Score Prediction is performed based on the models for ATM codes
prediction. The Quadratic Kappa (QK) scores for the estimations of the four
rubrics of classroom discussion quality are reported in Table 3. The baseline
for each rubric is an end-to-end Longformer model [1] which directly predicts
the IQA scores given the raw text transcripts using a linear layer on top of the
hidden representation of [CLS], ignoring the ATM codes. The results show that
all variations of Hierarchical Classification and Sequence Labeling outperform
the baselines, which emphasizes the importance of utilizing ATM codes to infer
IQA scores. Besides increasing performance, the ATM-based models also increase
model interpretability, useful for generating formative feedback in the future.
One notable observation is that using regression to estimate the IQA scores is
always better than using absolute counting. This supports our assumption that
regression will alleviate the sensitivity of miscounting and provides a smoother
transition from the number of times ATM codes appear to the actual IQA scores.
Using regression, the highest gain in QK scores for Hierarchical Classification
(0.09) and Sequence Labeling (0.07) are from S3 and S2, respectively.
1 We tried different ratios and 60% provides the best results.
Automated Assessment of Classroom Discussion
5
Table 3. IQA Scores Estimation Results in Quadratic Kappa (QK) averaged over 5-
fold cross-validation, inferred from Absolute Counting (A.Count) and Linear Regression
(Regression) after ATM prediction. Bold numbers are the best results for each rubric.
Rubric
Baseline
Hierarchical
Sequence
A.Count Regression A.Count Regression
S1: Teacher connects Students
0.34
0.43
0.54
0.50
0.55
/w merged codes
0.48
0.55
0.52
0.57
S2: Teacher presses Student
0.35
0.60
0.65
0.55
0.62
/w merged codes
0.64
0.68
0.57
0.63
S3: Student builds on each other
0.30
0.42
0.51
0.47
0.51
/w merged codes
0.49
0.54
0.50
0.53
S4: Student support their claims
0.36
0.60
0.65
0.57
0.61
/w merged codes
0.65
0.70
0.61
0.63
Fig. 1. IQA Score Estimation Results (QK) in relation to the amount of training data.
Merging consecutive same ATM codes into one also improves the perfor-
mance of IQA score estimation as expected. For the same approach, the increases
from this technique are mostly larger when absolute counting is used. The ATM
classification was on sentence level and absolute counting is more sensitive to
over-counting, so the merging technique is more effective for this method.
While Sequence Labeling yields the best S1 results, the best results for the
other rubrics come from Hierarchical Classification. Our reasoning is that for
S1, the relation to adjacent sentences plays a more important role to identify
the relevant ATM code as there should be multiple students speaking out their
ideas before the teacher can connect/synthesize them. Thus, Sequence Labeling,
which focuses more on dependencies between sentences, performs better. This
suggests that certain approaches are more suitable for certain rubrics.
Finally, Figure 1 demonstrates the performance of our best models (with re-
gression and merged codes) over training size. While the baselines do not improve
much after a certain size of training data, the lines of Hierarchical Classification
6
Tran et al.
and Sequence Labeling maintain upward trends, suggesting that these models
will continue to benefit from more data as we complete our video transcription.
Even using only 90 discussions, the QK results show that ATM -based model
reliability is already substantial for S2 and S4, and moderate for S1 and S3,
even though there were infrequent instances of relevant codes in the corpus.
4
Conclusion and Future Directions
We experimented with NLP approaches to automatically assess discussion qual-
ity using the IQA, and to deal with imbalanced ATM data and imperfect ATM
code prediction. Our results show that IQA models using either Hierarchical
Classification or Sequence Labeling to first predict ATM codes outperform base-
line end-to-end IQA models, while each of the ATM-based IQA models performs
better than the other in certain IQA rubrics. Once the full corpus is available,
we will generate a validity argument for whether automated scoring replicates
known associations in the corpus, and incorporate the demographic information
into our analyses. We will also utilize ATM codes beyond the 5 relevant to the
focused rubrics to add more context for ATM prediction. To mitigate the limited
size of even the full corpus, we will explore whether techniques such as transfer
learning that can take advantage of classroom discussion data from math [8] or
high school [7] that are now being made available to the community.
References
1. Beltagy, I., Peters, M.E., Cohan, A.: Longformer: The long-document transformer.
arXiv:2004.05150 (2020)
2. Correnti, R., Matsumura, L.C., Walsh, M., Zook-Howell, D., Bickel, D.D., Yu, B.:
Effects of online content-focused coaching on discussion quality and reading achieve-
ment: Building theory for how coaching develops teachers’ adaptive expertise. Read-
ing Research Quarterly 56(3), 519–558 (2021)
3. Devlin, J., Chang, M.W., Lee, K., Toutanova, K.: BERT: Pre-training of deep bidi-
rectional transformers for language understanding. In: Conf. of the North American
Chapter of ACL: Human Language Technologies. pp. 4171–4186. Minneapolis (2019)
4. Huang, Z., Xu, W., Yu, K.: Bidirectional LSTM-CRF models for sequence tagging.
CoRR abs/1508.01991 (2015), http://arxiv.org/abs/1508.01991
5. Jacobs, J., Scornavacco, K., Harty, C., Suresh, A., Lai, V., Sumner, T.: Promoting
rich discussions in mathematics classrooms: Using personalized, automated feedback
to support reflection and instructional change. Teaching and Teacher Education 112,
103631 (2022)
6. Matsumura, L.C., Garnier, H.E., Slater, S.C., Boston, M.D.: Toward measuring
instructional interactions “at-scale”. Educational Assessment 13(4), 267–300 (2008)
7. Olshefski, C., Lugini, L., Singh, R., Litman, D., Godley, A.: The Discussion Tracker
corpus of collaborative argumentation. In: Language Resources & Evaluation (2020)
8. Suresh, A., Jacobs, J., Clevenger, C., Lai, V., Tan, C., Martin, J.H., Sumner, T.:
Using AI to promote equitable classroom discussions: The TalkMoves application.
In: International Conf. on Artificial Intelligence in Education. pp. 344–348 (2021)
