Title: Uncertainty over Uncertainty: Investigating the Assumptions, Annotations, and Text Measurements of Economic Policy Uncertainty
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2010.04706v1
--------------------------------------------------

Uncertainty over Uncertainty: Investigating the Assumptions,
Annotations, and Text Measurements of Economic Policy Uncertainty
Katherine A. Keith∗
University of Massachusetts Amherst
kkeith@@cs.umass.edu
Christoph Teichmann
Bloomberg
cteichmann1@bloomberg.net
Brendan O’Connor
University of Massachusetts Amherst
brenocon@@cs.umass.edu
Edgar Meij
Bloomberg
emeij@bloomberg.net
Abstract
Methods and applications are inextricably
linked in science, and in particular in the do-
main of text-as-data. In this paper, we exam-
ine one such text-as-data application, an estab-
lished economic index that measures economic
policy uncertainty from keyword occurrences
in news. This index, which is shown to cor-
relate with ﬁrm investment, employment, and
excess market returns, has had substantive im-
pact in both the private sector and academia.
Yet, as we revisit and extend the original au-
thors’ annotations and text measurements we
ﬁnd interesting text-as-data methodological re-
search questions: (1) Are annotator disagree-
ments a reﬂection of ambiguity in language?
(2) Do alternative text measurements correlate
with one another and with measures of exter-
nal predictive validity? We ﬁnd for this ap-
plication (1) some annotator disagreements of
economic policy uncertainty can be attributed
to ambiguity in language, and (2) switching
measurements from keyword-matching to su-
pervised machine learning classiﬁers results in
low correlation, a concerning implication for
the validity of the index.
1
Introduction
The relatively novel research domain of text-as-
data, which uses computational methods to au-
tomatically analyze large collections of text, is a
rapidly growing subﬁeld of computational social
science with applications in political science (Grim-
mer and Stewart, 2013), sociology (Evans and
Aceves, 2016), and economics (Gentzkow et al.,
2019). In economics, textual data such as news
editorials (Tetlock, 2007), central bank communi-
cations (Lucca and Trebbi, 2009), ﬁnancial earn-
ings calls (Keith and Stent, 2019), company dis-
closures (Hoberg and Phillips, 2016), and newspa-
∗This work was done during an internship at Bloomberg.
pers (Thorsrud, 2020) have recently been used as
new, alternative data sources.
In one such economic text-as-data application,
Baker et al. (2016) aim to construct an economic
policy uncertainty (EPU) index whereby they quan-
tify the aggregate level that policy is inﬂuencing
economic uncertainty (see Table 1 for examples).
They operationalize this as the proportion of news-
paper articles that match keywords related to the
economy, policy, and uncertainty.
The index has had impact both on the private sec-
tor and academia.1 In the private sector, ﬁnancial
companies such as Bloomberg, Haver, FRED, and
Reuters carry the index and sell ﬁnancial profes-
sionals access to it. Academics show economic pol-
icy uncertainty has strong relationships with other
economic indicators: Gulen and Ion (2016) ﬁnd a
negative relationship between the index and ﬁrm-
level capital investment, and Brogaard and Detzel
(2015) ﬁnd that the index can positively forecast
excess market returns.
The EPU index of Baker et al. has substantive
impact and is a real-world demonstration of ﬁnding
economic signal in textual data. Yet, as the sub-
ﬁeld of text-as-data grows, so too does the need for
rigorous methodological analysis of how well the
chosen natural language processing methods opera-
tionalize the social science construct at hand. Thus,
in this paper we seek to re-examine Baker et al.’s
linguistic, annotation, and measurement assump-
tions. Regarding measurement, although keyword
look-ups yield high-precision results and are inter-
pretable, they can also be brittle and may suffer
from low recall. Baker et al. did not explore alter-
native text measurements based on, for example,
word embeddings or supervised machine learning
classiﬁers.
1As of October 7, 2020, Google Scholar reports Baker et al.
(2016) to have over 4400 citations.
arXiv:2010.04706v1  [cs.CL]  9 Oct 2020
No.
Example
1
Demand for new clothing is uncertain because several states may implement large hikes in their sales tax rates.
2
The outlook for the H1B visa program remains highly uncertain. As a result, some high-tech ﬁrms fear that shortages
of qualiﬁed workers will cramp their expansion plans.
3
The looming political ﬁght over whether to extend the Bush-era tax cuts makes it extremely difﬁcult to forecast federal
income tax collections in 2011.
4
Uncertainty about prospects for war in Iraq has encouraged a build-up of petroleum inventories and pushed oil prices
higher.
5
Some economists claim that uncertainties due to government industrial policy in the 1930s prolonged and deepened
the Great Depression.
6
It remains unclear whether the government will implement new incentives for small business hiring.
Table 1: Positive examples of policy-related economic uncertainty. We label spans of text as indicating policy,
economy, uncertainty, or a causal relationship. Examples were selected from hand-labeled positive examples and
the coding guide provided by Baker et al. (2016).
In exploring Baker et al.’s construction of EPU,
we identify and disentangle multiple sources of un-
certainty. First, there is the real underlying uncer-
tainty about economic outcomes due to government
policy that the index attempts to measure. Second,
there is semantic uncertainty that can be expressed
in the language of newspaper articles. Third, there
is annotator uncertainty about whether a document
should be labeled as EPU or not. Finally, there
is modeling uncertainty in which text classiﬁers
are uncertain about the decision boundary between
positive and negative classes.
In this paper, we revisit and extend Baker et al.’s
human annotation process (§3) and computational
pipeline that obtains EPU measurement from text
(§4). In doing so, we draw on concepts from quan-
titative social science’s measurement modeling,
mapping observable data to theoretical constructs,
which emphasizes the importance of validity (is it
right?) and reliability (can it be repeated?) (Lo-
evinger, 1957; Messick, 1987; Quinn et al., 2010;
Jacobs and Wallach, 2019).
Overall, this paper contributes the following:
• We examine the assumptions Baker et al. use to
operationalize economic policy uncertainty via
keyword-matching of newspaper articles. We
demonstrate that using keywords collapses some
rich linguistic phenomena such as semantic un-
certainty (§2.1).
• We also examine the causal assumptions of
Baker et al. through the lens of structural causal
models (Pearl, 2009) and argue that readers’ per-
ceptions of economic policy uncertainty may be
important to capture (§2.2).
• We conduct an annotation experiment by re-
annotating documents from Baker et al.. We ﬁnd
preliminary evidence that disagreements in anno-
tation could be attributed to inherent ambiguity
in the language that expresses EPU (§3).
• Finally, we replicate and extend Baker et al.’s
data pipeline with numerous measurement sen-
sitivity extensions: ﬁltering to US-only news,
keyword-matching versus supervised document
classiﬁers, and prevalence estimation approaches.
We demonstrate that a measure of external predic-
tive validity, i.e., correlations with a stock-market
volatility index (VIX), is particularly sensitive to
these decisions (§4).
2
Assumptions of Measuring Economic
Policy Uncertainty from News
The goal of Baker et al. (2016) is to measure the
theoretical construct of policy-related economic
uncertainty (EPU) for particular times and geo-
graphic regions. Baker et al. assume they can use
information from newspaper articles as a proxy for
EPU, an assumption we explore in great detail in
Section 2.2, and they deﬁne EPU very broadly in
their coding guidelines: “Is the article about policy-
related aspects of economic uncertainty, even if
only to a limited extent?”2 For an article to be anno-
tated as positive, there must be a stated causal link
between policy and economic consequences and
either the former or the latter must be uncertain.3
Grounds for labeling a document as a positive in-
clude “uncertainty regarding the economic effects
of policy actions” (or inactions), and “uncertainty
2http://policyuncertainty.com/media/
Coding_Guide.pdf
3“If the article discusses economic uncertainty in one part
and policy in another part but never discusses policy in con-
nection to economic uncertainty, then do not code it as about
economic policy uncertainty.”
KeyOrg
KeyExp
Economy
economic, economy
+ growth, economies, ﬁnancial, recession,
slowdown
Uncertainty
uncertain, uncertainty
+ unclear, unsure, uncertainties, turmoil, confusion,
worries
Policy
regulation, deﬁcit, legislation, congress, white house, federal reserve, the fed, regulations, regulatory,
deﬁcits, congressional, legislative, legislature
Table 2: Original keywords used in Baker et al.’s monthly United States index (KeyOrg). Expanded keywords
include all words from KeyOrg plus the ﬁve nearest neighbors from pre-trained GloVe embeddings for the economy
and uncertainty categories (KeyExp).
over who makes or will make policy decisions that
have economic consequences.” In Table 1, we pro-
vide examples of text spans that successfully en-
code EPU given these guidelines. For instance,
the ﬁrst example indicates that a government pol-
icy (increase in state sales tax) is causing uncer-
tainty in the economy (demand for new clothing).
Baker et al. operationalize this theoretical con-
struct of EPU as keyword-matching of newspaper
documents: for each document, if the document
has at least one word in each of the economy, un-
certainty, and policy keyword categories (see Ta-
ble 2 in the Appendix) then it is considered a posi-
tive document. Counts of positive documents are
summed and then normalized by the total number
of documents published by each news outlet.
2.1
Semantic Uncertainty
While the keywords Baker et al. (2016) select (“un-
certain” or “uncertainty”) are the most overt ways
to express uncertainty via language, they do not
capture the full extent of how humans express
uncertainty. For instance, Example No. 6 in Ta-
ble 1 would be counted as a negative by Baker
et al. despite indicating semantic uncertainty via
the phrase “it remains unclear.” These keyword
assumptions are a threat to content validity, “the
extent to which a measurement model captures ev-
erything we might want it to” (Jacobs and Wallach,
2019).
We look to deﬁnitions from linguistics to po-
tentially expand the operationalization of uncer-
tainty; we refer the reader to Szarvas et al. (2012)
for all subsequent deﬁnitions and quotes. In par-
ticular, uncertainty is deﬁned as a phenomenon
that represents a lack of information. With re-
spect to truth-conditional semantics, semantic un-
certainty refers to propositions “for which no truth
value can be attributed given the speaker’s men-
tal state.” Discourse-level uncertainty indicates
“the speaker intentionally omits some information
from the statement, making it vague, ambiguous,
or misleading” and in the context of Baker et al.
could result from journalists’ linguistic choices to
express ambiguity in economic policy uncertainty.
For instance, in the ﬁrst example in Table 3, the
lexical cues “suggest” and “might” indicate to the
reader that the journalist writing the article is un-
clear about the intention of Alan Greenspan. In
contrast, epistemic modality “encodes how much
certainty or evidence a speaker has for the proposi-
tion expressed by his utterance,” (e.g., “Congress-
woman X: ‘We may delay passing the tariff bill.’”)
and doxastic modality refers to the beliefs of the
speaker (“I believe that Congress will . . .”). In the
second example in Table 3, the entity “he” seems
to be uncertain about the fate of the economy be-
cause he “shakes his head in bewilderment,” which
demonstrates that uncertainty can also be conveyed
through world knowledge and inference.
Collapsing all these types of semantic uncer-
tainty to the keywords “uncertainty” and “uncer-
tain” has major implications: (a) the relationship
between the uncertainty journalists express and
what readers infer impacts the causal assumptions
(§2.2) and annotation decisions (§3) of this task,
and (b) Baker et al.’s keywords are most likely low-
recall which could affect empirical measurement
results (§4). We see fruitful future work in improv-
ing content validity and recall via automatic uncer-
tainty and modality analysis from natural language
processing, e.g. McShane et al. (2004); Ganter
and Strube (2009); Saur´ı and Pustejovsky (2009);
Farkas et al. (2010); Szarvas et al. (2012).
2.2
Causal Assumptions
Using the paradigm of structural causal models
(Pearl, 2009), we re-examine the causal assump-
tions of Baker et al.. In Figure 1, for a single time-
step,4 U∗represents the real, aggregate level of
4Baker et al. (2016) aggregate by day, month, quarter, or
year.
Example
Docid
The
stock
market
had
soared
on
Mr.
Greenspan’s suggestion that global ﬁnancial
problems posed as great a threat to the United
States as inﬂation did, suggesting that a rate
cut to stimulate the economy might be on the
horizon
1047100
But ask him whether the Mexican stock market
will rise or plunge tomorrow and he shakes
his head in bewilderment.
1043578
Table 3: Selected examples extracted from the New
York Times Annotated Corpus (NYT-AC) that convey
semantic uncertainty about the economy. Bolding is
our own. Docids are from the NYT-AC metadata.
economic policy uncertainty in the world which is
unobserved. If one could obtain a measurement of
U∗, then one could analyze the causal relationship
between U∗and other macroeconomic variables,
M. Presumably, newspaper reporting, X, is af-
fected by U∗and x = fX(u∗) where fX is a non-
parametric function that represents a causal process.
In our setting, fX represents the process of media
production: for example, the ability of journalists
to collect information from sources; or editorial
decisions on what topics will be published. The
major assumption of Baker et al. is that they can
obtain a measure of U∗via a proxy measure from
newspaper text, U, where u = fU(x). By simple
composition, u = fU(fX(u∗)). Yet, aside from
examining the political bias of media, Baker et al.
largely ignore fX and how the media production
process could inﬂuence EPU measurements.
However, an alternative causal path from U∗to
M goes through H∗, the macro-level human per-
ception of real EPU. In this case, U∗is irrelevant
as long as people are perceiving policy-related eco-
nomic uncertainty to be changing, they could po-
tentially make real economic decisions (e.g. hiring
or purchases) that could affect the greater macro-
economy, M.
It is unclear how to design a causal intervention
in which one manipulates the real EPU, do(U∗), in
order to estimate its effect on X and M. However,
one could design an ideal causal experiment to
intervene on newspaper text, do(X); one could
artiﬁcially change the level of EPU coverage in
synthetic articles, show these to participants, and
measure the resulting difference in participants’
economic decisions. If H∗to M is the causal
path of interest,5 then it is extremely important
5There is some evidence from the original authors that hu-
Figure 1: Structural causal model of the economic pol-
icy uncertainty measurements in which variables are
nodes and directed edges denote causal dependence.
Unlike Baker et al. (2016) who claim to measure U,
we posit that measuring H is important. Shaded nodes
are observed variables and unshaded nodes are latent.
to measure and model human perception of EPU,
an assumption we explore in terms of annotation
decisions in Section 3.
3
Annotator Uncertainty
Reliable human annotation is essential for both
building supervised classiﬁers and assessing the
internal validity of text-as-data methods. In order
to validate their EPU index, Baker et al. sample
documents from each month, obtain binary labels
on the documents from annotators, and then con-
struct a “human-generated” index which they report
has a 0.86 correlation with their keyword-based in-
dex (aggregated quarterly). Yet, in our analysis of
Baker et al.’s annotations (denoted below as BBD),
we ﬁnd only 16% of documents have more than
one annotator and of these, the agreement rates are
moderate: 0.80 pairwise agreement and 0.60 Krip-
pendorff’s α chance-adjusted agreement (Artstein
and Poesio, 2008). See Line 2 of Table 4 for ad-
ditional descriptive statistics of these annotations.
The original authors did not address whether this
disagreement is a result of annotator bias, error in
annotations, or true ambiguity in the text.
In contrast to the popular paradigm that one
should aim for high inner-annotator agreement
rates (Krippendorff, 2018), recent research has
shown “disagreement between annotators provides
a useful signal for phenomena such as ambiguity
in the text” (Dumitrache et al., 2018). Addition-
ally, recent research in natural language processing
man perception is important: In the EPU index released to the
public, one of three underlying components is a disagreement
of economic forecasters as a proxy for uncertainty. See http:
//policyuncertainty.com/methodology.html.
Subset
Ann.
Source
Num.
Docs
Num.
Anns.
Prop. Pos.
Anns.
Prop. Docs.
Agr.
Pairwise
Agree
Krip.-α
All
BBD
13797
16060
0.42
–
–
–
2+ Anns.
BBD
2150
4413
0.43
0.80
0.80
0.60
Sample A (Unan.)
BBD
19
41
0.29
1.00
1.00
1.00
Ours
19
96
0.29
0.37
0.68
0.21
Sample B (Non-unan.)
BBD
18
40
0.50
0.00
0.07
-0.80
Ours
18
97
0.54
0.28
0.65
0.27
Table 4: Rows 1-2: Descriptive statistics for BBD, Baker et al. (2016)’s annotated dataset, and the subset of these
documents that have more than two annotations each (2+ Anns.). Rows 3-6: Sample A with unanimous (unan.)
agreement in BBD labels and Sample B with non-unanimous (non-unan.) BBD labels. For these samples, we
gather additional annotations. Columns: Annotation (ann.) source, number of documents (num. docs), number
of annotations (num. anns.), proportion of positive annotations (prop. positive anns.), proportion of documents
for which all annotator labels are in unanimous agreement (prop. docs. agr.), pairwise agreement in labels, and
Krippendorff’s α (Krip.-α).
Sample
PXA
Total pairs
A
0.70
206
B
0.50
218
Table 5:
Pairwise cross-agreement (PXA) rates be-
tween BBD and our annotations.
(Paun et al., 2018; Pavlick and Kwiatkowski, 2019)
and computer vision (Sharmanska et al., 2016) has
leveraged annotator uncertainty to improve mod-
eling. Thus, for our setting, we ask the following
research question:
RQ1: Is there inherent ambiguity in the lan-
guage that expresses economic policy uncertainty?
If so, are annotator disagreements a reﬂection of
this ambiguity?
The following evidence lends to our hypothesis
that there is inherent ambiguity in whether docu-
ments encode EPU: (1) the original coding guide
of Baker et al. had 17 pages of “hard calls” that de-
scribe difﬁcult or ambiguous documents, (2) there
was a moderate amount of annotator disagreement
in BBD (Table 4), (3) we qualitatively analyze ex-
amples with disagreement and reason about what
makes the inferences of these documents difﬁcult
(§3.2, and Tables 11 and 10 in the Appendix), and
(4) we run an experiment in which we gather ad-
ditional annotations and show that our annotations
have more disagreement with documents that have
non-unanimous labels in BBD (§3.1).
3.1
Our annotation experiment
The ideal assessment of inherent annotator uncer-
tainty would be to gather a large number of anno-
tations for many documents and then analyze the
posterior distribution over labels.6 We perform a
similar, small-scale experiment in which we recruit
10 annotators, a mix of professional analysts and
PhD students, who annotate 37 documents for a
total of 193 annotations. 7 We sampled documents
from the pool of BBD documents that had more
than one annotator and the BBD labels were unani-
mous (Sample A) and non-unanimous (Sample B).
We re-annotated these samples in order to provide
insight into the nature of these unanimous and non-
unanimous labels. See Figure 4 in the Appendix
for our full annotation instructions.
Pairwise cross-agreement. In order to quan-
titatively compare two annotation rounds (ours
vs. Baker et al.’s), we provide a new metric, pair-
wise cross-agreement (PXA). Formally, for each
document of interest, d ∈D, let the Ad and Bd be
the set of annotations on that document from each
of the two rounds respectively. Let Pd be the set
of all pairs, (a ∈Ad, b ∈Bd) from combining one
annotation from each of the two rounds. Then,
PXA =
∑d∈D ∑(a,b)∈Pd 1(a = b)
∑d∈D ∣Pd∣
.
(1)
Results. The results of our experiment (Tables 4
and 5) provide evidence supporting our hypothe-
sis that there is inherent ambiguity in documents
about EPU that contributes to annotator disagree-
ment. In Table 5, PXA is higher in Sample A
(0.70), in which BBD annotators had unanimous
6For instance, Pavlick and Kwiatkowski (2019) analyze
disagreement in natural language inference by gathering 50
annotations per document and ﬁnd the label distributions are
often bi-modal, indicating meaningful disagreement.
7We originally sampled 40 documents but after annotation
had to discard some that were duplicates or had errors from
HTML extraction.
agreement, compared to Sample B (0.50) in which
BBD annotators had non-unanimous labels. Since
our annotations agreed with Sample A more, this
could indicate these documents inherently have
more agreement. The pairwise agreement between
our annotations on Sample A and B are roughly
the same (Table 4) but the proportion of documents
that had unanimous agreement among our ﬁve an-
notators per document was slightly more in Sample
A versus Sample B (0.37 vs. 0.28). Limitations
of our experiment include that our sample size is
relatively small and our annotation instructions are
different and signiﬁcantly shorter than Baker et al..
3.2
Qualitative Document Analysis
Our qualitative analysis suggests that readers’ per-
ceptions of EPU differ meaningfully and it is difﬁ-
cult to measure EPU with a simple document-level
binary label. In Tables 10 and 11 in the Appendix,
we present documents with the highest levels of
agreement from Sample A and disagreement from
Sample B. Annotators are likely to disagree on the
label of the document when need real world knowl-
edge to infer whether a policy is contributing to
economic uncertainty. For instance, in Table 11 Ex-
ample 1, the reader has to infer that the author of an
op-ed would only write an op-ed about a policy if
it was uncertain, but the uncertainty is never explic-
itly stated in text. In other instances, the causal link
between policy and economic uncertainty is un-
clear. In Table 11 Example 4, economic downturn
is mentioned as well as turnover in the administra-
tion but these are never explicitly linked; yet, some
annotators may have read “questions about what
lies ahead” as uncertainty that also encompasses
economic uncertainty. Although there has been a
rise of common sense reasoning research in natu-
ral language processing (e.g.
Bhagavatula et al.
(2020); Huang et al. (2019); Sap et al. (2019)), we
suspect current state-of-the-art NLP systems would
be unable to accurately resolve the inferences stated
above. Furthermore, if there is inherent ambiguity
in the language that expresses EPU, and, as we
argue in Section 2.2, human perception is impor-
tant, then we may desire to build models that can
identify ambiguous documents and account for the
uncertainty from ambiguity of language into mea-
surement predictions, e.g. Paun et al. (2018). We
leave this for future work.
Split
Model
Prec.
Recall
F1
Acc.
Train
KeyOrg
0.63
0.67
0.65
0.65
LogReg-BOW
0.86
0.90
0.88
0.88
Test
KeyOrg
0.61
0.69
0.64
0.70
LogReg-BOW
0.69
0.72
0.71
0.76
Table 6: Document-level classiﬁcation statistics. Train-
ing is BBD documents 1985-2007 (N=1844) with an-
notations from a single annotator and testing is all BBD
annotated documents 2007-2012 (N=687). For testing,
the majority class is used and ties are randomly broken.
4
Measurement
For text-as-data applications, substantive results
are contingent on how researchers operationalize
measurement of the (latent) theoretical construct
of interest via observed text data. Using Baker
et al.’s original causal assumptions (Section 2.2),
we formally deﬁne the measurement of interest as:
U = g(X),
(2)
where g is the measurement function that maps
text, X, to economic policy uncertainty, U.8 For
text-as-data practitioners, we emphasize that there
is a “garden of forking paths” (Gelman and Lo-
ken, 2014) of how g can be operationalized, for in-
stance, in the representation of text (bag-of-words
vs. embeddings), document classiﬁcation function
(deterministic keyword matching vs. supervised
machine learning classiﬁers), and ways of aggre-
gating individual document predictions (mean of
predictions vs. prevalence-aware aggregation).
RQ2: What happens when we change g to
equally or more valid measurement functions? In
particular, we are interested in sensitivity: for two
measurements, g1 and g2, does U1 correlate well
with U2; and external predictive validity: for each
measurement, gi, does Ui correlate well with the
VIX, a stock-market volatility index based on S&P
500 options prices?
Baker et al. also use the VIX as a measure of
external validity, and like Baker et al. we note that
the VIX is a good proxy for economic uncertainty,
but does not necessarily capture policy uncertainty.
As Baker et al. mention, “differences in the topical
scope between the VIX and the EPU index are an
important source of distinct variation in the two
measures.” In the future, we could compare our
8Egami et al. (2018) call this g function the codebook
function and describe how it can generically map text to any
lower-dimensional representation.
Figure 2: EPU Index, prevalence of documents exhibiting economic policy
uncertainty, at inference time on the NYT-AC for all keyword methods (top)
and document classiﬁer methods (bottom) as well as the VIX. Note, for the
bottom ﬁgure, the scale of the y-axis differs for CC versus PCC.
Figure 3: Pearson correlation be-
tween all text measurement mod-
els and the VIX.
measures to the other two external validity mea-
sures of Baker et al.: mentions of uncertain in
the Federal Reserve’s Beige Books and large daily
moves in the S&P stock index.
Data and pre-processing. Although Baker et al.
use 10 newspapers to construct their US-based in-
dex, we instead use the New York Times Annotated
Corpus (NYT-AC) (Sandhaus, 2008) because the
text data is cleaned, easily accessible, and results
on the corpus are reproducible. This collection
includes over 1.8 million articles written and pub-
lished by the New York Times between January
1, 1987 and June 19, 2007. Baker et al. assume
that using newspapers based in the United States
is sufﬁcient to ﬁnd a signal of US-based EPU. To
test this assumption, we apply a simple heuristic
to the dateline of NYT-AC articles and remove arti-
cles that mention non-US cities. However, we ﬁnd
relatively little variation in results via this heuristic
(see Appendix, Figure 7).
4.1
Keyword matching
Matching keyword lists, also known as lexicons or
dictionaries, is a straightforward method to retrieve
and/or classify documents of interest, and has the
advantage of being interpretable. However, relying
on a small set of keywords can create issues with
recall and generalization. On NYT-AC, we apply
the original keyword matching method of Baker
et al. (2016) who label a document as positive if it
matches any of 2 economy keywords, AND any of
2 uncertainty keywords, AND any of 13 policy key-
words, (KeyOrg). We also compare a method with
the same economy and uncertainty matching cri-
teria without policy keyword matching (KeyEU);
and a method for which we expand the economic
and uncertainty keywords via word embeddings
(KeyExp). See Table 2 in the Appendix for the full
list of keywords.
KeyExp. Although Baker et al. use human au-
ditors to ﬁnd policy keywords that minimize the
false positive and false negative rates, they do not
expand or optimize for economy or uncertainty
keywords. Thus, we expand these keyword lists
via GloVe word embeddings9 (Pennington et al.,
2014), and ﬁnd the ﬁve nearest neighbors via co-
sine distance.10 This is a simple keyword expan-
sion technique. In future work, one could look to
the literature on lexicon induction to improve creat-
ing lexicons that represent the semantic concepts
of interest (Taboada et al., 2011; Pryzant et al.,
2018; Hamilton et al., 2016; Rao and Ravichan-
dran, 2009). Alternatively, one could also create a
probabilistic classiﬁer over pre-selected lexicons to
soften the predictions, or use other uncertainty lex-
icons or even automatic uncertainty cue detectors.
4.2
Document classiﬁers
Probabilistic supervised machine learning classi-
ﬁers are optimized to minimize the training loss
9We used the 200-dimensional, 6B token corpus from
Wikipedia and Common Crawl http://nlp.stanford.
edu/data/glove.6B.zip
10We manually remove clear obvious negative keywords:
policy from the economic keyword bank and prospects and
remain from the uncertainty keyword banks.
between the predicted and true classes, and typ-
ically have better precision and recall trade-offs
compared to keyword matching methods. We use
1844 documents and labels from BBD from 1985-
2007 as training data and 687 documents from
2007-2012 as a held-out test set. We train a sim-
ple logistic regression classiﬁer using sklearn11
(Pedregosa et al., 2011) with a bag-of-words repre-
sentation of text (LogReg-BOW). We tokenize and
prune the vocabulary to retain words that appear
in at least 5 documents, resulting in a vocabulary
size of 15,968. We tune the L2-penalty via ﬁve-
fold cross-validation. We also try alternative (non-
BOW) text representations but these did not result
in improved performance (Appendix, § D). Note
that the labeled documents in BBD are a biased
sample as the authors select documents to annotate
that match the economy and uncertainty keyword
banks and do not select documents at random.
4.3
Prevalence estimation
Measuring economic policy uncertainty is an in-
stance of prevalence estimation, the task of esti-
mating the proportion of items in each given class.
Previous work has shown that simple aggregation
methods over individual class labels can be biased
if there is a shift in the distribution from train-
ing to testing or if the task is difﬁcult (Keith and
O’Connor, 2018). We compare aggregating via
classify and count (CC), taking the mean over bi-
nary labels, and probabilistic classify and count
(PCC), taking the mean over classiﬁers’ inferred
probabilities. See the Appendix §D.3 for additional
prevalence estimation experiments.
4.4
Results
Addressing RQ2, our experimental results show
that changes in measurement can result in substan-
tial differences in the corresponding index. Ta-
ble 6 presents individual classiﬁcation results on
the training and test sets of BBD, and Figures 2
and 3 show inference of the models on NYT-AC. In
Figure 2, we note that the overall prevalences are
substantially different: KeyExp has higher preva-
lence than KeyOrg as expected with more keywords
but the supervised methods infer prevalences near
0.2 (CC) and 0.4 (PCC) which indicates they may
be biased towards the training prevalence. LogReg-
BOW achieves both better individual classiﬁcation
predictive performance and combined with a prob-
abilistic classify and count (PCC) prevalence esti-
11Version 0.22.1 https://scikit-learn.org/
Pearson’s r
KeyOrg-10 vs. KeyOrg-NYT
0.68
KeyOrg-10 vs. VIX
0.57
KeyOrg-NYT vs. VIX
0.15
Table 7: We use the ofﬁcial EPU index from Baker et al.
which applies keyword-matching (KeyOrg) on newspa-
pers from 10 major outlets (10). For the years 1990-
2006, we correlate this index with the same keyword-
matching method on only the New York Times Anno-
tated Corpus (NYT) and with the VIX.
mation method achieves better correlation with the
VIX (0.26 vs. KeyOrg’s 0.15). The better predic-
tive performance and correlation with VIX suggests
PCC-LogReg-BOW represents a reasonable mea-
surement of economic policy uncertainty. Given
this, the low correlation between PCC-LogReg-
BOW and KeyOrg (0.38) raises concerning ques-
tions about KeyOrg’s validity.
4.5
Limitations
We use the NYT-AC as a “sandbox” for our experi-
ments because of proprietary restrictions that limit
us from acquiring the full text of all 10 news outlets
used by Baker et al. To understand the limitations
of using only a single news outlet, we compare the
“ofﬁcial” aggregated index of Baker et al.12 with
KeyOrg applied to only the NYT-AC. Table 7 shows
a 0.68 correlation between the ofﬁcial EPU in-
dex (KeyOrg-10) and the same keyword-matching
method on only the NYT-AC (KeyOrg-NYT). Yet,
KeyOrg-10 has a much higher correlation with the
VIX, 0.57, compared to KeyOrg-NYT’s correlation
of 0.15. See Figure 8 in the Appendix for a graph
of these different indexes. We hypothesize apply-
ing PCC-LogReg-BOW to the texts of the all 10
newspapers used by Baker et al. would result in
improved external predictive validity, but we leave
an empirical conﬁrmation of this to future work. In
practice, while keyword look-ups have lower recall
than supervised methods they have the advantage
of being interpretable and can use counts from doc-
ument retrieval systems instead of full texts.
5
Related work
There have been only a few other attempts to con-
struct alternative, non-keyword measurements of
economic policy uncertainty. Azqueta-Gavald´on
(2017) apply topic models and manually map the
12From “News Based Policy Uncert Index” column of
http://policyuncertainty.com/media/US_
Policy_Uncertainty_Data.xlsx
topics to Baker et al.’s EPU categories and ﬁnd their
method tightly correlates (0.94) with the original
index. In an unpublished manuscript, Nyman and
Ormerod (2020) expand the uncertainty keywords
of Baker et al. via nearest neighbor embeddings
and ﬁnd Granger causality between their expanded
keyword list and the original EPU index. In con-
trast, we are the ﬁrst to take a fully supervised
learning approach to measuring EPU and analyze
the original annotations of Baker et al..
Measurement of economic variables from
text. Other work has examined measuring eco-
nomic variables from text data (see Gentzkow et al.
(2019) for a survey). For example, topic mod-
els have been applied to central bank communi-
cations (Hansen et al., 2018) and newspaper arti-
cles (Thorsrud, 2020; Bybee et al., 2020) while
other work identiﬁes negated uncertainty markers
(e.g. “there is no uncertainty”) in the Federal Re-
serve’s Beige Books (Saltzman and Yung, 2018)
and extracts sentiment from central bank commu-
nications (Apel and Grimaldi, 2012). Boudoukh
et al. (2019) use off-the-shelf supervised document
classiﬁers to demonstrate that the information in
news can predict stock prices.
Text-as-data methods. Traditional ways of an-
alyzing textual data include content analysis where
human annotators read and hand-code documents
for particular phenomena (Krippendorff, 2018). In
the last decade, many researchers have adapted
machine learning and NLP methods to the needs
of social scientists (Card, 2019; O’Connor et al.,
2011). NLP technologies such as lexicons, topic
models (Roberts et al., 2014; Blei et al., 2003), su-
pervised classiﬁers, word embeddings (Mikolov
et al., 2013; Pennington et al., 2014), and large-
scale pre-trained language model representations
(Devlin et al., 2019) have been applied to textual
data to extract relevant signals. More recent work
attempts to extend text-as-data methods to incorpo-
rate principles from causal inference (Pryzant et al.,
2018; Wood-Doughty et al., 2018; Veitch et al.,
2020; Roberts et al., 2020; Keith et al., 2020).
6
Future directions
In the future, estimating the sensitivity of causal
estimates to the different measurement approaches
presented in this paper could potentially have sub-
stantive impact. Using a Bayesian modeling ap-
proach to annotator uncertainty (Paun et al., 2018),
investigating better calibration, which has been
shown to improve prevalence estimation (Card
and Smith, 2018), or estimating model uncertainty
could improve measurement. One could also shift
from document-level predictions of EPU to para-
graph, sentence, or span-level predictions. Anno-
tating discourse structure and selecting discourse
fragments, e.g. Prasad et al. (2004), could poten-
tially increase annotator agreement. These sub-
document extraction models could also potentially
provide human-interpretable contextualization of
movements in an EPU index.
7
Conclusion
There is great promise for text-as-data methods
and applications; however, we echo the cautionary
advice of Grimmer and Stewart (2013) that auto-
matic methods require extensive “problem-speciﬁc
validation.” Our paper’s investigation of Baker
et al. provides a number of general insights for
text-as-data practioners along these lines. First,
content validity: when dealing with text data, one
needs to think carefully about the kinds of linguis-
tic information one is trying to measure. For in-
stance, mapping economic policy uncertainty to
a document-level binary label collapses all types
of semantic uncertainty, many of which cannot be
identiﬁed via keywords alone. Second, one needs
to examine social perception assumptions. Is one
trying to prescribe an annotation schema, or, as we
argue in this paper, are people’s perceptions about
the concept as important as the concept itself, espe-
cially in the face of ambiguity in language? Third,
sensitivity of measurements: text-as-data practition-
ers can strengthen their substantive conclusions if
multiple measurement approaches give similar re-
sults. For economic policy uncertainty, this paper
demonstrates that switching from keywords to ag-
gregating the outputs of a document classiﬁer are
not tightly correlated, a concerning implication for
the validity of this index.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Bloomberg’s AI Engineering
team, especially Diego Ceccarelli, Miles Osborne
and Anju Kambadur, as well as Su Lin Blodgett
for helpful feedback and directions. Additional
thanks to the anonymous reviewers from the 2020
Natural Language Processing and Computational
Social Science Workshop for their insights. Kather-
ine Keith acknowledges support from Bloomberg’s
Data Science Ph.D. Fellowship.
References
Mikael Apel and Marianna Grimaldi. 2012. The infor-
mation content of central bank minutes. Riksbank
Research Paper Series.
Sanjeev Arora, Yingyu Liang, and Tengyu Ma. 2017.
A simple but tough-to-beat baseline for sentence em-
beddings. In ICLR.
Ron Artstein and Massimo Poesio. 2008. Inter-coder
agreement for computational linguistics. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 34(4):555–596.
Andr´es Azqueta-Gavald´on. 2017.
Developing news-
based economic policy uncertainty index with un-
supervised machine learning.
Economics Letters,
158:47–50.
Scott R Baker, Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J Davis.
2016.
Measuring economic policy uncertainty.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(4):1593–
1636.
Iz Beltagy, Matthew E Peters, and Arman Cohan.
2020. Longformer: The long-document transformer.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05150.
Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, Chaitanya
Malaviya, Keisuke Sakaguchi, Ari Holtzman, Han-
nah Rashkin, Doug Downey, Wen-tau Yih, and Yejin
Choi. 2020. Abductive commonsense reasoning. In
ICLR.
David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan.
2003.
Latent dirichlet allocation.
Journal of ma-
chine Learning research, 3(Jan):993–1022.
Jacob Boudoukh, Ronen Feldman, Shimon Kogan, and
Matthew Richardson. 2019.
Information, trading,
and volatility: Evidence from ﬁrm-speciﬁc news.
The Review of Financial Studies, 32(3):992–1033.
Jonathan Brogaard and Andrew Detzel. 2015.
The
asset-pricing implications of government economic
policy uncertainty. Management Science, 61(1):3–
18.
Leland Bybee, Bryan T Kelly, Asaf Manela, and
Dacheng Xiu. 2020.
The structure of economic
news.
Technical report, National Bureau of Eco-
nomic Research.
Dallas Card. 2019.
Accelerating Text-as-Data Re-
search in Computational Social Science. Ph.D. the-
sis, Carnegie Mellon University.
Dallas Card and Noah A Smith. 2018.
The impor-
tance of calibration for estimating proportions from
annotations. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pages 1636–
1646.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understand-
ing. In NAACL-HLT.
Anca Dumitrache, Lora Aroyo, and Chris Welty. 2018.
Crowdsourcing ground truth for medical relation ex-
traction.
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelli-
gent Systems, 8(2):1–20.
Naoki Egami, Christian J Fong, Justin Grimmer, Mar-
garet E Roberts, and Brandon M Stewart. 2018.
How to make causal inferences using texts. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1802.02163.
James A Evans and Pedro Aceves. 2016.
Machine
translation: Mining text for social theory. Annual
Review of Sociology, 42:21–50.
Rich´ard Farkas, Veronika Vincze, Gy¨orgy M´ora, J´anos
Csirik, and Gy¨orgy Szarvas. 2010.
The CoNLL-
2010 shared task: learning to detect hedges and their
scope in natural language text. In Proceedings of
the fourteenth conference on computational natural
language learning–Shared task, pages 1–12.
Viola Ganter and Michael Strube. 2009.
Finding
hedges by chasing weasels: Hedge detection using
wikipedia tags and shallow linguistic features.
In
Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Conference
Short Papers, pages 173–176.
Andrew Gelman and Eric Loken. 2014. The statistical
crisis in science: data-dependent analysis–a “garden
of forking paths”. American scientist, 102(6):460–
466.
Matthew Gentzkow, Bryan Kelly, and Matt Taddy.
2019. Text as data. Journal of Economic Literature,
57(3):535–74.
Justin Grimmer and Brandon M Stewart. 2013. Text as
data: The promise and pitfalls of automatic content
analysis methods for political texts. Political analy-
sis, 21(3):267–297.
Huseyin Gulen and Mihai Ion. 2016.
Policy uncer-
tainty and corporate investment. The Review of Fi-
nancial Studies, 29(3):523–564.
William L Hamilton, Kevin Clark, Jure Leskovec, and
Dan Jurafsky. 2016. Inducing domain-speciﬁc senti-
ment lexicons from unlabeled corpora. In Proceed-
ings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing. Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, volume
2016, page 595. NIH Public Access.
Stephen Hansen, Michael McMahon, and Andrea Prat.
2018.
Transparency and deliberation within the
FOMC: a computational linguistics approach. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(2):801–870.
Gerard Hoberg and Gordon Phillips. 2016. Text-based
network industries and endogenous product differen-
tiation. Journal of Political Economy, 124(5):1423–
1465.
Lifu Huang, Ronan Le Bras, Chandra Bhagavatula, and
Yejin Choi. 2019.
Cosmos QA: Machine reading
comprehension with contextual commonsense rea-
soning. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages
2391–2401.
Mohit Iyyer, Varun Manjunatha, Jordan Boyd-Graber,
and Hal Daum´e III. 2015. Deep unordered compo-
sition rivals syntactic methods for text classiﬁcation.
In Proceedings of the 53rd annual meeting of the as-
sociation for computational linguistics and the 7th
international joint conference on natural language
processing (volume 1: Long papers), pages 1681–
1691.
Abigail
Z
Jacobs
and
Hanna
Wallach.
2019.
Measurement
and
fairness.
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:1912.05511.
Katherine Keith, David Jensen, and Brendan O’Connor.
2020. Text and Causal Inference: A review of using
text to remove confounding from causal estimates.
In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Katherine
Keith
and
Brendan
O’Connor.
2018.
Uncertainty-aware generative models for inferring
document class prevalence. In Proceedings of the
2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 4575–4585.
Katherine Keith and Amanda Stent. 2019. Modeling
ﬁnancial analysts’ decision making via the pragmat-
ics and semantics of earnings calls. In Proceedings
of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 493–503.
Klaus Krippendorff. 2018. Content analysis: An intro-
duction to its methodology. Sage publications.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-
dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
Roberta: A robustly optimized BERT pretraining ap-
proach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692.
Jane Loevinger. 1957. Objective tests as instruments
of psychological theory.
Psychological reports,
3(3):635–694.
David O Lucca and Francesco Trebbi. 2009. Measur-
ing central bank communication: an automated ap-
proach with application to fomc statements. Techni-
cal report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Marjorie
McShane,
Sergei
Nirenburg,
and
Ron
Zacharski. 2004. Mood and modality: out of theory
and into the fray. Natural Language Engineering,
10(1):57–89.
Samuel Messick. 1987. Validity. ETS Research Report
Series, 1987(2):i–208.
Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their compositional-
ity. In Advances in neural information processing
systems, pages 3111–3119.
Rickard Nyman and Paul Ormerod. 2020. Text as data:
a machine learning-based approach to measuring un-
certainty. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.06457.
Brendan O’Connor, David Bamman, and Noah A
Smith. 2011. Computational text analysis for social
science: Model assumptions and complexity. In Sec-
ond Workshop on Comptuational Social Science and
the Wisdom of Crowds (NIPS 2011).
Silviu Paun, Bob Carpenter, Jon Chamberlain, Dirk
Hovy, Udo Kruschwitz, and Massimo Poesio. 2018.
Comparing Bayesian models of annotation. Trans-
actions of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, 6:571–585.
Ellie Pavlick and Tom Kwiatkowski. 2019. Inherent
disagreements in human textual inferences. Transac-
tions of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 7:677–694.
Judea Pearl. 2009. Causality. Cambridge university
press.
Fabian Pedregosa, Ga¨el Varoquaux, Alexandre Gram-
fort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier
Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron
Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, et al. 2011. Scikit-learn:
Machine learning in python. the Journal of machine
Learning research, 12:2825–2830.
Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D
Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for word rep-
resentation. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference
on empirical methods in natural language process-
ing (EMNLP), pages 1532–1543.
Rashmi Prasad, Eleni Miltsakaki, Aravind Joshi, and
Bonnie Webber. 2004. Annotation and Data Mining
of the Penn Discourse Treebank. In In Proceedings
of the ACL Workshop on Discourse Annotation.
Reid Pryzant, Kelly Shen, Dan Jurafsky, and Stefan
Wagner. 2018. Deconfounded lexicon induction for
interpretable social science. In Proceedings of the
2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Pa-
pers), pages 1615–1625.
Kevin M Quinn, Burt L Monroe, Michael Colaresi,
Michael H Crespin, and Dragomir R Radev. 2010.
How to analyze political attention with minimal as-
sumptions and costs. American Journal of Political
Science, 54(1):209–228.
Delip Rao and Deepak Ravichandran. 2009.
Semi-
supervised polarity lexicon induction. In Proceed-
ings of the 12th Conference of the European Chapter
of the ACL (EACL 2009), pages 675–682.
Margaret E. Roberts,
Brandon M. Stewart,
and
Richard A. Nielsen. 2020. Adjusting for confound-
ing with text matching. American Journal of Politi-
cal Science.
Margaret E Roberts, Brandon M Stewart, Dustin
Tingley,
Christopher Lucas,
Jetson Leder-Luis,
Shana Kushner Gadarian, Bethany Albertson, and
David G Rand. 2014. Structural topic models for
open-ended survey responses. American Journal of
Political Science, 58(4):1064–1082.
Bennett Saltzman and Julieta Yung. 2018. A machine
learning approach to identifying different types of
uncertainty. Economics Letters, 171:58–62.
Evan Sandhaus. 2008. The new york times annotated
corpus. Linguistic Data Consortium, Philadelphia,
6(12):e26752.
Maarten Sap, Hannah Rashkin, Derek Chen, Ronan Le-
Bras, and Yejin Choi. 2019. SocialIQA: Common-
sense reasoning about social interactions. EMNLP.
Roser Saur´ı and James Pustejovsky. 2009. Factbank:
a corpus annotated with event factuality. Language
resources and evaluation, 43(3):227.
Viktoriia Sharmanska, Daniel Hern´andez-Lobato, Jose
Miguel Hernandez-Lobato, and Novi Quadrianto.
2016.
Ambiguity helps: Classiﬁcation with dis-
agreements in crowdsourced annotations.
In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vi-
sion and Pattern Recognition, pages 2194–2202.
Gy¨orgy Szarvas, Veronika Vincze, Rich´ard Farkas,
Gy¨orgy M´ora, and Iryna Gurevych. 2012.
Cross-
genre and cross-domain detection of semantic uncer-
tainty. Computational Linguistics, 38(2):335–367.
Maite Taboada, Julian Brooke, Milan Toﬁloski, Kim-
berly Voll, and Manfred Stede. 2011. Lexicon-based
methods for sentiment analysis. Computational lin-
guistics, 37(2):267–307.
Paul C Tetlock. 2007. Giving content to investor sen-
timent: The role of media in the stock market. The
Journal of ﬁnance, 62(3):1139–1168.
Leif Anders Thorsrud. 2020. Words are the new num-
bers: A newsy coincident index of the business cy-
cle.
Journal of Business & Economic Statistics,
38(2):393–409.
Victor Veitch, Dhanya Sridhar, and David Blei. 2020.
Adapting text embeddings for causal inference. In
Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
pages 919–928. PMLR.
Zach Wood-Doughty, Ilya Shpitser, and Mark Dredze.
2018. Challenges of using text classiﬁers for causal
inference. In Proceedings of the Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, volume 2018, page 4586. NIH
Public Access.
Appendix
A
Datasets
Here we provide more information on the data used
in annotation and measurement experiments.
• BBD. From Baker et al. (2016), we combine
the authors’ annotations with the full text data
they provided.13 These documents and annota-
tions are sampled from ten major newspapers
in the United States.14 We also study and refer
to their Code Guide when analyzing examples
for this paper.15 See Lines 1-2 of Table 4 for
descriptive statistics of this dataset.
• NYT-AC. We use the New York Times Anno-
tated Corpus as a sandbox for our experiments
(Sandhaus, 2008).16 This corpus includes over
1.8 million articles written and published by
the New York Times between January 1, 1987
and June 19, 2007.
• VIX. The VIX is an index of market expec-
tations of the next 30 days’ U.S. stock mar-
ket volatility, derived from S&P 500 options
prices. Like Baker et al., we take a monthly av-
erage over the daily VIX measures, obtained
from a standard proprietary database.
B
Annotation notes
We provide additional descriptive statistics of
Baker et al. (2016)’s original annotations in Ta-
bles 8 and 9. The annotation instructions for our
experiment (§3.1) are provided in Figure 4. In our
annotation experiment, the mean annotator conﬁ-
dence levels are 3.81 for Sample A and 3.85 for
Sample B.
C
Qualitative examples
Figures 10 and 11 provide examples with high an-
notator agreement and disgreement respectively.
13http://policyuncertainty.com/AUDIT_
ANALYSIS.zip and http://policyuncertainty.
com/media/All%20Audit%20Hard%20Copies.
rar
14LA Times, USA Today, Chicago Tribune, Washington
Post, Boston Globe, Wall Street Journal, New York Times, Mi-
ami Herald, Dallas Morning News, San Francisco Chronicle
15http://policyuncertainty.com/media/
Coding_Guide.pdf
16https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/
LDC2008T19
Annotator
Mean pos.
Std
N
A
0.300
0.46
50
B
0.619
0.49
278
C
0.431
0.50
297
D
0.445
0.50
449
E
0.551
0.50
472
F
0.330
0.47
790
G
0.402
0.49
1168
H
0.389
0.49
1185
I
0.350
0.48
1265
J
0.398
0.49
1443
K
0.455
0.50
1606
L
0.397
0.49
1740
M
0.405
0.49
2320
N
0.443
0.50
2997
Table 8: Descriptive statistics for the original annota-
tions of Baker et al. (2016). Annotator names have
been anonymized to letters. For each annotator, we re-
port the mean number of positive annotations (mean
pos.), the standard deviation of positive annotations
(std), and the total number of annotations by that an-
notator (N).
Num. Annotators
Num. Docs
1
11647
2
2053
3
83
4
12
5
2
Table 9: For Baker et al.’s original dataset, the num-
ber of documents that have a particular number of an-
notators. Here, 16% of documents have only a single
annotator.
D
Measurement: Additional
Experiments
In this section, we provide additional measurement
experiments. Also note there is a very small over-
lap between our training time documents and in-
ference time NYT-AC documents. There are 375
documents at training time from NYT between the
years of 1990 and 2006. However, the total number
of inference documents is 1,501,131 so this is less
than 0.025% of documents.
D.1
Filtering to US-Only News
Initial qualitative analysis reveals that many docu-
ments, and in particular articles with high annota-
tor disagreement, are focused on events outside the
Figure 4: Annotation instructions for our experiment.
United States. An unstated assumption of Baker
et al. (2016) is that US-based news sources will
primarily report US-based news and thus US-based
economic policy uncertainty. We test this assump-
tion empirically.
To remove non-US news, we use a simple heuris-
tic that gives almost perfect precision. NYT-AC has
metadata about the dateline of an article, for exam-
ple “KUWAIT, Sunday, March 30,” “SAN ANTO-
NIO, March 29,” or “BAGHDAD, Iraq, March 29.”
We (1) use the GeoNames Gazateer17 and ﬁlter to
cities that have greater than 15,000 inhabitants;18
(2) separate these city names into US and non-US
cities such that ties go to US. For example, Athens
would not be removed because the town of Athens,
Georgia is in the United State; (3) write a rule-
based text parser that extracts the span of text that
is in all capitals, (4) if the city name is in non-US
cities, we discard the document.
Per month, on average, we remove 449 docu-
ments that were about non-US news. See Figure 6
for a comparison of all NYT articles, articles with
the dateline, and US-only articles based on our
heuristic.
Figure 7 displays correlation results for all mod-
els with the US-Only document ﬁlter. Applying the
US-Only ﬁlter only slightly improves correlation
of all models with the VIX (0.01-0.04 correlation).
From these results, it seems that Baker et al.’s as-
sumption is valid. However, we also acknowledge
that our heuristic is high-precision, low recall and
17http://www.geonames.org/
18https://datahub.io/core/world-cities
Example selection
Our analysis
Label Mean, Docid
1
...Several recent news reports have ques-
tioned the stamina of Wells Fargo’s real estate
portfolio in the event of a recession that ex-
tends to California. The analysis had driven
the bank’s stock sharply down. ....
Stock market newsletter digest. Economics
policy is not mentioned as uncertain
0.0, MIHB 11 1990 8
2
. . . Just eight days before the threatened impo-
sition of punitive U.S. tariffs on Japanese lux-
ury cars, Japanese automakers are signaling a
strong desire to compromise with Washington
in the bitter dispute over automotive trade. . . .
Report on international trade dispute. ”threat-
ened” directly expresses uncertainty, ”tariffs”
are economic policy
0.8, DMNB 6 1995 8
Table 10: Hand-selected examples with strong annotator agreement. Docids correspond to those provided in Baker
et al. (2016)’s dataset. Label mean is the mean over our experiment’s ﬁve annotations per document.
Example selection
Our analysis
Label Mean, Docid
1
...I am a true believer that mobile broad-
band will help my company and hundreds
of other businesses in South Florida work
more efﬁciently, better serve consumers and
hire more employees. On a related matter,
policymakers in Washington, D.C. are mak-
ing decisions on whether to allow AT&T to
pay approximately $39 billion for its wire-
less rival T-Mobile. This is a deal of vital
importance to our community ....
An op-ed arguing that a merger should be
allowed to go forward. Arguing for a certain
outcome implies uncertainty of the outcome,
but uncertainty is never explicitly stated.
0.4, MIHB 5 2011 3
2
...angst over rising interest rates triggered
a nasty sell-off in the stock market Friday
. .. The markets also fret that the Federal Re-
serve Board will move to curb that inﬂation
threat . . .
Reports on downturn in stock market. An-
notators must decide: is there uncertainty
about FED actions or strong expectation of
disfavoured actions.
0.4, LA 8 1997 9
3
...If Cuba’s ﬂedgling recovery is to con-
tinue, Mr. Castro must legalize small- and
medium-sized businesses, boost wages and
gradually introduce free markets, U.S. ofﬁ-
cials say. ...Cuban ofﬁcials have a very dif-
ferent view and blame the long-time U.S. ban
on trade with the island for much of their
economic woes....
Reports on state of affairs in Cuba. States as-
sumption that US or Cuban policy will even-
tually lead to economic problems. Uncer-
tainty is only implied and no concrete poli-
cies are mentioned
0.6, DMNB 12 1999 2
4
...Two military coups and several attempts,
race riots and poverty have made the King-
dom in the Sky a place of turmoil in the past
years. Economic problems and the repeal
of apartheid in South Africa, Lesotho’s over-
powering neighbor on all sides, raise even
more questions about what lies ahead. Sym-
pathetic foreign powers have donated mil-
lions to Lesotho. ...
Describes situation in Lesotho. Mentions
economic downturn, large turnover in ad-
ministrations and race riots. Not stated that
turnover/riots lead to uncertainty over eco-
nomic policy, but could be reasonably in-
ferred as part reason for downturn.
0.4, MIHB 7 1991 15
Table 11: Hand-selected examples with strong annotator disagreement. Docids correspond to those provided in
Baker et al. (2016)’s dataset. Label mean is the mean over our experiment’s ﬁve annotations per document.
in the future, one could possibly use a country-level
document classiﬁer instead.
D.2
Predicting after EU ﬁlter
As we acknowledge in the main text, the training
set is biased because documents were sampled only
if they matched the economy and uncertainty key-
word banks. To make a fair comparison at inference
time, we looked at the predictions of our document
classiﬁers on the subset of documents in NYT-AC
that also matched these economy and uncertainty
keyword banks (KeyEU). In Figure 5, we see that
the subset of these models had lower correlation
with the VIX.
Split
Model
Prec.
Recall
F1
Acc.
Train
LogReg-BERT
0.79
0.77
0.78
0.79
Test
LogReg-BERT
0.61
0.59
0.60
0.68
Table 12: Performance results on the training and test sets for the LongFormer representation with logistic regres-
sion (LogReg-BERT). The results in this table are comparable to Table 6.
Figure 5: Estimate PCC and CC only within the set of
documents that pass the EU ﬁlter.
D.3
Additional prevalence estimation
experiments
As an alternative to classify and count (CC) and
probabilistic classify and count (PCC) prevalence
estimation methods, we also experiment with the
Implicit Likelihood (ImpLik) prevalence estima-
tion method of Keith and O’Connor (2018). This
method gives the predictions of a discriminative
classiﬁer a generative re-interpretation and backs
out an implicit individual-level likelihood function
which can take into account bias in the training
prevalence. We use the authors’ freq-e software
package.19 Figure 7 shows a high correlation be-
tween ImpLik and PCC, 0.83 correlation; however,
ImpLik had much lower correlation with the VIX
(0.1). Note, the mean prevalences from ImpLik are
much lower than PCC or CC with a mean monthly
prevalence across 1990-2006 of 0.02. Thus, the
method seems to be correcting for a more realistic
prevalence but the true prevalence values may be
too low to pick-up relevant signal via this method.
D.4
BERT representations
Finally, we acknowledge that a bag-of-words rep-
resentation in the document classiﬁer is dissatis-
fying to capture long-range semantic dependen-
cies and the contextual nature of language that
19https://github.com/slanglab/freq-e. For
the label prior we used the training prevalence of 0.48.
has motivated recent research in contextual, dis-
tributed representations of text. Thus, we use the
frozen representations of a large, pre-trained lan-
guage model that has been optimized for long doc-
uments, the LongFormer (Beltagy et al., 2020).
This is a model that optimizes a RoBERTa model
(Liu et al., 2019) for long documents. We use
the huggingface implementation of the Long-
Former20 and use the 768-dimensional “pooled out-
put”21 as our document representation. We then
use the same sklearn logistic regression training
as the BOW models.
Comparing Table 12 to Table 6, we see that
this representation has decreased performance com-
pared to LogReg-BOW. We speculate that this de-
crease in performance may originate in having to
truncate documents to 4096 tokens due to the con-
straints of the model architecture. With more com-
putational resources, we would ﬁne-tune the pre-
trained weights instead of leaving them frozen. Fu-
ture work could also consider obtaining alternative
representations of text via weighted averaging of
embeddings (Arora et al., 2017), deep averaging
networks (Iyyer et al., 2015), or pooling BERT
embeddings of all paragraphs in a document.
20https://huggingface.co/transformers/
model_doc/longformer.html
21This is the hidden state of the last layer of the ﬁrst token
of the sequence which is then passed through a linear layer
and Tanh activation function. The linear layer weights are
trained from the next sentence prediction objective during
pre-training.
Figure 6: NYT total documents (red), documents with datelines (green) and documents for which the dateline does
not have a non-US city (blue). We checked and conﬁrmed and the spike in 1995-10 is an artifact of the corpus.
Figure 7: Correlations between all models. The addition of –USOnly to a model name means we apply the model
only on the subset of documents that have passed our USOnly heuristic. ImpLik is the implicit likeihood prevalence
estimation method of Keith and O’Connor (2018).
Figure 8: Ofﬁcial EPU versus the original keywords on the NYT-AC (KeyOrg).
