Title: Modeling Language Variation and Universals: A Survey on Typological Linguistics for Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1807.00914v3
--------------------------------------------------

Modeling Language Variation and Universals:
A Survey on Typological Linguistics for
Natural Language Processing
Edoardo Maria Ponti∗
LTL, University of Cambridge
Helen O’Horan∗∗
LTL, University of Cambridge
Yevgeni Berzak†
Department of Brain and Cognitive
Sciences, MIT
Ivan Vuli´c‡
LTL, University of Cambridge
Roi Reichart§
Faculty of Industrial Engineering and
Management, Technion – IIT
Thierry Poibeau#
LATTICE Lab, CNRS and ENS/PSL and
Univ. Sorbonne nouvelle/USPC
Ekaterina Shutova**
ILLC, University of Amsterdam
Anna Korhonen††
LTL, University of Cambridge
Linguistic typology aims to capture structural and semantic variation across the world’s
languages. A large-scale typology could provide excellent guidance for multilingual Natural
Language Processing (NLP), particularly for languages that suffer from the lack of human labeled
resources. We present an extensive literature survey on the use of typological information in the
development of NLP techniques. Our survey demonstrates that to date, the use of information
in existing typological databases has resulted in consistent but modest improvements in system
performance. We show that this is due to both intrinsic limitations of databases (in terms of
coverage and feature granularity) and under-employment of the typological features included in
them. We advocate for a new approach that adapts the broad and discrete nature of typological
categories to the contextual and continuous nature of machine learning algorithms used in
contemporary NLP. In particular, we suggest that such approach could be facilitated by recent
developments in data-driven induction of typological knowledge.
∗English Faculty Building, 9 West Road Cambridge CB3 9DA, United Kingdom. E-mail: ep490@cam.ac.uk
∗∗English Faculty Building. E-mail: helen.ohoran@gmail.com
† 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. E-mail: berzak@mit.edu
‡ English Faculty Building. E-mail: iv250@cam.ac.uk
§ Technion City, Haifa 3200003, Israel. E-mail: roiri@ie.technion.ac.il
# 1 Rue Maurice Arnoux, 92120 Montrouge, France. E-mail: thierry.poibeau@ens.fr
∗∗Science Park 107, 1098 XG Amsterdam, Netherlands. E-mail: shutova.e@uva.nl
†† English Faculty Building. E-mail: alk23@cam.ac.uk
Submission received: 30 June 2018; revised version received: 20 March 2019; accepted for publication: 12 June
2019.
© 2019 Association for Computational Linguistics
arXiv:1807.00914v3  [cs.CL]  26 Oct 2020
Volume xx, Number xx
1. Introduction
The world’s languages may share universal features at a deep, abstract level, but the
structures found in real-world, surface-level texts can vary signiﬁcantly. This cross-
lingual variation has challenged the development of robust, multilingually applicable
NLP technology, and as a consequence, existing NLP is still largely limited to a handful of
resource-rich languages. The architecture design, training, and hyper-parameter tuning
of most current algorithms are far from being language-agnostic, and often inadvertently
incorporate language-speciﬁc biases (Bender 2009, 2011). In addition, most state-of-the-
art machine learning models rely on supervision from (large amounts of) labeled data
— a requirement that cannot be met for the majority of the world’s languages (Snyder
2010).
Over time, approaches have been developed to address the data bottleneck in
multilingual NLP. These include unsupervised models that do not rely on the availability
of manually annotated resources (Snyder and Barzilay 2008; Vuli´c, De Smet, and Moens
2011, inter alia) and techniques that transfer data or models from resource-rich to resource-
poor languages (Padó and Lapata 2005; Das and Petrov 2011; Täckström, McDonald,
and Uszkoreit 2012, inter alia). Some multilingual applications, such as Neural Machine
Translation and Information Retrieval, have been facilitated by learning joint models
that learn from several languages (Ammar et al. 2016; Johnson et al. 2017, inter alia)
or via multilingual distributed representations of words and sentences (Mikolov, Le,
and Sutskever 2013, inter alia). Such techniques can lead to signiﬁcant improvements in
performance and parameter efﬁciency over monolingual baselines (Pappas and Popescu-
Belis 2017).
Another, highly promising source of information for modelling cross-lingual varia-
tion can be found in the ﬁeld of Linguistic Typology. This discipline aims to systematically
compare and document the world’s languages based on the empirical observation of their
variation with respect to cross-lingual benchmarks (Comrie 1989; Croft 2003). Research
efforts in this ﬁeld have resulted in large typological databases, e.g. most prominently
the World Atlas of Language Structures (WALS) (Dryer and Haspelmath 2013). Such
databases can serve as a source of guidance for feature choice, algorithm design, and
data selection or generation in multilingual NLP.
Previous surveys on this topic have covered earlier research integrating typological
knowledge into NLP (O’Horan et al. 2016; Bender 2016), however, there is still no
consensus on the general effectiveness of this approach. For instance, Sproat (2016)
has argued that data-driven machine learning should not need to commit to any
assumptions about categorical and manually deﬁned language types as deﬁned in
typological databases.
In this paper, we provide an extensive survey of typologically informed NLP methods
to date, including the more recent neural approaches not previously surveyed in this
area. We consider the impact of typological (including both structural and semantic)
information on system performance and discuss the optimal sources for such information.
Traditionally, typological information has been obtained from hand-crafted databases
and, therefore, it tends to be coarse-grained and incomplete. Recent research has focused
on inferring typological information automatically from multilingual data (Asgari and
Schütze 2017, inter alia), with the speciﬁc purpose of obtaining a more complete and
ﬁner-grained set of feature values. We survey these techniques and discuss ways to
integrate their predictions into the current NLP algorithms. To the best of our knowledge,
this has not yet been covered in the existing literature.
2
Ponti et al.
Modeling Language Variation and Universals
In short, the key questions our paper addresses can be summarized as follows:
(i) Which NLP tasks and applications can beneﬁt from typology? (ii) What are the
advantages and limitations of currently available typological databases? Can data-driven
inference of typological features offer an alternative source of information? (iii) Which
methods have been proposed to incorporate typological information in NLP systems,
and how should such information be encoded? (iv) To what extent does the performance
of typology-savvy methods surpass typology-agnostic baselines? How does typology
compare to other criteria of language classiﬁcation, such as genealogy? (v) How can
typology be harnessed for data selection, rule-based systems, and model interpretation?
We start this survey with a brief overview of Linguistic Typology (§ 2) and multilin-
gual NLP (§ 3). After these introductory sections we proceed to examine the development
of typological information for NLP, including that in hand-crafted typological databases
and that derived through automatic inference from linguistic data (§ 4). In the same
section, we also describe typological features commonly selected for application in NLP.
In § 5 we discuss ways in which typological information has been integrated into NLP
algorithms, identifying the main trends and comparing the performance of a range of
methods. Finally, in § 6 we discuss the current limitations in the use of typology in NLP
and propose novel research directions inspired by our ﬁndings.
2. Overview of Linguistic Typology
There is no consensus on the precise number of languages in the world. For example,
Glottolog provides the estimate of 7748 (Hammarström et al. 2016), while Ethnologue
(Lewis, Simons, and Fennig 2016) refers to 7097.1 This is due to the fact that deﬁning
what constitutes a ’language’ is in part arbitrary. Mutual intelligibility, which is used
as the main criterion for including different language variants under the same label, is
gradient in nature. Moreover, social and political factors play a role in the deﬁnition of
language.
Linguistic Typology is the discipline that studies the variation among the world’s
languages through their systematic comparison (Comrie 1989; Croft 2003). The compari-
son is challenging because linguistic categories cannot be pre-deﬁned (Haspelmath 2007).
Rather, cross-linguistically signiﬁcant categories emerge inductively from the comparison
of known languages, and are progressively reﬁned with the discovery of new languages.
Crucially, the comparison needs to be based on functional criteria, rather than formal
criteria. Typologists distinguish between constructions, abstract and universal functions,
and strategies, the type of expressions adopted by each language to codify a speciﬁc
construction (Croft et al. 2017). For instance, the passive voice is considered a strategy
that emphasizes the semantic role of patient: some languages lack this strategy and use
others strategies to express the construction. For instance, Awtuw (Sepik family) simply
allows for the subject to be omitted.
The classiﬁcation of the strategies in each language is grounded in typological
documentation (Bickel 2007, p. 248). Documentation is empirical in nature and involves
collecting texts or speech excerpts, and assessing the features of a language based on their
analysis. The resulting information is stored in large databases (see § 4.1) of attribute–
values (this pair is henceforth referred to as typological feature), where usually each
1 These counts include only languages traditionally spoken by a community as their principal means of
communication, and exclude unattested, pidgin, whistled, and sign languages.
3
Volume xx, Number xx
attribute corresponds to a construction and each value to the most widespread strategy
in a speciﬁc language.
Analysis of cross-lingual patterns reveals that cross-lingual variation is bounded and
far from random (Greenberg 1966b). Indeed, typological features can be interdependent:
the presence of one feature may implicate another (in one direction or both). This
interdependence is called restricted universal, as opposed to unrestricted universals,
which specify properties shared unconditionally by all languages. Such typological
universals (restricted or not) are rarely absolute (i.e. exceptionless); rather, they are
tendencies (Corbett 2010), hence they are called “statistical”. For example, consider
this restricted universal: if a language (such as Hmong Njua, Hmong–Mien family)
has prepositions, then genitive-like modiﬁers follow their head. If, instead, a language
(such as Slavey, Na–Dené family) has postpositions, the order of heads and genitive-
like modiﬁers is swapped. However, there are known exceptions: Norwegian (Indo–
European) has prepositions but genitives precede their syntactic heads.2 Moreover, some
typological features are rare while others are highly frequent. Interestingly, this also
means that some languages are intuitively more plausible than others. Implications and
frequencies of features are important as they unravel the deeper explanatory factors
underlying the patterns of cross-linguistic variation (Dryer 1998).
Cross-lingual variation can be found at all levels of linguistic structure. The seminal
works on Linguistic Typology were concerned with morphosyntax, mainly morphologi-
cal systems (Sapir 2014 [1921], p. 128) and word order (Greenberg 1966b). This level of
analysis deals with the form of meaningful elements (morphemes and words) and their
combination, hence it is called structural typology. As an example, consider the alignment
of the nominal case system (Dixon 1994): some languages like Nenets (Uralic) use the
same case for subjects of both transitive and intransitive verbs, and a different one for
objects (nominative–accusative alignment). Other languages like Lezgian (Northeast
Caucasian) group together intransitive subjects and objects, and treat transitive subjects
differently (ergative–absolutive alignment).
On the other hand, semantic typology studies languages at the semantic and prag-
matic levels. This area was pioneered by anthropologists interested in kinship (d’Andrade
1995) and colors (Berlin and Kay 1969), and was expanded by studies on lexical classes
(Dixon 1977). The main focus of semantic typology has been to categorize languages
in terms of concepts (Evans 2011) in the lexicon, in particular with respect to the 1)
granularity, 2) division (boundary location), and 3) membership criteria (grouping and
dissection). For instance, consider the event expressed by to open (something). It lacks a
precise equivalent in languages such as Korean, where similar verbs overlap in meaning
only in part (Bowerman and Choi 2001). For instance, ppaeda means ‘to remove an object
from tight ﬁt’, used e.g. for drawers, and pyeolchida means ‘to spread out a ﬂat thing’,
used e.g. for hands. Moreover, the English verb encodes the resulting state of the event,
whereas an equivalent verb in another language such as Spanish (abrir) rather expresses
the manner of the event (Talmy 1991). Although variation in the categories is pervasive
due to their partly arbitrary nature, it is constrained cross-lingually via shared cognitive
constraints (Majid et al. 2007).
Similarities between languages do not always arise from language-internal dynamics
but also from external factors. In particular, similarities can be inherited from a common
2 Exception-less generalizations are known as absolute universals. However, properties that have been
proposed as such are often controversial, because they are too vacuous or have been eventually falsiﬁed
(Evans and Levinson 2009).
4
Ponti et al.
Modeling Language Variation and Universals
ancestor (genealogical bias) or borrowed by contact with a neighbor (areal bias) (Bakker
2010). Owing to genealogical inheritance, there are features that are widespread within a
family but extremely rare elsewhere (e.g. the presence of click phonemes in the Khoisan
languages). As an example of geographic percolation, most languages in the Balkan area
(Albanian, Bulgarian, Macedonian, Romanian, Torlakian) have developed, even without
a common ancestor, a deﬁnite article that is put after its noun simply because of their
close proximity.
Research in linguistic typology has sought to disentangle such factors and to integrate
them into a single framework aimed at answering the question “what’s where why?”
(Nichols 1992). Language can be viewed as a hybrid biological and cultural system. The
two components co-evolved in a twin track, developing partly independently and partly
via mutual interaction (Durham 1991). The causes of cross-lingual variation can therefore
be studied from two complementary perspectives — from the perspective of functional
theories or event-based theories (Bickel 2015). The former theories involve cognitive and
communicative principles (internal factors) and account for the origin of variation, while
the latter ones emphasize the imitation of patterns found in other languages (external
factors) and account for the propagation (or extinction) of typological features (Croft
1995, 2000).
Examples of functional principles include factors associated with language use, such
as the frequency or processing complexity of a pattern (Cristofaro and Ramat 1999).
Patterns that are easy or widespread get integrated into the grammar (Haspelmath 1999,
inter alia). On the other hand, functional principles allow the speakers to draw similar
inferences from similar contexts, leading to locally motivated pathways of diachronic
change through the process known as grammaticalization (Greenberg 1966a, 1978; Bybee
1988). For instance, in the world’s languages (including English) the future tense marker
almost always originates from verbs expressing direction, duty, will, or attempt because
they imply a future situation.
The diachronic and gradual origin of the changes in language patterns and the statis-
tical nature of the universals explain why languages do not behave monolithically. Each
language can adopt several strategies for a given construction and partly inconsistent
semantic categories. In other words, typological patterns tend to be gradient. For instance,
the semantics of grammatical and lexical categories can be represented on continuous
multi-dimensional maps (Croft and Poole 2008). Bybee and McClelland (2005) have
noted how this gradience resembles the patterns learned by connectionist networks (and
statistical machine learning algorithms in general). In particular, they argue that such
architectures are sensitive to both local (contextual) information and general patterns, as
well as to their frequency of use, similarly to natural languages.
Typological documentation is limited by the fact that the evidence available for each
language is highly unbalanced and many languages are not even recorded in a written
form.3 However, large typological databases such as WALS (Dryer and Haspelmath 2013)
nevertheless have an impressive coverage (syntactic features for up to 1519 languages).
Where such information can be usefully integrated in machine learning, it can provide
an alternative form of guidance to manual construction of resources that are now largely
lacking for low resource languages. We discuss the existing typological databases and
the integration of their features into NLP models in sections 4 and 5.
3 According to Lewis, Simons, and Fennig (2016), 34.4% of the world’s languages are threatened, not
transmitted to younger generations, moribund, nearly extinct or dormant. Moreover, 34% of the world’s
languages are vigorous but have not yet developed a system of writing.
5
Volume xx, Number xx
3. Overview of Multilingual NLP
The scarcity of data and resources in many languages represents a major challenge for
multilingual NLP. Many state-of-the-art methods rely on supervised learning, hence their
performance depends on the availability of manually crafted datasets annotated with
linguistic information (e.g., treebanks, parallel corpora) and/or lexical databases (e.g.,
terminology databases, dictionaries). Although similar resources are available for key
tasks in a few well-researched languages, the majority of the world’s languages lack them
almost entirely. This gap cannot be easily bridged: the creation of linguistic resources is a
time-consuming process and requires skilled labor. Furthermore, the immense range of
possible tasks and languages makes the aim of a complete coverage unrealistic.
One solution to this problem explored by the research community abandons the
use of annotated resources altogether and instead focuses on unsupervised learning.
This class of methods infers probabilistic models of the observations given some latent
variables. In other words, it unravels the hidden structures within unlabeled text data.
Although these methods have been employed extensively for multilingual applications
(Snyder and Barzilay 2008; Vuli´c, De Smet, and Moens 2011; Titov and Klementiev
2012, inter alia), their performance tends to lag behind the more linguistically informed
supervised learning approaches (Täckström, McDonald, and Nivre 2013). Moreover, they
have been rarely combined with typological knowledge. For these reasons, we do not
review them in this chapter.
Other promising ways to overcome data scarcity include transferring models or
data from resource-rich to resource-poor languages (§ 3.1) or learning joint models
from annotated examples in multiple languages (§ 3.2) in order to leverage language
inter-dependencies. Early approaches of this kind have relied on universal, high-level
delexicalized features, such as PoS tags and dependency relations. More recently,
however, the incompatibility of (language-speciﬁc) lexica has been countered by mapping
equivalent words into the same multilingual semantic space through representation
learning (§ 3.3). This has enriched language transfer and multilingual joint modelling
with lexicalized features. In this chapter, we provide an overview of these methods, as
they constitute the backbone of the typology-savvy algorithms surveyed in § 5.
3.1 Language Transfer
Linguistic information can be transferred from resource-rich languages to resource-poor
languages: these are commonly referred to as source languages and target languages,
respectively. Language transfer is challenging as it requires us to match word sequences
with different lexica and word orders, or syntactic trees with different (anisomorphic)
structures (Ponti et al. 2018a). As a consequence, the information obtained from the source
languages typically needs to be adapted, by tailoring it to the properties of the target
languages. The methods developed for language transfer include annotation projection,
(de)lexicalized model transfer, and translation (Agi´c et al. 2014). We illustrate them below
using dependency parsing as an example.
Annotation projection was introduced in the seminal work of Yarowsky, Ngai, and
Wicentowski (2001) and Hwa et al. (2005). In its original formulation, as illustrated in
Figure 1a, a source text is parsed and word-aligned with a target parallel raw text. Its
annotation (e.g. PoS tags and dependency trees) is then projected directly and used to
train a supervised model on the target language. Later reﬁnements to this process are
known as soft projection, where constraints can be used to complement alignment, based
on distributional similarity (Das and Petrov 2011) or constituent membership (Padó and
6
Ponti et al.
Modeling Language Variation and Universals
Figure 1: Three methods for language transfer: a) annotation projection, b) model transfer,
and c) translation. The image has been adapted from Tiedemann (2015).
Lapata 2009). Moreover, source model expectations on labels (Wang and Manning 2014;
Agi´c et al. 2016) or sets of most likely labels (Khapra et al. 2011; Wisniewski et al. 2014)
can be projected instead of single categorical labels. These can constrain unsupervised
models by reducing the divergence between the expectations on target labels and on
source labels or support ‘ambiguous learning’ on the target language, respectively.
Model transfer instead involves training a model (e.g. a parser) on a source language
and applying it on a target language (Zeman and Resnik 2008), as shown in Figure
1b. Due to their incompatible vocabularies, models are typically delexicalized prior
to transfer and take language-independent (Nivre et al. 2016) or harmonized (Zhang
et al. 2012) features as input. In order to bridge the vocabulary gap, model transfer was
later augmented with multilingual Brown word clusters (Täckström, McDonald, and
Uszkoreit 2012) or multilingual distributed word representations (see § 3.3).
Machine translation offers an alternative to lexicalization in absence of annotated
parallel data. As shown in Figure 1c, a source sentence is machine translated into a
target language, (Banea et al. 2008) or through a bilingual lexicon (Durrett, Pauls, and
Klein 2012). Its annotation is then projected and used to train a target-side supervised
model. Translated documents can also be employed to generate multilingual sentence
representations, which facilitate language transfer (Zhou, Wan, and Xiao 2016).
Some of these methods are hampered by their resource requirements. In fact,
annotation projection and translation need parallel texts to align words and train
translation systems, respectively (Agi´c, Hovy, and Søgaard 2015). Moreover, comparisons
of state-of-the-art algorithms revealed that model transfer is competitive with machine
translation in terms of performance (Conneau et al. 2018). Partly owing to these reasons,
typological knowledge has been mostly harnessed in connection with model transfer,
as we discuss in § 5.2. Moreover, typological features can guide the selection of the best
7
Volume xx, Number xx
Figure 2: In multilingual joint learning, representations can be private or shared across
languages. Tied parameters are shown as neurons with identical color. Image adapted
from Fang and Cohn (2017), representing multilingual PoS tagging for Bambara (left)
and Warlpiri (right).
source language to match to a target language for language transfer (Agi´c et al. 2016,
inter alia), which beneﬁts all the above-mentioned methods (see § 5.3).
3.2 Multilingual Joint Supervised Learning
NLP models can be learned jointly from the data in multiple languages. In addition to
facilitating intrinsically multilingual applications, such as Neural Machine Translation
and Information Extraction, this approach often surpasses language-speciﬁc monolingual
models as it can leverage more (although noisier) data (Ammar et al. 2016, inter alia). This
is particularly true in scenarios where either a target or all languages are resource-lean
(Khapra et al. 2011) or in code-switching scenarios (Adel, Vu, and Schultz 2013). In fact,
multilingual joint learning improves over pure model transfer also in scenarios with
limited amounts of labeled data in target language(s) (Fang and Cohn 2017).4
A key strategy for multilingual joint learning is parameter sharing (Johnson et al.
2017). More speciﬁcally, in state-of-the-art neural architectures input and hidden repre-
sentations can be either private (language-speciﬁc) or shared across languages. Shared
representations are the result of tying the parameters of a network component across
languages, such as word embeddings (Guo et al. 2016), character embeddings (Yang,
Salakhutdinov, and Cohen 2016), hidden layers (Duong et al. 2015b) or the attention
4 This approach is also more cost-effective in terms of parameters (Pappas and Popescu-Belis 2017).
8
Ponti et al.
Modeling Language Variation and Universals
mechanism (Pappas and Popescu-Belis 2017). Figure 2 shows an example where all the
components of a PoS tagger are shared between two languages (Malagasy on the left and
Polish on the right). Parameter sharing, however, does not necessarily imply parameter
identity: it can be enforced by minimizing the distance between parameters (Duong et al.
2015a) or between latent representations of parallel sentences (Niehues et al. 2011; Zhou
et al. 2015) in separate language-speciﬁc models.
Another common strategy in multilingual joint modeling is providing information
about the properties of the language of the current text in the form of input language
vectors (Guo et al. 2016). The intuition is that this helps tailoring the joint model toward
speciﬁc languages. These vectors can be learned end-to-end in neural language modeling
tasks (Tsvetkov et al. 2016; Östling and Tiedemann 2017) or neural machine translation
tasks (Johnson et al. 2017; Ha, Niehues, and Waibel 2016). Ammar et al. (2016) instead
used language vectors as a prior for language identity or typological features.
In § 5.2, we discuss ways in which typological knowledge is used to balance
private and shared neural network components and provide informative input language
vectors. In § 6.3, we argue that language vectors do not need to be limited to features
extracted from typological databases, but also include automatically induced typological
information (Malaviya, Neubig, and Littell 2017, see § 4.3).
3.3 Multilingual Representation Learning
The multilingual algorithms reviewed in § 3.1 and § 3.2 are facilitated by dense real-
valued vector representations of words, known as multilingual word embeddings. These
can be learned from corpora and provide pivotal lexical features to several downstream
NLP applications. In multilingual word embeddings, similar words (regardless of the
actual language) obtain similar representations. Various methods to generate multilingual
word embeddings have been developed. We follow the classiﬁcation proposed by Ruder
(2018), whereas we refer the reader to Upadhyay et al. (2016) for an empirical comparison.
Monolingual mapping generates independent monolingual representations and
subsequently learns a linear map between a source language and a target language based
on a bilingual lexicon (Mikolov, Le, and Sutskever 2013) or in an unsupervised fashion
through adversarial networks (Conneau et al. 2017). Alternatively, both spaces can be
cast into a new, lower-dimensional space through canonical correlation analysis (CCA)
based on dictionaries (Ammar et al. 2016) or word alignments (Guo et al. 2015).
Pseudo-cross-lingual approaches merge words with contexts of other languages
and generate representations based on this mixed corpus. Substitutions are based on
Wiktionary (Xiao and Guo 2014) or machine translation (Gouws and Søgaard 2015;
Duong et al. 2016). Moreover, the mixed corpus can be produced by randomly shufﬂing
words between aligned documents in two languages (Vuli´c and Moens 2015).
Cross-lingual training approaches jointly learn embeddings from parallel corpora
and enforce cross-lingual constraints. This involves minimizing the distance of the hidden
sentence representations of the two languages (Hermann and Blunsom 2014) or decoding
one from the other (Lauly, Boulanger, and Larochelle 2013), possibly adding a correlation
term to the loss (Chandar et al. 2014).
Joint optimization typically involves learning distinct monolingual embeddings,
while enforcing cross-lingual constraints. These can be based on alignment-based
translations (Klementiev, Titov, and Bhattarai 2012), cross-lingual word contexts (Luong,
Pham, and Manning 2015), the average representations of parallel sentences (Gouws,
Bengio, and Corrado 2015), or images (Rotman, Vuli´c, and Reichart 2018).
9
Volume xx, Number xx
In this section, we have brieﬂy outlined the most widely used methods in mul-
tilingual NLP. Although they offer a solution to data scarcity, cross-lingual variation
remains a challenge for transferring knowledge across languages or learning from several
languages simultaneously. Typological information offers promising ways to address this
problem. In particular, we have noted that it can support model transfer, parameter
sharing, and input biasing through language vectors. In the next two sections, we
elaborate on these solutions. In particular, we review the development of typological
information and the speciﬁc features which are selected for various NLP tasks (§ 4).
Afterwards, we discuss ways in which these features are integrated in NLP algorithms,
for which applications they have been harnessed, and whether they truly beneﬁt system
performance (§ 5).
4. Selection and Development of Typological Information
In this section we ﬁrst present major publicly available typological databases and then
discuss how typological information relevant to NLP models is selected, pre-processed
and encoded. Finally, we highlight some limitations of database documentation with
respect to coverage and feature granularity, and discuss how missing and ﬁner-grained
features can be obtained automatically.
4.1 Hand-Crafted Documentation in Typological Databases
Figure 3: Number of grammatical genders for nouns in the world’s languages according
to WALS (Dryer and Haspelmath 2013): none (white), two (yellow), three (orange), four
(red), ﬁve or more (black).
Typological databases are created manually by linguists. They contain taxonomies
of typological features, their possible values, as well as the documentation of feature
values for the world’s languages. Major typological databases, listed in Table 1, typically
organize linguistic information in terms of universal features and language-speciﬁc
values. For example, Figure 3 presents language-speciﬁc values for the feature number of
grammatical genders for nouns on a world map. Note that each language is color-coded
10
Ponti et al.
Modeling Language Variation and Universals
Name
Levels
Coverage
Feature Example
World Atlas of
Language
Structures
(WALS)
Phonology,
Morphosyn-
tax, Lexical
semantics
2,676 languages;
192 attributes; 17%
values covered
ORDER OF OBJECT AND VERB
Amele : OV (713)
Gbaya Kara : VO (705)
Atlas of Pidgin
and Creole
Language
Structures
(APiCS)
Phonology,
Morphosyntax
76 languages; 335
attributes
TENSE–ASPECT SYSTEMS
Ternate Chabacano : purely aspectual (10)
Afrikaans : purely temporal (1)
URIEL
Typological
Compendium
Phonology,
Morphosyn-
tax, Lexical
semantics
8,070 languages;
284 attributes;
~439,000 values
CASE IS PREFIX
Berber (Middle Atlas) : yes (38)
Hawaaian : no (993)
Syntactic
Structures of the
World’s
Languages
(SSWL)
Morphosyntax
262 languages;
148 attributes; 45%
values covered
STANDARD NEGATION IS SUFFIX
Amharic : yes (21)
Laal : no (170)
AUTOTYP
Morphosyntax
825 languages,
~1000 attributes
PRESENCE OF CLUSIVITY
!Kung (Ju) : false
Ik (Kuliak) : true
Valency Patterns
Leipzig (ValPaL)
Predicate–
argument
structures
36 languages; 80
attributes; 1,156
values
TO LAUGH
Mandinka : 1 > V
Sliammon : V.sbj[1] 1
Lyon–
Albuquerque
Phonological
Systems Database
(LAPSyD)
Phonology
422 languages;
~70 attributes
â AND ú
Sindhi : yes (1)
Chuvash : no (421)
PHOIBLE Online
Phonology
2155 languages;
2,160 attributes
m
Vietnamese : yes (2053)
Pirahã : no (102)
StressTyp2
Phonology
699 languages;
927 attributes
STRESS ON FIRST SYLLABLE
Koromfé : yes (183)
Cubeo : no (516)
World Loanword
Database (WOLD)
Lexical
semantics
41 languages; 24
attributes; ~2000
values
HORSE
Quechua : kaballu borrowed (24)
Sakha : s1lg1 no evidence (18)
Intercontinental
Dictionary Series
(IDS)
Lexical
semantics
329 languages;
1310 attributes
WORLD
Russian : mir
Tocharian A : ¯arki´sos.i
Automated
Similarity
Judgment
Program (ASJP)
Lexical
Semantics
7,221 languages;
40 attributes
I
Ainu Maoka : co7okay
Japanese : watashi
Table 1: An overview of major publicly accessible databases of typological information.
The databases are ordered by description level (and secondly by date of creation), along
with their coverage. The table also provides feature examples: for each feature (in small
capitals) we present two example languages with distinct feature values, and the total
number of languages with each value in parenthesis (where applicable).
11
Volume xx, Number xx
according to its value. Further examples for each database can be found in the rightmost
column of Table 1.
Some databases store information pertaining to multiple levels of linguistic de-
scription. These include the World Atlas of Language Structures (WALS) (Dryer and
Haspelmath 2013) and the Atlas of Pidgin and Creole Language Structures (APiCS)
(Michaelis et al. 2013). Among all presently available databases, WALS has been the
most widely used in NLP. In this resource, which has 142 typological features in total,
1–19 deal with phonology, 20–29 with morphology, 30–57 with nominal categories, 58–64
with nominal syntax, 65–80 with verbal categories, 81–97 and 143–144 with word order,
98–121 with simple clauses, 122–128 with complex sentences, 129–138 with the lexicon,
and 139–142 with other properties.
Other databases only cover features at a speciﬁc level of linguistic description. For
example, both Syntactic Structures of the World’s Languages (SSWL) (Collins and Kayne
2009) and AUTOTYP (Bickel et al. 2017) focus on syntax. SSWL features are manually
crafted, whereas AUTOTYP features are derived automatically from primary linguistic
data using scripts. The Valency Patterns Leipzig (ValPaL) (Hartmann, Haspelmath, and
Taylor 2013) provides verbs as attributes and predicate–argument structures as their
values (including both valency and morphosyntactic constraints). For example, in both
Mandinka and Sliammon, the verb to laugh has a valency of 1; in other words, it requires
only one mandatory argument, the subject. In Mandinka the subject precedes the verb,
but there is no agreement requirement; in Sliammon, on the other hand, the word order
does not matter, but the verb is required to morphologically agree with the subject.
For phonology, the Phonetics Information Base and Lexicon (PHOIBLE) (Moran,
McCloy, and Wright 2014) collates information on segments (binary phonetic features). In
the Lyon–Albuquerque Phonological Systems Database (LAPSyD) (Maddieson et al.
2013), attributes are articulatory traits, syllabic structures or tonal systems. Finally,
StressTyp2 (Goedemans, Heinz, and der Hulst 2014) deals with stress and accent patterns.
For instance, in Koromfé each word’s ﬁrst syllable has to be stressed, but not in Cubeo.
Other databases document various aspects of semantics. The World Loanword
Database (WOLD) (Haspelmath and Tadmor 2009) documents loanwords by identifying
the donor languages and the source words. The Automated Similarity Judgment Program
(ASJP) (Wichmann, Holman, and Brown 2016) and the Intercontinental Dictionary Series
(IDS) (Key and Comrie 2015) indicate how a meaning is lexicalized across languages: e.g.
the concept of WORLD is expressed as mir in Russian, and as ¯arki´sos.i in Tocharian A.
Although typological databases store abundant information on many languages,
they suffer from shortcomings that limit their usefulness. Perhaps the most signiﬁcant
shortcoming of such resources is their limited coverage. In fact, feature values are
missing for most languages in most databases. Other shortcomings are related to feature
granularity. In particular, most databases fail to account for feature value variation within
each language: they report only majority value rather than the full range of possible
values and their corresponding frequencies. For example, the dominant Adjective–Noun
word order in Italian is Adjective before Noun; however, the opposite order is also
attested. The latter information is often missing from typological databases.
Further challenges are posed by restricted feature applicability and feature hierar-
chies. Firstly, some features apply, by deﬁnition, only to subsets of languages that share
another feature value. For instance, WALS feature 113A documents “Symmetric and
Asymmetric Standard Negation", whereas WALS feature 114A “Subtypes of Asymmetric
Standard Negation”. Although a special NA value is assigned for symmetric-negation
languages in the latter, there are cases where languages without the prerequisite feature
are simply omitted from the sample. Secondly, features can be partially redundant, and
12
Ponti et al.
Modeling Language Variation and Universals
Subject, Object and Verb 81A
Subject and Verb 82A
Object and Verb 83A
Object, Oblique and Verb 84A
Adposition and Noun Phrase 85A
Genitive and Noun 86A
Adjective and Noun 87A
Demonstrative and Noun 88A
Numeral and Noun 89A
0
2
4
6
Ammar+ 2016
Daiber+ 2016
Naseem+ 2012
Täckström+ 2013
Zhang+ 2012
Zhang+ 2015
Figure 4: Feature sets employed in a sample of typologically informed experiments for
dependency parsing. The numbers refer to WALS ordering (Dryer and Haspelmath
2013).
subsume other features. For instance, WALS feature 81A “Order of Subject, Object and
Verb” encodes the same information as WALS feature 82A “Order of Subject and Verb”
and 83A “Order of Object and Verb”, with the addition of the order of Subject and Object.
4.2 Feature Selection from Typological Databases
The databases presented above can serve as a rich source of typological information
for NLP. In this section, we survey the feature sets that have been extracted from these
databases in typologically informed NLP studies. In § 5.4, we review in which ways
and to which degree of success these features have been integrated in machine learning
algorithms.
Most NLP work incorporated a subset of word order features from WALS (Dryer and
Haspelmath 2013), mostly for the task of syntactic dependency parsing, where word order
provides crucial guidance (Naseem, Barzilay, and Globerson 2012). The feature subsets
used in different studies are shown in Figure 4. As depicted in the ﬁgure, these studies
employed quite similar word order features. The feature set ﬁrst established by Naseem,
Barzilay, and Globerson (2012) served as inspiration for subsequent works. These works,
however, often discarded features with the same value for all of the languages in their
sample, as these were not discriminative.
Another group of studies used more comprehensive feature sets. The feature set
of Daiber, Stanojevi´c, and Sima’an (2016) included not only WALS word order features
but also nominal categories (e.g. ‘Conjunctions and Universal Quantiﬁers’) and nominal
syntax (e.g. ‘Possessive Classiﬁcation’). Berzak, Reichart, and Katz (2015) considered all
features from WALS associated with morphosyntax and pruned out the redundant ones,
resulting in a total of 119 features. Søgaard and Wulff (2012) utilized all the features in
WALS with the exception of phonological features. Tsvetkov et al. (2016) selected 190
binarized phonological features from URIEL (Littel, Mortensen, and Levin 2016). These
13
Volume xx, Number xx
ga
fi
hu
it
es
fr
de
sv
cs
en
(a) Word-order features
hu
fi
ga
sv
de
en
cs
it
es
fr
(b) All WALS features with average genus values
Figure 5: Heat maps of encodings for different subsets of typological WALS features
taken from Ammar et al. (2016): rows stand for languages, dimensions for attributes, and
color intensities for feature values. Encodings are clustered hierarchically by similarity.
The meaning of language codes is: DE German, CS Czech, EN English, ES Spanish, FR
French, FI Finnish, GA Irish Gaelic, HU Hungarian, IT Italian, SV Swedish.
features encoded the presence of single segments, classes of segments, minimal contrasts
in a language inventory, and the number of segments in a class. For instance, they record
whether a language allows two sounds to differ only in voicing, such as /t/ and /d/.
Finally, a small number of experiments adopted the entire feature inventory of
typological databases, without any sort of pre-selection. In particular Agi´c (2017) and
Ammar et al. (2016) extracted all the features in WALS, while (Deri and Knight 2016)
all the features in URIEL. Schone and Jurafsky (2001) did not resort to basic typological
features, but rather to “several hundred [implicational universals] applicable to syntax”
drawn from the Universal Archive (Plank and Filiminova 1996).
Typological attributes that are extracted from typological databases are typically
represented as feature vectors in which each dimension encodes a feature value. This
feature representation is often binarized (Georgi, Xia, and Lewis 2010): for each possible
value v of each database attribute a, a new feature is created with value 1 if it corresponds
to the actual value for a speciﬁc language and 0 otherwise. Note that this increases
the number of features by a factor of
1
||a||
P||a||
i=1 ||vai||. Although binarization helps
harmonizing different features and different databases, it obscures the different types of
typological variables.
To what extent do the limitations of typological databases mentioned in § 4.1
affect the feature sets surveyed in this section? The coverage is generally broad for
the languages used in these experiments, as they tend to be well documented. For
instance, on average 79.8% of the feature values are populated for the 14 languages
appearing in Berzak, Reichart, and Katz (2015), as opposed to 17 percent for all the
languages in WALS.
14
Ponti et al.
Modeling Language Variation and Universals
Author
Details
Requirements
Langs
Features
Morphosyntactic Annotation
Liu (2010)
Treebank count
Treebank
20
word order
Lewis and Xia
(2008)
IGT projection
IGT, source
chunker
97
word and
morpheme order,
determiners
Bender et al. (2013)
IGT projection
IGT, source
chunker
31
word order and
case alignment
Östling (2015)
Treebank
projection
Parallel text,
source tagger
and parser
986
word order
Zhang et al. (2016)
PoS projection
source tagger,
seed dictionary
6
word order
Unsupervised Propagation
Teh, Daumé III,
and Roy (2007)
Hierarchical
typological cluster
WALS
2150
whole
Georgi, Xia, and
Lewis (2010)
Majority value
from k-means
typological cluster
WALS
whole
whole
Coke, King, and
Radev (2016)
Majority value
from genus
Genealogy and
WALS
325
word order and
passive
Littel, Mortensen,
and Levin (2016)
Family, area, and
typology-based
Nearest Neighbors
Genealogy and
WALS
whole
whole
Berzak, Reichart,
and Katz (2014)
English as a
Second
Language-based
Nearest Neighbors
ESL texts
14
whole
Malaviya, Neubig,
and Littell (2017)
Task-based
language vector
NMT dataset
1017
whole
Bjerva and
Augenstein (2018)
Task-based
language vector
PoS tag dataset
27-824
phonology,
morphology,
syntax
Supervised Learning
Takamura, Nagata,
and Kawasaki
(2016)
Logistic regression
WALS
whole
whole
Murawaki (2017)
Bayesian + feature
and language
interactions
Genealogy and
WALS
2607
whole
Wang and Eisner
(2017)
Feed-forward
Neural Network
WALS, tagger,
synthetic
treebanks
37
word order
Cotterell and
Eisner (2017)
Determinant Point
Process with
neural features
WALS
200
vowel inventory
Daumé III and
Campbell (2007)
Implication
universals
Genealogy and
WALS
whole
whole
Lu (2013)
Automatic
discovery
Genealogy and
WALS
1646
word order
Cross-lingual
distribution
Wälchli and
Cysouw (2012)
Sentence edit
distance
Multi-parallel
texts, pivot
100
motion verbs
Asgari and
Schütze (2017)
Pivot alignment
Multi-parallel
texts, pivot
1163
tense markers
Roy et al. (2014)
Correlations in
counts and
entropy
None
23
adposition word
order
Table 2: An overview of the strategies for prediction of typological features.
15
Volume xx, Number xx
It is hard to assess at a large scale how informative is a set of typological features.
However, these can be meaningfully compared with genealogical information. Ideally,
these two properties should not be completely equivalent (otherwise they would be
redundant),5 but at the same time they should partly overlap (language cognates inherit
typological properties from the same ancestors). In Figure 5, we show two feature sets
appearing in Ammar et al. (2016), each depicted as a heatmap. Each row represents a
language in the data, each cell is colored according to the feature value, ranging from 0
to 1. In particular, the feature set of Figure 5a is the subset of word order features listed
in Figure 4; and Figure 5b is a large set of WALS features where values are averaged by
language genus to ﬁll in missing values.
In order to compare the similarities of the typological feature vectors among
languages, we clustered languages hierarchically based on such vectors.6 Intuitively, the
more this hierarchy resembles their actual family tree, the more redundant typological
information is. This is the case for 5b, where the lowest-lever clusters correspond
exactly to a genus or family (top-down: Romance, Slavic, Germanic, Celtic, Uralic).
Still, the language vectors belonging to the same cluster display some micro-variations
in individual features. On the other hand, 5a shows clusters differing from language
genealogy: for instance, English and Czech are merged although they belong to different
genera (Germanic and Slavic). However, this feature set fails to account for ﬁne-grained
differences among related languages: for instance, French, Spanish, and Italian receive
the same encoding.7
To sum up, this section’s survey on typological feature sets reveals that most
experiments have taken into account a small number of databases and features therein.
However, several studies did utilize a larger set of coherent features or full databases.
Although well-documented languages do not suffer much from coverage issues, we
showed how difﬁcult it is to select typological features that are non-redundant with
genealogy, fully discriminative, and informative. The next section addresses these
problems proposing automatic prediction as a solution.
4.3 Automatic Prediction of Typological Features
The partial coverage and coarse granularity of existing typological resources sparked
a line of research on automatic acquisition of typological information. Missing feature
values can be predicted based on: i) heuristics from morphosyntactic annotation that
pre-exists, such as treebanks, or is transferred from aligned texts (§ 4.3.1); ii) unsupervised
propagation from other values in a database based on clustering or language similarity
metrics (§ 4.3.2); iii) supervised learning with Bayesian models or artiﬁcial neural
networks (§ 4.3.3); or iv) heuristics based on co-occurrence metrics, typically applied to
multi-parallel texts (§ 4.3.4). These strategies are summarized in Table 2.
With the exception of Naseem, Barzilay, and Globerson (2012), who treated typo-
logical information as a latent variable, automatically acquired typological features
have not been integrated into algorithms for NLP applications to date. However, they
have several advantages over manually crafted features. Unsupervised propagation and
supervised learning ﬁll in missing values in databases, thereby extending their coverage.
Moreover, heuristics based on morphosyntactic annotation and co-occurrence metrics
5 This does not apply to isolates, however: by deﬁnition, no genealogical information is available for these
languages. Hence, typology is the only source of information about their properties.
6 Clustering was performed through the complete linkage method.
7 Notwithstanding they have different preferences over word orders (Liu 2010).
16
Ponti et al.
Modeling Language Variation and Universals
extract additional information that is not recorded in typological databases. Further,
they can account for the distribution of feature values within single languages, rather
than just the majority value. Finally, they do not make use of discrete cross-lingual
categories to compare languages; rather, language properties are reﬂected in continuous
representations, which is in line with their gradient nature (see § 2)
4.3.1 Heuristics based on morphosyntactic annotation. Morphosyntactic feature values
can be extracted via heuristics from morphologically and syntactically annotated texts.
For example, word order features can be calculated by counting the average direction
of dependency relations or constituency hierarchies (Liu 2010). Consider the tree of a
sentence in Welsh from Bender et al. (2013) in Figure 6. The relative order of verb–subject,
and verb–object can be deduced from the position of the relevant nodes VBD, NNS and
NNO (highlighted).
S
PP
NN
bachgen
boy
IN+DT
i’r
to the
NP
NNO
lyfr
book
NP
NNS
athro
teacher
DT
yr
the
VBD
rhoddodd
gave
Figure 6: Constituency tree of a Welsh sentence.
Morphosyntactic annotation is often unavailable for resource-lean languages. In such
cases, it can be projected from a source directly to several target languages through
language transfer. For instance, Östling (2015) project source morphosyntactic annotation
directly to several languages through a multilingual word alignment. After the alignment
and projection, word order features are calculated by the average direction of dependency
relations. Similarly, Zhang et al. (2016) transfer POS annotation with a model transfer
technique relying on multilingual embeddings, created through monolingual mapping
(see § 3.3). After the projection, they predict feature values with a multiclass Support
Vector Machine (SVM) using POS tag n-gram features.
Finally, typological information can be extracted from Interlinear Glossed Texts (IGT).
Such collections of example sentences are collated by linguists and contain grammatical
glosses with morphological information. These can guide alignment between the example
sentence and its English translation. Lewis and Xia (2008) and Bender et al. (2013)
project chunking information from English and train Context Free Grammars on target
languages. After collapsing identical rules, they arrange them by frequency and infer
word order features.
4.3.2 Unsupervised propagation. Another line of research seeks to increase the coverage
of typological databases borrowing missing values from the known values in other
languages. One approach is clustering languages according to some criterion and
propagating the majority value within each cluster. Hierarchical clusters can be created
either according to typological features (e.g. Teh, Daumé III, and Roy (2007)) or based on
language genus (Coke, King, and Radev 2016). Through extensive evaluation, Georgi, Xia,
17
Volume xx, Number xx
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
−10
0
10
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
(a) Input vectors
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
−10
0
10
(b) Cell states
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
−10
0
10
−10
0
10
20
family
G −−
Afro−Asiatic
Atlantic−Congo
Austronesian
Indo−European
Nambiquaran
Nuclear Trans New Guinea
Otomanguean
Sino−Tibetan
(c) Predicted WALS
Figure 7: Language representations dimensionality-reduced with t-SNE.
and Lewis (2010) demonstrate that typology based clustering outperforms genealogical
clustering for unsupervised propagation of typological features. Among the clustering
techniques examined, k-means appears to be the most reliable as compared to k-medoids,
the Unweighted Pair Group Method with Arithmetic mean (UPGMA), repeated bisection,
and hierarchical methods with partitional clusters.
Language similarity measures can also rely on a distributed representation of each
language. These language vectors are trained end-to-end as part of neural models
for downstream tasks such as many-to-one Neural Machine Translation. In particular,
language vectors can be obtained from artiﬁcial trainable tokens concatenated to every
input sentence, similarly to Johnson et al. (2017), or from the aggregated values of the
hidden state of a neural encoder. Using these language representations, typological
feature values are propagated using K Nearest Neighbors (Bjerva and Augenstein 2018)
or predicted with logistic regression (Malaviya, Neubig, and Littell 2017).
Language vectors can be conceived as data-driven, continuous typological rep-
resentations of a language, and as such provide an alternative to manually crafted
typological representations. Similarly to the analysis carried out in § 4.2, we can
investigate how much language vectors align with genealogical information. Figure
7 compares continuous representations based on artiﬁcial tokens (Figure 7a) and encoder
hidden states (Figure 7b) with vectors of discrete WALS features from URIEL (Figure 7c).
All the representations are reduced to 2 dimensions with t-SNE, and color-coded based
on their language family.
As the plots demonstrate, the information encoded in WALS vectors is akin to ge-
nealogical information, partly because of biases introduced by family-based propagation
of missing values (Littel, Mortensen, and Levin 2016, see § 4.3.2). On the other hand,
artiﬁcial tokens and encoder hidden states cannot be reduced to genealogical clusters.
Yet, their ability to predict missing values is not inferior to WALS features (as detailed
in § 4.3.5). This implies that discrete and continuous representations appear to capture
different aspects of the cross-lingual variation, while being both informative. For this
reason, they are possibly complementary and could be combined in the future.
4.3.3 Supervised learning. As an alternative to unsupervised propagation, one can learn
an explicit model for predicting feature values through supervised classiﬁcation. For
instance, Takamura, Nagata, and Kawasaki (2016) use logistic regression with WALS
features and evaluate this model in a cross-validation setting where one language is held
18
Ponti et al.
Modeling Language Variation and Universals
out in each fold. Wang and Eisner (2017) provide supervision to a feed-forward neural
network with windows of PoS tags from natural and synthetic corpora.
Supervised learning of typology can also be guided by non typological information
(see § 2). Within the Bayesian framework, Murawaki (2017) exploits not only typological
but also genealogical and areal dependencies among languages to represent each
language as a binary latent parameter vector through a series of autologistic models.
Cotterell and Eisner (2017, 2018) develop a point-process generative model of vowel
inventories (represented as either IPA symbols or acoustic formants) based on some
universal cognitive principles: dispersion (phonemes are as spread out as possible in the
acoustic space) and focalization (some positions in the acoustic space are preferred due
to the similarity of the main formants).
An alternative approach to supervised prediction of typology is based on learning
implicational universals of the kind pioneered by Greenberg (1963) with probabilistic
models from existing typological databases. Using such universals, features can be
deduced by modus ponens. For instance, once it has been established that the presence
of ‘High consonant/vowel ratio’ and ‘No front-rounded vowels’ implies ‘No tones’, the
latter feature value can be deduced from the premises if those are known. Daumé III
and Campbell (2007) proposes a Bayesian model for learning typological universals that
predicts features based on the intuition that their likelihood does not equal their prior
probability, but rather is constrained by other features. Lu (2013) cast this problem as
knowledge discovery, where language features are encoded in a Directed Acyclic Graph.
The strength of implication universals is represented as weights associated with the
edges of this graph.
4.3.4 Heuristics based on Cross-Lingual Distributional Information. Typological fea-
tures can also emerge in a data-driven fashion, based on distributional information from
Figure 8: Wälchli and Cysouw (2012)’s cross-lingual sentence visualization for Mapun-
gundun. In the top-right corner is the legend of the motion verbs taken into consideration.
Each data point is an instance of a verb in a sentence, positioned according to its
contextualized sense. English glosses are the authors’ interpretations of the main clusters.
19
Volume xx, Number xx
multi-parallel texts. Wälchli and Cysouw (2012) create a matrix where each row is a
parallel sentence, each column is a language, and cell values are lemmas of motion
verbs occurring in those sentences. This matrix can be transformed to a (Hamming)
distance matrix between sentence pairs, and reduced to lower dimensionality via Multi-
Dimensional Scaling (MDS). This provides a continuous map of lexical semantics that is
language-speciﬁc, but motivated by categories that emerge across languages. For instance,
Figure 8 shows the ﬁrst two dimensions of the MDS similarity matrix in Mapudungun,
where the ﬁrst dimension can be interpreted as reﬂecting the direction of motion.
Asgari and Schütze (2017) devised a procedure to obtain markers of grammatical
features across languages. Initially, they manually select a language containing an
unambiguous and overt marker for a speciﬁc typological feature (called head pivot)
based on linguistic expertise. For instance, ti in Seychellois Creole (French Creole) is a
head pivot for past tense marking. Then, this marker is connected to equivalent markers
in other languages through alignment-based χ2 test in a multi-parallel corpus and n-gram
counts.
Finally, typological features can be derived from raw texts in a completely unsu-
pervised fashion, without multi-parallel texts. Roy et al. (2014) use heuristics to predict
the order of adpositions and nouns. Adpositions are identiﬁed as the most frequent
words. Afterwards, the position of the noun is established based on whether selectional
restrictions appear on the right context or the left context of the adposition, according to
count-based and entropy-based metrics.
4.3.5 Comparison of the strategies. Establishing which of the above-mentioned strate-
gies is optimal in terms of prediction accuracy is not straightforward. In Figure 9, we
collect the scores reported by several of the surveyed papers, provided that they concern
speciﬁc features or the whole WALS dataset (as opposed to subsets) and are numerical
(as opposed to graphical plots). However, these results are not strictly comparable,
since language samples and/or the split of data partitions may differ. The lack of
standardization in this respect allows us to draw conclusions only about the difﬁculty of
predicting each feature relative to a speciﬁc strategy: for instance, the correct value of
passive voice is harder to predict than word order, as claimed by Bender et al. (2013) and
witnessed by Figure 9.
However, some papers carry out comparisons of the different strategies within the
same experimental setting. According to Coke, King, and Radev (2016), propagation from
the genus majority value outperforms logistic regression among word-order typological
features. On the other hand, Georgi, Xia, and Lewis (2010) argue that typology-based
clusters are to be preferred in general. This apparent contradiction stems from the nature
of the target features: genealogy excels in word order features due to their diachronic
stability. As they tend to be preserved over time, they are often shared by all members of
a family. In turn, majority value propagation is surpassed by supervised classiﬁcation
when evaluated on the entire WALS feature set (Takamura, Nagata, and Kawasaki 2016).
In general, there appears to be no ‘one-size-ﬁts-all’ algorithm. For instance, Coke,
King, and Radev (2016) outperform Wang and Eisner (2017) for object–verb order (83A)
but are inferior to it for adposition–noun (85A). In fact, each strategy is suited for
different features, and requires different resources. Based on Figure 9, the extraction of
information from morphosyntactic annotation is well suited for word order features,
whereas distributional heuristics from multi-parallel texts are more informative about
lexicalization patterns. On the other hand, unsupervised propagation and supervised
learning are general-purpose strategies. Moreover, the ﬁrst two presuppose some
annotated and/or parallel texts, whereas the second two need a pre-existing database
20
Ponti et al.
Modeling Language Variation and Universals
0
25
50
75
100
107A33A 37A 38A 51A 69A 81A 82A 83A 85A 86A 87A 88A 89A 92A 98Awhole
Paper
Bender 2013
Bjerva 2018
Coke 2015
Georgi 2010
Lewis 2008
Littel 2017
Malaviya 2017
Murawaki 2017
Ostling 2015
Takamura 2015
Wang 2017
Figure 9: Accuracy of different approaches (see legend on the right) in predicting missing
values of WALS typological features (speciﬁed on the vertical axis).
documentation. Strategies may be preferred according to which resources are available
for a speciﬁc language.
Many strategies have a common weakness, however, as they postulate incorrectly
that language samples are independent and identically distributed (Lu 2013; Cotterell
and Eisner 2017). This is not the case due to the interactions of family, area, and
implicational universals. The solutions adopted to mitigate this weakness vary: Wang and
Eisner (2017) balance the data distribution with synthetic examples, whereas Takamura,
Nagata, and Kawasaki (2016) model family and area interactions explicitly. However,
according to Murawaki (2017), these interactions have different degrees of impact on
typological features. In particular, inter-feature dependencies are more inﬂuential than
inter-language dependencies, and horizontal diffusibility (borrowing from neighbours)
is more prominent than vertical stability (inheriting from ancestors).
Finally, a potential direction for future investigation emerges from this section’s
survey. In addition to missing value completion, automatic prediction often also accounts
for the variation internal to each language. However, some strategies go even further, and
“open the way for a typology where generalizations can be made without there being
any need to reduce the attested diversity of categorization patterns to discrete types”
(Wälchli and Cysouw 2012). In fact, language vectors (Malaviya, Neubig, and Littell
2017; Bjerva and Augenstein 2018) and distributional information from multi-parallel
texts (Asgari and Schütze 2017) are promising insofar they capture latent properties
of languages in a bottom-up fashion, preserving their gradient nature. This offers an
alternative to hand-crafted database features: in § 6.3 we make a case for integrating
continuous, data-driven typological representations into NLP algorithms.
21
Volume xx, Number xx
Author
Details
Number of
Languages /
Families
Task
Rules
Bender (2016)
Grammar generation
12 / 8
semantic parsing
Feature engineering
Naseem, Barzilay,
and Globerson (2012)
Generative
17 / 10
syntactic parsing
Täckström,
McDonald, and
Nivre (2013)
Discriminative
graph-based
16 / 7
syntactic parsing
Zhang and Barzilay
(2015)
Discriminative
tensor-based
10 / 4
syntactic parsing
Daiber, Stanojevi´c,
and Sima’an (2016)
One-to-many MLP
22 / 5
reordering for
machine translation
Ammar et al. (2016)
Multi-lingual
transition-based
7 / 1
syntactic parsing
Tsvetkov et al. (2016)
Phone-based
polyglot language
model
9 / 4
identiﬁcation of
lexical borrowings
and speech synthesis
Schone and Jurafsky
(2001)
Design of Bayesian
network
1 / 1
word cluster labeling
Data Manipulation
Deri and Knight
(2016)
Typology-based
selection
227
grapheme to
phoneme
Agi´c (2017)
PoS divergence
metric
26 / 5
syntactic parsing
Søgaard and Wulff
(2012)
Typology-based
weighing
12 / 1
syntactic parsing
Wang and Eisner
(2017)
Word-order-based
tree synthesis
17 / 7
syntactic parsing
Ponti et al. (2018a)
Construction-based
tree preprocessing
6 / 3
machine translation,
sentence similarity
Table 3: An overview of the approaches to use typological features in NLP models.
5. Uses of Typological Information in NLP Models
The typological features developed as discussed in § 4 are of signiﬁcant importance
for NLP algorithms. Particularly, they are employed in three main ways. First, they
can be manually converted into rules for expert systems (§5.1); second, they can be
integrated into algorithms as constraints that inject prior knowledge or tie together
speciﬁc parameters across languages (§ 5.2); and, ﬁnally, they can guide data selection
and synthesis (§ 5.3). All of these approaches are summarized in Table 3 and described
in detail in the following sections, with a particular focus on the second approach.
5.1 Rule-based Systems
An interesting example of a rule-based system in our context is the Grammar Matrix
kit, presented by Bender (2016), where rule-based grammars can be generated from
typological features. These grammars are designed within the framework of Minimal
Recursion Semantics (Copestake et al. 2005) and can parse a natural language input
string into a semantic logical form.
The Grammar Matrix consists of a universal core grammar and language-speciﬁc
libraries for phenomena where typological variation is attested. For instance, the module
for coordination typology expects the speciﬁcation of the kind, pattern, and position
of a grammatical marking, as well as the phrase types it covers. For instance, the Ono
language (Trans–New Guinea) expresses it with a lexical, monosyndetic, pre-nominal
22
Ponti et al.
Modeling Language Variation and Universals
marker so in noun phrases. A collection of pre-deﬁned grammars is available through
the Language CoLLAGE initiative (Bender 2014).
5.2 Feature Engineering and Constraints
The most common usage of typological features in NLP is in feature engineering and
constraint design for machine learning algorithms. Two popular approaches we consider
here are language transfer with selective sharing, where the parameters of languages with
similar typological features are tied together (§ 5.2.1), and joint multilingual learning,
where typological information is used in order to bias models to reﬂect the properties of
speciﬁc languages (see § 5.2.2).
5.2.1 Selective sharing. This framework was introduced by Naseem, Barzilay, and
Globerson (2012) and was subsequently adopted by Täckström, McDonald, and Nivre
(2013) and Zhang and Barzilay (2015). It aims at parsing sentences in a language transfer
setting (see § 3.1) where there are multiple source languages and a single unobserved
target language. It assumes that head–modiﬁer relations between part of speech pairs
are universal, but the order of parts of speech within a sentence is language-speciﬁc.
For instance, adjectives always modify nouns, but in Igbo (Niger–Congo) they linearly
precede nouns, while in Nihali (isolate) they follow nouns. Leveraging this intuition,
selective sharing models learn dependency relations from all source languages, while
ordering is learned from typologically related languages only.
Selective sharing was originally implemented in a generative framework, factorizing
the recursive generation of dependency tree fragments into two steps (Naseem, Barzilay,
and Globerson 2012). The ﬁrst one is universal: the algorithm selects an unordered
(possibly empty) set of modiﬁers {M} given a head h with probability P({M}|h), where
both the head and the modiﬁers are characterized by their PoS tags. The second step is
language-speciﬁc: each dependent m is assigned a direction d (left or right) with respect
to h based on the language l, with probability P(d|m, h, l). Dependents in the same
direction are eventually ordered with a probability drawn from a uniform distribution
over their possible unique permutations. The total probability is then deﬁned as follows:
P(n|h, θ1) · σn
 X
mi∈M
P(mi|h, θ2)
!
·
Y
mi∈M
σ (w · g(m, h, l, fl)) ·
1
||MR||||ML||
(1)
In Equation 1, the ﬁrst step is expressed as two factors: the estimation of the number n of
modiﬁers, parametrized by θ1, and the actual selection of modiﬁers, parametrized by θ2,
with the softmax function σ converting the n values into probabilities. The second step,
overseeing the assignment of a direction to the dependencies, is parametrized by w that
multiplies a feature function g(), whose arguments include a typology feature vector
fl. The values of all the parameters are estimated by maximizing the likelihood of the
observations.
Täckström, McDonald, and Nivre (2013) proposed a discriminative version of the
model, in order to amend the alleged limitations of the original generative variant. In
particular, they dispose of the strong independence assumptions (e.g. between choice
and ordering of modiﬁers) and invalid feature combinations. For instance, the WALS
feature ‘Order of subject, verb, and object’ (81A) should be taken into account only when
the head under consideration is a verb and the dependent is a noun, but in the generative
model this feature was fed to g() regardless of the head–dependency pair. The method of
23
Volume xx, Number xx
Täckström, McDonald, and Nivre (2013) is a delexicalized ﬁrst-order graph-based parser
based on a carefully selected feature set. From the set proposed by McDonald, Crammer,
and Pereira (2005), they keep only (universal) features describing selectional preferences
and dependency length. Moreover, they introduce (language-speciﬁc) features for the
directionality of dependents, based on combinations of the PoS tags of the head and
modiﬁers with corresponding WALS values.
This approach was further extended to tensor-based models by Zhang and Barzilay
(2015), in order to avoid the shortcomings of manual feature selection. They induce
a compact hidden representation of features and languages by factorizing a tensor
constructed from their combination. The prior knowledge from the typological database
enables the model to forbid the invalid interactions, by generating intermediate feature
embeddings in a hierarchical structure. In particular, given n words and l dependency
relations, each arc h →m is encoded as the tensor product of three feature vectors for
heads Φh ∈Rn, modiﬁers Φm ∈Rn and the arcs Φh→m ∈Rl. A score is obtained through
the inner product of these and the corresponding r rank-1 dense parameter matrices for
heads H ∈Rn×r, dependents M ∈Rn×r, and arcs M ∈Rl×r. The resulting embedding is
subsequently constrained through a summation with the typological features Tuφtu:
S(h
l−→m) =
r
X
i=1
[Hcφhc]i[Mcφmc]i ⊙
{[Tlφtl]i + [Lφl]i ⊙
([Tuφtu]i + [Hφh]i[Mφm]i[Dφd]i)}
(2)
Equation 2 shows how the overall score of a labeled dependency is enriched (by element-
wise product) with (1) the features and parameters for arc labels Lφl constrained by
the typological vector Tlφtl; and (2) features and parameters for head contexts Hcφhc
and dependent contexts Mcφmc. This loss is optimized within a maximum soft-margin
objective through on-line passive–aggressive updates.
The different approaches to selective sharing presented here explicitly deal with
cases where the typological features do not match any of the source languages, which
may lead learning astray. Naseem, Barzilay, and Globerson (2012) propose a variant of
their algorithm where the typological features are not observed (in WALS), treating
them as latent variables, and learning the model parameters in an unsupervised
fashion with the Expectation Maximization algorithm (Dempster, Laird, and Rubin
1977). Täckström, McDonald, and Nivre (2013) tackle the same problem from the side
of ambiguous learning. The discriminative model on the target language is trained on
sets of automatically predicted ambiguous labels by. Finally, Zhang and Barzilay (2015)
employ semi-supervised techniques, where only a handful of annotated examples from
the target language is available.
5.2.2 Multi-lingual Biasing. Some papers leverage typological features to gear the shared
parameters of a joint multilingual model toward the properties of a speciﬁc language.
Daiber, Stanojevi´c, and Sima’an (2016) develop a reordering algorithm that estimates the
permutation probabilities of aligned word pairs in multi-lingual parallel texts. The best
sequence of permutations is inferred via k-best graph search in a ﬁnite state automaton,
producing a lattice. This algorithm, which receives lexical, morphological, and syntactic
features of the source word pairs and typological features of the target language as input,
has shown to beneﬁt a downstream machine translation task.
24
Ponti et al.
Modeling Language Variation and Universals
The joint multilingual parser of Ammar et al. (2016) shares hidden-layer parameters
across languages, and combines both language-invariant and language-speciﬁc features
in its copious lexicalized input feature set. This transition-based parser selects the next
action z (e.g. SHIFT) from a pool of possible actions given its current state pt, as deﬁned
in Equation 3:
P(z|pt) = σ(gz
⊤max(0, W st ⊕bt ⊕at ⊕lit + b) + qz)
(3)
P(z|pt) is deﬁned in terms of a set of iteratively manipulated, densely represented data
structures: a buffer bt, a stack st, and an action history at. The hidden representation
of these modules are the output of stack-LSTMs, that are in turn fed with input
word feature representations (stack and buffer) and action representations (history).
The shared parameters are biased toward a particular language through language
embeddings lit. The language embeddings consist of (a non-linear transformation of)
either a mere one-hot identity vector or a vector of typological properties taken from
WALS. In particular, they are added to both input feature and action vectors, to affect the
three above-mentioned modules individually, and concatenated to the hidden module
representations, to affect the entire parser state. The resulting state representation is
propagated through an action-speciﬁc layer parametrized by gt and qt, and activated by
a softmax function σ over actions.
Similarly, typological features have been employed to bias input and hidden states of
language models. For example, Tsvetkov et al. (2016) proposed a multilingual phoneme-
level language model where an input phoneme x and a language vector ℓat time t are
linearly mapped to a local context representation and then passed to a global LSTM.
This hidden representation Gℓ
t is factored by a non-linear transformation of typological
features tℓ, as shown in Equation 4:
Gℓ
t = LSTM(Wcxxt + Wcℓxℓ+ b, gt−1) ⊗tanh(Wℓtℓ+ bℓ)⊤
(4)
P(φt|φ<t, ℓ) = σ(W vec(Gℓ
t) + b)
(5)
As described in Equation 5, Gℓ
t is then vectorized and mapped to a probability distribu-
tion of possible next phonemes φt. The phoneme vectors, learned by the language model
in an end-to-end manner, were demonstrated to beneﬁt two downstream applications:
lexical borrowing identiﬁcation and speech synthesis.
Moreover, typological features (in the form of implicational universals) can guide
the design of Bayesian networks. Schone and Jurafsky (2001) assign part-of-speech labels
to word clusters acquired in an unsupervised fashion. The underlying network is acyclic
and directed, and is converted to a join-tree network to handle multiple parents (Jensen
1996). For instance, the sub-graph for the ordering of numerals and nouns is intertwined
also with properties of adjectives and adpositions. The ﬁnal objective maximizes the
probability of a tag Ti and a feature set Φi given the implicational universals U as
argmaxT P({Φi, Ti}n
i=1|U).
5.3 Data Selection, Synthesis, and Preprocessing
Another way in which typological features are used in NLP is to guide data selection.
This procedure is crucial for 1) language transfer methods, as it guides the choice of the
most suitable source languages and examples; and 2) multilingual joint models, in order
to weigh the contribution of each language and example. The selection is typically carried
25
Volume xx, Number xx
out through general language similarity metrics. For instance, Deri and Knight (2016) base
their selection on the URIEL language typology database, considering information about
genealogical, geographic, syntactic, and phonetic properties. This facilitates language
transfer of grapheme-to-phoneme models, by guiding the choice of source languages
and aligning phoneme inventories.
Metrics for source selection can also be extracted in a data-driven fashion, without
explicit reference to structured taxonomies. For instance, Rosa and Zabokrtsky (2015)
estimate the Kullback–Leibler divergence between part-of-speech trigram distributions
for delexicalized parser transfer. In order to approximate the divergence in syntactic
structures between languages, Ponti et al. (2018a) employ the Jaccard distance between
morphological feature sets and the tree edit distance of delexicalized dependency parses
of similar sentences.
A-priori and bottom-up approaches can also be combined. For delexicalized parser
transfer, Agi´c (2017) relies on a weighted sum of distances based on 1) the PoS divergence
deﬁned by Rosa and Zabokrtsky (2015); 2) the character-based identity prediction of
the target language; and 3) the Hamming distance from the target language typological
vector. In fact, they have different weaknesses: language identity (and consequently
typology) fail to abstract away from language scripts. On the other hand, the accuracy of
PoS-based metrics deteriorates easily in scenarios with poor amounts of data.
Source language selection is a special case of source language weighting where
weights are one-hot vectors. However, weights can also be gradient and consist of real
numbers. Søgaard and Wulff (2012) adapt delexicalized parsers by weighting every
training instance based on the inverse of the Hamming distance between typological
(or genealogical) features in source and target languages. An equivalent bottom-up
approach is developed by Søgaard (2011) who weighs source language sentences based
on the perplexity between their coarse PoS tags and the predictions of a sequential model
trained on the target language.
Alternatively, the lack of target annotated data can be alleviated by synthesizing new
examples, thus boosting the variety and amount of the source data. For instance, the
Galactic Dependency Treebanks stem from real trees whose nodes have been permuted
probabilistically according to the word order rules for nouns and verbs in other languages
(Wang and Eisner 2016). Synthetic trees improve the performance of model transfer
for parsing when the source is chosen in a supervised way (performance on target
development data) and in an unsupervised way (coverage of target PoS sequences).
Rather than generating new synthetic data, Ponti et al. (2018a) leverage typological
features to pre-process treebanks in order to reduce their variation in language transfer
tasks. In particular, they adapt source trees to the typology of a target language with
respect to several constructions in a rule-based fashion. For instance, relative clauses in
Arabic (Afro–Asiatic) with an indeﬁnite antecedent drop the relative pronoun, which
is mandatory in Portuguese (Indo–European). Hence, the pronoun has to be added,
or deleted in the other direction. Feeding pre-processed syntactic trees to lexicalized
syntax-based neural models, such as feature-based recurrent encoders (Sennrich and
Haddow 2016) or TreeLSTMs (Tai, Socher, and Manning 2015), achieves state-of-the-art
results in Neural Machine Translation and cross-lingual sentence similarity classiﬁcation.
5.4 Comparison
In light of the performance of the above methods, to what extent can typological features
beneﬁt downstream NLP tasks and applications? To answer this key question, consider
the performance scores of each model reported in Figure 10. Each model has been
26
Ponti et al.
Modeling Language Variation and Universals
UAS
UAS
UAS
BLEU
MAE
UAS
PPL
WER
UAS
UAS
UAS
BLEU
F1
Agic 2017
Ammar 2016
Berzak 2016
Daiber 2016
Deri 2016
Naseem 2012
Ponti 2018 (NMT)
Ponti 2018 (STS)
Sogaard 2012
Tackstrom 2013
Tsvetkov 2016
Wang 2016
Zhang 2015
0
25
50
75
100
Feature
Baseline
Data−driven
Genealogy
Language Identity
Typology
Figure 10: Performance of the surveyed algorithms for the tasks detailed in Table
3. The algorithms are evaluated with different feature sets: no typological features
(Baseline), latently inferred typology (Data-driven), Genealogy, Language Identity, and
gold database features (Typology). Evaluation metrics are reported right of the bars:
Unlabeled Attachment Score (UAS), Perplexity (PPL), F1 Score, BiLingual Evaluation
Understudy (BLEU), Word Error Rate (WER), and Mean Absolute Error (MAE).
evaluated in the original paper in one (or more) of the three main settings: with gold
database features (Typology), with latently inferred typological features (Data-driven), or
without both (Baseline), and with otherwise identical architecture and hyper-parameters.
It is evident that typology-enriched models consistently outperform baselines across
several NLP tasks. Indeed, the scores are higher for metrics that increase (Unlabeled
Attachment Score, F1 Score and BLEU) and lower for metrics that decrease (Word
Error Rate, Mean Average Error and Perplexity) with better predictions. Nevertheless,
improvements tend to be moderate, and only a small number of experiments support
27
Volume xx, Number xx
them with statistical signiﬁcance tests. In general, it appears that they fall short of the
potential usefulness of typology: in § 6 we analyse the possible reasons for this.
Some of the experiments we have surveyed investigate the effect of substituting
typological features with features related to Genealogy and Language Identity (e.g.
one-hot encoding of languages). Based on the results in Figure 10, it is unclear whether
typology should be preferred, as it is sometimes rivaled by other types of features.
In particular, it is typology that excels according to Tsvetkov et al. (2016), genealogy
according to Søgaard and Wulff (2012) and Täckström, McDonald, and Nivre (2013), and
language identity according to Ammar et al. (2016). However, drawing conclusions from
the last experiment seems incautious: in § 4.2, we argued that their selection of features
(presented in Figure 5) is debatable due to low diversiﬁcation or noise. Moreover, it
should be emphasized that one-hot language encoding is limited to the joint multilingual
learning setting: since it does not convey any information, it is of no avail in language
transfer.
Finally, let us consider the effectiveness of the above methods with respect to
incorporating typological features in NLP models. In case of selective sharing, the tensor-
based discriminative model (Zhang and Barzilay 2015) outperforms the graph-based
discriminative model (Täckström, McDonald, and Nivre 2013), which in turn surpasses
the generative model (Naseem, Barzilay, and Globerson 2012). With regard to biasing
multilingual models, there is a clear tendency toward letting typological features interact
not merely with the input representation, but also with deeper levels of abstraction such
as hidden layers.
Overall, this comparison supports the claim that typology can potentially aid in
designing the architecture of algorithms, engineering their features, and selecting and
pre-processing their data. Nonetheless, this discussion also revealed that many challenges
lie ahead for each of these goals to be accomplished fully. We discuss them in the next
section.
6. Future Research Avenues
In § 5 we surveyed the current uses of typological information in NLP. In this section we
discuss potential future research avenues that may result in a closer and more effective
integration of linguistic typology and multilingual NLP. In particular, we discuss: 1) the
extension of existing methods to new tasks, possibly exploiting typological resources that
have been neglected thus far (§ 6.1); 2) new methods for injecting typological information
into NLP models as soft constraints or auxiliary objectives (§ 6.2); and 3) new ways to
acquire and represent typological information that reﬂect the gradient and contextual
nature of cross-lingual variation (§ 6.3).
6.1 Extending the Usage to New Tasks and Features
The trends observed in § 5 reveal that typology is integrated into NLP models mostly in
the context of morphosyntactic tasks, and particularly syntactic parsing. Some exceptions
include other levels of linguistic structure, such as phonology (Tsvetkov et al. 2016; Deri
and Knight 2016) and semantics (Bender 2016; Ponti et al. 2018a). As a consequence, the
set of selected typological features is mostly limited to a handful of word-order features
from a single database, WALS. Nonetheless, the array of tasks that pertain to polyglot
NLP is broad, and other typological datasets that have thus far been neglected may be
relevant for them.
28
Ponti et al.
Modeling Language Variation and Universals
For example, typological frame semantics might beneﬁt semantic role labeling, as
it speciﬁes the valency patterns of predicates across languages, including the number
of arguments, their morphological markers, and their order. This information can be
cast in the form of priors for unsupervised syntax-based Bayesian models (Titov and
Klementiev 2012), guidance for alignments in annotation projection (Padó and Lapata
2009; Van der Plas, Merlo, and Henderson 2011), or regularizers for model transfer in
order to tailor the source model to the grammar of the target language (Kozhevnikov
and Titov 2013). Cross-lingual information about frame semantics can be extracted, for
example, from the Valency Patterns Leipzig database (ValPaL).
Typological information regarding lexical semantics patterns can further assist
various NLP tasks, by providing information about translationally equivalent words
across languages. Such information is provided in databases such as the World Loanword
Database (WOLD), the Intercontinental Dictionary Series (IDS), and the Automated
Similarity Judgment Program (ASJP). One example task is word sense disambiguation,
as senses can be propagated from multilingual word graphs (Silberer and Ponzetto 2010)
by bootstrapping from a few pivot pairs (Khapra et al. 2011), by imposing constraints in
sentence alignments and harvesting bag-of-words features from these (Lefever, Hoste,
and De Cock 2011), or by providing seeds for multilingual WE-based lexicalized model
transfer (Zennaki, Semmar, and Besacier 2016).
Another task where lexical semantics is crucial is sentiment analysis, for similar
reasons: bilingual lexicons constrain word alignments for annotation projection (Almeida
et al. 2015) and provide pivots for shared multilingual representations in model transfer
(Fernández, Esuli, and Sebastiani 2015; Ziser and Reichart 2018). Moreover, sentiment
analysis can leverage morphosyntactic typological information about constructions that
alter polarity, such as negation (Ponti, Vuli´c, and Korhonen 2017).
Finally, morphological information was shown to aid interpreting the intrinsic
difﬁculty of texts for language modeling and neural machine translation, both in
supervised (Johnson et al. 2017) and in unsupervised (Artetxe et al. 2018) setups. In
fact, the degree of fusion between roots and inﬂectional/derivative morphemes impacts
the type/token ratio of texts, and consequently their rate of infrequent words. Moreover,
the ambiguity of mapping between form and meaning of morphemes determines the
usefulness of injecting character-level information (Gerz et al. 2018a,b). This variation
has to be taken into account in both language transfer and multilingual joint learning.
As a ﬁnal note, we stress that the addition of new features does not concern just
future work, but also the existing typology-savvy methods, which can widen their
scope. For instance, the parsing experiments grounded on selective sharing (§ 5.2) could
also take into consideration WALS features about Nominal Categories, Nominal Syntax,
Verbal Categories, Simple Clauses, and Complex Sentences, as well as features from other
databases such as SSWL, APiCS, and AUTOTYP. Likewise, models for phonological tasks
(Tsvetkov et al. 2016; Deri and Knight 2016) could also extract features from typological
databases such as LAPSyD and StressTyp2.
6.2 Injecting Typological Information into Machine Learning Algorithms
In § 5, we discussed the potential of typological information to provide guidance to NLP
methods, and surveyed approaches such as network design in Bayesian models (Schone
and Jurafsky 2001), selective sharing (Naseem, Barzilay, and Globerson 2012, inter alia),
and biasing of multilingual joint models (Ammar et al. 2016, inter alia). However, many
other frameworks (including those already mentioned in § 3) have been developed
independently in order to allow the integration of expert and domain knowledge into
29
Volume xx, Number xx
traditional feature-based machine learning algorithms and neural networks. In this
section we survey these frameworks and discuss their applicability to the integration of
typological information into NLP models.
Encoding cross-language variation and preferences into a machine learning model
requires a mechanism that can bias the learning (i.e. training and parameter estimation)
and inference (prediction) of the model towards some pre-deﬁned knowledge. In prac-
tice, learning algorithms, both linear (e.g. structured perceptron (Collins 2002), MIRA
(Crammer and Singer 2003) and structured SVM (Taskar, Guestrin, and Koller 2004))
and non-linear (deep neural models) iterate between an inference step and a step of
parameter update with respect to a gold standard. The inference step is the natural place
where external knowledge could be encoded through constraints. This step biases the
prediction of the model to agree with the external knowledge which, in turn, affects both
the training process and the ﬁnal prediction of the model at test time.
Information about cross-lingual variation, particularly when extracted empirically
(see § 4), reﬂects tendencies rather than strict rules. As a consequence, soft, rather than
hard constraints are a natural vehicle for their encoding. We next survey a number of
existing approaches that can efﬁciently encode such constraints.
The goal of an inference algorithm is to predict the best output label according to
the current state of the model parameters.8 For this purpose, the algorithm searches the
space of possible output labels in order to ﬁnd the best one. Efﬁciency hence plays a
key role in these algorithms. Introducing soft constraints into an inference algorithm,
therefore, posits an algorithmic challenge: how can the output of the model be biased to
agree with the constraints while the efﬁciency of the search procedure is kept? In this
paper we do not answer this question directly but rather survey a number of approaches
that succeed in dealing with it.
Since linear models have been prominent in NLP research for a much longer time,
it is not surprising that frameworks for the integration of soft constraints into these
models are much more developed. The approaches proposed for this purpose include
posterior regularization (PR) (Ganchev et al. 2010), generalized expectation (GE) (Mann
and McCallum 2008), constraint-driven learning (CODL) (Chang, Ratinov, and Roth
2007), dual decomposition (DD) (Globerson and Jaakkola 2007; Komodakis, Paragios, and
Tziritas 2011) and Bayesian modeling (Cohen 2016). These techniques employ different
types of knowledge encoding, e.g. PR uses expectation constraints on the posterior
parameter distribution, GE prefers parameter settings where the model’s distribution
on unsupervised data matches a predeﬁned target distribution, CODL enriches existing
statistical models with Integer Linear Programming (ILP) constraints, while in Bayesian
modeling a prior distribution is deﬁned on the model parameters.
PR has already been used for incorporating universal linguistic knowledge into an
unsupervised parsing model (Naseem et al. 2010). In the future, it could be extended
to typological knowledge, which is a good ﬁt for soft constraints. As another option,
Bayesian modeling sets prior probability distributions according to the relationships
encoded in typological features (Schone and Jurafsky 2001). Finally, DD has been applied
to multi-task learning, which paves the way for typological knowledge encoding through
a multi-task architecture in which one of the tasks is the actual NLP application and
the other is the data-driven prediction of typological features. In fact a modiﬁcation of
8 Generally speaking, an inference algorithm can make other predictions such as computing expectations
and marginal probabilities. As in the context of this paper we are mostly focused on the prediction of the
best output label, we refer only to this type of inference problems.
30
Ponti et al.
Modeling Language Variation and Universals
this archiecture has already been applied to minimally supervised learning and domain
adaptation with soft (non-typological) constraints (Rush et al. 2012; Reichart and Barzilay
2012).
The same ideas could be exploited in deep learning algorithms. We have seen in § 3.2
that multilingual joint models combine both shared and language-dependent parameters,
in order to capture the universal properties and cross-lingual differences, respectively. In
order to enforce this division of roles more efﬁciently, these models could be augmented
with the auxiliary task of predicting typological features automatically. This auxiliary
objective could update parameters of the language-speciﬁc component, or those of
the shared component, in an adversarial fashion, similarly to what Chen et al. (2018)
implemented by predicting language identity.
Recently, Hu et al. (2016a,b) and Wang and Poon (2018) proposed frameworks
that integrate deep neural models with manually speciﬁed or automatically induced
constraints. Similarly to CoDL, the focus in Hu et al. (2016a) and Wang and Poon (2018) is
on logical rules, while the ideas in Hu et al. (2016b) are related to PR. These frameworks
provide a promising avenue for the integration of typological information and deep
models.
A particular non-linear deep learning domain where knowledge integration is
already prominent is multilingual representation learning (§ 3.3). In this domain a
number of works (Faruqui et al. 2015; Rothe and Schütze 2015; Osborne, Narayan, and
Cohen 2016; Mrkši´c et al. 2016) have proposed means through which external knowledge
sourced from linguistic resources (such as WordNet, BabelNet, or lists of morphemes)
can be encoded in word embeddings. Among the state-of-the-art specialization methods
ATTRACT-REPEL (Mrkši´c et al. 2017; Vuli´c et al. 2017) pushes together or pulls apart vector
pairs according to relational constraints, while preserving the relationship between words
in the original space and possibly propagating the specialization knowledge to unseen
words or transferring it to other languages (Ponti et al. 2018b). The success of these
works suggests that a more extensive integration of external linguistic knowledge in
general, and typological knowledge in particular, is likely to play a key role in the future
development of word representations.
6.3 A New Typology: Gradience and Context-Sensitivity
As shown in § 4.2, most of the typology-savvy algorithms thus far exploited features
extracted from manually crafted databases. However, this approach is riddled by several
shortcomings, which are reﬂected in the small performance improvements observed in
§ 5.4. Luckily, these shortcomings may potentially be averted through the use of methods
that allow typological information to emerge from the data in a bottom-up fashion, rather
than being predetermined. In what follows we advocate for such a data-driven approach,
based on several considerations.
Firstly, typological databases provide incomplete documentation of the cross-lingual
variation, in terms of features and languages. Raw textual data, which is easily accessible
for many languages and cost-effective, may provide a valid alternative that can facilitate
automatic learning of more complete knowledge. Secondly, database information is
approximate, as it is restricted to the majority strategy within a language. However,
in theory each language allows for multiple strategies in different contexts and with
different frequencies, hence databases risk hindering models from learning less likely
but plausible patterns (Sproat 2016). Inferring typological information from text would
enable a system to discover patterns within individual examples, including both the
frequent and the infrequent ones. Thirdly, typological features in databases are discrete,
31
Volume xx, Number xx
employing predeﬁned categories devised to make high-level generalizations across
languages. However, several categories in natural language are gradient (see for instance
the discussion on semantic categorization in § 2), hence they are better captured by
continuous features. In addition to being psychologically motivated, this sort of gradient
representation is also more compatible with machine learning algorithms and particularly
with deep neural models that naturally operate with real-valued multi-dimensional word
embeddings and hidden states.
To sum up, the automatic development of typological information and its possible
integration into machine learning algorithms have the potential to solve an important
bottleneck in polyglot NLP. Current manually curated databases consist of incomplete,
approximate, and discrete features that are intended to reﬂect contextual and gradient
information implicitly present in text. These features are fed to continuous, probabilistic,
and contextual machine learning models — which do not form a natural ﬁt for the
typological features. Instead, we believe that modeling cross-lingual variation directly
from textual data can yield typological information that is more suitable for machine
learning.
Several techniques surveyed in § 4.3 are suited to serve this purpose. In particular,
the extraction from morphosyntactic annotation (Liu 2010, inter alia) and alignments
from multi-parallel texts (Asgari and Schütze 2017, inter alia) provide information
about typological constructions at the level of individual examples. Moreover, language
vectors (Malaviya, Neubig, and Littell 2017; Bjerva and Augenstein 2018) and alignments
from multi-parallel texts preserve the gradient nature of typology through continuous
representations.
The successful integration of these components would affect the way multilingual
feature engineering is performed. As opposed to using binary vectors of typological
features, the information about language-internal variation could be encoded as real-
valued vectors where each dimension is a possible strategy for a given construction
and its relative frequency within a language. As an alternative, selective sharing and
multilingual biasing could be performed at the level of individual examples rather
than languages as a whole. In particular, model parameters could be transferred among
similar examples and input/hidden representations could be conditioned on contextual
typological patterns. Finally, focusing on the various instantiations of a particular type
rather than considering languages as indissoluble blocks would enhance data selection,
similarly to what Søgaard (2011) achieved using PoS n-grams for similarity measurement.
The selection of similar sentences rather than similar languages as source data in language
transfer is likely to yield large improvements, as demonstrated by Agi´c (2017) for parsing
in an oracle setting.
Finally, the bottom-up development of typological features may address also
radically resource-less languages that lack even raw textual data in a digital format.
For this group, which still constitutes a large portion of the world’s languages, there
are often available reference grammars written by ﬁeld linguists, which are the ultimate
source for typological databases. These grammars could be queried automatically, and
ﬁne-grained typological information could be harvested through information extraction
techniques.
7. Conclusions
In this article, we surveyed a wide range of approaches integrating typological informa-
tion, derived from the empirical and systematic comparison of the world’s languages,
and NLP algorithms. The most fundamental problem for the advancement of this line of
32
Ponti et al.
Modeling Language Variation and Universals
research is bridging the gap between the interpretable, language-wide, and discrete
features of linguistic typology found in database documentation, and the opaque,
contextual, and probabilistic models of NLP. We addressed this problem by exploring
a series of questions: i) for which tasks and applications is typology useful? ii) Which
are the advantages and limitations of currently available typological databases? Can
data-driven inference of typological features offer an alternative source of information?
iii) Which methods allow us to inject typological information from external resources,
and how should such information be encoded? iv) By which margin do typology-savvy
methods surpass typology-agnostic baselines? How does typology compare to other
criteria of language classiﬁcation, such as genealogy? v) In addition to augmenting
machine learning algorithms, which other purposes do typology serve for NLP? We
summarize our key ﬁndings below:
1.
Typological information is currently used predominantly for morphosyn-
tactic tasks, in particular dependency parsing. As a consequence, these
approaches typically select a limited subset of features from a single dataset
(WALS) and focus on a single aspect of variation (typically word order).
However, typological databases also cover other important features, related
to predicate–argument structure (ValPaL), phonology (LAPSyD, PHOIBLE,
StressTyp2) and lexical semantics (IDS, ASJP), which are currently largely
neglected by the multilingual NLP community. In fact, these features have
the potential to beneﬁt many tasks addressed by language transfer or joint
multilingual learning techniques, such as semantic role labeling, word sense
disambiguation, or sentiment analysis.
2.
Typological databases tend to be incomplete, containing missing values
for individual languages or features. This hinders the integration of the
information in such databases into NLP models; and therefore, several tech-
niques have been developed to predict missing values automatically. They
include heuristics derived from morphosyntactic annotation; propagation
from other languages based on hierarchical clusters or similarity metrics;
supervised models; and distributional methods applied to multi-parallel
texts. However, none of these techniques surpasses the others across the
board in prediction accuracy, as each excels in different feature types. A
challenge left for future work is creating ensembles of techniques to offset
their individual disadvantages.
3.
The most widespread approach to exploit typological features in NLP
algorithms is “selective sharing” for language transfer. Its intuition is that a
model should learn universal properties from all examples, but language-
speciﬁc information only from examples with similar typological properties.
Another successful approach is gearing multilingual joint models towards
speciﬁc languages by concatenating typological features in input, or condi-
tioning hidden layers and global sequence representations on them. New
approaches could be inspired by traditional techniques for encoding external
knowledge into machine learning algorithms through soft constraints on the
inference step, semi-supervised prototype-driven methods, specialization of
semantic spaces, or auxiliary objectives in a multi-task learning setting.
4.
The integration of typological features into NLP models yields consistent
(even if often moderate) improvements over baselines lacking such features.
33
Volume xx, Number xx
Moreover, guidance from typology should be preferred to features related
to genealogy or other language properties. Models enriched with the latter
features occasionally perform equally well due to their correlation with
typological features, but fall short when it comes to modeling diversiﬁed
language samples or ﬁne-grained differences among languages.
5.
In addition to feature engineering, typological information has served
several other purposes. Firstly, it allows experts to deﬁne rule-based models,
or to assign priors and independence assumptions in Bayesian graphical
models. Secondly, it facilitates data selection and weighting, at the level
of both languages and individual examples. Annotated data can be also
synthesized or preprocessed according to typological criteria, in order to
increase their coverage of phenomena or availability for further languages.
Thirdly, typology enables researchers to interpret and reasonably foresee the
difference in performance of algorithms across the sampled languages.
Finally, we advocated for a new approach to linguistic typology inspired by the most
recent trends in the discipline and aimed at averting some fundamental limitations of the
current approach. In fact, typological database documentation is incomplete, approxi-
mate, and discrete. As a consequence, it does not ﬁt well with the gradient and contextual
models of machine learning. However, typological databases are originally created from
raw linguistic data. An alternative approach could involve learning typology from such
data automatically (i.e. from scratch). This would capture the variation within languages
at the level of individual examples, and to naturally encode typological information into
continuous representations. These goals have already been partly achieved by methods
involving language vectors, heuristics derived from morphosyntactic annotation, or
distributional information from multi-parallel texts. The main future challenge is the
integration of these methods into machine learning models, as opposed to sourcing
typological features from databases.
In general, we demonstrated that typology is relevant to a wide range of NLP tasks
and provides the most effective and principled way to carry out language transfer
and multilingual joint learning. We hope that the research described in this survey will
provide a platform for deeper integration of typological information and NLP techniques,
thus furthering the advancement of multilingual NLP.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by ERC Consolidator Grant LEXICAL (no 648909).
References
Adel, Heike, Ngoc Thang Vu, and Tanja
Schultz. 2013. Combination of recurrent
neural networks and factored language
models for code-switching language
modeling. In Proceedings of ACL, pages
206–211.
Agi´c, Željko. 2017. Cross-lingual parser
selection for low-resource languages. In
Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop
on Universal Dependencies (UDW 2017),
pages 1–10.
Agi´c, Željko, Dirk Hovy, and Anders Søgaard.
2015. If all you have is a bit of the Bible:
Learning POS taggers for truly
low-resource languages. In The 53rd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the 7th International Joint
Conference of the Asian Federation of Natural
Language Processing (ACL - IJCNLP 2015),
pages 268–272.
Agi´c, Željko, Anders Johannsen, Barbara
Plank, Héctor Alonso Martínez, Natalie
Schluter, and Anders Søgaard. 2016.
Multilingual projection for parsing truly
34
Ponti et al.
Modeling Language Variation and Universals
low-resource languages. Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics,
4:301.
Agi´c, Željko, Jörg Tiedemann, Kaja
Dobrovoljc, Simon Krek, Danijela Merkler,
and Sara Može. 2014. Cross-lingual
dependency parsing of related languages
with rich morphosyntactic tagsets. In
Proceedings of the EMNLP 2014 Workshop on
Language Technology for Closely Related
Languages and Language Variants, pages
13–24.
Almeida, Mariana SC, Cláudia Pinto, Helena
Figueira, Pedro Mendes, and André FT
Martins. 2015. Aligning opinions:
Cross-lingual opinion mining with
dependencies. In Proceedings of the 53rd
Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics and the 7th
International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing, pages 408–418.
Ammar, Waleed, George Mulcaire, Miguel
Ballesteros, Chris Dyer, and Noah A Smith.
2016. Many languages, one parser. TACL.
Artetxe, Mikel, Gorka Labaka, Eneko Agirre,
and Kyunghyun Cho. 2018. Unsupervised
neural machine translation. In Proceedings
of the Sixth International Conference on
Learning Representations, pages 1–12.
Asgari, Ehsaneddin and Hinrich Schütze.
2017. Past, present, future: A
computational investigation of the
typology of tense in 1000 languages. In
Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 113–124.
Bakker, Dik. 2010. Language sampling. In
JJ Song, editor, The Oxford handbook of
linguistic typology. Oxford University Press,
pages 100–127.
Banea, Carmen, Rada Mihalcea, Janyce Wiebe,
and Samer Hassan. 2008. Multilingual
subjectivity analysis using machine
translation. In Proceedings of the Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 127–135.
Bender, Emily M. 2009. Linguistically naïve !=
language independent: why NLP needs
linguistic typology. In Proceedings of the
EACL 2009 Workshop on the Interaction
between Linguistics and Computational
Linguistics: Virtuous, Vicious or Vacuous?,
pages 26–32.
Bender, Emily M. 2011. On achieving and
evaluating language-independence in NLP.
Linguistic Issues in Language Technology,
3(6):1–26.
Bender, Emily M. 2014. Language collage:
Grammatical description with the lingo
grammar matrix. In LREC, pages
2447–2451.
Bender, Emily M. 2016. Linguistic typology in
natural language processing. Linguistic
Typology, 20(3):645–660.
Bender, Emily M., Michael Wayne Goodman,
Joshua Crowgey, and Fei Xia. 2013.
Towards creating precision grammars from
interlinear glossed text: Inferring
large-scale typological properties. In
LaTeCH 2013, pages 74–83.
Berlin, Brent and Paul Kay. 1969. Basic color
terms: Their universality and evolution.
California University Press.
Berzak, Yevgeni, Roi Reichart, and Boris Katz.
2014. Reconstructing native language
typology from foreign language usage. In
CoNLL, pages 21–29.
Berzak, Yevgeni, Roi Reichart, and Boris Katz.
2015. Contrastive analysis with predictive
power: Typology driven estimation of
grammatical error distributions in ESL. In
CoNLL, pages 94–102.
Bickel, Balthasar. 2007. Typology in the 21st
century: Major current developments.
Linguistic Typology, 11(1):239–251.
Bickel, Balthasar. 2015. Distributional
typology: statistical inquiries into the
dynamics of linguistic diversity. Oxford
handbook of linguistic analysis, pages
901–923.
Bickel, Balthasar, Johanna Nichols, Taras
Zakharko, Alena Witzlack-Makarevich,
Kristine Hildebrandt, Michael Rießler,
Lennart Bierkandt, Fernando Zúˆniga, and
John Lowe. 2017. The AUTOTYP
typological databases. version 0.1.0.
Technical report.
Bjerva, Johannes and Isabelle Augenstein.
2018. From phonology to syntax:
Unsupervised linguistic typology at
different levels with language embeddings.
In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers),
volume 1, pages 907–916.
Bowerman, Melissa and Soonja Choi. 2001.
Shaping meanings for language: universal
and language-speciﬁc in the acquisition of
semantic categories. In Language acquisition
and conceptual development. Cambridge
University Press, pages 475–511.
Bybee, Joan and James L McClelland. 2005.
Alternatives to the combinatorial paradigm
of linguistic theory based on domain
general principles of human cognition. The
linguistic review, 22(2-4):381–410.
35
Volume xx, Number xx
Bybee, Joan L. 1988. The diachronic
dimension in explanation. In JA Hawkins,
editor, Explaining language universals. Basil
Blackwell, pages 350–379.
Chandar, Sarath, Stanislas Lauly, Hugo
Larochelle, Mitesh Khapra, Balaraman
Ravindran, Vikas C Raykar, and Amrita
Saha. 2014. An autoencoder approach to
learning bilingual word representations. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, pages 1853–1861.
Chang, Ming-Wei, Lev Ratinov, and Dan Roth.
2007. Guiding semi-supervision with
constraint-driven learning. In ACL, pages
280–287.
Chen, Xilun, Yu Sun, Ben Athiwaratkun,
Claire Cardie, and Kilian Weinberger. 2018.
Adversarial deep averaging networks for
cross-lingual sentiment classiﬁcation.
Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, 6:557–570.
Cohen, Shay B. 2016. Bayesian Analysis in
Natural Language Processing. Synthesis
Lectures on Human Language
Technologies. Morgan and Claypool.
Coke, Reed, Ben King, and Dragomir R.
Radev. 2016. Classifying syntactic
regularities for hundreds of languages.
CoRR, abs/1603.08016.
Collins, Chris and Richard Kayne. 2009.
Syntactic structures of the world’s
languages. http:
//sswl.railsplayground.net/.
Collins, Michael. 2002. Discriminative
training methods for hidden markov
models: Theory and experiments with
perceptron algorithms. In EMNLP, pages
1–8.
Comrie, Bernard. 1989. Language universals
and linguistic typology: Syntax and
morphology. University of Chicago Press.
Conneau, Alexis, Guillaume Lample,
Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Ludovic Denoyer,
and Hervé Jégou. 2017. Word translation
without parallel data. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1710.04087.
Conneau, Alexis, Ruty Rinott, Guillaume
Lample, Adina Williams, Samuel Bowman,
Holger Schwenk, and Veselin Stoyanov.
2018. XNLI: Evaluating cross-lingual
sentence representations. In Proceedings of
the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages
2475–2485.
Copestake, Ann, Dan Flickinger, Carl Pollard,
and Ivan A Sag. 2005. Minimal recursion
semantics: An introduction. Research on
language and computation, 3(2-3):281–332.
Corbett, Greville G. 2010. Implicational
hierarchies. In JJ Song, editor, The Oxford
handbook of linguistic typology. Oxford
University Press, pages 190–205.
Cotterell, Ryan and Jason Eisner. 2017.
Probabilistic typology: Deep generative
models of vowel inventories. In Proceedings
of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), volume 1, pages 1182–1192.
Cotterell, Ryan and Jason Eisner. 2018. A deep
generative model of vowel formant
typology. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 1
(Long Papers), volume 1, pages 37–46.
Crammer, Koby and Yoram Singer. 2003.
Ultraconservative online algorithms for
multiclass problems. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 3:951–991.
Cristofaro, S and P Ramat. 1999. Introduzione
alla tipologia linguistica. Carocci.
Croft, William. 1995. Autonomy and
functionalist linguistics. Language, pages
490–532.
Croft, William. 2000. Explaining language
change: An evolutionary approach. Pearson
Education.
Croft, William. 2003. Typology and universals.
Cambridge University Press.
Croft, William, Dawn Nordquist, Katherine
Looney, and Michael Regan. 2017.
Linguistic typology meets universal
dependencies. In Proceedings of the 15th
International Workshop on Treebanks and
Linguistic Theories (TLT15), pages 63–75.
Croft, William and Keith T Poole. 2008.
Inferring universals from grammatical
variation: Multidimensional scaling for
typological analysis. Theoretical linguistics,
34(1):1–37.
Daiber, Joachim, Miloš Stanojevi´c, and Khalil
Sima’an. 2016. Universal reordering via
linguistic typology. In Proceedings of
COLING 2016, the 26th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics:
Technical Papers, pages 3167–3176.
d’Andrade, Roy G. 1995. The development of
cognitive anthropology. Cambridge
University Press.
Das, Dipanjan and Slav Petrov. 2011.
Unsupervised part-of-speech tagging with
bilingual graph-based projections. In ACL,
pages 600–609.
Daumé III, Hal and Lyle Campbell. 2007. A
Bayesian model for discovering typological
implications. In ACL, pages 65–72.
36
Ponti et al.
Modeling Language Variation and Universals
Dempster, Arthur P, Nan M Laird, and
Donald B Rubin. 1977. Maximum
likelihood from incomplete data via the em
algorithm. Journal of the royal statistical
society. Series B (methodological), pages 1–38.
Deri, Aliya and Kevin Knight. 2016.
Grapheme-to-phoneme models for (almost)
any language. In ACL, pages 399–408.
Dixon, Robert MW. 1977. Where have all the
adjectives gone? Studies in Language.
International Journal sponsored by the
Foundation “Foundations of Language”,
1(1):19–80.
Dixon, Robert MW. 1994. Ergativity.
Cambridge University Press.
Dryer, Matthew S. 1998. Why statistical
universals are better than absolute
universals. In Papers from the 33rd Regional
Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society,
pages 1–23.
Dryer, Matthew S. and Martin Haspelmath,
editors. 2013. WALS Online. Max Planck
Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology.
Duong, Long, Trevor Cohn, Steven Bird, and
Paul Cook. 2015a. Low resource
dependency parsing: Cross-lingual
parameter sharing in a neural network
parser. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the 7th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing,
volume 2, pages 845–850.
Duong, Long, Trevor Cohn, Steven Bird, and
Paul Cook. 2015b. A neural network model
for low-resource universal dependency
parsing. In Proceedings of the 2015
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 339–348.
Duong, Long, Hiroshi Kanayama, Tengfei Ma,
Steven Bird, and Trevor Cohn. 2016.
Learning crosslingual word embeddings
without bilingual corpora. In Proceedings of
the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages
1285–1295.
Durham, William H. 1991. Coevolution: Genes,
culture, and human diversity. Stanford
University Press.
Durrett, Greg, Adam Pauls, and Dan Klein.
2012. Syntactic transfer using a bilingual
lexicon. In Proceedings of the 2012 Joint
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing and Computational
Natural Language Learning, pages 1–11.
Evans, Nicholas. 2011. Semantic typology. In
The Oxford Handbook of Linguistic Typology.
Oxford University Press, pages 504–533.
Evans, Nicholas and Stephen C Levinson.
2009. The myth of language universals:
Language diversity and its importance for
cognitive science. Behavioral and brain
sciences, 32(5):429–448.
Fang, Meng and Trevor Cohn. 2017. Model
transfer for tagging low-resource languages
using a bilingual dictionary. In Proceedings
of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2:
Short Papers), volume 2, pages 587–593.
Faruqui, Manaal, Jesse Dodge, Sujay Kumar
Jauhar, Chris Dyer, Eduard Hovy, and
Noah A. Smith. 2015. Retroﬁtting word
vectors to semantic lexicons. In
NAACL-HLT, pages 1606–1615.
Fernández, Alejandro Moreo, Andrea Esuli,
and Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2015.
Distributional correspondence indexing for
cross-lingual and cross-domain sentiment
classiﬁcation. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Research, 55:131–163.
Ganchev, Kuzman, Jennifer Gillenwater, Ben
Taskar, et al. 2010. Posterior regularization
for structured latent variable models.
Journal of Machine Learning Research,
11:2001–2049.
Georgi, Ryan, Fei Xia, and William Lewis.
2010. Comparing language similarity
across genetic and typologically-based
groupings. In COLING, pages 385–393.
Gerz, Daniela, Edoardo Maria Ponti, Jason
Naradowsky, Roi Reichart, Anna Korhonen,
and Ivan Vuli´c. 2018a. Language modeling
for morphologically rich languages:
Character-aware modeling for word-level
prediction. Transactions of the Association of
Computational Linguistics, pages 451–466.
Gerz, Daniela, Ivan Vuli´c, Edoardo Maria
Ponti, Roi Reichart, and Anna Korhonen.
2018b. On the relation between linguistic
typology and (limitations of) multilingual
language modeling. In Proceedings of the
2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 316–327.
Globerson, Amir and Tommi S Jaakkola. 2007.
Fixing max-product: Convergent message
passing algorithms for MAP LP-relaxations.
In NIPS, pages 553–560.
Goedemans, Rob, Jeffrey Heinz, and
Harry Van der Hulst, editors. 2014.
Stresstyp2. University of Connecticut,
University of Delaware, Leiden University,
and the U.S. National Science Foundation.
Gouws, Stephan, Yoshua Bengio, and Greg
Corrado. 2015. Bilbowa: Fast bilingual
distributed representations without word
alignments. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, pages 748–756.
Gouws, Stephan and Anders Søgaard. 2015.
Simple task-speciﬁc bilingual word
37
Volume xx, Number xx
embeddings. In NAACL-HLT, pages
1386–1390.
Greenberg, Joseph H. 1963. Some universals
of grammar with particular reference to the
order of meaningful elements. Universals of
Language, 2:73–113.
Greenberg, Joseph H. 1966a. Synchronic and
diachronic universals in phonology.
Language, 42(2):508–517.
Greenberg, Joseph H. 1966b. Universals of
language. MIT Press.
Greenberg, Joseph H. 1978. Diachrony,
synchrony and language universals. In
Joseph H. Greenberg, Charles A. Ferguson,
and Edith A. Moravcsik, editors, Universals
of Human Language, Vol. 1: Method and
Theory. Stanford University Press, pages
61–92.
Guo, Jiang, Wanxiang Che, Haifeng Wang,
and Ting Liu. 2016. A universal framework
for inductive transfer parsing across
multi-typed treebanks. In Proceedings of
COLING 2016, the 26th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics:
Technical Papers, pages 12–22.
Guo, Jiang, Wanxiang Che, David Yarowsky,
Haifeng Wang, and Ting Liu. 2015.
Cross-lingual dependency parsing based
on distributed representations. In
Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics and
the 7th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing, volume 1,
pages 1234–1244.
Ha, Thanh-Le, Jan Niehues, and Alexander
Waibel. 2016. Toward multilingual neural
machine translation with universal encoder
and decoder. In Proceedings of the 2016
International Workshop on Spoken Language
Translation (IWSLT).
Hammarström, Harald, Robert Forkel, Martin
Haspelmath, and Sebastian Bank, editors.
2016. Glottolog 2.7. Max Planck Institute for
the Science of Human History, Jena.
Hartmann, Iren, Martin Haspelmath, and
Bradley Taylor, editors. 2013. Valency
Patterns Leipzig. Max Planck Institute for
Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig.
Haspelmath, Martin. 1999. Optimality and
diachronic adaptation. Zeitschrift für
Sprachwissenschaft, 18(2):180–205.
Haspelmath, Martin. 2007. Pre-established
categories don’t exist: Consequences for
language description and typology.
Linguistic typology, 11(1):119–132.
Haspelmath, Martin and Uri Tadmor, editors.
2009. WOLD. Max Planck Institute for
Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig.
Hermann, Karl Moritz and Phil Blunsom.
2014. Multilingual distributed
representations without word alignment.
In Proceedings of ICLR.
Hu, Zhiting, Xuezhe Ma, Zhengzhong Liu,
Eduard Hovy, and Eric Xing. 2016a.
Harnessing deep neural networks with
logic rules. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
volume 1, pages 2410–2420.
Hu, Zhiting, Zichao Yang, Ruslan
Salakhutdinov, and Eric Xing. 2016b. Deep
neural networks with massive learned
knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2016
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 1670–1679.
Hwa, Rebecca, Philip Resnik, Amy Weinberg,
Clara I. Cabezas, and Okan Kolak. 2005.
Bootstrapping parsers via syntactic
projection across parallel texts. Natural
Language Engineering, 11(3):311–325.
Jensen, Finn V. 1996. An introduction to
Bayesian networks, volume 210. UCL press
London.
Johnson, Melvin, Mike Schuster, Quoc V Le,
Maxim Krikun, Yonghui Wu, Zhifeng Chen,
Nikhil Thorat, Fernanda Viégas, Martin
Wattenberg, Greg Corrado, et al. 2017.
Google’s multilingual neural machine
translation system: Enabling zero-shot
translation. Transactions of the Association of
Computational Linguistics, 5(1):339–351.
Key, Mary Ritchie and Bernard Comrie,
editors. 2015. IDS. Max Planck Institute for
Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig.
Khapra, Mitesh M., Salil Joshi, Arindam
Chatterjee, and Pushpak Bhattacharyya.
2011. Together we can: Bilingual
bootstrapping for WSD. In ACL, pages
561–569.
Klementiev, Alexandre, Ivan Titov, and Binod
Bhattarai. 2012. Inducing crosslingual
distributed representations of words. In
COLING, pages 1459–1474.
Komodakis, Nikos, Nikos Paragios, and
Georgios Tziritas. 2011. MRF energy
minimization and beyond via dual
decomposition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
33(3):531–552.
Kozhevnikov, Mikhail and Ivan Titov. 2013.
Cross-lingual transfer of semantic role
labeling models. In Proceedings of the 51st
Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 1190–1200.
Lauly, Stanislas, Alex Boulanger, and Hugo
Larochelle. 2013. Learning multilingual
word representations using a bag-of-words
38
Ponti et al.
Modeling Language Variation and Universals
autoencoder. In Deep Learning Workshop at
NIPS.
Lefever, Els, Véronique Hoste, and Martine
De Cock. 2011. Parasense or how to use
parallel corpora for word sense
disambiguation. In Proceedings of the 49th
Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, volume 2, pages
317–322.
Lewis, M Paul, Gary F Simons, and Charles D
Fennig. 2016. Ethnologue: Languages of the
world, 19th edition. SIL international.
Lewis, William D and Fei Xia. 2008.
Automatically identifying computationally
relevant typological features. In IJCNLP,
pages 685–690.
Littel, Patrick, David R. Mortensen, and Lori
Levin. 2016. URIEL Typological database.
Pittsburgh: CMU.
Liu, Haitao. 2010. Dependency direction as a
means of word-order typology: A method
based on dependency treebanks. Lingua,
120(6):1567–1578.
Lu, Xia. 2013. Exploring word order
universals: a probabilistic graphical model
approach. In Proceedings of ACL (Student
Research Workshop), pages 150–157.
Luong, Thang, Hieu Pham, and
Christopher D Manning. 2015. Bilingual
word representations with monolingual
quality in mind. In Proceedings of the 1st
Workshop on Vector Space Modeling for
Natural Language Processing, pages 151–159.
Maddieson, Ian, Sébastien Flavier, Egidio
Marsico, Christophe Coupé, and François
Pellegrino. 2013. LAPSyd:
Lyon-Albuquerque phonological systems
database. In INTERSPEECH, pages
3022–3026.
Majid, Asifa, Melissa Bowerman, Miriam van
Staden, and James S Boster. 2007. The
semantic categories of cutting and breaking
events: A crosslinguistic perspective.
Cognitive Linguistics, 18(2):133–152.
Malaviya, Chaitanya, Graham Neubig, and
Patrick Littell. 2017. Learning language
representations for typology prediction. In
Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 2529–2535.
Mann, Gideon S. and Andrew McCallum.
2008. Generalized expectation criteria for
semi-supervised learning of conditional
random ﬁelds. In ACL, pages 870–878.
McDonald, Ryan, Koby Crammer, and
Fernando Pereira. 2005. Online
large-margin training of dependency
parsers. In Proceedings of the 43rd annual
meeting on association for computational
linguistics, pages 91–98.
Michaelis, Susanne Maria, Philippe Maurer,
Martin Haspelmath, and Magnus Huber,
editors. 2013. Atlas of Pidgin and Creole
Language Structures Online. Max Planck
Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology.
Mikolov, Tomas, Quoc V Le, and Ilya
Sutskever. 2013. Exploiting similarities
among languages for machine translation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1309.4168.
Moran, Steven, Daniel McCloy, and Richard
Wright, editors. 2014. PHOIBLE Online.
Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary
Anthropology, Leipzig.
Mrkši´c, Nikola, Ivan Vuli´c, Diarmuid Ó
Séaghdha, Ira Leviant, Roi Reichart, Milica
Gaši´c, Anna Korhonen, and Steve Young.
2017. Semantic specialization of
distributional word vector spaces using
monolingual and cross-lingual constraints.
Transactions of the Association of
Computational Linguistics, 5(1):309–324.
Mrkši´c, Nikola, Diarmuid Ó Séaghdha, Blaise
Thomson, Milica Gaši´c, Lina
Rojas-Barahona, Pei-Hao Su, David
Vandyke, Tsung-Hsien Wen, and Steve
Young. 2016. Counter-ﬁtting word vectors
to linguistic constraints. In NAACL-HLT,
pages 142–148.
Murawaki, Yugo. 2017. Diachrony-aware
induction of binary latent representations
from typological features. In Proceedings of
the Eighth International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long
Papers), volume 1, pages 451–461.
Naseem, Tahira, Regina Barzilay, and Amir
Globerson. 2012. Selective sharing for
multilingual dependency parsing. In ACL,
pages 629–637.
Naseem, Tahira, Harr Chen, Regina Barzilay,
and Mark Johnson. 2010. Using universal
linguistic knowledge to guide grammar
induction. In Proceedings of EMNLP 2010,
pages 1234–1244.
Nichols, Johanna. 1992. Language diversity in
space and time. University of Chicago Press.
Niehues, Jan, Teresa Herrmann, Stephan
Vogel, and Alex Waibel. 2011. Wider
context by using bilingual language models
in machine translation. In Proceedings of the
Sixth Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation, pages 198–206.
Nivre, Joakim, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe,
Filip Ginter, Yoav Goldberg, Jan Hajic,
Christopher D. Manning, Ryan McDonald,
Slav Petrov, Sampo Pyysalo, Natalia
Silveira, Reut Tsarfaty, and Daniel Zeman.
2016. Universal dependencies v1: A
multilingual treebank collection. In LREC,
39
Volume xx, Number xx
pages 1659–1666.
O’Horan, Helen, Yevgeni Berzak, Ivan Vuli´c,
Roi Reichart, and Anna Korhonen. 2016.
Survey on the use of typological
information in natural language processing.
Proceedings of COLING 2016, the 26th
International Conference on Computational
Linguistics: Technical Papers, pages
1297–1308.
Osborne, D., S. Narayan, and S. B. Cohen.
2016. Encoding prior knowledge with
eigenword embeddings. Transactions of the
ACL, pages 417–430.
Östling, Robert. 2015. Word order typology
through multilingual word alignment. In
ACL, pages 205–211.
Östling, Robert and Jörg Tiedemann. 2017.
Continuous multilinguality with language
vectors. In Proceedings of the 15th Conference
of the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Volume 2, Short
Papers, volume 2, pages 644–649.
Padó, Sebastian and Mirella Lapata. 2005.
Cross-linguistic projection of role-semantic
information. In EMNLP, pages 859–866.
Padó, Sebastian and Mirella Lapata. 2009.
Cross-lingual annotation projection for
semantic roles. Journal of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Research, 36(1):307–340.
Pappas, Nikolaos and Andrei Popescu-Belis.
2017. Multilingual hierarchical attention
networks for document classiﬁcation. In
8th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (IJCNLP),
EPFL-CONF-231134, pages 1015–1025.
Plank, Frans and Elena Filiminova. 1996.
Universals archive.
http://www.ling.unikonstanz.de/
pages/proj/sprachbau.htm.
Universität Konstanz.
Van der Plas, Lonneke, Paola Merlo, and
James Henderson. 2011. Scaling up
automatic cross-lingual semantic role
annotation. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, volume 2, pages 299–304.
Ponti, Edoardo Maria, Roi Reichart, Anna
Korhonen, and Ivan Vuli´c. 2018a.
Isomorphic transfer of syntactic structures
in cross-lingual nlp. In Proceedings of the
56th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), volume 1, pages 1531–1542.
Ponti, Edoardo Maria, Ivan Vuli´c, Goran
Glavaš, Nikola Mrkši´c, and Anna
Korhonen. 2018b. Adversarial propagation
and zero-shot cross-lingual transfer of
word vector specialization. In Proceedings of
the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 282–293.
Ponti, Edoardo Maria, Ivan Vuli´c, and Anna
Korhonen. 2017. Decoding sentiment from
distributed representations of sentences. In
Proceedings of the 6th Joint Conference on
Lexical and Computational Semantics (* SEM
2017), pages 22–32.
Reichart, Roi and Regina Barzilay. 2012. Multi
event extraction guided by global
constraints. In NAACL, pages 70–79.
Rosa, Rudolf and Zdenek Zabokrtsky. 2015.
KLcpos3 - a language similarity measure
for delexicalized parser transfer. In ACL,
pages 243–249.
Rothe, Sascha and Hinrich Schütze. 2015.
AutoExtend: Extending word embeddings
to embeddings for synsets and lexemes. In
ACL, pages 1793–1803.
Rotman, Guy, Ivan Vuli´c, and Roi Reichart.
2018. Bridging languages through images
with deep partial canonical correlation
analysis. In Proceedings of ACL 2018, pages
910–921.
Roy, Rishiraj Saha, Rahul Katare, Niloy
Ganguly, and Monojit Choudhury. 2014.
Automatic discovery of adposition
typology. In Proceedings of COLING, pages
1037–1046.
Ruder, Sebastian. 2018. A survey of
cross-lingual embedding models. Journal of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research.
Rush, Alexander M., Roi Reichart, Michael
Collins, and Amir Globerson. 2012.
Improved parsing and POS tagging using
inter-sentence consistency constraints. In
EMNLP-CoNLL, pages 1434–1444.
Sapir, Edward. 2014 [1921]. Language.
Cambridge University Press.
Schone, Patrick and Daniel Jurafsky. 2001.
Language-independent induction of part of
speech class labels using only language
universals. In IJCAI-2001 Workshop "Text
Learning: Beyond Supervision".
Sennrich, Rico and Barry Haddow. 2016.
Linguistic input features improve neural
machine translation. In Proceedings of the
First Conference on Machine Translation,
volume 1, pages 83–91.
Silberer, Carina and Simone Paolo Ponzetto.
2010. UHD: Cross-lingual word sense
disambiguation using multilingual
co-occurrence graphs. In Proceedings of the
5th International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation, pages 134–137.
Snyder, Ben. 2010. Unsupervised Multilingual
Learning. PhD thesis. MIT.
Snyder, Benjamin and Regina Barzilay. 2008.
Unsupervised multilingual learning for
morphological segmentation. In
40
Ponti et al.
Modeling Language Variation and Universals
Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, pages 737–745.
Søgaard, Anders. 2011. Data point selection
for cross-language adaptation of
dependency parsers. In ACL, pages
682–686.
Søgaard, Anders and Julie Wulff. 2012. An
empirical study of non-lexical extensions to
delexicalized transfer. Proceedings of
COLING 2012: Posters, pages 1181–1190.
Sproat, Richard. 2016. Language typology in
speech and language technology. Linguistic
Typology, 20(3):635–644.
Täckström, Oscar, Ryan McDonald, and
Joakim Nivre. 2013. Target language
adaptation of discriminative transfer
parsers. In NAACL-HLT, pages 1061–1071.
Täckström, Oscar, Ryan McDonald, and Jakob
Uszkoreit. 2012. Cross-lingual word
clusters for direct transfer of linguistic
structure. In NAACL-HLT, pages 477–487.
Tai, Kai Sheng, Richard Socher, and
Christopher D Manning. 2015. Improved
semantic representations from
tree-structured long short-term memory
networks. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the 7th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing
(Volume 1: Long Papers), volume 1, pages
1556–1566.
Takamura, Hiroya, Ryo Nagata, and
Yoshifumi Kawasaki. 2016. Discriminative
analysis of linguistic features for
typological study. In LREC, pages 69–76.
Talmy, Leonard. 1991. Path to realization: A
typology of event conﬂation. In Proceedings
of the Seventeenth Annual Meeting of the
Berkeley Linguistics Society: General Session
and Parasession on The Grammar of Event
Structure, pages 480–519.
Taskar, Ben, Carlos Guestrin, and Daphne
Koller. 2004. Max-margin Markov
networks. In NIPS, pages 25–32.
Teh, Yee Whye, Hal Daumé III, and Daniel M
Roy. 2007. Bayesian agglomerative
clustering with coalescents. In Proceedings
of NIPS, pages 1473–1480.
Tiedemann, Jörg. 2015. Cross-lingual
dependency parsing with universal
dependencies and predicted pos labels.
Proceedings of the Third International
Conference on Dependency Linguistics
(Depling 2015), pages 340–349.
Titov, Ivan and Alexandre Klementiev. 2012.
Crosslingual induction of semantic roles.
In Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Long Papers-Volume 1, pages 647–656.
Tsvetkov, Yulia, Sunayana Sitaram, Manaal
Faruqui, Guillaume Lample, Patrick Littell,
David Mortensen, Alan W. Black, Lori
Levin, and Chris Dyer. 2016. Polyglot
neural language models: A case study in
cross-lingual phonetic representation
learning. In NAACL, pages 1357–1366.
Upadhyay, Shyam, Manaal Faruqui, Chris
Dyer, and Dan Roth. 2016. Cross-lingual
models of word embeddings: An empirical
comparison. In Proceedings of the 54th
Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), volume 1, pages 1661–1670.
Vuli´c, Ivan, Wim De Smet, and
Marie-Francine Moens. 2011. Identifying
word translations from comparable corpora
using latent topic models. In Proceedings of
the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies: short papers-Volume 2, pages
479–484.
Vuli´c, Ivan and Marie-Francine Moens. 2015.
Bilingual word embeddings from
non-parallel document-aligned data
applied to bilingual lexicon induction. In
Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics and
the 7th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing (Volume 2: Short
Papers), volume 2, pages 719–725.
Vuli´c, Ivan, Nikola Mrkši´c, Roi Reichart,
Diarmuid Ó Séaghdha, Steve Young, and
Anna Korhonen. 2017. Morph-ﬁtting:
Fine-tuning word vector spaces with
simple language-speciﬁc rules. In
Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), volume 1, pages
56–68.
Wälchli, Bernhard and Michael Cysouw. 2012.
Lexical typology through similarity
semantics: Toward a semantic map of
motion verbs. Linguistics, 50(3):671–710.
Wang, Dingquan and Jason Eisner. 2016. The
galactic dependencies treebanks: Getting
more data by synthesizing new languages.
Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, 4:491–505.
Wang, Dingquan and Jason Eisner. 2017.
Fine-grained prediction of syntactic
typology: Discovering latent structure with
supervised learning. Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics
(TACL), 5:147–162.
Wang, Hai and Hoifung Poon. 2018. Deep
probabilistic logic: A unifying framework
for indirect supervision. In Proceedings of
the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in
41
Volume xx, Number xx
Natural Language Processing.
Wang, Mengqiu and Christopher D Manning.
2014. Cross-lingual pseudo-projected
expectation regularization for weakly
supervised learning. Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics,
2:55–66.
Wichmann, Søren, Eric W. Holman, and
Cecil H. Brown, editors. 2016. The ASJP
Database (version 17). Max Planck Institute
for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig.
Wisniewski, Guillaume, Nicolas Pécheux,
Souhir Gahbiche-Braham, and François
Yvon. 2014. Cross-lingual part-of-speech
tagging through ambiguous learning. In
EMNLP, pages 1779–1785.
Xiao, Min and Yuhong Guo. 2014. Distributed
word representation learning for
cross-lingual dependency parsing. In
Proceedings of CoNLL, pages 119–129.
Yang, Zhilin, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and
William Cohen. 2016. Multi-task
cross-lingual sequence tagging from
scratch. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.06270.
Yarowsky, David, Grace Ngai, and Richard
Wicentowski. 2001. Inducing multilingual
text analysis tools via robust projection
across aligned corpora. In Proceedings of the
ﬁrst international conference on Human
language technology research, pages 1–8.
Zeman, Daniel and Philip Resnik. 2008.
Cross-language parser adaptation between
related languages. In Proceedings of IJCNLP,
pages 35–42.
Zennaki, Othman, Nasredine Semmar, and
Laurent Besacier. 2016. Inducing
multilingual text analysis tools using
bidirectional recurrent neural networks. In
Proceedings of COLING 2016, the 26th
International Conference on Computational
Linguistics: Technical Papers, pages 450–460.
Zhang, Yuan and Regina Barzilay. 2015.
Hierarchical low-rank tensors for
multilingual transfer parsing. In EMNLP,
pages 1857–1867.
Zhang, Yuan, David Gaddy, Regina Barzilay,
and Tommi Jaakkola. 2016. Ten pairs to tag
– multilingual POS tagging via coarse
mapping between embeddings. In NAACL,
pages 1307–1317.
Zhang, Yuan, Roi Reichart, Regina Barzilay,
and Amir Globerson. 2012. Learning to
map into a universal POS tagset. In
EMNLP, pages 1368–1378.
Zhou, Guangyou, Tingting He, Jun Zhao, and
Wensheng Wu. 2015. A subspace learning
framework for cross-lingual sentiment
classiﬁcation with partial parallel data. In
Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International
Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(IJCAI 2015), pages 1426–1432.
Zhou, Xinjie, Xianjun Wan, and Jianguo Xiao.
2016. Cross-lingual sentiment classiﬁcation
with bilingual document representation
learning. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 1403–1412.
Ziser, Yftah and Roi Reichart. 2018. Deep
pivot-based modeling for cross-language
cross-domain transfer with minimal
guidance. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 238–249.
42
43
