Title: Modeling Disagreement in Automatic Data Labelling for Semi-Supervised Learning in Clinical Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2205.14761v2
--------------------------------------------------

Modeling Disagreement in Automatic Data Labelling for Semi-Supervised
Learning in Clinical Natural Language Processing
Hongshu Liu1∗Nabeel Seedat2∗
Julia Ive3
1 Imperial College London
2 University of Cambridge
3 Queen Mary University of London
hongshu.liu19@imperial.ac.uk, ns741@cam.ac.uk, j.ive@qmul.ac.uk
Abstract
Computational models providing accurate esti-
mates of their uncertainty are crucial for risk
management associated with decision making
in healthcare contexts. This is especially true
since many state-of-the-art systems are trained
using the data which has been labelled auto-
matically (self-supervised mode) and tend to
overﬁt. In this work, we investigate the qual-
ity of uncertainty estimates from a range of
current state-of-the-art predictive models ap-
plied to the problem of observation detection
in radiology reports.
This problem remains
understudied for Natural Language Processing
in the healthcare domain.
We demonstrate
that Gaussian Processes (GPs) provide supe-
rior performance in quantifying the risks of 3
uncertainty labels based on the negative log
predictive probability (NLPP) evaluation met-
ric and mean maximum predicted conﬁdence
levels (MMPCL), whilst retaining strong pre-
dictive performance.
1
Introduction
While current machine learning and deep learning
models have shown great success in a variety of au-
tomated classiﬁcation tasks (Rajkomar et al., 2018;
Yang et al., 2018), sensitive healthcare contexts,
necessitate that these models quantify the risks of
different diagnosis decisions, i.e. positive - the ill-
ness is highly likely, uncertain - the illness is likely,
with lower risks, negative - the illness is highly
unlikely. The 3 uncertainty labels (also our class
labels) allow each diagnosis decision to be made,
by factoring in the degrees of uncertainty.
This is especially relevant as human annotation
is very costly and model training data is often la-
belled by automatic labellers that use ontologies or
are rule-based. For example, the UMLS (Uniﬁed
Medical Language System) ontology (Bodenreider,
2004) is almost predominantly used to match lin-
guistics patterns in clinical text to medical concepts
∗Equal contribution.
(e.g. using the MetaMap tool (Aronson, 2006)).
The corpora annotated in this fashion are used to
learn neural detectors of medical concepts in the
self-supervised setting (Zhang et al., 2021). Rule-
based automatic labellers such as CheXpert (Irvin
et al., 2019), which builds on NegBio (Peng et al.,
2018) use rules predeﬁned by experts to extract
clinical observations from the free text of radiology
reports. Both use different rules, where CheXpert
is more conservative, with more uncertain labels.
Most clinical Natural Language Processing
(NLP) models focus on optimizing predictive clas-
siﬁcation performance on class labels with point
estimates, but pay less attention to further quantify
the risks and uncertainty of these labels. Bayesian
methods offer as a solution, a principled approach
to produce well-calibrated uncertainty estimates.
Popular Bayesian approximations (e.g., model en-
sembles, dropout techniques etc) have primarily
been studied in the general NLP domain (Ova-
dia et al., 2019) or for continuous healthcare data
(Combalia et al., 2020; Leibig et al., 2017). More
rarely, those studies are in Clinical Natural Lan-
guage Processing (NLP) (Yang et al., 2019; Guo
et al., 2021), which has a unique asymmetric risk
where underestimates and overestimates of conﬁ-
dence should be evaluated differently.
In this work, we build a model using Gaussian
Processes (GPs) (Williams and Rasmussen, 2006),
a Bayesian non-parametric method to quantify the
uncertainty and disagreements associated with au-
tomatic data labels. Instead of learning distribu-
tions over model parameters as in Bayesian Deep
Learning (BDL), GP models are non-parametric
and learn distributions over functions, thus allow-
ing for better generalisation.
We compare GP performance to two types of
Bayesian approximations: frequentist ensembles
using both Random Forests (RFs) (Breiman, 2001)
and Deep Ensembles (ENS) (Lakshminarayanan
et al., 2017), which are considered state-of-the-
arXiv:2205.14761v2  [cs.LG]  7 Jun 2022
art for uncertainty estimation in predictive settings
(Lobacheva et al., 2020; Seedat and Kanan, 2019).
We make use of the three automatic uncertainty
labels (considered noisy labels), as provided by
the CheXpert and Negbio labellers for diagnostics
using radiology reports and make the following
contributions:
(1) We study the quality of uncertainty estimates
of a new range of uncertainty-aware models, previ-
ously understudied in clinical NLP;
(2) We successfully apply Sparse Gaussian Pro-
cesses (GPs) to the diagnosis detection task in ra-
diology reports. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the ﬁrst application in clinical NLP and we
demonstrate that GPs provides superior uncertainty
representations yet retain comparable predictive
performance when compared to baselines Random
Forests and Deep Ensembles;
(3) We demonstrate the utility of uncertainty es-
timates for the models trained with data labelled
automatically (self-supervised) with disagreements
(differences of opinions from rule-based CheXpert
and Negbio labellers). GPs outperform the RF and
ENS models: providing less certainty in the pre-
dictions for the test cases where labels assigned by
different labellers disagree. Correct identiﬁcation
of such cases is crucial for reliable and trustworthy
risk management, where any uncertain cases are
referred for screening or to a human expert.
2
Methodology
Gaussian Processes (GPs) offer a principled prob-
abilistic modelling approach and provide uncer-
tainty estimates without needing post-processing,
hence motivating our modelling decision. The GP
is deﬁned by GP(µ(x), K(x, x
′, θ)), a mean func-
tion and covariance function respectively. When
the GP is realized on observed data it is given as:
p(y|f) = Qn
i=1 p(yi)|fi). where f is a vector of la-
tent functions p(f|x, θ) = Qn
i=1 N(fi; 0, Kj). Due
to space limitations we refer to Williams and Ras-
mussen (2006) for more details. In our work, we
apply GPs to the classiﬁcation task of clinical ob-
servation detection. The challenge with using GPs
for classiﬁcation is that an approximation for the
posterior is required.1 GPs also have a complexity
of O(n3) (Williams and Rasmussen, 2006), due
1Since the likelihood can no longer be assumed Gaussian
due to the discrete labels, computing the posterior becomes
computationally intractable and hence, requires methods such
as Markov Chain Monte Carlo and Variational Inference to
approximate the posterior.
to the matrix inversion, making it computationally
intensive for NLP tasks using large datasets and
high dimensional embeddings.
Hence, in dealing with the these challenges, we
use Sparse GPs with Black-box variational infer-
ence (Dezfouli and Bonilla, 2015) (minimize the
log-evidence lower bound) and use the Reparame-
terization Trick (Kingma and Welling, 2014) to
approximate the GPs - in a more computation-
ally feasible method, using a small set of latent
inducing points. This approach is based on Titsias
(2009). We also use automatic relevance determi-
nation (ARD) (MacKay, 1996) to allow for more
ﬂexibility in our kernel representation.
3
Experimental settings
3.1
Data
We study free-text radiology reports in the MIMIC-
CXR database v2.0.0 (Johnson et al., 2019). The
dataset is labelled by both the CheXpert (primary
label) and Negbio labellers. CheXpert is based on
Negbio, but they follow different strategies in men-
tion detection: Negbio uses MetaMap and CheX-
pert curates concepts predeﬁned by clinical experts.
We analyse the ‘Edema’ pathology- 65,833 re-
ports with 3 uncertainty labels: positive, uncertain
and negative as explained earlier. Edema was cho-
sen due to the large data size, more inconsistent
labels between the two labellers and more balanced
split between classes. We partition the ‘Edema’
examples into: (1) 63,482 consistent labels (∼96%
dataset), where both CheXpert and Negbio labels
agree (CONS: 26,455 - positive, 11,781 - uncertain,
25,246 - negative) and (2) 2,351 inconsistent labels
making up ∼4% of the total dataset, where CheX-
pert and Negbio labels disagree (INCONS, 522:
positive, 1,317 - uncertain, 512 - negative). Val-
idation and Test sets preserve the described class
proportions and contain 10% of the dataset each.
In our setup, we use two variants of the
inconsistent test sets (i.e.
labellers disagree)
to quantify the generalisation to different label-
ing mechanisms namely: NegINCONSTest and
CheXINCONSTest, taking as the ‘ground truth’,
the automatic Negbio and CheXpert labels, respec-
tively. CheXpert is considered the primary label,
hence the Train and Validation sets only use CheX-
pert labels, also containing both consistent and in-
consistent data as mentioned above.
Text pre-processing (tokenisation, lower-casing,
white space and punctuation removal) is done us-
ing Texthero. The average token length is ∼
43.5 tokens. Each training example’s input data is
represented by a 200 dimensional ﬁxed length vec-
tor averaged over tokens. We use the biomedical
Word2Vec-Pubmed word embeddings
(Chiu
et al., 2016) to represent tokens.
Table 1: Results comparing GPs, RF and ENS based on
accuracy and NLPP for both inconsistent (OOD) and
consistent test sets. Bold highlights the best results.
NegINCONSTest
CheXINCONSTest
CONSTest
Acc↑
NLPP↓
Acc↑
NLPP↓
Acc↑
NLPP↓
GP
0.294
1.234
0.519
0.634
0.816
0.293
RF
0.271
1.451
0.579
0.598
0.795
0.316
ENS
0.263
1.281
0.468
0.691
0.840
0.269
3.2
Models
Our Sparse GP model consists of 300 inducing
points and a radial basis function (RBF) kernel
making use of ARD to learn the length scales.
The expected likelihood term in Lelbo is estimated
using Monte Carlo sampling. The GP model is
trained stochastically with RMSProp (learning rate
= 0.003, epochs=2, batch size=500).
The RF model (using Scikit-learn (Pe-
dregosa et al., 2011)) has the following hyper-
parameters based on random search over standard
parameters: 300 trees and a max depth of 40. Iso-
tonic regression is used to obtain well-calibrated
predictive distributions (comparable to the GP).
The Deep Ensemble (ENS) model based on
(Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017) has: 5 randomly
initialized models (MLP with 3-hidden layers
with 200 hidden units/layer (with batch norm),
Adam (learning rate = 3e-3), epochs=10)). Fol-
lowing (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017), we use ad-
versarial training (fast gradient sign method (Good-
fellow et al., 2015)), for better model robustness.
3.3
Evaluation metrics
The models are evaluated based on predictive per-
formance (accuracy) and we quantify the quality of
the uncertainty representations using the negative
log predictive probability NLPP = −log p(C =
yn|xn). NLPP penalises both overconﬁdent pre-
dictions that are incorrect predictions and under-
conﬁdent predictions that are correct. We optimise
for higher predictive performance and lower NLPP.
Since we do not have ground truth labels for
multiple human experts, we additionally assess
the mean maximum predicted conﬁdence level
(MMPCL) of a certain test set (see Table 2),
MMPCL =
1
N
PN
n=1 maxj p(yn = Cj|xn),
where N is total number of data points in the spe-
ciﬁc test set and Cj is per class label.
4
Results
We carry out two experiments:
(1) We mea-
sure the performance in uncertainty representa-
tion and predictive performance of the model
trained and validated on primary labels (CheXpert
- CheXTrain and CheXVal, both contain con-
sistent and inconsistent dataset) for the inconsis-
tent Test data (disagreement- NegINCONSTest,
CheXINCONSTest), as well as for the consis-
tent Test data (agreement - CONSTest); (2) We
conduct a group-wise performance analysis, partic-
ularly assessing how different models deal with the
asymmetric risk of false negatives.
4.1
Performance across labeller agreement
Inconsistent Labels. Evaluating performance on
inconsistent labels (CheXpert and Negbio disagree)
highlights the use case of evaluation on out-of-
distribution (OOD) labels (since the models are
trained on CheXpert labels, but tested on Neg-
bio labels - NegINCONSTest).
Table 1 illus-
trates the average predictive accuracy and aver-
age NLPP for all the test sets (NegINCONSTest,
CheXINCONSTest, CONSTest). Overall, all
models exhibit a higher NLPP across on both in-
consistent test sets compared to CONSTest. The
high NLPP highlights the models are able to cor-
rectly represent predictive uncertainty, when there
was in fact disagreement in predictions.
For experiments, comparing NegINCONSTest
and CheXINCONSTest, we note that CheX-
pert has more conservative labels compared
to Negbio:
i.e CheXINCONSTest
contains
63% of uncertain labels and 13% negative,
whilst NegINCONSTest
30% uncertain and
63% negative.
When the GP is evaluated on
NegINCONSTest (labels are OOD) it outper-
forms the RF, yet the RF outperforms the GP
on CheXINCONSTest (labels are in-distribution
to training labels - CheXpert).
In the case
of ENS, it outperforms GP when evaluated
on CONSTest but performs worse on incon-
sistent test sets (both CheXINCONSTest and
NegINCONSTest). These results highlight the
RF can be biased/overﬁt the “conservative” dis-
tribution of the training data, whereas the GP
provides more ‘neutral’ predictions, generalising
better to OOD data (e.g.
NegINCONSTest).
The poor performance of ENS on inconsistent
test data (CheXINCONSTest (in-distribution) ,
NegINCONSTest (OOD)), highlights that ENS
does not generalize to OOD data nor does it handle
noisy labels well. The GPs generalization perfor-
mance is highly desirable in medical settings and
our results on GP generalization is corroborated
by (Schulam and Saria, 2017). For further analysis
based on calibration see Appendix A.
Consistent Labels. As a control experiment and
to account for the imbalanced data, we randomly
sample the CONS test set (CONSTest) such that
it has the same size as the other two inconsistent
test sets. All models show lower NLPP compared
to the inconsistent experiments as the cases within
CONSTest tend to have high certainty/agreement.
4.2
Group-wise analysis for asymmetric risk
A signiﬁcant asymmetric risk in the healthcare con-
text lies in False Negatives (FN), i.e. missing a pos-
itive diagnosis. Ideally, models should represent
FNs with low predictive conﬁdence, whilst True
Positives (TPs) should have high predictive conﬁ-
dence. As shown in Table 2, we compare the MMP-
CLs of FNs and TPs for the positive and uncertain
labels for NegINCONSTest and CONSTest and
ignore the negative labels.
On CONSTest (labellers agree), the GP pro-
vides lower MMPCL for FN predictions and higher
MMPCL for TP predictions when compared to
the RF across all test sets. Whilst, ENS has good
performance for FN positive and TP uncertain,
this is traded off for reduced performance for
FN uncertain and TP positive. We note that since
GP has better balanced performance across both
classes (positive and uncertain) it is likely to gener-
alise better/not overﬁt, thus dealing with asymmet-
ric risk in a more appropriate and balanced manner.
Similar patterns are observed for NegINCONS,
with the GP better representing the asymmetric risk
(for both positive and uncertain) when compared
to both ENS and RF. However, the results are less
conclusive due to the sparsity of FNs: we have only
one FN data point with positive label for GP and
RF. Further, the two data points are different, hence
the result where the RF outperforms on this sub-
set, cannot be considered as reliably representative.
That said, the absence of TP uncertain labels for
RF model mirrors the disagreements between the
two labellers and highlights the inherent difﬁculty
in predicting uncertain cases.
Overall, the GP and ENS give similar perfor-
mance for in-distribution test data CONSTest,
however on the OOD test data NegINCONSTest,
the GP gives better performance.
Table 2: Results for GP, RF & ENS, wrt. MMPCL
for FNs and TPs evaluated on NegINCONSTest and
CONSTest. Bold highlights the best results: lower
conﬁdence FN and higher conﬁdence TP is desirable.
NegINCONSTest
CONSTest
Positive
Uncertain
Positive
Uncertain
FN
GP
0.565
0.800
0.647
0.638
RF
0.408
0.857
0.657
0.661
ENS
0.694
0.876
0.624
0.640
TP
GP
0.711
0.605
0.797
0.752
RF
0.680
0
0.774
0.730
ENS
0.670
0.318
0.780
0.834
5
Conclusions
We present a Sparse GP model for clinical NLP
that is capable of quantifying the risks of different
uncertainty labels. This model can be particularly
advantageous in self-supervised learning scenarios
with automatically labelled datasets. It predicts
lower conﬁdence estimates for the test examples
where different labelling heuristics tend to disagree.
Also, overall our sparse GP provides more conser-
vative predictions by showing lower conﬁdence in
incorrect predictions. This is important in health-
care contexts where potential harms from a model
error can be very extensive as compared to singular
errors of a doctor. This also implies that our model
could be used to ﬂag clinical notes for further re-
view (e.g. by a human expert).
Whilst, this work is focused on uncertainty in
labelling for medical tasks, we believe it highlights
the utility of probabilistic models applied to “noisy”
labels and that similar methods could provide util-
ity for NLP based automated labelling tasks. Fur-
thermore, we hope that this work will spur further
research in this understudied area of automated la-
belling in clinical NLP - where annotated data is
limited and expensive.
6
Ethical Considerations
This study has been conducted strictly observing
relevant guidelines for usage of the MIMIC III
data. Medical decision making has high-stakes
consequences, hence to mitigate any potential risks
we note that the presented models should be used
only to assist human medical experts in their deci-
sions. Before the deployment of these models, they
should be to subject to systematic validation.
References
Alan R Aronson. 2006.
Metamap: Mapping text to
the umls metathesaurus. Bethesda, MD: NLM, NIH,
DHHS, 1:26.
Olivier Bodenreider. 2004.
The uniﬁed medical lan-
guage system (umls): integrating biomedical termi-
nology. Nucleic acids research, 32:267–270.
Leo Breiman. 2001. Random forests. 45(1):5–32.
Billy Chiu, Gamal Crichton, Anna Korhonen, and
Sampo Pyysalo. 2016. How to train good word em-
beddings for biomedical nlp. In Proceedings of the
15th workshop on biomedical natural language pro-
cessing.
M. Combalia, F. Hueto, S. Puig, J. Malvehy, and V. Vi-
laplana. 2020. Uncertainty estimation in deep neu-
ral networks for dermoscopic image classiﬁcation.
In 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW).
Amir Dezfouli and Edwin V Bonilla. 2015. Scalable in-
ference for gaussian process models with black-box
likelihoods. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 28, pages 1414–1422.
Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian
Szegedy. 2015. Explaining and harnessing adversar-
ial examples. In ICLR.
Yang Guo, Zhengyuan Liu, Savitha Ramasamy, and
Pavitra Krishnaswamy. 2021.
Uncertainty Char-
acterization for Predictive Analytics with Clinical
Time Series Data. Springer International Publishing.
Irvin, Rajpurkar, Ko, Yu, Ciurea-Ilcus, Chute, Mark-
lund, Haghgoo, Ball, and Shpanskaya. 2019. Chex-
pert: A large chest radiograph dataset with uncer-
tainty labels and expert comparison. In AAAI Con-
ference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, volume 33, pages
590–597.
Alistair E. W. Johnson, Tom J. Pollard, Nathaniel R.
Greenbaum, Matthew P. Lungren, Chih ying Deng,
Yifan Peng, Zhiyong Lu, Roger G. Mark, Seth J.
Berkowitz, and Steven Horng. 2019. Mimic-cxr-jpg,
a large publicly available database of labeled chest
radiographs.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. 2014.
Auto-
encoding variational bayes.
Balaji Lakshminarayanan,
Alexander Pritzel,
and
Charles Blundell. 2017.
Simple and scalable pre-
dictive uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems.
Christian Leibig, Vaneeda Allken, Murat Seçkin Ay-
han, Philipp Berens, and Siegfried Wahl. 2017.
Leveraging uncertainty information from deep neu-
ral networks for disease detection. Scientiﬁc reports,
7(1):1–14.
Ekaterina Lobacheva, Nadezhda Chirkova, Maxim
Kodryan, and Dmitry P Vetrov. 2020.
On power
laws in deep ensembles. Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, 33:2375–2385.
David J. C. MacKay. 1996.
Bayesian Methods
for Backpropagation Networks,
pages 211–254.
Springer New York, New York, NY.
Yaniv Ovadia, Emily Fertig, Jie Ren, Zachary Nado,
D. Sculley, Sebastian Nowozin, Joshua Dillon, Bal-
aji Lakshminarayanan, and Jasper Snoek. 2019. Can
you trust your model's uncertainty?
evaluating
predictive uncertainty under dataset shift.
In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
volume 32.
Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Vincent Michel
Alexandre Gramfort,
Bertrand Thirion,
Olivier
Grisel, Peter Prettenhofer Mathieu Blondel, Ron
Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, Jake Vanderplas, Alexan-
dre Passos, David Cournapeau, Matthieu Brucher,
Matthieu Perrot, and Édouard Duchesnay. 2011.
Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python. Journal
of Machine Learning Research, 12:2825–2830.
Peng, Wang, Lu, Bagheri, Summers, and Lu. 2018.
Negbio: a high-performance tool for negation and
uncertainty detection in radiology reports.
AMIA
Summits on Translational Science Proceedings.
Alvin Rajkomar, Eyal Oren, Kai Chen, Andrew M.
Dai, Nissan Hajaj, Michaela Hardt, Peter J. Liu, Xi-
aobing Liu, Jake Marcus, Mimi Sun, Patrik Sund-
berg, Hector Yee, Kun Zhang, Yi Zhang, Gerardo
Flores, Gavin E. Duggan, Jamie Irvine, Quoc Le,
Kurt Litsch, Alexander Mossin, Justin Tansuwan,
De Wang, James Wexler, Jimbo Wilson, Dana Lud-
wig, Samuel L. Volchenboum, Katherine Chou,
Michael Pearson, Srinivasan Madabushi, Nigam H.
Shah, Atul J. Butte, Michael D. Howell, Claire Cui,
Greg S. Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. 2018. Scalable
and accurate deep learning with electronic health
records. npj Digital Medicine, 1(1).
Peter Schulam and Suchi Saria. 2017. Reliable deci-
sion support using counterfactual models.
In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
pages 1697–1708.
Nabeel Seedat and Christopher Kanan. 2019.
To-
wards calibrated and scalable uncertainty repre-
sentations for neural networks.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1911.00104.
Titsias. 2009.
Variational learning of inducing vari-
ables in sparse gaussian processes. In Artiﬁcial In-
telligence and Statistics.
Christopher KI Williams and Carl Edward Rasmussen.
2006. Gaussian processes for machine learning, vol-
ume 2. MIT press Cambridge, MA.
Hao-Yu Yang, Junling Yang, Yue Pan, Kunlin Cao,
Qi Song, Feng Gao, and Youbing Yin. 2019. Learn
to be uncertain: Leveraging uncertain labels in chest
x-rays with bayesian neural networks. In IEEE Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Workshops.
Zhongliang Yang, Yongfeng Huang, Yiran Jiang, Yuxi
Sun, Yu-Jin Zhang, and Pengcheng Luo. 2018. Clin-
ical assistant diagnosis for electronic medical record
based on convolutional neural network.
Scientiﬁc
Reports, 8(1).
Jingqing Zhang, Luis Bolanos, Tong Li, Ashwani Tan-
war, Guilherme Freire, Xian Yang, Julia Ive, Vibhor
Gupta, and Yike Guo. 2021. Self-supervised detec-
tion of contextual synonyms in a multi-class setting:
Phenotype annotation use case.
Appendix A
Calibration.
Figure 1 compares the calibration of the GP, RF and ENS models, which all generate probabilities close
to the optimal curve. While, seemingly the calibrated RF model (using Isotonic Regression) gives more
optimal predictions than the GP and ENS models, this result is based on the CONS test set (which is the
same as the training distribution where both CheXpert and NegBio labels agree). However, both the GP
and ENS are slightly less optimal as they generalize better across labellers and hence the GP and ENS
overﬁt less to CONS speciﬁcally, when compared to RF.
Figure 1: Reliability diagram for the CONSTest set: fraction of positives (y-axis) vs mean predicted value (x-axis)
Appendix B
Examples of False Negatives
A data point from consistent test set labelled Positive classiﬁed as Negative, (paraphrased)
AGAIN MILD PROMINENCE OF THE PULMONARY INTERSTITIAL MARKINGS SUGGESTIVE
OF PULMONARY EDEMA, STABLE. SUBSEGMENTAL ATELECTASIS AT THE LUNG BASES.
THERE IS NO DEFINITE CONSOLIDATION. NO PNEUMOTHORACES ARE SEEN.
A data point from inconsistent test set labelled
Positive classiﬁed as Negative, (paraphrased)
THE PATIENT IS STATUS POST DUAL-LEAD LEFT-SIDED AICD WITH LEADS EXTENDING TO
THE EXPECTED POSITIONS OF THE RIGHT ATRIUM AND RIGHT VENTRICLE. PATIENT IS STA-
TUS POST MEDIAN STERNOTOMY. THERE IS PROMINENCE OF THE CENTRAL PULMONARY
VASCULATURE SUGGESTING MILD EDEMA/VASCULAR CONGESTION. THE CARDIAC
SILHOUETTE REMAINS QUITE ENLARGED. DIFFICULT TO EXCLUDE SMALL PLEURAL
EFFUSIONS. THERE IS BIBASILAR ATELECTASIS. NO DISCRETE FOCAL CONSOLIDATION
IS SEEN, ALTHOUGH OPACITY AT THE LUNG BASES PROJECTED ON THE LATERAL VIEW
WHILE MAY BE DUE TO OVERLYING SOFT TISSUES, CONSOLIDATION IS DIFFICULT TO
EXCLUDE.
