Title: Learning Neural Models for Natural Language Processing in the Face of Distributional Shift
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2109.01558v1
--------------------------------------------------

Learning Neural Models
for Natural Language Processing
in the Face of Distributional Shift
Paul Michel
CMU-LTI-21-013
July 2021
Language Technologies Institute
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Thesis Committee:
Graham Neubig (Chair)
Carnegie Mellon University
Zico Kolter
Carnegie Mellon University
Zachary Lipton
Carnegie Mellon University
Tatsunori Hashimoto
Stanford University
Submitted in partial fulﬁllment of the requirements
for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy.
Copyright © 2021 Paul Michel
arXiv:2109.01558v1  [cs.CL]  3 Sep 2021
Connaître, ce n’est point démonter, ni expliquer.
C’est accéder à la vision.
Mais, pour voir, il convient d’abord de participer.
Cela est dur apprentissage. . .
ANTOINE DE SAINT EXUPERY
Abstract
The dominating NLP paradigm of training a strong neural predictor to perform one task on a spe-
ciﬁc dataset has led to state-of-the-art performance in a variety of applications (eg. sentiment clas-
siﬁcation, span-prediction based question answering or machine translation). However, it builds
upon the assumption that the data distribution is stationary, ie. that the data is sampled from a
ﬁxed distribution both at training and test time. This way of training is inconsistent with how we
as humans are able to learn from and operate within a constantly changing stream of information.
Moreover, it is ill-adapted to real-world use cases where the data distribution is expected to shift
over the course of a model’s lifetime.
The ﬁrst goal of this thesis is to characterize the different forms this shift can take in the con-
text of natural language processing, and propose benchmarks and evaluation metrics to measure its
effect on current deep learning architectures. We then proceed to take steps to mitigate the effect
of distributional shift on NLP models. To this end, we develop methods based on parametric re-
formulations of the distributionally robust optimization framework. Empirically, we demonstrate
that these approaches yield more robust models as demonstrated on a selection of realistic prob-
lems. In the third and ﬁnal part of this thesis, we explore ways of efﬁciently adapting existing
models to new domains or tasks. Our contribution to this topic takes inspiration from information
geometry to derive a new gradient update rule which alleviate catastrophic forgetting issues during
adaptation.
3
Acknowledgements
This thesis would not have been made possible without the continuous support, involvement and
help from my amazing PhD supervisor Graham Neubig. He spent countless hours discussing
research with me, helping me with paper writing and was overall very supportive throughout my
PhD. I realize now that I was extremely lucky to have such a thoughtful and conscientious advisor.
It was a great pleasure to be working with him all these years.
I also want to thank the members of my committee, Zico Kolter, Zachary Lipton and Tatsunori
Hashimoto for their insightful feedback which helped shape this document into its current form.
I am particularly grateful for Tatsu’s involvement, as he became a close collaborator over the last
year or so. I must also thank the many anonymous reviewers who gave feedback on the work
presented here. Our relationship over the years had its ups and downs, but overall the discussions
we had had a net positive impact on my work, and for that I am thankful.
Of course, the work presented here was the product of collaboration with all my co-authors
Xian Li and Juan Pino (both of whom I had the pleasure to intern with at Facebook in 2018),
Liz Salesky (our discussions at the JSALT workshop in 2019 helped spur the work presented
in Chapter 7) and Lucia Specia (also met at JSALT) and the entire team behind the two WMT
robustness shared tasks.
I am also very lucky to have had the opportunity to collaborate with a host of brilliant re-
searchers on other papers which didn’t make it in this document: in no particular order Jaime Car-
bonell, Xinyi Wang, Hieu Pham, Omer Levy, Danish, Ameet Talwalkar, Antonios Anastasopoulos,
Ziyi Dou and Junjie Hu. I was also very happy to work with Keita Kurita and Lucio Dery, both
brilliant students and who made our collaborations together enjoyable ﬁrst experiences in advising
more junior researchers. I am also thankful to the Deepmind language team (and in particular my
hosts Dani Yogatama and Sebastian Ruder) who hosted me for a remote internship in the middle
of a global pandemic.
I attribute the main reason for my pleasurable PhD experience to the fantastic environment
at CMU and at the LTI. I was happy to be surrounded by other remarkable students within our
research group (NeuLab), in particular Chunting Zhou, Pengcheng Yin, Chaitanya Malaviya and
Shruti Rijhwani, as well as all the others who joined us over the years. I was also lucky to make
long lasting friends at CMU: Abhilasha Ravichander, Siddarth Dalmia, Rajat Kulshreshtha, Chi-
rag Nagpal, Evangelia Spiliopoulou, Artidoro Pagnoni, Mariia Ryskina, Shruti Palaskar, Raphael
Olivier, Xinya Li, James Fiacco and all the others. I’m also grateful for the wonderful people I met
at various conferences (back in the olden days of in-person conferences), in particular Kris Cao,
4
Kazuya Kawakami, Roee Aharoni, Gail Weiss and Jad Kabbara.
These acknowledgments would not be complete without a mention of the Pittsburgh food and
drinks scene. Many a research discussion was had around a drink at Peter’s pub, Stack’d, Fuel
and Fuddle, Mario’s or Hemingway’s. I also have fond memories of lunches/dinners/coffee breaks
at the Chipotle on Forbes, Sushi Fuku, Quiznos, the indian foodtruck, Porch, Tazza de Oro and
Arriviste to mention only a few. They kept my belly full and my wallet ﬂat. Finally, a special
mention goes to the Carnegie Museum of Natural History whose incredible dinosaur exhibit (and
good coffee) was a welcome breath of fresh air while I was putting the ﬁnishing touches to this
thesis.
I must also acknowledge the continued support of my parents, Matthieu and Véronique. They
have given me every opportunity I needed to go as far as I could in my studies. I realize that this is
a privilege that many people I know (and many more I don’t) did not have.
Last, but perhaps foremost, I would not have been able to go through these PhD years without
the unconditional love and support from my then girlfriend, now wife, Clémence. You endured
ﬁve long years of distance to make this possible, yet somehow you were always close by my side.
This thesis is, of course, dedicated to you.
5
Contents
1
Introduction
9
2
Background and Literature Review
13
2.1
Terminology and Deﬁnitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
Distributional Shift . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
Robustness to Distributional Shift
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
I
Measuring and Evaluating Robustness
22
3
MTNT: A Testbed for Machine Translation of Noisy Text
23
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Noise and Input Variations in Language on the Internet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Collection Procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4
Dataset Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.5
Machine Translation Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.6
Language Modeling Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.7
MTNT in Action: the 2019 and 2020 WMT Robustness Shared Tasks
. . . . . . .
37
3.8
Related work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.9
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4
On Evaluation of Adversarial Perturbations for Sequence-to-Sequence Models
41
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2
A Framework for Evaluating Adversarial Attacks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3
Gradient-Based Adversarial Attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.4
Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.5
Adversarial Training with Meaning-Preserving Attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6
4.6
Related work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.7
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
II
Making Robust Models
58
5
Modeling the Second Player in Distributionally Robust Optimization
59
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.2
Parameterizing the Uncertainty Set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.3
Optimizing P-DRO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.4
Experimental Analysis of Parametric DRO (P-DRO) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.5
P-DRO in Practice: Case Study of Toxicity Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
5.6
Additional Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
5.7
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
6
Distributionally Robust Models with Parametric Likelihood Ratios
79
6.1
Parametric Likelihood Ratio
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
6.2
Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
6.3
Analysis and Ablations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
6.4
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
III
Adaptation
93
7
Regularizing Trajectories to Mitigate Catastrophic Forgetting
94
7.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
7.2
Background and Notations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
7.3
Regularizing the Trajectory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
7.4
Continual Learning Experiment Setting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
7.5
Continual Learning Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
7.6
Low-Resource Adaptation Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
7.7
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
8
Conclusion
113
Appendix
145
A Supplemental Material for Chapter 5
145
7
A.1 Reorganizing the Lagrangian L(ψ, τ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
B
Supplemental Material for Chapter 7
146
B.1
The Standard Gradient Update (Equation 7.3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 146
B.2
Equivalence of the Hessian of the KL Divergence and the Fisher Information Matrix 146
B.3
Obtaining the Co-natural Update (Equation 7.7) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147
8
Chapter 1
Introduction
The ability to use and comprehend language as a mean of communication is a unique characteristic
of human intelligence. Natural language is fundamentally non-stationary: the way we produce
utterances is modulated by a myriad of factors that are ever changing based on our interlocutors,
social context, emotions, or communication medium used. Our capacity to operate in and adapt to
such a dynamic environment is another deﬁning feature of intelligence. Indeed from their youngest
age, infants are seldom placed in static situations, yet they are still able to learn emerging patterns
from a constant ﬂow of information (see e.g. Dupoux (2018)). Hence, it is a natural goal for
artiﬁcial intelligence research to develop agents that are capable of acquiring natural language
understanding and generation abilities in the face of a changing environment.
The development of computer systems which can understand and produce natural language
is realized through Natural Language Processing (NLP). In recent years, neural-network based
machine learning models have been the source of rapid progress in NLP, and now represent the
state-of-the-art in a large number of real-world applications (such as machine translation (Wu et al.,
2016), named entity recognition (Lample et al., 2016) or speech recognition (Xiong et al., 2018)),
reaching human parity on a variety of benchmarks (Wang et al., 2020a; Rajpurkar et al., 2020)1.
Yet, these models exhibit a pattern of failures when confronted with changes to their training
environment:
• They are highly sensitive to domain shift: they perform poorly when confronted with text
from a different domain, for example text concerning different topics (Gururangan et al.,
2020), demographics (Blodgett et al., 2016; Amodei et al., 2016; Hovy & Søgaard, 2015),
1Meaning that they outperform human annotated baselines, we make no claim that these systems have achieved any
kind of human-like intelligence.
9
and even using different data collection processes (Gururangan et al., 2018). In particular,
these models often perform poorly when evaluated on sub-populations,2 and they can latch
on to spurious correlations (McCoy et al., 2019).
• They are vulnerable to speciﬁc word or character-level perturbations (Papernot et al., 2016;
Ebrahimi et al., 2018b; Belinkov & Bisk, 2018b). This phenomenon poses security concerns,
as this opens up trained models to various types of attacks by nefarious agents: e.g. bypassing
toxicity detection models (Hosseini et al., 2017).
• When they are trained on new tasks or domains, they rapidly forget previously acquired
knowledge, a phenomenon known as catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989;
Kirkpatrick et al., 2017). This makes adaptation to new data distributions an arduous and
unreliable process necessitating signiﬁcant amounts of domain expertise and regularization
(Miceli Barone et al., 2017).
These shortcomings are not only at odds with the natural behaviour observed in intelligent
agents mentioned above, but represents a liability for practical users and designers of such sys-
tems. Indeed, machine learning models trained on static datasets can fail spectacularly in the face
of real-world situations, sometimes with dire consequences (for example, this mis-translation of
“good morning” into “attack them” due to dialectic variations; Hern (2017)). More insidiously,
the representation disparity between training datasets and the real world can, for example, unfairly
affect and further disenfranchise minority groups (Hashimoto et al., 2018; Dixon et al., 2018).
The principal desired characteristic of the machine learning models used in NLP is the ability
to learn and generalize from a ﬁnite number of training examples. The most common learning
paradigm, empirical risk minimization, relies on the assumption that this training data is sampled
from a ﬁxed distribution, and generalization is construed as the ability to perform well on unseen
samples from this same distribution. The failure cases described above occur when the model oper-
ates in a different distribution than the one it was trained on, in which case standard generalization
guarantees break down. In this context, the discrepancy between a machine learning model’s learn-
ing and operating environment can be described as distributional shift. The research presented in
this thesis focuses on what we believe to be the three major axes of progress towards addressing
distributional shift in the context of NLP: Evaluation, Robustness and Adaptation.
We start with evaluation because distributional shift is particularly difﬁcult to characterize and
measure, especially in regard to natural language. This is partly due to the absence of a canonical
2Domains that exist, but are under-represented in their training data (Sagawa et al., 2020).
10
metric structure of the data. In other words, it is not clear how to efﬁciently measure the semantic
similarity between two sentences and as a result there is no straight-forward way to measure the
discrepancy between two samples, let alone two distributions. Therefore, as a natural ﬁrst step
in addressing distributional shift, we propose a new benchmark (Chapter 3) and evaluation metric
(Chapter 4) to evaluate domain shift and robustness to adversarial perturbations respectively. With
these tools in hand, we set out to construct robust models that are trained to be less sensitive to
distributional shift, even in the absence of explicit information on the nature of shift. This is done
by leveraging the diversity of data within the training distribution to ensure uniform performance
over a variety of domains present in the training data (sub-populations). Speciﬁcally we formulate a
parametric version of the distributionally robust optimization framework which allows for training
models that are more robust to sub-population shift (Chapters 5 and 6). Finally, learning in a static
environment is fundamentally sub-optimal: we cannot expect our models to perform well on each
and every possible future setting, and we must be able to adapt them to any new scenario we
encounter. Consequently, we research mechanisms by which we are able to ﬁne-tune a trained
model on new evidence, without forgetting previously acquired knowledge (Chapter 7).
The detailed outline of our contributions in this thesis is presented below:
• Chapter 2 lays out a description of the distributional shift phenomenon and discusses previ-
ous and current work in this general area.
• Part I: Measuring and Evaluating Robustness
– In Chapter 3, we introduce a benchmark for evaluating machine translation models
against distributional shift. Speciﬁcally, the proposed dataset — dubbed MTNT —
provides a testbed for translation of noisy social media text, a challenging domain for
common state-of-the-art models trained on news and parliamentary proceedings. This
work was published as Michel & Neubig (2018a) at EMNLP 20183, Li et al. (2019) at
WMT 20194 and (Specia et al., 2020) at WMT 2020.5
– In Chapter 4, we examine the difﬁculty of evaluating adversarial perturbations on
NLP models, with an emphasis on sequence-to-sequence models. We propose an eval-
uation framework centered around the idea of evaluating the perturbations’ effect on
3https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/events/emnlp-2018/
4https://www.statmt.org/wmt19/robustness.html
5https://www.statmt.org/wmt20/robustness.html
11
the semantics of the input sentences. The content of this chapter originally appeared as
Michel et al. (2019b) at NAACL 2019.6
• Part II: Making Robust Models
– Chapter 5 describes an approach for training models that are robust to distributional
shift, using a parametric version of the distributionally robust optimization (DRO)
framework. Speciﬁcally, we train a model to minimize its expected loss under the dis-
tribution deﬁned by another generative model (the “adversary”), which is itself trained
to represent the worst-case distribution for the model. In experiments, we ﬁnd that
this approach (called Parametric DRO) yields models that are more robust compared to
other baselines in the DRO literature. This chapter was previously published at ICLR
20217 as Michel et al. (2021).
– Chapter 6 presents an improvement over the P-DRO approach whereby a parametric
re-weighting of the training data is learned. With appropriate constraints, and a simple
but crucial minibatch-level renormalization trick, we ﬁnd that this results in a simple
DRO approach which reliably outperforms other baselines and necessitates little hyper-
parameter tuning. The work presented in this chapter is currently undergoing peer
review.
• Part III: Adaptation
– In Chapter 7, we develop a technique for mitigating the catastrophic forgetting issue
that arises when adapting a model to a new domain or a new task. The approach,
inspired by ideas in information geometry, is demonstrated to drastically reduce for-
getting compared to regular gradient descent, and enjoys complementarity with com-
mon continual-learning baselines. This chapter contains work that was released as a
preprint.
6https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/events/naacl-2019/
7https://iclr.cc/Conferences/2021
12
Chapter 2
Background and Literature Review
From a broad perspective, the goal of machine learning is to produce a model that is able to perform
a given task, such as predicting an output variable y from an input, x (e.g. sentiment given a movie
review, or French translation given an English sentence...) given ﬁnite amounts of training data
(in our example, (x, y) pairs). In this chapter, we formalize this setting for the rest of this thesis.
2.1
Terminology and Deﬁnitions
In machine learning, we are confronted with learning to perform a task given a ﬁnite number
of examples. In the context of this thesis, a task T will be referring to a triplet containing two
measurable spaces X and Y, as well as a probability distribution p with support on the Cartesian
product X × Y. X represents the space of all possible inputs (for example the space of all 32 × 32
images, or the space of all English sentences), while Y stands for the space of all admissible
outputs (for example the set {positive, negative} in sentiment classiﬁcation, or all sentences of a
target language in translation). Finally, p will represent the true distribution of the data in nature
(for example it will assign high probability to a pair of English and French sentences that are
translations of each other).
In general, learning a task will consist of training a model to approximate the conditional
distribution p(y | x), based only on a ﬁnite number of training examples x, y ∼p. Speciﬁcally, we
will focus on parametric models, i.e. models that are fully determined by a ﬁnite, constant (with
respect to the size of the training data) number of parameters described by a vector θ that can take
its values in Θ, the set of all possible parameters (in practice Rd or a subset thereof, where d is the
total number of parameters).
13
Traditionally, given a loss function ℓ: X × Y × Θ 7→R+ measuring the discrepancy between
model θ’s prediction on x and the reference output y, the modeler will estimate parameters θ∗that
better ﬁt the distribution p data by minimizing the expected risk
LExpected Risk(θ) = E(x,y)∼pℓθ(x, y).
(2.1)
Note that we abuse notation and write ℓθ(x, y) for ℓ(x, y, θ) to distinguish between the dependency
over θ, the model parameters, and (x, y), the model’s inputs. As implied earlier, one cannot com-
pute the total expectation Ex,y∼p and we must resort to minimizing the empirical risk computed
over a ﬁnite training set (x1, y1), . . . , (xn, yn)
LEmpirical Risk(θ) = 1
n
n
X
i=1
ℓθ(xi, yi)
(2.2)
2.2
Distributional Shift
2.2.1
What is Distributional Shift
In the empirical risk minimization (ERM) paradigm, machine learning models are trained to mini-
mize their expected loss under a single, static distribution. However, this assumption is not always
valid in practical applications. For example, a machine translation system trained on a majority of
news article might come to be used to translate social media comments. While the overall task is
can arguably be considered the same at a high level from the point of view of a human, there are
signiﬁcant differences in the data distribution (for instance, social media comments may contain
more informal language).
In the most general sense, distributional shift (or distribution shift) is simply an instance of the
test distribution q being different from the training data distribution p. Of course, this deﬁnition
is too broad to be realistic, let alone useful in practice.1 Precisely deﬁning and categorizing what
characterizes an acceptable shift is still very much an active area of research.
2.2.2
Categorizing Distributional Shift
While we will not attempt to formulate a complete taxonomy of distributional shifts, we will paint
a broad strokes picture of how they are categorized in the literature. We will distinguish two main
1Consider, in a binary classiﬁcation task, setting q(y | x) = 1 −p. Only the distribution changes, yet the two tasks are
directly at odds with each other.
14
Table 2.1: Examples of “mechanistic” categorizations of distributional shift.
p(x, y)
−→
q(x, y)
Covariate shift
p(x) p(y | x)
−→
q(x) p(y | x)
Label shift
p(x | y) p(y)
−→
p(x | y) q(y)
Concept shift
p(x) p(y | x)
−→
p(x )q(y | x)
Sub-population shift
PK
i=1 αi pi(x, y)
−→
PK
i=1 βi pi(x, y)
schools of thought for distinguishing distributional shift: a “mechanistic” and a “causal” approach.
Mechanistic Categorization
The ﬁrst approach is to distinguish shifts by describing, in mathematical terms, the mechanics of
how the change manifests in the data generation process. The appeal of this categorization is that
it allows for a more principled, theoretical approach to tackling distributional shift. A summary of
the examples described in this section can be found in Table 2.1.
The most well known instance is covariate shift (Shimodaira, 2000; Sugiyama & Müller, 2005;
Storkey, 2009; Bickel et al., 2009), where only the distribution over the input space X (sometimes
called the space of “covariates”) changes, and the conditional distribution p(y | x) is assumed to
stay the same. Covariate shift is a rather intuitive assumption, especially in such cases where there
is a clear causal relationship between the covariates x and the targets y. It holds an important place
within the distribution shift literature because its particular characteristics justify the use of speciﬁc
algorithms, some of which enjoy appealing properties. For instance, it can be tackled by means of
re-weighting with the covariate likelihood ratio q(x)/p(x) (Shimodaira, 2000), and the covariate
shift assumption can yield tighter guarantees (Duchi et al., 2019).
Another, diametrically opposed type of shift is label-shift (or prior probability shift in Storkey
(2009)), where only the marginal on Y changes, and the reverse conditional p(x | y) stays ﬁxed.
This is most relevant when the causal relationship between x and y is reversed, for example when
diagnosing an illness (y) from its symptoms (x). Speciﬁc methods have been developed to tackle
this scenario (Zhang et al., 2013; Lipton et al., 2018), although their application is generally less
common in the NLP literature. Finally, a comparatively less well studied occurrence is concept-
shift, in which the marginal p(x) is assumed ﬁxed, but the conditional changes to another dis-
tribution q(y | x) (Quiñonero-Candela et al., 2009). This can result from a mismatch between
annotators: for instance in machine translation, different professional annotators may use slightly
different translation conventions. Widmer & Kubat (1996) postulates that this is due to the presence
15
of some “unknown context”, such as the two translators having had a different education, which
leads to them adhering to two mildly different deﬁnitions of the translation problem. A concrete ex-
ample of this phenomenon in toxicity detection (in the English language) is the “n-word” problem.
This racial slur and other historically charged terms such as “queer” are often used disparagingly
towards certain underrepresented minorities. However some of them were re-appropriated by mi-
nority speakers within their respective communities (Rahman, 2012). Without information about
the speaker, it can be difﬁcult to determine the toxicity of an utterance containing such words, even
for human annotators (Sap et al., 2019).
Another, more elaborate example of a “mechanistically deﬁned” category of distribution shift
is what Koh et al. (2020) calls “sub-population shift”. In sub-population shift, it is assumed that
the training distribution p can be decomposed as a mixture of K different domains p = α1q1 +
. . . + αKqK,
P
i αi = 1. This can be the case by design: for example the training data for the
WMT machine translation competition2 is aggregated from many different machine translation
corpora, or the MultiNLI textual entailment dataset (Williams et al., 2018) was created speciﬁcally
to contain data from different domains. But in many more cases the training data may be an
aggregate of various domains, unbeknownst to the dataset’s creator: for instance text datasets
often contain data from different dialects (e.g. American vs. British English, French vs. Canadian
French, etc...). The benchmarks aginst which the methods described Part II of this thesis will be
evaluated are all examples of sub-population shifts.
Causal Categorization
An alternate view is to distinguish the distribution shifts through the real world phenomena that
cause them. This more empirical approach has the merit of describing realistic cases of distribution
shift which may not clearly (or provably) ﬁt into the mathematically deﬁned categories presented
in the previous section, but are prevalent enough to warrant the development of bespoke solutions.
A predominant cause of distributional shift is change over time (Kelly et al., 1999; Hand, 2006).
For instance, Bloomﬁeld (1933) documents nine categories of lexical semantic drift that words may
undergo over time3. While not laying out a precise typology, McCulloch (2020) also touches on a
variety of semantic shift that occurred more recently (and at a comparatively faster pace) with the
advent of the internet. The effect of these changes in meaning on word embedding models such as
Word2Vec (Mikolov et al. (2013), a staple of the NLP pipeline at the time) were summarized in
2http://statmt.org/wmt21/
3The various causes of this drift are elaborated upon in later studies (Blank & Koch, 2013; Grzega & Schoener, 2007)
16
Kutuzov et al. (2018). Identifying time as the underlying cause for this phenomenon has the beneﬁt
of suggesting solutions tailored to the problem at hand: for example, one could use dynamic word-
embedding models (Rudolph & Blei, 2018) to predict upcoming drift, and use this knowledge to
augment the training data. In a more recent example, Lazaridou et al. (2021) highlights the speciﬁc
importance of “dynamic evaluation”4 (Mikolov et al., 2010) for mitigating loss in performance due
to time shift in language models.
In other examples, distributional shift can be described in terms of data collection: a prime
example is what Storkey (2009) calls biased sampling. Subtle design choices at the time of the
creation of the training dataset (such as data source, pre-processing, or annotation scheme) can in-
troduce biases into the training distribution. A recent illustration of biased sampling is the case of
crowd-sourced natural language inference5 datasets (Gururangan et al., 2018): annotators tasked
with crafting a contradictory hypothesis from a premise would frequently resort to introducing
negation markers (in English: “not”, “never”, etc...). This introduced a spurious correlation be-
tween the presence of such negative words and the “contradiction” label. When confronted with
test data that doesn’t conform to this pattern (e.g. cases of entailment where the hypothesis does
include a negation marker), models trained with empirical risk minimization (ERM) break down
(Sagawa et al., 2020).
Local and Global Shifts
Aside from the two types of categorization described above, we believe that it is worth making
another distinction between what we will call “local” and “global” shifts, purely by virtue of the
fact that they are both the subject of considerable, yet distinct areas of the literature. We use
the term local to refer to cases where the shifted distribution q can be obtained by applying a
transformation (deterministic or non-deterministic) to data points in p. Of course, this isn’t a very
clearly deﬁned category since any distribution can be transported into another one via an optimal
transport map. In this case, we refer speciﬁcally to shifts that are best explicitly deﬁned by such
“local” transformations. This category encompasses phenomena such as character or word-level
noise (of the kind described in Belinkov & Bisk (2018b) for instance) or adversarial perturbations
(Papernot et al., 2016; Ebrahimi et al., 2018b,a; Cheng et al., 2018a), small modiﬁcations to the
input of a machine learning model that cause dramatic changes to its output.
4The process of continuously training a language model at test time.
5Natural language inference is another name for the task of recognizing textual entailment. In its most common
formulation, the model is given two sentences, the premise and the hypothesis, and is asked to determine whether the
ﬁrst entails or contradict the second (or whether there is no clear entailment relationship).
17
The notion of global shift will then be used to refer to those type of distributional shift that
cannot easily be modeled as local shifts. We make this distinction because, as will be discussed in
Chapter 4, local shift can — and should — be addressed speciﬁcally.
2.3
Robustness to Distributional Shift
2.3.1
Distributionally Robust Optimization
There is a rather large body of literature devoted to training models that are robust to distributional
shift, under the name of distributionally robust optimization (DRO). In DRO, models are trained
not to minimize their expected risk under any one distribution p, but rather their worst case risk
under a pre-determined family of distributions Q, called the “uncertainty set”
min
θ∈Θ max
q∈Q E(x,y)∼q ℓθ(x, y)
|
{z
}
LDRO(θ)
.
(2.3)
The DRO loss in Equation 2.3 provides an upper bound on the expected loss of the model
under any distribution in the uncertainty set Q, which motivates the use the solution of the min-
max problem as a robust model. However this objective is only useful insofar that Q (1) covers
test distributions of interest (corresponding to different domains, demographics, etc.) and (2) is not
overly pessimistic. To fulﬁl this second condition, there should exist some model θ∗that achieves
low loss simultaneously on the test distribution as well as Q. This often requires that Q only
contain distributions that are “close” to the training distribution under some divergence metric, or
that are restricted to covariate shifts.
In some cases, it is conceivable that Q is available at training time. For instance, we might
have access to some amount of data in K domains of interest, in which case the DRO loss can be
written as a maximum over the ﬁnite set Q = {q1, . . . , qK}. This setting is sometimes referred to
as Group-DRO and has been studied in Oren et al. (2019); Sagawa et al. (2020); Zhou et al. (2021).
In the absence of explicit information about the domains of interest, it is up to the practitioner
to carefully deﬁne this uncertainty set. There is substantial existing work on nonparametric for-
mulations of DRO, where Q is expressed as a divergence ball centered at the training distribution.
Popular examples in the literature are:
• f-divergence balls, also called φ-divergences or Rényi divergences (Cover, 1999; Van Erven
& Harremos, 2014) are a family of divergence metrics of the form df(p, q) = Eq f(p
q) where
18
f : R+ →R is a convex function mapping 1 to 0, and q is assumed to be absolutely
continuous to p (p(x, y) = 0 ⇒q(x, y)). Well-known representatives include the Kullback-
Leibler (KL) divergence (f(u) = u log u), Pearson’s χ2 divergence (f(u) = 1
2(u −1)2) or
the total variation distance (f(u) = 1
2|u −1|). They have seen extensive use in the DRO
literature (Ben-Tal et al., 2013; Hu & Hong, 2013; Faury et al., 2020).
• Wasserstein/IPM balls. The 1-Wasserstein distance or earth mover’s distance between two
probability distributions p, q on a metric space Z is deﬁned as W1 = infπ∈Π Ez,z′∼π ρ(z, z′)
where Π is the set of all joint distributions on Z × Z with marginals p and q, and ρ is
Z’s canonical metric. Contrary to f-divergences, the Wasserstein metric makes no assump-
tions of absolute continuity, and it allows practitioners to design problem speciﬁc uncer-
tainty sets by choosing the most relevant distance metric ρ. This has made it a popular
choice for DRO problems where such metrics are well deﬁned (e.g. for real valued inputs),
particularly in the context of adversarial robustness (Gao & Kleywegt, 2016; Esfahani &
Kuhn, 2018; Sinha et al., 2018). Integral probability metrics (IPMs) are another common
class of divergences between probability distributions to which (under some conditions, see
Theorem 11.8.2 in Dudley (2018)) the Wasserstein distance belongs. They take the form
γF(p, q) = suph∈F |Ep h −Eq h| where F is a set of real valued bounded measurable func-
tions on X × Y. Although Wasserstein-DRO is are by far more common in the literature,
there has been some recent work on general IPM bounded uncertainty sets (Husain, 2020).
• Moment constraints consists in uncertainty sets where admissible distribution have to sat-
isfy some (generally linear or quadratic) constraint on their moments, e.g. ∥Eq −µ∥≤M
for some pre-speciﬁed values µ and M. They are perhaps one of the oldest formulations of
DRO, with roots in operations research (Scarf, 1957; Dupaˇcová, 1987; Delage & Ye, 2010)
and with some exceptions (Nguyen et al., 2020), they have seen relatively little use in the
modern machine learning context.
• CVaR constraints (or α-coverage). Originating from the ﬁnancial risk management lit-
erature (Rockafellar et al., 2000), the conditional value at risk (CVaR) is concerned with
guaranteeing good performance under all distributions q that α-covered by p, meaning that
for all (x, y), q(x, y) ≤αp(x, y) with α ∈]0, 1]. This formalizes in the language of probabil-
ity distributions the idea that q is a subset that covers only a fraction α of the training data.
CVaR-constrained uncertainty sets underpin a variety of recently proposed approaches for
robust machine learning, even if they are not always explicitly acknowledged as such (Fan
19
et al., 2017; Curi et al., 2020; Levy et al., 2020).
All these nonparametric approaches are appealing as they require very little domain-speciﬁc
knowledge, have well-understood theory (Duchi & Namkoong, 2018), and optimization proce-
dures (e.g. Hu & Hong (2013) for KL constraints and Levy et al. (2020) for χ2 and CVaR con-
straints). We refer to (Rahimian & Mehrotra, 2019) for a more in-depth overview.
Unfortunately, nonparametric DRO algorithms suffer from being overly pessimistic. Their
uncertainty sets tend to include distributions that are exceedingly difﬁcult to learn, or not rep-
resentative of real-world distribution shifts. Furthermore, they often cannot enforce even basic
constraints such as covariate shift (Duchi et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2018). Group-structured DRO
uncertainty sets (Sagawa et al., 2020) overcome some of these challenges, but as alluded to before,
they require signiﬁcant domain expertise to pre-specify target sub-populations that a model should
be robust to.
2.3.2
Measuring Robustness
Over the years, various works have attempted to come up with speciﬁc measures of model ro-
bustness in order to provide out-of-distribution generalization guarantees. Unfortunately, common
divergence metrics such as the KL divergence (KL(p∥q) = Ep log q
p; Kullback & Leibler (1951)) or
the total variation distance (dTV(p, q) = supx |p(x) −q(x)|; Saks (1937)) generally yield vacuous
bounds.
Ben-David et al. (2010) (following a line of work initiated in Kifer et al. (2004) and Ben-David
et al. (2007)) introduced a new distance metric called the H-divergence, speciﬁcally geared towards
yielding out-of-distribution generalization bounds. The central insight of the H-divergence is to
induce a distance that is speciﬁc to the family of models being trained (the titular H). A key feature
of the H-divergence is that it can be approximated with another metric, the proxy A-distance. In
broad strokes, the proxy A-distance is proportional to how easy it is to discriminate between the
two domains p and q using classiﬁers from H. More precisely, given two datasets Up and Uq
sampled from p and q respectively, it reads:
ˆdA(p, q) = 2(1 −2ϵ(Up, Uq))
(2.4)
with
ϵ(Up, Uq) = min
h∈H
1
|Up| + |Uq|
X
x∈Up∪Uq
|h(x) −1x∈Up|
(2.5)
20
In other words, ϵ is the best error-rate (within H) for distinguishing Up from Uq. Naturally the
exact minimum is in general intractable, but it can be estimated by training a classiﬁer on ﬁnite
amounts of training data sampled from p and q, making it more conducive to applied research.
Although the H-divergence literature has inspired some work in “unsupervised domain adap-
tation”6 (Ganin & Lempitsky (2015) and the follow-up literature on domain adversarial neural
networks), it has seen relatively little use in NLP, with some notable exceptions (Blitzer & Pereira,
2007; Rai et al., 2010; Glorot et al., 2011). More recent empirical comparisons (Elsahar & Gallé,
2019; Kashyap et al., 2021) have shown the proxy A-Distance to be competitive when it comes
to predicting performance drop in the face of domain shift, possibly heralding a resurgence of the
metric. We refer the interested reader to Kashyap et al. (2021) for a complete taxonomy and a
more exhaustive overview of domain divergences (written with an NLP audience in mind).
With regards to adversarial perturbation speciﬁcally, there is a considerable amount of work
devoted to providing certiﬁable robustness guarantees (see Katz et al. (2017); Sinha et al. (2018);
Wong & Kolter (2018); Raghunathan et al. (2018) inter alia). Often, these guarantees rely on
ideas related to Lipschitz continuity bounds: limiting the change in a model’s output as a function
of small perturbations in its inputs. These ideas are difﬁcult to transpose to NLP as they rely on
some notion of a “small change” in the input, which is usually described in terms of ℓ2 norm for
continuous data such as images, but is harder to formalize in natural languages. Jia et al. (2019)
circumvent this issue by adapting an approach from the computer vision literature (Interval Bound
Propagation (IBP); Dvijotham et al. (2018)) to speciﬁc neural architectures to yield robustness
guarantees to word-level perturbations at the embedding level. Overall, guaranteed adversarial
robustness in NLP is still an active area of research, with recent work extending these ideas to
more modern architectures (Shi et al., 2020) for example.
6Training models to be robust to domain shift given unlabeled samples from the target domain
21
Part I
Measuring and Evaluating Robustness
22
Chapter 3
MTNT: A Testbed for Machine Translation
of Noisy Text
3.1
Introduction
After this overview of the distributional shift problem, in this chapter we present our ﬁrst contri-
bution: a benchmark dataset for Machine Translation of Noisy Text (MTNT), consisting of noisy
user-generated content such as the following comment:
#nlproc is actualy f*ing hARD tbh
This handcrafted sentence showcases several types of noise that are commonly seen on so-
cial media: abbreviations (“#nlproc”), typographical errors (“actualy”), obfuscated profanities
(“f*ing”), inconsistent capitalization (“hARD”), Internet slang (“tbh” for “to be honest”) and emo-
jis (
). Although machine translation has achieved signiﬁcant quality improvements over the
past few years due to the advent of Neural Machine Translation (NMT) Kalchbrenner & Blunsom
(2013); Sutskever et al. (2014); Bahdanau et al. (2014); Wu et al. (2016), systems are still not ro-
bust to noisy input like this Belinkov & Bisk (2018a); Khayrallah & Koehn (2018). For example,
Google Translate1 translates the above example into French as:
#nlproc est en train de f * ing dur hb
which translates back into English as “#nlproc is in the process of [f * ing] hard hb”. This shows
that noisy input can lead to erroneous translations that can be misinterpreted or even offensive.
1translate.google.com as of May 2018
23
Noise in social media text is a known issue that has been investigated in a variety of previous
work Eisenstein (2013); Baldwin et al. (2013). Most recently, Belinkov & Bisk (2018a) have
focused on the difﬁculties that character based NMT models have translating text with character
level noise within individual words (from scrambling to simulated human errors such as typos or
spelling/conjugation errors). This is a good ﬁrst step towards noise-robust NMT systems, but as we
demonstrate in Section 3.2, word-by-word replacement or scrambling of characters doesn’t cover
all the idiosyncrasies of language on the Internet.
At this point, despite the obvious utility of creating noise-robust MT systems, and the scientiﬁc
challenges contained therein, there is currently a bottleneck in that there is no standard open bench-
mark for researchers and developers of Machine Translation (MT) systems to test the robustness
of their models to these and other phenomena found in noisy text on the Internet. In this chapter,
we introduce Machine Translation of Noisy Text (MTNT), a new, realistic dataset aimed at testing
robustness of MT systems to these phenomena. The dataset contains naturally created noisy source
sentences with professionally sourced translations both in a pair of typologically close languages
(English and French) and distant languages (English and Japanese). We collect noisy comments
from the Reddit2 online discussion website (Section 3.3) in English, French and Japanese, and com-
missioned professional translators to translate to and from English, resulting in approximately 1000
test samples and from 6k to 36k training samples in four language pairs (English-French (en-fr),
French-English (fr-en), English-Japanese (en-ja) and Japanese-English (ja-en)). In addi-
tion, we release additional small monolingual corpora in those 3 languages to both provide data for
semi-supervised adaptation approaches as well as noisy Language Modeling (LM) experiments.
We test standard translation models (Section 3.5) on our data to understand their failure cases and
to provide baselines for future work.3 Finally, we describe the 2019 and 2020 WMT Robustness
shared task in which MTNT was used as a benchmark for robust machine translation (Section 3.7).
The data is publicly available at https://pmichel31415.github.io/mtnt/.
3.2
Noise and Input Variations in Language on the Internet
3.2.1
Examples from Social Media Text
The term “noise” can encompass a variety of phenomena in natural language, with variations across
languages (e.g.what is a typo in logographic writing systems?) and type of content Baldwin et al.
2www.reddit.com
3Additional language modeling experiments can be found in Appendix 3.6
24
(2013). To give the reader an idea of the challenges posed to MT and NLP systems operating
on this kind of text, we provide a non-exhaustive list of types of noise and more generally input
variations that deviate from standard MT training data we’ve encountered in Reddit comments:
• Spelling/typographical errors: “across” →“accross”, “receive” →“recieve”, “could have”
→“could of”, “temps” →“tant”, “除く” →“覗く”
• Word omission/insertion/repetition: “je n’aime pas” →“j’aime pas”,“je pense” →“moi
je pense”
• Grammatical errors: “a ton of” →“a tons of”, “There are fewer people” →“There are
less people”
• Spoken language: “want to” →“wanna”, “I am” →“I’m”, “je ne sais pas” →“chais pas”,
“何を笑っているの” →“何わろてんねん”,
• Internet slang: “to be honest” →“tbh”, “shaking my head” →“smh”, “mort de rire” →
“mdr”, “笑” →“w”/“草”
• Proper nouns (with or without correct capitalization): “Reddit”→“reddit”
• Dialects: African American Vernacular English, Scottish, Provençal, Québécois, Kansai,
Tohoku...
• Code switching: “This is so cute” →“This is so kawaii”, “C’est trop conventionel” →
“C’est trop mainstream”, “現在捏造中...” →“Now 捏造ing...”
• Jargon: on Reddit: “upvote”, “downvote”, “sub”, “gild”
• Emojis and other unicode characters:
,
,
,
,
,
,
• Profanities/slurs (sometimes masked) “f*ck”, “m*rde” ...
3.2.2
Is Translating Noisy Text just another Adaptation Problem?
To a certain extent, translating noisy text is a type of adaptation, which has been studied extensively
in the context of both Statistical Machine Translation (SMT) and NMT Axelrod et al. (2011); Li
et al. (2010); Luong & Manning (2015); Chu et al. (2017); Miceli Barone et al. (2017); Wang et al.
(2017); Michel & Neubig (2018b). However, it presents many differences with previous domain
25
Collection
         Monolingual Data
         Parallel Data
Fetch 
comment from the
API
Normalize 
tokenize, lowercase,
strip markdown 
Pre-ﬁlter 
Remove urls, other
languages, bots 
OOV ﬁlter 
[OPTIONAL] 
only keep comments
with OOV words 
LM ﬁlter 
Filter by subword LM
score 
Translate 
Send ~15k comments to
translation
Manually split into
sentences and verify
1000 translations
Automatically split
the remaining
comments into
sentences
Test set 
(~1000 sentences)
Training set 
(6k-36k sentences) 
Split the remaining data in
monolingual train, test and
validation data
3.1
3.3
3.3
3.3
3.3
3.4
3.4
Figure 3.1: Summary of our collection process and the respective sections addressing them. We
apply the same procedure for each language.
adaptation problems, where the main goal is to adapt from a particular topic or style. In the case
of noisy text, it will not only be the case that a particular word will be translated in a different way
than it is in the general domain (e.g. as in the case of “sub”), but also that there will be increased
lexical variation (e.g. due to spelling or typographical errors), and also inconsistency in grammar
(e.g. due to omissions of critical words or mis-usage). The sum of these differences warrants that
noisy MT be treated as a separate instance than domain adaptation, and our experimental analysis
in 3.5.4 demonstrates that even after performing adaptation, MT systems still make a large number
of noise-related errors.
3.3
Collection Procedure
We ﬁrst collect noisy sentences in our three languages of interest, English, French and Japanese.
We refer to Figure 3.1 for an overview of the data collection and translation process.
We choose Reddit as a source of data because (1) its content is likely to exhibit noise, (2)
some of its sub-communities are entirely run in different languages, in particular, English, French
and Japanese, and (3) Reddit is a popular source of data in curated and publicly distributed NLP
datasets Tan et al. (2016). We collect data using the public Reddit API. 4
4In particular, we use this implementation: praw.readthedocs.io/en/latest, and our complete code is
available at http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~pmichel1/mtnt/.
26
Note that the data collection and translation is performed at the comment level. We split the
parallel data into sentences as a last step.
3.3.1
Data Sources
For each language, we select a set of communities (“subreddits”) that we know contain many
comments in that language:
English: Since an overwhelming majority of the discussions on Reddit are conducted in English,
we don’t restrict our collection to any community in particular.
French: /r/france, /r/quebec and /r/rance. The ﬁrst two are among the biggest French
speaking communities on Reddit. The third is a humor/sarcasm based offspring of /r/france.
Japanese: /r/newsokur, /r/bakanewsjp, /r/newsokuvip, /r/lowlevelaware and
/r/steamr. Those are the biggest Japanese speaking communities, with over 2,000 sub-
scribers at the time of collection.
We collect comments made during the 03/27/2018-03/29/3018 time period for English, 09/2018-
03/2018 for French and 11/2017-03/2018 for Japanese. The large difference in collection time is
due to the variance in comment throughput and relative amount of noise between the languages.
3.3.2
Contrast Corpora
Not all comments found on Reddit exhibit noise as described in Section 3.2. Because we would
like to focus our data collection on noisy comments, we devise criteria that allow us to distinguish
potentially noisy comments from clean ones. Speciﬁcally, we compile a contrast corpus composed
of clean text that we can compare to, and ﬁnd potentially noisy text that differs greatly from the
contrast corpus. Given that our ﬁnal goal is MT robust to noise, we prefer that these contrast
corpora consist of the same type of data that is often used to train NMT models. We select different
datasets for each language:
English: The English side of the preprocessed parallel training data provided for the German-
English WMT 2017 News translation task,5 as provided on the website. This amounts to
≈5.85 million sentences.
5http://www.statmt.org/wmt17/translation-task.html
27
French: The entirety of the French side of the parallel training data provided for the English-
French WMT 2015 translation task.6 This amounts to ≈40.86 million sentences.
Japanese: We aggregate three small/medium sized MT datasets: KFTT Neubig (2011), JESC
Pryzant et al. (2017) and TED talks Cettolo et al. (2012), amounting to ≈4.19 million
sentences.
3.3.3
Identifying Noisy Comments
We now describe the procedure used to identify comments containing noise.
Pre-ﬁltering
First, we perform three pre-processing to discard comments that do not represent
natural noisy text in the language of interest:
1. Comments containing a URL, as detected by a regular expression.
2. Comments where the author’s username contains “bot” or “AutoModerator”. This mostly
removes automated comments from bots.
3. Comments in another language: we run langid.py7 Lui & Baldwin (2012) and discard
comments where p(lang | comment) > 0.5 for any language other than the one we are
interested in.
This removes cases that are less interesting, i.e. those that could be solved by rule-based
pattern matching or are not natural text created by regular users in the target language. Our third
criterion in particular discards comments that are blatantly in another language while still allowing
comments that exhibit code-switching or that contain proper nouns or typos that might skew the
language identiﬁcation. In preliminary experiments, we noticed that these criteria 14.47, 6.53 and
7.09 % of the collected comments satisﬁed the above criteria respectively.
Normalization
After this ﬁrst pass of ﬁltering, we pre-process the comments before running
them through our noise detection procedure. We ﬁrst strip Markdown8 syntax from the comments.
For English and French, we normalize the punctuation, lowercase and tokenize the comments us-
ing the Moses tokenizer. For Japanese, we simply lowercase the alphabetical characters in the
6http://www.statmt.org/wmt15/translation-task.html
7https://github.com/saffsd/langid.py
8https://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown
28
comments. Note that this normalization is done for the purpose of noise detection only. The col-
lected comments are released without any kind of preprocessing. We apply the same normalization
procedure to the contrast corpora.
Unknown words
In the case of French and English, a clear indication of noise is the presence
of out-of-vocabulary words (OOV): we record all lowercased words encountered in our reference
corpus described in Section 3.3.2 and only keep comments that contain at least one OOV. Since
we did not use word segmentation for the Japanese reference corpus, we found this method not to
be very effective to select Japanese comments and therefore skipped this step.
Language model scores
The ﬁnal step of our noise detection procedure consists of selecting
those comments with a low probability under a language model trained on the reference mono-
lingual corpus. This approach mirrors the one used in Moore & Lewis (2010) and Axelrod et al.
(2011) to select data similar to a speciﬁc domain using language model perplexity as a metric.
We search for comments that have a low probability under a sub-word language model for more
ﬂexibility in the face of OOV words. We segment the contrast corpora with Byte-Pair Encoding
(BPE) using the sentencepiece9 implementation. We set the vocabulary sizes to 1, 000, 1, 000 and
4, 000 for English, French and Japanese respectively. We then use a 5-gram Kneser-Ney smoothed
language model trained using kenLM10 Heaﬁeld et al. (2013) to calculate the log probability, nor-
malized by the number of tokens for every sentence in the reference corpus. Given a reddit com-
ment, we compute the normalized log probability of each of its lines under our subword language
model. If for any line this score is below the 1st percentile of scores in the reference corpus, the
comment is labeled as noisy and saved.
3.3.4
Creating the Parallel Corpora
Once enough data has been collected, we isolate 15, 000 comments in each language by the fol-
lowing procedure:
• Remove all duplicates. In particular, this handles comments that might have been scraped
twice or automatic comments from bots.
9https://github.com/google/sentencepiece
10https://kheafield.com/code/kenlm/
29
• To further weed out outliers (comments that are too noisy, e.g.ASCII art, wrong language...or
not noisy enough), we discard comments that are on either end of the distribution of nor-
malized LM scores within the set of collected comments. We only keep comments whose
normalized score is within the 5-70 percentile for English (resp. 5-60 for French and 10-70
for Japanese). These numbers are chosen by manually inspecting the data.
• Choose 15, 000 samples at random.
We then concatenate the title of the thread where the comment was found to the text and send
everything to an external vendor for manual translations. Upon reception of the translations, we
noticed a certain amount of variation in the quality of translations, likely because translating social
media text, with all its nuances, is difﬁcult even for humans. In order to ensure the highest quality
in the translations, we manually ﬁlter the data to segment the comments into sentences and weed
out poor translations for our test data. We thereby retain around 1, 000 sentence pairs in each
direction for the ﬁnal test set.
We gather the samples that weren’t selected for the test sets to be used for training or ﬁne-tuning
models on noisy data. We automatically split comments into sentences with a regular expression
detecting sentence delimiters, and then align the source and target sentences. Should this alignment
fail (i.e.the source comment contains a different number of sentences than the target comment after
automatic splitting), we revert back to providing the whole comment without splitting. For the
training data, we do not verify the correctness of translations as closely as for the test data. Finally,
we isolate ≈900 samples in each direction to serve as validation data.
Information about the size of the data can be found in Table 3.1c, 3.1a and 3.1b for the test,
training and validation sets respectively. We tokenize the English and French data with the Moses
Koehn et al. (2007) tokenizer and the Japanese data with Kytea Neubig et al. (2011) before counting
the number of tokens in each dataset.
3.3.5
Monolingual Corpora
After the creation of the parallel train and test sets, a large number of unused comments remain
in each language, which we provide as monolingual corpora. This additional data has two pur-
poses: ﬁrst, it serves as a resource for in-domain training using semi-supervised methods relying
on monolingual data (e.g. Cheng et al. (2016); Zhang & Zong (2016)). Second, it provides a
language modeling dataset for noisy text in three languages.
We select 3, 000 comments at random in each dataset to form a validation set to be used to tune
30
Table 3.1: Datasets numbers.
#samples
#src tokens
#trg tokens
en-fr
36,058
841k
965k
fr-en
19,161
661k
634k
en-ja
5,775
281k
506k
ja-en
6,506
172k
128k
(a) Training sets numbers.
#samples
#src tokens
#trg tokens
852
16,957
18,948
886
41,578
46,886
852
40,124
46,886
965
25,010
23,289
(b) Validation sets numbers.
#samples
#src tokens
#trg tokens
en-fr
1,020
15,919
18,445
fr-en
1,022
16,662
16,038
en-ja
1,002
11,040
20,008
ja-en
1,020
23,997
33,429
(c) Test set numbers.
#samples
#tok
#char
en
train
81,631
3,99M
18,9M
dev
3,000
146k
698k
fr
train
26,485
1,52M
7,49M
dev
3,000
176k
867k
ja
train
32,042
943k
3.9M
dev
3,000
84k
351k
(d) Monolingual data numbers.
hyper-parameters, and provide the rest as training data. The data is provided with one comment
per line. Newlines within individual comments are replaced with spaces. Table 3.1d contains
information on the size of the datasets. As with the parallel MT data, we provide the number of
tokens after tokenization with the Moses tokenizer for English and French and Kytea for Japanese.
3.4
Dataset Analysis
In this section, we investigate the proposed data to understand how different categories of noise
are represented and to show that our test sets contain more noise overall than established MT
benchmarks.
3.4.1
Quantifying Noisy Phenomena
We run a series of tests to count the number of occurrences of some of the types of noise described
in Section 3.2. Speciﬁcally we pass our data through spell checkers to count spelling and grammar
errors. Due to some of these tests being impractical to run on a large scale, we limit our analysis
to the test sets of MTNT.
We use slightly different procedures depending on the tools available for each language. We test
31
Table 3.2: Numbers, per 100 tokens, of quantiﬁable noise occurrences. For each language and
category, the dataset with the highest amount of noise is highlighted.
Spelling
Grammar
Emojis
Profanities
en
newstest2014
0.210
0.189
0.000
0.030
newsdiscusstest2015
0.621
0.410
0.021
0.076
MTNT (en-fr)
2.180
0.559
0.289
0.239
fr
newstest2014
2.776
0.091
0.000
0.245
newsdiscusstest2015
1.686
0.457
0.024
0.354
MTNT
4.597
1.464
0.252
0.690
ja
TED
0.011
0.266
0.000
0.000
KFTT
0.021
0.228
0.000
0.000
JESC
0.096
0.929
0.090
0.058
MTNT
0.269
1.527
0.156
0.036
for spelling and grammar errors in English data using Grammarly11, an online resource for English
spell-checking. Due to the unavailability of an equivalent of Grammarly in French and Japanese,
we test for spelling and grammar error using the integrated spell-checker in Microsoft Word 201312.
Note that Word seems to count proper nouns as spelling errors, giving higher numbers of spelling
errors across the board in French as compared to English.
For all languages, we also count the number of profanities and emojis using custom-made lists
and regular expressions13. In order to compare results across datasets of different sizes, we report
all counts per 100 words.
The results are recorded in the last row of each section in Table 3.2. In particular, for the
languages with a segmental writing system, English and French, spelling errors are the dominant
type of noise, followed by grammar error. Unsurprisingly, the former are much less present in
Japanese.
3.4.2
Comparison to Existing Machine Translation Test Sets
Table 3.2 also provide a comparison with the relevant side of established MT test sets. For English
and French, we compare our data to newstest201414 and newsdiscusstest201515 test sets. For
11https://www.grammarly.com/
12https://products.office.com/en-us/microsoft-word-2013
13available with our code at https://github.com/pmichel31415/mtnt
14http://www.statmt.org/wmt15/dev-v2.tgz
15http://www.statmt.org/wmt15/test.tgz
32
Japanese, we compare with the test sets of the datasets described in Section 3.3.2.
Overall, MTNT contains more noise in all metrics but one (there are more profanities in JESC,
a Japanese subtitle corpus). This conﬁrms that MTNT indeed provides a more appropriate bench-
mark for translation of noisy or non-standard text.
Compared to synthetically created noisy test sets Belinkov & Bisk (2018a) MTNT contains
less systematic spelling errors and more varied types of noise (e.g.emojis and profanities) and is
thereby more representative of naturally occurring noise.
3.5
Machine Translation Experiments
We evaluate standard NMT models on our proposed dataset to assess its difﬁculty. Our goal is not
to train state-of-the art models but rather to test standard off-the-shelf NMT systems on our data,
and elucidate what features of the data make it difﬁcult.
3.5.1
Model Description
All our models are implemented in DyNet Neubig et al. (2017) with the XNMT toolkit Neubig et al.
(2018). We use approximately the same setting for all language pairs: the encoder is a bidirectional
LSTM with 2 layers, the attention mechanism is a multi layered perceptron and the decoder is a 2
layered LSTM. The embedding dimension is 512, all other dimensions are 1024. We tie the target
word embeddings and the output projection weights Press & Wolf (2017). We train with Adam
Kingma & Ba (2014) with XNMT’s default hyper-parameters, as well as dropout (with probability
0.3). We used BPE subwords to handle OOV words. Full conﬁguration details as well as code to
reproduce the baselines is available at https://github.com/pmichel31415/mtnt.
3.5.2
Training Data
We train our models on standard MT datasets:
• en ↔fr: Our training data consists in the europarl-v716 and news-commentary-v1017 cor-
pora, totaling 2, 164, 140 samples, 54, 611, 105 French tokens and 51, 745, 611 English to-
kens (non-tokenized). We use the newsdiscussdev201514 dev set from WMT15 as validation
data and evaluate the model on the newsdiscusstest201515 and newstest201414 test sets.
16http://www.statmt.org/europarl/
17http://www.statmt.org/wmt15/training-parallel-nc-v10.tgz
33
• en ↔ja: We concatenate the respective train, validation and test sets of the three corpora
mentioned in 3.3.2. In particular we detokenize the Japanese part of each dataset to make
sure that any tokenization we perform will be uniform (in practice we remove ASCII spaces).
This amounts to 3, 900, 772 training samples (34, 989, 346 English tokens without tokeniza-
tion). We concatenate the dev sets associated with these corpora to serve as validation data
and evaluate on each respective test set separately.
Table 3.3: BLEU scores of NMT models on the various datasets.
en-fr
fr-en
newstest2014
33.52
28.93
newsdiscusstest2015
33.03
30.76
MTNT
21.77
23.27
MTNT (+tuning)
29.73
30.29
en-ja
ja-en
TED
14.51
13.25
KFTT
20.82
20.77
JESC
15.77
18.00
MTNT
9.02
6.65
MTNT (+tuning)
12.45
9.82
3.5.3
Results
We use sacreBLEU18, a standardized BLEU score evaluation script proposed by Post (2018b), for
BLEU evaluation of our benchmark dataset. It takes in detokenized references and hypotheses and
performs its own tokenization before computing BLEU score. We specify the intl tokenization
option. In the case of Japanese text, we run both hypothesis and reference through KyTea before
computing BLEU score. We strongly encourage that evaluation be performed in the same manner
in subsequent work, and will provide both scripts and an evaluation web site in order to facilitate
reproducibility.
Table 3.3 lists the BLEU scores for our models on the relevant test sets in the two language
pairs, including the results on MTNT.
18https://github.com/mjpost/sacreBLEU
34
Table 3.4: Comparison of our model’s output before and after ﬁne-tuning in fr-en.
Source
Moi faire la gueule dans le métro me manque, c’est grave ?
Target
I miss sulking in the underground, is that bad?
Our model
I do not know what is going on in the metro, that is a serious matter.
+ ﬁne-tuning
I do not want to be in the metro, it’s serious?
Source
* C’est noël / pâques / pentecôte / toussaint : Pick One, je suis pas catho
Target
Christmas / Easter / Pentecost / All Saints: Pick One, I’m not Catholic!
Our model
<unk> It is a pale/poward, a palec<unk>te d’<unk>tat: Pick One, I am not a catho!
+ ﬁne-tuning
<unk> It’s no<unk>l / pesc<unk>e /pentecate /mainly: Pick One, I’m not catho!
3.5.4
Analysis of the MT outputs
To better understand the types of errors made by our model, we count the n-grams that are over-
and under- generated with respect to the reference translation. Speciﬁcally, we compare the count
ratios of all 1- to 3-grams in the output and in the reference and look for the ones with the highest
(over-generated) and lowest (under-generated) ratio.
We ﬁnd that in English, the model under-generates the contracted form of the negative (“do
not”/“don’t”) or of auxiliaries (“That is”/“I’m”). Similarly, in French, our model over generates
“de votre” (where “votre” is the formal 2nd person plural for “your”) and “n’ai pas” which show-
cases the “ne [...] pas” negation, often dropped in spoken language. Conversely, the informal
second person “tu” is under-generated, as is the informal and spoken contraction of “cela”, “ça”.
In Japanese, the model under-generates, among others, the informal personal pronoun 俺(“ore”)
or the casual form だ(“da”) of the verb です(“desu”, to be). In ja-en the results are difﬁcult to
interpret as the model seems to produce incoherent outputs (e.g. “no, no, no...”) when the NMT
system encounters sentences it has not seen before. The full list of n-grams with the top 5 and
bottom 5 count ratios in each language pair is displayed in Table 3.5.
3.5.5
Fine-Tuning
Finally, we test a simple domain adaptation method by ﬁne-tuning our models on the training data
described in Section 3.3.4. We perform one epoch of training with vanilla SGD with a learning
rate of 0.1 and a batch size of 32. We do not use the validation data at all. As evidenced by the
results in the last row of Table 3.3, this drives BLEU score up by 3.17 to 7.96 points depending
on the language pair. However large this increase might be, our model still breaks on very noisy
sentences. Table 3.4 shows three examples in fr-en. Although our model somewhat improves
35
Table 3.5: Over and under generated n-grams in our model’s output for en-fr
fr-en
en-fr
ja-en
en-ja
Over generated
<unk>
<unk>
no, no,
※
it is not
qu’ils
i
が
I do not
de votre
no, no, no,
か?
That is
s’il
so on and
て
not have
n’ai pas
on and so
すか?
Under generated
it’s
tu
|
？
I’m
ça
Is
よ。
I don’t
que tu
>
って
>
!
""The
俺
doesn’t
as
those
だ。
after ﬁne-tuning, the translations remain inadequate in all cases. In the third case, our model
downright fails to produce a coherent output. This shows that despite improving BLEU score,
naive domain adaptation by ﬁne-tuning doesn’t solve the problem of translating noisy text.
3.6
Language Modeling Experiments
In addition to our MT experiments, we report character-level language modeling results on the
monolingual part of our dataset. We use the data described in Section 3.3.5 as training and valida-
tion sets. We evaluate the trained model on the source side of our en-fr, fr-en and ja-en test
sets for English, French and Japanese respectively.
We report results for two models: a Kneser-Ney smoothed 6-gram model (implemented with
KenLM) and an implementation of the AWD-LSTM proposed in Merity et al. (2018)19. We report
the Bit-Per-Character (bpc) counts in table 3.6. We intend these results to serve as a baseline for
future work in language modeling of noisy text in either of those three languages.
19https://github.com/salesforce/awd-lstm-lm
36
Table 3.6: Language modeling scores
6-gram
AWD LSTM
dev
test
dev
test
English
2.081
2.179
1.706
1.810
French
1.906
2.090
1.449
1.705
Japanese
5.003
5.497
4.801
5.225
3.7
MTNT in Action: the 2019 and 2020 WMT Robustness
Shared Tasks
A year after MTNT was originally published, the dataset was featured in the Robustness shared
task20 at the 2019 conference on machine translation (WMT). Participants were allowed to use
large amounts of out-of-domain data from the main WMT translation task21 or from the three
en-ja corpora described in Section 3.5, as well as the MTNT dataset itself as a small in-domain
corpus. Submitted systems were evaluated on new, blind test sets collected using the same proce-
dure as MTNT i.e. scraped from Reddit, ﬁltered out for noisy comments using a sub-word language
modeling criterion and translated by professionals.
The shared task attracted 23 submissions from 11 teams. Methods used by competing teams
included variants of data cleaning (removal of noisy training samples), the use of placeholders (to
account for special characters that could be copied such as emojis), data augmentation strategies
(such as back-translation or the addition of ﬁltered data from external sources), domain-aware
training (via the addition of domain tags), ﬁne-tuning and ensembling. Table 3.7 showcases an
example where speciﬁc handling of casing allowed some systems to outperform others on samples
containing ALL CAPS (a common phenomenon in user-generated content on social media). A
more detailed description of the submissions, as well as an analysis of the results, can be found in
the ﬁndings paper Li et al. (2019).
The shared task was renewed in 2020, with a broader focus on general domain robustness22.
In this iteration, participants were asked to train models in one of two language pairs (English-
German and English Japanese) using only the data available for the WMT20 news translation
task (Barrault et al., 2020). The evaluation data was aggregated from three different domains:
20http://www.statmt.org/wmt19/robustness.html
21http://www.statmt.org/wmt15/translation-task.html
22http://www.statmt.org/wmt20/robustness.html
37
Output
BLEU+1
Ref
From Sri Lanka , to Russia , to the United States , to Japan
I mean it ’s a market THAT GOES EVERYWHERE .
CUNI
from sri lanka , to russia , to the united states , to japon I
mean it ’s a market QUI VA PARTOUT .
33.0
NLE
From Sri Lanka , to Russia , to the United States , to Japan
I mean it ’s a market THAT GOES EVERYWHERE .
100
Table 3.7: An example of handling of casing in two fr-en systems, CUNI (Helcl et al., 2019)
and NLE (Bérard et al., 2019). The CUNI system does not recognize the ALL CAPS text in the
French sentence, and simply copies the source. On the other hand, the NLE system uses a speciﬁc
case tagging technique which enables it to properly translate the relevant phrase, while preserving
the original casing.
Wikipedia comments with toxic content23, speech recognition transcripts (Wang et al., 2020b),
and a new test set of reddit comments, collected following again the same procedure as MTNT.
Evaluation proceeded in two distinct phases. In the ﬁrst “zero-shot” phase, submitted systems
were simply evaluated against the unseen test sets, thus testing the domain robustness of models
trained using only out-of-domain data. In the second “few-shot” phase, participants were given a
single week to ﬁne-tune their systems using limited amounts of training data from each domain
(including the MTNT training data). Each system output was evaluated using both automatic
metrics (BLEU) and human judgements. In the case of the latter, evaluators were not only asked
to rate the machine-generated translations on a numerical scale of 1 to 5, but also to indicate
the presence of “catastrophic errors” belonging to pre-deﬁned categories such as “introduction of
toxicity”, “mis-translation of named entities” or “change in units/time/date/numbers”
This edition of the task received 59 submissions by 11 participating teams from both industry
and academic institutions. By and large, most teams used similar approaches as the previous year,
speciﬁcally tagged back-translations, ensembling or ﬁne-tuning on ﬁltered data. In addition, some
teams used adaptor modules (Bapna & Firat, 2019) for more efﬁcient ﬁne-tuning, with some level
of success. The human evaluation of the results uncovered a predominance of named entity mis-
translations among catastrophic errors, followed by sentiment reversal and introduction of toxicity.
We refer to the ﬁndings paper (Specia et al., 2020) for a full description of the data collection
process, evaluation procedure and participating systems.
23https://www.kaggle.com/c/jigsaw-toxic-comment-classification-challenge
38
Acknowledgement
The work discussed in this section was carried out in two different papers,
Li et al. (2019) and Specia et al. (2020). The present author was not ﬁrst author on either of these
papers. His contributions were, for Li et al. (2019) to help with the general organization of the
task, including establishing the goal of the task, planning, handling submissions and in particular
to be responsible for collecting the blind test sets. For Specia et al. (2020), his contributions were
more focused on data collection for the reddit test set.
3.8
Related work
Handling noisy text has received growing attention among various language processing tasks due to
the abundance of user generated content on popular social media platforms Crystal (2001); Herring
(2003); Danet & Herring (2007). These contents are considered as noisy when compared to news
corpora which have been the main data source for language tasks Baldwin et al. (2013); Eisenstein
(2013). They pose several unique challenges because they contain a larger variety of linguistic
phenomena that are absent in the news domain and that lead to degraded quality when applying an
model to out-of-domain data (Ritter et al., 2011; Luong & Manning, 2015). Additionally, they are
live examples of the Cmabrigde Uinervtisy (Cambridge University) effect, where state-of-the-art
models become brittle while human’s language processing capability is more robust (Sakaguchi
et al., 2017; Belinkov & Bisk, 2018a).
Efforts to address these challenges have been focused on creating in-domain datasets and an-
notations (Owoputi et al., 2013; Kong et al., 2014; Blodgett et al., 2017), and domain adaptation
training (Luong & Manning, 2015). In MT, improvements were obtained for SMT (Formiga &
Fonollosa, 2012). However, the speciﬁc challenges for neural machine translation have not been
studied until recently Belinkov & Bisk (2018a); Sperber et al. (2017); Cheng et al. (2018b). The
ﬁrst provides empirical evidence of non-trivial quality degradation when source sentences con-
tain natural noise or synthetic noise within words, and the last two explore data augmentation and
adversarial approaches of adding noise efﬁciently to training data to improve robustness.
Our work also contributes to recent advances in evaluating neural machine translation quality
with regard to speciﬁc linguistic phenomena, such as manually annotated test sentences for English
to French translation, in order to identify errors due to speciﬁc linguistic divergences between the
two languages (Isabelle et al., 2017), or automatically generated test sets to evaluate typical errors
in English to German translation (Sennrich, 2017). Our contribution distinguishes itself from this
previous work and other similar initiatives (Peterson, 2011) by providing an open test set consisting
of naturally occurring text exhibiting a wide range of phenomena related to noisy input text from
39
contemporaneous social media.
3.9
Discussion
In this chapter, we proposed a new dataset to test MT models for robustness to the types of noise
encountered in natural language on the Internet. We contribute parallel training and test data in
both directions for two language pairs, English ↔French and English ↔Japanese, as well as
monolingual data in those three languages. We show that this dataset contains more noise than
existing MT test sets and poses a challenge to models trained on standard MT corpora. We further
demonstrate that these challenges cannot be overcome by a simple domain adaptation approach
alone. After its publication, MTNT served as the basis for two shared tasks at the WMT confer-
ence in machine translation, fostering research on models and evaluation metrics for this speciﬁc
problem (Li et al., 2019; Specia et al., 2020). In addition, it was used independently in a variety of
subsequent work, either as a benchmark for e.g. data augmentation techniques (Karpukhin et al.,
2019; Vaibhav et al., 2019) or as an exemplar of domain shift in machine translation (Michel et al.,
2019a).
40
Chapter 4
On Evaluation of Adversarial Perturbations
for Sequence-to-Sequence Models
4.1
Introduction
While the previous chapter’s focus was on evaluating models under distributional shift to the social
media domain (a type of shift which we referred to as a “global” shift in Chapter 2), in this chapter
we take a closer look at a different type of distributional shift: adversarial perturbations. At a high
level, attacking a machine learning model with adversarial perturbations is the process of making
changes to its input to maximize an adversarial goal, such as mis-classiﬁcation Szegedy et al.
(2013) or mis-translation Zhao et al. (2018). These attacks provide insight into the vulnerabilities
of machine learning models and their brittleness to samples outside the training distribution. Lack
of robustness to these attacks poses security concerns to safety-critical applications, e.g. self-
driving cars Bojarski et al. (2016).
Adversarial attacks were ﬁrst deﬁned and investigated for computer vision systems (Szegedy
et al. (2013); Goodfellow et al. (2014b); Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. (2016) inter alia), where the
input space is continuous, making minuscule perturbations largely imperceptible to the human
eye. In discrete spaces such as natural language sentences, the situation is more problematic;
even a ﬂip of a single word or character is generally perceptible by a human reader. Thus, most
of the mathematical framework in previous work is not directly applicable to discrete text data.
Moreover, there is no canonical distance metric for textual data like the ℓp norm in real-valued
vector spaces such as images, and evaluating the level of semantic similarity between two sentences
is a ﬁeld of research of its own Cer et al. (2017). This elicits a natural question: what does the term
41
“adversarial perturbation” mean in the context of NLP?
We propose a simple but natural criterion for adversarial examples in NLP, particularly un-
targeted1 attacks on sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) models: adversarial examples should be
meaning-preserving on the source side, but meaning-destroying on the target side. The focus on
explicitly evaluating meaning preservation is in contrast to previous work on adversarial examples
for seq2seq models Belinkov & Bisk (2018b); Zhao et al. (2018); Cheng et al. (2018a); Ebrahimi
et al. (2018a). Nonetheless, this feature is extremely important; given two sentences with equiv-
alent meaning, we would expect a good model to produce two outputs with equivalent meaning.
In other words, any meaning-preserving perturbation that results in the model output changing
drastically highlights a fault of the model.
A ﬁrst technical contribution of this chapter is to lay out a method for formalizing this con-
cept of meaning-preserving perturbations (Section 4.2). This makes it possible to evaluate the
effectiveness of adversarial attacks or defenses either using gold-standard human evaluation, or
approximations that can be calculated without human intervention. We further propose a simple
method of imbuing gradient-based word substitution attacks (Section 4.3.1) with simple constraints
aimed at increasing the chance that the meaning is preserved (Section 4.3.2).
Our experiments are designed to answer several questions about meaning preservation in seq2seq
models. First, we evaluate our proposed “source-meaning-preserving, target-meaning-destroying”
criterion for adversarial examples using both manual and automatic evaluation (Section 4.4.2) and
ﬁnd that a less widely used evaluation metric (chrF) provides signiﬁcantly better correlation with
human judgments than the more widely used BLEU and METEOR metrics. We proceed to perform
an evaluation of adversarial example generation techniques, ﬁnding that chrF does help to distin-
guish between perturbations that are more meaning-preserving across a variety of languages and
models (Section 4.4.3). Finally, we apply existing methods for adversarial training to the adver-
sarial examples with these constraints and show that making adversarial inputs more semantically
similar to the source is beneﬁcial for robustness to adversarial attacks and does not decrease test
performance on the original data distribution (Section 4.5). A toolkit implementing our evaluation
framework is released at https://github.com/pmichel31415/teapot-nlp.
1Here we use the term untargeted in the same sense as Ebrahimi et al. (2018a): an attack whose goal is simply to
decrease performance with respect to a reference translation.
42
4.2
A Framework for Evaluating Adversarial Attacks
In this section, we present a simple procedure for evaluating adversarial attacks on seq2seq models.
We will use the following notation: x and y refer to the source and target sentence respectively. We
denote x’s translation by model M as yM. Finally, ˆx and ˆyM represent an adversarially perturbed
version of x and its translation by M, respectively. The nature of M and the procedure for obtaining
ˆx from x are irrelevant to the discussion below.
4.2.1
The Adversarial Trade-off
The goal of adversarial perturbations is to produce failure cases for the model M. Hence, the
evaluation must include some measure of the target similarity between y and yM, which we will
denote stgt(y, ˆyM). However, if no distinction is being made between perturbations that preserve
the meaning and those that don’t, a sentence like “he’s very friendly” is considered a valid adver-
sarial perturbation of “he’s very adversarial”, even though its meaning is the opposite. Hence, it
is crucial, when evaluating adversarial attacks on MT models, that the discrepancy between the
original and adversarial input sentence be quantiﬁed in a way that is sensitive to meaning. Let us
denote such a source similarity score ssrc(x, ˆx).
Based on these functions, we deﬁne the target relative score decrease as:
dtgt(y, yM, ˆyM) =





0 if stgt(y, ˆyM) ≥stgt(y, yM)
stgt(y,yM)−stgt(y,ˆyM)
stgt(y,yM)
otherwise.
(4.1)
The choice to report the relative decrease in stgt makes scores comparable across different mod-
els or languages2. For instance, for languages that are comparatively easy to translate (e.g. French-
English), stgt will be higher in general, and so will the gap between stgt(y, yM) and stgt(y, ˆyM).
However this does not necessarily mean that attacks on this language pair are more effective than
attacks on a “difﬁcult” language pair (e.g. Czech-English) where stgt is usually smaller.
We recommend that both ssrc and dtgt be reported when presenting adversarial attack results.
However, in some cases where a single number is needed, we suggest reporting the attack’s success
S := ssrc + dtgt. The interpretation is simple: S > 1 ⇔dtgt > 1 −ssrc, which means that the attack
has destroyed the target meaning (dtgt) more than it has destroyed the source meaning (1 −ssrc).
Importantly, this framework can be extended beyond strictly meaning-preserving attacks. For
2Note that we do not allow negative dtgt to keep all scores between 0 and 1.
43
example, for targeted keyword introduction attacks Cheng et al. (2018a); Ebrahimi et al. (2018a),
the same evaluation framework can be used if stgt (resp. ssrc) is modiﬁed to account for the presence
(resp. absence) of the keyword (or its translation in the source). Similarly this can be extended to
other tasks by adapting stgt (e.g. for classiﬁcation one would use the zero-one loss, and adapt the
success threshold).
4.2.2
Similarity Metrics
Throughout Section 4.2.1, we have not given an exact description of the semantic similarity scores
ssrc and stgt. Indeed, automatically evaluating the semantic similarity between two sentences is an
open area of research and it makes sense to decouple the deﬁnition of adversarial examples from
the speciﬁc method used to measure this similarity. In this section, we will discuss manual and
automatic metrics that may be used to calculate it.
Human Judgment
Judgment by speakers of the language of interest is the de facto gold standard metric for seman-
tic similarity. Speciﬁc criteria such as adequacy/ﬂuency Ma & Cieri (2006), acceptability Goto
et al. (2013), and 6-level semantic similarity Cer et al. (2017) have been used in evaluations of MT
and sentence embedding methods. In the context of adversarial attacks, we propose the following
6-level evaluation scheme, which is motivated by previous measures, but designed to be (1) sym-
metric, like Cer et al. (2017), (2) and largely considers meaning preservation but at the very low
and high levels considers ﬂuency of the output3, like Goto et al. (2013):
How would you rate the similarity between the meaning of these two sentences?
0. The meaning is completely different or one of the sentences is meaningless
1. The topic is the same but the meaning is different
2. Some key information is different
3. The key information is the same but the details differ
4. Meaning is essentially equal but some expressions are unnatural
5. Meaning is essentially equal and the two sentences are well-formed Englisha
aOr the language of interest.
3This is important to rule out nonsensical sentences and distinguish between clean and “noisy” paraphrases (e.g. typos,
non-native speech...). We did not give annotators additional instruction speciﬁc to typos.
44
Automatic Metrics
Unfortunately, human evaluation is expensive, slow and sometimes difﬁcult to obtain, for example
in the case of low-resource languages. This makes automatic metrics that do not require human
intervention appealing for experimental research. This section describes 3 evaluation metrics com-
monly used as alternatives to human evaluation, in particular to evaluate translation models.4
BLEU: Papineni et al. (2002) is an automatic metric based on n-gram precision coupled with
a penalty for shorter sentences. It relies on exact word-level matches and therefore cannot detect
synonyms or morphological variations.
METEOR: Denkowski & Lavie (2014) ﬁrst estimates alignment between the two sentences
and then computes unigram F-score (biased towards recall) weighted by a penalty for longer sen-
tences. Importantly, METEOR uses stemming, synonymy and paraphrasing information to per-
form alignments. On the downside, it requires language speciﬁc resources.
chrF: Popovi´c (2015) is based on the character n-gram F-score. In particular we will use the
chrF2 score (based on the F2-score — recall is given more importance), following the recom-
mendations from Popovi´c (2016). By operating on a sub-word level, it can reﬂect the semantic
similarity between different morphological inﬂections of one word (for instance), without requir-
ing language-speciﬁc knowledge which makes it a good one-size-ﬁts-all alternative.
Because multiple possible alternatives exist, it is important to know which is the best stand-in
for human evaluation. To elucidate this, we will compare these metrics to human judgment in
terms of Pearson correlation coefﬁcient on outputs resulting from a variety of attacks in Section
4.4.2.
4.3
Gradient-Based Adversarial Attacks
In this section, we overview the adversarial attacks we will be considering in the rest of this chapter.
4.3.1
Attack Paradigm
We perform gradient-based attacks that replace one word in the sentence so as to maximize an ad-
versarial loss function Ladv, similar to the substitution attacks proposed in Ebrahimi et al. (2018b).
4Note that other metrics of similarity are certainly applicable within the overall framework of Section 4.2.2, but we
limit our examination in this chapter to the three noted here.
45
Table 4.1: Examples of different adversarial inputs. The substituted word is highlighted.
Original
Pourquoi faire cela ?
English gloss
Why do this?
Unconstrained
construisant (English: building) faire cela ?
kNN
interrogez (English: interrogate) faire cela ?
CharSwap
Puorquoi (typo) faire cela ?
Original
Si seulement je pouvais me muscler aussi rapidement.
English gloss
If only I could build my muscle this fast.
Unconstrained
Si seulement je pouvais me muscler etc rapidement.
kNN
Si seulement je pouvais me muscler plsu (typo for “more”) rapidement.
CharSwap
Si seulement je pouvais me muscler asusi (typo) rapidement.
General Approach
Precisely, for a word-based translation model M 5, and given an input sentence w1, . . . , wn, we ﬁnd
the position i∗and word w∗satisfying the following optimization problem:
arg max
1≤i≤n, ˆw∈V Ladv(w0, . . . , wi−1, ˆw, wi+1, . . . , wn)
(4.2)
where Ladv is a differentiable function which represents our adversarial objective. Using the ﬁrst
order approximation of Ladv around the original word vectors w1, . . . , wn6, this can be derived to
be equivalent to optimizing
arg max
1≤i≤n, ˆw∈V [ ˆw −wi]⊺∇wi Ladv .
(4.3)
The above optimization problem can be solved by brute-force in O(n|V|) space complexity,
whereas the time complexity is bottlenecked by a |V| × d times n × d matrix multiplication, which
is not more computationally expensive than computing logits during the forward pass of the model.
Overall, this naive approach is sufﬁciently fast to be conducive to adversarial training. We also
found that the attacks beneﬁted from normalizing the gradient by taking its sign.
Extending this approach to ﬁnding the optimal perturbations for more than 1 substitution would
require exhaustively searching over all possible combinations. However, previous work Ebrahimi
et al. (2018a) suggests that greedy search is a good enough approximation.
5Note that this formulation is also valid for character-based models (see Ebrahimi et al. (2018a)) and subword-based
models. For subword-based models, additional difﬁculty would be introduced due to changes to the input resulting
in different subword segmentations. This poses an interesting challenge that is beyond the scope of the current work.
6More generally we will use the bold w when talking about the embedding vector of word w
46
The Adversarial Loss Ladv
We want to ﬁnd an adversarial input ˆx such that, assuming that the model has produced the correct
output y1, . . . , yt−1 up to step t −1 during decoding, the probability that the model makes an error
at the next step t is maximized.
In the log-semiring, this translates into the following loss function:
Ladv(ˆx, y) =
|y|
X
t=1
log(1 −p(yt | ˆx, y1, . . . , yt−1))
(4.4)
4.3.2
Enforcing Semantically Similar Adversarial Inputs
In contrast to previous methods, which don’t consider meaning preservation, we propose simple
modiﬁcations of the approach presented in Section 4.3.1 to create adversarial perturbations at the
word level that are more likely to preserve meaning. The basic idea is to restrict the possible word
substitutions to similar words. We compare two sets of constraints:
kNN: This constraint enforces that the word be replaced only with one of its 10 nearest neigh-
bors in the source embedding space. This has two effects: ﬁrst, the replacement will be likely
semantically related to the original word (if words close in the embedding space are indeed se-
mantically related, as hinted by Table 4.1). Second, it ensures that the replacement’s word vector
is close enough to the original word vector that the ﬁrst order assumption is more likely to be
satisﬁed.
CharSwap: This constraint requires that the substituted words must be obtained by swapping
characters. Word internal character swaps have been shown to not affect human readers greatly
McCusker et al. (1981), hence making them likely to be meaning-preserving. Moreover we add
the additional constraint that the substitution must not be in the vocabulary, which will likely be
particularly meaning-destroying on the target side for the word-based models we test here. In
such cases where word-internal character swaps are not possible or can’t produce OOV words, we
resort to the naive strategy of repeating the last character of the word. The exact procedure used to
produce this kind of perturbations is described in Listing 4.3.2. Note that for a word-based model,
every OOV will look the same (a special <unk> token), however the choice of OOV will still have
an inﬂuence on the output of the model because we use unk-replacement.
1
def make_oov(
2
word,
3
vocab,
4
max_scrambling,
47
5
):
6
"""Modify a word to make it OOV
7
(while keeping the meaning)"""
8
# If the word has >3 letters
9
# try scrambling them
10
L = len(word)
11
if L > 3:
12
# For a fixed number of steps
13
for _ in range(max_scrambling):
14
# Swap two adjacent letters
15
# in the middle of the word
16
pos = random.randint(1, L - 3)
17
word = word[:pos]
18
word += word[pos+1] + word[pos]
19
word += word[pos+2:]
20
# If we got an OOV already just
21
# return it
22
if word not in vocab:
23
return word
24
# If nothing worked, or the word is
25
# too short for scrambling, just
26
# repeat the last letter ad nauseam
27
char = word[-1]
28
while word in vocab:
29
word = word + char
30
return word
In contrast, we refer the base attack without constraints as Unconstrained hereforth. Table 4.1
gives qualitative examples of the kind of perturbations generated under the different constraints.
For subword-based models, we apply the same procedures at the subword-level on the original
segmentation. We then de-segment and re-segment the resulting sentence (because changes at the
subword or character levels are likely to change the segmentation of the resulting sentence).
4.4
Experiments
Our experiments serve two purposes. First, we examine our proposed framework of evaluating
adversarial attacks (Section 4.2), and also elucidate which automatic metrics correlate better with
human judgment for the purpose of evaluating adversarial attacks (Section 4.4.2). Second, we use
this evaluation framework to compare various adversarial attacks and demonstrate that adversarial
attacks that are explicitly constrained to preserve meaning receive better assessment scores (Section
48
4.4.3).
4.4.1
Experimental setting
Data: Following previous work on adversarial examples for seq2seq models Belinkov & Bisk
(2018b); Ebrahimi et al. (2018a), we perform all experiments on the IWSLT2016 dataset Cettolo
et al. (2016) in the {French,German,Czech}→English directions (fr-en, de-en and cs-en).
We compile all previous IWSLT test sets before 2015 as validation data, and keep the 2015 and
2016 test sets as test data. The data is tokenized with the Moses tokenizer Koehn et al. (2007). The
exact data statistics can be found in Table 4.2.
Table 4.2: IWSLT2016 data statistics.
#train
#valid
#test
fr-en
220.4k
6,824
2,213
de-en
196.9k
11,825
2,213
cs-en
114.4k
5,716
2,213
MT Models: We perform experiments with two common NMT models.
The ﬁrst is an
LSTM based encoder-decoder architecture with attention (Luong et al., 2015). It uses 2-layer
encoders and decoders, and dot-product attention.
We set the word embedding dimension to
300 and all others to 500. The second model is a self-attentional Transformer Vaswani et al.
(2017), with 6 1024-dimensional encoder and decoder layers and 512 dimensional word embed-
dings. Both the models are trained with Adam Kingma & Ba (2014), dropout Srivastava et al.
(2014) of probability 0.3 and label smoothing Szegedy et al. (2016) with value 0.1. We exper-
iment with both word based models (vocabulary size ﬁxed at 40k) and subword based models
(BPE Sennrich et al. (2016) with 30k operations). For word-based models, we perform <unk>
replacement, replacing <unk> tokens in the translated sentences with the source words with the
highest attention value during inference. The full experimental setup and source code are avail-
able at https://github.com/pmichel31415/translate/tree/paul/pytorch_
translate/research/adversarial/experiments.
Automatic Metric Implementations: To evaluate both sentence and corpus level BLEU score,
we ﬁrst de-tokenize the output and use sacreBLEU7 Post (2018b) with its internal intl tok-
enization, to keep BLEU scores agnostic to tokenization. We compute METEOR using the ofﬁcial
7https://github.com/mjpost/sacreBLEU
49
implementation8. ChrF is reported with the sacreBLEU implementation on detokenized text with
default parameters. A toolkit implementing the evaluation framework described in Section 4.2.1
for these metrics is released at https://github.com/pmichel31415/teapot-nlp.
4.4.2
Correlation of Automatic Metrics with Human Judgment
Table 4.3: Correlation of automatic metrics to human judgment of adversarial source and target
sentences. “∗” indicates that the correlation is signiﬁcantly better than the next-best one.
Language
BLEU
METEOR
chrF
French
0.415
0.440
0.586∗
English
0.357
0.478∗
0.497
We ﬁrst examine which of the automatic metrics listed in Section 4.2.2 correlates most with
human judgment for our adversarial attacks. For this experiment, we restrict the scope to the case
of the LSTM model on fr-en. For the French side, we randomly select 900 sentence pairs (x, ˆx)
from the validation set, 300 for each of the Unconstrained, kNN and CharSwap constraints. To
vary the level of perturbation, the 300 pairs contain an equal amount of perturbed input obtained
by substituting 1, 2 and 3 words. On the English side, we select 900 pairs of reference translations
and translations of adversarial input (y, ˆyM) with the same distribution of attacks as the source
side, as well as 300 (y, yM) pairs (to include translations from original inputs). This amounts to
1,200 sentence pairs in the target side.
These sentences are sent to English and French speaking annotators to be rated according to the
guidelines described in Section 4.2.2. Each sample (a pair of sentences) is rated by two independent
evaluators. If the two ratings differ, the sample is sent to a third rater (an auditor and subject matter
expert) who makes the ﬁnal decision.
Finally, we compare the human results to each automatic metric with Pearson’s correlation
coefﬁcient. The correlations are reported in Table 4.3. As evidenced by the results, chrF exhibits
higher correlation with human judgment, followed by METEOR and BLEU. This is true both on
the source side (x vs ˆx) and in the target side (y vs ˆyM). We evaluate the statistical signiﬁcance
of this result using a paired bootstrap test for p < 0.01. Notably we ﬁnd that chrF is signiﬁcantly
better than METEOR in French but not in English. This is not too unexpected because METEOR
has access to more language-dependent resources in English (speciﬁcally synonym information)
and thereby can make more informed matches of these synonymous words and phrases. Moreover
8http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~alavie/METEOR/
50
Table 4.4: Correlation of automatic metrics to human judgment of semantic similarity between
original and adversarial source sentences, broken down by number of perturbed words. “∗” indi-
cates that the correlation is signiﬁcantly better than the next-best one.
# edits
BLEU
METEOR
chrF
1
0.351
0.352
0.486∗
2
0.403
0.424
0.588∗
3
0.334
0.393
0.560∗
Table 4.5: Correlation of automatic metrics to human judgment of semantic similarity between
original and adversarial source sentences, broken down by type of constraint on the perturbation.
“∗” indicates that the correlation is signiﬁcantly better than the next-best one.
Constraint
BLEU
METEOR
chrF
Unconstrained
0.274
0.572
0.599
CharSwap
0.274
0.319
0.383
kNN
0.534
0.584
0.606
the French source side contains more “character-level” errors (from CharSwap attacks) which are
not picked-up well by word-based metrics like BLEU and METEOR.
We provide a breakdown of the correlation coefﬁcients of automatic metrics with human judg-
ment for source-side meaning-preservation, both in terms of number of perturbed words (Table
4.4) and constraint (Table 4.5). While those coefﬁcients are computed on a much smaller sample
size, and their differences are not all statistically signiﬁcant with p < 0.01, they exhibit the same
trend as the results from Table 4.3 (BLEU < METEOR < chrF). In particular Table 4.4 shows
that the good correlation of chrF with human judgment is not only due to the ability to distinguish
between different number of edits.
Thus, in the following, we report attack results both in terms of chrF in the source (ssrc) and
relative decrease in chrF (RDchrF) in the target (dtgt).
4.4.3
Attack Results
We can now compare attacks under the three constraints Unconstrained, kNN and CharSwap and
draw conclusions on their capacity to preserve meaning in the source and destroy it in the target.
Attacks are conducted on the validation set using the approach described in Section 4.3.1 with 3
substitutions (this means that each adversarial input is at edit distance at most 3 from the original
input). Results (on a scale of 0 to 100 for readability) are reported in Table 4.6 for both word-
51
Table 4.6: Target RDchrF and source chrF scores for all the attacks on all our models (word- and
subword-based LSTM and Transformer).
LSTM
Transformer
Language pair
cs-en
de-en
fr-en
cs-en
de-en
fr-en
Word-based
Target RDChrF
Target RDChrF
Original chrF
45.68
49.43
57.49
47.66
51.08
58.04
Unconstrained
25.38
25.54
25.59
25.24
25.00
24.68
CharSwap
24.11
24.94
23.60
21.59
23.23
21.75
kNN
15.00
15.59
15.22
20.74
19.97
18.59
Source chrF
Source chrF
Unconstrained
70.14
72.39
74.29
69.03
71.93
73.23
CharSwap
82.65
84.40
86.62
84.13
85.97
87.02
kNN
78.08
78.11
77.62
74.94
77.92
77.88
Subword-based
Target RDChrF
Target RDChrF
Original chrF
48.30
52.42
59.08
49.70
54.01
59.65
Unconstrained
25.79
26.03
26.96
23.97
25.07
25.28
CharSwap
18.65
19.15
19.75
16.98
18.38
17.85
kNN
15.00
16.26
17.12
19.02
18.58
18.63
Source chrF
Source chrF
Unconstrained
69.32
72.12
73.57
68.66
71.51
72.65
CharSwap
85.84
87.46
87.98
85.79
87.07
87.99
kNN
76.17
77.74
78.03
73.05
75.91
76.54
and subword- based LSTM and Transformer models. To give a better idea of how the different
variables (language pair, model, attack) affect performance, we give a graphical representation of
these same results in Figure 4.1 for the word-based models. The rest of this section discusses the
implication of these results.
Source chrF Highlights the Effect of Adding Constraints: Comparing the kNN and Char-
Swap rows to Unconstrained in the “source” sections of Table 4.6 clearly shows that constrained
attacks have a positive effect on meaning preservation. Beyond validating our assumptions from
Section 4.3.2, this shows that source chrF is useful to carry out the comparison in the ﬁrst place9.
To give a point of reference, results from the manual evaluation carried out in Section 4.4.2 show
that that 90% of the French sentence pairs to which humans gave a score of 4 or 5 in semantic
similarity have a chrF > 78.
9It can be argued that using chrF gives an advantage to CharSwap over kNN for source preservation (as opposed to
METEOR for example). We ﬁnd that this is the case for Czech and German (source METEOR is higher for kNN) but
not French. Moreover we ﬁnd (see e.g. Table 4.4) that chrF correlates better with human judgement even for kNN.
52
Figure 4.1:
Graphical representation of the results in Table 4.6 for word-based models. High
source chrF and target RDchrF (upper-right corner) indicates a good attack.
Different Architectures are not Equal in the Face of Adversity: Inspection of the target-side
results yields several interesting observations. First, the high RDchrF of CharSwap for word-based
model is yet another indication of their known shortcomings when presented with words out of
their training vocabulary, even with <unk>-replacement. Second, and perhaps more interestingly,
Transformer models appear to be less robust to small embedding perturbations (kNN attacks) com-
pared to LSTMs. Although the exploration of the exact reasons for this phenomenon is beyond the
scope of this work, this is a good example that RDchrF can shed light on the different behavior of
different architectures when confronted with adversarial input. Overall, we ﬁnd that the CharSwap
constraint is the only one that consistently produces attacks with > 1 average success (as deﬁned
in Section 4.2.1) according to Table 4.6. Table 4.7 contains two qualitative examples of this attack
on the LSTM model in fr-en.
4.5
Adversarial Training with Meaning-Preserving Attacks
4.5.1
Adversarial Training
Adversarial training Goodfellow et al. (2014b) augments the training data with adversarial ex-
amples.
Formally, in place of the negative log likelihood (NLL) objective on a sample x, y,
53
Table 4.7: Example of CharSwap attacks on the fr-en LSTM. The ﬁrst example is a successful
attack (high source chrF and target RDchrF) whereas the second is not.
Successful attack
(source chrF = 80.89, target RDchrF = 84.06)
Original
Ils le réinvestissent directement en engageant plus de procès.
Adv. src
Ilss le réinvestissent dierctement en engagaent plus de procès.
Ref.
They plow it right back into ﬁling more troll lawsuits.
Base output
They direct it directly by engaging more cases.
Adv. output
.. de plus.
Unsuccessful attack
(source chrF = 54.46, target RDchrF = 0.00)
Original
C’était en Juillet 1969.
Adv. src
C’étiat en Jiullet 1969.
Ref.
This is from July, 1969.
Base output
This was in July 1969.
Adv. output
This is. in 1969.
L(x, y) = NLL(x, y), the loss function is replaced with an interpolation of the NLL of the original
sample x, y and an adversarial sample ˆx, y:
L′(x, y) = (1 −α)NLL(x, y) + αNLL(ˆx, y)
(4.5)
Ebrahimi et al. (2018a) suggest that while adversarial training improves robustness to adver-
sarial attacks, it can be detrimental to test performance on non-adversarial input. We investigate
whether this is still the case when adversarial attacks are largely meaning-preserving.
In our experiments, we generate ˆx by applying 3 perturbations on the ﬂy at each training step.
To maintain training speed we do not solve Equation (4.2) iteratively but in one shot by replacing
the argmax by top-3. Although this is less exact than iterating, this makes adversarial training
time less than 2× slower than normal training. We perform adversarial training with perturbations
without constraints (Unconstrained-adv) and with the CharSwap constraint (CharSwap-adv). All
experiments are conducted with the word-based LSTM model.
4.5.2
Results
Test performance on non-adversarial input is reported in Table 4.8. In keeping with the rest of the
paper, we primarily report chrF results, but also show the standard BLEU as well.
54
Language pair
cs-en
de-en
fr-en
Base
44.21
49.30
55.67
(22.89)
(28.61)
(35.28)
α = 1.0
Unconstrained-adv
41.38
46.15
53.39
(21.51)
(27.06)
(33.96)
CharSwap-adv
43.74
48.85
55.60
(23.00)
(28.45)
(35.33)
α = 0.5
Unconstrained-adv
43.68
48.60
55.55
(22.93)
(28.30)
(35.25)
CharSwap-adv
44.57
49.14
55.88
(23.66)
(28.66)
(35.63)
Table 4.8: ChrF (BLEU) scores on the original test set before/after adversarial training of the
word-based LSTM model.
We observe that when α = 1.0, i.e. the model only sees the perturbed input during training10,
the Unconstrained-adv model suffers a drop in test performance, whereas CharSwap-adv’s per-
formance is on par with the original. This is likely attributable to the spurious training samples
(ˆx, y) where y is not an acceptable translation of ˆx introduced by the lack of constraint. This effect
disappears when α = 0.5 because the model sees the original samples as well.
Not unexpectedly, Table 4.9 indicates that CharSwap-adv is more robust to CharSwap con-
strained attacks for both values of α, with 1.0 giving the best results. On the other hand, Unconstrained-
adv is similarly or more vulnerable to these attacks than the baseline. Hence, we can safely con-
clude that adversarial training with CharSwap attacks improves robustness while not impacting test
performance as much as unconstrained attacks.
4.6
Related work
Following seminal work on adversarial attacks by Szegedy et al. (2013), Goodfellow et al. (2014b)
introduced gradient-based attacks and adversarial training. Since then, a variety of attack Moosavi-
Dezfooli et al. (2016) and defense Cissé et al. (2017); Kolter & Wong (2017) mechanisms have
been proposed. Adversarial examples for NLP speciﬁcally have seen attacks on sentiment Papernot
et al. (2016); Samanta & Mehta (2017); Ebrahimi et al. (2018b), malware Grosse et al. (2016),
10This setting is reminiscent of word dropout Iyyer et al. (2015).
55
Language pair
cs-en
de-en
fr-en
Base
24.11
24.94
23.60
α = 1.0
Unconstrained-adv
25.99
26.24
25.67
CharSwap-adv
16.46
17.19
15.72
α = 0.5
Unconstrained-adv
26.52
27.26
24.92
CharSwap-adv
20.41
20.24
16.08
Table 4.9: Robustness to CharSwap attacks on the validation set with/without adversarial training
(RDchrF). Lower is better.
gender Reddy & Knight (2016) or toxicity Hosseini et al. (2017) classiﬁcation to cite a few.
In MT, methods have been proposed to attack word-based Zhao et al. (2018); Cheng et al.
(2018a) and character-based Belinkov & Bisk (2018b); Ebrahimi et al. (2018a) models. However
these works side-step the question of meaning preservation in the source: they mostly focus on tar-
get side evaluation. Finally there is work centered around meaning-preserving adversarial attacks
for NLP via paraphrase generation Iyyer et al. (2018) or rule-based approaches Jia & Liang (2017);
Ribeiro et al. (2018); Naik et al. (2018); Alzantot et al. (2018). However the proposed attacks are
highly engineered and focused on English.
4.7
Conclusion
This chapter highlights the importance of performing meaning-preserving adversarial perturba-
tions for NLP models (with a focus on seq2seq). We proposed a general evaluation framework for
adversarial perturbations and compared various automatic metrics as proxies for human judgment
to instantiate this framework. We then conﬁrmed that, in the context of MT, “naive” attacks do
not preserve meaning in general, and proposed alternatives to remedy this issue. Finally, we have
shown that a careful choice of more meaning-preserving perturbations is beneﬁcial for adversarial
training.
Since the original publication of the content in this chapter in 2019, a number of works have
followed-up, either by adapting the evaluation framework to other tasks, e.g. semantic parsing in
Huang et al. (2021), or by building upon it for designing more imperceptible adversarial pertur-
bations, for instance using the proposed evaluation metrics as rewards for reinforcement learning
based perturbation generation (Zou et al., 2020), or pushing further the concept of indistinguishable
56
perturbations with encoding speciﬁc character substitutions (Boucher et al., 2021).
57
Part II
Making Robust Models
58
Chapter 5
Modeling the Second Player in
Distributionally Robust Optimization
5.1
Introduction
Up to this point, we have principally been concerned with evaluating the effect that various types
of distributional shifts have on existing models. In this chapter and the next, we now tackle the
problem of training models that are more robust against distributional shifts.
The tendency of machine learning models to exhibit drops in accuracy when confronted with
data from domains that are absent from or under-represented in their training data often arises from
the objective function of ERM. Recall that in ERM, the parameters θ of the model are learned by
minimizing the expectation of a loss function ℓunder a data distribution p (or, speciﬁcally in
practice, an associated empirical data distribution ˆp)
LERM(θ) = E(x,y)∼ˆpℓ(x, y, θ).
(5.1)
When the model encounters data sampled from a different distribution qtest ̸= p, performance can
suffer signiﬁcantly. As described in Chapter 2, distributionally robust optimization (DRO) provides
a natural solution to this issue by replacing the expected risk under a single distribution p with the
worst expected risk over a pre-determined family of distributions Q (the “uncertainty set”)
LDRO(θ) = max
q∈Q E(x,y)∼q ℓ(x, y, θ).
(5.2)
If Q contains qtest, the DRO objective upper bounds the expected risk under qtest. However, a priori
59
knowledge of possible test distributions is not always available or easy to acquire. For example,
training a model to be robust to some demographic attributes (Q = {qdemographic 1, qdemographic 2, . . .})
requires collecting and annotating data with the necessary information, an expensive and ethically
fraught endeavour. In the absence of such information, one has to resort to deﬁning the uncertainty
set analytically, drawing on one’s intuition of what constitutes a possible test distribution given
the observed training distribution, such as using moment constraints (Delage & Ye, 2010; Nguyen
et al., 2020), f-divergence (Ben-Tal et al., 2013; Hu & Hong, 2013; Faury et al., 2020), Wasser-
stein/IPM (Sinha et al., 2018; Husain, 2020) balls, or coarse-grained mixture models (Oren et al.,
2019; Hu et al., 2018). However, the need for keeping the inner supremum in Eq. (5.2) tractable
limits the possible choices.
In this chapter, we propose that the uncertainty set be instead deﬁned as a family of parametric
generative models. The resulting DRO objective (§5.2) is a differentiable game with two players:
the original model ℓ(x, y; θ) and a model of its worst-case distribution qψ(x, y), the titular “second
player” which we hereafter refer to as the adversary. Using this formulation — which we call
P-DRO — allows for more ﬂexibility in the choice of the adversary’s architecture (and so the un-
certainty set). Unfortunately, ﬁnding a solution of this game via direct application of simultaneous
gradient descent (Singh et al., 2000) is difﬁcult (Balduzzi et al., 2018). In particular, direct gradi-
ent descent on the uncertainty set suffers from instability due to the large variance of the gradients
(Greensmith et al., 2004), and hyper-parameter selection is not straightforward.
To address these challenges, we make two main contributions (§5.3): ﬁrst, we propose a new
relaxation of the DRO game’s inner maximization problem (with KL constraints). The resulting
objective is more amenable to simultaneous gradient update than the original zero-sum game and
signiﬁcantly improves training stability, while still yielding useful adversaries. Second, we develop
a principled approach for selecting hyper-parameters: we leverage the learned adversaries to decide
which of any two given models trained with P-DRO is more robust than the other.
We do an in-depth set of experiments analyzing the effect of our proposed changes on both a
toy task as well as a more realistic, yet still synthetic sentiment classiﬁcation task (§5.4). Finally,
we show that in the more realistic setting of toxicity detection, P-DRO yields models that are more
robust to changes in demographic groups, even though these groups are unknown at training time,
opening up applications in combatting dataset bias (§5.5). Code to reproduce our experiments can
be found at https://github.com/pmichel31415/P-DRO.
60
5.2
Parameterizing the Uncertainty Set
Consider a model parameterized by θ ∈Rdmodel. Minimizing the DRO objective described in
Eq. (5.2) over the uncertainty set Q turns the optimization problem into the min-max (or zero-
sum) game
min
θ∈Rd max
q∈Q E(x,y)∼q ℓ(x, y, θ).
(5.3)
The ﬁrst player controls the parameters θ, whilst the second player controls the worst-case distribu-
tion q. In the absence of explicit information on groups of interest (such as demographics, domain,
etc.), an adequate choice of the uncertainty set Q is critical to the success of DRO. This is in fact
very much an active area of research (Sinha et al. (2018); Duchi & Namkoong (2018); Oren et al.
(2019), see Rahimian & Mehrotra (2019) for a survey). Q must be sufﬁciently large to contain test
distributions of interest, but if it is too large it may contain “adversarial” distributions on which
no model can perform well. Moreover, the design of Q is also circumscribed by the necessity of
keeping the min-max problem tractable, particularly in the context of stochastic optimization. In
Hu & Hong (2013) and Duchi et al. (2016) for example, the choice of f-divergence balls allows
the use of duality arguments to reformulate (5.3) as a more manageable min-min problem. Others,
like Hu et al. (2018) or Oren et al. (2019), propose using mixture models, the simplicity of which
enables them to solve the inner maximization problem efﬁciently.
Instead, we propose to explicitly model the second player in the DRO game as a parametric
model qψ of the data. Of course, not all parameterizations ψ ∈Rdadv of a given generative model
represent useful distributions, and we require that the adversary stay “close” to the underlying true
data distribution p. As a measure of distance between qψ and p, we choose the KL (Kullback &
Leibler, 1951) divergence due to its wide acceptance in the machine learning community, as well
as its appealing properties in the context of DRO.1 The KL upper bound, κ, is left as a parameter
to be decided by the experimenter. We refer to the resulting DRO formulation as Parametric DRO
min
θ
max
ψ
KL(qψ∥p)≤κ
E(x,y)∼qψℓ(x, y, θ)
|
{z
}
LP-DRO(θ,ψ)
.
(5.4)
5.3
Optimizing P-DRO
The min-max problem in Eq. (5.4) belongs to a class of games called “differentiable games” (an-
other famous representative being generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al., 2014a)). We
1For instance: KL(q∥p) < +∞implies that q stays within the support of p
61
Model
Adversary 
Figure 5.1:
Summary of P-DRO: At every step of training, (x, y) pairs are sampled from the
data distribution p and fed to both the model θ and the adversary ψ. For every sample, the model
produces loss values ℓ(x, y; θ) and the adversary produces densities qψ(x, y). Both are combined
into Lmodel and Ladv, which are used to update the θ and ψ respectively, via simultaneous gradient
updates.
can search for a solution of this game with simultaneous gradient descent (Singh et al., 2000), i.e.
by simultaneously updating θ and ψ with −∇θ LP-DRO and ∇ψ LP-DRO respectively. Unfortunately,
in general, there is no theoretical guarantee that simultaneous gradient descent will converge to a
Nash equilibrium2 (Balduzzi et al., 2018), nor that any such equilibrium even exists if the objective
is non-convex in θ (or non-concave in ψ). The success of GANs and the follow-up literature (Wang
et al., 2019c) serves as an encouraging example that gradient based methods can yield useful so-
lutions despite the pessimistic theoretical results. In this section, we discuss difﬁculties that arise
when optimizing θ and ψ jointly, and propose modiﬁcations of the objective to address them.
5.3.1
Training the Model θ
We could train the model θ by taking negative gradient steps on E(x,y)∼qψ ℓ(x, y; θ). This gradi-
ent can be estimated by sampling examples from qψ and averaging the gradient of their losses.
2Nash equilibria (Osborne & Rubinstein, 1994) can be thought of the game theoretic analog of global minima in
optimization.
62
Unfortunately, this objective requires that qψ is well-behaved at all iterations, as it is the only
source of supervision for θ. If qψ is initialized incorrectly or begins producing unrealistic (x, y),
the quality of θ degrades as it begins to learn a predictor on invalid training examples from qψ.
As an alternative, we opt to compute the gradients for θ with importance sampling, i.e. rewriting
L P-DRO as E(x,y)∼p
qψ(x,y)
p(x,y) ℓ(x, y; θ), which ensures that all (x, y) samples will be derived from the
training set itself. Unfortunately, the true density p is unknown to us. As an approximation, we
replace qψ(x,y)
p(x,y) with the likelihood ratio between qψ and the maximum likelihood estimate of p,
qψ0 := arg maxqψ E(x,y)∼p log qψ(x, y). This changes the min-max problem to
min
θ
max
ψ
KL(qψ∥p)≤κ
E(x,y)∼p
qψ(x, y)
qψ0(x, y)ℓ(x, y, θ)
|
{z
}
Lmodel
.
(5.5)
This becomes a simple expected loss objective, which we can estimate by sampling from the
empirical distribution ˆp. In experiments, we ﬁnd that with this formulation we are able to train
robust θ even when qψ is only a mediocre generative model (see Appendix 5.6.2). To further
stabilize training at the beginning of the optimization process, we initialize ψ with ψ0, making the
objective exactly the same as ERM for the ﬁrst gradient step.
5.3.2
Training the Adversary ψ
According to Eq. (5.5) the adversary ψ must maximize E(x,y)∼qψ
p(x,y)
qψ0(x,y)ℓ(x, y, θ) within a KL ball
of ﬁxed radius. This is challenging for several reasons: ﬁrst, enforcing the bound is intractable for
complex families of adversaries where e.g. projecting onto the KL ball is another difﬁcult opti-
mization problem of its own. Second, maximizing the expectation with respect to the parameters
of the distribution qψ is prone to instability due to large gradient variance (Greensmith et al., 2004).
Lagrangian Relaxation
To address the ﬁrst difﬁculty, we loosen the strict KL constraint and
instead consider the Lagrangian relaxation L
L(ψ, τ) = E(x,y)∼qψ
p(x, y)
qψ0(x, y)ℓ(x, y, θ) −τ (KL(qψ∥p) −κ) .
(5.6)
63
We ﬁx the Lagrangian multiplier τ > 0 as treat it as a “temperature” hyper-parameter. With some
reorganization (which we develop in Appendix A.1), we can show that
L(ψ, τ) = −τKL(qψ∥q∗
τ,θ) + C.
(5.7)
Where q∗
τ,θ ∝p(x, y)e
p(x,y)
qψ0 (x,y)
ℓ(x,y;θ)
τ
and C is a constant in ψ. In other words, maximizing L in
ψ is equivalent to minimizing the KL divergence between qψ and q∗
τ,θ. One difﬁculty with this
objective is that q∗
τ,θ depends upon the unknown probability density p(x, y). We avoid this problem
by treating the density ratio
p(x,y)
qψ0(x,y) as a constant, which is closely related to assumptions that have
been used successfully in past formulations of DRO (Oren et al., 2019). Empirically, we ﬁnd that
incorporating qψ0 as a surrogate for p is a serviceable approximation, as demonstrated in Section
5.4.
Reversing the KL
Minimizing the KL divergence in this direction is difﬁcult for several reasons.
First, it entails optimizing an expectation in qψ over ψ, which is difﬁcult due to the large variance
of the gradients (Greensmith et al., 2004). Second, computing this KL necessitates access to the
true theoretical density p(x, y) in order to compute q∗
τ,θ(x, y) in the argument of the expectation,
but this quantity is unknown in practice.3 To sidestep these issues, we elect to minimize the reverse
direction KL(q∗
τ,θ∥qψ) instead. Due to the KL divergence being non-symmetric, this is a rather
crude approximation4, the implications of which are discussed in Norouzi et al. (2016). However,
we ﬁnd that this approach dramatically stabilizes the gradient dynamics while still yielding good
adversaries, as observed empirically in Section 5.4.7. Discarding the entropy term (constant in ψ),
the resulting problem is equivalent to minimizing
Ladv(ψ, τ) := −1
Zτ,θ
Ep e
ℓ(x,y;θ)
τ
log qψ(x, y)
(5.8)
in ψ, where Zτ,θ = Ep e
ℓ(x,y;θ)
τ
is the normalizer of q∗. In this case, we can estimate this expectation
by substituting the empirical distribution ˆp for p in the expectation.
3Note that substituting the empirical distribution ˆp for p poses issues here, because qψ is not absolutely continuous
with respect to ˆp.
4For instance, the optimum of the reverse KL doesn’t necessarily match that of the forward KL within the parametric
confusion set Q
64
Computing the Normalizer
Approximating the inverse normalizer
1
Zτ,θ in a minibatch yields a
biased estimator. On the other hand, computing Zτ,θ over the entire training data at each step is
prohibitive since it requires computing the loss of every single example. As a middle ground, we
keep a running normalizer ˜Zk computed from the average of the normalizers over a ﬁxed number
k of consecutive minibatches. In other words, if Bi and θi denote the minibatch and adversary
parameters at step i respectively, the normalizer at step t will be
˜Zk =
1
Pt
i=t−k |Bi|
t
X
i=t−k
X
x,y∈Bi
e
ℓ(x,y;θi)
τ
.
(5.9)
If k is too low, there is a risk of under-estimating the normalizer, especially if the distribution of
weights contains infrequent high weight samples. On the other hand, if k is too high there is a risk
of using “stale” weights in the normalizer. In experiments, we treat k as a hyper-parameter.
5.3.3
Optimal Stopping
When should one stop training a model with P-DRO? In ERM it is customary to stop training after
the empirical risk — periodically evaluated on a held out validation dataset — stops decreasing.
This is particularly important to prevent over-ﬁtting to the training data. However, it is not an
appropriate criterion for P-DRO, since the model is not trained to minimize empirical risk in the
ﬁrst place. A more pertinent choice is to compare the robust validation losses
Lrobust,valid(θ) = max
qψ∈Q
1
|Dvalid|
X
x,y∈Dvalid
qψ(x, y)
qψ0(x, y)ℓ(x, y; θ)
|
{z
}
:=Lvalid(θ,ψ)
.
(5.10)
However, ﬁnding the inner supremum for each of the T evaluation checkpoints θ1 . . . θT is expen-
sive as it requires solving T independent optimization problems. Instead, we leverage the existence
of adversaries ψt associated with each model θt, as well as the initial adversary ψ0 and take the
maximum over the T + 1 adversaries {ψ0, . . . , ψT}. Since our relaxation of the P-DRO objective
loosens the KL constraint, we need weed out adversaries which might violate it. Speciﬁcally, we
estimate the KL(qψ∥p) = Ep qψ/p log qψ/p on the validation set, using qψ/qψ0 as a stand-in for
qψ/p, and reject all adversaries for which the result is greater than a threshold, which we set to
log 10 based on preliminary experiments detailed in Appendix 5.6.1.5 We refer to this stopping
5To simplify notation, this additional constraint is implicit in the rest of this section.
65
criterion as Minmax.
Computing the full min-max necessitates keeping track of T models and T + 1 adversaries,
which is ponderous when the model is large. As a solution, we propose an approximation, Greedy-
Minmax, in which we only keep one best model θ∗. At each evaluation step T, we compare θT
to θ∗, and update θ∗to whichever achieves lower robust validation loss over the T + 1 adversaries
ψ0, . . . , ψT.
By keeping track of only one additional model, and using the weights
qψt(xi,yi)
qψ0(xi,yi) of individual
examples in Dvalid as sufﬁcient statistics for computing the loss against each adversary, Greedy-
Minmax can be achieved with space complexity 2dmodel + T|Dvalid|, which is much more efﬁcient
than the T(dmodel + dadv) of Minmax.
5.3.4
Hyper-parameter Selection
Our proposed P-DRO method relies on 3 different hyper-parameters (in addition to the model’s
hyper-parameters): the adversary learning rate λ, the temperature τ and the size of the re-normalizing
window k. As a consequence, we need a reliable criterion for deciding which of two conﬁgura-
tions is better. This model comparison bears many similarities with the stopping problem described
above. Therefore, we resort to a similar solution: given two models θ1, θ2 trained with P-DRO, and
their respective adversaries {ψ1
0, . . . , ψ1
T}, {ψ2
0, . . . , ψ2
T} (for instance, the adversaries associated
with θ1 and θ2 at periodic checkpoints during training), we select the best model following
θ∗= arg min
θ∈{θ1,θ2}
max
ψ∈{ψ1
0,...,ψ1
T ,ψ2
0,...,ψ2
T } Lvalid(θ, ψ).
(5.11)
5.4
Experimental Analysis of P-DRO
Before moving on to a real world scenario in Section 5.5, we ﬁrst demonstrate that P-DRO is
able to learn robust models in a synthetic NLP task, and perform ablation studies to examine the
importance of the various modiﬁcations described in Section 5.3.
5.4.1
Experimental Setting
For analysis purposes, we design a simple NLP task amenable to DRO. We speciﬁcally choose
NLP as a domain due to the striking success of language models as generative models of textual
data (Sundermeyer et al., 2012; Radford et al., 2018), which can be used to model the uncertainty
66
set. We base our task off of the binary version of the Stanford Sentiment Treebank dataset (SST-
2; Socher et al. (2013)), which we modify to introduce spurious correlation. Speciﬁcally, we
introduce a distractor token to some sentences. The distractor we use consists of prepending “so
, ” to the sentence (“i hated this movie” −→“so , I hated this movie”), which doesn’t change the
underlying sentiment. The resulting samples can be categorized in 4 “groups” depending on their
label (positive or negative) and the presence or absence of the distractor. In particular, we add
this distractor to 95% of the negative reviews and 5% of the positive reviews in the training and
validation set, so that the presence of the distractor strongly correlates with negative sentiment (a
similar construction is proposed in (Utama et al., 2020)). In the test data, we modify 50% of all
sentences for each class equitably to ensure that there is enough data in each group, but we report
“average” test accuracy by re-weighting the group accuracies to mimick the training distribution.
We call this modiﬁed task BiasedSST.
5.4.2
Model Settings
In all experiments, we split the text into sub-word tokens using the tokenizer described in (Devlin
et al., 2018). For the classiﬁer, we train a simple one layer BiLSTM model with embedding/hidden
dimension 300. During training, we sample minibatches that contain at most 64 sentences or 2500
tokens, whichever is greater, in order to prevent GPU memory overﬂow in case of long sentences.
We train all models with Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) with an initial learning rate of 2 × 10−5,
which we decay linearly at each step until the end of training. We validate the models every epoch.
For BERT, we start from the bert-base-uncased checkpoint.
5.4.3
Adversary Settings
In all experiments, we use an auto-regressive transformer model based on the successful GPT-2
language model (Radford et al., 2019) architecture but with 6 layers, a dimension of 512 and 8
attention heads (we experiment with a smaller, LSTM based adversary in Section 5.6.2). In order
to model the input output pair (x, y), we pre-pend a special label-speciﬁc token to sentences before
running them through the language model. We train the adversary with vanilla stochastic gradient
descent, which we found more stable in experiments.
To initialize the adversary (to obtain ψ0), we ﬁrst pre-train the model on a generic, relatively
large language modeling dataset, WikiText-103 (Merity et al., 2017). We also use a batch size of 64
samples or 2500 tokens, and train with Adam for 10 epochs, with a ﬁxed learning rate of 3 × 10−4.
67
Then, we ﬁne-tune this model on each dataset, this time minimizing the negative log-likelihood
of the (x, y) pair, using the same hyper-parameters but a smaller learning rate (10−5). We ﬁnd
that, due to the small to medium size of the datasets under consideration, this LM pretraining step
helped achieve lower error on the generative modeling task.
5.4.4
Baselines
In addition to ERM, we also compare three other approaches. First, to appreciate how well the
model could perform if the groups were known at training time, we train with Group-DRO on
the oracle groups using an exponentiated-gradients based online algorithm (Oracle DRO; Sagawa
et al. (2020)). Second, we implement Topic DRO (Oren et al., 2019), a method for DRO on NLP
where the uncertainty set is determined by mixtures of a topic model. Finally, we compare to non-
parametric DRO with a KL constrained uncertainty set (Hu & Hong, 2013; Hu et al., 2018), which
we adapt to ﬁt our online mini-batch training setting (NonParam). Below, we outline experimental
details for the latter two.
Topic DRO
To train the topic model for Topic DRO, we ﬁrst pre-process the text by removing all punctuation,
urls and user mentions (for twitter data). Importantly, we remove stop-words for our toxicity
experiments but not for our BiasedSST experiment. This is because the distractor token we use
(“so”) belongs to most English stop words lists, and removing it would completely prevent the
topic model from picking up on the groups of interest. We then estimate the parameters of the
model with Gensim6 and use similar settings as Oren et al. (2019) (α = 0.1, β = 1.0), setting the
number of topics to 10.
For both Oracle-DRO and Topic DRO, we use the algorithm proposed in Sagawa et al. (2020) to
estimate the worst-case group (either oracle group or topic in Topic DRO) online during training.
We perform grid-search over {1, 0.1, 0.01} to ﬁnd the best learning rate for the group weights
update. For Oracle DRO, the best model is simply selected by robust validation accuracy. For
Topic DRO, unless speciﬁed otherwise, we select the model with the lowest worst-case error over
all topics.
6https://radimrehurek.com/gensim/
68
NonParam
In the KL-constrained non-parametric setting, the min-max problem reads
min
θ
max
q s.t.
KL(qψ∥p)≤κ
E(x,y)∼qℓ(x, y, θ).
(5.12)
Here, κ is the desired radius of the KL ball, and is treated as a hyper-parameter. The solution of the
inner maximum has an analytical solution of the form q∗
θ =
a
Zθ,τ∗p(x, y)e
ℓ(x,y;θ)
τ∗
(see Hu & Hong
(2013); Hu et al. (2018) for details) with Zθ,τ ∗= Epe
ℓ(x,y;θ)
τ∗
and τ ∗such that
KL(q∗∥p) = Ep
e
ℓ(x,y;θ)
τ∗
Zθ,τ ∗
 ℓ(x, y; θ)
τ ∗
−log Zθ,τ ∗
!
= κ.
Note that both computing Zθ,τ ∗and KL(q∗∥p) require taking expectations over p. In our setting,
where ℓ(x, y; θ) is the output of a large neural network, we cannot afford to take this expectation
over the entire training data at each step. Instead, we fall back to taking the average over each
mini-batch. We ﬁnd τ ∗with binary search in log10 space within the [10−10, 1010] interval and clip
to the lowest or highest value should the result lie outside the search interval.
In all experiments, we try 4 different values for κ: 0.01, 0.1, 1 and 10. Unless indicated
otherwise, we perform early stopping and hyper-parameter selection using our Minmax criterion
using the non-parametric weights as adversaries on the validation data.
5.4.5
P-DRO can Learn Robust Models
Table 5.1: Average and robust accuracies on BiasedSST. Underlining indicates statistically signif-
icant difference compared to ERM (p < 0.05)
Robust
Average
ERM
2.15 ± 0.97
95.09 ± 0.16
Topic DRO
5.18 ± 1.46
95.00 ± 0.10
NonParam
28.11 ± 2.16
92.45 ± 1.55
P-DRO
34.98 ± 9.39
84.21 ± 2.11
Oracle DRO
67.71 ± 3.03
77.91 ± 4.49
69
We train 7 models with P-DRO on BiasedSST using different hyper-parameters for the adver-
sary. We start from conﬁguration λ = 10−4, τ = 0.01, k = 5, and for each hyper-parameter we
run a conﬁguration with a smaller and a higher value, keeping all other hyper-parameters the same.
We train for 50 epochs and select the best model using the strategies described in Section 5.3.
We report the worst-case (“robust”) accuracy over all groups on the test set, as well the average
accuracy in Table 5.1 (we report the mean and standard deviation over 5 runs). We ﬁnd that both
Topic DRO, NonParam and P-DRO are more robust than ERM, but the latter outperforms the
former two close to 30 and 7 points respectively, achieving 52% of Oracle DRO’s robust accuracy,
while not leveraging any information on the oracle groups.
5.4.6
Optimal Stopping and Hyper-parameter Selection Ablation
To understand the importance of the optimal stopping and hyper-parameter selection strategy de-
scribed in Section 5.3.3, we perform an ablation on the BiasedSST dataset comparing 4 strategies:
• Average: models are selected based on their average zero-one loss (i.e. error rate) on the
unmodiﬁed validation set. This is the baseline stopping criterion.
• Minmax: selection based on the adversaries (as described in Section 5.3.3), with and without
the KL constraint, as well as its variant Greedy-Minmax for stopping.
• Oracle: in this setting the groups are known (in the validation set), and models are selected
based on their error rate on the worst performing group. This is the optimal criterion for the
group-DRO setting we are considering.
To compare stopping criterions experiments, we only consider one set of hyper-parameters:
λ = 10−4, k = 5 and τ = 0.01. From the robust validation accuracies reported in Table 5.2a, we
ﬁrst observe that Average stopping results in a robust accuracy of 0, highlighting the necessity for a
suitable stopping criterion. We ﬁnd that Minmax, especially with a KL constraint, is a much better
strategy, recovering ≈60% of the performance achievable with Oracle stopping. Notably, the
Greedy-Minmax variant which we use in practice reaches very close results (< 1 point difference)
despite its requiring to keep track of only 2 out of the 50 model checkpoints at any time.
To understand the effectiveness of the Minmax strategy for selecting hyper-parameters. We
take the models trained in Section 5.4.5, but select the best hyper-parameters using the differ-
ent strategies described above. Results, shown in Table 5.2b, conﬁrm that Minmax (with the KL
constraint) is a better choice than Average for selecting hyper-parameters, even though the im-
provement is not as striking as for stopping.
70
Table 5.2: Effect of different optimal stopping and hyper-parameter selection strategies on robust
validation accuracy.
(a) Optimal stopping
Criterion
Robust accuracy
Average
0.00 ± 0.00
Minmax
25.22 ± 13.01
+KL constraint
31.30 ± 10.07
+Greedy-Minmax
32.17 ± ± 11.20
Oracle
50.95 ± 5.01
(b) Hyper-parameter selection
Criterion
Robust accuracy
Average
31.03 ± 12.16
Minmax
28.62 ± 12.37
+KL constraint
35.65 ± 11.47
Oracle
38.26 ± 13.01
5.4.7
Importance of Ladv
Figure 5.2: A toy classiﬁcation task.
Finally, we investigate the importance of modifying the
adversary’s objective as described in Section 5.3.2. For
this experiment, we devise a simpler toy task on which
directly training the constrained DRO objective is pos-
sible. Speciﬁcally, we consider the two-dimensional bi-
nary classiﬁcation problem pictured in Figure 5.2. The
training data consists of 10,000 points partitioned in two
normally distributed “domains” with a 1:50 sampling ra-
tio and different classiﬁcation boundaries. We train a lo-
gistic regression model, which cannot perfectly ﬁt the
training data and must trade-off between accuracy on
each domain. For the sake of simplicity, we only model
the input variables x7 as isotropic normal distributions
with ﬁxed variance: the adversaries’ parameter ψ ∈R2
represents the location of the Gaussian (we ﬁx the variance to the empirical variance of the data).
We compare 3 different versions of P-DRO: ﬁrst, naive simultaneous gradient descent on the
zero-sum game, without any constraint on the adversary (bare P-DRO), then the same, but with
an approximation of the explicit KL constraint between qψ and qψ0 (+KL constraint. Even in this
simplest setting, the exact KL between qψ (a gaussian) and p (a mixture of gaussians) does not
7In other words, we set qψ(x, y) = p(y | x)qψ(x), where p(y | x), is the true conditional which will be canceled out
in the ratio qψ(x,y)
qψ0(x,y).
71
have an analytical expression (Hershey & Olsen, 2007). Instead, we fall back on enforcing the KL
constraint between qψ and qψ0, both isotropic gaussians with the same standard deviation. Let µ
and µ0 ∈R2 denote their respective mean, and σ > 0 their standard deviation. In this context,
their KL divergence reduces to:
KL(qψ∥qψ0) = KL(qψ0∥qψ) =
1
2σ2∥µ −µ0∥2
In other words, the KL divergence is equivalent to the euclidean distance between the distributions’
means. We use this fact to project ψ (in the KL sense) onto Bκ = { ˆψ | KL(q ˆψ∥qψ0) < κ}:
projBκ(ψ) := arg min
ˆψ∈Bκ
KL(qψ∥q ˆψ)
= ψ0 +
√
2κσ
∥ψ −ψ0∥(ψ −ψ0)
Table 5.3: Ablation of P-DRO to train the linear
model on the toy task. We report accuracy on
both domains, as well as robust accuracy.
Average
Robust
ERM
84.66 ± 0.10
49.75 ± 0.05
bare P-DRO
49.97 ± 0.10
49.85 ± 0.10
+kl constraint
76.63 ± 9.93
58.41 ± 9.25
+Ladv
76.97 ± 0.43
64.32 ± 1.31
Finally we report results using our relax-
ation and the KL reversal described in Sec-
tion 5.3.2 (+Ladv). For each setting, we report
the average and robust accuracy with mean and
standard deviation over 10 runs. For the KL
constraint and the relaxation, we report the best
results among 4 values of the KL bound κ and
the temperature τ respectively.
In Table 5.3, we observe that bare P-DRO is
too unstable and systematically diverges. The
addition of a KL constraint mitigates this be-
haviour, but the zero-sum objective is still unstable, as evidenced by the high standard deviations.
Finally, we ﬁnd that the addition of Lrev stabilizes the training process greatly, leading to consis-
tently high robust accuracy.
5.5
P-DRO in Practice: Case Study of Toxicity Detection
In this section, we demonstrate the effectiveness of P-DRO in the more realistic setting of toxicity
detection, the task of recognizing various forms of toxic language (eg. hate speech or offensive
language). Identifying online abuse on the internet is a crucial challenge, and has garnered much
72
interest in the NLP community (Schmidt & Wiegand, 2017; Fortuna & Nunes, 2018). However,
recent work (Sap et al., 2019) has shown that there is strong correlation between toxic labels and
the presence of certain markers of dialects of English spoken by minority groups. This correlation
is in turn ampliﬁed by hate speech classiﬁers trained on such data, leading to biased prediction.
Our results on BiasedSST suggest that P-DRO can provide one solution to preventing models
from absorbing spurious correlations present in their training data, even in the absence of protected
attributes (such as language variety here).
5.5.1
Experimental Setting
Following Sap et al. (2019) and Xia et al. (2020), we perform experiments on two datasets:
DWMW17 (Davidson et al., 2017), a corpus of 25K tweets classiﬁed in three categories: hate
speech (6%), offensive (76%) and neither (18%), and FDCL18 (Founta et al., 2018), a 100k sized
dataset, also collected from Twitter and annotated with an additional spam label, with the following
breakdown by categories: hateful (5%), abusive (27%), normal (54%) and spam (14%).
The released version of these datasets does not contain information on the dialect of each user.
In order to be able to evaluate our models, and to train an Oracle DRO baseline, we follow Sap
et al. (2019) and use annotations provided by the dialect classiﬁer described in Blodgett et al.
(2016) to label each example as one of four English varieties: White-aligned, African American,
Hispanic, and Other. Note that, as these are automatically obtained labels, the groups may not
exactly correspond to the actual racial sociolects, however Sap et al. (2019) does report that they
correlate highly with self-reported race, and they serve as a useful proxy in the absence of manual
annotation.
We formulate the group-DRO problem by separating each dataset into independent groups
identiﬁed by both language variety and label, for a total of 12 and 16 groups for DWMW17 and
FDCL18 respectively. Some of these groups are severely under-represented in the test set. In
order to make our robust accuracy results reliable yet still representative of the under-represented
groups, we combine groups that contain less than 100 samples into a single group to compute
robust test accuracies.
On DWMW17, we train the same BiLSTM model as described in Section 5.4.6. To illustrate
the applicability of P-DRO to other model architectures, we pick BERT (Devlin et al., 2018), a
large scale pre-trained model as a classiﬁer on FDCL18. In both cases, we adopt the Transformer
architecture described in Section 5.4.6 as the adversary. We train the adversary with a temperature
of τ = 0.01 and a normalizing window k = 10. To demonstrate the efﬁcacy of automatic hyper-
73
Table 5.4: Robust test accuracy on the DWMW17 and FDCL18 toxicity detection tasks.
(a) No group information.
DWMW17
FDCL18
Robust
Average
Robust
Average
ERM
53.19 ± 1.70
69.44 ± 0.53
19.57 ± 7.00
81.56 ± 0.26
Topic DRO
45.26 ± 3.47
61.68 ± 5.02
16.48 ± 5.46
80.49 ± 0.49
NonParam
54.13 ± 1.14
70.54 ± 0.64
17.54 ± 6.41
81.20 ± 0.11
P-DRO
69.06 ± 1.70
69.69 ± 2.50
30.25 ± 10.13
79.91 ± 1.41
Oracle DRO
74.50 ± 1.74
65.79 ± 0.76
55.23 ± 3.97
72.43 ± 2.61
(b) With group information on the validation set.
Robust
Average
Robust
Average
ERM
53.15 ± 0.87
69.64 ± 1.01
34.07 ± 3.20
78.78 ± 0.38
Topic DRO
52.02 ± 1.26
69.11 ± 0.49
34.82 ± 3.73
79.59 ± 0.85
NonParam
49.41 ± 5.60
58.53 ± 5.71
43.13 ± 6.97
69.51 ± 3.07
P-DRO
63.05 ± 4.25
63.07 ± 3.92
47.61 ± 4.53
74.82 ± 1.90
Oracle DRO
74.50 ± 1.74
65.79 ± 0.76
55.23 ± 3.97
72.43 ± 2.61
parameter selection in the P-DRO setting, we delegate the choice of the adversary’s learning rate
λ to grid-search, training 3 models with λ ∈{10−5, 10−4, 10−3} and selecting the best using the
Minmax criterion described in Section 5.3.4. We also report numbers for Oracle DRO and Topic
DRO. Results are averaged over 5 runs, each with a different random seed.
5.5.2
Can P-DRO Produce more Robust Models?
Table 5.4a reports the robust test accuracies of all models on both tasks. Importantly, except for
Oracle DRO, none of the methods compared here necessitate any knowledge of the groups, neither
in the training nor validation data. We observe that in both settings P-DRO is able to achieve higher
robust accuracy than ERM, Topic DRO and NonParam.
This suggests P-DRO as a useful option in case no group information whatsoever is available.
However, in practice, it may be feasible to annotate at least a small amount of data with group
information. To emulate this scenario, we perform the same experiment, but assume that group
annotations are available on the validation data, which we use to determine optimal stopping and
hyper-parameters. Results for this setting are reported in Table 5.4b. We ﬁnd that, while the use
74
of robust validation accuracy yields more robust models even for ERM (especially on FDCL18),
P-DRO is still the best alternative that doesn’t require group annotation on the training data.
5.6
Additional Experiments
5.6.1
Minmax Validation KL Threshold
The Monte-Carlo estimate of KL(qψ∥p) on the validation set is
1
|Dvalid|
P
x,y∈Dvalid
qψ(x,y)
p(x,y) log qψ(x,y)
p(x,y) .
Similarly to Section 5.3, we approximate the (unknown) likelihood ratio qψ(x,y)
p(x,y) with qψ(x,y)
qψ0(x,y).
We want to reject all adversaries where this approximated KL is greater than some threshold,
κvalid, but how do we choose a good value for κvalid? Consider an adversary which selects a fraction
of the validation data of size α|Dvalid| for some α ∈(0, 1]. In such a case, the likelihood ratio is
1/α on this subset and 0 everywhere else, and the resulting KL estimate will be log α. In other
words, choosing a threshold of κvalid means allowing the adversary to potentially select any subset
of size at least 1/eκvalid of the original data. Our heuristic choice, log 10, corresponds to allowing
subsets of size at least 10% of |Dvalid|.
Of course, this is only a heuristic because the adversary can reweight the validation set non-
uniformly. To assess the effect of κvalid on Greedy-Minmax, we compute the average robust vali-
dation error of the selected model across 5 runs for 3 different values of the adversary’s learning
rate. Results on BiasedSST, depicted in Figure 5.3, show that adversaries with higher learning rate
are more sensitive to the choice of threshold, but all values of κvalid between log 5 and log 20 seem
to work for these settings.
5.6.2
P-DRO Experiments with an LSTM Adversary
We replicate the experiments BiasedSST experiments in Section 5.4, but this time using a smaller
generative model, which is unlikely to generate good samples. Speciﬁcally, we use a one layer
LSTM model (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) with embedding and hidden dimension 256. We
only perform grid-search over λ ∈[10−5, 10−4, 10−3] and select the best with Minmax.
Once pre-trained on the BiasedSST dataset, this model achieves a perplexity of 227.0, more
than 4 times worse than the transformer model we use in other experiments (49.8). However,
as evidenced by its robust accuracy displayed in Table 5.5, P-DRO is still able to learn a robust
model. We take this as evidence that the re-weighting introduced in Section 5.3 helps stabilize
training even when qψ is not a perfect model of the data.
75
Figure 5.3: Evolution of the robust validation accuracy of the model selected by Greedy-Minmax
as a function of the KL threshold κvalid
log1
log2
log5
log10
log20
log50
log100
log1000
log10000
KL threshold
0
20
40
Robust validation accuracy
= 10
5
= 10
4
= 10
3
Table 5.5: Average and robust accuracies on BiasedSST when P-DRO is trained with an LSTM
adversary. Underlining indicates statistically signiﬁcant difference compared to ERM (p < 0.05)
Robust
Average
ERM
2.15 ± 0.97
95.09 ± 0.16
Topic DRO
5.18 ± 1.46
95.00 ± 0.10
NonParam
28.11 ± 2.16
92.45 ± 1.55
P-DRO
43.68 ± 4.93
86.58 ± 1.77
Oracle DRO
67.71 ± 3.03
77.91 ± 4.49
76
Table 5.6: Effect of hyper-parameters on robust validation accuracy on BiasedSST
Robust accuracy
Minmax stopping
Oracle stopping
λ = 10−5
28.62 ± 12.37
45.10 ± 4.50
λ = 10−4
44.74 ± 3.24
50.43 ± 5.05
λ = 10−3
25.57 ± 10.33
38.70 ± 2.97
τ = 0.1
39.72 ± 5.55
50.00 ± 4.98
τ = 0.01
44.74 ± 3.24
50.43 ± 5.05
τ = 0.001
44.74 ± 3.24
50.87 ± 5.09
k = 1
41.98 ± 4.48
49.60 ± 5.39
k = 5
44.74 ± 3.24
50.43 ± 5.05
k = 10
32.17 ± 11.20
50.95 ± 5.01
5.6.3
Inﬂuence of hyper-parameters on P-DRO
We study the inﬂuence of the 3 hyper-parameters τ (temperature), k (size of the renormalization
window) and λ (learning rate of the adversary) on the performance of P-DRO. All experiments are
run on the BiasedSST dataset, and the analysis proceeds as follows: we start from conﬁguration
τ = 0.01, k = 5 and λ = 10−4 and vary each of the hyper-parameters independently. We report
two numbers for each conﬁguration: robust accuracy of the best model (1) using Greedy-Minmax
stopping and (2) using Oracle stopping. The latter is useful to disentangle the effect of the stopping
criterion.
As seen in the results shown in Table 5.6, we ﬁnd that τ has the least effect on robust accu-
racies. While the renormalization window parameter k has some effect on optimal stopping, the
best robust accuracy achieved by the model (with oracle stopping) varies little. We observe the
adversary’s learning rate λ to be the most sensitive hyper-parameter, which is why we restrict our
grid-search to λ in Section 5.5.
5.7
Conclusion
In this chapter, we have shown that there is promise in using parametric families of neural gen-
erative models for deﬁning the uncertainty set in distributionally robust optimization. While we
only perform experiments on NLP tasks, this approach can, in theory, be applied in any modality.
77
However, the reliance of P-DRO on good quality generative models limits its adoption in applica-
tions where good quality generative models are unavailable, or when such model cannot produce
exact densities efﬁciently. In the following chapter, we will address these issues by parameterizing
the likelihood ratio qψ/p directly, an alternative formulation which poses different implementation
challenges.
78
Chapter 6
Distributionally Robust Models with
Parametric Likelihood Ratios
In chapter 5 we proposed P-DRO, a promising approach where the uncertainty set is deﬁned by
a parametric family of generative models, which allows for more ﬂexibility in deﬁning the uncer-
tainty set. Despite P-DRO’s demonstrated ability to train models that are robust to distributional
shift, it suffers from several drawbacks: ﬁrst, it necessitates training an auxiliary generative model
of the data. This can be difﬁcult for several reasons. First, this limits the applicability of the
method to domains with generative models that allow for exact probability computations. More-
over, even when such generative models are available, they are often more computationally de-
manding than their discriminative counterparts. In language models for instance, probabilities for
sequences of text are obtained by iteratively producing conditional probabilities over all tokens in
the vocabulary. This additional step results in considerable computational overhead compared to
discriminative models. Second, it is challenging to use in practice due to its reliance on a number
of hyperparameters and approximations to the objective function.
In this chapter, we propose a new approach for DRO, called R-PDRO, based on a key mod-
iﬁcation of the P-DRO algorithm: instead of modeling the worst-case distributions directly, we
parametrize the likelihood ratio between the training distribution and the worst-case distribution.
This removes the dependency on an unwieldy generative model, making the method useful for
more applications. While likelihood-ratio formulations of DRO have been tried in prior work
(Sagawa et al., 2020), we show that they are particularly effective for parametric, neural-network
based adversaries. Our approach relies on two simple ideas: a mini-batch level normalization
strategy to enforce likelihood ratio constraints and a KL divergence penalty to limit the scope of
79
the uncertainty set. R-PDRO consistently achieves equal or better robust sub-population accu-
racy compared to P-DRO and other baselines on a variety of standard benchmarks in image and
text classiﬁcation. In addition, we ﬁnd it is both faster than P-DRO and depends on fewer hyper-
parameters. Additional ablation and analysis experiments demonstrate that our minibatch normal-
ization strategy is necessary for high performance, and that the parametric adversaries enabled
by R-PDRO are substantially more resistant to label noise compared to traditional non-parametric
approaches to DRO.
6.1
Parametric Likelihood Ratio
6.1.1
DRO as a Likelihood Ratio Optimization Problem
In the situation that all distributions in Q are absolutely continuous with respect to p (i.e. for all
q ∈Q, q(x, y) > 0 only if p(x, y) > 0) the inner maximum in Equation 2.3 can be rewritten purely
as a function of the likelihood ratio q
p
E(x,y)∼q ℓθ(x, y) = E(x,y)∼p
q(x, y)
p(x, y)ℓθ(x, y).
(6.1)
Such absolute continuity assumptions are standard in f-divergence and group DRO methods,
which both rely upon re-weighting the training distributions. In fact, the KL divergence constraint
in P-DRO presupposes absolute continuity.
This suggests that the inner maximum can be re-written as an optimization problem on func-
tions r : X × Y −→R+ within the uncertainty set R ∈{r | pr ∈Q}
min
θ
max
r∈R E(x,y)∼p r(x, y)ℓθ(x, y).
(6.2)
This reparametrization of the problem will allow us to replace the parametric family of generative
models with a parametric family over probability ratios.
6.1.2
Ratio-based P-DRO
The likelihood-ratio formulation described above is appealing for P-DRO because it enables the
use of discriminative style neural architectures for parameterizing the ratio r, which opens up many
more options for deﬁning the parametric uncertainty set. Speciﬁcally, we can set the adversary to
80
be any parametric function rψ : X × Y −→R+ verifying Ex,y∼p rψ(x, y) = 1. The key insight
that we use to realize our proposed method is that we do not need to limit the choice of adversaries
to those that implicitly satisfy this normalization condition (i.e. generative models). Instead, we
can pick any adversary and treat normalization as an additional constraint (the “normalization
constraint”).
Note that in this case, the KL constraint takes the simple form KL(prψ∥p) = Eprψ log prψ
p
=
Ep rψ log rψ. The ﬁnal min-max problem, which we dub ratio-based P-DRO (R-PDRO), is as
follows:
min
θ
max
ψ
Ep rψ log rψ≤κ
Eprψ=1
E(x,y)∼prψ(x, y)ℓθ(x, y)
|
{z
}
LR-PDRO
.
(6.3)
As in P-DRO, we can look for equilibria of this differentiable min-max game by performing
simultaneous gradient updates (Singh et al., 2000) to θ and ψ in directions −∇θLR-PRDO and
+∇ψLR-PRDO respectively. Although ﬁnding global equilibria is not guaranteed in high dimen-
sional non-convex settings (Balduzzi et al., 2018), empirical evidence from Chapter 5 suggests
that models trained in this manner still reach useful solutions.
In experiments, we adopt an exponential parameterization rψ(x, y) = efψ(x,y) where fψ is the
output of any parametric model with values in R. Similarly to P-DRO, we do not explicitly enforce
the KL constraint (due to the difﬁculty of projecting onto the KL ball), and instead relax it in the
form of a KL term τ Ep rψ log rψ added to the loss function. The regularization strength τ is treated
as a hyper-parameter.
6.1.3
Enforcing the normalization constraint
In addition to the KL constraint, R-PDRO necessitates that rψ satisﬁes a normalization constraint
Ep rψ = 1 to ensure that prψ is a proper probability distribution over Dtrain. If that were not the
case, the adversary rψ could artiﬁcially increase the weighted expectation Ep rψℓθ by assigning a
total weight greater than 1 to the entire dataset.
Existing methods for ratio based DRO such as Sagawa et al. (2020) achieve this by either
projecting rψ onto the simplex {r | Ep r = 1} after each gradient update on ψ, or by directly
parametrizing the ratio as rψ(x, y) = efψ(x,y)/ Ep efψ. Unfortunately, these solutions are compu-
tationally infeasible in practical scenarios with large datasets. Indeed, they necessitate computing
the entire expectation over p, which can be costly when each fψ(x, y) is the output of a neural
model.
We propose two simple, yet effective solutions for addressing this issue in the context of mini-
81
batch training where we can only compute fψ for small number of samples (x1, y1), . . . , (xn, yn)
at each step of training.
Self-normalization
is inspired by the idea of “self-normalization” developed for globally nor-
malized structured prediction models (Andreas et al., 2015; Goyal et al., 2019). It consists in
adding a relaxation of the normalization constraint to the objective. Speciﬁcally, following Goyal
et al. (2019) we add a squared penalty on the log normalizer at the minibatch level. Ignoring the
KL penalty, this regularized objective takes the following form:
Lself-norm(θ, ψ) = 1
n
n
X
i=1
rψ(xi, yi)ℓθ(xi, yi) −β log
 1
n
n
X
i=1
rψ(xi, yi)
!2
.
(6.4)
The hyper-parameter β controls the regularization strength. Intuitively, this penalizes adversary
that assign too much (or too little) total weight to the minibatch. However, the choice of an optimal
β adds an additional degree of freedom to R-PDRO, which suggests our second option as a simpler
alternative.
Batch-level normalization
consists of using the normalized ratio at the minibatch level by set-
ting
˜rψ(xi, yi) =
efψ(xi,yi)
Pn
j=1 efψ(xj,yj)
(6.5)
for each sample (xi, yi) in the minibatch. An obvious downside of this approach is that the weight
of each sample now depends on the minibatch it was sampled from. This can be problematic for
small batch sizes: as an extreme example, for a batch size of 1, this normalization scheme assigns
the same weight of 1 to every sample, making the objective equivalent to ERM.
However, minibatch approximations have proven effective for other forms of DRO (Hu et al.,
2018; Levy et al., 2020) and there is some evidence that they can yield accurate estimates for
higher batch sizes (Cortes et al., 2010). In practice we ﬁnd that this approach yields good results
for commonly used batch sizes, is generally more stable than the self-normalization penalty, and
does not introduce any additional hyper-parameters. In most of our experiments, we adopt this
approach unless speciﬁed otherwise. In that case, the R-PDRO objective on a minibatch becomes
Lbatch-level norm(θ, ψ) =
n
X
i=1
˜rψ(xi, yi)ℓθ(xi, yi)
|
{z
}
expected loss under prψ
−τ
n
X
i=1
˜rψ(xi, yi) log ˜rψ(xi, yi)
|
{z
}
KL penalty
.
(6.6)
82
The KL term serves to penalize ratios that deviate too much from 1.1 The only hyper-parameter
that needs to be tuned is the KL regularization strength τ.
6.2
Experiments
6.2.1
Datasets
We perform experiments on four datasets: two text classiﬁcation datasets used in chapter 5, Biased
SST and FDCL18 and two image classiﬁcation datasets from Sagawa et al. (2020), Waterbirds
and CelebA. Speciﬁc details for each dataset follow these previous works, as described below:
Biased SST
is based on the SST-2 sentiment classiﬁcation dataset (Radford et al., 2018), but
modiﬁed to introduce spurious correlation between a distractor token (“So,”) and positive labels
in around 95% of the dataset. In this setting models trained with ERM can very easily learn this
spurious correlation, which hurts performance on the small sub-population that doesn’t suffer from
this bias.
FDCL18
A toxicity detection dataset of tweets labeled as hateful (5%), abusive (27%), normal
(54%) and spam (14%). The group-DRO problem is formulated by partitioning the evaluation
data along labels as dialectal annotation obtained automatically with an off-the shelf classiﬁer
(Blodgett et al., 2016; Sap et al., 2019). In particular these dialects align closely with self-reported
race, and Sap et al. (2019) found that machine learning models trained on such toxicity detection
datasets tend to exhibit bias towards certain labels depending on the demographics of the tweets’
authors, particularly with minorities. In order to report more reliable accuracy numbers, all groups
containing less than 100 samples are aggregated when computing test accuracies.
Waterbirds
An image classiﬁcation dataset where the task is to predict “land bird” or “water
bird” with the confounding factor of the background; most water (resp. land) bird pictures have
water (resp. land) on the background.
CelebA
A popular face recognition dataset originally published by Liu et al. (2015). The group-
DRO problem is formulated as a task of predicting the hair color (“Blond” or “Dark”) across
groups formed by the combination of the label and the (binary) gender of the subject. Due to the
1Note that the penalty is subtracted because we are maximizing with respect to ψ
83
Table 6.1:
Robust and average test accuracies on the Biased SST and FDCL18 datasets. Un-
derlined numbers indicates statistically signiﬁcant difference compared to ERM (p < 0.05). Bold
numbers indicates the best number in each column (barring Oracle DRO).
Biased SST
FDCL18
Robust
Average
Robust
Average
ERM
2.15 ± 0.97
95.09 ± 0.16
19.57 ± 7.00
81.56 ± 0.26
Topic DRO
5.18 ± 1.46
95.00 ± 0.10
16.48 ± 5.46
80.49 ± 0.49
NonParam
28.11 ± 2.16
92.45 ± 1.55
17.54 ± 6.41
81.20 ± 0.11
P-DRO
34.98 ± 9.39
84.21 ± 2.11
30.25 ± 10.13
79.91 ± 1.41
R-PDRO
50.70 ± 7.33
86.60 ± 2.96
53.52 ± 1.66
76.62 ± 1.43
Oracle DRO
67.71 ± 3.03
77.91 ± 4.49
55.23 ± 3.97
72.43 ± 2.61
Table 6.2: Robust and average test accuracies on the Waterbirds and CelebA datasets. Underlined
numbers indicates statistically signiﬁcant difference compared to ERM (p < 0.05). Bold numbers
indicates the best number in each column (barring Oracle DRO).
Waterbirds
CelebA
Robust
Average
Robust
Average
ERM
68.32 ± 2.02
89.23 ± 0.36
40.33 ± 2.29
95.89 ± 0.05
NonParam
72.21 ± 0.95
90.54 ± 0.72
43.33 ± 3.58
95.72 ± 0.10
R-PDRO
73.49 ± 3.01
90.15 ± 0.74
55.78 ± 9.15
93.10 ± 3.87
Oracle DRO
85.60 ± 0.95
89.12 ± 1.20
89.22 ± 0.90
92.59 ± 0.40
spurious correlation between blond hair/female and dark hair/male, models trained with ERM tend
to achieve lower accuracies on underrepresented groups such as “blond-haired male” which totals
only 0.85% of the training data.
6.2.2
Experimental Setting
On BiasedSST and FDCL18 we follow the experimental setting of chapter 5 and train a BiLSTM
and BERT-base model Devlin et al. (2018) respectively. On the image classiﬁcation datasets we
train Resnet-50 architectures (He et al., 2016) pre-trained on ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) as in
Sagawa et al. (2020).
Since the adversary in R-PDRO can be any discriminative architecture, we opt for the natu-
ral solution of using a similar architecture for this model. For instance on Biased SST, we take
84
fψ(x, y) as the raw logit output by a BiLSTM architecture identical to that of the classiﬁer (with-
out the ﬁnal softmax layer). We do the same for the other datasets, with the exception of FDCL18
where we use a smaller DistillBERT model (Sanh et al., 2019) for efﬁciency. We use the same
learning rate and optimizer for both model and adversary and only vary the KL penalty weight
τ ∈{0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1.0}. We perform optimal stopping using the Minmax criterion proposed
in chapter 5: every epoch T, we determine the best model by explicitly solving a greedy approxi-
mation of the min-max game between all previously checkpointed adversaries and models on the
validation dataset Dvalid.
θ∗= arg min
θi=1...T
max
ψj=1...T
1
|Dvalid|
X
x,y∈Dvalid
˜rψj(x, y)ℓθi(x, y)
(6.7)
A similar strategy is applied for hyper-parameter selection. Importantly, we substitute the 0-1 loss
for ℓθ in Equation 6.7 as we found in preliminary experiments on BiasedSST that it consistently
produced better results.
We compare our results to 5 different methods experimented with in chapter 5:
• ERM: standard training to minimize the average loss.
• NonParam: Non-parametric DRO with a KL constrained uncertainty set (Hu & Hong, 2013;
Hu et al., 2018). In this particular case, the inner maximization problem has an analytical
solution of the form q(x, y) ∝e
ℓθ(x,y)
τ∗
where τ ∗is chosen so that the KL divergence with the
training distribution is smaller than a pre-deﬁned bound κ. As a result, examples with high
losses are up-weighted.
• Topic-DRO: a variation on Topic CVaR (Oren et al., 2019) using the online algorithm from
Sagawa et al. (2020) to minimize the worst case loss on a collection of pseudo domains
automatically generated via topic modeling.2 We use this baseline for the text datasets only
(Biased SST and FDCL18).
• P-DRO: the parametric DRO approach proposed in chapter 5. For image datasets, prelimi-
nary experiments using auto-regressive models for image modeling (Van Oord et al., 2016)
proved to be prohibitively slow. Therefore, we only report P-DRO on text datasets as in
chapter 5.
2This baseline was inaccurately referred to as “Topic CVaR” in chapter 5
85
• Oracle DRO: an online algorithm for minimizing the worst-case loss on the true uncertainty
set (Sagawa et al., 2020). Contrary to all other methods, Oracle DRO presupposes that we
know the groups of interest at training time. As such, it is not directly comparable and serves
to provide an upper bound of the robust accuracy that can be achieved.
Across all experiments, we report results with mean and standard deviation across 5 reruns
with different seeds.
Dataset-speciﬁc Hyper-parameters
All hyper-parameters listed below are constant across all methods:
Text Datasets
The input data is tokenized using the bert-base-uncased sub-word tok-
enizer from Devlin et al. (2018). We train both classiﬁer and adversary with Adam (Kingma & Ba,
2014) using a learning rate of 2 × 10−5, linearly decay the learning rate to 0 at each step. We train
with batches of size 64 (or containing up to 2500 tokens, whichever is lower) for 50 and 20 epochs
for BiasedSST and FDCL18 respectively, evaluating model on the validation data every epoch.
Image Datasets
On both datasets, images are rescaled to 224 × 224 pixels and pixel values are
normalized to have mean 0 and variance 1 across all 3 color channels on the training data. At
training time, we augment the data by randomly cropping or ﬂipping the images horizontally. We
train using regular stochastic gradient descent using a constant learning rate of 10−3 and a batch
size of 32. We train for 75 and 13 epochs on Waterbirds and CelebA respectively (those numbers
were chosen to match the number of steps trained to Sagawa et al. (2020) despite the smaller batch
size), and validate every 100 (for Waterbirds) and 1000 (for CelebA) training steps.
Method Speciﬁc Hyper-parameters
For NonParam we follow the adaptation of Hu et al. (2018) used in chapter 5 and choose the
optimal temperature τ ∗based on minibatch level estimates of the KL divergence. We treat the KL
bound κ as a hyper-parameter. We adapt the Minmax stopping criterion of P-DRO to the non-
parametric adversaries as we found it yielded more robust models than those selected with average
validation accuracy. We sweep over κ ∈{0.01, 0.1, 1.0, 10.0}
For R-PDRO we perform optimal stopping using the Minmax criterion with a KL threshold of
log 10 in all experiments, to match the value recommended for P-DRO. Speciﬁcally, we estimate
86
the KL divergence of checkpointed adversaries ψi on the validation data as follows:
1
|Dvalid|
X
x,y∈Dvalid
ˆrψ(x, y) log ˆrψ(x, y)
(6.8)
and reject adversaries for which this quantity exceeds log 10.
6.2.3
Results
For all methods, we report the worst accuracy over all groups in the test set (the “robust accuracy”).
Models that are robust to sub-population shift will have higher robust accuracies. Since there is
often a trade-off between being robust to distribution shift and performing well on the training
distribution, we also report the standard accuracy on the original test set (the “average accuracy”)
As shown in Table 6.1, R-PDRO works particularly well on the two text classiﬁcation tasks,
beating all baselines by a large margin on both BiasedSST and FDCL18. In fact, its robust accu-
racy almost matches that of Oracle DRO on FDCL18, despite the fact that the former doesn’t use
an any group information at training time. Compared to P-DRO, we ﬁnd that results are not only
better, but also more consistent as evidenced by the lower standard deviation.
Results are also generally good on image datasets (see Table 6.2). On Waterbirds both the
NonParam baseline and R-PDRO perform much better than ERM, with a slight edge for R-PDRO
(although the latter exhibits a higher variance across reruns). On CelebA, R-PDRO largely outper-
forms the baselines.
6.3
Analysis and Ablations
We perform a series of analysis experiments and ablation studies to better (1) identify how the para-
metric representation of the ratio provides improvements over non-parametric alternatives and (2)
understand the importance of the various choices made with regards to the renormalization scheme
described in Section 6.1. Throughout this section, experiments are performed on the BiasedSST
dataset.
6.3.1
Why are Parametric Adversaries Better? The Case of Label Noise
Our experimental results in Section 6.2 shows that parametric approaches such as P-DRO and R-
PDRO consistently outperform their non-parametric counterparts. A possible explanation for this
87
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Label noise probability
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Accuracy
Robust
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Label noise probability
Average
R-PDRO
NonParam
Figure 6.1: Effect of label noise on parametric and non parametric DRO.
phenomenon is that for non-parametric approaches, the optimal weights generally only depends on
the loss of the model. This can be problematic because the non-parametric worst-case distribution
will indiscriminately up-weight noisy samples that have high loss. On the other hand, we hypoth-
esize that it is more difﬁcult for the parametric adversary to “ﬁt to the noise” and that it tends to
focus more on systematic patterns of failures of the model.
To corroborate this hypothesis, we perform experiments by adding increasing amounts of noise
to the Biased SST. Speciﬁcally, for each example in the training set we replace the original label
with a random label with probability pnoise = 0, 0.1, . . . , 0.5.3 We then train models on these
increasingly noisy datasets using both a parametric (R-PDRO) and non-parametric (NonParam)
approach. To simplify experiments we only run one hyper-parameter conﬁguration for each (τ =
0.1 and κ = 1 for R-PDRO and NonParam respectively) and report the test accuracies of the
model with the highest robust accuracy on the validation set. Results are averaged over 5 runs with
different random seeds.
As showcased in Figure 6.1, while R-PDRO’s robust accuracy seems to suffer under the effect
of noise, we ﬁnd that its average accuracy is a lot more resilient to the introduction of label noise
compared to NonParam, losing around 12 points when pnoise = 0.2 (88.04 →75.89), versus 26 for
NonParam (83.14 →57.16). This further supports our hypothesis that non-parametric adversaries
tend to ﬁt to these noisy examples, which decreases the overall quality of the resulting classiﬁer.
3pnoise = 0 corresponds to the original dataset.
88
6.3.2
Optimization with Simultaneous Gradient Updates Plays a Crucial
Role
Despite the aforementionned results, it remains unclear why R-PDRO learns re-weightings that
are less sensitive to label noise or difﬁcult examples compared to R-PDRO. Indeed, since the non-
parametric adversary is the optimal solution of the inner minimization problem in Eq. 6.2, it stands
to reason that (large, sometimes over-parameterized) parametric adversaries from R-PDRO would
converge to the same solutions as NonParam.
Our hypothesis is that the simultaneous updates to both model and adversary parameters pre-
vent the parametric adversary from converging towards such non-parametric solutions, and pro-
vides some implicit regularization against up-weighting examples that are noisy or too difﬁcult.
To verify this hypothesis, we conduct a toy experiment where we allow the adversary to take
additional gradient steps in-between each update to the classiﬁer. At the limit, this would allow
the adversary to ﬁnd an optimum of the inner maximization problem at each step of training the
classiﬁer (which for large enough adversaries, might come close to the non-parametric solution).
For computational efﬁciency, these experiments are performed on the toy setting described in
Chapter 5, Section 5.4.7: a linear model is trained on a binary classiﬁcation problem with two
domains, one of which is severely under-represented. For our adversary, we experiment with a
linear adversary, as well as larger multilayer perceptrons with one hidden layer and 2 (MLP-2) and
4 (MLP-4) hidden units. In Figure 6.2, we report the average robust accuracy (across 5 reruns)
for classiﬁers trained with R-PDRO when the adversary is allowed to take more steps than the
classiﬁer.
We observe that R-PDRO’s robust accuracy suffers from giving the adversary too much time to
catch up with the classiﬁer: as the number of updates to the adversary increases, robust accuracy
decreases. This effect is ampliﬁed in larger adversaries (e.g. MLP-4).
This experiment underlines the importance of the simultaneous gradient updates, which prevent
large, over-parameterized adversaries from converging to the sub-optimal non-parametric solution.
6.3.3
Batch-level Normalization vs Self-normalization
In Section 6.1.3, we discussed two alternatives for enforcing the normalization constraint on the
ratios (Eprψ = 1): a regularization-based approach (“self-normalization”) and batch level renor-
malization. In Figure 6.3a, we show the effect of self-normalization with different values of the
regularization weight β for a ﬁxed value of the KL penalty τ = 0.1. We ﬁnd that batch-level nor-
89
1
2
5
10
20
50
100
# of adversary steps per classifier steps
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Robust accuracy
Adversary
Linear
MLP-2
MLP-4
Figure 6.2: Evolution of R-PDRO’s robust accuracy as the adversary is allowed to take more
gradient steps than the classiﬁer in a toy setting.
malization achieves a slightly better robust accuracy than the best self-normalization conﬁguration.
In chapter 5, the Minmax stopping criterion was identiﬁed as a major contributing factor to
the performance of parametric DRO approaches. To understand how it affects each normalization
strategy, we perform the same experiment as above but this time without the Minmax criterion, se-
lecting instead the model with the highest robust accuracy on the validation set (“Oracle stopping”),
which provides an upper bound to the robust accuracy that can be achieved. Results in Figure 6.3b
show that although accuracies are generally closer, we again ﬁnd that batch-level normalization
matches the best self-normalization penalty. This indicates that batch-level normalization not only
performs as well as self-normalization (without the need for tuning the additional hyper-parameter
β), but also that it interacts better with the Minmax stopping criterion, making it a preferable
alternative overall.
6.3.4
Effect of Batch Size on Re-normalization
As pointed out in Section 6.1.3, a potential downside of the minibatch-level normalization ap-
proach is that the effective weight of each sample then depends on the other samples within the
minibatch. For example, consider an adversary that assigns high weight to only 5% of the training
data. With a small enough batch size, it is likely that some batches may not contain any example
of the high weight subpopulation, in which case minibatch level renormalization will overestimate
the weight of the sample in the minibatch.
To assess the severity of this issue, we run R-PDRO on Biased SST with τ = 0.1 and vary
90
10
3
10
2
10
1
100
101
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Accuracy
Robust
10
3
10
2
10
1
100
101
Average
Self-normalization
ERM
Batch-level normalization
(a) Minmax stopping
10
3
10
2
10
1
100
101
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Accuracy
Robust
10
3
10
2
10
1
100
101
Average
Self-normalization
ERM
Batch-level normalization
(b) Oracle stopping
Figure 6.3:
Effect of self-normalization coefﬁcient β on robust and average accuracy. For two
different stopping strategy: Minmax stopping (used in experiments in Section 6.2) and Oracle
stopping. We report results of ERM (which corresponds to β = ∞) and batch level renormalization
for comparison.
the batch size in {4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128}. Each conﬁguration is run 3 times, and we report average
and standard deviation of the robust and average test accuracies in Table 6.3. Results suggest that
while robust accuracy indeed deteriorates for lower batch sizes (4 and 8), results are consistently
good for batch sizes upwards of 16, a reasonable number considering that larger batch sizes are
often preferred in the literature (Popel & Bojar, 2018; Goyal et al., 2017).
91
Table 6.3: Effect of batch size on R-PDRO performance.
Batch size
Robust
Average
64 (ERM)
32.97 ± 2.34
92.42 ± 0.38
4
37.50 ± 2.37
92.32 ± 0.75
8
38.08 ± 2.06
91.61 ± 0.48
16
41.67 ± 3.53
91.24 ± 0.34
32
42.32 ± 0.72
89.77 ± 1.42
64
44.15 ± 6.83
88.30 ± 2.33
128
42.25 ± 7.90
88.21 ± 2.02
6.4
Conclusion
In this chapter we have proposed a parametric, likelihood ratio based approach to distributionally
robust optimization of machine learning models. With the proposed method, we can use any type
of parametric function estimator to deﬁne the uncertainty set of the DRO min-max game. We
showed that with a careful renormalization strategy, the proposed method (R-PDRO) can be used
to train robust models. It depends on very few hyper-parameters and consistently performs well on
a number of benchmarks, making it an appealing off-the-shelf option. Finally we have shown that
such parametric approaches are more resilient to the presence of noise in the training data when
compared to their non-parametric alternatives.
The main downside of R-PDRO is the computational overhead of jointly training a second
neural model. An interesting direction for future work is to improve its efﬁciency through parallel
computation or by sharing parameters between the classiﬁer and the adversary.
92
Part III
Adaptation
93
Chapter 7
Regularizing Trajectories to Mitigate
Catastrophic Forgetting
It is good to have an end to journey toward;
but it is the journey that matters, in the end.
Ursula K. Le Guin
7.1
Introduction
The methods presented in previous chapters are able to train models that are more robust to dis-
tributional shifts because they can identify sub-population of the training data corresponding to
potential domains where the model performs poorly. However, there are cases where the model
might be confronted with a completely unseen test distribution, or even with a new task. In such
cases where the test environment cannot be anticipated, an alternative solution is to adapt the
model, using the limited amounts of data that are available in the target domain or task.
However, continual learning of multiple tasks is hampered by catastrophic forgetting (Mc-
Closkey & Cohen, 1989; Ratcliff, 1990), the tendency of previously acquired knowledge to be
overwritten when learning a new task.
Modern techniques to mitigate catastrophic forgetting can be roughly categorized into 3 lines of
work (see Parisi et al. (2019) for a comprehensive overview): 1. regularization-based approaches,
where forgetting is mitigated by the addition of a penalty term in the learning objective (Kirkpatrick
et al. (2017); Chaudhry et al. (2018a), inter alia), 2. dynamic architectures approaches, which
94
incrementally increase the model’s capacity to accomodate the new tasks (Rusu et al., 2016), and
3. memory-based approaches, which retain data from learned tasks for later reuse (Lopez-Paz &
Ranzato, 2017; Chaudhry et al., 2018b, 2019). Among these, regularization-based approaches are
particularly appealing because they do not increase the model size and do not require access to
past data. This is particularly relevant to real-world scenarios where keeping data from previous
training tasks may be impractical because of infrastructural or privacy-related reasons. Moreover,
they are of independent intellectual interest because of their biological inspiration rooted in the
idea of synaptic consolidation (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017).
In these regularization-based approaches, a good regularizer will ensure that, when learning a
new task, gradient descent will ultimately converge to parameters that yield good results on the
new task while preserving performance on previously learned tasks. Critically, this is predicated
upon successful optimization of the regularized objective, a fact that has been largely taken for
granted in previous work. Non-convexity of the loss function, along with noise in the data (due
to small or biased datasets) or in the gradients (due to stochastic gradient descent), can yield op-
timization trajectories — and ultimately convergence points — that are highly non-deterministic,
even for the same starting parameters. As we demonstrate in this chapter, this can cause unintended
catastrophic forgetting along the optimization path. This is illustrated in a toy setting in Figure 7.1:
a two parameter model is trained to perform task T2 (an arbitrary bi-modal loss function) after
having learned task T1 (a logistic regression task). Standard ﬁnetuning, even in the presence of a
regularized objective (EWC; Kirkpatrick et al. (2017)), quickly changes the loss of T1 and tends to
converge to a solution with high T1 loss.
We propose to remedy this issue by regularizing not the objective function but the optimization
trajectory itself, speciﬁcally by preconditioning gradient descent with the empirical Fisher infor-
mation of previously learned tasks (§7.3). This yields what we refer to as a co-natural gradient,
an update rule inspired by the natural gradient (Amari, 1997), but taking the Fisher information
of previous tasks as a natural Riemannian metric1 of the parameter space, instead of the Fisher
information of the task being optimized for. When we introduce our proposed co-natural gradient
for the toy example of Figure 7.1, the learning trajectory follows a path that changes the loss on
T1 much more slowly, and tends to converges to the optimum that incurs the lowest performance
degradation on T1.
We test the validity of our approach in a continual learning scenario (§7.4). We show that
the co-natural gradient consistently reduces forgetting in a variety of existing continual learning
1Informally, the reader can think of a Riemannian metric as a function that assigns an inner product u, v 7→gx(u, v)
to each point x in the space, thus inducing a localized notion of distance and curvature.
95
T1
T2
Finetuning
EWC
Co-natural finetuning
Figure 7.1: On the importance of trajectories: an example with 2-dimensional logistic regres-
sion. Having learned task T1, the model is trained on T2 with two different objectives: minimizing
the loss on T2 (Finetuning) and a regularized objective (EWC; Kirkpatrick et al. (2017)). We add a
small amount of Gaussian noise to gradients in order to simulate the stochasticity of the trajectory.
Plain ﬁnetuning and EWC often converge to a solution with high loss for T1, but the co-natural
optimization trajectory consistently converges towards the optimum with lowest loss for T1. Each
individual plot corresponds to a separate run using a different random seed.
approaches by a large factor, and greatly improves performance over simple ﬁnetuning, without
modiﬁcation to the training objective. As an additional contribution, we assemble a new collection
of 13 tasks for evaluating continual learning on text classiﬁcation.
We further investigate the special case of transfer learning in a two-task, low-resource scenario.
In this speciﬁc case, control over the optimization trajectory is particularly useful because the
optimizer has to rely on early stopping to prevent overﬁtting to the meager amount of training data
in the target task. We show that the co-natural gradient yields the best trade-offs between source
and target domain performance over a variety of hyper-parameters (§7.6).
The work presented in this chapter bears many similarities to previous related works on Bayesian
formulations of continual learning which used similar inverse-Fisher conditioning to reduce for-
getting: NVCL (Tseran et al., 2018) and GNG (Chen et al., 2018). However, we our work makes
signiﬁcant contributions over these previous approaches
First, these prior works were developed in the framework of Bayesian continual learning. While
the central idea of using the Fisher to modulate the update is similar, we adopt a broader approach
and successfully apply this technique to a variety of other techniques outside the Bayesian scaf-
folding. Second, we introduce a damping coefﬁcient, which allows control over the regularization
effect of the co-natural gradient, as evidenced by our analysis in Appendix A.4 speciﬁcally, and
more generally by the results in Section 4 and 5, where our results are obtained by performing
grid-search over this additional hyper-parameter. Third, we provide empirical evidence of the co-
96
natural gradients’ effectiveness in a variety of experimental settings from relatively small, toy-like
models and datasets (e.g. Split CIFAR or Omniglot) to more realistic scenarios (e.g. MiniIma-
geNet, BERT on text classiﬁcation and our MT experiments). In comparison, the aforementioned
previous work only test small 2 layers MLP models on MNIST and FashionMNIST. We believe
that this establishes our work as a strong, independent contribution.
7.2
Background and Notations
We ﬁrst give a brief overview of the continual learning paradigm and existing approaches for
overcoming catastrophic forgetting.
7.2.1
Notation
Let us deﬁne a task as a triplet containing an input space X and an output space Y, both measurable
spaces, as well as a distribution D over X × Y. In general, learning a task will consist of training
a model to approximate the conditional distribution p(y | x) induced by D.
Consider a probabilistic model pθ parametrized by θ ∈Rd where d is the size of the model,
trained to perform a source task S = ⟨XS, YS, DS⟩to some level of performance, yielding param-
eters θS. In the most simple instance of continual learning, we are tasked with learning a second
target task T = ⟨XT, YT, DT⟩. In general in a multitask setting, it is not the case that the input
or output spaces are the same. The discrepancy between input/output space can be addressed in
various ways, e.g. by adding a minimal number of task-speciﬁc parameters (for example, differ-
ent softmax layers for different label sets). To simplify exposition, we set these more speciﬁc
considerations aside for now, and assume that XS = XT and YS = YT.
At any given point during training for task T, our objective will be to minimize the loss function
LT(θ) – generally the expected negative log-likelihood Ex,y∼DT [−log pθ(y | x)]. Typically, this
will be performed by iteratively adding incremental update vectors δ ∈Rd to the parameters
θ ←−θ + δ.
7.2.2
Existing Approaches for Continual Learning
In this chapter, we focus on those models that have a ﬁxed architecture over the course of continual
learning. The study of continual learning for models of ﬁxed capacity can be split into two distinct
(but often overlapping) streams of work:
97
Regularization-based approaches introduce a penalty in the loss function LT, often quadratic,
pulling the weights θ back towards θS:
LT(θ) = EDT −log pθ(y | x)
|
{z
}
NLL on task T
+ λ(θ −θS)TΩS(θ −θS)
|
{z
}
Regularization term
(7.1)
where ΩS is a matrix, generally diagonal, that encodes the respective importance of each pa-
rameter with respect to task S, and λ is a regularization strength hyper-parameter. Various choices
have been proposed for ΩS; the diagonal empirical Fisher information matrix (Kirkpatrick et al.,
2017), or path-integral based importance measures (Zenke et al., 2017; Chaudhry et al., 2018a).
More elaborate regularizers have been proposed based on e.g. a Bayesian formulation of continual
learning (Nguyen et al., 2017; Ahn et al., 2019) or a distillation term (Li & Hoiem, 2016; Dhar
et al., 2019). The main advantage of these approaches is that they do not rely on having access to
training data of previous tasks.
Memory-based approaches store data from previously seen tasks for re-use in continual learn-
ing, either as a form of constraint, by e.g. ensuring that training on the new task doesn’t increase
the loss on previous tasks (Lopez-Paz & Ranzato, 2017; Chaudhry et al., 2018b), or for replay i.e.
by retraining on instances from previous tasks (Rebufﬁet al., 2017; Chaudhry et al., 2019; Aljundi
et al., 2019b,a). Various techniques have been proposed for the selection of samples to store in the
memory (Chaudhry et al., 2019; Aljundi et al., 2019b) or for retrieval of the samples to be used for
replay Aljundi et al. (2019a).
All of these methods rely on stochastic gradient descent to optimize their regularized objective
or to perform experience replay, with the notable exception of GEM (Lopez-Paz & Ranzato, 2017;
Chaudhry et al., 2018b), where the gradients are projected onto the orthogonal complement of
previous task’s gradients. However, this method has been shown to perform poorly in comparison
with simple replay (Chaudhry et al., 2019), and it still necessitates access to data from previous
tasks.
7.3
Regularizing the Trajectory
After brieﬂy recalling how the usual update is obtained in gradient descent, we derive a new, co-
natural update designed to better preserve the distribution induced by the model over previous
tasks.
98
7.3.1
Warm up: the Standard Gradient Descent Update
At point θ in the parameter space, gradient descent ﬁnds the optimal update δ that is (1) small
and (2) locally minimizes the difference in loss L(θ + δ) −L(θ) (≈δ⊺∇θL at the ﬁrst order).
Traditionally this can be formulated as minimizing the Lagrangian:
L(δ) =
δ⊺∇θLT
|
{z
}
ﬁrst order
loss minimization term
+
µ∥δ∥2
| {z }
“small update” term
(7.2)
with Lagrangian multiplier µ > 0. Minimizing L for δ yields the well-known optimal update
δ∗:
δ∗= −1
2µ∇θLT
(7.3)
where
1
2µ corresponds to the learning rate (see Appendix B for the full derivation).
7.3.2
KL Regularization of Trajectories
The ∥δ∥2 term in L implicitly expresses the underlying assumption that the best measure of distance
between parameters θ and θ + δ is the Euclidean distance. In a continual learning setting however,
the quantity we are most interested in preserving is the probability distribution that θ models on
the source task S:
pS
θ (x, y) = pθ(y | x)pS(x)
(7.4)
Therefore, a more natural distance between θ and θ + δ is the Kullback-Leibler divergence
KL(pS
θ ∥pS
θ+δ) (Kullback & Leibler, 1951). For preventing catastrophic forgetting along the opti-
mization path, we incorporate incorporate this KL term into the Lagrangian L itself:
L(δ) = δ⊺∇θLT + µ∥δ∥2 + νKL(pS
θ ∥pS
θ+δ)
(7.5)
Doing so means that the optimization trajectory will tend to follow the direction that changes
the distribution of the model the least. Notably, this is not a function of the previous objective LS,
so knowledge of the original training objective is not necessary during continual learning (which is
typically the case in path-integral based regularization methods (Zenke et al., 2017) or experience
replay (Chaudhry et al., 2019)).
99
7.3.3
Co-natural Gradient Optimization
Presuming that δ is small, we can perform a second order Taylor approximation of the function δ 7→
KL(pS
θ ∥pS
θ+δ) around 0. Considering that both the zeroeth and ﬁrst order terms are null because 0 is
a global minimizer of δ 7→KL(pS
θ ∥pS
θ+δ), this reduces the Lagrangian to a quadratic optimization
problem (we refer the reader to Pascanu & Bengio (2013) for a more detailed derivation.):
L(δ) = δ⊺∇θLT + µ∥δ∥2 + 1
2νδ⊺F S
θ δ
(7.6)
where F S
θ is the Hessian of the KL divergence around θ. A crucial, well-known property of
this matrix is that it coincides with the Fisher information matrix2 Ex,y∼pθ[(∇log pS
θ )(∇log pS
θ )T]
(the expectation being taken over the model’s distribution pθ; see Appendix B for details). This is
appealing from a computational perspective because the Fisher can be computed by means of ﬁrst
order derivatives only.
Minimizing for δ yields the following optimal update:
δ∗= −λ
h
F S
θ + αI
i−1 ∇θLT
(7.7)
where coefﬁcients µ and ν are folded into two hyper-parameters: the learning rate λ and a
damping coefﬁcient α (the step-by-step derivation can be found in Appendix B). In practice, espe-
cially with low damping coefﬁcients, it is common to obtain updates that are too large (typically
when some parameters have no effect on the KL divergence). To address this, we re-normalize δ∗
to have the same norm as the original gradient, ∥∇LT∥. Moreover, to improve numerical stabil-
ity in the case of degenerate Fisher matrices, we add a very small damping term of 10−12 to all
experiments.
For computational reasons, we will make 3 key practical approximations to the Fisher:
1. F S
θ ≈F S
θS: we maintain the Fisher computed at θS, instead of recomputing FS at every
step of training. This relieves us of the computational burden of updating the Fisher for
every new value of θ. This approximation (shared by previous work, e.g. Kirkpatrick et al.
(2017);Chaudhry et al. (2018a)) is only valid insofar as θS and θ are close. Empirically we
observe that this still leads to good results.
2. F S is diagonal: this is a common approximation in practice with two appealing properties.
First, this makes it realistic to store the d diagonal Fisher coefﬁcients in memory. Second,
2Hence our use of the letter F to designate the Hessian
100
this trivializes the inverse operation (simply invert the diagonal elements).
3. Empirical Fisher: this common approximation replaces the expectation under the model’s
distribution by the expected log-likelihood of the true distribution: Ex,y∼pS[(∇log pS
θ )(∇log pS
θ )T]
(mind the subscript). This is particularly useful in tasks with a large or unbounded number of
classes (e.g. structured prediction), where summing over all possible outputs is intractable.
We can then compute the diagonal of the empirical Fisher using Monte Carlo sampling:
1
N
PN
i=1[∇log pS
θ (yi | xi)]2 with (xi, yi) sampled from DS (we use N = 1000 for all experi-
ments).
This formulation bears many similarities with the natural gradient from Amari (1997), which
also uses the KL divergence as a metric for choosing the optimal update δ∗in gradient descent.
There is a however a crucial difference, both in execution and purpose: where the natural gradient
uses knowledge of the curvature of the KL divergence of DT to speed-up convergence, our pro-
posed method leverages the curvature of the KL divergence on DS to slow-down divergence from
pS
θS. To highlight the resemblance and complementarity between these two concepts, we refer to
the new update as the co-natural gradient.
7.3.4
Beyond Two Tasks
In a continual learning scenario, we are confronted with a large number of tasks T1 . . . Tn presented
in sequential order. When learning Tn, we can change the Lagrangian L from 7.5 to incorporate
the constraints for all previous tasks T1 . . . Tn−1:
L(δ) = δ⊺∇θLTn + µ∥δ∥2 +
n−1
X
i=1
νiKL(pTi
θ ∥pTi
θ+δ)
(7.8)
This in turn changes the Fisher in Eq. 7.8 to ˜Fn−1 := 1
2
Pn−1
i=1 νiF Ti. The choice of the coefﬁ-
cients νi is crucial. Setting all νi to the same value, i.e. assigning the same importance to all tasks
is suboptimal for a few reasons. First and foremost, it is unreasonable to expect of a model with
ﬁnite capacity to remember an unbounded number of tasks (as tasks “ﬁll-up” the model capacity,
˜Fn−1 is likely to become more “homogeneous”). Second, as training progresses and θ changes,
our approximation that F Ti
θ
≈F Ti
θTi is less and less likely to hold.
We address this issue in the same fashion as Schwarz et al. (2018), by keeping a rolling expo-
101
Table 7.1: Average accuracies and forgetting after all tasks have been learnt, with and without the
co-natural gradient. Results are reported in percentages (± the standard deviation over 5 re-runs).
Bold print indicates statistically signiﬁcant difference between standard and co-natural (p < 0.05).
(a) Split CIFAR
Finetuning
EWC
ER
Average accuracy ↑
Standard
31.56 ±2.11
50.63 ±2.30
59.30 ±0.92
Co-natural
55.97 ±1.48
54.81 ±2.06
64.72 ±0.85
Forgetting ↓
Standard
35.48 ±2.46
11.56 ±1.93
9.20 ±0.99
Co-natural
5.04 ±1.24
4.77 ±1.11
2.52 ±0.58
(b) Omniglot
Finetuning
EWC
ER
Average accuracy ↑
20.21 ±3.97
71.16 ±0.51
70.41 ±3.05
67.84 ±4.85
67.39 ±1.45
78.04 ±1.79
Forgetting ↓
73.52 ±3.80
22.27 ±0.76
12.60 ±2.76
12.09 ±4.69
8.61 ±1.93
4.95 ±0.39
(c) MiniImageNet
Finetuning
EWC
ER
Average accuracy ↑
Standard
35.36 ±1.75
62.19 ±1.49
65.93 ±0.49
Co-natural
63.91 ±1.54
63.89 ±1.11
71.00 ±0.67
Forgetting ↓
Standard
42.08 ±1.56
6.98 ±1.65
12.57 ±0.61
Co-natural
8.86 ±2.03
6.96 ±1.28
4.72 ±0.89
(d) Text Classiﬁcation
Finetuning
EWC
ER
Average accuracy ↑
62.13 ±2.90
67.79 ±1.18
73.57 ±0.42
68.74 ±1.49
68.07 ±1.30
69.35 ±1.45
Forgetting ↓
13.79 ±2.84
0.75 ±0.39
2.16 ±0.23
0.73 ±0.18
0.50 ±0.37
0.50 ±0.25
nential average of the Fisher matrices:
˜F γ
n = γFTn + (1 −γ) ˜F γ
n−1
(7.9)
In this case, previous tasks are gracefully forgotten at an exponential rate controlled by γ. We
account for the damping α term in Eq. 7.7 by setting ˜F0 :=
α
γ I. In preliminary experiments,
we have found γ = 0.9 to yield consistently good results, and use this value in all presented
experiments.
7.4
Continual Learning Experiment Setting
7.4.1
Setup, Evaluation and Baselines
To examine our hypothesis that controlling the optimization trajectory with the co-natural gradient
reduces catastrophic forgetting, we follow the experimental procedure from Chaudhry et al. (2019):
102
given a collection of tasks, we create a “validation set” of 3 tasks used to select the best hyper-
parameters, and keep the remaining tasks for evaluation. This split is chosen at random and kept
the same across all experiments. In most settings, the nature and possibly the number of classes
changes from task to task. We account for this by training a separate “task head” for each task: an
afﬁne transform projecting the features onto the number of classes, followed by a softmax layer.
We apply continual learning only to the remaining, “feature-extraction” part of the model.
We report results using two common metrics for continual learning: average accuracy, the
accuracy at the end of training averaged over all tasks, and forgetting. Forgetting is deﬁned in
Chaudhry et al. (2018a) as the difference in performance on a task between the current model and
the best performing model on this task. Formally if AT
t represents the accuracy on task T at step t
of training, the forgetting F T
t at step t is deﬁned as F T
t = maxτ<t AT
τ −AT
t . Low forgetting means
that the model tend to keep the same level of performance on a task it has previously learned.
We implement the proposed co-natural update rule on top of 3 baselines:
• Finetuning: Simply train the model on the task at hand, without any form of regularization.
• EWC: Proposed by Kirkpatrick et al. (2017), it is a simple but effective quadratic regulariza-
tion approach. While neither the most recent nor sophisticate regularization technique, it is
a natural baseline for us to compare to in that it also consists in a Fisher-based penalty — al-
beit in the loss function instead of the optimization dynamics. We also use the rolling Fisher
described in Section 7.3.4, making our EWC baseline equivalent to the superior online EWC
introduced by Schwarz et al. (2018).
• ER: Experience replay with a ﬁxed sized episodic memory proposed by Chaudhry et al.
(2019). While not directly comparable to EWC in that it presupposes access to data from
previous tasks, ER is a simple approach that boasts the best performances on a variety of
benchmarks (Chaudhry et al., 2019). In all experiments, we use a memory of size 1,000
populated with reservoir sampling.
Training proceeds as follows: we perform exhaustive search on all possible hyper-parameter
conﬁgurations using the validation tasks. Every conﬁguration is reran 5 times (3 for text classiﬁ-
cation) with a different random seed and assigned a score based on the average task score at the
end of training (averaged over reruns). We then evaluate the best hyper-parameters by continual
training on the evaluation tasks. Results are reported over 5 random restarts, and we control for
statistical signiﬁcance using a paired t-test (we pair together runs with the same task ordering). For
all experiments we train with plain stochastic gradient descent.
103
0
10
20
30
40
(a) Finetuning
0
10
20
30
40
(b) EWC
0
10
20
30
40
(c) ER
0
10
20
30
40
(d) Co-natural Finetuning
Figure 7.2: Evolution of task performance over the course of continual learning on one ordering
of Omniglot. For visibility we only show accuracies for every ﬁfth task. The rectangular shaded
regions delineate the period during which each task is being trained upon; with the exception of
ER, this is the only period the model has access to the data for this task.
7.4.2
Datasets
We use the four following task suites in our experiments:
Split CIFAR
The CIFAR100 dataset, split into 20 independent 5-way classiﬁcation tasks with 2500 training
examples and 500 test examples each. This split, performed at random, is kept the same across all
104
experiments, only the order of these tasks is changed. Following Chaudhry et al. (2018b), we use
a smaller version of the ResNet architecture (He et al., 2016) train on each task for 1 epoch with
batch size 10.
Omniglot
The Omniglot dataset (Lake et al., 2015) consists of 50 independent character recognition datasets
on different alphabet. We adopt the setting of Schwarz et al. (2018) and consider each alphabet
as a separate task, and split each task such that every character is present 12, 4 and 4 times in the
training, validation and test set respectively (out of the 20 images for each character).3
On this dataset we use the same small CNN architecture as Schwarz et al. (2018). We augment
the training data by randomly shifting and rotating images and train on each task for 2500 steps
(120 to 417 epochs depending on the alphabet) with batch size 32. We ignore the validation data
and simply evaluate on the test set at the end of training.
Split MiniImageNet
The MiniImageNet dataset (a subset of the popular ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) dataset4; Vinyals
et al. (2016)). We split the dataset into 20 disjoint 5-way classiﬁcation tasks, similarly to Split
CIFAR, and use the same smaller ResNet. We train on each task for 500 steps with batch size 32
(= 6.4 epochs). We ignore the validation data and simply evaluate on the test set at the end of
training.
Text Classiﬁcation
The most recent work on continual learning of language tasks (de Masson d’Autume et al., 2019)
relies on a relatively small set of tasks (5 classiﬁcation tasks from Zhang et al. (2015)). This
small number of tasks is not amenable to our experimental setup described above, where 3 tasks
are reserved for validation. Therefore we assemble a larger collection of text classiﬁcation datasets
from three sources: the GLUE benchmark (Wang et al., 2019b), the SuperGLUE benchmark (Wang
et al., 2019a) and the text classiﬁcation datasets used in de Masson d’Autume et al. (2019). To keep
3Note that this is a different setting than the usual meta-learning scenario that Omniglot is used for.
4Similarly to Omniglot, MiniImageNet was originally intended as a meta-learning benchmark and therefore its stan-
dard train/validation/test split consists of disjoint classes. We perform a custom transversal split so that the dataset
can be used as a standard 100-way classiﬁcation task. The accuracies reported here are not to be compared with the
meta-learning literature.
105
things relatively simple, we only keep tasks that 1. are single sentence or sentence pair classiﬁcation
tasks and 2. have more than 1000 training examples. Speciﬁcally, we use the following tasks from
each dataset (reported with the training data size):
• GLUE
– CoLA (Warstadt et al., 2018): 8.6K
– MultiNLI (Williams et al., 2018): 392.7K
– MRPC (Dolan & Brockett, 2005): 3.7K
– QNLI (Rajpurkar et al., 2016): 108.4K
– QQP (Iyer et al., 2017): 363.8K
– RTE (Dagan et al., 2005; Haim et al., 2006; Giampiccolo et al., 2007; Bentivogli et al.,
2009): 2.5K
– SST-2 (Socher et al., 2013): 67.3K
• SuperGLUE
– BoolQ (Clark et al., 2019): 9.4K
• de Masson d’Autume et al. (2019)
– AG News (Gulli, 2005) (115.0K)
– Amazon Reviews Full (McAuley & Leskovec, 2013) (115.0K)
– DBPedia (Lehmann et al., 2015) (115.0K)
– Yahoo Answers (Zhang et al., 2015) (115.0K)
– Yelp Reviews Full (Yelp, 2015) (115.0K)
Note that the RTE dataset from SuperGLUE also satisﬁes our task type and dataset size con-
straint, however according to Wang et al. (2019a) it is an exact duplicate of GLUE’s RTE dataset,
therefore we don’t include it. de Masson d’Autume et al. (2019) performed some mild preprocess-
ing and subsampling of the datasets in Zhang et al. (2015), however they did not release the ﬁnal
data. We perform a similar preprocessing step: for datasets where each sample consists in several
pieces of text (typically review title and body in the Amazon and Yelp datasets), we concatenate all
106
into one utterance, joined with a period and a space (“.
”). We subsample the datasets to 115K
training samples, 5K validation samples and 7.6K test samples.
We randomly select three out of these 13 tasks to serve as the validation split upon which
to perform hyper-parameter search, namely: BoolQ, MRPC and SST-2. Since test sets are not
available for the GLUE and SuperGLUE benchmark, we compute the ﬁnal scores on the validation
datasets. Note that in all our experiments, validation data is not used during training, therefore
there is no leakage of the ultimate evaluation dataset in the training procedure
Instructions to download and code to preprocess the data will be made available at https://
github.com/pmichel31415/translate/tree/paul/pytorch_translate/research/
adversarial/experiments to facilitate reproduction of our results and future work on con-
tinual learning for text classiﬁcation. Following recent practice in text classiﬁcation, we use a large
model that has already been pre-trained in an unsupervised fashion (speciﬁcally bert-base-uncased5
from Devlin et al. (2018)), and ﬁne-tune the model on the supervised classiﬁcation tasks. We train
on each task for 1000 steps with batch size 16 (from 7 to < 1 epochs due to the large variance in
dataset sizes).
7.4.3
Grid-search Parameters
For each all image-related tasks, we perform grid-search over the following parameter values:
• Learning rate (all methods): 0.1, 0.03, 0.01
• EWC regularization strength (EWC, Co-natural EWC): 0.5, 1, 5
• Fisher damping coefﬁcient (Co-natural ﬁnetuning, Co-natural EWC, Co-natural ER): 0, 1,
0.1
For text classiﬁcation with BERT speciﬁcally, preliminary experiments showed that all meth-
ods beneﬁtted from lower learning rate as well as lower regularization (likely due to the fact that
optimization is starting from a pretrained model). We therefore use the following values:
• Learning rate (all methods): 0.05, 0.01, 0.005
• EWC regularization strength (EWC, Co-natural EWC): 0.5, 0.1, 0.05
5We use the open-source implementation from Wolf et al. (2019) with the default conﬁguration.
107
• Fisher damping coefﬁcient (Co-natural ﬁnetuning, Co-natural EWC, Co-natural ER): 1, 10,
100
For ER, we simply set the replay batch size to the same value as standard training (10 and
32 for Split CIFAR and Omniglot respectively). Note that whenever applicable, we re-normalize
the diagonal Fisher so that the sum of its weights is equal to the number of parameters in the
model. This is so that the hyper-parameter choice is less dependent on the size of the model. In
particular this means that the magnitude of each diagonal element is much bigger, which is why we
do grid-search over smaller regularization parameters for EWC than is common in the literature.
7.5
Continual Learning Results
7.5.1
The Co-natural Gradient Helps Prevent Forgetting
The upper half of Tables 7.1a, 7.1b, 7.1c and 7.1d reports the average accuracy of all the tasks at the
end of training (higher is better). We observe that the co-natural gradient always improves greatly
over simple ﬁnetuning, and occasionally over EWC and ER. We note that simple co-natural ﬁne-
tuning (without any other form of regularization) sometimes matches or exceeds the performance
of EWC even though it requires strictly fewer resources (there is no need to store the previous
parameters as in EWC, or data in ER).
Even more appreciable is the effect of the co-natural trajectories on forgetting, as shown in
the lower half of Table 7.1. As evidenced by the results in the lowest rows, using the co-natural
gradient on top of ﬁnetuning and ER systematically results in large drops in forgetting across
all datasets. With EWC, the conclusion is more nuanced. While the co-natural gradient never
increases forgetting, the effect is not always statistically signiﬁcant.
To get a qualitative assessment of the learning trajectories that yield such results, we visualize
the accuracy curves of 10 out of the 47 evaluation tasks of Omniglot in Figure 7.2. We observe that
previous approaches do poorly at keeping stable levels of performance over a long period of time
(especially for tasks learned early in training), a problem that is largely alleviated by the co-natural
preconditioning. This seems to come at the cost of more intransigence (Chaudhry et al., 2018a),
i.e. some of the later tasks are not being learnt properly. In models of ﬁxed capacity, there is a
natural trade-off between intransigence and forgetting (see also the “stability-plasticity” dilemma
in neuroscience Grossberg (1982)). Our results position the co-natural gradient as a strong low-
forgetting/moderate intransigence basis for future work.
108
7.5.2
Sensitivity to Damping
The main hyper-parameter for the co-natural gradient is the damping parameter α from Eq. 7.7.
In our previous experiments, the value of α is chosen according to grid search on a small number
of tasks. While this is a realistic setting for practical applications, in this section we perform a
smaller, targeted experiment to examine the effect of α on catastrophic forgetting.
We focus on the 17 evaluation tasks of the Split CIFAR dataset and set the learning rate to 0.1.
We observe how much the model “forgets” about the ﬁrst task it has observed after training on all
others. Speciﬁcally, we train on the ﬁrst task, compute its Fisher F1, and then proceed to train on
the 16 remaining tasks with the co-natural gradient using F1 +α (in particular we do not regularize
for the other tasks). We observe how the value of alpha affects the ﬁnal forgetting of the ﬁrst task
at the end of training, as well as the model’s ability to learn new tasks (sometimes referred to as
“intransigence” in the literature Chaudhry et al. (2018a)). As a measure of the latter, we report the
maximum accuracy achieved by the model averaged over the 16 remaining tasks.
We evaluate values of α from 10−7 to 102 (following a geometric progression), as well as the
two extremal values α = 0 (“pure” co-natural gradient6) and α = ∞(simple ﬁnetuning). All
results are averaged over 10 random restarts (with different model initialization and task order).
We observe in Figure 7.3a that forgetting monotonically increases with the damping coefﬁ-
cient. Similarly, Figure 7.3b shows how increasing α results in lower intransigence. While these
two observations are expected, it is interesting to note the existence of a “sweet spot” around
α ∈[10−5, 10−4] where damped co-natural gradient is signiﬁcantly less intransigent than the un-
damped co-natural gradient while simultaneously not being signiﬁcantly less robust to forgetting
(all hypotheses are tested for with p < 0.05).
7.6
Low-Resource Adaptation Experiments
In this section we take a closer look at the speciﬁc case of adapting a model from a single task to
another, when we only have access to a minimal amount of data in the target task. In this case,
controlling the learning trajectory is particularly important because the model is being trained on
an unreliable sample of the true distribution of the target task, and we have to rely on early-stopping
to prevent overﬁtting. We show that using the co-natural gradient during adaptation helps both at
preserving source task performance and reach higher overall target task performance.
6As mentioned in Section 7.3, we do actually add a small damping term ε = 10−12 to all experiments.
109
10
5
10
2
101
0
10
20
30
40
Forgetting
=
= 10
7
102
= 0
(a) Forgetting
10
5
10
2
101
50
55
60
65
70
Other tasks best acc.
=
= 10
7
102
= 0
(b) Intransigence
Figure 7.3: Effect of damping on forgetting and intransigence. The horizontal axis (measuring
α) follows a logarithmic scale. The width of the bands on each side of the curves represent the
standard deviation over the 10 re-runs.
7.6.1
Experimental Setting
We perform experiments on two different scenarios:
Image classiﬁcation
We take MiniImagenet as a source task and CUB (a 200-way birds species
classiﬁcation dataset; Welinder et al. (2010)) as a target task. To guarantee a strong base model
despite the small size of MiniImageNet, we start off from a ResNet18 model (He et al., 2016)
pretrained on the full ImageNet, which we retroﬁt to MiniImageNet by replacing the last fully
connected layer with a separate linear layer regressed over the MiniImageNet training data. To
simulate a low-resource setting, we sub-sample the CUB training set to 200 images (≈1 per
class). Scores for these tasks are reported in terms of accuracy.
Machine translation
We consider adaptation of an English to French model trained on WMT15
(a dataset of parallel sentences crawled from parliamentary proceedings, news commentary and
web page crawls; Bojar et al. (2015)) to MTNT (a dataset of Reddit comments; Michel & Neubig
(2018a)). Our model is a Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) pretrained on WMT15. Similarly
to CUB, we simulate a low-resource setting by taking a sub-sample of 1000 sentence pairs as a
110
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
CUB accuracy
75.0
77.5
80.0
82.5
85.0
87.5
90.0
92.5
MiniImagenet accuracy
Base model score
Finetuning
EWC
Co-natural finetuning
Co-natural EWC
(a) MiniImageNet to CUB adaptation
30.8
31.0
31.2
31.4
31.6
31.8
32.0
32.2
32.4
MTNT BLEU
37.6
37.8
38.0
38.2
38.4
38.6
38.8
39.0
39.2
newstest2014 BLEU
Base model score
Finetuning
Co-natural finetuning
EWC
Co-natural EWC
(b) WMT to MTNT ﬁne-tuning
Figure 7.4: Low-resource adaptation results. The source (resp. target) task performance is repre-
sented on the vertical (resp. horizontal) axis. Pareto optimal conﬁgurations for each method are
highlighted and the frontier is represented with dashed lines. The solid gray lines indicate the score
of the original model trained on the source task.
training set. Scores for these two datasets are reported in terms of BLEU score (Papineni et al.,
2002).7
Here we do not allow any access to data in the source task when training on the target task. We
compare four methods Finetuning (our baseline), Co-natural ﬁnetuning, EWC (which has been
proven effective for domain adaptation, see Thompson et al. (2019)) and Co-natural EWC.
Given that different methods might lead to different trade-offs between source and target task
performance, with some variation depending on the hyper-parameters (e.g. learning rate, regular-
ization strength...), we take inspiration from Thompson et al. (2019) and graphically report results
for all hyper-parameter conﬁguration of each method on the 2 dimensional space deﬁned by the
score on source and target tasks8. Additionally, we highlight the Pareto frontier of each method
i.e. the set of conﬁgurations that are not strictly worse than any other conﬁguration for the same
model.
7We use sacrebleu (Post, 2018a) with -tok intl as recommended by Michel & Neubig (2018a).
8For CUB in particular we report the average accuracy of every conﬁguration over 5 runs, each with a different 200-
sized random subset of the data.
111
7.6.2
Results
The adaptation results for both scenarios are reported in Figure 7.4. We ﬁnd that in both cases, the
co-natural gradient not only helps preserving the source task performance, but to some extent it also
allows the model to reach better performance on the target task as well. We take this to corroborate
our starting hypothesis: while introducing a regularizer does help, controlling the optimization
dynamics actively helps counteract overﬁtting to the very small amount of training data, because
the co-natural pre-conditioning makes it harder for stochastic gradient descent to push the model
towards directions that would also hurt the source task.
7.7
Conclusion
We have presented the co-natural gradient, a technique that regularizes the optimization trajectory
of models trained in a continual setting. We have shown that the co-natural gradient stands on
its own as an efﬁcient approach for overcoming catastrophic forgetting, and that it effectively
complements and stabilizes other existing techniques at a minimal cost. We believe that the co-
natural gradient — and more generally, trajectory regularization — can serve as a solid bedrock
for building agents that learn without forgetting.
112
Chapter 8
Conclusion
In this thesis, we have explored ways to mitigate the difﬁculty of learning neural models for nat-
ural language processing when confronted with changes in the data distribution. We presented an
overview of the problem and the current state of the literature, and made contributions along three
core axes: evaluation, robustness and adaptation.
Because benchmarks and evaluation metrics are our compass towards successfully addressing
distributional shift, in Part I we ﬁrst developed a new dataset (MTNT, Chapter 3) for evaluating the
ability of machine translation models (usually trained on news articles or parliamentary proceed-
ings) to handle a shift to the social media domain. This conﬁrmed that common neural architectures
suffer signiﬁcant performance drops when confronted with text data from social media sources. In
Chapter 4, we tackled the distinct, but equally important issue of evaluating adversarial perturba-
tion on textual inputs, with a focus on sequence-to-sequence models. Speciﬁcally, we proposed an
evaluation framework which we validated against human evaluations, and showed its beneﬁts for
the purpose of carrying out effective adversarial training strategies. Collecting datasets and design-
ing evaluation metrics is a time-consuming, often thankless and ultimately sisyphean endeavour:
new models inevitably “overﬁt” to the available benchmarks on which they are evaluated, which
necessitates creating new datasets, new metrics etc...But as our work illustrates, every contribu-
tion helps: for example, our MTNT dataset helped assess the robustness of modern MT models,
and was used as the basis for two subsequent robust machine translation shared task, helping to
drive innovation in that area.
In Part II we focused on the central problem of training models that are robust to distributional
shifts. Our approach took inspiration from existing work in distributionally robust optimization,
wherein models are trained to minimize their expected risk against the most difﬁcult data dis-
113
tribution within a pre-determined family (the “uncertainty set”). In our work we confronted the
difﬁculty of deﬁning this uncertainty set appropriately for practical applications. Our approach
(called Parametric DRO) revolved around modeling the uncertainty set as a parametric family of
generative models (Chapter 5) or likelihood ratios (Chapter 6) to strike a better balance between
the extreme pessimism or the limited expressivity of existing alternatives in the literature. In P-
DRO, a robust classiﬁer learns to minimize its expected loss under a parametric adversary which
is itself trained to model the sub-population on which the classiﬁer performs the worst. We em-
pirically demonstrated that both variants could be used to derive models that were signiﬁcantly
more robust to sub-population shifts compared with relevant baselines. While the work presented
in these two chapters is more recent, we hope that it can serve as a strong foundation towards more
distributionally robust models in NLP.
Finally, due to the inherent limitations of our DRO approach, which anticipates distributional
shifts using only a static dataset, in Part III we turned to the problem of adapting existing models
to new data distributions or tasks. We used ideas from information geometry to derive a gradient
update rule (dubbed the “co-natural gradient”) for mitigating the catastrophic forgetting effect,
where adapting neural models to new tasks or domains causes signiﬁcant drops in performance in
previously learned tasks (Chapter 7). The effectiveness of this method was validated on a diverse
selection of continual-learning benchmarks, as well as a machine translation domain adaptation
problem using our previously proposed MTNT dataset as a test bed.
Beyond the conclusions directly derived from our contributions described above, we identify
two higher level takeaways from our time pursuing research on the speciﬁc topic of distributional
shift. The ﬁrst is that proper evaluation is of paramount importance. This idea has permeated
every chapter of this thesis. Of course, this was the central motivation for the entirety of Part
I, but we have also made a conscious effort to conduct fair and consistent evaluation in chapters
5, 6 and 7. This is particularly important in the specialised sub-areas that are distributionally
robust optimization and continual learning, because due to their cross-sectional nature, they tend to
attract practitioners with diverse research backgrounds. This often results in inconsistent evaluation
standards, which can can hamper progress (Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2020; Farquhar & Gal, 2018).
Our second key takeaway is that, for practical applications of machine learning (such as NLP),
research progress should be guided by, but not limited to what is predicted by theory. This is es-
pecially relevant in the context of deep learning, where theory lags behind the state of the art (Na-
garajan & Kolter, 2019)1. In our work on Parametric DRO in Part II, we experimented with highly
non-convex-concave differentiable games which were not guaranteed to even converge. Further-
1And of course, advancing theory is a worthwhile and crucial pursuit in and of itself.
114
more, we used a number of (sometimes extreme) approximations to make our methods useable in
practical NLP scenarios. Despite this, we found that they outperformed more principled, but per-
haps less ﬂexible baselines from the non-parametric DRO literature. This is not to say that research
should proceed by blindly throwing ideas on the metaphorical wall and “seeing what sticks” (an
inefﬁcient, not to mention computationally unsustainable process). But there is a balance to strike,
and we can achieve signiﬁcant progress by taking inspiration from more conservative lines of work
and porting them over to more applied research areas, without being restrained by mathematical
rigour.
Future Work
During our investigations throughout the course of producing the work described in this thesis,
we have come to identify open questions which we believe would provide fertile ground for future
research. In the next few paragraphs, we elaborate on these possible future directions towards close
the gap between human and machine learning in NLP in the face of distributional shift
In our own work, we have mostly been concerned with “interpolative” versions of distributional
robustness, wherein we assume that our training data contains enough diversity for us to simulate
potential distributional shifts. This setting has its uses, as demonstrated by our positive results in
a variety of realistic benchmarks in Part 2.3. But there is value in considering a more difﬁcult
scenario where we might have to extrapolate and guess at what unseen domains might look like.
While there is some existing work in generating difﬁcult or out-of-domain examples in computer
vision (Yue et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2020), this remains an under-explored area of the literature,
especially when it comes to natural language processing. Leveraging the generative capabilities
of strong parametric adversaries trained with P-DRO to hallucinate unseen, yet difﬁcult examples
could be a viable path to progress in this challenging setting.
With respect to the adaptation aspect, we believe that it is time for the community to move be-
yond the episodic setting commonly considered in continual learning and start tackling the “stream-
ing” setting where the test (or training!) distribution is liable to change continuously over time.
This scenario is more representative of how we as humans interact with our non-stationary envi-
ronment, and it poses exciting new challenges, not only terms of the learning algorithms needed in
such environments, but also with regards to how these same algorithms should be evaluated. How
do “episodic” continual learning algorithm such as the co-natural gradient (Chapter 7) fare against
continuous distribution shift? And can the variety of data distributions observed over time in turn
guide the construction of more accurate uncertainty sets in DRO? These are only some of the many
115
open questions in this so far relatively uncharted research area. While there has been preliminary
work on this general topic very recently (Lazaridou et al., 2021; Hombaiah et al., 2021), there is
still a long road ahead, as it were.
Finally, as large models pre-trained with a language modeling objective have become ever
more prominent in NLP research over the past few years (Radford et al., 2019; Dai et al., 2019;
Raffel et al., 2019), the distinction between domain and task has become blurrier. For example, in
Radford et al. (2019) and Raffel et al. (2019), multiple tasks are reformulated as a single, uniﬁed
language modeling or question answering task. We hypothesize that this trend is only going to
increase because, as its name indicates, natural language is a natural communication protocol for
us to interact with and query our models. With this in mind, we posit that creating models that are
both robust and able to adapt to shift in the data distribution is a critical requirement for developing
artiﬁcial agents that are capable of tackling a variety of tasks in diverse environments. We hope
that the work presented in this thesis towards training models that are better equipped to deal with
distributional shift provides a useful step in this direction.
116
Bibliography
Ahn, H., Lee, D., Cha, S., and Moon, T.
Uncertainty-based continual learning with adaptive
regularization. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS), 2019.
Aljundi, R., Caccia, L., Belilovsky, E., Caccia, M., Charlin, L., and Tuytelaars, T. Online continual
learning with maximally interfered retrieval. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2019a.
Aljundi, R., Lin, M., Goujaud, B., and Bengio, Y. Gradient based sample selection for online
continual learning. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference on Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems (NeurIPS), 2019b.
Alzantot, M., Sharma, Y., Elgohary, A., Ho, B.-J., Srivastava, M., and Chang, K.-W. Generating
natural language adversarial examples. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 2890–2896, 2018.
Amari, S.-i. Neural learning in structured parameter spaces-natural riemannian gradient. In Pro-
ceedings of the 9th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), pp.
127–133, 1997.
Amodei, D., Ananthanarayanan, S., Anubhai, R., Bai, J., Battenberg, E., Case, C., Casper, J.,
Catanzaro, B., Cheng, Q., Chen, G., Chen, J., Chen, J., Chen, Z., Chrzanowski, M., Coates,
A., Diamos, G., Ding, K., Du, N., Elsen, E., Engel, J., Fang, W., Fan, L., Fougner, C., Gao,
L., Gong, C., Hannun, A., Han, T., Johannes, L., Jiang, B., Ju, C., Jun, B., LeGresley, P., Lin,
L., Liu, J., Liu, Y., Li, W., Li, X., Ma, D., Narang, S., Ng, A., Ozair, S., Peng, Y., Prenger,
R., Qian, S., Quan, Z., Raiman, J., Rao, V., Satheesh, S., Seetapun, D., Sengupta, S., Srinet,
K., Sriram, A., Tang, H., Tang, L., Wang, C., Wang, J., Wang, K., Wang, Y., Wang, Z., Wang,
Z., Wu, S., Wei, L., Xiao, B., Xie, W., Xie, Y., Yogatama, D., Yuan, B., Zhan, J., and Zhu,
117
Z. Deep speech 2 : End-to-end speech recognition in english and mandarin. In Proceedings
of the 33rd International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 173–182, 2016. URL
http://proceedings.mlr.press/v48/amodei16.html.
Andreas, J., Rabinovich, M., Jordan, M. I., and Klein, D. On the accuracy of self-normalized log-
linear models. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems (NIPS), pp. 1783–1791, 2015.
Axelrod, A., He, X., and Gao, J. Domain adaptation via pseudo in-domain data selection. In
Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), pp. 355–362, 2011.
Bahdanau, D., Cho, K., and Bengio, Y. Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and
translate. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2014.
Balduzzi, D., Racaniere, S., Martens, J., Foerster, J., Tuyls, K., and Graepel, T. The mechanics of
n-player differentiable games. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML), pp. 354–363, 2018. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/
balduzzi18a/balduzzi18a.pdf.
Baldwin, T., Cook, P., Lui, M., MacKinlay, A., and Wang, L. How noisy social media text, how
diffrnt social media sources?
In Proceedings of the 6th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing (IJCNLP), pp. 356–364, 2013. URL http://www.aclweb.
org/anthology/I13-1041.
Bapna, A. and Firat, O. Simple, scalable adaptation for neural machine translation. In Proceedings
of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2019.
Barrault, L., Biesialska, M., Bojar, O., Costa-jussà, M. R., Federmann, C., Graham, Y., Grund-
kiewicz, R., Haddow, B., Huck, M., Joanis, E., Kocmi, T., Koehn, P., Lo, C.-k., Ljubeši´c, N.,
Monz, C., Morishita, M., Nagata, M., Nakazawa, T., Pal, S., Post, M., and Zampieri, M. Findings
of the 2020 conference on machine translation (WMT20). In Proceedings of the 5th Conference
on Machine Translation (WMT), 2020.
Belinkov, Y. and Bisk, Y.
Synthetic and natural noise both break neural machine translation.
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018a.
118
Belinkov, Y. and Bisk, Y. Synthetic and natural noise both break neural machine translation. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018b.
Ben-David, S., Blitzer, J., Crammer, K., Pereira, F., et al. Analysis of representations for do-
main adaptation. Proceedings of the 20th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems (NIPS), 2007.
Ben-David, S., Blitzer, J., Crammer, K., Kulesza, A., Pereira, F., and Vaughan, J. W. A theory of
learning from different domains. Machine learning, 79(1-2):151–175, 2010.
Ben-Tal, A., Den Hertog, D., De Waegenaere, A., Melenberg, B., and Rennen, G. Robust solutions
of optimization problems affected by uncertain probabilities. Management Science, 59(2):341–
357, 2013.
Bentivogli, L., Clark, P., Dagan, I., and Giampiccolo, D. The ﬁfth pascal recognizing textual
entailment challenge. In TAC, 2009.
Bérard, A., Calapodescu, I., and Roux, C. Naver labs europe’s systems for the wmt19 machine
translation robustness task. In Proceedings of the Fourth Conference on Machine Translation
(Volume 2: Shared Task Papers, Day 1), pp. 526–532, 2019.
Bickel, S., Brückner, M., and Scheffer, T. Discriminative learning under covariate shift. Journal
of Machine Learning Research, 10(Sep):2137–2155, 2009.
Blank, A. and Koch, P. Historical semantics and cognition, volume 13. Walter de Gruyter, 2013.
Blitzer, J. and Pereira, F. Domain adaptation of natural language processing systems. University
of Pennsylvania, pp. 1–106, 2007.
Blodgett, S. L., Green, L., and O’Connor, B. Demographic dialectal variation in social media:
A case study of African-American English.
In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pp. 1119–1130, 2016. URL https:
//www.aclweb.org/anthology/D16-1120.
Blodgett, S. L., Wei, J., and O’Connor, B. A dataset and classiﬁer for recognizing social media
english. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Noisy User-generated Text, pp. 56–61, 2017.
Bloomﬁeld, L. Language. Allen & Unwin, 1933.
119
Bojar, O., Chatterjee, R., Federmann, C., Haddow, B., Huck, M., Hokamp, C., Koehn, P., Lo-
gacheva, V., Monz, C., Negri, M., Post, M., Scarton, C., Specia, L., and Turchi, M. Findings of
the 2015 workshop on statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the 10th Workshop on
Statistical Machine Translation (WMT), pp. 1–46, 2015.
Bojarski, M., Del Testa, D., Dworakowski, D., Firner, B., Flepp, B., Goyal, P., Jackel, L. D.,
Monfort, M., Muller, U., Zhang, J., et al. End to end learning for self-driving cars. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1604.07316, 2016.
Boucher, N., Shumailov, I., Anderson, R., and Papernot, N. Bad characters: Imperceptible nlp
attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09898, 2021.
Cer, D., Diab, M., Agirre, E., Lopez-Gazpio, I., and Specia, L. Semeval-2017 task 1: Semantic
textual similarity multilingual and crosslingual focused evaluation. In Proceedings of the 11th
International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2017), pp. 1–14, 2017.
Cettolo, M., Girardi, C., and Federico, M. Wit3: Web inventory of transcribed and translated talks.
In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Association for Machine Translation
(EAMT), pp. 261–268, 2012.
Cettolo, M., Niehues, J., Stüker, S., Bentivogli, L., Cattoni, R., and Federico, M. The iwslt 2016
evaluation campaign. In Proceedings of the 2016 International Workshop on Spoken Language
Translation (IWSLT), 2016.
Chaudhry, A., Dokania, P. K., Ajanthan, T., and Torr, P. H. Riemannian walk for incremental
learning: Understanding forgetting and intransigence. In Proceedings of the 16th European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 532–547, 2018a.
Chaudhry, A., Ranzato, M., Rohrbach, M., and Elhoseiny, M. Efﬁcient lifelong learning with a-
gem. Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018b.
Chaudhry, A., Rohrbach, M., Elhoseiny, M., Ajanthan, T., Dokania, P. K., Torr, P. H., and Ranzato,
M. Continual learning with tiny episodic memories. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.10486, 2019.
Chen, Y., Diethe, T., and Lawrence, N. Facilitating bayesian continual learning by natural gradients
and stein gradients. In Continual Learning Workshop@ NeurIPS, 2018.
120
Cheng, M., Yi, J., Zhang, H., Chen, P.-Y., and Hsieh, C.-J. Seq2sick: Evaluating the robustness
of sequence-to-sequence models with adversarial examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.01128,
2018a.
Cheng, Y., Xu, W., He, Z., He, W., Wu, H., Sun, M., and Liu, Y. Semi-supervised learning for
neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL), pp. 1965–1974, 2016.
Cheng, Y., Tu, Z., Meng, F., Zhai, J., and Liu, Y. Towards robust neural machine translation.
In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL), 2018b.
Chu, C., Dabre, R., and Kurohashi, S. An empirical comparison of domain adaptation methods for
neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL), pp. 385–391, 2017.
Cissé, M., Bojanowski, P., Grave, E., Dauphin, Y., and Usunier, N. Parseval networks: Improving
robustness to adversarial examples. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
Clark, C., Lee, K., Chang, M.-W., Kwiatkowski, T., Collins, M., and Toutanova, K. BoolQ: Ex-
ploring the surprising difﬁculty of natural yes/no questions. In Proceedings of the 2019 Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT), pp. 2924–2936, 2019.
Cortes, C., Mansour, Y., and Mohri, M. Learning bounds for importance weighting. In Proceedings
of the 23rd Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), volume 10,
pp. 442–450. Citeseer, 2010.
Cover, T. M. Elements of information theory. John Wiley & Sons, 1999.
Crystal, D. Language and the Internet. Cambridge University Press, 2001.
Curi, S., Levy, K. Y., Jegelka, S., and Krause, A.
Adaptive sampling for stochas-
tic
risk-averse
learning.
In
Larochelle,
H.,
Ranzato,
M.,
Hadsell,
R.,
Balcan,
M. F.,
and Lin,
H. (eds.),
Proceedings of the 34th Annual Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 33, pp. 1036–1047. Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
0b6ace9e8971cf36f1782aa982a708db-Paper.pdf.
121
Dagan, I., Glickman, O., and Magnini, B. The pascal recognising textual entailment challenge. In
Machine Learning Challenges Workshop, pp. 177–190. Springer, 2005.
Dai, Z., Yang, Z., Yang, Y., Cohen, W. W., Carbonell, J., Le, Q. V., and Salakhutdinov, R.
Transformer-xl: Attentive language models beyond a ﬁxed-length context.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1901.02860, 2019.
Danet, B. and Herring, S. The Multilingual Internet: Language, Culture, and Communication
Online. Oxford University Press., New York, 2007.
Davidson, T., Warmsley, D., Macy, M., and Weber, I. Automated hate speech detection and the
problem of offensive language. In Proceedings of the 11th International AAAI Conference on
Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM), 2017.
de Masson d’Autume, C., Ruder, S., Kong, L., and Yogatama, D. Episodic memory in lifelong
language learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 13122–13131,
2019.
Delage, E. and Ye, Y. Distributionally robust optimization under moment uncertainty with appli-
cation to data-driven problems. Operations research, 58(3):595–612, 2010.
Deng, J., Dong, W., Socher, R., Li, L.-J., Li, K., and Fei-Fei, L. Imagenet: A large-scale hierar-
chical image database. In Proceedings of the 22nd IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 248–255, 2009.
Denkowski, M. and Lavie, A. Meteor universal: Language speciﬁc translation evaluation for any
target language. In Proceedings of the EACL 2014 Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation,
2014.
Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., and Toutanova, K. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies (NAACL-HLT), 2018.
Dhar, P., Singh, R. V., Peng, K.-C., Wu, Z., and Chellappa, R. Learning without memorizing. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 5138–
5146, 2019.
122
Dixon, L., Li, J., Sorensen, J., Thain, N., and Vasserman, L. Measuring and mitigating unintended
bias in text classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 2018 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and
Society, pp. 67–73, 2018.
Dolan, W. B. and Brockett, C. Automatically constructing a corpus of sentential paraphrases.
In Proceedings of the The 3rd International Workshop on Paraphrasing (IWP), 2005. URL
http://aclweb.org/anthology/I05-5002.
Duchi, J. and Namkoong, H.
Learning models with uniform performance via distributionally
robust optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.08750, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/
pdf/1810.08750.pdf.
Duchi, J., Glynn, P., and Namkoong, H. Statistics of robust optimization: A generalized empirical
likelihood approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.03425, 2016.
Duchi, J., Hashimoto, T., and Namkoong, H. Distributionally robust losses for latent covariate
mixtures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.13982, 2020.
Duchi, J. C., Hashimoto, T., and Namkoong, H. Distributionally robust losses against mixture
covariate shifts. Under revision in Operations Research, 2019.
Dudley, R. M. Real analysis and probability. CRC Press, 2018.
Dupaˇcová, J. The minimax approach to stochastic programming and an illustrative application.
Stochastics: An International Journal of Probability and Stochastic Processes, 20(1):73–88,
1987.
Dupoux, E.
Cognitive science in the era of artiﬁcial intelligence: A roadmap for reverse-
engineering the infant language-learner. Cognition, 173:43–59, 2018.
Dvijotham, K., Gowal, S., Stanforth, R., Arandjelovic, R., O’Donoghue, B., Uesato, J., and Kohli,
P. Training veriﬁed learners with learned veriﬁers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.10265, 2018.
Ebrahimi, J., Lowd, D., and Dou, D. On adversarial examples for character-level neural machine
translation. In COLING, 2018a.
Ebrahimi, J., Rao, A., Lowd, D., and Dou, D. Hotﬂip: White-box adversarial examples for text
classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pp. 31–36, 2018b.
123
Eisenstein, J. What to do about bad language on the internet. In Proceedings of the 2013 Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT), pp. 359–369, 2013. URL http://www.aclweb.
org/anthology/N13-1037.
Elsahar, H. and Gallé, M. To annotate or not? predicting performance drop under domain shift.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), pp. 2163–2173, 2019.
Esfahani, P. M. and Kuhn, D. Data-driven distributionally robust optimization using the wasserstein
metric: Performance guarantees and tractable reformulations. Mathematical Programming, 171
(1):115–166, 2018.
Fan, Y., Lyu, S., Ying, Y., and Hu, B.-G. Learning with average top-k loss. In Proceedings of the
31st Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), pp. 497–505, 2017.
Farquhar, S. and Gal, Y.
Towards robust evaluations of continual learning.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1805.09733, 2018.
Faury, L., Tanielian, U., Dohmatob, E., Smirnova, E., and Vasile, F. Distributionally robust coun-
terfactual risk minimization. In Proceedings of the 34th Meeting of the Association for Advance-
ment of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI), volume 34, pp. 3850–3857, 2020.
Formiga, L. and Fonollosa, J. A. R. Dealing with input noise in statistical machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING), pp.
319–328, 2012. URL http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/C12-2032.
Fortuna, P. and Nunes, S. A survey on automatic detection of hate speech in text. ACM Computing
Surveys (CSUR), 51(4):1–30, 2018.
Founta, A.-M., Djouvas, C., Chatzakou, D., Leontiadis, I., Blackburn, J., Stringhini, G., Vakali,
A., Sirivianos, M., and Kourtellis, N. Large scale crowdsourcing and characterization of twitter
abusive behavior. In Proceedings of the 12th International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and
Social Media (ICWSM), 2018.
Ganin, Y. and Lempitsky, V. Unsupervised domain adaptation by backpropagation. In Proceedings
of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 1180–1189. PMLR,
07–09 Jul 2015. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v37/ganin15.pdf.
124
Gao, R. and Kleywegt, A. J. Distributionally robust stochastic optimization with wasserstein dis-
tance. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.02199, 2016.
Giampiccolo, D., Magnini, B., Dagan, I., and Dolan, B. The third pascal recognizing textual
entailment challenge. In Proceedings of the ACL-PASCAL workshop on textual entailment and
paraphrasing, pp. 1–9. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2007.
Glorot, X., Bordes, A., and Bengio, Y. Domain adaptation for large-scale sentiment classiﬁcation:
A deep learning approach. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML), 2011.
Goodfellow, I., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B., Warde-Farley, D., Ozair, S., Courville, A.,
and Bengio, Y. Generative adversarial nets. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), pp. 2672–2680, 2014a. URL http://
papers.nips.cc/paper/5423-generative-adversarial-nets.pdf.
Goodfellow, I. J., Shlens, J., and Szegedy, C. Explaining and harnessing adversarial examples.
Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2014b.
Goto, I., Chow, K.-P., Lu, B., Sumita, E., and T’sou, B. K.-Y. Overview of the patent machine
translation task at the ntcir-10 workshop. In NII Test Collection for IR Systems, 2013.
Goyal, K., Dyer, C., and Berg-Kirkpatrick, T. An empirical investigation of global and local nor-
malization for recurrent neural sequence models using a continuous relaxation to beam search. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT), pp. 1724–1733, 2019.
Goyal, P., Dollár, P., Girshick, R., Noordhuis, P., Wesolowski, L., Kyrola, A., Tulloch, A., Jia,
Y., and He, K. Accurate, large minibatch sgd: Training imagenet in 1 hour. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1706.02677, 2017.
Greensmith, E., Bartlett, P. L., and Baxter, J. Variance reduction techniques for gradient estimates
in reinforcement learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 5(Nov):1471–1530, 2004.
Grossberg, S. T. Studies of Mind and Brain: Neural Principles of Learning, Perception, Develop-
ment, Cognition, and Motor Control, volume 70. Springer Science & Business Media, 1982.
Grosse, K., Papernot, N., Manoharan, P., Backes, M., and McDaniel, P. Adversarial perturbations
against deep neural networks for malware classiﬁcation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.04435, 2016.
125
Grzega, J. and Schoener, M.
English and general historical lexicology.
Eichstätt-Ingolstadt:
Katholische Universität, 2007.
Gulli, A.
Ag’s corpus of news articles.
http://groups.di.unipi.it/~gulli/AG_
corpus_of_news_articles.html, 2005.
Gulrajani, I. and Lopez-Paz, D. In search of lost domain generalization. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.
Gururangan, S., Swayamdipta, S., Levy, O., Schwartz, R., Bowman, S., and Smith, N. A. Anno-
tation artifacts in natural language inference data. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies (NAACL-HLT), pp. 107–112, 2018.
Gururangan, S., Marasovi´c, A., Swayamdipta, S., Lo, K., Beltagy, I., Downey, D., and Smith, N. A.
Don’t stop pretraining: Adapt language models to domains and tasks. In Proceedings of the 58th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 8342–8360, Online, July
2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.740. URL
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.acl-main.740.
Haim, R. B., Dagan, I., Dolan, B., Ferro, L., Giampiccolo, D., Magnini, B., and Szpektor, I. The
second pascal recognising textual entailment challenge. In Proceedings of the Second PASCAL
Challenges Workshop on Recognising Textual Entailment, 2006.
Hand, D. J. Classiﬁer technology and the illusion of progress. Statistical science, 21(1):1–14,
2006.
Hashimoto, T., Srivastava, M., Namkoong, H., and Liang, P. Fairness without demographics in
repeated loss minimization. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML), pp. 1929–1938. PMLR, 2018.
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Pro-
ceedings of the 29th IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
pp. 770–778, 2016.
Heaﬁeld, K., Pouzyrevsky, I., Clark, J. H., and Koehn, P. Scalable modiﬁed Kneser-Ney language
model estimation. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL), pp. 690–696, 2013. URL https://kheafield.com/papers/
edinburgh/estimate_paper.pdf.
126
Helcl, J., Libovick`y, J., and Popel, M. Cuni system for the wmt19 robustness task. In Proceedings
of the 4th Conference on Machine Translation (WMT), 2019.
Hern,
A.
Facebook
translates
’good
morning’
into
’attack
them’,
lead-
ing
to
arrest.
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/oct/24/facebook-
palestine-israel-translates-good-morning-attack-them-arrest,
2017.
URL
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/oct/24/
facebook-palestine-israel-translates-good-morning-attack-them-arrest.
Accessed: 2020-04-17.
Herring, S. C. Media and language change: Introduction. Journal of Historical Pragmatics, 4(1):
1–17, 2003.
Hershey, J. and Olsen, P. Approximating the kullback leibler divergence between gaussian mix-
ture models. Proceedings of the International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal
Processing (ICASSP), 4:IV–317–IV–320, 2007.
Hochreiter, S. and Schmidhuber, J. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):1735–
1780, 1997.
Hombaiah, S. A., Chen, T., Zhang, M., Bendersky, M., and Najork, M. Dynamic language models
for continuously evolving content. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.06297, 2021.
Hosseini, H., Kannan, S., Zhang, B., and Poovendran, R. Deceiving google’s perspective api built
for detecting toxic comments. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.08138, 2017.
Hovy, D. and Søgaard, A. Tagging performance correlates with author age. In Proceedings of
the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pp. 483–488,
2015. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P15-2079.
Hu, W., Niu, G., Sato, I., and Sugiyama, M. Does distributionally robust supervised learning give
robust classiﬁers? In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML), pp. 2029–2037, 2018. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/hu18a/
hu18a.pdf.
Hu, Z. and Hong, L. J. Kullback-leibler divergence constrained distributionally robust optimiza-
tion. Available at Optimization Online, 2013.
127
Huang, S., Li, Z., Qu, L., and Pan, L. On robustness of neural semantic parsers. In Proceedings
of the 16th European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL), pp.
3333–3342, 2021.
Husain, H. Distributional robustness with ipms and links to regularization and gans. In Proceedings
of the 34th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Isabelle, P., Cherry, C., and Foster, G. A challenge set approach to evaluating machine translation.
In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP), pp. 2486–2496, 2017. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
D17-1263.
Iyer,
S.,
Dandekar,
N.,
and
Csernai,
K.
First
quora
dataset
re-
lease:
Question
pairs.
https://www.quora.com/q/quoradata/
First-Quora-Dataset-Release-Question-Pairs, 2017.
Iyyer, M., Manjunatha, V., Boyd-Graber, J., and Daumé III, H.
Deep unordered composition
rivals syntactic methods for text classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 7th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1681–1691, 2015.
Iyyer, M., Wieting, J., Gimpel, K., and Zettlemoyer, L. Adversarial example generation with
syntactically controlled paraphrase networks. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pp. 1875–1885, 2018.
Jia, R. and Liang, P. Adversarial examples for evaluating reading comprehension systems. In
Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pp. 2021–2031, 2017.
Jia, R., Raghunathan, A., Göksel, K., and Liang, P. Certiﬁed robustness to adversarial word sub-
stitutions. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT), 2019.
Kalchbrenner, N. and Blunsom, P. Recurrent continuous translation models. In Proceedings of
the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp.
1700–1709, 2013.
128
Karpukhin, V., Levy, O., Eisenstein, J., and Ghazvininejad, M. Training on synthetic noise im-
proves robustness to natural noise in machine translation. In Proceedings of the 5th Workshop
on Noisy User-generated Text (W-NUT), pp. 42–47, 2019.
Kashyap, A. R., Hazarika, D., Kan, M.-Y., and Zimmermann, R. Domain divergences: A survey
and empirical analysis. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT),
2021.
Katz, G., Barrett, C., Dill, D. L., Julian, K., and Kochenderfer, M. J. Reluplex: An efﬁcient
smt solver for verifying deep neural networks. In International Conference on Computer Aided
Veriﬁcation, pp. 97–117. Springer, 2017.
Kelly, M. G., Hand, D. J., and Adams, N. M. The impact of changing populations on classiﬁer
performance. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge
discovery and data mining (KDD), 1999.
Khayrallah, H. and Koehn, P. On the impact of various types of noise on neural machine translation.
In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Neural Machine Translation and Generation (WNMT),
pp. 74–83, 2018.
Kifer, D., Ben-David, S., and Gehrke, J. Detecting change in data streams. In Proceedings of the
30th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases, 2004.
Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2014.
Kirkpatrick, J., Pascanu, R., Rabinowitz, N., Veness, J., Desjardins, G., Rusu, A. A., Milan, K.,
Quan, J., Ramalho, T., Grabska-Barwinska, A., et al. Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in
neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114(13):3521–3526, 2017.
Koehn, P., Hoang, H., Birch, A., Callison-Burch, C., Federico, M., Bertoldi, N., Cowan, B., Shen,
W., Moran, C., Zens, R., Dyer, C., Bojar, O., Constantin, A., and Herbst, E. Moses: Open
source toolkit for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pp. 177–180, 2007.
Koh, P. W., Sagawa, S., Marklund, H., Xie, S. M., Zhang, M., Balsubramani, A., Hu, W., Yasunaga,
M., Phillips, R. L., Gao, I., et al. Wilds: A benchmark of in-the-wild distribution shifts. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2012.07421, 2020.
129
Kolter, J. Z. and Wong, E. Provable defenses against adversarial examples via the convex outer
adversarial polytope. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.00851, 2017.
Kong, L., Schneider, N., Swayamdipta, S., Bhatia, A., Dyer, C., and Smith, N. A. A dependency
parser for tweets. In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 1001–1012, 2014. URL http://www.aclweb.org/
anthology/D14-1108.
Kullback, S. and Leibler, R. A. On information and sufﬁciency. The annals of mathematical
statistics, 22(1):79–86, 1951.
Kutuzov, A., Øvrelid, L., Szymanski, T., and Velldal, E. Diachronic word embeddings and se-
mantic shifts: a survey. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics (COLING), 2018.
Lake, B. M., Salakhutdinov, R., and Tenenbaum, J. B. Human-level concept learning through
probabilistic program induction. Science, 350:1332–1338, 2015.
Lample, G., Ballesteros, M., Subramanian, S., Kawakami, K., and Dyer, C.
Neural architec-
tures for named entity recognition. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies
(NAACL-HLT), pp. 260–270, 2016.
Lazaridou, A., Kuncoro, A., Gribovskaya, E., Agrawal, D., Liska, A., Terzi, T., Gimenez, M.,
d’Autume, C. d. M., Ruder, S., Yogatama, D., et al. Pitfalls of static language modelling. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2102.01951, 2021.
Lehmann, J., Isele, R., Jakob, M., Jentzsch, A., Kontokostas, D., Mendes, P. N., Hellmann, S.,
Morsey, M., Van Kleef, P., Auer, S., et al. Dbpedia–a large-scale, multilingual knowledge base
extracted from wikipedia. Semantic Web – Interoperability, Usability, Applicability, 6(2):167–
195, 2015.
Levy, D., Carmon, Y., Duchi, J. C., and Sidford, A. Large-scale methods for distributionally robust
optimization. Proceedings of the 34th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS), 33, 2020.
Li, M., Zhao, Y., Zhang, D., and Zhou, M. Adaptive development data selection for log-linear
model in statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on
Computational Linguistics (COLING), pp. 662–670, 2010.
130
Li, X., Michel, P., Anastasopoulos, A., Belinkov, Y., Durrani, N., Firat, O., Koehn, P., Neubig, G.,
Pino, J., and Sajjad, H. Findings of the ﬁrst shared task on machine translation robustness. In
Proceedings of the 4th Conference on Machine Translation (WMT), pp. 91–102, 2019. URL
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W19-5303.
Li, Z. and Hoiem, D. Learning without forgetting. Proceedings of the 14th European Conference
on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2016.
Lipton, Z. C., Wang, Y.-X., and Smola, A. Detecting and correcting for label shift with black box
predictors. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
2018.
Liu, Z., Luo, P., Wang, X., and Tang, X. Deep learning face attributes in the wild. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), December 2015.
Lopez-Paz, D. and Ranzato, M. Gradient episodic memory for continual learning. In Proceedings
of the 31st Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), pp. 6467–
6476, 2017.
Lui, M. and Baldwin, T. langid.py: An off-the-shelf language identiﬁcation tool. In Proceedings
of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pp. 25–30,
2012. URL http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P12-3005.
Luong, M.-T. and Manning, C. D. Stanford neural machine translation systems for spoken lan-
guage domains. In Proceedings of the 2015 International Workshop on Spoken Language Trans-
lation (IWSLT), 2015.
Luong, T., Pham, H., and Manning, C. D. Effective approaches to attention-based neural machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pp. 1412–1421, 2015.
Ma, X. and Cieri, C. Corpus support for machine translation at ldc. In Language Resources and
Evaluation Conference, 2006.
McAuley, J. and Leskovec, J. Hidden factors and hidden topics: understanding rating dimensions
with review text. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems (RecSys),
pp. 165–172, 2013.
131
McCloskey, M. and Cohen, N. J. Catastrophic interference in connectionist networks: The se-
quential learning problem. In Psychology of learning and motivation, volume 24, pp. 109–165.
Elsevier, 1989.
McCoy, T., Pavlick, E., and Linzen, T. Right for the wrong reasons: Diagnosing syntactic heuristics
in natural language inference. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL), pp. 3428–3448, 2019.
McCulloch, G. Because internet: Understanding the new rules of language. Riverhead Books,
2020.
McCusker, L. X., Gough, P. B., and Bias, R. G. Word recognition inside out and outside in. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 7(3):538, 1981.
Merity, S., Xiong, C., Bradbury, J., and Socher, R. Pointer sentinel mixture models. Proceedings
of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.
Merity, S., Keskar, N. S., and Socher, R. Regularizing and optimizing lstm language models.
Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018.
Miceli Barone, A. V., Haddow, B., Germann, U., and Sennrich, R. Regularization techniques for
ﬁne-tuning in neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 1490–1495, 2017.
Michel, P. and Neubig, G. MTNT: A testbed for machine translation of noisy text. In Proceedings
of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp.
543–553, 2018a.
Michel, P. and Neubig, G. Extreme adaptation for personalized neural machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL),
2018b. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P18-2050.pdf.
Michel, P., Levy, O., and Neubig, G. Are sixteen heads really better than one? In Proceedings of
the 33rd Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2019a.
Michel, P., Li, X., Neubig, G., and Pino, J. On evaluation of adversarial perturbations for sequence-
to-sequence models. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT),
pp. 3103–3114, 2019b. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/N19-1314.
132
Michel, P., Hashimoto, T., and Neubig, G. Modeling the second player in distributionally ro-
bust optimization. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), 2021.
Mikolov, T., Karaﬁát, M., Burget, L., ˇCernock`y, J., and Khudanpur, S. Recurrent neural network
based language model.
In Proceedings of the 11th Annual Conference of the International
Speech Communication Association (InterSpeech), 2010.
Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., and Dean, J. Efﬁcient estimation of word representations
in vector space. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), 2013.
Moore, R. C. and Lewis, W. Intelligent selection of language model training data. In Proceedings
of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pp. 220–
224, 2010.
Moosavi-Dezfooli, S.-M., Fawzi, A., and Frossard, P. Deepfool: A simple and accurate method to
fool deep neural networks. 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pp. 2574–2582, 2016.
Nagarajan, V. and Kolter, J. Z. Uniform convergence may be unable to explain generalization in
deep learning. Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS), 2019.
Naik, A., Ravichander, A., Sadeh, N., Rose, C., and Neubig, G. Stress test evaluation for natural
language inference. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, pp. 2340–2353, 2018.
Neubig, G. The Kyoto free translation task. http://www.phontron.com/kftt, 2011.
Neubig, G., Nakata, Y., and Mori, S. Pointwise prediction for robust, adaptable japanese morpho-
logical analysis. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL), pp. 529–533, 2011.
Neubig, G., Dyer, C., Goldberg, Y., Matthews, A., Ammar, W., Anastasopoulos, A., Ballesteros,
M., Chiang, D., Clothiaux, D., Cohn, T., et al. Dynet: The dynamic neural network toolkit.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.03980, 2017.
133
Neubig, G., Sperber, M., Wang, X., Felix, M., Matthews, A., Padmanabhan, S., Qi, Y., Sachan,
D. S., Arthur, P., Godard, P., Hewitt, J., Riad, R., and Wang, L. XNMT: The extensible neural
machine translation toolkit. In Conference of the Association for Machine Translation in the
Americas (AMTA) Open Source Software Showcase, 2018.
Nguyen, C. V., Li, Y., Bui, T. D., and Turner, R. E. Variational continual learning. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.
Nguyen, V. A., Si, N., and Blanchet, J. Robust bayesian classiﬁcation using an optimistic score
ratio. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2020.
Norouzi, M., Bengio, S., Jaitly, N., Schuster, M., Wu, Y., Schuurmans, D., et al. Reward augmented
maximum likelihood for neural structured prediction. In Proceedings of the 30th Annual Con-
ference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), volume 29, pp. 1723–1731, 2016.
Oren, Y., Sagawa, S., Hashimoto, T., and Liang, P. Distributionally robust language modeling.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP), pp. 4227–4237, 2019. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
D19-1432.
Osborne, M. J. and Rubinstein, A. A Course in Game Theory. The MIT Press, 1994. ISBN
0262150417.
Owoputi, O., O’Connor, B., Dyer, C., Gimpel, K., Schneider, N., and Smith, N. A. Improved part-
of-speech tagging for online conversational text with word clusters. In Proceedings of the 2013
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT), pp. 380–390, 2013. URL https://www.
aclweb.org/anthology/N13-1039.
Papernot, N., McDaniel, P., Swami, A., and Harang, R.
Crafting adversarial input sequences
for recurrent neural networks. In Military Communications Conference, MILCOM 2016-2016
IEEE, pp. 49–54. IEEE, 2016.
Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., and Zhu, W.-J. Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of
machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (ACL), pp. 311–318, 2002.
134
Parisi, G. I., Kemker, R., Part, J. L., Kanan, C., and Wermter, S. Continual lifelong learning with
neural networks: A review. Neural Networks, 2019.
Pascanu, R. and Bengio, Y. Revisiting natural gradient for deep networks. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2013.
Peterson, K. Openmt12 evaluation, 2011.
Popel, M. and Bojar, O. Training tips for the transformer model. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.00247,
2018.
Popovi´c, M. chrf: character n-gram f-score for automatic mt evaluation. In Proceedings of the
Tenth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pp. 392–395, 2015.
Popovi´c, M. chrf deconstructed: beta parameters and n-gram weights. In Proceedings of the First
Conference on Machine Translation: Volume 2, Shared Task Papers, pp. 499–504, 2016. doi:
10.18653/v1/W16-2341.
Post, M. A call for clarity in reporting BLEU scores. In Proceedings of the 3rd Conference on
Machine Translation (WMT), pp. 186–191, 2018a.
Post, M. A call for clarity in reporting bleu scores. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.08771, 2018b.
Press, O. and Wolf, L. Using the output embedding to improve language models. In Proceedings
of the 15th European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL), pp.
157–163, 2017.
Pryzant, R., Chung, Y., Jurafsky, D., and Britz, D. Jesc: Japanese-english subtitle corpus. ArXiv
e-prints, 2017.
Quiñonero-Candela, J., Sugiyama, M., Lawrence, N. D., and Schwaighofer, A. Dataset shift in
machine learning. Mit Press, 2009.
Radford, A., Narasimhan, K., Salimans, T., and Sutskever, I. Improving language understanding
with unsupervised learning. Technical report, Technical report, OpenAI, 2018.
Radford, A., Wu, J., Child, R., Luan, D., Amodei, D., and Sutskever, I. Language models are
unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI Blog, 1:8, 2019.
135
Raffel, C., Shazeer, N., Roberts, A., Lee, K., Narang, S., Matena, M., Zhou, Y., Li, W., and Liu,
P. J. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a uniﬁed text-to-text transformer. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1910.10683, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/1910.10683.pdf.
Raghunathan, A., Steinhardt, J., and Liang, P. Certiﬁed defenses against adversarial examples. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018.
Rahimian, H. and Mehrotra, S. Distributionally Robust Optimization: A Review. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.05659, 2019.
Rahman, J. The n word: Its history and use in the african american community. Journal of English
Linguistics, 40(2):137–171, 2012.
Rai, P., Saha, A., Daumé III, H., and Venkatasubramanian, S. Domain adaptation meets active
learning. In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Active Learning for Natural
Language Processing, 2010.
Rajpurkar, P., Zhang, J., Lopyrev, K., and Liang, P. SQuAD: 100,000+ questions for machine
comprehension of text. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 2383–2392, 2016.
Rajpurkar,
P.,
Jia,
R.,
and
Liang,
P.
Squad
2.0
benchmark
leaderboard.
https://rajpurkar.github.io/SQuAD-explorer/, 2020. URL https://rajpurkar.github.
io/SQuAD-explorer/. Accessed: 2020-04-16.
Ratcliff, R. Connectionist models of recognition memory: constraints imposed by learning and
forgetting functions. Psychological review, 97(2):285, 1990.
Rebufﬁ, S.-A., Kolesnikov, A., Sperl, G., and Lampert, C. H. icarl: Incremental classiﬁer and
representation learning. In Proceedings of the 30th IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 2001–2010, 2017.
Reddy, S. and Knight, K. Obfuscating gender in social media writing. In Proceedings of the First
Workshop on NLP and Computational Social Science. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 2016.
Ribeiro, M. T., Singh, S., and Guestrin, C. Semantically equivalent adversarial rules for debugging
nlp models. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 856–865, 2018.
136
Ritter, A., Clark, S., Etzioni, O., et al. Named entity recognition in tweets: an experimental study.
In Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), pp. 1524–1534. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2011.
Rockafellar, R. T., Uryasev, S., et al. Optimization of conditional value-at-risk. Journal of risk, 2:
21–42, 2000.
Rudolph, M. and Blei, D. Dynamic embeddings for language evolution. In Proceedings of the
27th International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW), 2018.
Rusu, A. A., Rabinowitz, N. C., Desjardins, G., Soyer, H., Kirkpatrick, J., Kavukcuoglu, K.,
Pascanu, R., and Hadsell, R. Progressive neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.04671,
2016.
Sagawa, S., Koh, P. W., Hashimoto, T. B., and Liang, P. Distributionally robust neural networks for
group shifts: On the importance of regularization for worst-case generalization. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.
URL https:
//arxiv.org/pdf/1911.08731.pdf.
Sakaguchi, K., Duh, K., Post, M., and Van Durme, B. Robsut wrod reocginiton via semi-character
recurrent neural network. In Proceedings of the 31st Meeting of the Association for Advancement
of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI), pp. 3281–3287, 2017.
Saks, S. Theory of the integral monograﬁe matematyczne. Vol. VII., Warszawa-Lwow, 1937.
Samanta, S. and Mehta, S.
Towards crafting text adversarial samples.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.02812, 2017.
Sanh, V., Debut, L., Chaumond, J., and Wolf, T. Distilbert, a distilled version of bert: smaller,
faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01108, 2019.
Sap, M., Card, D., Gabriel, S., Choi, Y., and Smith, N. A. The risk of racial bias in hate speech
detection. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (ACL), pp. 1668–1678, 2019. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
P19-1163.
Scarf, H. E. A Min-Max Solution of an Inventory Problem. RAND Corporation, Santa Monica,
CA, 1957.
137
Schmidt, A. and Wiegand, M. A survey on hate speech detection using natural language pro-
cessing.
In Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Natural Language Process-
ing for Social Media (SocialNLP), pp. 1–10, 2017. URL https://www.aclweb.org/
anthology/W17-1101.
Schwarz, J., Czarnecki, W., Luketina, J., Grabska-Barwinska, A., Teh, Y. W., Pascanu, R., and
Hadsell, R. Progress & compress: A scalable framework for continual learning. In Proceedings
of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 4535–4544, 2018.
Sennrich, R.
How grammatical is character-level neural machine translation?
assessing mt
quality with contrastive translation pairs.
In Proceedings of the 15th European Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL), pp. 376–382, 2017.
URL http:
//www.aclweb.org/anthology/E17-2060.
Sennrich, R., Haddow, B., and Birch, A. Neural machine translation of rare words with sub-
word units. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL), pp. 1715–1725, 2016. URL http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
P16-1162.
Shi, Z., Zhang, H., Chang, K.-W., Huang, M., and Hsieh, C.-J. Robustness veriﬁcation for trans-
formers. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
2020.
Shimodaira, H.
Improving predictive inference under covariate shift by weighting the log-
likelihood function. Journal of statistical planning and inference, 90(2):227–244, 2000.
Singh, S. P., Kearns, M. J., and Mansour, Y. Nash convergence of gradient dynamics in general-
sum games. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, UAI
’00, pp. 541–548, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2000. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc. ISBN
1558607099.
Sinha, A., Namkoong, H., and Duchi, J. Certifying some distributional robustness with principled
adversarial training. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions (ICLR), 2018.
Socher, R., Perelygin, A., Wu, J., Chuang, J., Manning, C. D., Ng, A., and Potts, C. Recursive
deep models for semantic compositionality over a sentiment treebank. In Proceedings of the
138
2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 1631–
1642, 2013.
Specia, L., Li, Z., Pino, J., Chaudhary, V., Guzmán, F., Neubig, G., Durrani, N., Belinkov, Y.,
Koehn, P., Sajjad, H., et al.
Findings of the wmt 2020 shared task on machine translation
robustness. In Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Machine Translation (WMT), 2020.
Sperber, M., Niehues, J., and Waibel, A. Toward robust neural machine translation for noisy input
sequences. In Proceedings of the 2017 International Workshop on Spoken Language Translation
(IWSLT), pp. 90–96, 2017. URL http://workshop2017.iwslt.org/downloads/
iwslt2017_proceeding_v2.pdf.
Srivastava, N., Hinton, G. E., Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and Salakhutdinov, R. Dropout: a
simple way to prevent neural networks from overﬁtting. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
15(1):1929–1958, 2014.
Storkey, A. When training and test sets are different: characterizing learning transfer. Dataset shift
in machine learning, pp. 3–28, 2009.
Sugiyama, M. and Müller, K.-R. Input-dependent estimation of generalization error under covari-
ate shift. Statistics & Decisions, 23(4/2005):249–279, 2005.
Sundermeyer, M., Schlüter, R., and Ney, H. Lstm neural networks for language modeling. In Pro-
ceedings of the 13th Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication Association
(InterSpeech), 2012.
Sutskever, I., Vinyals, O., and Le, Q. V. Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks. In
Proceedings of the 28th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS),
pp. 3104–3112, 2014.
Szegedy, C., Zaremba, W., Sutskever, I., Bruna, J., Erhan, D., Goodfellow, I. J., and Fergus, R.
Intriguing properties of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6199, 2013.
Szegedy, C., Vanhoucke, V., Ioffe, S., Shlens, J., and Wojna, Z. Rethinking the inception architec-
ture for computer vision. 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pp. 2818–2826, 2016.
139
Tan, C., Niculae, V., Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, C., and Lee, L. Winning arguments: Interaction
dynamics and persuasion strategies in good-faith online discussions. In Proceedings of the 25th
International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW), pp. 613–624. International World Wide
Web Conferences Steering Committee, 2016.
Thompson, B., Gwinnup, J., Khayrallah, H., Duh, K., and Koehn, P. Overcoming catastrophic
forgetting during domain adaptation of neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the 2019
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT), 2019.
Tseran, H., Khan, M. E., Harada, T., and Bui, T. D. Natural variational continual learning. In
Continual Learning Workshop@ NeurIPS, 2018.
Utama, P. A., Moosavi, N., and Gurevych, I. Towards debiasing nlu models from unknown biases.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.12303, 2020.
Vaibhav, V., Singh, S., Stewart, C., and Neubig, G. Improving robustness of machine translation
with synthetic noise. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT),
2019.
Van Erven, T. and Harremos, P. Rényi divergence and kullback-leibler divergence. IEEE Transac-
tions on Information Theory, 60(7):3797–3820, 2014.
Van Oord, A., Kalchbrenner, N., and Kavukcuoglu, K. Pixel recurrent neural networks. In Pro-
ceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 1747–1756.
PMLR, 2016.
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, Ł., and
Polosukhin, I. Attention is all you need. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), pp. 5998–6008, 2017.
Vinyals, O., Blundell, C., Lillicrap, T., Wierstra, D., et al. Matching networks for one shot learn-
ing. In Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
(NIPS), pp. 3630–3638, 2016.
Wang, A., Pruksachatkun, Y., Nangia, N., Singh, A., Michael, J., Hill, F., Levy, O., and Bowman, S.
Superglue: A stickier benchmark for general-purpose language understanding systems. In Pro-
140
ceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
pp. 3261–3275, 2019a.
Wang, A., Singh, A., Michael, J., Hill, F., Levy, O., and Bowman, S. R. Glue: A multi-task
benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understanding. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019b.
Wang, A., Singh, A., Michael, J., Hill, F., Levy, O., and Bowman, S. R. Glue benchmark leader-
board. https://gluebenchmark.com/leaderboard, 2020a. URL https://gluebenchmark.
com/leaderboard. Accessed: 2020-04-16.
Wang, C., Pino, J., Wu, A., and Gu, J. Covost: A diverse multilingual speech-to-text translation
corpus. pp. 4197–4203, 2020b.
Wang, R., Utiyama, M., Liu, L., Chen, K., and Sumita, E. Instance weighting for neural machine
translation domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 1483–1489, 2017.
Wang, Z., She, Q., and Ward, T. E. Generative adversarial networks in computer vision: A survey
and taxonomy. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.01529, 2019c.
Warstadt, A., Singh, A., and Bowman, S. R. Neural network acceptability judgments. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1805.12471, 2018.
Welinder, P., Branson, S., Mita, T., Wah, C., Schroff, F., Belongie, S., and Perona, P. Caltech-
UCSD Birds 200.
Technical Report CNS-TR-2010-001, California Institute of Technology,
2010.
Widmer, G. and Kubat, M. Learning in the presence of concept drift and hidden contexts. Machine
learning, 23(1):69–101, 1996.
Williams, A., Nangia, N., and Bowman, S. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sentence un-
derstanding through inference. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies
(NAACL-HLT), pp. 1112–1122, 2018.
Wolf, T., Debut, L., Sanh, V., Chaumond, J., Delangue, C., Moi, A., Cistac, P., Rault, T., Louf,
R., Funtowicz, M., and Brew, J. Huggingface’s transformers: State-of-the-art natural language
processing. ArXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03771, 2019.
141
Wong, E. and Kolter, Z. Provable defenses against adversarial examples via the convex outer
adversarial polytope. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5286–5295. PMLR,
2018.
Wu, Y., Schuster, M., Chen, Z., Le, Q. V., Norouzi, M., Macherey, W., Krikun, M., Cao, Y., Gao,
Q., Macherey, K., et al. Google’s neural machine translation system: Bridging the gap between
human and machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.08144, 2016.
Xia, M., Field, A., and Tsvetkov, Y.
Demoting racial bias in hate speech detection.
In Pro-
ceedings of the 9th International Workshop on Natural Language Processing for Social Media
(SocialNLP), pp. 7–14, 2020. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.
socialnlp-1.2.
Xiong, W., Wu, L., Alleva, F., Droppo, J., Huang, X., and Stolcke, A. The microsoft 2017 conversa-
tional speech recognition system. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 5934–5938, 2018.
Yelp. Yelp dataset challenge. https://www.yelp.com/dataset/challenge, 2015.
Yue, X., Zhang, Y., Zhao, S., Sangiovanni-Vincentelli, A., Keutzer, K., and Gong, B. Domain
randomization and pyramid consistency: Simulation-to-real generalization without accessing
target domain data. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision (ICCV), 2019.
Zenke, F., Poole, B., and Ganguli, S. Continual learning through synaptic intelligence. In Pro-
ceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 3987–3995,
2017.
Zhang, J. and Zong, C. Exploiting source-side monolingual data in neural machine translation.
In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), pp. 1535–1545, 2016.
Zhang, K., Schölkopf, B., Muandet, K., and Wang, Z. Domain adaptation under target and condi-
tional shift. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
pp. 819–827, 2013.
Zhang, X., Zhao, J., and LeCun, Y. Character-level convolutional networks for text classiﬁca-
tion. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
(NIPS), pp. 649–657, 2015.
142
Zhao, Z., Dua, D., and Singh, S. Generating natural adversarial examples. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018.
Zhou, C., Ma, X., Michel, P., and Neubig, G. Examining and combating spurious features under
distribution shift. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML), 2021.
Zhou, K., Yang, Y., Hospedales, T., and Xiang, T. Deep domain-adversarial image generation for
domain generalisation. In Proceedings of the 34th Meeting of the Association for Advancement
of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI), 2020.
Zou, W., Huang, S., Xie, J., Dai, X., and Chen, J. A reinforced generation of adversarial examples
for neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the 8th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL), pp. 3486–3497, 2020.
143
Appendix
144
Appendix A
Supplemental Material for Chapter 5
A.1
Reorganizing the Lagrangian L(ψ, τ)
Let us write the Lagrangian L explicitly:
L(ψ, τ) = E(x,y)∼qψ
p(x, y)
qψ0(x, y)ℓ(x, y, θ) −τ (KL(qψ∥p) −κ)
(A.1)
= E(x,y)∼qψ
p(x, y)
qψ0(x, y)ℓ(x, y, θ) −τ E(x,y)∼qψ log qψ(x, y)
p(x, y) + τκ
(A.2)
= τ E(x,y)∼qψ log


p(x, y)e
p(x,y)
qψ0 (x,y)
ℓ(x,y,θ)
τ
qψ(x, y)


+ τκ
(A.3)
= τ(κ −KL(qψ∥q∗
τ,θ)) + log
 
E(x,y)∼p e
p(x,y)
qψ0 (x,y)
ℓ(x,y,θ)
τ
!
(A.4)
This last step requires that the log moment generating function of ℓunder p exist for τ. In most
scenarios we consider, ℓis typically the negative log likelihood of a neural network model, which
is generally bounded. Therefore the moment generating function is deﬁned everywhere.
Note that the KL term is the only one dependent on ψ, therefore maximizing L for ψ is equiv-
alent to maximizing −KL(qψ∥q∗
τ,θ), in other words minimizing KL(qψ∥q∗
τ,θ)
145
Appendix B
Supplemental Material for Chapter 7
B.1
The Standard Gradient Update (Equation 7.3)
We derive the standard update in Eq. 7.3 by solving the Lagrangian L in Eq. 7.2 for δ. Given that
its ﬁrst and second derivatives with respect to δ are:
∇L = ∇LT + 2µδ
∇2L = 2µI
the problem is trivially strictly convex and its global minimizer δ∗satisﬁes:
∇L

δ∗= 0 ⇐⇒δ∗= −1
2µ∇LT
□
B.2
Equivalence of the Hessian of the KL Divergence and the
Fisher Information Matrix
To simplify notation, let us perform the change of variables θ+δ →x. We show that the Hessian of
the KL coincides with the Fisher on θ: in other words, ∇2KL(pθ∥px)

x=θ = Epθ[(∇log pθ)(∇log pθ)⊺].
Under mild regularity assumptions1, we can write (all derivatives are taken with respect to variable
1Essentially allowing us to interchange derivatives and integrals.
146
x):
∇2KL(pθ∥px) = ∇2Epθ[log pθ]
|
{z
}
=0
−∇2Epθ[log px]
= −Epθ[∇2 log px]
Now note that ∇2 log px can be rewritten via standard derivatives manipulations as ∇2px
px
−
(∇px)(∇px)⊺
p2x
. This leads to:
∇2KL(pθ∥px) = −Epθ
"∇2px
px
#
+ Epθ
" ∇px
px
!  ∇px
px
!⊺#
When taken at θ, the ﬁrst term evaluates to2 :
Epθ
"∇2px
px
#
x=θ
=
"Z
pθ(z)∇2px(z)
px(z) dz
#
x=θ
=
Z
pθ(z)∇2pθ(z)
pθ(z) dz
=
Z
∇2pθ(z)dz
= ∇2
Z
pθ(z)dz
|
{z
}
=1
= 0
By using the identity ∇px
px = ∇log px and evaluating at x = θ, the second term gives us:
∇2KL(pθ∥px)

x=θ = Epθ[(∇log pθ)(∇log pθ)⊺]
□
B.3
Obtaining the Co-natural Update (Equation 7.7)
We solve the Lagrangian from Eq. 7.6 in a similar fashion as in B.1. First we compute its gradient
and Hessian with respect to δ:
2We abuse notation and write ∇px

x=θ as ∇pθ
147
∇L = ∇LT + 2µδ + νF S
θ δ
= ∇LT + (νF S
θ + 2µI)δ
∇2L = (νF S
θ + 2µI)
While not as straightforwardly as the one in B.1, this problem is also strongly convex: indeed
F S
θ is positive semi-deﬁnite (as an expectation of PSD matrices) and the addition of µI ensures
that ∇2L is positive deﬁnite. We ﬁnd the unique solution by solving:
∇L

δ∗= 0 ⇐⇒∇LT + (νF S
θ + 2µI)δ∗= 0
⇐⇒δ∗= −[νF S
θ + 2µI]−1∇LT
Set λ := 1
ν and α := µ
ν to get Eq. 7.7 □
148
