Title: Attention in Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1902.02181v4
--------------------------------------------------

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 32, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2021
4291
Attention in Natural Language Processing
Andrea Galassi
, Marco Lippi
, and Paolo Torroni
Abstract—Attention is an increasingly popular mechanism
used in a wide range of neural architectures. The mechanism
itself has been realized in a variety of formats. However,
because of the fast-paced advances in this domain, a systematic
overview of attention is still missing. In this article, we deﬁne
a uniﬁed model for attention architectures in natural language
processing, with a focus on those designed to work with vector
representations of the textual data. We propose a taxonomy of
attention models according to four dimensions: the representation
of the input, the compatibility function, the distribution function,
and the multiplicity of the input and/or output. We present the
examples of how prior information can be exploited in attention
models and discuss ongoing research efforts and open challenges
in the area, providing the ﬁrst extensive categorization of the
vast body of literature in this exciting domain.
Index Terms—Natural language processing (NLP), neural
attention, neural networks, review, survey.
I. INTRODUCTION
I
N MANY problems that involve the processing of natural
language, the elements composing the source text are
characterized by having each a different relevance to the task
at hand. For instance, in aspect-based sentiment analysis, cue
words, such as “good” or “bad,” could be relevant to some
aspects under consideration, but not to others. In machine
translation, some words in the source text could be irrelevant in
the translation of the next word. In a visual question-answering
task, background pixels could be irrelevant in answering a
question regarding an object in the foreground but relevant to
questions regarding the scenery.
Arguably, effective solutions to such problems should factor
in a notion of relevance, so as to focus the computational
resources on a restricted set of important elements. One
possible approach would be to tailor solutions to the speciﬁc
genre at hand, in order to better exploit known regularities
of the input, by feature engineering. For example, in the
argumentative analysis of persuasive essays, one could decide
to give special emphasis to the ﬁnal sentence. However, such
an approach is not always viable, especially if the input is
long or very information-rich, such as in text summarization,
Manuscript received July 5, 2019; revised December 17, 2019 and April 17,
2020; accepted August 20, 2020. Date of publication September 10, 2020; date
of current version October 6, 2021. This work was supported by Horizon
2020, project AI4EU, under Grant 825619. (Corresponding author: Andrea
Galassi.)
Andrea Galassi and Paolo Torroni are with the Department of Computer
Science and Engineering (DISI), University of Bologna, 40126 Bologna, Italy
(e-mail: a.galassi@unibo.it; paolo.torroni@unibo.it).
Marco Lippi is with the Department of Sciences and Methods for Engineer-
ing (DISMI), University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, 41121 Modena, Italy
(e-mail: marco.lippi@unimore.it).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this article are available
online at https://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TNNLS.2020.3019893
where the output is the condensed version of a possibly lengthy
text sequence. Another approach of increasing popularity
amounts to machine learning the relevance of input elements.
In that way, neural architectures could automatically weigh the
relevance of any region of the input and take such a weight
into account while performing the main task. The commonest
solution to this problem is a mechanism known as attention.
Attention was ﬁrst introduced in natural language process-
ing (NLP) for machine translation tasks by Bahdanau et al. [2].
However, the idea of glimpses had already been proposed in
computer vision by Larochelle and Hinton [3], following the
observation that biological retinas ﬁxate on relevant parts of
the optic array, while resolution falls off rapidly with eccentric-
ity. The term visual attention became especially popular after
Mnih et al. [4] signiﬁcantly outperformed the state of the art in
several image classiﬁcation tasks as well as in dynamic visual
control problems such as object tracking due to an architecture
that could adaptively select and then process a sequence of
regions or locations at high resolution and use a progressively
lower resolution for further pixels.
Besides offering a performance gain, the attention mecha-
nism can also be used as a tool for interpreting the behavior of
neural architectures, which are notoriously difﬁcult to under-
stand. Indeed, neural networks are subsymbolic architectures;
therefore, the knowledge they gather is stored in numeric
elements that do not provide any means of interpretation
by themselves. It then becomes hard if not impossible to
pinpoint the reasons behind the wrong output of a neural
architecture. Interestingly, attention could provide a key to
partially interpret and explain neural network behavior [5]–[9],
even if it cannot be considered a reliable means of explana-
tion [10], [11]. For instance, the weights computed by attention
could point us to relevant information discarded by the neural
network or to irrelevant elements of the input source that have
been factored in and could explain a surprising output of the
neural network.
Therefore, visual highlights of attention weights could be
instrumental in analyzing the outcome of neural networks,
and a number of speciﬁc tools have been devised for such a
visualization [12], [13]. Fig. 1 shows an example of attention
visualization in the context of aspect-based sentiment analysis.
For all these reasons, attention has become an increasingly
common ingredient of neural architectures for NLP [14], [15].
Table I presents a nonexhaustive list of neural architectures
where the introduction of an attention mechanism has brought
about a signiﬁcant gain. Works are grouped by the NLP
tasks they address. The spectrum of tasks involved is remark-
ably broad. Besides NLP and computer vision [16]–[18],
attentive models have been successfully adopted in many
other different ﬁelds, such as speech recognition [19]–[21],
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
4292
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 32, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2021
Fig. 1.
Example of attention visualization for an aspect-based sentiment analysis task, from [1, Fig. 6]. Words are highlighted according to attention scores.
Phrases in bold are the words considered relevant for the task or human rationales.
TABLE I
NONEXHAUSTIVE LIST OF WORKS THAT EXPLOIT ATTENTION, GROUPED
BY THE TASK(S) ADDRESSED
recommendation [22], [23], time-series analysis [24], [25],
games [26], and mathematical problems [27], [28].
In NLP, after an initial exploration by a number of seminal
papers [2], [59], a fast-paced development of new attention
models and attentive architectures ensued, resulting in a highly
diversiﬁed architectural landscape. Because of, and adding to,
the overall complexity, it is not unheard of different authors
who have been independently following similar intuitions lead-
ing to the development of almost identical attention models.
For instance, the concepts of inner attention [68] and word
attention [41] are arguably one and the same. Unsurprisingly,
the same terms have been introduced by different authors to
deﬁne different concepts, thus further adding to the ambiguity
in the literature. For example, the term context vector is used
with different meanings by Bahdanau et al. [2], Yang et al.
[52], and Wang et al. [129].
In this article, we offer a systematic overview of attention
models developed for NLP. To this end, we provide a general
model of attention for NLP tasks and use it to chart the
major research activities in this area. We also introduce a
taxonomy that describes the existing approaches along four
dimensions: input representation, compatibility function, dis-
tribution function, and input/output multiplicity. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst taxonomy of attention
models. Accordingly, we provide a succinct description of each
attention model, compare the models with one another, and
offer insights on their use. Moreover, we present the examples
regarding the use of prior information in unison with attention,
debate about the possible future uses of attention, and describe
some interesting open challenges.
We restrict our analysis to attentive architectures designed
to work with vector representation of data, as it typically is
the case in NLP. Readers interested in attention models for
tasks where data have a graphical representation may refer to
Lee et al. [130].
What this survey does not offer is a comprehensive account
of all the neural architectures for NLP (for an excellent
overview, see [131]) or of all the neural architectures for NLP
that uses an attention mechanism. This would be impossible
and would rapidly become obsolete because of the sheer
volume of new articles featuring architectures that increasingly
rely on such a mechanism. Moreover, our purpose is to
produce a synthesis and a critical outlook rather than a ﬂat
listing of research activities. For the same reason, we do not
offer a quantitative evaluation of different types of attention
mechanisms since such mechanisms are generally embedded
in larger neural network architectures devised to address
GALASSI et al.: ATTENTION IN NLP
4293
speciﬁc tasks, and it would be pointless in many cases to
attempt comparisons using different standards. Even for a
single speciﬁc NLP task, a fair evaluation of different attention
models would require experimentation with multiple neural
architectures, extensive hyperparameter tuning, and validation
over a variety of benchmarks. However, attention can be
applied to a multiplicity of tasks, and there are no data
sets that would meaningfully cover such a variety of tasks.
An empirical evaluation is thus beyond the scope of this
article. There are, however, a number of experimental studies
focused on particular NLP tasks, including machine transla-
tion [37], [42], [48], [132], argumentation mining [125], text
summarization [58], and sentiment analysis [7]. It is worth-
while remarking that, on several occasions, attention-based
approaches enabled a dramatic development of entire research
lines. In some cases, such a development has produced an
immediate performance boost. This was the case, for example,
with the transformer [36] for sequence-to-sequence annotation,
as well as with BERT [60], currently among the most popular
architectures for the creation of embeddings. In other cases,
the impact of attention-based models was even greater, paving
the way to radically new approaches for some tasks. This
was the inﬂuence of Bahdanau et al.’s work [2] to the ﬁeld
of machine translation. Likewise, the expressive power of
memory networks [59] signiﬁcantly contributed to the idea
of using deep networks for reasoning tasks.
This survey is structured as follows. In Section II, we deﬁne
a general model of attention and describe its components.
We use a well-known machine-translation architecture intro-
duced by Bahdanau et al. [2] as an illustration and an instance
of the general model. In Section III, we elaborate on the
uses of attention in various NLP tasks. Section IV presents
our taxonomy of attention models. Section V discusses how
attention can be combined with knowledge about the task or
the data. Section VI is devoted to open challenges, current
trends, and future directions. Section VII concludes this article.
II. ATTENTION FUNCTION
The attention mechanism is a part of a neural architecture
that enables to dynamically highlight relevant features of the
input data, which, in NLP, is typically a sequence of textual
elements. It can be applied directly to the raw input or to its
higher level representation. The core idea behind attention is to
compute a weight distribution on the input sequence, assigning
higher values to more relevant elements.
To illustrate, we brieﬂy describe a classic attention archi-
tecture, called RNNsearch [2]. We chose RNNsearch because
of its historical signiﬁcance and for its simplicity with respect
to other structures that we will describe further on.
A. Example for Machine Translation and Alignment
RNNsearch uses attention for machine translation. The
objective is to compute an output sequence y that is a
translation of an input sequence x. The architecture consists
of an encoder followed by a decoder, as shown in Fig. 2.
The encoder is a bidirectional recurrent neural network
(BiRNN) [133] that computes an annotation term hi for every
Fig. 2.
Architecture of RNNsearch [2] (left) and its attention model (right).
input term xi of x
(h1, . . . , hT) = BiRNN(x1, . . . , xT ).
(1)
The decoder consists of two cascading elements: the atten-
tion function and an RNN. At each time step t, the attention
function produces an embedding ct of the input sequence,
called a context vector. The subsequent RNN, characterized
by a hidden state st, computes from such an embedding
a probability distribution over all possible output symbols,
pointing to the most probable symbol yt
p(yt|y1, . . . , yt−1, x) = RNN(ct).
(2)
The context vector is obtained as follows. At each time
step t, the attention function takes as input the previous hidden
state of the RNN st−1 and the annotations h1, . . . , hT. Such
inputs are processed through an alignment model [see (3)]
to obtain a set of scalar values eti that score the matching
between the inputs around position i and the outputs around
position t. These scores are then normalized through a softmax
function, so as to obtain a set of weights ati [see (4)]
eti = f (st−1, hi)
(3)
ati =
exp(eti)
T
j=1 exp(etj)
.
(4)
Finally, the context vector ct is computed as a weighted
sum of the annotations hi based on their weights ati
ct =

i
atihi.
(5)
Quoting Bahdanau et al. [2], the use of attention “relieve[s]
the encoder from the burden of having to encode all informa-
tion in the source sentence into a ﬁxed-length vector. With this
new approach, the information can be spread throughout the
sequence of annotations, which can be selectively retrieved by
the decoder accordingly.”
B. Uniﬁed Attention Model
The characteristics of an attention model depend on the
structure of the data whereupon they operate and on the desired
output structure. The uniﬁed model we propose is based on
4294
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 32, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2021
TABLE II
NOTATION
Fig. 3.
Core attention model.
and extends the models proposed by Vaswani et al. [36] and
Daniluk et al. [61]. It comprises a core part shared by almost
the totality of the models found in the surveyed literature,
as well as some additional components that, although not
universally present, are still found in most literature models.
Fig. 3 shows the core attention model, which is part of the
general model shown in Fig. 4. Table II lists the key terms
and symbols. The core of the attention mechanism maps a
sequence K of dk vectors ki, the keys, to a distribution a
of dk weights ai. K encodes the data features whereupon
attention is computed. For instance, K may be word or
character embeddings of a document, or the internal states
of a recurrent architecture, as it happens with the annotation
hi in RNNsearch. In some cases, K could include multiple
features or representations of the same object (e.g., both
one-hot encoding and embedding of a word) or even—if the
task calls for it—representations of entire documents.
More often than not, another input element q, called query,1
is used as a reference when computing the attention distribu-
tion. In that case, the attention mechanism will give emphasis
to the input elements relevant to the task according to q. If no
query is deﬁned, attention will give emphasis to the elements
inherently relevant to the task at hand. In RNNsearch, for
instance, q is a single element, namely, the RNN hidden state
st−1. In other architectures, q may represent different entities:
embeddings of actual textual queries, contextual information,
1The concept of “query” in attention models should not be confused with
that used in tasks like question answering or information retrieval. In our
model, the “query” is part of a general architecture and is task-independent.
background knowledge, and so on. It can also take the form of
a matrix rather than a vector. For example, in their document
attentive reader, Sordoni et al. [67] made use of two query
vectors.
From the keys and query, a vector e of dk energy scores ei
is computed through a compatibility function f
e = f (q, K).
(6)
Function f corresponds to RNNsearch’s alignment model
and to what other authors call energy function [43]. Energy
scores are then transformed into attention weights using what
we call a distribution function g
a = g(e).
(7)
Such weights are the outcome of the core attention mech-
anism. The commonest distribution function is the softmax
function, as in RNNsearch, which normalizes all the scores to
a probability distribution. Weights represent the relevance of
each element to the given task, with respect to q and K.
The computation of these weights may already be sufﬁcient
for some tasks, such as the classiﬁcation task addressed by Cui
et al. [70]. Nevertheless, many tasks require the computation
of new representation of the keys. In such cases, it is common
to have another input element; a sequence V of dk vectors
vi, the values, representing the data whereupon the attention
computed from K and q is to be applied. Each element of V
corresponds to one and only one element of K, and the two can
be seen as different representations of the same data. Indeed,
many architectures, including RNNsearch, do not distinguish
between K and V. The distinction between keys and values
was introduced by Daniluk et al. [61], who use different repre-
sentations of the input for computing the attention distribution
and the contextual information.
V and a are thus combined to obtain a new set Z of
weighted representations of V [see (8)], which are then
merged together so as to produce a compact representation
of Z usually called the context vector c [see (9)].2 The
2Although most authors use this terminology, we shall remark that Yang
et al. [52], Wang et al. [129], and other authors used the term context vector
to refer to other elements of the attention architecture.
GALASSI et al.: ATTENTION IN NLP
4295
Fig. 4.
General attention model.
commonest way of obtaining c from Z is by summation.
However, alternatives have been proposed, including gating
functions [93]. Nevertheless, c will be mainly determined by
values associated with higher attention weights
zi = aivi
(8)
c =
dk

i=1
zi.
(9)
What we described so far was a synthesis of the most
frequent architectural choices made in the design of attentive
architectures. Other options will be explored in Section IV-D.
C. Deterministic Versus Probabilistic Attention
Before we proceed, a brief remark about some relevant
naming conventions is in order. The attention model described
so far is sometimes described in the literature as a mapping
with a probabilistic interpretation since the use of a softmax
normalization allows one to interpret the attention weights
as a probability distribution function (see [91]). Accordingly,
some recent literature deﬁnes as deterministic attention mod-
els [134], [135] and those models where context words,
whereupon attention is focused, are deterministically selected,
for example, by using the constituency parse tree of the
input sentence. However, other authors described the ﬁrst
model as deterministic (soft) attention, to contrast it with
stochastic (hard) attention, where the probability distribution
over weights is used to hardly sample a single input as context
vector c, in particular following a reinforcement learning
strategy [16]. If the weights a encode a probability distrib-
ution, the stochastic attention model differs from our general
model for the absence of (8) and (9) that are replaced by the
following equations:
˜s ∼Multinoulli({ai})
(10)
c =
dk

i=1
˜sivi
with ˜si ∈{0, 1}.
(11)
To avoid any potential confusion, in the remainder of this arti-
cle, we will abstain from characterizing the attention models
as deterministic, probabilistic, or stochastic.
TABLE III
POSSIBLE USES OF ATTENTION AND EXAMPLES OF RELEVANT TASK
III. USES OF ATTENTION
Attention enables us to estimate the relevance of the input
elements as well as to combine said elements into a com-
pact representation—the context vector—that condenses the
characteristics of the most relevant elements. Because the
context vector is smaller than the original input, it requires
fewer computational resources to be processed at later stages,
yielding a computational gain.
We summarize possible uses of attention and the tasks in
which they are relevant in Table III.
For tasks such as document classiﬁcation, where usually
there is only K in input and no query, the attention mechanism
can be seen as an instrument to encode the input into a compact
form. The computation of such an embedding can be seen as
a form of feature selection, and as such, it can be applied
to any set of features sharing the same representation. This
applies to cases where features come from different domains
as in multimodal tasks [78] or from different levels of a neural
architecture [38] or where they simply represent different
aspects of the input document [136]. Similarly, attention can
also be exploited as an auxiliary task during training so
that speciﬁc features can be modeled via a multitask setting.
This holds for several scenarios, such as visual question
answering [137], domain classiﬁcation for natural language
understanding [138], and semantic role labeling [97].
4296
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 32, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2021
When the generation of a text sequence is required, as in
machine translation, attention enables us to make use of a
dynamic representation of the input sequence, whereby the
whole input does not have to be encoded into a single vector.
At each time step, the encoding is tailored according to the
task, and in particular, q represents an embedding of the
previous state of the decoder. More generally, the possibility to
perform attention with respect to a query q allows us to create
representations of the input that depend on the task context,
creating specialized embeddings. This is particularly useful in
tasks, such as sentiment analysis and information extraction.
Since attention can create contextual representations of an
element, it can also be used to build sequence-to-sequence
annotators, without resorting to RNNs or convolutional neural
networks (CNNs), as suggested by Vaswani et al. [36],
who rely on an attention mechanism to obtain a whole
encoder/decoder architecture.
Attention can also be used as a tool for selecting speciﬁc
words. This could be the case, for example, in dependence
parsing [97] and in cloze question-answering tasks [66], [70].
In the former case, attention can be applied to a sentence in
order to predict dependences. In the latter, attention can be
applied to a textual document or to a vocabulary to perform a
classiﬁcation among the words.
Finally, attention can come in handy when multiple inter-
acting input sequences have to be considered in combination.
In tasks such as question answering, where the input consists
of two textual sequences—for instance, the question and
the document or the question and the possible answers—an
input encoding can be obtained by considering the mutual
interactions between the elements of such sequences, rather
than by applying a more rigid a priori deﬁned model.
IV. TAXONOMY FOR ATTENTION MODELS
Attention models can be described on the basis of the
following orthogonal dimensions: the nature of inputs (see
Section IV-A), the compatibility function (see Section IV-B),
the distribution function (see Section IV-C), and the number
of distinct inputs/outputs, which we refer to as “multiplic-
ity” (see Section IV-D). Moreover, attention modules can
themselves be used inside larger attention models to obtain
complex architectures such as hierarchical-input models (see
Section IV-A2) or in some multiple-input coattention models
(see Section IV-D2).
A. Input Representation
In NLP-related tasks, generally, K and V are representations
of parts of documents, such as sequences of characters, words,
or sentences. These components are usually embedded into
continuous vector representations and then processed through
key/value annotation functions (called kaf and vaf in Fig. 4),
so as to obtain a hidden representation resulting in K and V.
Typical annotation functions are RNN layers such as gated
recurrent units (GRUs), long short-term memory networks
(LSTMs), and CNNs. In this way, ki and vi represent an input
element relative to its local context. If the layers in charge of
annotation are trained together with the attention model, they
can learn to encode information useful to the attention model.
Alternatively, ki/vi can be taken to represent each input
element in isolation, rather than in context. For instance, they
could be a one-hot encoding of words or characters or a
pretrained word embedding. This results in an application of
the attention mechanism directly to the raw inputs, which
is a model known as inner attention [68]. Such a model
has proven to be effective by several authors, who have
exploited it in different fashions [36], [41], [54], [116]. The
resulting architecture has a smaller number of layers and
hyperparameters, which reduces the computational resources
needed for training.
K can also represent a single element of the input sequence.
This is the case, for example, in the work by Bapna et al. [38],
whose attention architecture operates on different encodings
of the same element, obtained by the subsequent application
of RNN layers. The context embeddings obtained for all
components individually can then be concatenated, producing
a new representation of the document that encodes the most
relevant representation of each component for the given task.
It would also be possible to aggregate each key or value with
its neighbors, by computing their average or sum [128].
We have so far considered the input to be a sequence of
characters, words, or sentences, which is usually the case.
However, the input can also be other things, such as a
juxtaposition of features or relevant aspects of the same textual
element. For instance, Li et al. [56] and Zadeh et al. [78]
considered the inputs composed of different sources, and in
[136] and [139], the input represents different aspects of the
same document. In that case, embeddings of the input can be
collated together and fed into an attention model as multiple
keys, as long as the embeddings share the same representation.
This allows us to highlight the most relevant elements of the
inputs and operate a feature selection, leading to a possible
reduction of the dimensionality of the representation via the
context embedding c produced by the attention mechanism.
Interestingly, Li et al. [120] proposed a model in which the
textual input sequence is mixed with the output of the attention
model. Their truncated history-attention model iterates the
computation of attention on top of a bi-LSTM. At each step,
the bi-LSTM hidden states are used as keys and values, while
the context vectors computed in the previous steps act as a
query.
We shall now explain in more detail two successful struc-
tures, which have become well-established building blocks
of neural approaches for NLP, namely, self-attention and
hierarchical-input architectures.
1) Self-Attention: We made a distinction between two input
sources: the input sequence, represented by K and V, and
the query, represented by q. However, some architectures
compute attention only based on the input sequence. These
architectures are known as self-attentive or intraattentive mod-
els. We shall remark, however, that these terms are used
to indicate many different approaches. The commonest one
amounts to the application of multiple steps of attention to
a vector K, using the elements kt of the same vector as
query at each step [18], [36]. At each step, the weights at
i
GALASSI et al.: ATTENTION IN NLP
4297
Fig. 5.
Example of use of attention in a sequence-to-sequence model.
represent the relevance of ki with respect to kt, yielding
dK separate context embeddings, ct, one per key. Attention
could thus be used as a sequence-to-sequence model, as an
alternative to CNNs or RNNs (see Fig. 5). In this way, each
element of the new sequence may be inﬂuenced by elements of
the whole input, incorporating contextual information without
any locality boundaries. This is especially interesting since
it could overcome a well-known shortcoming of RNNs: their
limited ability of modeling long-range dependences [140]. For
each element kt, the resulting distribution of the weights at
should give more emphasis to words that strongly relate to
kt. The analysis of these distributions will, therefore, provide
information regarding the relationship between the elements
inside the sequence. Modern text-sequence generation systems
often rely on this approach. Another possibility is to construct
a single query element q from the keys through a pooling
operation. Furthermore, the same input sequence could be
used both as keys K and query Q, applying a technique
we will describe in Section IV-D2, known as coattention.
Other self-attentive approaches, such as [52] and [100], are
characterized by the complete absence of any query term
q, which results in simpliﬁed compatibility functions (see
Section IV-B).
2) Hierarchical-Input Architectures: In some tasks, portions
of input data can be meaningfully grouped together into higher
level structures, where hierarchical-input attention models can
be exploited to subsequently apply multiple attention modules
at different levels of the composition, as shown in Fig. 6.
Consider, for instance, data naturally associated with a
two-level semantic structure, such as characters (the “micro”
elements) forming words (the “macro” elements) or words
forming sentences. Attention can be ﬁrst applied to the rep-
resentations of micro elements ki, so as to build aggregate
representations k j of the macro elements, such as context
vectors. Attention could then be applied again to the sequence
of macroelement embeddings, in order to compute an embed-
ding for the whole document D. With this model, attention
ﬁrst highlights the most relevant micro elements within each
macro element and, then, the most relevant macro elements in
the document. For instance, Yang et al. [52] applied attention
ﬁrst at word level, for each sentence in turn, to compute
sentence embeddings. Then, they applied attention again on
the sentence embeddings to obtain a document representation.
With reference to the model introduced in Section II, embed-
dings are computed for each sentence in D, and then, all
such embeddings are used together as keys K to compute the
document-level weights a and eventually D’s context vector c.
The hierarchy can be extended further. For instance, Wu et al.
[141] added another layer on top, applying attention also at
the document level.
If representations for both micro- and macro-level elements
are available, one can compute attention on one level and
then exploit the result as a key or query to compute atten-
tion on the other, yielding two different microrepresenta-
tion/macrorepresentation of D. In this way, attention enables
us to identify the most relevant elements for the task at both
levels. The attention-via-attention model by Zhao and Zhang
[43] deﬁnes a hierarchy with characters at the micro level and
words at the macro level. Both characters and words act as
keys. Attention is ﬁrst computed on word embeddings KW,
thus obtaining a document representation in the form of a
context vector cW, which in turn acts as a query q to guide the
application of character-level attention to the keys (character
embeddings) KC, yielding a context vector c for D.
Ma et al. [113] identiﬁed a single “target” macro-object T
as a set of words, which do not necessarily have to form a
sequence in D, and then used such a macro-object as keys,
KT. The context vector cT produced by a ﬁrst application of
the attention mechanism on KT is then used as query q in
a second application of the attention mechanism over D, with
the keys being the document’s word embeddings KW.
B. Compatibility Functions
The compatibility function is a crucial part of the attention
architecture because it deﬁnes how keys and queries are
matched or combined. In our presentation of compatibility
functions, we will consider a data model where q and ki
are monodimensional vectors. For example, if K represents
a document, each ki may be the embedding of a sentence,
a word, or a character. In such a model, q and ki may have
the same structure and, thus, the same size, although this is
not always necessary. However, in some architectures, q can
consist of a sequence of vectors or a matrix, a possibility we
explore in Section IV-D2.
Some
common
compatibility
functions
are
listed
in Table IV. Two main approaches can be identiﬁed.
The ﬁrst one is to match and compare K and q. For
instance, the idea behind the similarity attention proposed by
Graves et al. [142] is that the most relevant keys are the
most similar to the query. Accordingly, the authors present a
model that relies on a similarity function (sim in Table IV) to
compute the energy scores. For example, they rely on cosine
similarity, a choice that suits cases where the query and the
keys share the same semantic representation. A similar idea
is followed by the widely used multiplicative or dot attention,
where the dot product between q and K is computed. The
complexity of this computation is O(nkdk). A variation of
this model is scaled multiplicative attention, where a scaling
factor is introduced to improve performance with large
keys [36]. General attention, proposed by Luong et al. [29],
4298
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 32, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2021
Fig. 6.
Hierarchical input attention models deﬁned by Zhao and Zhang [43] (center), Yang et al. [52] (left), and Ma et al. [113] (right). The number inside
the attention shapes indicates the order of application. Different colors highlight different parts of the inputs.
TABLE IV
SUMMARY OF COMPATIBILITY FUNCTIONS FOUND IN THE LITERATURE.
W, W0, W1, . . . , AND b ARE LEARNABLE PARAMETERS
extends this concept in order to accommodate keys and queries
with different representations. To that end, it introduces a
learnable matrix parameter W. This parameter represents the
transformation matrix that maps the query onto the vector
space of keys. This transformation increases the complexity of
the operation to O(nqnkdk). In what could be called a biased
general attention, Sordoni et al. [67] introduced a learnable
bias, so as to consider some keys as relevant independently
of the input. Activated general attention [111] employs a
nonlinear activation function. In Table IV, act is a placeholder
for a nonlinear activation function, such as hyperbolic tangent,
tanh, rectiﬁer linear unit, ReLU [143], or scaled exponential
linear unit, SELU [144]. These approaches are particularly
suitable in tasks where the concept of relevance of a key is
known to be closely related to that of similarity to a query
element. These include, for instance, tasks where speciﬁc
keywords can be used as a query, such as abusive speech
recognition and sentiment analysis.
A different approach amounts to combining rather than
comparing K and q, using them together to compute a joint
representation, which is then multiplied by an importance
vector3 wimp, which has to adhere to the same semantic
of the new representation. Such a vector deﬁnes, in a way,
relevance and could be an additional query element, as offered
by Ma et al. [113] or a learnable parameter. In that case,
we speculate that the analysis of a machine-learned importance
vector could provide additional information on the model. One
of the simplest models that follows this approach is the concat
attention by Luong et al. [29], where a joint representation
is given by juxtaposing keys and queries. Additive attention
works similarly, except that the contribution of q and K can
be computed separately. For example, Bahdanau et al. [2]
precomputed the contribution of K in order to reduce the
computational footprint. The complexity of the computation,
ignoring the application of the nonlinear function, is thus
O(nwnkdk), where nw indicates the size of wimp. Moreover,
additive attention in principle could accommodate queries
of different size. In additive attention and concat attention,
the keys and the queries are fed into a single neural layer.
We speak instead of deep attention if multiple layers are
3Part of our terminology. As previously noted, wimp is termed context
vector by Yang et al. [52] and other authors.
GALASSI et al.: ATTENTION IN NLP
4299
employed [54]. Table IV shows a deep attention function with
L levels of depth, 1 < l < L. With an equal number of
neurons for all levels and reasonably assuming L to be much
smaller than any other parameter, the complexity becomes
O(nL
wnkdk). These approaches are especially suitable when
a representation of “relevant” elements is unavailable or it is
available but encoded in a signiﬁcantly different way from the
way that keys are encoded. This may be the case, for instance,
with tasks such as document classiﬁcation and summarization.
A
similar
rationale
lead
to
convolution-based
atten-
tion [119]. It draws inspiration from biological models,
whereby biological attention is produced through search tem-
plates and pattern matching. Here, the learned vector wimp
represents a convolutional ﬁlter, which embodies a speciﬁc
relevance template. The ﬁlter is used in a pattern-matching
process obtained by applying the convolution operation on key
subsequences. Applying multiple convolutions with different
ﬁlters enables a contextual selection of keys that match speciﬁc
relevance templates, obtaining a speciﬁc energy score for
each ﬁlter. Since each key belongs to multiple subsequences,
each key yields multiple energy scores. Such scores are
then aggregated in order to obtain a single value per key.
Aggregation could be achieved by sum or average. Table IV
illustrates convolution-based attention for a single ﬁlter of
size l. The complexity of such an operation is O(l2 nkdk).
These approaches are especially suitable when a representation
of “relevant” elements is unavailable or it is available but
encoded in a signiﬁcantly different way from the way that
keys are encoded. This may be the case, for instance, with
tasks such as document classiﬁcation and summarization.
Finally, in some models, the attention distribution ignores
K and only depends on q. We then speak of location-
based attention. The energy associated with each key is thus
computed as a function of the key’s position, independently of
its content [29]. Conversely, self-attention may be computed
only based on K, without any q. The compatibility functions
for self-attention, which are a special case of the more general
functions, are omitted from Table IV.
For an empirical comparison between some compatibility
functions (namely, additive and multiplicative attention) in the
domain of machine translation, we suggest the reader to refer
to Britz et al. [37].
C. Distribution Functions
Attention distribution maps energy scores to attention
weights. The choice of the distribution function depends on
the properties that the distribution is required to have—for
instance, whether it is required to be a probability distribution,
a set of probability scores, or a set of Boolean scores—on the
need to enforce sparsity, and on the need to account for the
keys’ positions.
One possible distribution function g is the logistic sigmoid,
as proposed by Kim et al. [47]. In this way, each weight ai
is constrained between 0 and 1, thus ensuring that the values
Vi and their corresponding weighted counterparts Zi share
the same boundaries. Such weights can thus be interpreted as
probabilities that an element is relevant. The same range can
also be forced on the context vector’s elements ci, by using
a softmax function, as it is commonly done. In that case, the
attention mechanism is called soft attention. Each attention
weight can be interpreted as the probability that the corre-
sponding element is the most relevant.
With sigmoid or softmax alike, all the key/value elements
have a relevance, small as it may be. Yet, it can be argued
that in some cases, some parts of the input are completely
irrelevant, and if they were to be considered, they would likely
introduce noise rather than contribute with useful information.
In such cases, one could exploit attention distributions that
altogether ignore some of the keys, thereby reducing the
computational footprint. One option is the sparsemax dis-
tribution [91], which truncates to zero the scores under a
certain threshold by exploiting the geometric properties of
the probability simplex. This approach could be especially
useful in those settings where a large number of elements
are irrelevant, such as in document summarization or cloze
question-answering tasks.
It is also possible to model structural dependences between
the outputs. For example, structured attention networks [47]
exploit neural conditional random ﬁelds to model the (con-
ditional) attention distribution. The attention weights are thus
computed as (normalized) marginals from the energy scores,
which are treated as potentials.
In some tasks, such as machine translation or image cap-
tioning, the relevant features are found in a neighborhood of
a certain position. In those cases, it could be helpful to focus
the attention only on a speciﬁc portion of the input. If the
position is known in advance, one can apply a positional mask,
by adding or subtracting a given value from the energy scores
before the application of the softmax [93]. Since the location
may not be known in advance, the hard attention model by
Xu et al. [16] considers the keys in a dynamically determined
location. Such a solution is less expensive at inference time,
but it is not differentiable. For that reason, it requires more
advanced training techniques, such as reinforcement learning
or variance reduction. Local attention [29] extends this idea
while preserving differentiability. Guided by the intuition that
in machine translation at each time step, only a small segment
of the input can be considered relevant, and local attention
considers only a small window of the keys at a time. The
window has a ﬁxed size, and the attention can be better
focused on a precise location by combining the softmax
distribution with a Gaussian distribution. The mean of the
Gaussian distribution is dynamic, whereas its variance can
either be ﬁxed, as done by Luong et al. [29] or dynamic,
as done by Yang et al. [39]. Selective attention [17] follows
the same idea; using a grid of Gaussian ﬁlters, it considers
only a patch of the keys, whose position, size, and resolution
depend on dynamic parameters.
Shen et al. [94] combined soft and hard attention, by apply-
ing the former only on the elements ﬁltered by the latter.
More precisely, softmax is only applied among a subset of
selected energy scores, whereas for the others, the weight is
set to zero. The subset is determined according to a set of
random variables, with each variable corresponding to a key.
The probability associated with each variable is determined
4300
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 32, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2021
through soft attention applied to the same set of keys. The
proper “softness” of the distribution could depend not only
on the task but also on the query. Lin et al. [44] deﬁned a
model whose distribution is controlled by a learnable, adaptive
temperature parameter. When a “softer” attention is required,
the temperature increases, producing a smoother distribution
of weights. The opposite happens when a “harder” attention
is needed.
Finally, the concept of locality can also be deﬁned according
to semantic rules, rather than the temporal position. This
possibility will be further discussed in Section V.
D. Multiplicity
We shall now present variations of the general uniﬁed model
where the attention mechanism is extended to accommodate
multiple, possibly heterogeneous, inputs or outputs.
1) Multiple Outputs: Some applications suggest that the
data could, and should, be interpreted in multiple ways.
This can be the case when there is ambiguity in the data,
stemming, for example, from words having multiple meanings
or when addressing a multitask problem. For this reason,
models have been deﬁned that jointly compute not only one
but multiple attention distributions over the same data. One
possibility presented by Lin et al. [100] and also exploited
by Du et al. [145] is to use additive attention (seen in
Section IV-B) with an importance matrix, instead of a vector,
Wimp ∈Rnk×no, yielding an energy scores matrix where
multiple scores are associated with each key. Such scores
can be regarded as different models of relevance for the
same values and can be used to create a context matrix
C ∈Rnv×no. Such embeddings can be concatenated together,
creating a richer and more expressive representation of the
values. Regularization penalties can be applied so as to enforce
the differentiation between models of relevance (for example,
the
Frobenius norm). In multidimensional attention [93],
where the importance matrix is a square matrix, attention
can be computed featurewise. To that end, each weight ai, j
is paired with the jth feature of the ith value vi, j , and a
featurewise product yields the new value zi. Convolution-
based attention [119] always produces multiple energy scores
distributions according to the number of convolutional ﬁlters
and the size of those ﬁlters.
Another possibility explored
by Vaswani et al. [36] is multihead attention. There, multiple
linear projections of all the inputs (K, V, and q) are performed
according to learnable parameters, and multiple attention func-
tions are computed in parallel. Usually, the processed context
vectors are then merged together into a single embedding.
A suitable regularization term is sometimes imposed so as to
guarantee sufﬁcient dissimilarity between attention elements.
Li et al. [34] proposed three possibilities: regularization on the
subspaces (the linear projections of V), the attended positions
(the sets of weights), or on the outputs (the context vectors).
Multihead attention can be especially helpful when combined
with nonsoft attention distribution since different heads can
capture local and global contexts at the same time [39].
Finally, labelwise attention [126] computes a separate attention
distribution for each class. This may improve the performance
as well as lead to a better interpretation of the data because it
could help isolate data points that better describe each class.
These techniques are not mutually exclusive. For example,
multihead and multidimensional attention can be combined
with one another [95].
2) Multiple Inputs: Coattention: Some architectures con-
sider the query to be a sequence of dq multidimensional
elements, represented by a matrix Q ∈Rnq×dq, rather than
by a plain vector. Examples of this setup are common in
architectures designed for tasks where the query is a sentence,
as in question answering, or a set of keywords, as in abusive
speech detection. In those cases, it could be useful to ﬁnd
the most relevant query elements according to the task and
the keys. A straightforward way of doing that would be to
apply the attention mechanism to the query elements, thus
treating Q as keys and each ki as query, yielding two inde-
pendent representations for K and Q. However, in that way,
we would miss the information contained in the interactions
between elements of K and Q. Alternatively, one could apply
attention jointly on K and Q, which become the “inputs”
of a coattention architecture [80]. Coattention models can be
coarse-grained or ﬁne-grained [112]. Coarse-grained models
compute attention on each input, using an embedding of the
other input as a query. Fine-grained models consider each
element of an input with respect to each element of the other
input. Furthermore, coattention can be performed sequentially
or in parallel. In parallel models, the procedures to compute
attention on K and Q symmetric, and thus, the two inputs are
treated identically.
a) Coarse-grained coattention: Coarse-grained models
use a compact representation of one input to compute attention
on the other. In such models, the role of the inputs as
keys and queries is no longer focal, and thus, a compact
representation of K may play as a query in parts of the
architecture and vice versa. A sequential coarse-grained model
proposed by Lu et al. [80] is alternating coattention, as shown
in Fig. 7 (left), whereby attention is computed three times
to obtain embeddings for K and Q. First, self-attention is
computed on Q. The resulting context vector is then used
as a query to perform attention on K. The result is another
context vector CK, which is further used as a query as attention
is again applied to Q. This produces a ﬁnal context vector,
C Q. The architecture proposed by Sordoni et al. [67] can
also be described using this model with a few adaptations.
In particular, Sordoni et al. [67] omitted the last step and
factor in an additional query element q in the ﬁrst two attention
steps. An almost identical sequential architecture is used by
Zhang et al. [86], who use q only in the ﬁrst attention step.
A parallel coarse-grained model is shown in Fig. 7 (right).
In such a model, proposed by Ma et al. [111], an average (avg)
is initially computed on each input and then used as a query
in the application of attention to generate the embedding of
the other input. Sequential coattention offers a more elaborate
computation of the ﬁnal results, potentially allowing to discard
all the irrelevant elements of Q and K, at the cost of a
greater computational footprint. Parallel coattention can be
optimized for better performance, at the expense of a “simpler”
elaboration of the outputs. It is worthwhile noticing that the
GALASSI et al.: ATTENTION IN NLP
4301
averaging step in Ma et al. [111]’s model could be replaced
by self-attention, in order to ﬁlter out irrelevant elements from
Q and K at an early stage.
b) Fine-grained coattention: In ﬁne-grained coattention
models, the relevance (energy scores) associated with each
key/query element pair ⟨ki/q j⟩is represented by the elements
E j,i of a coattention matrix E ∈Rdq×dk computed by a
cocompatibility function.
Cocompatibility functions can be straightforward adapta-
tions of any of the compatibility functions listed in Table IV.
Alternatively, new functions can be deﬁned. For example,
Fan et al. [112] deﬁned cocompatibility as a linear transfor-
mation of the concatenation between the elements and their
product [see (12)]. In decomposable attention [89], the inputs
are fed into neural networks, whose outputs are then multiplied
[see (13)]. Delaying the product to after the processing by
the neural networks reduces the number of inputs of such
networks, yielding a reduction in the computational footprint.
An alternative proposed by Tay et al. [75] exploits the Her-
mitian inner product. The elements of K and Q are ﬁrst
projected to a complex domain, then, the Hermitian product
between them is computed, and ﬁnally, only the real part of the
result is kept. Being the Hermitian product noncommutative,
E will depend on the roles played by the inputs as keys and
queries
E j,i = W([ki; q j; kiq j])
(12)
E j,i = (act(W1 Q + b1))⊺(act(W2K + b2)).
(13)
Because
E j,i
represent energy scores associated with
⟨ki/q j⟩pairs, computing the relevance of K with respect to
speciﬁc query elements, or, similarly, the relevance of Q with
respect to speciﬁc key elements, requires extracting informa-
tion from E using what we call an aggregation function. The
output of such a function is a pair aK/aQ of weight vectors.
The commonest aggregation functions are listed in Table V.
A simple idea is the attention pooling parallel model adopted
by dos Santos et al. [69]. It amounts to considering the highest
score in each row or column of E. By attention pooling, a key
ki will be attributed a high attention weight if and only if it
has a high coattention score with respect to at least one query
element q j. Key attention scores are obtained through rowwise
max pooling, whereas query attention scores are obtained
through columnwise max pooling, as shown in Fig. 8 (left).
Only considering the highest attention scores may be regarded
as a conservative approach. Indeed, low-energy scores can
only be obtained by keys whose coattention scores are all
low and thus likely to be irrelevant to all query elements.
Furthermore, the keys that are only relevant to a single query
element may obtain the same or even higher energy score
than keys that are relevant to all the query elements. The
same reasoning applies to query attention scores. This is a
suitable approach, for example, in tasks where the queries are
keywords in disjunction, such as in abusive speech recognition.
Conversely, the approaches follow to compute the energy score
of an element by accounting for all the related attention scores,
at the cost of a heavier computational footprint.
TABLE V
AGGREGATION FUNCTIONS. IN MOST CASES, aK AND a Q ARE OBTAINED
BY APPLYING A DISTRIBUTION FUNCTION, SUCH AS THOSE SEEN IN
SECTION IV-C, TO eK AND e Q, AND ARE THUS OMITTED FROM
THIS TABLE IN THE INTEREST OF BREVITY. AS CUSTOMARY,
Act IS A PLACEHOLDER FOR A GENERIC NONLINEAR
ACTIVATION FUNCTION, WHEREAS Dist INDICATES
A DISTRIBUTION FUNCTION SUCH AS SOFTMAX
Lu et al. [80] used a multilayer perceptron in order to learn
the mappings from E to eK and e Q. In [127], the computation
is even simpler since the ﬁnal energy scores are a linear
transformation of E. Cui et al. [70] instead applied the nested
model shown in Fig. 8 (right). First, two matrices M1 and
M2 are computed by separately applying a rowwise and a
columnwise softmax on E. The idea is that each row of
M1 represents the attention distribution over the document
according to a speciﬁc query element—and it could already be
used as such. Then, a rowwise average over M2 is computed so
as to produce an attention distribution aQ over query elements.
Finally, a weighted sum of M1 according to the relevance of
query elements is computed through the dot product between
M1 and aQ, obtaining the document’s attention distribution
over the keys, aK. An alternative nested attention model is
proposed by Nie et al. [88], whereby M1 and M2 are fed to
a multilayer perceptron, as is done by Lu et al. [80]. Further
improvements may be obtained by combining the results of
multiple coattention models. Fan et al. [112], for instance,
computed coarse-grained and ﬁne-grained attention in parallel
and combined the results into a single embedding.
V. COMBINING ATTENTION AND KNOWLEDGE
According to LeCun et al. [146], a major open challenge
in artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) is combining connectionist (or
subsymbolic) models, such as deep networks, with approaches
based on symbolic knowledge representation, in order to
4302
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 32, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2021
Fig. 7.
Coarse-grained coattention by Lu et al. [80] (left) and Ma et al. [111] (right). The number inside the attention shapes (and besides the average
operator) indicates the order in which they are applied. Different colors highlight different inputs.
Fig. 8. Fine-grained coattention models presented by dos Santos et al. [69] (left) and by Cui et al. [70] (right). Dashed lines show how max-pooling/distribution
functions are applied (columnwise or rowwise).
perform complex reasoning tasks. Throughout the last decade,
ﬁlling the gap between these two families of AI methodologies
has represented a major research avenue. Popular approaches
include statistical relational learning [147], neural-symbolic
learning [148], and the application of various deep learning
architectures [149], such as memory networks [59], neural
Turing machines [142], and several others.
From this perspective, attention can be seen both as an
attempt to improve the interpretability of neural networks
and as an opportunity to plug external knowledge into them.
As a matter of fact, since the weights assigned by attention
represent the relevance of the input with respect to the given
task, in some contexts, it could be possible to exploit this
information to isolate the most signiﬁcant features that allow
the deep network to make its predictions. On the other
hand, any prior knowledge regarding the data, the domain,
or the speciﬁc task, whenever available, could be exploited to
generate information about the desired attention distribution,
which could be encoded within the neural architecture.
In this section, we overview different techniques that can
be used to inject this kind of knowledge in a neural network.
We leave to Section VI further discussions on the open chal-
lenges regarding the combination of knowledge and attention.
A. Supervised Attention
In most of the works we surveyed, the attention model is
trained with the rest of the neural architecture to perform a
speciﬁc task. Although trained alongside a supervised proce-
dure, the attention model per se is trained in an unsupervised
fashion4 to select useful information for the rest of the
architecture. Nevertheless, in some cases, knowledge about the
desired weight distribution could be available. Whether it is
present in the data as a label or it is obtained as additional
information through external tools, it can be exploited to
perform a supervised training of the attention model.
1) Preliminary Training: One possibility is to use an exter-
nal classiﬁer. The weights learned by such a classiﬁer are
subsequently plugged into the attention model of a different
architecture. We name this procedure as preliminary training.
For example, Zhang et al. [53] ﬁrst trained an attention
model to represent the probability that a sentence contains
relevant information. The relevance of a sentence is given
by rationales [150], which are snippets of text that sup-
ports the corresponding document categorizations. In work by
Long et al. [118], a model is preliminarily trained on
eye-tracking data sets to estimate the reading time of words.
Then, the reading time predicted by the model is used as an
energy score in a neural model for sentiment analysis.
2) Auxiliary Training: Another possibility is to train the
attention model without preliminary training, but by treating
attention learning as an auxiliary task that is performed jointly
with the main task. This procedure has led to good results
4Meaning that there is no target distribution for the attention model.
GALASSI et al.: ATTENTION IN NLP
4303
in many scenarios, including machine translation [30], [35],
visual question answering [137], and domain classiﬁcation for
natural language understanding [138].
In some cases, this mechanism can also be exploited to
have attention model-speciﬁc features. For example, since the
linguistic information is useful for semantic role labeling,
attention can be trained in a multitask setting to represent the
syntactic structure of a sentence. Indeed, in LISA [97], a mul-
tilayer multiheaded architecture for semantic role labeling, one
of the attention heads is trained to perform dependence parsing
as an auxiliary task.
3) Transfer Learning: Furthermore, it is possible to perform
transfer learning across different domains [1] or tasks [115].
By performing a preliminary training of an attentive architec-
ture on a source domain to perform a source task, a mapping
between the inputs and the distribution of weights will be
learned. Then, when another attentive architecture is trained
on the target domain to perform the target task, the pretrained
model can be exploited. Indeed, the desired distribution can be
obtained through the ﬁrst architecture. Attention learning can,
therefore, be treated as an auxiliary task as in the previously
mentioned cases. The difference is that the distribution of the
pretrained model is used as ground truth, instead of using data
labels.
B. Attention Tracking
When attention is applied multiple times on the same
data, as in sequence-to-sequence models, a useful piece of
information could be how much relevance has been given to
the input along different model iterations. Indeed, one may
need to keep track of the weights that the attention model
assigns to each input. For example, in machine translation, it is
desirable to ensure that all the words of the original phrase
are considered. One possibility to maintain this information
is to use a suitable structure and provide it as an additional
input to the attention model. Tu et al. [33] exploited a piece
of symbolic information called coverage to keep track of the
weight associated with the inputs. Every time attention is
computed, such information is fed to the attention model as
a query element, and it is updated according to the output of
the attention itself. In [31], the representation is enhanced by
making use of a subsymbolic representation for the coverage.
C. Modeling the Distribution Function by
Exploiting Prior Knowledge
Another component of the attention model where prior
knowledge can be exploited is the distribution function. For
example, constraints can be applied to the computation of the
new weights to enforce the boundaries on the weights assigned
to the inputs. In [46] and [51], the coverage information is
exploited by a constrained distribution function, regulating the
amount of attention that the same word receives over time.
Prior knowledge could also be exploited to deﬁne or to
infer a distance between the elements in the domain. Such
domain-speciﬁc distance could then be considered in any
position-based distribution function, instead of the positional
distance. An example of distance could be derived by the
syntactical information. Chen et al. [40] and He et al. [109]
used distribution functions that consider the distance between
two words along the dependence graph of a sentence.
VI. CHALLENGES AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
In this section, we discuss open challenges and possible
applications of the attention mechanism in the analysis of
neural networks, as a support of the training process and as an
enabling tool for the integration of symbolic representations
within neural architectures.
A. Attention for Deep Networks Investigation
Whether attention may or may not be considered as a
mean to explain neural networks is currently an open debate.
Some recent studies [10], [11] suggest that attention cannot be
considered a reliable mean to explain or even interpret neural
networks. Nonetheless, other works [6]–[9] advocate the use
of attention weights as an analytic tool. Speciﬁcally, Jain
and Wallace [10] proved that attention is not consistent with
other explainability metrics and that it is easy to create local
adversarial distributions (distributions that are similar to the
trained model but produce a different outcome). Wiegreffe and
Pinter [9] pushed the discussion further, providing experiments
that demonstrate that creating an effective global adversarial
attention model is much more difﬁcult than creating a local one
and that attention weights may contain information regarding
feature importance. Their conclusion is that attention may
indeed provide an explanation of a model, if by explanation,
we mean a plausible, but not necessarily faithful, recon-
struction of the decision-making process, as suggested by
Rudin [151] and Riedl [152].
In the context of a multilayer neural architecture, it is fair to
assume that the deepest levels will compute the most abstract
features [146], [153]. Therefore, the application of attention
to deep networks could enable the selection of higher level
features, thus providing hints to understand which complex
features are relevant for a given task. Following this line of
inquiry in the computer vision domain, Zhang et al. [18]
showed that the application of attention to middle-to-high level
feature sets leads to better performance in image generation.
The visualization of the self-attention weights has revealed that
higher weights are not attributed to proximate image regions,
but rather to those regions whose color or texture is most
similar to that of the query image point. Moreover, the spatial
distribution does not follow a speciﬁc pattern, but instead,
it changes, modeling a region that corresponds to the object
depicted in the image. Identifying abstract features in an input
text might be less immediate than in an image, where the
analysis process is greatly aided by visual intuition. Yet, it may
be interesting to test the effects of the application of attention
at different levels and to assess whether its weights correspond
to speciﬁc high-level features. For example, Vaswani et al.
[36] analyzed the possible relation between attention weights
and syntactic predictions, Voita et al. [49] did the same with
anaphora resolutions, and Clark et al. [6] investigated the
correlation with many linguistic features. Voita et al. [50]
analyzed the behavior of the heads of a multihead model,
4304
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 32, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2021
discovering that different heads develop different behaviors,
which can be related to speciﬁc position or speciﬁc syntactical
element. Yang et al. [39] seemed to conﬁrm that the deeper
levels of neural architectures capture nonlocal aspects of
the textual input. They studied the application of locality at
different depths of an attentive deep architecture and showed
that its introduction is especially beneﬁcial when it is applied
to the layers that are closer to the inputs. Moreover, when
the application of locality is based on a variable-size window,
higher layers tend to have a broader window.
A popular way of investigating whether an architecture
has learned high-level features amounts to using the same
architecture to perform other tasks, as it happens with transfer
learning. This setting has been adopted outside the context of
attention, for example, by Shi et al. [154], who perform syn-
tactic predictions by using the hidden representations learned
with machine translation. In a similar way, attention weights
could be used as input features in a different model, so as
to assess whether they can select relevant information for a
different learning task. This is what happens, for example,
in attention distillation, where a student network is trained
to penalize the most confusing features according to a teacher
network, producing an efﬁcient and robust model in the task of
machine reading comprehension [155]. Similarly, in a transfer
learning setting, attentional heterogeneous transfer [156] has
been exploited in heterolingual text classiﬁcation to selectively
ﬁlter input features from heterogeneous sources.
B. Attention for Outlier Detection and Sample Weighing
Another possible use of attention may be for outlier detec-
tion. In tasks such as classiﬁcation or the creation of a
representative embedding of a speciﬁc class, attention could be
applied over all the samples belonging to that task. In doing so,
the samples associated with small weights could be regarded
as outliers with respect to their class. The same principle could
be potentially applied to each data point in a training set,
independently of its class. The computation of a weight for
each sample could be interpreted as assessing the relevance
of that speciﬁc data point for a speciﬁc task. In principle,
assigning such samples a low weight and excluding them
from the learning could improve a model’s robustness to noisy
input. Moreover, a dynamic computation of these weights
during training would result in a dynamic selection of different
training data in different training phases. While attention-less
adaptive data selection strategies have already proven to be
useful for efﬁciently obtaining more effective models [117],
to the best of our knowledge, no attention-based approach has
been experimented to date.
C. Attention Analysis for Model Evaluation
The impact of attention is greatest when all the irrelevant
elements are excluded from the input sequence, and the
importance of the relevant elements is properly balanced.
A seemingly uniform distribution of the attention weights
could be interpreted as a sign that the attention model has been
unable to identify the more useful elements. This, in turn, may
be due to the data that do not contain useful information for
the task at hand or it may be ascribed to the poor ability of the
model to discriminate information. Nevertheless, the attention
model would be unable to ﬁnd relevant information in the
speciﬁc input sequence, which may lead to errors. The analysis
of the distribution of the attention weights may, therefore, be a
tool for measuring an architecture’s conﬁdence in performing
a task on a given input. We speculate that a high entropy in
the distribution or the presence of weights above a certain
threshold may be correlated with a higher probability of
success of the neural model. These may, therefore, be used as
indicators, to assess the uncertainty of the architecture, as well
as to improve its interpretability. Clearly, this information
would be useful to the user, to better understand the model
and the data, but it may also be exploited by more complex
systems. For example, Heo et al. [157] proposed to exploit
the uncertainty of their stochastic predictive model to avoid
making risky predictions in healthcare tasks.
In the context of an architecture that relies on multiple
strategies to perform its task, such as a hybrid model that relies
on both symbolic and subsymbolic information, the uncer-
tainty of the neural model can be used as a parameter in the
merging strategy. Other contexts in which this information may
be relevant are multitask learning and reinforcement learning.
Examples of exploitation of the uncertainty of the model,
although in contexts other than attention and NLP, can be
found in works by Poggi and Mattoccia [158], Kendall et al.
[159], and Blundell et al. [160].
D. Unsupervised Learning With Attention
To properly exploit unsupervised learning is widely recog-
nized as one of the most important long-term challenges of
AI [146]. As already mentioned in Section V, attention is
typically trained in a supervised architecture, although without
a direct supervision on the attention weights. Nevertheless,
a few works have recently attempted to exploit attention within
purely unsupervised models. We believe this to be a promising
research direction, as the learning process of humans is indeed
largely unsupervised.
For example, in work by He et al. [161], attention is
exploited in a model for aspect extraction in sentiment analy-
sis, with the aim to remove words that are irrelevant for
the sentiment and to ensure more coherence of the predicted
aspects. In work by Zhang and Wu [162], attention is used
within autoencoders in a question-retrieval task. The main
idea is to generate semantic representations of questions, and
self-attention is exploited during the encoding and decoding
phases, with the objective to reconstruct the input sequences,
as in traditional autoencoders. Following a similar idea, Zhang
et al. [163] exploited bidimensional attention-based recursive
autoencoders for bilingual phrase embeddings, whereas Tian
and Fang [164] exploited attentive autoencoders to build sen-
tence representations and performed topic modeling on short
texts. Yang et al. [165] instead adopted an attention-driven
approach to unsupervised sentiment modiﬁcation in order to
explicitly separate sentiment words from content words.
In computer vision, attention alignment has been proposed
for unsupervised domain adaptation, with the aim to align the
GALASSI et al.: ATTENTION IN NLP
4305
attention patterns of networks trained on the source and target
domain, respectively [166]. We believe that this could be an
interesting scenario also for NLP.
E. Neural-Symbolic Learning and Reasoning
Recently, attention mechanisms started to be integrated
within some neural-symbolic models, whose application to
NLP scenarios is still at an early stage. For instance, in the
context of neural logic programming [167], they have been
exploited for reasoning over knowledge graphs, in order
to combine parameter and structure learning of ﬁrst-order
logic rules. They have also been used in logic attention
networks [168] to aggregate information coming from graph
neighbors with
both
rule-
and
network-based
attention
weights. Moreover, prior knowledge has also been exploited
by Shen et al. [169] to enable the attention mechanism to
learn the knowledge representation of entities for ranking
question–answer pairs.
Neural architectures exploiting attention performed well
also in reasoning tasks that are also addressed with symbolic
approaches, such as textual entailment [99]. For instance, Hud-
son and Manning [170] recently proposed a new architecture
for complex reasoning problems, with NLP usually being
one of the target sub-tasks, as in the case of visual question
answering. In such an architecture, attention is used within
several parts of the model, for example, over question words
or to capture long-range dependences with self-attention.
An attempt to introduce constraints in the form of logical
statements within neural networks has been proposed in [171]
where rules governing attention are used to enforce word align-
ment in tasks, such as machine comprehension and natural
language inference.
VII. CONCLUSION
Attention models have become ubiquitous in NLP applica-
tions. Attention can be applied to different input parts, different
representations of the same data, or different features, to obtain
a compact representation of the data as well as to highlight
the relevant information. The selection is performed through a
distribution function, which may consider locality in different
dimensions, such as space, time, or even semantics. Attention
can be used to compare the input data with a query element
based on measures of similarity or signiﬁcance. It can also
autonomously learn what is to be considered relevant, by cre-
ating a representation encoding what the important data should
be similar to. Integrating attention in neural architectures may
thus yield a signiﬁcant performance gain. Moreover, attention
can be used as a tool for investigating the behavior of the
network.
In this article, we have introduced a taxonomy of attention
models, which enabled us to systematically chart a vast portion
of the approaches in the literature and compare them to one
another. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst system-
atic, comprehensive taxonomy of attention models for NLP.
We have also discussed the possible role of attention in
addressing fundamental AI challenges. In particular, we have
shown how attention can be instrumental in injecting knowl-
edge into the neural model, so as to represent speciﬁc features,
or to exploit previously acquired knowledge, as in transfer
learning settings. We speculate that this could pave the way
to new challenging research avenues, where attention could be
exploited to enforce the combination of subsymbolic models
with symbolic knowledge representations to perform reasoning
tasks or to address natural language understanding. Recent
results also suggest that attention could be a key ingredient of
unsupervised learning architectures, by guiding and focusing
the training process where no supervision is given in advance.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Bao, S. Chang, M. Yu, and R. Barzilay, “Deriving machine attention
from human rationales,” in Proc. EMNLP, 2018, pp. 1903–1913.
[2] D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Neural machine translation by
jointly learning to align and translate,” in Proc. ICLR, 2015, pp. 1–15.
[3] H. Larochelle and G. E. Hinton, “Learning to combine foveal
glimpses with a third-order Boltzmann machine,” in Proc. NIPS, 2010,
pp. 1243–1251.
[4] V. Mnih, N. Heess, A. Graves, and K. Kavukcuoglu, “Recurrent models
of visual attention,” in Proc. NIPS. Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran
Associates, 2014, pp. 2204–2212.
[5] R. Guidotti, A. Monreale, S. Ruggieri, F. Turini, F. Giannotti, and
D. Pedreschi, “A survey of methods for explaining black box models,”
ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 51, no. 5, pp. 93:1–93:42, Aug. 2018.
[6] K. Clark, U. Khandelwal, O. Levy, and C. D. Manning, “What
does BERT look at? An analysis of BERT’s attention,” in Black-
boxNLP@ACL. Florence, Italy: ACL, Aug. 2019, pp. 276–286.
[7] G. Letarte, F. Paradis, P. Giguère, and F. Laviolette, “Importance of
self-attention for sentiment analysis,” in Proc. BlackboxNLP@EMNLP,
2018, pp. 267–275.
[8] S. Vashishth, S. Upadhyay, G. S. Tomar, and M. Faruqui, “Attention
interpretability across NLP tasks,” 2019, arXiv:1909.11218. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1909.11218
[9] S. Wiegreffe and Y. Pinter, “Attention is not not explanation,” in Proc.
EMNLP/IJCNLP, 2019, pp. 11–20.
[10] S. Jain and B. C. Wallace, “Attention is not explanation,” in Proc.
NAACL-HLT, 2019, pp. 3543–3556.
[11] S. Serrano and N. A. Smith, “Is attention interpretable?” CoRR,
vol. abs/1906.03731, 2019.
[12] S. Liu, T. Li, Z. Li, V. Srikumar, V. Pascucci, and P.-T. Bremer, “Visual
interrogation of attention-based models for natural language inference
and machine comprehension,” in Proc. EMNLP Syst. Demonstrations,
2018, pp. 36–41.
[13] J. Lee, J.-H. Shin, and J.-S. Kim, “Interactive visualization and manip-
ulation of attention-based neural machine translation,” in Proc. EMNLP
Syst. Demonstrations, 2017, pp. 121–126.
[14] A. Gatt and E. Krahmer, “Survey of the state of the art in natural
language generation: Core tasks, applications and evaluation,” J. Artif.
Intell. Res., vol. 61, pp. 65–170, Jan. 2018.
[15] T. Young, D. Hazarika, S. Poria, and E. Cambria, “Recent trends in
deep learning based natural language processing [review article],” IEEE
Comput. Intell. Mag., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 55–75, Aug. 2018.
[16] K. Xu et al., “Show, attend and tell: Neural image caption generation
with visual attention,” in Proc. ICML, vol. 37, 2015, pp. 2048–2057.
[17] K. Gregor, I. Danihelka, A. Graves, D. Rezende, and D. Wierstra,
“Draw: A recurrent neural network for image generation,” in Proc.
ICML, in Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 37, 2015,
pp. 1462–1471.
[18] H. Zhang, I. Goodfellow, D. Metaxas, and A. Odena, “Self-attention
generative adversarial networks,” in Proc. ICML, vol. 97, 2019,
pp. 7354–7363.
[19] J. Chorowski, D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “End-to-end
continuous speech recognition using attention-based recurrent NN:
First results,” CoRR, vol. abs/1412.1602, 2014.
[20] W. Chan, N. Jaitly, Q. Le, and O. Vinyals, “Listen, attend and
spell: A neural network for large vocabulary conversational speech
recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process.
(ICASSP), Mar. 2016, pp. 4960–4964.
[21] M. Sperber, J. Niehues, G. Neubig, S. Stüker, and A. Waibel,
“Self-attentional acoustic models,” in Proc. Interspeech, Sep. 2018,
pp. 3723–3727.
4306
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 32, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2021
[22] S. Wang, L. Hu, L. Cao, X. Huang, D. Lian, and W. Liu, “Attention-
based transactional context embedding for next-item recommendation,”
in Proc. AAAI, 2018, pp. 2532–2539.
[23] H. Ying et al., “Sequential recommender system based on hierarchical
attention networks,” in Proc. IJCAI, Jul. 2018, pp. 3926–3932.
[24] D. T. Tran, A. Iosiﬁdis, J. Kanniainen, and M. Gabbouj, “Temporal
attention-augmented bilinear network for ﬁnancial time-series data
analysis,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 30, no. 5,
pp. 1407–1418, May 2019.
[25] H. Song, D. Rajan, J. J. Thiagarajan, and A. Spanias, “Attend and
diagnose: Clinical time series analysis using attention models,” in Proc.
AAAI, 2018, pp. 4091–4098.
[26] J. Choi, B.-J. Lee, and B.-T. Zhang, “Multi-focus attention network
for efﬁcient deep reinforcement learning,” CoRR, vol. abs/1712.04603,
2017.
[27] O. Vinyals, M. Fortunato, and N. Jaitly, “Pointer networks,” in Proc.
NIPS. Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates, 2015, pp. 2692–2700.
[28] W. Kool, H. van Hoof, and M. Welling, “Attention, learn to solve
routing problems!” in Proc. ICLR, 2019, pp. 1–25.
[29] M.
Luong,
H.
Pham,
and
C.
D.
Manning,
“Effective
approaches to attention-based neural machine translation,” CoRR,
vol. abs/1508.04025, 2015.
[30] H. Mi, Z. Wang, and A. Ittycheriah, “Supervised attentions for neural
machine translation,” in Proc. EMNLP, 2016, pp. 2283–2288.
[31] H. Mi, B. Sankaran, Z. Wang, and A. Ittycheriah, “Coverage embed-
ding models for neural machine translation,” in Proc. EMNLP, 2016,
pp. 955–960.
[32] F. Meng, Z. Lu, H. Li, and Q. Liu, “Interactive attention for neural
machine translation,” in Proc. COLING, 2016, pp. 2174–2185.
[33] Z. Tu, Z. Lu, Y. Liu, X. Liu, and H. Li, “Modeling coverage for neural
machine translation,” in Proc. ACL, 2016, pp. 76–85.
[34] J. Li, Z. Tu, B. Yang, M. R. Lyu, and T. Zhang, “Multi-head
attention with disagreement regularization,” in Proc. EMNLP, 2018,
pp. 2897–2903.
[35] L. Liu, M. Utiyama, A. Finch, and E. Sumita, “Neural machine
translation with supervised attention,”
in Proc. COLING, 2016,
pp. 3093–3102.
[36] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. NIPS. Red Hook,
NY, USA: Curran Associates, 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[37] D. Britz, A. Goldie, M.-T. Luong, and Q. Le, “Massive exploration
of neural machine translation architectures,” in Proc. EMNLP, 2017,
pp. 1442–1451.
[38] A. Bapna, M. Chen, O. Firat, Y. Cao, and Y. Wu, “Training deeper
neural machine translation models with transparent attention,” in Proc.
EMNLP, 2018, pp. 3028–3033.
[39] B. Yang, Z. Tu, D. F. Wong, F. Meng, L. S. Chao, and T. Zhang,
“Modeling localness for self-attention networks,” in Proc. EMNLP,
2018, pp. 4449–4458.
[40] K. Chen, R. Wang, M. Utiyama, E. Sumita, and T. Zhao, “Syntax-
directed attention for neural machine translation,” in Proc. AAAI, 2018,
pp. 4792–4799.
[41] L. Wu, F. Tian, L. Zhao, J. Lai, and T. Liu, “Word attention for
sequence to sequence text understanding,” in Proc. AAAI, 2018,
pp. 5578–5585.
[42] T. Domhan, “How much attention do you need? A granular analysis
of neural machine translation architectures,” in Proc. ACL, 2018,
pp. 1799–1808.
[43] S. Zhao and Z. Zhang, “Attention-via-attention neural machine trans-
lation,” in Proc. AAAI, 2018, pp. 563–570.
[44] J. Lin, X. Sun, X. Ren, M. Li, and Q. Su, “Learning when to
concentrate or divert attention: Self-adaptive attention temperature for
neural machine translation,” in Proc. EMNLP, 2018, pp. 2985–2990.
[45] J. Lin, S. Ma, Q. Su, and X. Sun, “Decoding-history-based adap-
tive control of attention for neural machine translation,” CoRR,
vol. abs/1802.01812, 2018.
[46] C. Malaviya, P. Ferreira, and A. F. T. Martins, “Sparse and con-
strained attention for neural machine translation,” in Proc. ACL, 2018,
pp. 370–376.
[47] Y. Kim, C. Denton, L. Hoang, and A. M. Rush, “Structured attention
networks,” in Proc. ICLR, 2017, pp. 1–21.
[48] P. Michel, O. Levy, and G. Neubig, “Are sixteen heads really better
than one?” in Proc. NeurIPS, Vancouver, BC, Canada, Dec. 2019,
pp. 14014–14024.
[49] E. Voita, P. Serdyukov, R. Sennrich, and I. Titov, “Context-aware neural
machine translation learns anaphora resolution,” in Proc. ACL, 2018,
pp. 1264–1274.
[50] E. Voita, D. Talbot, F. Moiseev, R. Sennrich, and I. Titov, “Analyzing
multi-head self-attention: Specialized heads do the heavy lifting, the
rest can be pruned,” in Proc. ACL, 2019, pp. 5797–5808.
[51] A. F. T. Martins and J. Kreutzer, “Learning what’s easy: Fully differen-
tiable neural easy-ﬁrst taggers,” in Proc. EMNLP, 2017, pp. 349–362.
[52] Z. Yang, D. Yang, C. Dyer, X. He, A. Smola, and E. Hovy, “Hierar-
chical attention networks for document classiﬁcation,” in Proc. HLT-
NAACL, 2016, pp. 1480–1489.
[53] Y. Zhang, I. Marshall, and B. C. Wallace, “Rationale-augmented
convolutional neural networks for text classiﬁcation,” in Proc. EMNLP,
2016, pp. 795–804.
[54] J. Pavlopoulos, P. Malakasiotis, and I. Androutsopoulos, “Deeper
attention to abusive user content moderation,” in Proc. EMNLP, 2017,
pp. 1125–1135.
[55] A. M. Rush, S. Chopra, and J. Weston, “A neural attention model
for abstractive sentence summarization,” in Proc. EMNLP, 2015,
pp. 379–389.
[56] H. Li, J. Zhu, T. Liu, J. Zhang, and C. Zong, “Multi-modal sentence
summarization with modality attention and image ﬁltering,” in Proc.
IJCAI, 2018, pp. 4152–4158.
[57] A. Lauscher, G. Glavaš, S. P. Ponzetto, and K. Eckert, “Investigating the
role of argumentation in the rhetorical analysis of scientiﬁc publications
with neural multi-task learning models,” in Proc. EMNLP, 2018,
pp. 3326–3338.
[58] I. C. T. Ngoko, A. Mukherjee, and B. Kabaso, “Abstractive text
summarization using recurrent neural networks: Systematic literature
review,” in Proc. ICICKM, vol. 13, 2018, pp. 435–439.
[59] S. Sukhbaatar, A. Szlam, J. Weston, and R. Fergus, “End-to-end
memory networks,” in Proc. NIPS. Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran
Associates, 2015, pp. 2440–2448.
[60] J. Devlin, M. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in Proc.
NAACL-HLT, 2019, pp. 4171–4186.
[61] M. Daniluk, T. Rocktäschel, J. Welbl, and S. Riedel, “Frustratingly
short attention spans in neural language modeling,” in Proc. ICLR,
2017, pp. 1–10.
[62] K. M. Hermann et al., “Teaching machines to read and compre-
hend,” in Proc. NIPS. Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates, 2015,
pp. 1693–1701.
[63] J. Cheng, L. Dong, and M. Lapata, “Long short-term memory-networks
for machine reading,” in Proc. EMNLP, 2016, pp. 551–561.
[64] F. Hill, A. Bordes, S. Chopra, and J. Weston, “The goldilocks principle:
Reading children’s books with explicit memory representations,” in
Proc. ICLR, 2016, pp. 1–13.
[65] Y. Cui, T. Liu, Z. Chen, S. Wang, and G. Hu, “Consensus attention-
based neural networks for Chinese reading comprehension,” in Proc.
COLING, 2016, pp. 1777–1786.
[66] R. Kadlec, M. Schmid, O. Bajgar, and J. Kleindienst, “Text under-
standing with the attention sum reader network,” in Proc. ACL, 2016,
pp. 908–918.
[67] A. Sordoni, P. Bachman, and Y. Bengio, “Iterative alternating neural
attention for machine reading,” CoRR, vol. abs/1606.02245, 2016.
[68] B. Wang, K. Liu, and J. Zhao, “Inner attention based recurrent neural
networks for answer selection,” in Proc. ACL, 2016, pp. 1288–1297.
[69] C. N. dos Santos, M. Tan, B. Xiang, and B. Zhou, “Attentive pooling
networks,” CoRR, vol. abs/1602.03609, 2016.
[70] Y. Cui, Z. Chen, S. Wei, S. Wang, T. Liu, and G. Hu, “Attention-over-
attention neural networks for reading comprehension,” in Proc. ACL,
2017, pp. 593–602.
[71] B. Dhingra, H. Liu, Z. Yang, W. Cohen, and R. Salakhutdinov,
“Gated-attention readers for text comprehension,” in Proc. ACL, 2017,
pp. 1832–1846.
[72] Y. Shen, P.-S. Huang, J. Gao, and W. Chen, “ReasoNet: Learning
to stop reading in machine comprehension,” in Proc. KDD, 2017,
pp. 1047–1055.
[73] S. Kundu and H. T. Ng, “A question-focused multi-factor attention
network for question answering,” in Proc. AAAI, 2018, pp. 5828–5835.
[74] H. Zhu, F. Wei, B. Qin, and T. Liu, “Hierarchical attention ﬂow
for multiple-choice reading comprehension,” in Proc. AAAI, 2018,
pp. 6077–6085.
[75] Y. Tay, A. T. Luu, and S. C. Hui, “Hermitian co-attention networks
for text matching in asymmetrical domains,” in Proc. IJCAI, Jul. 2018,
pp. 4425–4431.
[76] Y. Hao et al., “An end-to-end model for question answering over
knowledge base with cross-attention combining global knowledge,” in
Proc. ACL, 2017, pp. 221–231.
[77] Y. Diao et al., “WECA: A WordNet-encoded collocation-attention
network for homographic pun recognition,” in Proc. EMNLP, 2018,
pp. 2507–2516.
GALASSI et al.: ATTENTION IN NLP
4307
[78] A. Zadeh, P. P. Liang, S. Poria, P. Vij, E. Cambria, and L. Morency,
“Multi-attention recurrent network for human communication compre-
hension,” in Proc. AAAI, 2018, pp. 5642–5649.
[79] H. Chen, G. Ding, Z. Lin, Y. Guo, and J. Han, “Attend to knowl-
edge: Memory-enhanced attention network for image captioning,” in
Advances in Brain Inspired Cognitive Systems Cham, Switzerland:
Springer, 2018, pp. 161–171.
[80] J. Lu, J. Yang, D. Batra, and D. Parikh, “Hierarchical question-image
co-attention for visual question answering,” in Proc. NIPS. Red Hook,
NY, USA: Curran Associates, 2016, pp. 289–297.
[81] Z. Yang, X. He, J. Gao, L. Deng, and A. Smola, “Stacked attention
networks for image question answering,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 21–29.
[82] J. Song, P. Zeng, L. Gao, and H. T. Shen, “From pixels to objects:
Cubic visual attention for visual question answering,” in Proc. IJCAI,
Jul. 2018, pp. 906–912.
[83] D. S. Chaplot, K. M. Sathyendra, R. K. Pasumarthi, D. Rajagopal,
and R. Salakhutdinov, “Gated-attention architectures for task-oriented
language grounding,” in Proc. AAAI, 2018, pp. 2819–2826.
[84] R. Zhang, C. N. dos Santos, M. Yasunaga, B. Xiang, and D. Radev,
“Neural coreference resolution with deep biafﬁne attention by joint
mention detection and mention clustering,” in Proc. ACL, 2018,
pp. 102–107.
[85] G. Kundu, A. Sil, R. Florian, and W. Hamza, “Neural cross-lingual
coreference resolution and its application to entity linking,” in Proc.
ACL, 2018, pp. 395–400.
[86] Q. Zhang, J. Fu, X. Liu, and X. Huang, “Adaptive co-attention
network for named entity recognition in tweets,” in Proc. AAAI, 2018,
pp. 5674–5681.
[87] R. Dong and D. Smith, “Multi-input attention for unsupervised OCR
correction,” in Proc. ACL, 2018, pp. 2363–2372.
[88] F. Nie, Y. Cao, J. Wang, C. Lin, and R. Pan, “Mention and entity
description co-attention for entity disambiguation,” in Proc. AAAI,
2018, pp. 5908–5915.
[89] A. Parikh, O. Täckström, D. Das, and J. Uszkoreit, “A decomposable
attention model for natural language inference,” in Proc. EMNLP, 2016,
pp. 2249–2255.
[90] Y. Tay, A. T. Luu, and S. C. Hui, “Compare, compress and propagate:
Enhancing neural architectures with alignment factorization for natural
language inference,” in Proc. EMNLP, 2018, pp. 1565–1575.
[91] A. Martins and R. Astudillo, “From softmax to sparsemax: A sparse
model of attention and multi-label classiﬁcation,” in Proc. ICML,
vol. 48, 2016, pp. 1614–1623.
[92] S. Wang and J. Jiang, “Learning natural language inference with
LSTM,” in Proc. HLT-NAACL, 2016, pp. 1442–1451.
[93] T. Shen, T. Zhou, G. Long, J. Jiang, S. Pan, and C. Zhang, “Disan:
Directional self-attention network for RNN/CNN-free language under-
standing,” in Proc. AAAI, 2018, pp. 5446–5455.
[94] T. Shen, T. Zhou, G. Long, J. Jiang, S. Wang, and C. Zhang,
“Reinforced self-attention network: A hybrid of hard and soft attention
for sequence modeling,” in Proc. IJCAI, Jul. 2018, pp. 4345–4352.
[95] Q. Chen, Z.-H. Ling, and X. Zhu, “Enhancing sentence embedding
with generalized pooling,” in Proc. COLING, 2018, pp. 1815–1826.
[96] I. Lopez-Gazpio, M. Maritxalar, M. Lapata, and E. Agirre, “Word n-
gram attention models for sentence similarity and inference,” Expert
Syst. Appl., vol. 132, pp. 1–11, Oct. 2019. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0957417419302842
[97] E. Strubell, P. Verga, D. Andor, D. Weiss, and A. McCallum,
“Linguistically-informed self-attention for semantic role labeling,” in
Proc. EMNLP, 2018, pp. 5027–5038.
[98] Z. Tan, M. Wang, J. Xie, Y. Chen, and X. Shi, “Deep semantic role
labeling with self-attention,” in Proc. AAAI, 2018, pp. 4929–4936.
[99] T. Rocktäschel, E. Grefenstette, K. M. Hermann, T. Kociský, and
P. Blunsom, “Reasoning about entailment with neural attention,” in
Proc. ICLR, 2016, pp. 1–9.
[100] Z. Lin et al., “A structured self-attentive sentence embedding,” in Proc.
ICLR, 2017, pp. 1–15.
[101] F. Luo, T. Liu, Q. Xia, B. Chang, and Z. Sui, “Incorporating
glosses into neural word sense disambiguation,” in Proc. ACL, 2018,
pp. 2473–2482.
[102] O. Vinyals, L. U. Kaiser, T. Koo, S. Petrov, I. Sutskever, and G. Hinton,
“Grammar as a foreign language,” in Proc. NIPS. Red Hook, NY, USA:
Curran Associates, 2015, pp. 2773–2781.
[103] N. Kitaev and D. Klein, “Constituency parsing with a self-attentive
encoder,” in Proc. ACL, 2018, pp. 2676–2686.
[104] R. Kohita, H. Noji, and Y. Matsumoto, “Dynamic feature selection
with attention in incremental parsing,” in Proc. COLING, 2018,
pp. 785–794.
[105] T. Dozat and C. D. Manning, “Deep biafﬁne attention for neural
dependency parsing,” in Proc. ICLR, 2017, pp. 1–8.
[106] D. Tang, B. Qin, and T. Liu, “Aspect level sentiment classiﬁcation with
deep memory network,” in Proc. EMNLP, 2016, pp. 214–224.
[107] J. Cheng, S. Zhao, J. Zhang, I. King, X. Zhang, and H. Wang,
“Aspect-level sentiment classiﬁcation with heat (hierarchical attention)
network,” in Proc. CIKM, 2017, pp. 97–106.
[108] Y. Wang, M. Huang, X. Zhu, and L. Zhao, “Attention-based LSTM
for aspect-level sentiment classiﬁcation,” in Proc. EMNLP, 2016,
pp. 606–615.
[109] R. He, W. S. Lee, H. T. Ng, and D. Dahlmeier, “Effective attention
modeling for aspect-level sentiment classiﬁcation,” in Proc. COLING,
2018, pp. 1121–1131.
[110] P. Zhu and T. Qian, “Enhanced aspect level sentiment classiﬁcation
with auxiliary memory,” in Proc. COLING, 2018, pp. 1077–1087.
[111] D. Ma, S. Li, X. Zhang, and H. Wang, “Interactive attention net-
works for aspect-level sentiment classiﬁcation,” in Proc. IJCAI, 2017,
pp. 4068–4074.
[112] F. Fan, Y. Feng, and D. Zhao, “Multi-grained attention network
for aspect-level sentiment classiﬁcation,” in Proc. EMNLP, 2018,
pp. 3433–3442.
[113] Y. Ma, H. Peng, and E. Cambria, “Targeted aspect-based sentiment
analysis via embedding commonsense knowledge into an attentive
LSTM,” in Proc. AAAI, 2018, pp. 5876–5883.
[114] Y. Tay, A. T. Luu, S. C. Hui, and J. Su, “Attentive gated lexicon reader
with contrastive contextual co-attention for sentiment classiﬁcation,” in
Proc. EMNLP, 2018, pp. 3443–3453.
[115] J. Yu, L. Marujo, J. Jiang, P. Karuturi, and W. Brendel, “Improving
multi-label emotion classiﬁcation via sentiment classiﬁcation with dual
attention transfer network,” in Proc. EMNLP, 2018, pp. 1097–1102.
[116] Z. Li, Y. Wei, Y. Zhang, and Q. Yang, “Hierarchical attention transfer
network for cross-domain sentiment classiﬁcation,” in Proc. AAAI,
2018, pp. 5852–5859.
[117] Y. Fan, F. Tian, T. Qin, J. Bian, and T.-Y. Liu, “Learning what data to
learn,” CoRR, 2017, pp. 1–7.
[118] Y. Long, R. Xiang, Q. Lu, C.-R. Huang, and M. Li, “Improving
attention model based on cognition grounded data for sentiment analy-
sis,” IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput., early access, Mar. 4, 2019, doi:
10.1109/TAFFC.2019.2903056.
[119] J. Du, L. Gui, Y. He, R. Xu, and X. Wang, “Convolution-based neural
attention with applications to sentiment classiﬁcation,” IEEE Access,
vol. 7, pp. 27983–27992, 2019.
[120] X. Li, L. Bing, P. Li, W. Lam, and Z. Yang, “Aspect term extraction
with history attention and selective transformation,” in Proc. IJCAI,
2018, pp. 4194–4200.
[121] D. Chen, J. Du, L. Bing, and R. Xu, “Hybrid neural attention for
agreement/disagreement inference in online debates,” in Proc. EMNLP,
2018, pp. 665–670.
[122] I. Habernal and I. Gurevych, “What makes a convincing argument?
Empirical analysis and detecting attributes of convincingness in Web
argumentation,” in Proc. EMNLP, 2016, pp. 1214–1223.
[123] C. Stab, T. Miller, B. Schiller, P. Rai, and I. Gurevych, “Cross-topic
argument mining from heterogeneous sources,” in Proc. EMNLP, 2018,
pp. 3664–3674.
[124] M. Spliethöver, J. Klaff, and H. Heuer, “Is it worth the attention?
A comparative evaluation of attention layers for argument unit seg-
mentation,” in ArgMining@ACL. Florence, Italy: ACL, Aug. 2019,
pp. 74–82.
[125] M. Spliethöver, J. Klaff, and H. Heuer, “Is it worth the attention?
A comparative evaluation of attention layers for argument unit seg-
mentation,” in Proc. 6th Workshop Argument Mining. Florence, Italy:
Association for Computational Linguistics, Aug. 2019, pp. 74–82.
[Online]. Available: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W19-4509
[126] F. Barbieri, L. E. Anke, J. Camacho-Collados, S. Schockaert, and
H. Saggion, “Interpretable emoji prediction via label-wise attention
LSTMs,” in Proc. EMNLP, 2018, pp. 4766–4771.
[127] X. Li, K. Song, S. Feng, D. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “A co-attention neural
network model for emotion cause analysis with emotional context
awareness,” in Proc. EMNLP, 2018, pp. 4752–4757.
[128] L. Gui, J. Hu, Y. He, R. Xu, Q. Lu, and J. Du, “A question answering
approach for emotion cause extraction,” in Proc. EMNLP, 2017,
pp. 1593–1602.
4308
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 32, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2021
[129] X. Wang, Y. Hua, E. Kodirov, G. Hu, and N. M. Robertson, “Deep
metric learning by online soft mining and class-aware attention,” in
Proc. AAAI, 2019, pp. 5361–5368, doi: 10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33015361.
[130] J. B. Lee, R. A. Rossi, S. Kim, N. K. Ahmed, and E. Koh, “Attention
models in graphs: A survey,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discovery Data,
vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 62:1–62:25, Nov. 2019.
[131] Y. Goldberg, Neural Network Methods for Natural Language Process-
ing (Synthesis Lectures on Human Language Technologies), vol. 10,
no. 1. San Rafael, CA, USA: Morgan & Claypool, 2017.
[132] G. Tang, M. Müller, A. Rios, and R. Sennrich, “Why self-attention?
A targeted evaluation of neural machine translation architectures,” in
Proc. EMNLP, 2018, pp. 4263–4272.
[133] M. Schuster and K. K. Paliwal, “Bidirectional recurrent neural net-
works,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 45, no. 11, pp. 2673–2681,
Nov. 1997.
[134] C. Ma, L. Liu, A. Tamura, T. Zhao, and E. Sumita, “Deterministic
attention for sequence-to-sequence constituent parsing,” in Proc. AAAI,
2017, pp. 3237–3243.
[135] L. Liu, M. Zhu, and S. Shi, “Improving sequence-to-sequence con-
stituency parsing,” in Proc. AAAI, 2018, pp. 4873–4880.
[136] S. Maharjan, M. Montes, F. A. González, and T. Solorio, “A genre-
aware attention model to improve the likability prediction of books,”
in Proc. EMNLP, 2018, pp. 3381–3391.
[137] T. Qiao, J. Dong, and D. Xu, “Exploring human-like attention
supervision in visual question answering,” in Proc. AAAI, 2018,
pp. 7300–7307.
[138] J.-K. Kim and Y.-B. Kim, “Supervised domain enablement atten-
tion for personalized domain classiﬁcation,” in Proc. EMNLP, 2018,
pp. 894–899.
[139] D. Kiela,
C. Wang, and K. Cho,
“Dynamic
meta-embeddings
for improved sentence representations,” in Proc. EMNLP, 2018,
pp. 1466–1477.
[140] Y. Bengio, P. Simard, and P. Frasconi, “Learning long-term depen-
dencies with gradient descent is difﬁcult,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.,
vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 157–166, Mar. 1994.
[141] C. Wu, F. Wu, J. Liu, and Y. Huang, “Hierarchical user and item
representation with three-tier attention for recommendation,” in Proc.
NAACL-HLT, 2019, pp. 1818–1826.
[142] A. Graves, G. Wayne, and I. Danihelka, “Neural turing machines,”
CoRR, vol. abs/1410.5401, 2014.
[143] X. Glorot, A. Bordes, and Y. Bengio, “Deep sparse rectiﬁer neural
networks,” in Proc. AISTATS, vol. 15, 2011, pp. 315–323.
[144] G. Klambauer, T. Unterthiner, A. Mayr, and S. Hochreiter, “Self-
normalizing neural networks,” in Proc. NIPS. Red Hook, NY, USA:
Curran Associates, 2017, pp. 971–980.
[145] J. Du, J. Han, A. Way, and D. Wan, “Multi-level structured self-
attentions
for distantly
supervised relation extraction,”
in Proc.
EMNLP, 2018, pp. 2216–2225.
[146] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature, vol. 521,
no. 7553, p. 436, 2015.
[147] L. Getoor and B. Taskar, Introduction to Statistical Relational Learn-
ing, vol. 1. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2007.
[148] A. S. D. Garcez, K. B. Broda, and D. M. Gabbay, Neural-Symbolic
Learning Systems: Foundations and Applications. Berlin, Germany:
Springer, 2012.
[149] M. Lippi, “Reasoning with deep learning: An open challenge,” in Proc.
CEUR Workshop, vol. 1802, 2017, pp. 38–43.
[150] O. Zaidan, J. Eisner, and C. Piatko, “Using ‘annotator rationales’
to improve machine learning for text categorization,” in Proc. HLT-
NAACL, 2007, pp. 260–267.
[151] C. Rudin, “Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high
stakes decisions and use interpretable models instead,” Nature Mach.
Intell., vol. 1, pp. 206–215, May 2019.
[152] M. O. Riedl, “Human-centered artiﬁcial intelligence and machine
learning,” Hum. Behav. Emerg. Technol., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 33–36, 2019.
[153] Q. V. Le, “Building high-level features using large scale unsupervised
learning,” in Proc. IEEE ICASSP, May 2013, pp. 8595–8598.
[154] X. Shi, I. Padhi, and K. Knight, “Does string-based neural MT learn
source syntax?” in Proc. EMNLP, 2016, pp. 1526–1534.
[155] M. Hu et al., “Attention-guided answer distillation for machine reading
comprehension,” in Proc. EMNLP, 2018, pp. 2077–2086.
[156] S. Moon and J. G. Carbonell, “Completely heterogeneous transfer
learning with attention—What and what not to transfer,” in Proc. IJCAI,
2017, pp. 2508–2514.
[157] J. Heo et al., “Uncertainty-aware attention for reliable interpretation
and prediction,” in Proc. NIPS. Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Asso-
ciates, 2018, pp. 917–926.
[158] M. Poggi and S. Mattoccia, “Learning a general-purpose conﬁdence
measure based on O(1) features and a smarter aggregation strategy for
semi global matching,” in Proc. 3DV, 2016, pp. 509–518.
[159] R. Cipolla, Y. Gal, and A. Kendall, “Multi-task learning using
uncertainty to weigh losses for scene geometry and semantics,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018,
pp. 7482–7491.
[160] C. Blundell, J. Cornebise, K. Kavukcuoglu, and D. Wierstra, “Weight
uncertainty in neural networks,” in Proc. ICML, 2015, pp. 1613–1622.
[161] R. He, W. S. Lee, H. T. Ng, and D. Dahlmeier, “An unsupervised
neural attention model for aspect extraction,” in Proc. ACL, vol. 1,
2017, pp. 388–397.
[162] M. Zhang and Y. Wu, “An unsupervised model with attention autoen-
coders for question retrieval,” in Proc. AAAI, 2018, pp. 4978–4986.
[163] B. Zhang, D. Xiong, and J. Su, “Battrae: Bidimensional attention-based
recursive autoencoders for learning bilingual phrase embeddings,” in
Proc. AAAI, 2017, pp. 3372–3378.
[164] T. Tian and Z. F. Fang, “Attention-based autoencoder topic model
for short texts,” Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 151, pp. 1134–1139,
Jan. 2019.
[165] P. Yang, J. Lin, J. Xu, J. Xie, Q. Su, and X. Sun, “Speciﬁcity-driven
cascading approach for unsupervised sentiment modiﬁcation,” in Proc.
EMNLP-IJCNLP, 2019, pp. 5511–5520.
[166] G. Kang, L. Zheng, Y. Yan, and Y. Yang, “Deep adversarial attention
alignment for unsupervised domain adaptation: The beneﬁt of target
expectation maximization,” in Proc. ECCV, 2018, pp. 401–416.
[167] F. Yang, Z. Yang, and W. W. Cohen, “Differentiable learning of
logical rules for knowledge base reasoning,” in Proc. NIPS, 2017,
pp. 2319–2328.
[168] P. Wang, J. Han, C. Li, and R. Pan, “Logic attention based neighbor-
hood aggregation for inductive knowledge graph embedding,” in Proc.
AAAI, vol. 33, 2019, pp. 7152–7159.
[169] Y. Shen et al., “Knowledge-aware attentive neural network for ranking
question answer pairs,” in Proc. SIGIR, 2018, pp. 901–904.
[170] D. A. Hudson and C. D. Manning, “Compositional attention networks
for machine reasoning,” in Proc. ICLR, 2018, pp. 1–20.
[171] T. Li and V. Srikumar, “Augmenting neural networks with ﬁrst-order
logic,” in Proc. ACL, 2019, pp. 292–302.
Andrea Galassi received the master’s degree in
computer
engineering
from
the
Department
of
Computer Science and Engineering, University of
Bologna, Bologna, Italy, in 2017, where he is cur-
rently pursuing the Ph.D. degree.
His research activity concerns artiﬁcial intelligence
and machine learning,
focusing on argumenta-
tion mining and related natural language process-
ing (NLP) tasks. Other research interests involve
deep learning applications to games and constraint
satisfaction problems (CSPs).
Marco Lippi held positions at the University of
Florence, Florence, Italy, University of Siena, Siena,
Italy, and the University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
He was a Visiting Scholar with Université Pierre
et Marie Curie (UPMC), Paris, France. He is cur-
rently an Associate Professor with the Department
of Sciences and Methods for Engineering, Univer-
sity of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
His work focuses on machine learning and artiﬁ-
cial intelligence, with applications to several areas,
including argumentation mining, legal informatics,
and medicine.
Prof. Lippi received the “E. Caianiello” Prize for the Best Italian Ph.D.
Thesis in the ﬁeld of neural networks in 2012.
Paolo Torroni has been an Associate Professor
with the University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, since
2015. He has edited over 20 books and special
issues and authored over 150 articles in compu-
tational logics, multiagent systems, argumentation,
and natural language processing. His main research
interest includes artiﬁcial intelligence.
Prof.
Torroni
serves
as
an
Associate
Edi-
tor for Fundamenta Informaticae and Intelligenza
Artiﬁciale.
