Title: Thesis proposal: Are We Losing Textual Diversity to Natural Language Processing?
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2409.09568v1
--------------------------------------------------

Thesis proposal: Are We Losing Textual Diversity to Natural Language
Processing?
Josef Jon
Charles University, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics
Prague, Czech Republic
jon@ufal.mff.cuni.cz
Abstract
This thesis argues that the currently widely
used Natural Language Processing algorithms
possibly have various limitations related to the
properties of the texts they handle and produce.
With the wide adoption of these tools in rapid
progress, we must ask what these limitations
are and what are the possible implications of
integrating such tools even more deeply into
our daily lives.
As a testbed, we have chosen the task of Neu-
ral Machine Translation (NMT). Nevertheless,
we aim for general insights and outcomes, ap-
plicable even to current Large Language Mod-
els (LLMs). We ask whether the algorithms
used in NMT have inherent inductive biases
that are beneficial for most types of inputs but
might harm the processing of untypical texts.
To explore this hypothesis, we define a set
of measures to quantify text diversity based
on its statistical properties, like uniformity or
rhythmicity of word-level surprisal, on multiple
scales (sentence, discourse, language). We then
conduct a series of experiments to investigate
whether NMT systems struggle with maintain-
ing the diversity of such texts, potentially reduc-
ing the richness of the language generated by
these systems, compared to human translators.
We search for potential causes of these limita-
tions rooted in training objectives and decoding
algorithms. Our ultimate goal is to develop al-
ternatives that do not enforce uniformity in the
distribution of statistical properties in the out-
put and that allow for better global planning of
the translation, taking into account the intrinsic
ambiguity of the translation task.
1
Introduction
Language technologies powered by machine learn-
ing, such as predictive typing, machine translation,
text generation, or chat assistants have become
deeply integrated into our daily lives. With the
advancement of Large Language Models (LLMs),
we can expect that interaction with such tools will
become an even more integral part of our work and
social interactions. Yet, many important questions
regarding these tools remain unanswered.
Do they understand language the same way we
do? Are they equipped to capture and reflect the
full spectrum of a language’s intricacies, innova-
tions, and diversity as effectively as a human? Are
there any biases within the algorithms themselves
that can be beneficial for processing ordinary types
of texts, but harmful for specific cases that deviate
from the usual rules found in mundane text con-
tent?
As our interaction with these machines deepens,
is it possible that the users (i.e. most of the world’s
population) will adapt their language, simplify it
for the machine to understand better? Could this
lead to further proliferation of simplistic, mundane
text, which will be in turn used to train a new gen-
eration of models, making them even less adept
at processing surprising inputs?
Will machine-
produced, monotonous content dominate our infor-
mational space, causing authentic texts to become
lost within it?1
Ultimately, could this trend contribute to a loss
of the diversity and richness of human language
and, consequently, human thought?2
This thesis explores such questions through the
lens of one specific application of these language
technologies: Neural Machine Translation (NMT).
We investigate NMT’s performance on texts that
diverge from the norm not in terms of terminol-
ogy or domain but in the structure and organiza-
tion of their information content. While the chal-
lenge of domain diversity might be resolved by the
field of Natural Language Processing (NLP) “by
itself", through the expansion of model and dataset
sizes, we seek to uncover text types for which, re-
1See Figure 1 for an example of such pollution already
happening within the field of machine learning research itself.
2For example, Kranich (2014) explains how language con-
tact results in language changes
arXiv:2409.09568v1  [cs.CL]  15 Sep 2024
Figure 1: Usage of words that are often produced by
ChatGPT in ICLR reviews in years 2020 to 2024. In-
creased frequency of these words in 2024 shows the
prevalence of using ChatGPT for writing reviews. From
Liang et al. (2024).
gardless of model dimensions, the intrinsic proper-
ties are lost in translation. Our goal is to identify
where NMT fails in preserving the essence of texts
that defy conventional patterns, regardless of the
amount of training data or model size.
Even if we answered all the proposed questions
positively, identifying a multitude of failure cases
and adverse impacts of current tools, it would not
change the rate at which these technologies are
adopted. Thus, the ultimate outcome of this thesis
is to propose a solution in the form of alternative
decoding algorithms and training objectives, that
allow the models to handle diverse texts properly.
2
Problems and proposed solutions
We briefly summarize the goals of this work in this
section. The literature describing the characteris-
tics we discuss here is listed in Section 3.
2.1
Measuring diversity
First, we establish criteria to assess the uniformity
and typicality of the distribution of information
on multiple scales, including the sentence level,
the discourse level, and the whole structure of the
language itself. Our methodology is based on the
existing literature (described in Section 3), and our
objective is to associate the measures at each level
with observable real-world phenomena.
At the word level, our exploration into measuring
information content – or surprisal – examines its
association with word-level reading times. We use
surprisal estimates obtained by language models to
predict the reading times. For sentences and para-
graphs, we assess the uniformity of these surprisal
values. We evaluate different methodologies based
on their correlation and their predictive capacity
for sentence-level reading times and linguistic ac-
ceptability as judged by humans.
At the discourse level, we intend to observe
rhythmic patterns in surprisal distribution to gauge
engagement by predicting at what point the audi-
ence may stop reading an article or listening to a
podcast. We hypothesize that a periodical change
between quick and slow pace of information trans-
mission has a large effect on the reader’s enjoyment
of the text.
Finally, in the context of entire languages, we
will estimate the optimal information rate or chan-
nel capacity language-wide, including comparisons
across different languages.
The properties we intend to observe during the
translation process at different levels of the lan-
guage are also listed in Figure 2.
Developing the measures for these properties
will allow us to:
1) Identify potentially problematic or difficult
types of texts for NMT,
2) evaluate the current algorithms and our inno-
vations,
3) identify texts that were already translated by
MT in the wild.
Points 1) and 2) are integral to this thesis, and
point 3) helps to counter one of the challenges that
is already present in MT and arises more with the
continuing adoption of LLMs: new models training
on the outputs of previous generations of models
due to pollution of the Web by machine-generated
text. Such a self-feedback loop inevitably leads to
loss of diversity over multiple iterations, up to a
completely degenerated output (Guo et al., 2023;
Briesch et al., 2023).
Section 4.1 discusses our progress in this task.
2.2
Diversity in MT
We employ the uniformity measures explored in the
previous part to answer one of the initial questions:
Does NMT make the surprisal distribution in the
translation more uniform than a human translator
would? We gather a diverse set of datasets to look
for correlations in surprisal distribution between
source and both human and machine translation.
We also compare the absolute values of the mea-
sures between professional human translation and
MT. As we discuss in Section 4.2, the results we
have gathered so far are not conclusive, as many
factors play a role in computing the surprisal. How-
ever, we did find some evidence of MT failing to
Word level
Sentence level
Discourse level
Language level
Surprisal value
(Non-)uniformity of
surprisal values
Rhythmicity of
the surprisals
Channel capacity,
optimal information rate
Figure 2: Proposed text properties that we plan to ob-
serve during the MT process.
maintain non-uniformity of surprisal distribution
in highly surprising texts, like poetry.
2.3
Causes of excessive uniformity
Assuming we will, in fact, find that the NMT strug-
gles to produce non-uniform text, we will investi-
gate the causes of this behavior. The most obvious
culprit seems to be beam search decoding. The
beam search was introduced as an approximation of
the maximum-a-posteriori (MAP) decoding, which
is in practice intractable. However, it has been
shown, quite surprisingly, that it produces better
results than the exact MAP decoding (Stahlberg
and Byrne, 2019), suggesting that it introduces
some own inductive bias into the translation pro-
cess. Meister et al. (2020) show that this bias is
linked to uniformity – beam search prefers hypothe-
ses where the surprisal is uniformly distributed and
the same results can be obtained with exact MAP
decoding with uniformity regularizer.
We hypothesize that this regularization is neces-
sary to produce high-quality MT outputs because of
insufficiencies in the modeling. The model is pre-
dominantly trained to generate the next word given
the source text and the previously produced target
text, a process that does not inherently encourage
global planning strategies. Without beam search
enforcing uniformity of the surprisals, the model
would make surprising decisions that it could in the-
ory "balance out" in the future, but, given the lack
of global planning, it performs this long-range bal-
ancing poorly. Beam search masks this inadequacy
of the model by enforcing surprisal uniformity.
This leads us to a conclusion: To replace beam
search in order to improve the translation of non-
uniform texts, we should also look into training
objectives and improve the global planning capa-
bilities of the model.
2.4
Alternative decoding algorithm
We propose an alternative decoding algorithm for
NMT. Sampling-based algorithms are commonly
used in Large Language Models (LLMs), but they
have been shown unfit for traditional NMT with
smaller model sizes. However, Minimum Bayes
risk decoding (MBR) with sampled hypotheses has
been very successful recently and we extend this
approach by using a genetic algorithm to combine
and modify the translation candidates (Jon and Bo-
jar, 2023), see Section 4.3. We show that it can
be successfully used to improve translation qual-
ity (Jon et al., 2023) or find biases and flaws in
MT evaluation metrics (Jon and Bojar, 2024). We
are circumventing the problem of too uniform sur-
prisals by using MT quality evaluation and estima-
tion metrics to guide the decoding, ignoring the
probability estimated by the model.
In the future, we will also address decoding
in LLMs and compare the properties of LLM-
generated text to the conventional NMT models.
2.5
Alternative training objective
In line with the previous reasoning, we have also
investigated alternative training objective functions
for NMT to allow for better global planning of the
translation. The intuitive reasoning behind this is
that global planning allows the model to estimate
how much probability the best solution has from
the start, so it can plan for more uneven distribution
of it throughout the output sequence, taking more
“risks" and selecting higher surprisal tokens, since it
knows it will get the probability “back" in the future
timesteps. We assume that beam search negates this
behavior, which is beneficial for models where the
global planning contains a lot of mistakes.
The approaches can range from simply predict-
ing more future tokens at a single timestep (Pal
et al., 2023; Stern et al., 2018), through sentence-
level objectives (Goyal et al., 2019; Lu et al.,
2020), to modeling hierarchical structures of the
text (Ainslie et al., 2020).
The long-term planning abilities are also inher-
ently related to the intrinsic uncertainty of the trans-
lation task, stemming from the fact that each source
sentence has multiple correct translations. Cur-
rent modeling approaches are inadequate since they
only model a single probability distribution over
Source text with properties
(surprisal uniformity,
rhymicity, ...)
Training objective
(Next word prediction)
NMT Model
Decoding algorithm
(Beam Search)
Translation with
changed properties
High diversity
Low diversity
Alternative with
better global
planning
Alternative that
maintains the text
properties
Training data
Measure
Fix
Replace
Replace
Detect
Figure 3: Illustration of the current NMT process and the points addressed in this thesis (red arrows).
the target sentence (although viable alternatives ex-
ist; Stahlberg and Kumar (2022)). In left-to-right
decoding, this uncertainty rises with the distance
of the future we are trying to predict, as at each
next token, the word choices are split into many
possible, and all correct, pathways. Thus, the inade-
quacy of the modeling becomes even more pressing
in our distant future modeling use case.
We propose using an auxiliary training objec-
tive, Contrastive Predictive Coding (CPC; van den
Oord et al. (2019)), that forces the internal repre-
sentations of the model at each timestep to be more
similar to future internal representations on multi-
ple levels of hierarchy (words, phrases, sentences,
and paragraphs). This allows us to model the future,
while simultaneously alleviating the uncertainty is-
sue, since instead of forcing a prediction of a single
token, we predict an internal representation of a
more abstract nature at some point in the future.
However, in current models, the internal represen-
tations are still only a single-point estimates of
the corresponding words or other linguistic phe-
nomena. We will explore approaches to model the
uncertainty in embeddings themselves, similar to
Kesiraju et al. (2020).
Conversely, the past context is also modeled in-
adequately in NMT. Traditional teacher forcing
practice, which feeds the previous reference token
into the decoder during training, imposes a single
“correct” past context on the model. This causes
exposure bias: the model never sees its own gen-
erated prefixes during the training, but they are
used at test time (Ranzato et al., 2016). This bias
negatively affects the fidelity of the statistical prop-
erties of generated text to the training data. In
a way, this discourages the model from planning
into the future (or accounting for possible futures)
when generating the current token, since in the
next step, the current token is thrown away any-
way. To address this, we will look into alternatives
that, for instance, introduce a lattice of possible
synonyms rather than a single reference token, of-
fering a range of potential past contexts, or we will
alternate between model’s predictions and gold to-
kens during the training. Additionally, we aim
to explore sentence-level training objectives that
permit the model to generate complete hypotheses
freely, evaluating them semantically against the ref-
erence, inspiring ourselves in modern MT quality
estimation approaches.
Reinforcement learning from human feedback
(RLHF; Stiennon et al. (2022); Ouyang et al.
(2022)) has recently gained popularity with LLMs
and it can be also viewed as a sentence-level ob-
jective. Later in our work, we will explore it along
with other techniques used in LLMs.
See Section 4.4 for details of the work on train-
ing objectives carried out so far.
2.6
Objectives
Based on the previous observations, we set out to
reach 5 objectives:
• O1: Identify texts that are inherently challeng-
ing for today’s NMT systems, create a simple
measure to score the non-uniformity of the
surprisal distribution on multiple levels.
• O2: Identify the root causes of the problems:
How do different steps of the NMT process
affect the properties of the output?
• O3: Develop alternative decoding algorithms
that mitigate the issues.
• O4: Develop alternative training objectives
that allow for better global planning.
• O5: Perform a case study where the resulting
system produces better translations in a real-
world scenario.
We illustrate the NMT process, the potential
problems we posit, and the places where we in-
tervene to counter them (red arrows) in Figure 3.
3
Characteristics of NMT-produced
language
In this section, we summarize the related work on
properties of translations produced by NMT and
the origins of these properties.
3.1
Lexical diversity in NMT
Lexical diversity is a measure of the richness of a
text’s vocabulary and common metrics include the
Type-Token Ratio (TTR) and the Measure of Tex-
tual Lexical Diversity (MTLD; McCarthy, 2005).
Studies have shown discrepancies in lexical diver-
sity between NMT and human translations, often
highlighting a reduction in lexical richness and the
reinforcement of biases within NMT systems.
Vanmassenhove et al. (2019) found that both
phrase-based MT and NMT systems overgeneral-
ize, leading to a loss of lexical richness by generat-
ing frequent words more often and rare words less
often than in their training data. The authors didn’t
use subword segmentation, which is one of the
main tools for NMT to generate morphologically
rich outputs, thus the results are not applicable to
fully-fledged NMT systems. They addressed these
concerns in their follow-up work, reaching similar
conclusions (Vanmassenhove et al., 2021).
Toral (2019) found that both raw and post-edited
machine translations (MT) offer less lexical diver-
sity than human translations, exhibiting issues like
simplification and source language interference.
Junczys-Dowmunt3 shows that NMT systems
evaluated in the WMT19 News task matched hu-
man lexical diversity. Nonetheless, the domain
of this task – newspaper articles – might be an
3https://marian-nmt.github.io/2020/01/22/
lexical-diversity.html
inadequate benchmark for evaluating lexical diver-
sity in NMT, since extensive lexical creativity is
usually not required for this type of text. Brglez
and Vintar (2022) initially found higher lexical di-
versity in English-Slovenian NMT than in human
translations. Their analysis clarified that perceived
diversity often stemmed from translation errors and
inconsistencies. This finding underscores an im-
portant insight we also address in our experiments:
measures of creativity or diversity in MT must al-
ways be balanced with considerations of translation
quality. Otherwise, translations with errors might
be mischaracterized as innovative or diverse, even
if they are simply wrong.
3.2
Skewed word frequencies
The root cause of the lexical uniformity is that the
distribution of word frequencies in NMT outputs is
skewed towards high-probability words. This leads
to more common words being used even more fre-
quently in translations, while rare words become
even scarcer (Ott et al., 2018; Koehn and Knowles,
2017). Achieving a distribution of output words
that mirrors the training data closely can best be
attempted through sampling from the model’s dis-
tribution. However, this approach often results in
sub-optimal translation quality.
To increase the translation quality of sampling-
based approaches, sampling can be combined with
Minimum Bayes Risk (MBR) decoding and ad-
vanced MT evaluation metrics. On the other hand,
MBR still brings about a resurgence of the origi-
nal bias, over-representing frequent words. This
is because MBR selects hypotheses that bear the
greatest similarity to other sampled hypotheses,
disadvantaging rare words due to their infrequent
sampling and consequent lower scores (Müller and
Sennrich, 2021).
3.3
Decoding Algorithms
Decoding algorithms are the mechanism through
which a subsequent word y(t) is predicted in an out-
put sequence at time step t, based on a probability
distribution over the target vocabulary, conditioned
upon the source sentence x and the sequence of
previously generated target words, formalized as
P(y(t)|x, y(t −1), . . . , y(0)). The probability of
a whole target sentence is factorized by the chain
rule as a product of these word-level probabilities.
The Maximum A Posteriori (MAP) decoding is tra-
ditionally employed to identify the most probable
translation under the model’s distribution. How-
ever, the search space for the decoding is very large:
the size of the target vocabulary to the power of
the maximum sentence length (theoretically un-
bounded). Therefore, an approximation of MAP is
used, most commonly the beam search (Och and
Ney, 2004; Graves, 2012). Both beam search and
MAP in general have many shortcomings which
are discussed in recent literature.
Stahlberg and Byrne (2019) introduce an exact
decoding algorithm utilizing depth-first search that
can be executed within reasonable time constraints
for most sentences.
Despite achieving optimal
model probabilities, a significant portion of the
translations produced end up as empty strings. Ad-
justments like length normalization improved this
but still produced translations of lower quality than
those from beam search, measured by BLEU score.
This discrepancy suggests two conclusions. First,
there might be an issue with how the whole trans-
lation task is modeled, since often the global op-
timum of these probabilistic models is an empty
string. It also suggests beam search’s effectiveness
may not be due to its accuracy as a MAP approx-
imation, but rather due to its ability to overcome
flaws in the probabilistic modeling approach, chal-
lenging the reliance on the model’s probability as
the selection criterion.
Meister et al. (2020) also explore the reasons
why beam search produces higher quality outputs
than an exact MAP search. They propose that
the beam search itself introduces an inductive bias.
To find it, they reverse engineer the objective that
beam search is a solution for, i.e. they try to build
MAP-based algorithm that produces the same re-
sults as beam search. Their conclusion is that the
exact MAP with a uniformity regularizer which
enforces Uniform Information Distribution (UID)
(Aylett and Turk, 2004; Fenk and Fenk-Oczlon,
1980; Levy and Jaeger, 2006; Bell et al., 2003;
Genzel and Charniak, 2002) behaves the same as
beam search. The UID hypothesis posits a pref-
erence among language users for utterances that
distribute information evenly. In other words, beam
search does not only look for the most probable so-
lution but also prefers solutions where the probabil-
ity is distributed evenly across the whole sentence.
This property effectively conceals mistakes in NMT
modeling and allows for the production of usable
translations, even being dubbed the beam search
blessing by Meister et al. (2020). Wei et al. (2021)
employ a similar regularizer in the training of the
model, which led to improved translation quality.
Beam search’s preference for selecting hypothe-
ses that adhere to UID principles at the sentence
level suggests a potential conflict for certain text
types, particularly those where an element of sur-
prise or non-uniform information distribution is
desired. This line of thinking forms the basis for
the examination of alternative decoding algorithms
within our study.
Work on pathologies of NMT, like Koehn and
Knowles (2017) and Stahlberg and Byrne (2019),
sparked a debate on whether the standard training
objective for machine translation, word-level maxi-
mum likelihood estimation, is suitable for model-
ing the task, and if the issues arise from the defini-
tion of the objective itself.
Eikema and Aziz (2020) suggest that the objec-
tive function is correct and the issue lies within
the MAP decoding. They argue that the mode of
the model’s distribution is not an adequate deci-
sion rule for as high-dimensional problem as NMT
-– only a very small probability mass is given to
the single most probable translation. Their analy-
sis shows that sampling-based approaches produce
translations more reflective of the training data’s
statistical properties, although they do not achieve
optimal translation quality. They advocate for min-
imum Bayes risk (MBR; Goel and Byrne (2000))
decoding over beam search, as it covers a broader
probability range and better preserves the training
data’s statistical properties.
MBR does not aim to identify translations with
the highest model probability. Instead, it seeks
translations that maximize a chosen utility func-
tion, often an MT evaluation metric such as BLEU
or COMET. Notably, MBR does not require refer-
ence translations; the utility function is evaluated
against the entire set of all possible translations of
the input.
Again, the complete computation is intractable
in practice, so sampling-based approximations are
used, such as sampling a pool of hypotheses from
the model and using them as both candidate transla-
tions and references, computing the utility function
of each hypothesis with respect to all the others.
The same authors discuss strategies to construct the
pool of hypotheses in Eikema and Aziz (2022).
MBR started to gain more popularity recently
because of advances in MT metrics which can be
used as the utility function (Amrhein and Sennrich,
2022; Freitag et al., 2022; Fernandes et al., 2022;
Jon et al., 2022; Jon and Bojar, 2023).
3.4
Training objective
Our discussion so far has already touched upon the
appropriateness of the prevailing objective in NMT.
Conventionally, this objective models the trans-
lation process as computing the probability of a
target translation y given a source sentence x, rep-
resented by a single probability distribution P(y|x).
In practice, this is implemented by a softmax layer
as the last layer of the decoder, which computes
probability distribution over target vocabulary in
each decoding timestep. Such a model implicitly
assumes the existence of a single “correct” trans-
lation for every source sentence – an assumption
that contrasts with the linguistic reality where an
extensive amount of valid translations can exist for
a single source text. This formulation of the ob-
jective forces these valid translations to compete
for representation within a single probability dis-
tribution, This does not allow the model to distin-
guish between two types of uncertainty: extrinsic
uncertainty, caused by noisy training data, and in-
trinsic uncertainty, caused by the existence of mul-
tiple valid translations of a single source sentence.
Stahlberg et al. (2022) identify the intrinsic uncer-
tainty as the main reason behind multiple patholo-
gies in NMT, including the already discussed issues
with MAP decoding.
SCONES (Single-label Contrastive Objective for
Non-Exclusive Sequences; Stahlberg and Kumar
(2022)) aims to remove this single correct transla-
tion assumption by modeling the translation proba-
bilities separately for each (source sentence, possi-
ble translation) pair, so that multiple valid transla-
tions from training data can be considered correct
at the same time. The results suggest that using
SCONES improves translation quality over many
language pairs and it alleviates the problems that
arise with MAP decoding described earlier – the
inadequacy of mode and shifting of the text statis-
tics compared to training data. The related work
that we directly base our approach on is described
in 2.5.
4
Progress so far
Here we describe the work towards the defined
objectives that we have carried out so far.
4.1
O1: Information distribution in language
Surprisal theory, introduced by Hale (2001), relates
cognitive effort to the surprisal value of words, sug-
gesting that the effort to comprehend a word in-
creases with its unpredictability given the context.
The surprisal of an element un in an utterance u
is defined as s(un) = −log p(un|u<n). The the-
ory (Hale, 2001) proposes that cognitive effort is
proportional to surprisal:
Effort(un) ∝s(un)
Choosing reading time and linguistic acceptabil-
ity ratings as proxies for the effort, we compared
surprisal estimates computed by multiple language
models across various datasets (Smith and Levy,
2013; Futrell et al., 2018; Warstadt et al., 2019) and
we successfully confirmed this hypothesis on the
word-level, as did many works before us (Fernan-
dez Monsalve et al., 2012; Goodkind and Bicknell,
2018; Oh and Schuler, 2022, 2023).
Applying this concept to a longer sequence, like
a sentence, leads to an unexpected conclusion: If
we calculate the sentence’s surprisal as the sum
of surprisals of its individual words, and if this
aggregate surprisal predicts the effort needed to
process the sentence, then any way of distributing
the information across the utterance is the same in
terms of the effort needed for comprehension.
The Uniform Information Density (UID) theory,
proposed by Levy and Jaeger (2006), accounts for
this unintuitive conclusion by proposing a super-
linear relationship between surprisal levels and cog-
nitive effort, factoring in utterance length N, sug-
gesting sentences with evenly distributed surprisal
are easier to comprehend:
Effort(u) ∝
N
X
n=1
s (un)k + c · N, k > 1
To illustrate the intuitive concept of surprisal
uniformity, consider these two sentences:
A) More uniform: "When she got home after a
long day at work, she decided to relax by read-
ing her favorite novel and having a cup of tea."
B) Less uniform: "London’s annual festival was
filled with activities, food stands, windsurfing,
and drinks, but the sudden unveiling of a Yetti
statue caught everyone’s attention."
0
5
10
15
20
25
Word position
0
5
10
15
20
25
Surprisal
More uniform
Less uniform
Figure 4: Surprisal behavior for the two examples sen-
tences, measured by GPT-2 model.
Most people would consider the second sentence
as more surprising, as some of the words feel un-
expected. We show the surprisal profiles of both
sentences in Figure 4. Indeed, we can see that the
profile of the second sentence (orange) looks less
uniform.
To operationalize our concept of uniformity and
anchor it into the real world, we carried out assess-
ments of various surprisal distribution uniformity
measures for their correlation with human accept-
ability ratings and reading times, extending the
work of Meister et al. (2021). We explore measures
like Local Variance (LV), Coefficient of Variation
(CV), Global Variance (GV), Gini coefficient, and
Super-linear Relationship (SL), and super-linear
syntactic log-odds ratio (SLOR, Kann et al., 2018;
Pauls and Klein, 2012):
• LV(u) =
1
N−1
PN
n=2 (s (un) −s (un−1))2
• CV(u) = σ(u)
µ(u)
• GV(u) = 1
N
PN
n=1 (s (un) −µ(corpus))2
• SL(u) = 1
N
PN
n=1 s (un)k
(k > 1)
• SLOR(u)
=
1
N
PN
n=1 s (un)k
−
su (un)k
(k > 1)
Function s denotes surprisal in of a word in con-
text, sn is a unigram, context-free surprisal. We
aimed to predict a sentence’s linguistic acceptabil-
ity and reading times using these surprisal distribu-
tion uniformity measures, employing statistical and
machine learning methods like Pearson’s r, linear
regression (LR), Support Vector Machines (SVM),
Multi-layer perceptron (MLP), Generalized linear
models (GLM) and Linear mixed-effect models
(LME). We sought to mostly replicate the results
of Meister et al. (2021) and to add novel evalua-
tion methods. We succeeded in obtaining similar
results under the exact same conditions, i.e. some
evidence to support the existence of a super-linear
(SL) relationship. However, we have also learned
that the outcome is very sensitive to methodologi-
cal choices, like the dataset, language model used
to calculate the surprisal, preprocessing and filter-
ing choices and evaluation methods. In fact, the
SL relationship for sentence-level reading times
was refuted by the most recent and most exten-
sive study so far (Shain et al., 2024). This study
presents strong evidence in favor of a simple linear
relationship between word-level surprisals and ef-
fort (the team also included the authors of Meister
et al. (2021)).
We present the results for linguistic acceptability
for the SLOR measure in Figure 5. We see that the
measure correlates better with acceptability ratings
for k > 1, and it is slightly more predictive in
LR and GLM models. According to SLOR, there
might be some preference for sentences with more
uniform surprisal distribution.
4.2
O1 and O2: MT and uniformity of
surprisal
We use the measures introduced in the previous
section to confirm one of our initial hypotheses: Is
NMT producing translations that are more uniform
in terms of surprisal distribution than a human?
This hypothesis posits that source sentences char-
acterized by highly uneven surprisal distributions
would exhibit more uniformity upon translation by
MT systems, a phenomenon not expected to occur
with human translations.
We measured this across multiple datasets: For
English to French, we use the Books corpus (Zhu
et al., 2015) (books), Global Voices (Nguyen and
Daumé III, 2019) (global), Newstest2014 (Bojar
et al., 2014) (wmt), and a poem by Oscar Wilde
translated into French by Jean Guiloineau (wilde).
For experiments in the English-Czech direction,
we draw upon the dataset provided by Zouhar and
Bojar (2024); Zouhar et al. (2023) (ORT).
Table 1 reveals that machine translations (MTx)
exhibit a better correlation with the source text’s
surprisal distribution than human translations (HT)
for all measured indices: LV 2 (local variance
squared), CV (coefficient of variation), and GV 2
(a) Pearson’s r
(b) Linear regression
(c) GLM
Figure 5: Behavior of SLOR measure, depending on power k used in the calculation.
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
COMET Threshold
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
Mean Values
books
MT1 Mean
MT2 Mean
Human Mean
Source Mean
(a) Books
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
COMET Threshold
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
Mean Values
global
MT1 Mean
MT2 Mean
Human Mean
Source Mean
(b) Global
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
COMET Threshold
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
Mean Values
wmt
MT1 Mean
MT2 Mean
Human Mean
Source Mean
(c) WMT
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
COMET Threshold
20
22
24
26
28
30
Mean Values
wilde
MT1 Mean
MT2 Mean
Human Mean
Source Mean
(d) Wilde
Figure 6: Relationship between COMET scores of the MT and the LV 2 measure. As a proxy of translation quality,
we use COMET score threshold to filter out low-quality translations. Higher values of LV 2 mean more diverse
surprisal distribution.
(global variance squared). Considering that human
translators might spread surprisal over larger text
units, we extended our analysis to document level
in the global_doc dataset, treating each document
as a single sequence of tokens for the purposes of
surprisal estimation. Yet, the results did not support
our hypothesis.
However, the absolute values of the uniformity
measures also indicated that MT is generally (with
some exceptions, depending on the measure and
the dataset) as uniform or less uniform than HT.
This contradicts our initial hypothesis that MT
will be more uniform in surprisal. We hypothe-
sized that this discrepancy might stem from er-
rors in MT: if the MT system translates the in-
put with some obvious mistakes, then these mis-
takes might be very surprising given the rest of
the sentence.
We used reference-free COMET
(wmt22-cometkiwi-da Rei et al., 2022) scores to
estimate the translation quality of the MT.
Figure 6 illustrates the LV 2 measure’s trends
for instances where the machine translation (MT)
COMET score surpasses a certain threshold (dis-
played on the x-axis). Uniformity between HT
(green) and MT (two systems, blue and orange)
remains steady across datasets, except for the wilde
dataset, which exhibits greater HT unevenness in
high-scoring translations. This observation could
imply that MT achieves higher surprisal unifor-
mity than HT in highly creative content like poetry,
dataset
measure
HT
MT1
MT2
books
LV 2
0.39
0.58
0.42
CV
0.42
0.51
0.50
GV 2
0.46
0.69
0.54
wmt
LV 2
0.43
0.54
0.58
CV
0.49
0.55
0.57
GV 2
0.46
0.57
0.64
global
LV 2
0.69
0.73
0.78
CV
0.65
0.70
0.63
GV 2
0.72
0.74
0.80
global_doc
LV 2
0.72
0.79
0.83
CV
0.68
0.81
0.82
GV 2
0.76
0.83
0.86
wilde
LV 2
0.16
0.40
0.53
CV
0.07
0.39
0.54
GV 2
0.16
0.40
0.53
Table 1: Pearson’s’ r for sentence-level surprisal unifor-
mity of measurements between source and either HT,
MT1 or MT2.
src
ref1
ref2
ref3
ref4
mt
mt2
Dataset
0
20
40
60
80
100
Mean LV2
Comparison of LV2 per translation origin
Figure 7: Difference of LV 2 scores between all (orange)
and high-quality (green) MT translations. Higher scores
indicate less uniform text.
when inaccurately translated segments are excluded
from the evaluation.
We have also experimented with another dataset,
ORT, which contains an English source sentence
and four high-quality Czech translations. We com-
pared surprisal distribution uniformity between the
hypotheses and two MT engines.
The results are presented in Figure 7. We see
that MT1 usually scores as the most uniform, while
MT2 is among the least uniform translations, show-
ing large variance among different MT systems.
The results, again, contradict our initial hypothe-
sis, that MT is inherently more uniform than HT
– it depends on both the human translator and MT
system used. We again set a COMET threshold
to filter out examples with low-quality MT. We
see that surprisal diversity is lower in high-quality
translations (green), especially for MT2, and the
third human reference (ref3) becomes the most
diverse. MT2 is as diverse as the human references,
with ref3 being an exception. Overall, we do not
have reliable proof that MT produces texts that
are more uniform in surprisal distribution than hu-
mans yet. Either our hypothesis is false, or our
measurement methodology is flawed. One possible
reason could be that the LMs we used to estimate
the surprisals are trained on human text, not on
MT outputs so it overestimates surprisal of some
phenomena in MT. We plan further experiments to
improve our methodology and extend the analysis
to more datasets.
4.3
O3: Alternative decoding algorithms
Our proposed alternative to the beam search is
based on sampling, MBR decoding, external re-
sources like dictionaries, and a genetic algorithm.
This method involves applying common GA opera-
tions – mutation and crossover – to a set of transla-
tion hypotheses, guided by a fitness function based
on one or more MT metrics. We have presented
this approach at ACL 2023 (Jon and Bojar, 2023)
and we used it successfully in two applications:
• Improving translation quality (Jon et al., 2023)
(winning constrained system of WMT23
English-Czech and Czech-Ukrainian)
• Creating adversarial examples for MT evalu-
ation metrics, we published sample datasets
along with code to create similar datasets for
arbitrary metric (Jon and Bojar, 2024)
Illustration of the algorithm is presented in Fig-
ure 8. First, an initial set of candidate sentences is
produced by an NMT model (e.g. via sampling or
beam search). Candidates are then evaluated using
a fitness function: a weighted sum of scores from
various MT metrics, possibly using MBR decoding
with the initial translation candidates as pseudo-
references. The scores are used by the selection
method, usually with some level of stochasticity
(e.g. tournament selection), to choose the subset
of translation candidates for as the parents for the
next iteration of the genetic algorithm.
The selected parents undergo a crossover opera-
tion, where two translation hypotheses are split at
a random word index and their segments swapped.
Subsequently, the mutation operation randomly al-
ters the candidates by removing, adding, or replac-
ing tokens, drawing new token choices from the
Fitness
function
scores= [0.7,0.4,0.1,0.8]
s1
s2
s3
s4
Selection
s1 x s2 x s4 => s4
s2 x s1 x s3 => s1
s3 x s1 x s2 => s1
s4 x s3 x s1 => s4
parents= [s4,s1,s1,s4]
Crossover
crossover
point, i=1
crossover
point, i=6
children
Mutation
He
 
went
to
see
them
I
 
saw
my
house
I
 
saw
my
house
He
 
went
to
see
them
He
 
saw
my
house
I
 
went
to
see
them
I
 
saw
my
see
them
He
 
went
to
house
He
 
saw
my
saw
I
 
went home
to
see
them
I
 
saw
my
see
them
He
He
 
went
to
I
saw
my
house
I
went
home
to 
see
He
went
to
see
them
I
came
to
my
house
Figure 8: One iteration of the GA algorithm for a population of 4 individuals. The steps with the yellow background
are equivalent to simple reranking, the steps with the blue background introduce the operations of the genetic
algorithm. Figure from Jon and Bojar (2023).
set of words in the initial candidates, dictionary, or
the target language wordlist. These candidates are
then scored again by the fitness function and the
whole process is repeated. After a given number of
iterations, the best-scoring candidate is selected as
the final translation. The final translation always
scores better or at least as well as the best trans-
lation from the initial candidates in the optimized
metric.
Our findings indicate that employing a single
MT metric in the fitness function tends to lead to
overfitting, producing translations that achieve high
scores according to that metric but contain serious
translation errors. To explore this behavior, we set
aside a designated held-out metric, which is not
used during the GA phase, to evaluate the transla-
tions generated by the algorithm. The results of
this experiment can be interpreted as a rudimentary
indicator of the robustness of the metric used in the
fitness function: if the held-out metric scores are
lower after GA than the initial hypotheses’ scores,
i.e. if the GA process decreases the held-out scores,
the metric is susceptible to adversarial examples
and overfitting. In Table 2, we show for how many
instances within our test set this decrease in held-
out metric scores occurs. CMT20 an QE20 refer to
wmt20-comet-da and wmt20-comet-qe-da. These
results indicate the ease with which metrics can be
misled to favor adversarially crafted translations
that exploit their weaknesses, biases, and blind
spots.
In Jon and Bojar (2024), we exploit this insight
to create adversarial test sets for specific metrics,
with a slight modification of the approach. Instead
of using the held-out metric ex-post, to find the
examples where the scores are worse, the held-out
metric is directly incorporated into the fitness func-
tion, with a small negative weight. This change was
made to actively steer the process toward creating
adversarial translations. We select random words
for possible mutations from an English wordlist.
See Table 4 in the appendix for examples of such
adversarial translations for multiple metrics. Neu-
ral metrics show problems that are typical for them,
like insensitivity to changes in named entities (prob-
ably due to embedding similarity of rare named
entities) Amrhein and Sennrich, 2022. BLEURT
specifically seems to overwhelmingly prefer words
that do not exist at all in the target language (they
are part of the rare noise in the English wordlist).
On the other hand, we have found that the ro-
bustness can be improved by combining multiple
O
Oinit + mo < Oga
... ∧Hinit > Hga + mh
CMT20
128 (85%)
57 (38%)
QE20
148 (99%)
142 (95%)
BLEU
150 (100%)
113 (75%)
Table 2: Number of examples which improved in opti-
mization metric after GA (2nd column) and at the same
time deteriorated in held-out metric (3rd column). From
Jon and Bojar (2023).
Fitness
+
-
=
BLEU
22%/1%
29%/7%
49%/92%
CHRF
13%/1%
69%/65%
18%/33%
CMT20
54%/23%
39%/32%
7%/45%
CMT20+QE20+BLEU
62%/43%
35%/35%
3%/23%
Table 3: Percentage of examples where the held-out
score (UniTE) improves (+), degrades (-), or doesn’t
change (=) for GA compared to best log-prob (before
slash) or MBR reranking (after slash). Bold results
are those where the held-out scores improve for more
examples than deteriorate. From Jon and Bojar (2023).
metrics in the fitness function (we use a weighted
sum of the values). In Table 3 we compare post-
GA translations with the best (in terms of model
log-prob) initial MT translation and the best trans-
lation after MBR reranking with the same metrics
(i.e. after reranking with the fitness function used
in the GA). We see that for the combination of
CMT20, QE20, and BLEU beats or draws with
the MBR reranking in most of the examples, while
the standalone metrics (e.g. only CHRF) are per-
forming worse, harming more examples than they
improve. An illustration of behavior of fitness and
held-out scores during GA in both the positive case
(improved held-out score) and negative case (de-
creased held-out score) is shown in Figure 9 in the
appendix.
These results were further extended and con-
firmed in our WMT23 submission (Jon et al., 2023),
where we show that newer versions of the COMET
metrics are more robust, but combining multiple
metrics is still beneficial. We have used GA to
modify the outputs of two other submissions in
English to Czech and Czech to Ukrainian tracks.
In both cases, the modified outputs were scored
slightly better by the human evaluators, although
the difference was not significant. We expect more
improvement could be obtained by tuning the pa-
rameters (mutation or crossover rate, number of
generations, ways to combine metrics in the fit-
ness function, . . . ), which we did not do due to the
computationally expensive nature of the process.
4.4
O4: Alternative training objectives
For Objective 4, we aimed to enhance NMT’s
ability for long-range planning within translations.
We incorporated the Contrastive Predictive Coding
(CPC) objective (van den Oord et al., 2019). This
algorithm introduces a regularization component
to the training loss, designed to align internal repre-
sentations in a selected layer in the current timestep
to the representations in future timesteps. One of
the strengths of CPC is its focus not on predicting
the exact future word, but rather on aligning future
representations of words. This partially mitigates
the issues with the ambiguity of the future, since
embeddings tend to be similar for synonyms that
would otherwise be penalized by the strict, single-
correct-token prediction.
Traditional loss functions like cross-entropy
struggle with predicting such high-dimensional tar-
gets like the internal representations directly. In-
stead, we focus on maintaining as much mutual
information as possible between these representa-
tions.
The concrete implementation is through an In-
foNCE loss, which maximizes the mutual informa-
tion between an internal representation (in practice,
we used embeddings in the last layer of the Trans-
former model) in the current step ct and the future
step ct+k (positive example) and minimize it with
respect to randomly selected representations from
the same batch cj (negative examples):
LN = −E
C
"
log
fk (ct+k, ct)
P
cj∈C fk (cj, ct)
#
In practice, the function fk can be implemented
in many ways, we have used a log-bilinear model:
fk (ct+k, ct) = exp
 cT
t+kWkct

By minimizing this loss function, the mutual in-
formation between the representations is most pre-
served (derived in van den Oord et al., 2019). Note
that for simplicity, we are using single token rep-
resentation ct+k as the target, but in practice, any
embedding can be used, for example, a pooled, av-
eraged embedding of multiple words, sentences, or
paragraphs.
One implementational problem is that in the
Transformer architecture, loss values and gradi-
ents for the backward pass are usually computed in
one step for the whole batch, with possible relation-
ships between the timesteps. This leads to a trivial
solution to optimizing the loss function: instead of
changing the past representations to contain more
information about the future, the model will learn
to store information about past representations in
future ones. We solve this issue by using a frozen
model to compute the future representations so that
they are not taken into account for gradient compu-
tations.
We have carried out initial experiments with this
implementation on MT. Overall, we have not seen
improvements in automated MT quality scores yet,
but we have only scratched the surface of potential
experimental settings.
4.5
Conclusions so far
We have confirmed that surprisal estimates from
language models are predictive of reading times on
word level. On the sentence level, the discussion
on the nature of the relationship between word sur-
prisal distribution and sentence reading times and
acceptability ratings is more complex. We have
evaluated multiple surprisal distribution uniformity
measures and our results show a small preference
towards more uniformly distributed surprisals in
human acceptability assessment. We used these
measures to test our hypothesis that MT produces
more uniform translations than a human. Again,
the results are mixed and vary greatly with chosen
experimental settings (language model, tokeniza-
tion, normalization, dataset). At best, we can see
some evidence for our hypothesis in diverse text
types, like books and poetry, but more research is
necessary.
To replace the potentially problematic beam
search, we have developed a novel decoding al-
gorithm, based on sampling, Minimum Bayes Risk
decoding, dictionaries, and a genetic algorithm.
We demonstrated its effectiveness in 1) improv-
ing translation quality and 2) creating adversarial
examples for arbitrary MT evaluation metrics.
We have implemented an auxiliary training
objective, Contrastive Predictive Coding, which
aligns internal representations of NMT in each step
with representations of future steps, as well as rep-
resentations of more abstract text units. We plan
more experiments with this architecture.
5
Future plans
We have taken the first steps to tackle objectives
O1 through O4, defined in the Introduction.
5.1
O1 and O2: Identification of problematic
texts and the root causes
So far, we have only analyzed the surprisal-related
properties of the text on the levels of words and sen-
tences. Our results are not conclusive. We plan to
run experiments on more diverse datasets, mostly
from the literary domain. We also hypothesize that
the the fact that the LMs are trained on natural text
and we use surprisal estimates from them to eval-
uate uniformity on both natural and MT-produced
text might affect the outcomes. We will train a new
LM on a 50:50 mix of both types of texts.
We will also evaluate alternative approaches to
obtaining the word level (pseudo-)surprisal esti-
mates, in place of language models. One possibility
is to create a dataset of texts with binary sentence-
level labels saying whether people consider the
sentence surprising. We will train a classification
model and use attribution methods (Javorský et al.,
2023) to calculate the influence of single words in
the decision.
We will move to longer textual units. We assume
that on the level of a whole discourse, for exam-
ple, a book or an article, some rhythmic changes
between a quick and a slow pace of transmitting
information, play a role in reader engagement and
enjoyment of the text. We are in the process of ob-
taining/creating datasets from podcasts with meta-
data about where the user stopped listening.
We plan experiments that include a time dimen-
sion as well (i.e. timestamps of the texts), to see if
the properties of the text on the Internet are already
changing, due to the use of modern language tools.
Overall, we did not find conclusive proof of
MT producing more uniformly surprising texts yet.
Even if the future planned experiments end incon-
clusively, the objectives O3 and O4, which encom-
pass most of the future work, can stand on their
own. The proposed novel decoding algorithms and
training objectives could improve other aspects of
language processing and generation as well.
5.2
O3: Decoding algorithms
So far, we have only considered problems brought
by the beam search decoding and we have not ex-
plored sampling algorithms used in current LLMs.
Figuring out their influence on the properties of the
text generated by LLMs will be the main part of
the remaining work in this objective.
5.3
O4: Training objectives
The main focus of our future work will be on global
training objectives. Such objectives could poten-
tially improve the overall quality of natural lan-
guage generation, aside from addressing the goals
of our work. Thus, even if we fail to identify con-
crete issues in O2, developing these objectives can
stand on its own. Global planning is linked to intrin-
sic uncertainty in MT, i.e. the notion that a single
source sentence has multiple possible translations.
This fact is not modeled in the current objective of
the MT – each source example has only one target
sentence probability distribution. This problem is
more pronounced in globally operating training ob-
jectives since the uncertainty rises with increasing
the distance from the prefix generated so far.
Our CPC objective addresses this by predicting
future internal representation instead of a single
token. However, even the representations used cur-
rently are only single-point estimates in the multi-
dimensional space of the model. We will look into
incorporating the uncertainty in these embeddings
as well, similar to Kesiraju et al. (2020), which
could help to address the inherent ambiguity in
generating translations. We will also conduct other
experiments with CPC to verify its generalization
and planning capabilities.
We will explore the use of segment-level training
objectives and the effects of teacher forcing and its
possible alternatives. We evaluate the ability of
the alternative objectives to follow multiple possi-
ble paths in the translation using a multi-reference
dataset (Bojar et al., 2013).
In the later stages, we plan to focus on LLMs
with their specifics, like RLHF (which can also be
considered a segment-level objective).
We might also move even further from tradi-
tional language modeling. An interesting approach
to increase diversity and do away with the “single
correct past” problem of auto-regressive, teacher-
forced architectures is the use of diffusion models
(Singh et al., 2023; Li et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2023).
5.4
O5: Real world use-cases
The more specific use cases (aside from saving the
world from uniformity by fixing NLP) are closely
related to the types of text we identify as problem-
atic. So far, given both our intuition and experimen-
tal results in Section 4.2, literary translation seems
like a promising testbed for our approach.
References
Joshua Ainslie, Santiago Ontanon, Chris Alberti, Va-
clav Cvicek, Zachary Fisher, Philip Pham, Anirudh
Ravula, Sumit Sanghai, Qifan Wang, and Li Yang.
2020. ETC: Encoding long and structured inputs in
transformers. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP), pages 268–284, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Chantal Amrhein and Rico Sennrich. 2022. Identifying
weaknesses in machine translation metrics through
minimum Bayes risk decoding: A case study for
COMET.
In Proceedings of the 2nd Conference
of the Asia-Pacific Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics and the 12th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1125–1141, Online
only. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Matthew Aylett and Alice Turk. 2004. The smooth
signal redundancy hypothesis:
A functional ex-
planation for relationships between redundancy,
prosodic prominence, and duration in spontaneous
speech. Language and Speech, 47(1):31–56. PMID:
15298329.
Alan Bell, Daniel Jurafsky, Eric Fosler-Lussier, Cyn-
thia Girand, Michelle Gregory, and Daniel Gildea.
2003. Effects of disfluencies, predictability, and ut-
terance position on word form variation in English
conversation. The Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 113(2):1001–1024.
Ondˇrej Bojar, Christian Buck, Christian Federmann,
Barry Haddow, Philipp Koehn, Johannes Leveling,
Christof Monz, Pavel Pecina, Matt Post, Herve Saint-
Amand, Radu Soricut, Lucia Specia, and Aleš Tam-
chyna. 2014. Findings of the 2014 workshop on
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the
Ninth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation,
pages 12–58, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Ondˇrej Bojar, Matouš Macháˇcek, Aleš Tamchyna,
and Daniel Zeman. 2013.
Many czech refer-
ences for 50 sentences selected from WMT11 data.
LINDAT/CLARIAH-CZ digital library at the Insti-
tute of Formal and Applied Linguistics (ÚFAL), Fac-
ulty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University.
Mojca Brglez and Spela Vintar. 2022. Lexical diversity
in statistical and neural machine translation. Inf.,
13:93.
Martin Briesch, Dominik Sobania, and Franz Rothlauf.
2023. Large language models suffer from their own
output: An analysis of the self-consuming training
loop.
Bryan Eikema and Wilker Aziz. 2020. Is MAP decoding
all you need? the inadequacy of the mode in neural
machine translation. In Proceedings of the 28th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 4506–4520, Barcelona, Spain (Online). Inter-
national Committee on Computational Linguistics.
Bryan Eikema and Wilker Aziz. 2022. Sampling-based
approximations to minimum Bayes risk decoding
for neural machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 10978–10993, Abu
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
August Fenk and Gertraud Fenk-Oczlon. 1980. Kon-
stanz im kurzzeitgedächtnis - konstanz im sprach-
lichen informationsfluß?
Zeitschrift für experi-
mentelle und angewandte Psychologie, 27:400–414.
Patrick Fernandes, António Farinhas, Ricardo Rei,
José G. C. de Souza, Perez Ogayo, Graham Neubig,
and Andre Martins. 2022. Quality-aware decoding
for neural machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 2022 Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, pages 1396–1412,
Seattle, United States. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Irene Fernandez Monsalve, Stefan L. Frank, and
Gabriella Vigliocco. 2012. Lexical surprisal as a
general predictor of reading time. In Proceedings
of the 13th Conference of the European Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
398–408, Avignon, France. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Markus Freitag, David Grangier, Qijun Tan, and Bowen
Liang. 2022. High quality rather than high model
probability: Minimum Bayes risk decoding with neu-
ral metrics. Transactions of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, 10:811–825.
Richard Futrell, Edward Gibson, Harry J. Tily, Idan
Blank, Anastasia Vishnevetsky, Steven Piantadosi,
and Evelina Fedorenko. 2018. The natural stories
corpus. In Proceedings of the Eleventh International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2018), Miyazaki, Japan. European Language
Resources Association (ELRA).
Dmitriy Genzel and Eugene Charniak. 2002. Entropy
rate constancy in text. In Proceedings of the 40th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 199–206, Philadelphia, Pennsylva-
nia, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Vaibhava Goel and William J. Byrne. 2000. Minimum
bayes-risk automatic speech recognition. Comput.
Speech Lang., 14:115–135.
Adam Goodkind and Klinton Bicknell. 2018. Predictive
power of word surprisal for reading times is a linear
function of language model quality. In Proceedings
of the 8th Workshop on Cognitive Modeling and Com-
putational Linguistics (CMCL 2018), pages 10–18,
Salt Lake City, Utah. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Kartik Goyal, Chris Dyer, and Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick.
2019. An empirical investigation of global and local
normalization for recurrent neural sequence models
using a continuous relaxation to beam search. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages 1724–1733,
Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Alex Graves. 2012. Sequence transduction with recur-
rent neural networks.
Yanzhu Guo, Guokan Shang, Michalis Vazirgiannis, and
Chloé Clavel. 2023. The curious decline of linguistic
diversity: Training language models on synthetic
text.
John Hale. 2001. A probabilistic Earley parser as a psy-
cholinguistic model. In Second Meeting of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Dávid Javorský, Ondˇrej Bojar, and François Yvon. 2023.
Assessing word importance using models trained for
semantic tasks.
Josef Jon and Ondˇrej Bojar. 2023. Breeding machine
translations: Evolutionary approach to survive and
thrive in the world of automated evaluation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pages 2191–2212, Toronto, Canada. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Josef Jon and Ondˇrej Bojar. 2024. Gaatme: A genetic
algorithm for adversarial translation metrics evalua-
tion. In LREC-COLING 2024: The 2024 Joint Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics,
Language Resources and Evaluation. In print.
Josef Jon, Martin Popel, and Ondˇrej Bojar. 2022. CUNI-
bergamot submission at WMT22 general translation
task. In Proceedings of the Seventh Conference on
Machine Translation (WMT), pages 280–289, Abu
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates (Hybrid). Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Josef Jon, Martin Popel, and Ondˇrej Bojar. 2023. CUNI
at WMT23 general translation task: MT and a genetic
algorithm. In Proceedings of the Eighth Conference
on Machine Translation, pages 119–127, Singapore.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Katharina Kann, Sascha Rothe, and Katja Filippova.
2018. Sentence-level fluency evaluation: References
help, but can be spared!
In Proceedings of the
22nd Conference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning, pages 313–323, Brussels, Belgium.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Santosh Kesiraju, Oldrich Plchot, Lukas Burget, and
Suryakanth V. Gangashetty. 2020.
Learning doc-
ument embeddings along with their uncertainties.
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Lan-
guage Processing, 28:2319–2332.
Philipp Koehn and Rebecca Knowles. 2017. Six chal-
lenges for neural machine translation. In Proceedings
of the First Workshop on Neural Machine Translation,
pages 28–39, Vancouver. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Svenja Kranich. 2014. Translations as a locus of lan-
guage contact.
Roger Levy and T. Florian Jaeger. 2006. Speakers opti-
mize information density through syntactic reduction.
volume 19, pages 849–856.
Xiang Lisa Li, John Thickstun, Ishaan Gulrajani, Percy
Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. 2022. Diffusion-
lm improves controllable text generation.
Weixin Liang, Zachary Izzo, Yaohui Zhang, Haley Lepp,
Hancheng Cao, Xuandong Zhao, Lingjiao Chen, Hao-
tian Ye, Sheng Liu, Zhi Huang, Daniel A. McFarland,
and James Y. Zou. 2024. Monitoring ai-modified con-
tent at scale: A case study on the impact of chatgpt
on ai conference peer reviews.
Zhenghao Lin, Yeyun Gong, Yelong Shen, Tong Wu,
Zhihao Fan, Chen Lin, Nan Duan, and Weizhu Chen.
2023. Text generation with diffusion language mod-
els: A pre-training approach with continuous para-
graph denoise.
Wenjie Lu, Leiying Zhou, Gongshen Liu, and Quan-
hai Zhang. 2020. A mixed learning objective for
neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the
19th Chinese National Conference on Computational
Linguistics, pages 974–983, Haikou, China. Chinese
Information Processing Society of China.
Philip M McCarthy. 2005. An assessment of the range
and usefulness of lexical diversity measures and the
potential of the measure of textual, lexical diversity
(MTLD). Ph.D. thesis, The University of Memphis.
Clara Meister, Ryan Cotterell, and Tim Vieira. 2020. If
beam search is the answer, what was the question?
In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP),
pages 2173–2185, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Clara Meister, Tiago Pimentel, Patrick Haller, Lena
Jäger, Ryan Cotterell, and Roger Levy. 2021. Revisit-
ing the Uniform Information Density hypothesis. In
Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 963–
980, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Mathias Müller and Rico Sennrich. 2021. Understand-
ing the properties of minimum Bayes risk decoding
in neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the
59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers), pages 259–272, Online. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Khanh Nguyen and Hal Daumé III. 2019.
Global
Voices: Crossing borders in automatic news sum-
marization. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop
on New Frontiers in Summarization, pages 90–97,
Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2004. The align-
ment template approach to statistical machine trans-
lation. Computational Linguistics, 30(4):417–449.
Byung-Doh Oh and William Schuler. 2022. Why does
surprisal from larger transformer-based language
models provide a poorer fit to human reading times?
Byung-Doh Oh and William Schuler. 2023. Why does
surprisal from larger transformer-based language
models provide a poorer fit to human reading times?
Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 11:336–350.
Myle Ott,
Michael Auli,
David Grangier,
and
Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. 2018. Analyzing uncertainty
in neural machine translation.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Car-
roll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang,
Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John
Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller,
Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder,
Paul Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. 2022.
Training language models to follow instructions with
human feedback.
Koyena Pal, Jiuding Sun, Andrew Yuan, Byron Wal-
lace, and David Bau. 2023. Future lens: Anticipating
subsequent tokens from a single hidden state. In
Proceedings of the 27th Conference on Computa-
tional Natural Language Learning (CoNLL), pages
548–560, Singapore. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Adam Pauls and Dan Klein. 2012. Large-scale syntactic
language modeling with treelets. In Proceedings
of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 959–968, Jeju Island, Korea. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Sumit Chopra, Michael Auli,
and Wojciech Zaremba. 2016. Sequence level train-
ing with recurrent neural networks.
Ricardo Rei, Marcos Treviso, Nuno M. Guerreiro,
Chrysoula Zerva, Ana C Farinha, Christine Maroti,
José G. C. de Souza, Taisiya Glushkova, Duarte
Alves, Luisa Coheur, Alon Lavie, and André F. T.
Martins. 2022. CometKiwi: IST-unbabel 2022 sub-
mission for the quality estimation shared task. In
Proceedings of the Seventh Conference on Machine
Translation (WMT), pages 634–645, Abu Dhabi,
United Arab Emirates (Hybrid). Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Cory Shain, Clara Meister, Tiago Pimentel, Ryan Cot-
terell, and Roger Levy. 2024. Large-scale evidence
for logarithmic effects of word predictability on read-
ing time. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 121(10):e2307876121.
Mukul Singh, José Cambronero, Sumit Gulwani, Vu Le,
Carina Negreanu, and Gust Verbruggen. 2023. Code-
fusion: A pre-trained diffusion model for code gener-
ation.
Nathaniel J Smith and Roger Levy. 2013. The effect
of word predictability on reading time is logarithmic.
Cognition, 128(3):302–319.
Felix Stahlberg and Bill Byrne. 2019. On NMT search
errors and model errors: Cat got your tongue? In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the
9th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 3356–
3362, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Felix Stahlberg, Ilia Kulikov, and Shankar Kumar. 2022.
Uncertainty determines the adequacy of the mode and
the tractability of decoding in sequence-to-sequence
models. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 8634–8645, Dublin,
Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Felix Stahlberg and Shankar Kumar. 2022.
Jam or
cream first? modeling ambiguity in neural machine
translation with SCONES. In Proceedings of the
2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies, pages 4950–4961, Seat-
tle, United States. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Mitchell Stern, Noam Shazeer, and Jakob Uszkoreit.
2018. Blockwise parallel decoding for deep autore-
gressive models.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Daniel M.
Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
Dario Amodei, and Paul Christiano. 2022. Learning
to summarize from human feedback.
Antonio Toral. 2019.
Post-editese: an exacerbated
translationese. In Proceedings of Machine Trans-
lation Summit XVII: Research Track, pages 273–281,
Dublin, Ireland. European Association for Machine
Translation.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. 2019.
Representation learning with contrastive predictive
coding.
Eva Vanmassenhove, Dimitar Shterionov, and Matthew
Gwilliam. 2021. Machine translationese: Effects of
algorithmic bias on linguistic complexity in machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Main Volume, pages 2203–2213,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Eva Vanmassenhove, Dimitar Shterionov, and Andy
Way. 2019. Lost in translation: Loss and decay of lin-
guistic richness in machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of Machine Translation Summit XVII: Research
Track, pages 222–232, Dublin, Ireland. European
Association for Machine Translation.
Alex Warstadt, Amanpreet Singh, and Samuel R. Bow-
man. 2019. Neural network acceptability judgments.
Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 7:625–641.
Jason Wei, Clara Meister, and Ryan Cotterell. 2021.
A cognitive regularizer for language modeling. In
Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics and the 11th
International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 5191–
5202, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Yukun Zhu, Ryan Kiros, Rich Zemel, Ruslan Salakhut-
dinov, Raquel Urtasun, Antonio Torralba, and Sanja
Fidler. 2015. Aligning books and movies: Towards
story-like visual explanations by watching movies
and reading books. In The IEEE International Con-
ference on Computer Vision (ICCV).
Vilém Zouhar and Ondˇrej Bojar. 2024. Quality and
quantity of machine translation references for auto-
mated metrics.
Vilém Zouhar, Vˇera Kloudová, Martin Popel, and
Ondˇrej Bojar. 2023. Evaluating optimal reference
translations.
A
Appendix
Metric
MT
post-GA
Ref
MT score GA score
CMT22-QE
In the NHL, "France" caught 36
games, its save rate at 92.3%.
In yn, "Frederic" clocked up 36 or-
dain, with touchdown rate at 92.3
Basilica
He has played 36 games in the NHL,
where his save percentage is 92.3%.
0.6407
0.7679
The 31-year-old full-back will be on
the scoresheet and could soon be in
goal.
The fullback will toilette on rotation
and could get into goal soon fungo
The thirty-one-year-old Pilsen native
will be on the bench and could soon
be in goal.
0.6901
0.7242
CMT22
The highest ranked in the affair is
Berbr, who no longer features in any
of the football functions.
The highest profile in glave affair is
Piute Denten who no longer longer
figures stanno any football functions
The most senior figure in the affair is
Berbr, who is no longer involved in
any football function.
0.7947
0.8104
Prince William, Duke of Cambridge,
is wearing the same as Princes George
and Louis shorts and a collared T-
shirt.
Prince Pippo, Duke of Goldwyn,
dressed the same as Princes Alexan-
der and Louis in shorts and a T-shirt
Prince William, Duke of Cambridge,
and Princes George and Louis are
wearing shorts and a polo shirt.
0.7675
0.8402
CHRF
Interior has got respirators signifi-
cantly cheaper than the Department
of Health
Interior got respirators mushy Asch
cheaper than the Ministry oie Ministry
of Health natl . fur . LADT Goethe
The Ministry of the Interior got respi-
rators much cheaper than the Ministry
of Health
0.5342
0.8168
PVO: medium-cold war, outdated;
short range - good, modern, relatively
good number.
unpaint: medium-cold war, obsolete;
short range - good, modern, relatively
Orth . enterable number. fugitively
favorer POS SMDF R.A.A.F. pm .
SM
SHORAD: medium - cold war, obso-
lete; short range - good, modern, rela-
tively favorable number.
67.9
82.0
BLEU
The picture, which will serve as a
Christmas card, was also posted by
heir to the throne Prince Charles and
wife Camilla.
knotty-leaved,
which
will
be
fat-shunning weeny-bopper Christ-
mas card, was also posted by the
heir to the throne, Prince Charles,
dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane
duodenocholecystostomy
cock-a-
doodle-doos his wife, Camilla.
The image, which will be used for the
Christmas card, was also posted by the
heir to the throne, Prince Charles, and
his wife, Camilla.
34.3
68.6
BLEURT
By the time I got off my seat, it was
gone.
Idun
epicanthi
got
achenium
tundun terebinthial off Ladakhi
Morgenthaler gone..
ecliptically
scholium mesonasal
By the time I got off the deer-stand,
he was gone.
0.3965
0.8183
His return to goal in the NHL even-
tually extended to more than two
months.
succinimid
Badajoz
hootchie-
kootchie cheongsam NHL taotai
meromyarian Abyla Nadean vainer
tenson months
In the end, his time away from the
NHL was extended by more than two
months.
0.5695
0.8510
Table 4: Examples from the adversarial test set. Superfluous words in the post-GA translation and words from
before GA that are missing post-GA are in bold. From Jon and Bojar (2024).
(a)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Generation
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Fitness
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
Held-out
Best fitness
Avg fitness
Held-out
(b)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Generation
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
Fitness
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
Held-out
Best fitness
Avg fitness
Held-out
Figure 9: Behavior of best and population-average fit-
ness, compared to held-out metric score H of the best
solution during a run of GA for two selected examples.
Held-out score H (UniTE) does not correlate well with
the fitness metric (CMT20+QE+BLEU) and the GA is
detrimental from the point of view of H in Example
a). In Example b), H behaves similarly to the fitness
function and the final held-out score is better than that
of the best initial candidate. From Jon and Bojar (2023).
