Title: Hierarchical Annotation for Building A Suite of Clinical Natural Language Processing Tasks: Progress Note Understanding
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2204.03035v1
--------------------------------------------------

Hierarchical Annotation for Building A Suite of Clinical Natural
Language Processing Tasks: Progress Note Understanding
Yanjun Gao1, Dmitriy Dligach2, Timothy Miller3, Samuel Tesch4, Ryan Lafﬁn4,
Matthew M. Churpek1, Majid Afshar1
1ICU Data Science Lab, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin
2Loyola University Chicago
3Boston Children’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School
4School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin
1{ygao, mchurpek, mafshar}medicine.wisc.edu
2ddligach@luc.edu
3Timothy.Miller@childrens.harvard.edu
4{sgtesch, rlafﬁn}@wisc.edu
Abstract
Applying methods in natural language processing on electronic health records (EHR) data is a growing ﬁeld. Existing corpus
and annotation focus on modeling textual features and relation prediction. However, there is a paucity of annotated corpus built
to model clinical diagnostic thinking, a process involving text understanding, domain knowledge abstraction and reasoning.
This work introduces a hierarchical annotation schema with three stages to address clinical text understanding, clinical
reasoning, and summarization. We created an annotated corpus based on an extensive collection of publicly available daily
progress notes, a type of EHR documentation that is collected in time series in a problem-oriented format. The conventional
format for a progress note follows a Subjective, Objective, Assessment and Plan heading (SOAP). We also deﬁne a new suite
of tasks, Progress Note Understanding, with three tasks utilizing the three annotation stages. The novel suite of tasks was
designed to train and evaluate future NLP models for clinical text understanding, clinical knowledge representation, inference,
and summarization.
Keywords: clinical natural language processing, electronic health record, clinical reasoning, corpus
1.
Introduction
Patients in the hospital have a multidisciplinary team
of physicians, nurses, and support staff who attend to
their care. As part of this care, providers input daily
progress notes to update the diagnoses and treatment
plan, and to document changes in the patient’s health
status.
The electronic health record (EHR) contains
these daily progress notes, and they are one of the
most frequent note types that carry the most relevant
and viewed documentation of a patient’s care (Brown
et al., 2014).
While EHRs are intended to provide
efﬁcient care, they are still riddled with problems of
note bloat (copying and pasting), information overload
(automatically embedded data and administrative docu-
mentation), and poorly organized notes that overwhelm
physicians and lead to burnout and, ultimately, inefﬁ-
cient care (Shoolin et al., 2013).
Applying methods in natural language processing to
the EHR is a growing ﬁeld with many potential ap-
plications in clinical decision support and augmented
care. Corpus and annotation on EHR data are created
to model semantic features and relation through lin-
guistic cues, including relation extraction (Mowery et
al., 2008), named entity recognition (Wang, 2009; Pa-
tel et al., 2018; Lybarger et al., 2021), question answer-
ing (Pampari et al., 2018; Raghavan et al., 2021), natu-
ral language inference (Romanov and Shivade, 2018),
etc. However, few corpora have been built to model
clinical thinking, especially about clinical diagnostic
reasoning, a process involving clinical evidence ac-
quisition, generating hypothesis, integration and ab-
straction over medical knowledge and synthesizing a
conclusion in the form of a diagnosis and treatment
plan (Bowen, 2006). In this work, we introduce a hi-
erarchical annotation with three stages addressing clin-
ical text understanding, reasoning and abstraction over
evidence, and diagnosis summarization. The annota-
tion guidelines were designed and developed by physi-
cians with clinical informatics expertise in conjunc-
tion with computational linguistic experts to model the
healthcare provider decision making process. Our an-
notations were built on top of the Medical Informa-
tion Mart for Intensive Care-III (MIMIC-III), a pub-
licly available English-language EHR (Johnson et al.,
2019).1
Meanwhile, there exists only a handful of language
benchmark tasks in medicine such as the National
Library of Medicine BLUE Benchmark (Peng et al.,
2019), Biomedical Language Understanding and Rea-
soning Benchmark (Gu et al., 2021), and shared tasks
hosted through Harvard’s National NLP Clinical Chal-
1MIMIC is available at https://physionet.org/
content/mimiciii/1.4/. Data usage agreement is re-
quired. Our annotation will be provided through note ID,
character offsets and labels upon acceptance.
arXiv:2204.03035v1  [cs.CL]  6 Apr 2022
Figure 1: An example progress note with SOAP sec-
tions annotated. Line breaks are preserved from the
raw note.
lenges (N2C2).2.
Some of these benchmarks con-
tain non-EHR data (Peng et al., 2019; Gu et al.,
2021).
Many of the EHR-based benchmarks are
time-insensitive, such as discharge summaries (Mul-
lenbach et al., 2021; Uzuner et al., 2008), radiol-
ogy reports (Abacha et al., 2021; Peng et al., 2018).
They also have a strong focus on modeling clini-
cal language instead of potentials for clinical appli-
cations with a practitioner-derived focus (Hultman et
al., 2019). Recent advances in large scale language
modeling enables pre-training on massive corpora and
ﬁne-tuning for in-domain tasks, such as transfer learn-
ing for BERT (Devlin et al., 2019; He et al., 2020)
with ClinicalBERT (Alsentzer et al., 2019; Hao et al.,
2020). These pre-trained models are evaluated on ex-
isting benchmarks with a great emphasis on domain
knowledge representation, but few are tested for clin-
ical reasoning and inference. Better benchmarks for
clinical use are needed to evaluate clinical NLP sys-
tems that model clinical reasoning and thinking.
The goal of the proposed research is to build a suite of
tasks for the following: (1) identify the relevant sec-
tions of the daily progress note - Subjective, Objective,
Assessment and Plan format (SOAP Note); (2) iden-
tify problems/diagnoses from a set of daily progress
notes; and (3) accurately discriminate related plans for
an assessment in the Assessment and Plan section (A/P
of the SOAP note) of daily progress notes. We refer
to our suite of tasks as Progress Note Understanding,
which covers automatic section segmentation, Assess-
ment and Plan reasoning, and diagnoses summariza-
tion. The three tasks are built from different levels of
text units and annotation stages.
Our contribution includes: (1) a novel and hierarchi-
cal annotation protocol jointly designed by NLP re-
2https://n2c2.dbmi.hms.harvard.edu/
searchers and physicians; (2) annotated data for train-
ing and evaluating NLP models on clinical text under-
standing, reasoning and text generation; (3) a new suite
of tasks proposed to develop and evaluate NLP models
for clinical applications that help to improve efﬁciency
of bedside care and reduce medical errors.
2.
Background
The daily progress note follows a speciﬁc format with
four major components: Subjective, Objective, As-
sessment, and Plan (SOAP). SOAP note documenta-
tion is engrained in medical school curriculum as well
as other training curricula, developed by Larry Weed,
MD, known as the father of the problem-oriented med-
ical record and inventor of the ubiquitous SOAP daily
progress note (Weed, 1964). It provides an easily rec-
ognizable template and pattern for systematic docu-
mentation, which lends itself also to reliable annota-
tion.
The main purpose of SOAP documentation is
to record the patients’ information, including recent
events in their care and active problems in a readable
and structured way so the patients’ diagnoses are read-
ily identiﬁed. This is separate from other note types,
such as the admission note (history and physical, also
known as H&P) or discharge summary, which are not
documented daily. The progress note is a time-series
data collection with a reproducible format on all hos-
pitalized patients, and it is the most frequently viewed
note by care teams (Hripcsak et al., 2011). As a pa-
tient’s condition becomes more severe with an increas-
ing number of interactions with providers, the progress
note may also increase in length.
Figure 1 shows an example of a daily progress note
with the sections and their corresponding subsections
labeled.
Every subsection in the progress note be-
longs to a section of SOAP. Subjective includes sec-
tions of free text describing patients’ symptoms, con-
ditions, daily changes in care, etc. Objective contains
sections of structured data such as lab results, vital sign,
radiology reports. Assessment and Plan sections are
considered by providers as the most important compo-
nents in SOAP note, synthesizing evidences from Sub-
jective and Objective and concluding the diagnoses and
treatment plans. Speciﬁcally, Assessment is the sec-
tion describing the patient and establishing the main
symptoms or problems for their encounter, and Plan ad-
dresses each differential diagnosis/problem with an ac-
tion plan or treatment plan for the day, so called PLAN
SUBSECTION. Figure 1 contains two PLAN SUBSEC-
TION, marked by purple color. Text “UGIB . . . daily
transfusions” is a different PLAN SUBSECTION than
“EtOH abuse . . . to years plus”. Each PLAN SUBSEC-
TION starts with a summary of a problem/diagnosis,
e.g. UGIB in the second subsection summarizing from
admit with upper GI bleed in the Assessment section.
The section headings are not always available in the
raw progress notes. Depending on the patients’ con-
ditions, some sections are not always required to be
present; hence, the number of sections in the progress
note may vary. In the end, the SOAP note is reﬂec-
tive of the provider’s effort to collect the most recent
and relevant data and synthesize the collected infor-
mation into a coherent understanding of patient’s con-
dition for decision-making and to ensure coordination
of care.
This skill in documentation requires clear
reasoning to link symptoms, lab and imaging results,
and other observations into temporally relevant and
problem-speciﬁc treatment plans.
3.
Data and Preparation
3.1.
Annotation Tool and Data Source
All annotation procedures were performed using a ded-
icated software tool called INCEpTION3 (Klie et al.,
2018). INCEpTION is an open-source software tool
that serves as a semantic annotation platform and of-
fers intelligent assistance and knowledge management.
A sampling of 5,000 unique daily progress notes using
the method described below were imported into the IN-
CEpTION data corpus from the MIMIC-III notes ﬁle.
Figure 2: A screenshot of INCEpTION interface. The line
numbers are indicated at left hand side. This piece of text are
labelled with CC, HPI 24HR, ALLERGIES, MED, indicat-
ing four sections.
The annotations performed using INCEpTION were
designed to provide labels and metadata in the daily
progress notes extracted from MIMIC-III. MIMIC-III
is an openly available dataset developed by the MIT
Lab for Computational Physiology, comprising de-
identiﬁed health data associated with approximately
60,000 intensive care hospitalizations.
MIMIC in-
cludes demographics, vital signs, laboratory tests, med-
ications, and over ten years of clinical notes collected
across all the intensive care units at Beth Israel Hospi-
tal in Boston, Massachusetts, USA. To build the cor-
3v0.19.2
(Released
on
2021-04-07),
available
at:
https://inception-project.github.io/
pus of notes, a uniform random sample of progress
notes across unique patient encounters were extracted
from the NOTEVENTS table of MIMIC-III, which
contained surgery, medicine, cardiovascular, neurol-
ogy, and trauma daily progress notes. The annotations
included an oversampling of medical progress notes be-
cause that is the largest service unit in the hospital.
3.2.
Note Type Selection
The progress note types from MIMIC-III included a to-
tal of 84 note types (DESCRIPTION header) includ-
ing the following: Physician Resident Note, Intensivist
Note (SICU, CVICU, TICU), PGY1 Progress Note,
PGY1/Attending Daily Progress Note MICU, MICU
Resident/Attending Daily Progress Note. Other note
types were excluded such as Nursing Progress Note
and Social Worker Progress Note because these are not
commonly structured in the SOAP format.
Further,
history and physical notes (admission notes) and dis-
charge summaries were excluded as these are not daily
progress notes and preclude analytics at the hospital en-
counter level in a time-series manner.
3.3.
Ineligible Progress Notes
After the sampling of notes was ﬁnalized, initial re-
view by annotators was to assess appropriate listing of
problems/diagnoses in the Assessment and Plan sec-
tion. Progress notes with a Plan section that did not
contain problems or diagnoses were excluded for anno-
tation. In particular, many progress notes may be writ-
ten with a systems-oriented Plan section which only
lists organ systems with related details but without a
diagnosis or problem identiﬁed (i.e., general systems-
oriented note only include mentions such as “Neurol-
ogy”, “Cardiovascular”, “Renal”, “Hematology”, etc.).
These types of progress notes occurred in 741 (49%) of
the reviewed notes from the sampled corpus and were
excluded for the following reasons: (1) they do not fol-
low the problem-oriented view that is needed for clin-
ical decision support; and (2) they are not the medi-
cal documentation best practices endorsed by medical
school curriculum.
4.
Annotation Protocol
We propose a hierarchical annotation schema consist-
ing of three stages: SOAP Section Tagging organiz-
ing all sections of the progress note into a SOAP cate-
gory; Assessment and Plan Relation Labeling specify-
ing causal relations between symptoms and problems
mentioned in the Assessment and diagnoses covered in
each PLAN SUBSECTION; Problem List Identiﬁcation
highlighting the ﬁnal diagnoses. Every stage of the an-
notation builds on top of the previous annotation. Fig-
ure 3 illustrates the ﬂow of the annotation. The input
to the ﬂow is the entire SOAP progress note. The ﬁrst
stage of annotation, SOAP Section Tagging, produces
text segments labeled with different sections (example
presented in Figure 1). Assessment and Plan sections
Figure 3: Annotation ﬂow diagram for Progress Note Understanding. Dotted line boxes indicate different stages.
Square text boxes are the labels produced at each stage.
Criterion
Label
Assessment section includes a primary diagnosis/problem and it is mentioned in the Plan subsection.
DIRECT
Progress note includes a primary diagnosis/problem for hospitalization and it is mentioned in the Plan subsection.
DIRECT
Plan subsection contains a problem/diagnosis related to the primary signs/symptoms in the Assessment section.
DIRECT
Plan subsection contains complications/subsequent events or organ failure related to the primary diagnosis/
INDIRECT
problem from the Assessment section.
Plan subsection contains other listed diagnoses/problems from the overall Progress Note or in the Assessment
INDIRECT
section that are not part of the primary diagnosis/problem.
Plan subsection contains a diagnosis/problem that is not previously mentioned but closely related (i.e., same
INDIRECT
organ system) to the primary diagnoses/problems mentioned in the overall Progress Note or Assessment section.
None of the criteria for Directly Related or Indirectly Related are met but a diagnosis/problem or other
NEITHER
signs/symptoms are mentioned.
Plan subsection does not include a diagnosis/problems OR signs/symptoms.
NOT REL
Figure 4: Guidelines for annotating the four relations (DIRECT, INDIRECT, NEITHER, NOT RELEVANT) between
Assessment and each subsection of Plan
Sections
Attributes
SOAP Type
Chief Complaint
CC
S
History of Present Illness
HPI 24HR
S
Past Medical History
PMH
S
Allergies
ALLERGIES
S
Patient Surgical History
PSH
S
Social History
SH
S
Family History
FH
S
Review of System
ROS
S
Physical Exam
PE
O
Medications
MED
O
Laboratory
LAB
O
Radiology
RAD
O
Vital Sign
VS
O
Assessment
PROBLEMLIST
A
Plan
PLAN
P
Addendum
ADDENDUM
OTHERS
Table 1: Section headings in the progress notes, anno-
tated tag attributes and corresponding SOAP types.
are segmented at stage 1, and will be used as input to
stage 2 Assessment and Plan Relation Labeling. The
Plan section containing multiple subsections will be in-
put to stage 3 for Problem List Identiﬁcation, producing
a list of diagnoses/problems.
4.1.
Progress Note Section Tagging
The ﬁrst stage of annotation is to segment the progress
notes into sections, where each section belongs to a
type of SOAP. Table 1 presents a list of sections and
headers that may appear in the progress notes and their
corresponding SOAP types, following the deﬁnitions
in (Weed, 1964). Given a progress note, the annotator
will mark each line of text using one of the attributes, as
shown in Figure 2. Most of the sections start with a sec-
tion header, indicating the lines below it falling into the
same category of information until next section. When
there is no section header, the annotator should mark
the attributes by the content expressed in the lines (e.g.
the line 14 Last dose of Antibiotics belonging to MED-
ICATIONS). We post-process the attribute labels and
further categorize them as one of the SOAP type. A
full description of the functionality of each section in
SOAP notes could be found in (Podder et al., 2020).
4.2.
Assessment and Plan Relation Labeling
The Assessment and Plan (A&P) sections are high-
lighted through the ﬁrst stage of annotation. Recall that
the Plan section contains multiple PLAN SUBSECTION,
each of which lists a detailed plan for one speciﬁc di-
agnosis/problem. The second stage of annotation is to
label PLAN SUBSECTION for its relation to the assess-
Figure 5: A screenshot of INCEpTION interface on A&P Labeling. The PLAN SUBSECTION (line 125) contains a PROBLEM
ICD sp ablation for ventricular arrythmia. A DIRECT link connects the PLAN SUBSECTION and the ASSESSMENT, indicating
that the problem is a major diagnosis. Once the link establishes, a text window pops up showing the text in the PLAN SUB-
SECTION (“Rhythm: Patient has ICD ... treatment in future”, and text in ASSESSMENT (“81 yr old M with a PMH ... further
monitoring.”), separated by a dash.
ment: (1) directly related; (2) indirectly related; (3) not
related; and (4) not relevant. These relations indicate
whether a PLAN SUBSECTION addresses the primary
diagnoses or problems related to the primary diagno-
sis (DIRECT), an adverse event or consequence from
the primary diagnosis or comorbidity mentioned in the
Assessment (INDIRECT), a problem or diagnosis not
mentioned in the progress note (NEITHER), or a Plan
subsection without a problem or diagnosis listed (NOT
RELEVANT). Figure 4 shows the guidelines for mark-
ing the relations between the Assessment and each sub-
section of the Plan. Figure 5 presents an example of
linking PLAN SUBSECTION with the Assessment us-
ing INCEpTION interface.
DIRECT, INDIRECT, and NEITHER relations all indi-
cate that a diagnosis/problem is found in the progress
note.
When the label is NOT RELEVANT, the plan
subsection has no mention of a problem. Instead, it
might describe quality improvement/administrative de-
tails such as physical therapy, occupational therapy, nu-
trition, prophylaxis (stress ulcer and gastric ulcer), or
disposition.
Figure 6: A Plan Subsection annotated with the PROB-
LEM (“Ventricular Arrythmia”) and ACTIONPLAN.
4.3.
Problem List Identiﬁcation
The
relevant
plan
subsections
include
a
prob-
lem/diagnosis with an associated treatment or action
plan, stating how the provider will address the problem.
At the third stage of the annotation, the goal is to high-
light the problems/diagnoses mentioned in the Plan
subsections separately from the treatment or action
plans for the day. In identifying problems/diagnoses,
the annotators only labeled the text spans covering
the problem in each Plan subsection, using the label
PROBLEM. Once the problem/diagnosis was labelled
then annotators labelled the accompanying ACTION-
PLAN for that PROBLEM and link the two attributes in-
dicated by PROBLEMAPPROACH. Figure 6 shows an
example plan subsection where the PROBLEM is “Ven-
tricular Arrhythmia”, and the ACTIONPLAN indicating
the medical treatment for the ventricular arrhythmia.
Problems sometimes include the syndrome (i.e., sepsis
syndrome, acute respiratory distress syndrome) along
with the underlying diagnosis (i.e, urinary tract infec-
tion, COVID-19 pneumonia). We ask the annotators to
mark the entire span of text where the text contained
both syndrome and/or diagnosis (e.g.
“sepsis likely
due to urinary tract infection”, where sepsis is the syn-
drome, and urinary tract infection is the diagnosis). We
include both syndrome and diagnosis because the same
diagnosis may lead to different medical treatment path-
ways depending on the syndrome. For instance, antibi-
otics are needed for the urinary tract infection and then
there are resuscitation efforts and additional monitoring
needed for the sepsis syndrome. Phrases connecting
between syndrome and diagnosis were included as part
of the PROBLEM label, such as “caused by” or “likely
due to” were included prior and after for diagnosis.
These are strong linguistic cues showing the causal re-
lations between syndrome and diagnosis, and reﬂecting
a physicians’ reasoning process. However, additional
details about the diagnoses were not needed. For ex-
ample, “Myocardial infarction involving the LAD s/p
PCI” should be labelled only for the diagnosis/problem
of “myocardial infarction”. Another example, “SVT
with hypotension: This occurred in setting of having
RA/RV manipulated with wire” should be labelled as
just “SVT with hypotension”. These were descriptions
of characteristics of the diagnosis.
4.4.
Annotator Training
The annotation guidelines and rules were initially de-
veloped and trialed by two physicians with board
certiﬁcations in critical care medicine, pulmonary
medicine, and clinical informatics.
The physicians
practice in the same ﬁeld as the authors of the source
notes. They are also experts in clinical research in-
formatics with an extensive research track in machine
learning and natural language processing, one of them
serves as the mentor and adjudicator for the trained an-
notators. Two medical students were recruited and had
received training in their medical school curriculum in
medical history taking and documentation (including
SOAP format), anatomy, pathophysiology, and phar-
macology. An additional three week period with orien-
tation and training was provided by one of the critical
care physicians to the annotators. Each annotator met
an inter-rater reliability with a kappa score of > 0.80
with the adjudicator prior to independent review. The
annotators augmented their medical knowledge with a
subscription and access to a large medical reference
library, UpToDate®4. The adjudicator performed au-
dits of the charts after approximately 200 were com-
pleted and if the inter-rater reliability fell below the
0.80 threshold then cases with disagreements were re-
viewed to consensus and the annotator was re-trained
again until threshold kappa agreement was met.
5.
Annotation Results
In total, two annotators labelled 768 progress notes
with 28,945 labels from all annotation stages. We fur-
ther split the corpus into train/dev/test, resulting in 608,
76 and 87 notes, respectively. All annotations were
stored as XML ﬁles. We reported statistics of the la-
bels for each stage.
Statistics for Section Tagging
We collected 3,790,
6,090, 787 and 2,742 labels for SOAP and OTHERS,
respectively. Table 2 presents the statistics of labels
broken down by each section attribute, showing the to-
tal and average number of section tagged and average
length of sections by tokens. Laboratory (LAB) was the
most frequent section type across our sampled progress
notes, with 4 sections per note on average. Often, more
than one lab test was required to provide evidences for
certain diseases, and every lab tested was included in
the progress note as an individual section. Assessment
and Plan sections were the longest with 577.29 tokens
per note, much more than any other sections. Recall
that Assessment and Plan viewed as the most impor-
tant piece in SOAP note, summarizing the evidence
4https://www.wolterskluwer.com/en/
solutions/uptodate
Attributes
#Labels
Avg #Labels
Avg
Per Note
Length
CC
750
0.98
12.70
HPI 24HR
807
1.51
94.37
PMH
731
0.95
7.42
ALLERGIES
764
0.99
17.24
PSH
12
0.02
33.91
SH
15
0.02
15.87
FH
711
0.93
5.05
ROS
740
0.96
21.61
PE
789
1.03
131.64
MED
823
1.07
76.31
LAB
3083
4.01
55.59
RAD
1395
1.82
38.75
VS
974
1.27
159.92
A&P
787
1.02
577.29
Addendum
727
0.95
47.62
Table 2: Total and average number of section tags, and
average length for each section counting by tokens.
Figure 7: Confusion matrix on the AP relation labels
between two annotators.
from other sections and listed diagnoses with treatment
plans. Physicians tend to spend most of their time read-
ing the Assessment and Plan sections and less than
10 percent of the content in physicians’ verbal hand-
offs were found outside the A/P section (Brown et al.,
2014).
Statistics of A&P Relation Labeling
Recall that
A&P relations were labelled between every pair of
PLAN SUBSECTION and the Assessment. Across the
sample set of progress notes, we had 7.73 plan sub-
sections per note on average. Table 3 summarizes the
count of labels on all annotated notes and the average
per note. The distribution across four relations were
relatively balanced, with NEITHER being the most fre-
Count
DIRECT
INDIRECT
NEITHER
NOT REL
Total
1404
1599
1913
1018
Per Note
1.83
2.09
2.49
1.32
Table 3: Total and average number of relation labels.
quently labelled and NOT RELEVANT being the least
frequently labelled.
Statistics of Problem Lists
We collected 4,843 and
4,759 labels for PROBLEM and ACTIONPLAN, respec-
tively. For every note, the average numbers of PROB-
LEM and ACTIONPLAN were both approximately 6.
Recall that the PROBLEM was highlighted after the
annotation for AP Relation Labeling, we were able
to count the problems that were labeled as DIRECT
and INDIRECT, which was 2,866 in total. We post-
processed the annotation such that for every assess-
ment, there was a list of direct problems and a list of in-
direct problems. Every list could be regarded as a short
summary, with distinct problems delimited by semi-
colons. In total we collect 743 and 619 summaries for
direct problems and indirect problems, respectively.
Inter-Annotator Agreement
We measured Cohen’s
Kappa on the AP relation labeling task, as it was
deemed the most difﬁcult by the annotators because it
was the only task that required clinical reasoning and
medical knowledge.
The two annotators achieved a
Cohen’s Kappa of 0.74 on 10 randomly sampled notes,
which represented good quality given the complexity of
the task. Figure 7 presents the agreement and disagree-
ment between the two annotators on four relations.
Most of the disagreement occurred between INDIRECT
and NEITHER, taking 9.83% of all labels, exposing the
difﬁculties in deciding whether a problem is due to a
subsequent event of the main diagnosis (INDIRECT) or
a separate disease altogether (NEITHER). Nonetheless,
the percentage of labels agreed by both annotators was
81.9%.
6.
Suite of Tasks for Progress Note
Understanding
In this section, we further propose the suite of clinical
NLP tasks: Progress Note Understanding. The suite
of tasks was developed from the annotation and de-
signed to train and evaluate models for clinical text un-
derstanding in future work. The suite of tasks was set
up in the same stream as the annotation, with each task
corresponding to an annotation stage and targeted at a
different NLP problem. Figure 8 presents a diagram of
the suite set up. The level of NLP difﬁculty in moving
from Task 1 to Task 3 were intended to increase from
classiﬁcation to classiﬁcation with medical knowledge
(NLI) to text generation. We consider the SOAP Note
Section Segmentation as the easiest task that only re-
quires text understanding, and the Diagnoses Summa-
rization to be the hardest as it investigates clinical text
understanding, clinical reasoning and text generation.
6.1.
Task 1: SOAP Note Segmentation
The suite of tasks started with a clinical text under-
standing task where the goal was to segment the entire
SOAP note into topic-relevant sections. We formulated
this task as labeling each line of the daily progress note
by its SOAP type based on the information contained in
the line. This task helped to train and evaluate models
that automatically understand the SOAP note structure
and topic-level contents, and highlights the problem-
oriented sections. We considered this task as a funda-
mental and essential step for NLP system pipelines for
clinical note processing, as previously shown in (Kr-
ishna et al., 2021; Cillessen and de Vries Robb´e, 2012;
Mowery et al., 2012). Previous work also focused on
segmenting SOAP notes (Mowery et al., 2012; Gane-
san and Subotin, 2014). Mowery et al. (2012) for-
mulated the task as sentence labeling using 50 emer-
gency department reports. Our proposed task is similar
to Ganesan and Subotin (2014) where the task is on
line-basis instead of sentence, but our work is a larger
corpus and is focused on daily progress notes. Lastly,
we plan to make our corpus available unlike prior work.
Evaluation will be measured using the F1 score and Ac-
curacy as in previous work (Mowery et al., 2012).
6.2.
Task 2: Assessment and Plan Reasoning
Recall that the Assessment and Plan sections contain
the most useful information for providers needing to
know what is the condition of a patient.
Providers
spend the most time viewing these sections, where clin-
ical reasoning occurs.
Providers conclude the diag-
noses/problems from the evidences presented in S and
O sections and the symptoms described in A section,
then infer the treatment plan for each diagnosis for that
day. It is a process of associating the patients’ current
condition with clinical problems, and assessing the so-
lutions with medical knowledge. Modeling such un-
derstanding and reasoning process greatly beneﬁts the
downstream applications that aim at improving efﬁ-
ciency of bedside care and reducing medical errors. We
propose task 2, Assessment and Plan Reasoning, a re-
lation classiﬁcation task that builds on top of the stage
2 annotation. Models trained and evaluated on this task
should predict one of four relations. We plan to use F1
score as the evaluation metric for this task.5
6.3.
Task 3: Problem/Diagnoses
Summarization
Automatically generating a set of diagnoses/problems
in a progress note could help providers quickly and ef-
ﬁciently understand and document a patient’s condi-
tion, and ultimately reduce effort in document review
and augment care during time-sensitive hospital events.
Devarakonda et al. (2017) demonstrated that a system
that automatically predicts diagnoses captures more
problems than human clinicians through a pilot study.
They built a two-level classiﬁer that ﬁrst predicted ma-
jor category of conditions and then a subsequent pre-
diction on the ﬁne-grained level of problems. Liang
et al. (2019) formulated the task as extractive summa-
rization on a disease-speciﬁc progress notes. To enrich
5The task is part of 2022 National NLP Clinical Challenge
(N2C2): https://n2c2.dbmi.hms.harvard.edu/
2022-track-3.
Figure 8: The Progress Note Understanding suite is consisted of three tasks, each of which corresponds to one annotation
stage. Task 3, Problem/Diagnoses Summarization, has two subtasks, Direct Problem Summarization and Indirect Problem
Summarization, using the problems identiﬁed in annotation stage 2 and 3.
the research on diagnosis summarization, we propose
Problem/Diagnoses Summarization with labels created
from annotation stage 2 and 3. Speciﬁcally, the task
consisted of two subtasks: Direct Problem Summariza-
tion and Indirect Problem Summarization. The goal
of Direct Problem Summarization is to take the assess-
ment section as input, and predict a list of primary diag-
noses. For Indirect Problem Summarization, the goal is
to predict a list of adverse events and subsequent diag-
noses given the entire progress note. Recall that in Fig-
ure 5, indirect problems included diagnoses/problems
that were not part of the Assessment or primary di-
agnoses, which required input from other sections in
the progress notes (e.g. LAB, VS) and would make
the task harder than Direct Problem Summarization.
Different from (Liang et al., 2019), we deﬁned both
subtasks as abstractive summarization, since our data
covered a larger breadth of diseases/problems and they
were not always explicitly mentioned in the progress
note. In some instances, the signs or symptoms of a
disease were listed, relevant objective data that pointed
to a diagnosis, or synonyms and acronyms of the dis-
ease or problem were listed in other parts of the note.
Recall that the text spans labelled by PROBLEM were
concatenated through semi-colons. Figure 9 includes
an example Direct Problem Summary with an assess-
ment it derived from.
For both summarization subtasks, we plan to follow
previous work on EHR summarization (MacAvaney et
al., 2019; Adams et al., 2021) and use the standard
summarization metrics like ROUGE (Lin, 2004). A
diagnosis could be expressed with different lexicons,
(e.g. “CAD” and “Coronaries”), hence we also con-
sider post-processing the summaries with the National
Library of Medicine’s Uniﬁed Medical Language Sys-
tem (UMLS) (Bodenreider, 2004) by mapping the clin-
ical terms to the UMLS metathesaurus of concept
Assessment
80 yo female with pmh of htn and DM admitted with an
NSTEMI transferred to the CCU after an attempted cath due
to a hypertensive emergency secondary to anxiety and
agitation.
Direct Problem Summary
multivessel CAD; Hypertensive emergency; Change in
mental status/agitation;
Figure 9:
An example Direct Problem Summary given
an Assessment section. The diagnosis “Multivessel CAD”
is inferred from “DM admitted with an NSTEMI transfered
to CCU”; “hypertensive emergency” is mentioned directly
in the assessment, and “Change in mental status/agitation”
refers to “anxiety and agitation”.
unique identiﬁers (CUIs), and measuring the F1 score
for clinical accuracy. Liang et al. (2019) also used this
method as their main evaluation.
7.
Conclusions
We introduce a novel and hierarchical annotation on
a large collection of publicly available EHR data and
aim to develop and evaluate models for automated sec-
tion segmentation, assessment and plan reasoning, and
diagnoses summarization. A suite of tasks, Progress
Note Understanding, is proposed to utilize the anno-
tation and contains three tasks, each of which corre-
sponds to an annotation stage. Future work will focus
on hosting shared tasks for the clinical NLP community
and using the tasks to build systems for applications in
clinical decision support.
Acknowledgement
We
thank
Professor
Ozlem
Uzuner (George Mason University) and Harvard
Department of Biomedical Informatics (DBMI) for the
feedback and guidance during N2C2 task setup.
8.
Reference
Abacha, A. B., M’rabet, Y., Zhang, Y., Shivade, C.,
Langlotz, C., and Demner-Fushman, D.
(2021).
Overview of the mediqa 2021 shared task on sum-
marization in the medical domain. In Proceedings
of the 20th Workshop on Biomedical Language Pro-
cessing, pages 74–85.
Adams, G., Alsentzer, E., Ketenci, M., Zucker, J., and
Elhadad, N. (2021). What’s in a summary? lay-
ing the groundwork for advances in hospital-course
summarization. In Proceedings of the 2021 Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, pages 4794–4811.
Alsentzer, E., Murphy, J., Boag, W., Weng, W.-H.,
Jindi, D., Naumann, T., and McDermott, M. (2019).
Publicly available clinical bert embeddings. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2nd Clinical Natural Language Pro-
cessing Workshop, pages 72–78.
Bodenreider, O. (2004). The uniﬁed medical language
system (umls): integrating biomedical terminology.
Nucleic acids research, 32(suppl 1):D267–D270.
Bowen, J. L. (2006). Educational strategies to promote
clinical diagnostic reasoning. New England Journal
of Medicine, 355(21):2217–2225.
Brown, P., Marquard, J., Amster, B., Romoser, M.,
Friderici, J., Goff, S., and Fisher, D.
(2014).
What do physicians read (and ignore) in elec-
tronic progress notes? Applied clinical informatics,
5(02):430–444.
Cillessen, F. and de Vries Robb´e, P. (2012). Modeling
problem-oriented clinical notes. Methods of infor-
mation in medicine, 51(06):507–515.
Devarakonda, M. V., Mehta, N., Tsou, C.-H., Liang,
J. J., Nowacki, A. S., and Jelovsek, J. E. (2017). Au-
tomated problem list generation and physicians per-
spective from a pilot study. International journal of
medical informatics, 105:121–129.
Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., and Toutanova,
K. (2019). Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
transformers for language understanding. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Vol-
ume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages 4171–4186.
Ganesan, K. and Subotin, M. (2014). A general su-
pervised approach to segmentation of clinical texts.
In 2014 IEEE International Conference on Big Data
(Big Data), pages 33–40. IEEE.
Gu, Y., Tinn, R., Cheng, H., Lucas, M., Usuyama,
N., Liu, X., Naumann, T., Gao, J., and Poon,
H. (2021). Domain-speciﬁc language model pre-
training for biomedical natural language process-
ing. ACM Transactions on Computing for Health-
care (HEALTH), 3(1):1–23.
Hao, B., Zhu, H., and Paschalidis, I. (2020). En-
hancing clinical bert embedding using a biomedi-
cal knowledge base. In Proceedings of the 28th in-
ternational conference on computational linguistics,
pages 657–661.
He, Y., Zhu, Z., Zhang, Y., Chen, Q., and Caverlee,
J. (2020). Infusing disease knowledge into bert for
health question answering, medical inference and
disease name recognition. In Proceedings of the
2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 4604–4614.
Hripcsak, G., Vawdrey, D. K., Fred, M. R., and Bost-
wick, S. B. (2011). Use of electronic clinical docu-
mentation: time spent and team interactions. Jour-
nal of the American Medical Informatics Associa-
tion, 18(2):112–117.
Hultman, G. M., Marquard, J. L., Lindemann, E., Arso-
niadis, E., Pakhomov, S., and Melton, G. B. (2019).
Challenges and opportunities to improve the clini-
cian experience reviewing electronic progress notes.
Applied clinical informatics, 10(03):446–453.
Johnson, A., Pollard, T., and Mark III, R. (2019).
Mimic-iii clinical database demo (version 1.4). Phy-
sioNet, 10:C2HM2Q.
Klie, J.-C., Bugert, M., Boullosa, B., de Castilho, R. E.,
and Gurevych, I. (2018). The inception platform:
Machine-assisted and knowledge-oriented interac-
tive annotation. In Proceedings of the 27th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics:
System Demonstrations, pages 5–9.
Krishna, K., Khosla, S., Bigham, J. P., and Lipton,
Z. C. (2021). Generating soap notes from doctor-
patient conversations using modular summarization
techniques. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
and the 11th International Joint Conference on Nat-
ural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 4958–4972.
Liang, J., Tsou, C.-H., and Poddar, A. (2019). A novel
system for extractive clinical note summarization us-
ing ehr data. In Proceedings of the 2nd Clinical Nat-
ural Language Processing Workshop, pages 46–54.
Lin, C.-Y. (2004). Rouge: A package for automatic
evaluation of summaries.
In Text summarization
branches out, pages 74–81.
Lybarger, K., Ostendorf, M., and Yetisgen, M. (2021).
Annotating social determinants of health using ac-
tive learning, and characterizing determinants using
neural event extraction. Journal of Biomedical In-
formatics, 113:103631.
MacAvaney, S., Sotudeh, S., Cohan, A., Goharian, N.,
Talati, I., and Filice, R. W. (2019). Ontology-aware
clinical abstractive summarization. In Proceedings
of the 42nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval,
pages 1013–1016.
Mowery, D. L., Harkema, H., and Chapman, W.
(2008). Temporal annotation of clinical text. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Current Trends
in Biomedical Natural Language Processing, pages
106–107.
Mowery, D., Wiebe, J., Visweswaran, S., Harkema,
H., and Chapman, W. W. (2012). Building an auto-
mated soap classiﬁer for emergency department re-
ports. Journal of biomedical informatics, 45(1):71–
81.
Mullenbach, J., Pruksachatkun, Y., Adler, S., Seale, J.,
Swartz, J., McKelvey, G., Dai, H., Yang, Y., and
Sontag, D. (2021). CLIP: A dataset for extracting
action items for physicians from hospital discharge
notes. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics and
the 11th International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 1365–1378, Online, August. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Pampari, A., Raghavan, P., Liang, J., and Peng, J.
(2018). emrqa: A large corpus for question answer-
ing on electronic medical records. In Proceedings of
the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 2357–2368.
Patel, P., Davey, D., Panchal, V., and Pathak, P. (2018).
Annotation of a large clinical entity corpus. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2033–
2042.
Peng, Y., Wang, X., Lu, L., Bagheri, M., Summers,
R., and Lu, Z. (2018). Negbio: a high-performance
tool for negation and uncertainty detection in radi-
ology reports. AMIA Jt Summits Transl Sci Proc,
2017:188–196.
Peng, Y., Yan, S., and Lu, Z. (2019). Transfer learn-
ing in biomedical natural language processing: An
evaluation of bert and elmo on ten benchmarking
datasets. In Proceedings of the 2019 Workshop on
Biomedical Natural Language Processing (BioNLP
2019).
Podder, V., Lew, V., and Ghassemzadeh, S. (2020).
Soap notes. StatPearls [Internet].
Raghavan, P., Liang, J. J., Mahajan, D., Chandra,
R., and Szolovits, P. (2021). emrkbqa: A clinical
knowledge-base question answering dataset. In Pro-
ceedings of the 20th Workshop on Biomedical Lan-
guage Processing, pages 64–73.
Romanov, A. and Shivade, C. (2018). Lessons from
natural language inference in the clinical domain.
In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
1586–1596.
Shoolin, J., Ozeran, L., Hamann, C., and Bria Ii, W.
(2013). Association of medical directors of informa-
tion systems consensus on inpatient electronic health
record documentation. Applied clinical informatics,
4(02):293–303.
Uzuner, O., Goldstein, I., Luo, Y., and Kohane, I.
(2008).
Identifying patient smoking status from
medical discharge records.
JOURNAL OF THE
AMERICAN MEDICAL INFORMATICS ASSOCIA-
TION, 15(1):14–24.
Wang, Y. (2009). Annotating and recognising named
entities in clinical notes. In proceedings of the ACL-
IJCNLP 2009 Student Research Workshop, pages
18–26.
Weed, L. L. (1964). Medical records, patient care, and
medical education. Irish Journal of Medical Science
(1926-1967), 39(6):271–282.
