Title: NARMADA: Need and Available Resource Managing Assistant for Disasters and Adversities
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2005.13524v1
--------------------------------------------------

NARMADA: Need and Available Resource Managing Assistant for
Disasters and Adversities
Kaustubh Hiware*
Mercari, Inc
Tokyo, Japan
hiwarekaustubh@gmail.com
Ritam Dutt*
Indian Institute of Technology
Kharagpur, India
ritam.dutt@gmail.com
Sayan Sinha
Indian Institute of Technology
Kharagpur, India
sayan.sinha@iitkgp.ac.in
Sohan Patro
Microsoft Corporation
Redmond, USA
sopatr@microsoft.com
Kripabandhu Ghosh
Tata Consultancy Services
Pune, India
kripa.ghosh@gmail.com
Saptarshi Ghosh
Indian Institute of Technology
Kharagpur, India
saptarshi@cse.iitkgp.ac.in
Abstract
Although a lot of research has been done on
utilising Online Social Media during disasters,
there exists no system for a speciﬁc task that
is critical in a post-disaster scenario – identify-
ing resource-needs and resource-availabilities
in the disaster-affected region, coupled with
their subsequent matching.
To this end, we
present NARMADA, a semi-automated plat-
form which leverages the crowd-sourced in-
formation from social media posts for assist-
ing post-disaster relief coordination efforts.
The system employs Natural Language Pro-
cessing and Information Retrieval techniques
for identifying resource-needs and resource-
availabilities from microblogs, extracting re-
sources from the posts, and also matching the
needs to suitable availabilities. The system is
thus capable of facilitating the judicious man-
agement of resources during post-disaster re-
lief operations.
1
Introduction
In recent years, microblogging sites like Twitter
and Weibo have played a pivotal role in gathering
situational information during disasters or emer-
gency scenarios such as earthquakes, epidemic out-
breaks, ﬂoods, hurricanes, and so on (Imran et al.,
2015; Nazer et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017). Speciﬁ-
cally, there are two types of information which are
considered useful (or ‘actionable’) by rescue work-
ers for assisting post-disaster relief operations.1
These include (i) Resource needs that talk about
the requirement of a speciﬁc resource (such as food,
water, shelter) and (ii) Resource availabilities that
talk about the availability of a speciﬁc resource in
the region. Some examples of tweets that inform
*Equal Contribution
1We discussed with relief workers from ‘Doctors For You’
(http://doctorsforyou.org/) and SPADE (http:
//www.spadeindia.org/).
Needs (excerpts)
Availabilities (excerpts)
Mobile phones are not
working, no electricity,
no water in #Thamel,
#Nepalquake
Please contact for drinking
free service water specially for
Earthquake Victim.
Sanjay
Limbu [mobile num]
Over 1400 killed. Many
Trapped. Medical Sup-
plies Requested.
20,000 RSS personnel with
medical supplies and other
help the ﬁrst to reach earth-
quake
damaged
zones
in
#Nepal
Nepal earthquake: thou-
sands in need of shelter
in country little able to
cope [url]
can anyone we know pick the
2000 second hand tents from
Sunauli and distribute it to the
people in need in Nepal?
Table 1: Examples of tweets stating resource-needs
and tweets stating corresponding matching resource-
availabilities, from a dataset of tweets on 2015 Nepal
earthquake. The common resources for each pair are
shown in boldface (table reproduced from our prior
work (Dutt et al., 2019)).
about resource-needs and resource-availabilities,
taken from a dataset of tweets related to the 2015
Nepal earthquake, are shown in Table 1. We re-
fer to such tweets as ‘needs’ and ‘availabilities’
henceforth.
The two major practical challenges faced in this
regard include (i) automated identiﬁcation of need
and availability posts from social media sites such
as Twitter and (ii) automated matching of the ap-
propriate needs and availabilities. There have been
prior works which have tried to address each of
these challenges separately. However, to the best
of our knowledge, there exists no system that inte-
grates the two tasks of identifying needs and avail-
abilities and their subsequent matching.
In this work, we present NARMADA (Need
and Available Resource Managing Assistant for
Disasters and Adversities), a uniﬁed platform for
the coordination of relief efforts during disasters
by managing the resources that are needed and/or
available in the disaster-affected region.
NAR-
MADA is designed to be a semi-automated sys-
arXiv:2005.13524v1  [cs.SI]  27 May 2020
tem to ensure supervision and accountability.
In this paper, we describe the Natural Lan-
guage Processing and Information Retrieval tech-
niques used in NARMADA for the following
tasks – (i) identifying resource-needs and resource-
availabilities from microblogs, (ii) extracting re-
source names and other critical information from
the posts (e.g., where the resource is needed, the
quantity that is needed/available), and (iii) match-
ing the needs to suitable availabilities. The sys-
tem can be accessed from https://osm-dm-kgp.
github.io/Narmada/. Although the system is cur-
rently applied over tweets only, NARMADA can
also seamlessly integrate information from other
sources, as well as enable users to add new infor-
mation as they deem ﬁt. We believe that the use of
this system during a real-time disaster event will
help in expediting relief operations.
Our work makes the following contributions.
1) We leverage contextual word embeddings to
develop supervised models for automated classiﬁ-
cation of tweets that inform about need or availabil-
ity of a resource.
2) We automate the process of categorising the
type of resource present in needs and availabilities
into food, health, shelter or logistics. This helps us
to identify covert information present in tweets.
3) We deploy NARMADA that leverages NLP
and IR techniques to identify resource needs and
availabilities from microblogs, extract relevant in-
formation, and subsequently match needs to suit-
able availabilities. We believe that such a system
would assist in post-disaster relief operations.
2
Related Work
There has been a lot of recent work on utilising On-
line Social Media (OSM) to facilitate post-disaster
relief operations – see (Imran et al., 2015; Nazer
et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017) for some recent sur-
veys on this topic. For instance, there have been
works on classifying situational and non-situational
information (Rudra et al., 2015, 2018), location
inferencing from social media posts during disas-
ters (Karimzadeh et al., 2013; Lingad et al., 2013;
Paule et al., 2018; Dutt et al., 2018; Kumar and
Singh, 2019), early detection of rumours from
social media posts (Mondal et al., 2018), emer-
gency information diffusion on social media during
crises (Kim et al., 2018), event detection (Hasan
et al., 2018), extraction of event-speciﬁc informa-
tive tweets during disaster (Laylavi et al., 2017)
and so on. Tweets speciﬁc to particular disasters
have been studied in (Gautam et al., 2019), along
with their categorisation. Certain other works have
focused on the classiﬁcation of such tweets by de-
termining the probability of them being re-shared
in Twitter (Neppalli et al., 2019). A comparison
of various learning-based methods has also been
recently conducted in (Assery et al., 2019).
Automated retrieval of needs and availabilities
have been attempted by employing regular expres-
sions (Purohit et al., 2013), pattern-matching tech-
niques (Temnikova et al., 2015), language mod-
els (Basu et al., 2017), and neural IR methods such
as word and character embeddings (Basu et al.,
2017; Khosla et al., 2017). Likewise, there has been
prior research on the automated matching of the
needs and availabilities using tf-idf similarity (Puro-
hit et al., 2013) and our prior works (Basu et al.,
2018; Dutt et al., 2019) that used word-embeddings
for the task. However, no prior work has attempted
end-to-end identiﬁcation and matching of needs
and availabilities, which we attempt in this work.
Some information systems have also been imple-
mented for disaster situations such as AIDR (AID,
2015) and Ushahidi (Ush, 2008) which employs
crowd-sourced information using social media to
assist disaster operations. To our knowledge, none
of the existing systems have attempted the speciﬁc
tasks in this work – identiﬁcation and matching of
resource-needs and resource-availabilities.
3
Dataset
We reuse the dataset made available by our prior
works (Khosla et al., 2017; Basu et al., 2018; Dutt
et al., 2019) which comprises tweets posted during
two disaster events i.e. (i) the earthquake in Nepal
in April, 2015 2, and (ii) the earthquake in central
Italy in August, 2016 3. Henceforth, we refer to the
scenarios as Nepal-quake and Italy-quake.
The tweets were collected using the Twitter
Search API4 with the queries ‘nepal quake’ and
‘italy quake’. The dataset consists of only English
tweets since it was observed that most tweets are
posted in English to enable rapid communication
between international agencies and the local popu-
lation.
2https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/April_
2015_Nepal_earthquake
3https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/August_
2016_Central_Italy_earthquake
4https://dev.twitter.com/rest/public/
search
Removing
duplicates
and
near-duplicates
yielded a corpus of 50,068 tweets for Nepal-quake
and 70,487 tweets for Italy-quake. However, the
number of tweets that inform about needs and
availabilities is very low – there are 499 and 1333
need and availability tweets for the Nepal-quake
dataset. Likewise, the Italy-quake had only 177
needs and 233 availabilities (see (Dutt et al., 2019)
for more details).
4
Methodology
In this section, we describe the methodologies that
are incorporated within the NARMADA system.
The overarching goal of the system is to facilitate
post-disaster relief coordination efforts using the
vast information available on social media. To that
end, it performs three essential tasks – (i) identi-
fying needs and availabilities, (ii) extracting ac-
tionable information from the need and availability
tweets, and (iii) matching appropriate needs and
availabilities. NARMADA is designed to execute
each of the above three tasks in an automated fash-
ion. We elaborate on the speciﬁc methodology
involved for each of these sub-tasks in the ensu-
ing subsection. However, prior to each of these
tasks, we perform pre-processing on the tweet text
as follows.
Pre-processing tweets: We employed standard
pre-processing techniques on the tweet text to re-
move URLs (but not email ids), mentions, char-
acters like brackets, ‘RT’, and other non-ASCII
characters like #, &, ellipses and Unicode charac-
ters corresponding to emojis. We also segmented
CamelCase words and joint alphanumeric terms
like ‘Nepal2015’ into distinct terms (‘Nepal’ and
‘2015’). However, we did not perform case-folding
or stemming on the tweet-text to enable subsequent
detection of proper nouns (explained below).
4.1
Identifying needs and availabilities
Identifying needs and availabilities is challenging
since they account for only ≈3.64% and ≈0.58%
of the entire Nepal-quake and Italy-quake datasets,
respectively. Prior works have approached this
problem as a retrieval task using a wide array of
techniques such as regular-expressions (Purohit
et al., 2013), pattern-matching (Temnikova et al.,
2015), language models (Basu et al., 2017), and
recently neural IR techniques such as word and
character embeddings (Basu et al., 2017; Khosla
et al., 2017; Basu et al., 2019).
To enable the real-time deployment, a system
needs to ﬁlter out tweets on an individual basis.
To that end, we decided to adopt a supervised ap-
proach for classifying a tweet as ‘need’, or as ‘avail-
ability’ or as ‘others’ (i.e., a three-class classiﬁca-
tion problem). We experimented with different
neural architectures for both in-domain and cross-
domain classiﬁcation. In-domain classiﬁcation im-
plies that the model is trained and tested on tweets
related to the same disaster event. On the other
hand, cross-domain classiﬁcation involves training
on tweets related to one event (say ‘Nepal-quake’)
and evaluating on tweets related to another event
(‘Italy-quake’) (Basu et al., 2019).
Baseline methods:
Convolutional Neural Net-
works (CNN) have been found to work well in the
classiﬁcation of disaster-related tweets (Caragea
et al., 2016; Nguyen et al., 2017). Hence we use
the CNN of (Kim, 2014) as a baseline model. We
operate on 300-dimensional word-embeddings and
ﬁx the feature maps to 100 dimensions. We imple-
ment convolutional ﬁlters with kernel-size 3, 4, and
5 respectively, with stride 1, and non-linear ReLU
activation units. Finally, we apply max-pooling
before passing it through a fully-connected layer
and softmax with negative log-likelihood (NLL)
loss. We experiment with randomly initialized em-
beddings as well as different kinds of pre-trained
embeddings – Glove(Pennington et al., 2014)5,
word2vec (Mikolov et al., 2013) 6, fasttetxt em-
beddings (Bojanowski et al., 2017)7 and CrisisNLP
embeddings (Imran et al., 2016) trained on tweets
posted during many disaster events.
Proposed model: We propose to use a pre-trained
BERT model (Devlin et al., 2018) (bert-base-
uncased) to represent a tweet as a 768-dimensional
embedding. We pass the represented tweet through
a fully connected layer which classiﬁes it into the
aforementioned three categories. Using BERT pre-
trained embeddings helps us in two ways. Firstly,
the BERT model itself remains a part of the entire
end-to-end system; hence it gets ﬁne-tuned while
training. Moreover, BERT uses multiple bidirec-
tional self-attention modules which helps capture
contextual information.
In-domain classiﬁcation: Table 2 notes the per-
5https://nlp.stanford.edu/projects/
glove/
6https://code.google.com/p/word2vec/
7https://fasttext.cc/docs/en/
english-vectors.html
Nepal-quake
Italy-quake
Methodology
Prec
Rec
F1
Prec
Rec
F1
CNN + random
0.803
0.612
0.681
0.926
0.552
0.637
CNN + Glove
0.790
0.668
0.716
0.846
0.680
0.727
CNN + Word2vec
0.796
0.660
0.712
0.847
0.644
0.709
CNN + Fasttext
0.771
0.628
0.683
0.870
0.640
0.703
CNN + CrisisNLP
0.767
0.634
0.682
0.734
0.585
0.635
BERT (proposed for F1)
0.786
0.866
0.823
0.856
0.722
0.779
BERT (proposed for Rec)
0.791
0.872
0.828
0.843
0.810
0.826
Table 2: Performance of the neural architectures for
in-domain classiﬁcation of tweets into three classes –
needs, availabilities, and others. Best F1-scores in bold-
face.
formances of the various classiﬁcation models in
in-domain settings, averaged over both the classes
needs and availabilities.
For each of the two
datasets, we consider 20% (randomly sampled) of
the labelled data as the test set, 70% of the rest as
the training set, and the rest 10% was used as the
validation set. We report the Precision, Recall and
F1-score on the test set as the evaluation measures.
We consider F1-score as the primary score since it
incorporates both Precision and Recall. The pro-
posed BERT model outperforms all other models
in terms of F1-score.
We trained two versions of our proposed BERT
model – (i) one version was trained to optimise
the F1-score (our primary measure) on the valida-
tion set, and (ii) the second version was trained
to optimise the Recall on the validation set. We
speciﬁcally tried one version to optimise Recall,
since it is usually considered important to identify
all needs and availabilities in a disaster situation.
As seen in Table 2, both versions of the model
achieved comparable performance on the Nepal-
quake dataset (F1-scores of 0.823 and 0.828). But
the version trained for optimizing Recall achieved
substantially higher performance on the Italy-quake
dataset where needs and availabilities are much
sparser. This improved performance justiﬁes our
decision of focusing on improving Recall.
Cross-domain classiﬁcation: In a cross-domain
setting, the model is trained on tweets of one
event and then evaluated on tweets of the other
event. We compare the performance of the BERT
model against the best-supervised model (‘Best-
SM’) of (Basu et al., 2019), which is a CNN classi-
ﬁer initialised with CrisisNLP embeddings. Table 3
shows results when the models are trained on Italy-
quake tweets and tested on Nepal-quake tweets.
Similarly, Table 4 shows the opposite setting, i.e.,
the models are trained on Nepal-quake tweets and
Method
P@100
R@100
F1@100
Needs
Best-SM (Basu et al., 2019)
0.443
0.044
0.080
BERT (proposed)
0.320
0.066
0.110
Availabilities
Best-SM (Basu et al., 2019)
0.533
0.019
0.037
BERT (proposed)
0.500
0.038
0.070
Table 3: Performance of the neural architectures when
trained on Italy-quake and tested on Nepal-quake. Best
F1-scores in boldface.
Method
P@100
R@100
F1@100
Needs
Best-SM (Basu et al., 2019)
0.198
0.056
0.087
BERT (proposed)
0.32
0.184
0.234
Availabilities
Best-SM (Basu et al., 2019)
0.216
0.046
0.076
BERT (proposed)
0.28
0.121
0.168
Table 4: Performance of the neural architectures when
trained on Nepal-quake and tested on Italy-quake. Best
F1-scores in boldface.
tested on Italy-quake tweets. In both cases, we
use the BERT model optimised for F1-score, as
described above. Even for cross-domain perfor-
mance, we see that the BERT model outperforms
the CNN-based baseline of (Basu et al., 2019).
4.2
Extracting relevant ﬁelds from needs and
availabilities
Prior discussions with relief workers helped us
identify the following ﬁve ﬁelds that are deemed
relevant in coordinating the relief efforts, namely:
(i) resource – which items are needed/available,
(ii) quantity – how much of each resource is
needed/available, (iii) location – where is the re-
source needed/available, (iv) source – who needs
the resource or who is offering, and (v) contact –
how to contact the said source.
We adapt the unsupervised methodology of our
prior work (Dutt et al., 2019) to extract the relevant
ﬁelds from needs and availabilities. We sought to
incorporate this technique due to the paucity of
labelled instances which discourages a supervised
machine learning approach (and because gather-
ing many labelled instances is difﬁcult in a dis-
aster scenario). Moreover, the unsupervised ap-
proach was shown to be generalizable across sev-
eral datasets (Dutt et al., 2019). We describe the
adapted methodology in this section.
Unsupervised resource extraction: We start by
giving a brief description of the methodology
in (Dutt et al., 2019). We perform dependency
parsing on the text to obtain a Directed Acyclic
Tweet Text
Resource
villagers in the remote community of
food
ghyangphedi fear hunger and #starvation
earthquake victims sleeping outside in nepal
shelter
people are shivering in the cold
shelter
free calls to italy in the wake of earthquake
logistics
Table 5: Examples of covert tweets and the correspond-
ing resource class assigned to the tweet by our BERT-
based resource classiﬁer.
Graph (DAG). We compile an initial list of head-
words (send, need, donate, etc.) which consists of
the verbs in the query-set and the ROOT word of
the DAG. We have identiﬁed speciﬁc characteris-
tics of the child nodes of the headwords that enable
us to label the node as a potential resource.
For example, if a word w is tagged as a NOUN
and is the direct object of the ‘donates’, w can be
expected to be a potential resource. We have also
identiﬁed dependency rules, that increases the list
of head-words to improve our recall. We thus ob-
tain a list of potential resources after dependency
parsing. We then verify these potential resources
by checking for the semantic similarity of the ex-
tracted words with a pre-compiled list of resources
commonly used during disasters. The resource list
is obtained from several reputed sources like UN-
OCHA8, UNHCR9 and WHO10. This pre-compiled
list also enables us to categorise the resources into
four classes namely food (bottled water, biscuits,
rice), health (blood, medicine, latrines), shelter
(tents, blankets, tarpaulins), and logistics (electric-
ity, helicopters, cash).
Adapting the method to deal with covert tweets:
One of the limitations of the unsupervised method-
ology in (Dutt et al., 2019) is the inability to glean
relevant information from covert tweets where the
resource needed/available is not mentioned explic-
itly. We illustrate instances of such covert tweets in
Table 5. Since the resource name is not explicitly
stated in the tweet-text, the methodology in (Dutt
et al., 2019) cannot identify the resources for such
tweets.
To circumvent this problem, we again use the
pre-trained BERT model (Devlin et al., 2018) to en-
code a tweet. We pass this representation through
a linear layer and perform multi-label classiﬁca-
tion into the aforementioned four categories, i,e.
food, health, shelter and logistics. We use multi-
8https://www.unocha.org/
9https://www.unhcr.org/
10https://www.who.int/
Dataset
Precision
Recall
F1-score
Nepal-quake
0.838
0.882
0.843
Italy-quake
0.825
0.858
0.823
Table 6: Performance of the multi-label BERT-based
resource classiﬁer on in-domain classiﬁcation.
Method
P@100
R@100
F1@100
Nepal-quake
USM (Dutt et al., 2019)
0.623
0.833
0.685
BERT (trained on Italy)
0.484
0.670
0.522
BERT (trained on Italy + 5% Nepal)
0.636
0.834
0.680
Italy-quake
USM (Dutt et al., 2019)
0.487
0.595
0.516
BERT (trained on Nepal)
0.798
0.862
0.808
Table 7: Comparing the BERT-based resource classiﬁer
with the unsupervised methodology (USM) of (Dutt
et al., 2019) in cross-domain setting. Best F1-scores
in boldface.
label classiﬁcation since a particular tweet can
mention multiple resources. This adaptation helps
the methodology to correctly classify many of the
covert tweets, as demonstrated in Table 5 (the sec-
ond column shows the resource-class that is as-
signed by our methodology).
We report the in-domain classiﬁcation perfor-
mance of our BERT-based resource classiﬁer for
the Nepal-quake and Italy-quake datasets in Table 6.
We test on 20% of the data (sampled randomly) and
train on the remaining 70% while using 10% for
validation. We optimise the model with the highest
macro F1-score on the validation set.
Next, we compare the performance of the pro-
posed BERT-based resource classiﬁer with that of
the unsupervised methodology of (Dutt et al., 2019)
(which we refer to as ‘USM’). To ensure a fair com-
parison, we perform this comparison in a cross-
domain setting wherein we train the supervised
model on one dataset (e.g., Nepal-quake) and eval-
uate on another (e.g., Italy-quake). We present the
results of this comparison in Table 7.
We observe from Table 7 that the BERT resource
classiﬁer trained on Nepal-quake signiﬁcantly out-
performs USM over the Italy-quake dataset (F1-
score of 0.808 for the BERT method and 0.516
for USM). In contrast, the BERT resource classi-
ﬁer when trained on Italy-quake yielded signiﬁ-
cantly poorer results on Nepal-quake dataset than
USM. However, training only on an additional 5%
of labelled instances of the Nepal-quake dataset,
demonstrated comparative performance (F1-score
of 0.680 for the BERT method and 0.685 for USM).
The reason for these performances is as follows.
The Italy-quake dataset does not contain mention
of several amenities that are heavily prevalent in
Tweet text (excerpts)
Resource
Location
Quantity
Source
Contact
Urgent need of analgesic,antibiotics, be-
tadiene, swabs in kathmandu!!
Call for
help 98XXX-XXXXX #earthquake #Nepal
#KTM (N)
analgesic,
an-
tibiotics, beta-
diene, swabs
kathmandu,
ktm, nepal
98XXX-
XXXXX
India sends 39 #NDRF team, 2 dogs and 3
tonnes equipment to Nepal Army for rescue
operations: Indian Embassy in #Nepal (A)
NDRF
team,
dogs,
nepal
dogs
-
2,
NDRF team
- 39
India
Visiting Sindhupalchok devastating earth-
quake highly affected district . Delivery
Women in a tent . No water no toilet (N)
tent,
delivery
women, water
Sindhupalchok
Rajasthan Seva Samiti donates more than
800 tents to Nepal Earthquake victims (A)
tents
tents-800
Rajasthan
Seva Samiti
Table 8: Examples of information extracted from need (N) and availability (A) tweets by the methodologies pro-
posed in this work. Red colour indicates wrongly extracted information.
the Nepal-quake dataset, but not vice-versa. This
difference is mainly because the Italy earthquake
was a comparatively mild one in a developed re-
gion, and hence not many resources were needed;
in contrast, the Nepal earthquake was a severe one
in a developing region, and a lot of resources were
needed in Nepal. Hence the Nepal-quake dataset
contains mention of far more varied resources, as
compared to the Italy-quake dataset.
Thus, including the BERT-based resource clas-
siﬁer in addition to the unsupervised methodology
improves resource extraction performance, and also
lends generalisability across different datasets.
Extracting Locations: We extract geographical
locations from the tweet text using the methodol-
ogy in our prior work (Dutt et al., 2018). First,
we apply several unsupervised techniques to ex-
tract a set of potential locations. These techniques
include (i) segmentating hashtags, (ii) disambiguat-
ing proper nouns from parse trees, (iii) identifying
phrases with regex matches, (iv) dependency pars-
ing to locate nouns close from words in query-set
in the DAG, and (v) employing pre-trained Named
Entity Recognizers 11 to identify words tagged as
geographical location. Next, we verify these poten-
tial locations using a gazetteer. We consider those
locations to be valid only if their geospatial coor-
dinates lie within the boundary of the affected re-
gion (e.g., Nepal or Italy). We used two gazetteers
namely Geonames 12 and Open Street Map 13 to
identify locations with varying levels of granularity
(as detailed in (Dutt et al., 2018)).
Extracting the source: We consider as viable
11We use the inbuilt NER tool of SpaCy (https://
spacy.io/)
12http://www.geonames.org/
13http:420//geocoder.readthedocs.io/
providers/OpenStreetMap.html
sources two types of words – (i) proper nouns that
are tagged as organisations, persons or geographi-
cal locations by a Named Entity Recognizer, and
(ii) proper nouns that are child nodes of dependency
parsing – provided they have not been identiﬁed
previously as ‘location’ or ‘resources’ during the
veriﬁcation phase. See our prior work (Dutt et al.,
2019) for details of the methodology.
Extracting Quantity: For each resource extracted,
we identify whether it is preceded by a numeric to-
ken. The numeric token may be the orthographic
notation of a number (e.g., ‘100’) or may seman-
tically represent a number (e.g., ‘hundred’). We
assign the numeric token as the quantity of the
particular resource.
Extracting Contact: We use regular expressions
to identify contacts corresponding to email-ids and
phone numbers.
The performance of our information extraction
methods (in terms of precision, recall and F1-score)
was similar to what is presented in (Dutt et al.,
2019). In our experiments, we obtained F1-scores
of 0.89, 0.91, 0.76, 0.58 and 1.00 for identifying
Resources, Location, Quantity, Source and Contact
respectively, for need-tweets. Likewise, the F1-
scores for availability-tweets were 0.85, 0.85, 0.84,
0.65 and 1.00 respectively. Table 8 shows some
examples of the ﬁelds extracted by our methods
from some need-tweets and availability-tweets.
4.3
Matching needs and availabilities
We propose a fast and real-time algorithm for
matching needs and availabilities based on pro-
portion of common resources. Speciﬁcally, for
a given need-tweet, we compute the match with a
particular availability-tweet as the fraction of the
resources extracted from the need-tweet, that are
also present in the availability-tweet. For the given
Figure 1: NARMADA’s architecture overview
need tweet, availability-tweets are ranked in de-
creasing order of the fraction of common resources
(ties resolved arbitrarily).
We also experiment with some baseline method-
ologies, namely using common nouns (Basu et al.,
2018), tf-idf vectors of the tweet text (Purohit
et al., 2013) and local word embeddings of the
tweet (Basu et al., 2018). Our methodology (based
on the proportion of common resources) obtains
an F1-score of 0.84 for Nepal-quake and an F1-
score of 0.87 for Italy-quake dataset respectively,
which is competitive with the performance of the
baselines.
This section described the NLP and IR techniques
used in NARMADA. The next section describes
the system architecture.
5
System Architecture
The high-level system architecture for NARMADA
is shown in Figure 1.
The system can be ac-
cessed from https://osm-dm-kgp.github.io/
Narmada/, where further details and a demonstra-
tion video are also provided14. NARMADA is de-
signed and built for the Web, thus not restricting it
to any particular operating system or browser type,
allowing cross-platform (desktop/mobile) function-
ality.
5.1
User Interface
The user interface has been designed in Typescript
using Angular, a popular web-application frame-
work. ngx-admin15 was used as a boilerplate for
front-end components. The interface has been de-
signed to be intuitive, yet presenting as much in-
formation as possible without overcrowding. A
detailed note is available at https://osm-dm-kgp.
github.io/Narmada/.
The user interface comprises a dashboard
14Additional details have been provided in the Appendices.
15https://github.com/akveo/ngx-admin
(shown in Figure 2) that acts as a landing page. Be-
sides providing an initial view of active needs and
availabilities (at the present point of time), it dis-
plays matched resources. The user is provided with
various options to make it easy to search and lo-
cate resources as well as highlight items as deemed
necessary.
An alternate section is available where users can
enter new needs/availabilities manually. The class
labels of the information are detected automati-
cally, but the user is allowed to modify the same.
Another section for “Completed matches” is to be
used for logging completed or exhausted needs and
resources. A user manual is also attached to the UI.
5.2
Server
The major services provided by the backend server
include classiﬁcation and categorisation of the
tweets in the system. It also provides support for
the addition of new information and their automatic
categorisation. Facilities have been provided for
marking resources once their need is fulﬁlled or the
availability gets exhausted.
The server side uses NodeJS framework and is
written in Javascript. Nginx is used as an HTTP
server to make the frontend accessible to the pub-
lic. However, the NLP-related extraction tasks are
handled better in Python. The server partly uses a
Flask-based Python backend, a micro web frame-
work. The Flask server makes API calls to the
deep learning classiﬁers, featuring BERT, which
returns the output. The output is further reﬂected
in the frontend. The server sends information re-
quested by the user interface via RESTful API,
which supports cached responses on the frontend
and enables the system to be scalable, thus allowing
more users to use this service. API endpoints are
publicly available, which would allow program-
matic access to the server’s functionalities (see
https://osm-dm-kgp.github.io/Narmada/).
6
Discussion
NARMADA intends to assist in crossing the initial
barrier in identifying and matching needs and avail-
abilities from social media during the occurrence
of a disaster. In practice, it becomes necessary
for other service providers to be triggered in or-
der to make sure that the needs are addressed, by
proper collection, transportation and provisioning
of the matched resources deemed to be available.
For instance, the needs and availabilities could be
marked on a map, with each type of resource be-
Figure 2: Dashboard of NARMADA – (a) Navigation Buttons. (b) Needs and Availabilities List: tweets are
displayed in reverse chronological order; gray tweet: already matched; black tweet: unmatched; each tweet con-
tains a notch at the bottom-right corner, clicking on which reveals more details. (c) Search Box: when a query is
entered, the needs and availabilities containing the query-phrase are displayed. (d) Matching List: displays the
matched needs and availabilities; clicking a matching displays its resources, and gives the user an option to mark
it as completed.
ing represented with a different symbol, making it
easy to physically locate them. Local volunteers
might be provided with a mobile app to help them
ﬁnd nearby needs and availabilities. Misinforma-
tion in twitter is common (Bal et al., 2020). The
volunteers would also need a facility to conﬁrm
that the posted needs and availabilities are indeed
genuine, concerning various parameters such as
quantity (since at times of disasters, needs may be
exaggerated).
7
Conclusion and Future Work
We proposed a system NARMADA for resource
management during a disaster situation. Though
the system is developed to work across posts from
various social media platform, this research fo-
cused on data from Twitter. The real-time nature
and easy access to large volumes of information
provided by Twitter have made it a lucrative choice
for disaster analytics.
Currently, the system allows all users to perform
any action on the system. One future task would be
to implement a login system that would allow dif-
ferent access-levels to different users. For instance,
a visitor would be able to only view and query in-
formation, a volunteer would be able to add new
resources, mark a need as matched, etc., while a
system administrator would have rights to undo
all actions of all users, etc. The current system
does not allow multiple volunteers to communicate
within the platform over a resource, which we wish
to incorporate in the future. We also plan to incor-
porate support for vernacular languages, provided
the requisite tools are available.
References
2008. Ushahidi. https://www.ushahidi.com/.
2015. Aidr (artiﬁcial intelligence for disaster response).
http://aidr.qcri.org/.
Nasser Assery,
Yuan Xiaohong,
Sultan Almalki,
Roy Kaushik, and Qu Xiuli. 2019.
Compar-
ing learning-based methods for identifying disaster-
related tweets.
In 2019 18th IEEE International
Conference On Machine Learning And Applications
(ICMLA), pages 1829–1836. IEEE.
Rakesh Bal,
Sayan Sinha,
Swastika Dutta,
Ris-
abh Joshi, Sayan Ghosh, and Ritam Dutt. 2020.
Analysing the extent of misinformation in cancer re-
lated tweets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.13657.
Moumita Basu, Kripabandhu Ghosh, Somenath Das,
Ratnadeep Dey, Somprakash Bandyopadhyay, and
Saptarshi Ghosh. 2017. Identifying post-disaster re-
source needs and availabilities from microblogs. In
Proc. ASONAM.
Moumita
Basu,
Anurag
Shandilya,
Kripabandhu
Ghosh, and Saptarshi Ghosh. 2018.
Automatic
matching of resource needs and availabilities in mi-
croblogs for post-disaster relief.
In Comp. Proc.
WWW 2018 2018, pages 25–26.
Moumita Basu, Anurag Shandilya, Prannay Khosla,
Kripabandhu Ghosh, and Saptarshi Ghosh. 2019.
Extracting resource needs and availabilities from mi-
croblogs for aiding post-disaster relief operations.
IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Sys-
tems, 6(3):604–618.
Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and
Tomas Mikolov. 2017. Enriching word vectors with
subword information. Transactions of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, 5:135–146.
Cornelia Caragea, Adrian Silvescu, and Andrea H
Tapia. 2016.
Identifying informative messages in
disaster events using convolutional neural networks.
In International Conference on Information Systems
for Crisis Response and Management, pages 137–
147.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2018. Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understand-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805.
Ritam Dutt, Moumita Basu, Kripabandhu Ghosh, and
Saptarshi Ghosh. 2019. Utilizing microblogs for as-
sisting post-disaster relief operations via matching
resource needs and availabilities. Information Pro-
cessing & Management, 56(5):1680–1697.
Ritam Dutt, Kaustubh Hiware, Avijit Ghosh, and
Rameshwar Bhaskaran. 2018. Savitr: A system for
real-time location extraction from microblogs dur-
ing emergencies. In Proc. WWW Workshop SMERP.
Akash Kumar Gautam, Luv Misra, Ajit Kumar, Kush
Misra, Shashwat Aggarwal, and Rajiv Ratn Shah.
2019. Multimodal analysis of disaster tweets. In
2019 IEEE Fifth International Conference on Multi-
media Big Data (BigMM), pages 94–103. IEEE.
Mahmud Hasan, Mehmet A. Orgun, and Rolf Schwit-
ter. 2018. Real-time event detection from the Twit-
ter data stream using the TwitterNews+ Framework.
Information Processing & Management.
Online:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2018.03.001.
Muhammad Imran, Carlos Castillo, Fernando Diaz,
and Sarah Vieweg. 2015.
Processing Social Me-
dia Messages in Mass Emergency: A Survey. ACM
Computing Surveys, 47(4):67:1–67:38.
Muhammad Imran, Prasenjit Mitra, and Carlos Castillo.
2016. Twitter as a lifeline: Human-annotated twitter
corpora for nlp of crisis-related messages. In Pro-
ceedings of the Tenth International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2016),
Paris, France. European Language Resources Asso-
ciation (ELRA).
Morteza
Karimzadeh,
Wenyi
Huang,
Siddhartha
Banerjee, Jan Oliver Wallgr¨un, Frank Hardisty,
Scott Pezanowski, Prasenjit Mitra, and Alan M.
MacEachren. 2013.
Geotxt: A web api to lever-
age place references in text. In Proceedings of the
7th Workshop on Geographic Information Retrieval,
pages 72–73.
Prannay Khosla, Moumita Basu, Kripabandhu Ghosh,
and Saptarshi Ghosh. 2017. Microblog retrieval for
post-disaster relief: Applying and comparing neural
IR models. CoRR, abs/1707.06112.
Jooho Kim, Juhee Bae, and Makarand Hastak. 2018.
Emergency information diffusion on online social
media during storm Cindy in U.S.
International
Journal of Information Management, 40:153 – 165.
Yoon Kim. 2014.
Convolutional neural networks
for sentence classiﬁcation.
In Proceedings of the
2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1746–1751,
Doha, Qatar. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Abhinav Kumar and Jyoti Prakash Singh. 2019. Lo-
cation reference identiﬁcation from tweets during
emergencies: A deep learning approach.
Interna-
tional journal of disaster risk reduction, 33:365–
375.
Farhad Laylavi, Abbas Rajabifard, and Mohsen Kalan-
tari. 2017. Event relatedness assessment of Twitter
messages for emergency response. Information Pro-
cessing & Management, 53:266–280.
Tao Li, Ning Xie, Chunqiu Zeng, Wubai Zhou,
Li Zheng, Yexi Jiang, Yimin Yang, Hsin-Yu Ha,
Wei Xue, Yue Huang, Shu-Ching Chen, Jainendra
Navlakha, and S. S. Iyengar. 2017.
Data-Driven
Techniques in Disaster Information Management.
ACM Comput. Surv., 50(1):1:1–1:45.
John Lingad, Sarvnaz Karimi, and Jie Yin. 2013. Loca-
tion extraction from disaster-related microblogs. In
Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on
world wide web, pages 1017–1020. ACM.
Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their composition-
ality.
In C. J. C. Burges, L. Bottou, M. Welling,
Z. Ghahramani, and K. Q. Weinberger, editors, Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems
26, pages 3111–3119. Curran Associates, Inc.
Tamal Mondal, Prithviraj Pramanik, Indrajit Bhat-
tacharya, Naiwrita Boral, and Saptarshi Ghosh.
2018. Analysis and Early Detection of Rumors in
a Post Disaster Scenario. Information Systems Fron-
tiers, 20(5).
Tahora H. Nazer, Guoliang Xue, Yusheng Ji, and Huan
Liu. 2017. Intelligent disaster response via social
media analysis a survey. SIGKDD Explor. Newsl.,
19(1):46–59.
Venkata Kishore Neppalli, Cornelia Caragea, Doina
Caragea, Murilo Cerqueira Medeiros, Andrea H
Tapia, and Shane E Halse. 2019.
Predicting
tweet retweetability during hurricane disasters. In
Emergency and Disaster Management: Concepts,
Methodologies,
Tools,
and Applications,
pages
1277–1298. IGI Global.
Dat Tien Nguyen, Kamla Al-Mannai, Shaﬁq R Joty,
Hassan Sajjad, Muhammad Imran, and Prasenjit Mi-
tra. 2017. Robust classiﬁcation of crisis-related data
on social networks using convolutional neural net-
works. In ICWSM, pages 632–635.
Jorge David Gonzalez Paule, Yeran Sun, and Yashar
Moshfeghi. 2018. On ﬁne-grained geolocalisation
of tweets and real-time trafﬁc incident detection. In-
formation Processing & Management.
Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D.
Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for word rep-
resentation. In Proc. EMNLP.
Hemant Purohit, Carlos Castillo, Fernando Diaz, Amit
Sheth, and Patrick Meier. 2013. Emergency-relief
coordination on social media: Automatically match-
ing resource requests and offers.
First Monday,
19(1).
Koustav Rudra, Niloy Ganguly, Pawan Goyal, and Sap-
tarshi Ghosh. 2018.
Extracting and summarizing
situational information from the twitter social me-
dia during disasters. ACM Trans. Web, 12(3):17:1–
17:35.
Koustav Rudra, Subham Ghosh, Pawan Goyal, Niloy
Ganguly, and Saptarshi Ghosh. 2015. Extracting sit-
uational information from microblogs during disas-
ter events: A classiﬁcation-summarization approach.
In Proc. CIKM.
Irina Temnikova, Carlos Castillo, and Sarah Vieweg.
2015. EMTerms 1.0: A Terminological Resource
for Crisis Tweets. In Proc. ISCRAM.
Appendices
A
Detailed User Interface description
Brieﬂy, the user interface has ﬁve components:
A.1
Dashboard
As shown in Figure 2, the dashboard provides a preliminary view of unmatched needs and availabilities.
Since the dashboard serves as the landing page, several functionalities are supported:
(a) It can view the currently active needs, availabilities and matched resources in separate tabs, as
in Fig 2(b). Additional details pertaining to a tweet like text, URL, & parsed information like contact,
location and source are displayed in a card layout.
(b) Search As seen in Fig 2 (b), when ﬁlled in, allows the viewers to query needs, availabilites and
matched resources, all in one go.
(c) The interface displays the matches corresponding to need and availabilities. This allows one
to view needs and matching availabilities (also vice versa) on the same screen. Clicking on a need
resource reveals matching availabilities by default. The search tab is remodelled to show resource ﬁelds
for the speciﬁc resource, along with an option to show potential matches . Since we aim to build a
semi-autonomous system, the sysadmin (or some volunteer) has to manually match/assign a need to
an appropriate resource. Once a matching availability is selected, a match is made and appears in the
Matching column.
(d) Once a match is made, assigned and completed by a volunteer, the match can be marked completed.
Completed matches, needs and availabilities are explained in the next subsection.
(e) A map is provided that highlights the location the resource has been reported from, to assist in
geolocating resources.
A.2
Completed matches
This section acts as a logger to track completed or exhausted matches. It shares the same layout as the
dashboard, apart from the presence of a search feature.
Figure 3: NARMADA’s New Resource page. (a) The ﬁrst step towards adding a new resource is to enter text
and click on ”PARSE”. (b) All the parsed information are displayed, which can be modiﬁed by the user. (c)
Auto-detected location from text.
A.3
New information
As shown in Figure 3, this view allows manual entry of details for a new need or availability. The
information is automatically extracted but can be edited if required. The user is expected to enter text and
click the parse button. A manual assignment must be made if classiﬁcation could not be detected. Upon
parsing (and editing) the information, the new resource can be saved, which is available on the dashboard
immediately.
A.4
Tweet trafﬁc
Apart from actionable items, users may be interested in the overall tweet activity about a particular disaster
/ word / phrase. For this, we integrate the view of Savitr (Dutt et al., 2018), which tracks Twitter activity
related to any disasters on a day-to-day basis.
A.5
Manual
To allow users to view a sizeable amount of information at once, we understand it is possible to ﬁnd the
system complicated. Short, handy videos are available in order to explain the functionality for each of the
prior components, along with a mission statement for the project.
B
Detailed backend description
The server side uses NodeJS framework and is written in Javascript. Nginx is used as an HTTP server
to make the frontend accessible to the public. However, the NLP-related extraction tasks are handled
better in Python. So a part of the server-side has been hosted with Flask, a micro web framework in
Python. The Flask server makes API calls to the deep learning classiﬁers, featuring BERT, which returns
the output. The output is further reﬂected in the frontend. The server sends information requested by the
user interface via RESTful API, which supports cached responses on the frontend and enables the system
to be scalable, thus allowing more users to use this service.
API endpoints are publicly available, which would allow programmatic access to the servers
functionalities.
API documentation can be found at https://osm-dm-kgp.github.io/Narmada/
#api-description. The major services provided are:
B.1
Fetching information i.e. needs, availabilites and matches
Filtering by multiple conditions (such as matched or not, containing a particular resource) is also possible.
B.2
Matching needs and availabilities
For a provided need/availability, top 20 matches are suggested based on resource similarity.
B.3
Elevating matched status
Whenever a suitable match is found for a need/ availability, the corresponding pair is marked as Matched.
Once the Match has been assigned to a volunteer and is completed, the sysadmin can mark this match as
Completed, which moves both these resources from the dashboard to the Completed Resources view.
B.4
Parsing and adding new information
The system allows creation of new need/availability for a provided text. This is achieved by parsing all
information - resources, contact, location, quantity and source from the said text and returning these ﬁelds.
